Polish Manuscripts: OR THE Secret History OF THE REIGN OF JOHN SOBIESKI, The
III. of that Name, K. of Poland.

CONTAINING A Particular Account of the Siege of Vienna, and some Circumstances
in Relation to the Raising of it; not before made known to the World: With the
Letters that passed on that Occasion, betwixt the Emperor, King of Poland,
Pope, Elector of Brandenburg, Duke of Lorrain, Republic of Venice, and many
remarkable Intrigues of those respective Courts.

The Whole intermixed with an Account of the Author's Travels through Germany,
Poland, Hungary, etc. And many useful Geographical Remarks.

Translated from the French Original, wrote by M. Dalerac, a Domestic to the
late Queen of Poland, and employed by that Court in Important Negotiations, to
those of the French King, Emperor, etc.

LONDON: Printed for H. Rhodes, at the Star, near Fleet-Bridge; T. Bennet, at
the Half Moon in St. Paul's Churchyard; A. Bell, at the Cross-Keys and Bible
in Cornhil; T. Leigh and D. Midwinter, at the Rose and Crown in St. Paul's
Churchyard. 1700.

THE Author's PREFACE.
THE War that the Turks commenced against the Emperor in 1683. has been
attended with such remarkable Circumstances, that it will be hard to find in
Ages past any thing more worthy of Public View, or more capable of
embellishing History. All the Relations that have hitherto been published, are
defective, stuffed with forged Particulars, disguised Narratives and
Circumstances founded upon no better Authority, than that of some Letters from
one Friend to another, who diverted themselves at the Expense of the Truth. Yet
the Public was easily imposed upon, as usual, by those sorts of Relations,
which they fancy contain something more Secret and Particular, than is to be
found in the Public Newspapers.

One of the most intolerable of those Forgeries is (in my Opinion) what we
find in the Story of Mahomet VI. who was dethroned, the Absurdities of which, I
shall observe according as they come in my Way.

It Is true, that he who wrote the Historical Account of the Fall of that
Ottoman Emperor, was not on the spot where those Affairs were transacted, nor
is an Historian obliged always to see what he relates. It Is not for that I
condemn him, but I cannot excuse his insisting upon the Infallibility of his
Memoirs, upon which he founds his Relation. If he had no better for the other
Particulars of the Sultan's Misfortune than he has for the Circumstances of the
Campagn of Vienna; We shall quickly see by reading of them, how little Credit
is to be given to his Romance.

Those Considerations prevailed upon me to undertake this Work, and to form the
Design of giving the History of that famous War, with all the Exactness of an
Eyewitness with all the Fidelity of a disinterested Writer, and without
Passion, Qualities very requisite in every Historian, especially in one who
writes the History of hs own Time, in the view of those who are concerned in
the Matter, and whose Attention to it is no small Obstacle to that Liberty,
which he might otherwise be inclinable to take.

My Testimony and Sincerity is so much more to be relied on, because I was not
wanting in Care and Exactness to observe what passed in that great Event, nor
do I want Courage to speak the plain Truth without disguise. The Letters and
other Pieces, I join to my Relation, are incontestible Proofs of it. The Reader
must begin with razing out his Prejudices, and forgetting, if possible, the
sorry Relations that have already been published of that Campaign, which
contain nothing of real Truth, but the Gross of the Action, that is to say the
raising of the Siege, and the Names of those that commanded at it.

Before I enter upon those particulars, I conceive it will not be amiss to say
something how the Poles manage their War, which will be found at large in the
first Chapter. I could have added some Circumstances concerning the League
concluded at the Diet of Warsaw, betwixt the Republic and the Emperor, but it
is not with Negotiations as with Military Exploits; the latter being acted in
the view of the Public, seem to require, or at least to allow that Fame may be
charged with them: But the former demand a respectful Silence, the Interests
and hidden Designs of Princes not admitting us either to be able or to dare to
publish them in the same manner as we do their Exploits and Atchievments. So
that I have satisfied my self here with illustrating the Historical
Particulars, of a Public Event, one of the most considerable that has fallen
out in our Days, but which may well be said to be more remarkable by the
happiness of the Success, than by the greatness of it or the difficulty of
putting it in Execution. In effect, it may be said without rashness, That there
were many Blunders in the Art of War, committed on both sides on this Occasion,
as if the same Genius which conceived those vast Designs, had all of a sudden
been deprived of Understanding and Reflection to carry them on to an issue. But
here we must except the Duke of Lorrain, who always showed himself a great
Captain both in Project and Execution, was constantly faithful to the Common
Cause, neglected his own Interest, sacrificed all to those of the Empire, which
he served without concerning himself with the particular Interests or Heats of
the Ministers of the Court of Vienna.

I shall further add here, for illustrating those Preliminaries, that the
Emperor being informed of the Design of the Turks to make a powerful Irruption
into Hungary, looked out for Methods on all sides, to guard himself and prevent
the Storm. Finding it was not to be done, by renewing of the Truce, the very
Proposal of which was rejected by the Port, he bethought himself of having
recourse to an Alliance with Christian Princes, Count Albert Caprara his Envoy
at Constantinople not having been able to succeed in the Treaty that he had
Order to manage with those Infidels. The Emperor knew that the King of Poland
had a design to renew his War with the Turks, which being too much divulged, by
Noisie Embassies sent to several Princes, had made the Sultan hasten his
Preparations. The Emperor knew also that the Repub^ick of Poland was making
considerable Preparations for the Recovery of Caminiec and Podolia. Upon this
he ordered his Resident at the Court of Poland to begin a Negotiation on that
Subject. After the first overtures the King of Poland sent the Great Chancellor
of the Crown his Brother-in Law, to confer with some of the Imperial Ministers
at Breslaw, on pretense of taking the Waters of Hiertberg on the Frontiers of
Bohemia.

This Conference had all the Success which the Court of Vienna could desire.
There they laid the Foundation of that famous League, which reached such a
fatal Blow to the Ottoman Empire. The Count de Valestein was in 18 Months
after, sent by his Imperial Majesty in Quality of Ambassador to the Diet held
at Warsaw, with the necessary full Powers to complete that Great Work. Not only
the League was concluded, but a particular Treaty made by the Mediation of the
Nuncio Palavicini, in which the King of Poland engaged himself to march in
Person to the Relief of Vienna, in case it was besieged, the Grand Vizier
having actually projected it.

I speak nothing of the extraordinary Preparations that were afterward made in
the Empire and Poland, that may easily be judged of by the Greatness of the
Event, and the Importance of the Design. I shall only observe, that the
Republic made surprising Efforts, the Pope opened his Treasures, and the K. of
Poland his Coffers, which no Body expected from that Monarch, so as those that
knew him, nay, even those of his own Family and nearest Relations could scarce
believe it when they saw it. This in some measure may serve to justify the
Ambassadors that resided at his Court, whose want of penetration or exactness
was so much blamed, because their Accounts were afterward found to differ very
much from the real posture of Affairs. Such Contrarieties are more ordinary at
the Court of Poland, than at any other in Europe. There Is no Point so difficult
to know, nor more uneasy to manage because of the different Interests which
justle there. They have their separate Negotiations, as they have different
Interests from that of the Kingdom in general. They abound with Cabals,
Intrigues, etc. The K. in particular has his separate Maxims and Politics. The
Q. makes a second Party, which is principally made up of her own Family, and
many times she brings over the King. The Confidents of that Princess have
likewise a distinct Interest for themselves, under her Majesty's Protection,
and the shadow of her Name; so that an Ambassador must have an Universal Genius
to negotiate with so many Heads, and conciliate so many different Parties, in
order to bring 'em into the Interest of his Prince.

Besides, if an Ambassador apply himself too much to make Interest at Court, he
certainly miscarries with the Republic, where there are also as many Heads of
Parties, as there are Senators and Ministers, who in General are always
opposite to the Interest and Designs of the King. On the other Hand, if he
endeavor to get in with the Republic, he infallibly loses the Court, which is
no despicable Enemy; so that a Minister able to manage both, is as hard to be
found as the Phaenix, of whom we know nothing but the Name.

I thought fit to inform the Reader of those Circumstances, that he may know
the Genius of a Nation, whose Exploits I am about to recount, and avoid drawing
Consequences to their Favor or Disadvantage upon the extraordinary Particulars
he may meet with in this Relation. I have further observed two things, which
the Public has approved in other Works. The one is, that I have added an
Iunerary at the ends of the Chapters, to satisfy the Curiosity of Travelers;
and the other is, that I have wrote the Names of the Persons and Places,
according as they are pronounced in each Language, wherein I took the Advice of
Men that were able to inform me.

There is newly published,
AN Historical Account of the Divisions in Poland, from the Death of King John
Sobieski, to the Settlement of the present King on the Throne. Containing a
particular Relation of the late King's Death, and of all the Intrigues of the
several Candidates, till the Coronation of the Elector of Saxony. Translated
from the French Original. Written by M. de la Bizardiere; and suppressed in
France. Printed for H. Rhodes, T. Bennet, A. Bell, D. Midwinter and T. Leigh.

Secret Memoirs OF THE REIGN OF JOHN SOBIESKI, KING of POLAND.
CHAP. I.
Containing the State of the Armies of Poland: The different sorts of Troops
that compose them: Their Pay: Their Arms: And their Manner of Encampment and
Fighting.
THE Explanation of this Head is absolutely necessary before we enter upon the
Relation of the Campaign of Vienna, because the Polish Soldiery differs so
much, in every thing, from that of other Countries, that we cannot make a
Judgment of their Exploits, without knowing how they put them in Execution.
Here we are to treat of a People different from those of this Part of the
World, Men that have a distinct sort of Arms, a Discipline proper to
themselves, and a Method of War peculiar to their own Nation, of which we have
formed an extraordinary Idea, merely because of the Turks and Tartars, who are
the Enemies they have to deal with. We must examine, If the good Opinion
conceived of them, be well founded; and, Whether it ought to be ascribed to the
Skilfulness of the Poles in Matters of War, or to the Unskilfulness of their
Enemies.

It must be owned, That there is Valor to be found amongst the Polish Troops:
That their Infantry is resolute, and their Cavalry bold, and manage their
Horses better with an ordinary Snaffle, than the French and Germans do theirs
with their Bitts and Spurs, which are altogether unknown to the Poles. But, at
the same time, we may truly say, That the Valor of the Poles is not so much a
Noble and Generous Courage, as a Natural Insensibility of Temper, in relation
to Danger, or a Vain glorious Humor, to which they are emboldened by their
Numbers, and a brutal Fierceness, acquired by a Habit of enduring the Rigors of
the Season, want of Provisions and other Conveniences, which is plain enough
to be seen in Duels, wherein the Poles seem to have no Sense of Honor, and
likewise in Posts of danger, which they very willingly yield to those that
think them the more honorable, because more dangerous. In Duels they always
give over upon the first wound, and constantly fight in presence of Spectators,
who are there, as they pretend, to prevent foul Play, but, in effect, to part
the Combatants, without sometimes giving them leave so much as to draw Blood.
They don't value themselves here upon those nice Points of Honor, as in other
Nations. Those brave Fellows armed Capapee, and who seem to threaten the very
Sky with their fierce Looks, dare not in cold Blood attack a vigorous French
Man Hand to Hand, that offers to look them in the Face. They go always in
Troops or keep their Blood warm with Brandy on such Occasions. Yet I must
confess, this is not without Exception. I know Lords and single Gentlemen among
them, who are Persons of an undaunted Courage, of a Noble refined Valor of a
great Capacity for Martial Affairs, and fully instructed in the Art of War,
which is of no use nor esteem here, because they neither make Sieges nor
Attacks, but do all in the Field. Besides, the best concerted Designs that can
be, miscarry here for want of Necessaries to put them in Execution. They have
neither Engineers, Artillery-Men, Utensils nor Ammunition ready in time. The
building of a Bridge, is with them a Work of three Months. When the Cannon is
in the Field, the Ammunition is in the Magazin. Their Infantry pinched with
Hunger, starved with Cold, and overwhelmed with Misery, and their Cavalry lazy
and void of Experience, are enough to frustrate the best laid designs of the
greatest Generals. Among those who deserve this Character, we must reckon the
Palatin of Russia, Jablonouski a Lord of a fine Presence, of a Noble and
Warlike, and yet of a sweet Mien, he is a Person of undaunted Courage,
accompanied with an admirable Temper, and great Penetration. He was first Grand
Ensign of the Crown, afterward Little General, and for his Valor advanced to
the Supreme Dignity of Grand General, after the Death of Prince Demetrius
Wietsnievistski. One of the Actions wherein this General signalized himself
with part of the Foreign Troops was to stop the fury of Tartars, and give the
King time to retire under Leopold with the rest of his Army. This particular
will merit the Readers pardon for the Digression I shall here make to acquaint
him with one of the greatest Actions of the King of Poland, and the Palatin of
Russia.

The City of Leopold is Capital of the Palatinat of Russia, the Seat of the
Palatin, and is become famous in the History of the present Age, by reason of
the share it has born in the War betwixt the Poles and the Turks: But this
Action of the King, which we are now about to relate, will consecrate its
Memory to all Posterity, and advance it to the highest Pinnacle of Glory. In the
last Year of the Reign of Michael his Predecessor, this City was in great
danger. The Turks burnt its Suburbs in 1672. and were likely to have carried
this Important Place, which is but sorrily fortified, had not the Inhabitants
come to a Treaty, promised a great Sum for their Redemption, and given up the
principal Citizens as Hostages, who were retained a long time in Caminiec. But
King John III. knew how to guard this City in the Sequel of the War, by the
most glorious Methods imaginable. In 1675. the Tartars advanced very near this
City, which the Grand Vizier had commanded them to besiege. The King of Poland
encamped round the Place, and fortified the same with diligence, though he had
scarcely 5000 Men left. Ibrahim Pacha and Sultan Nuradin commanded the Enemies
Army, which consisted of 15000 Turks and 20000 Tartars. These two Generals
having miscarried before several other Places, sat down before Sbaracz, in
which there were but 40 Heidukes and 6000 Paysants, who were more inclined to
surrender, than to fight, and in effect, as soon as the Enemy appeared, the
Rabble opened the Gates.

After this Expedition Ibrahim retired to Caminiec, and Nuradin detatch'd 15000
Men to block up Leopold, posting himself with the rest of the Army, two Leagues
higher to attend the Issue, which was to his dishonor, for the King of Poland
marched with some Squadrons against the Enemy, charged them with vigor, and
drove them back to Nuradin's Camp, whence that Tartar Prince retired with great
Precipitation.

Some time after, having assembled more Troops, he renewed his design of
investing Leopold and forcing the King's Camp, and undertook it himself at the
Head of 40000 chosen Men, being attended with abundance of Officers of the best
repute among the Tartars. He began with the Attack of Slotzow, which is a
Castle belonging to the King's Hereditary Demesnes, within ten Leagues of
Leopold on the side of Caminiec. This Castle is well enough for a Gentleman's
House, and has some Fortifications according to the Modern way, faced with
Stone, but of very little Defense. The Enemy attacqued it vigorously, by way of
Scalade with Sword in Hand. The Palatin of Russia defended it with extreme
bravery, and forced the Tartars to retire from before this sorry Place, after
an obstinate Fight of five Hours duration.

Nuradin thinking it best to preserve his Troops that were designed for a more
important Expedition, would not expose them to any more Assaults, but continued
his march toward Leopold, and possessed himself of a vast Plain below the
Hills, with which the Town is surrounded, and upon which the King had taken his
Post. This Plain was covered in an Instant with the Enemies Squadrons, who
raised such a mighty Dust as quickly covered them from view. In the mean time,
those of the Castle of Leopold fired some Guns to give Notice to the People of
the Country, to retire for their Security behind the King's Camp. His Majesty
having viewed that of the Tartars, was nothing discouraged by their prodigious
Number, but gave all necessary Orders for the safety of his Camp, and the City
in which the Queen and the Princes her Sons were shut up. He posted Guards in
two places, on the Right and Left, to prevent a Surprise, placed his Infantry
in Ambuscade, amongst the Bushes at the foot of the Hills, which separated his
Camp from the Plains possessed by the Tartars, and planted his Cannon on the
Heights, to favor the descent of his Squadrons, his eagerness to fight, having
quite over-ballanced his Enemies Numbers.

They began to skirmish as soon as they could join, and the Polish Horse not
finding a convenient ground at first, were put into disorder, but the King
coming to their relief with the rest of his Troops, and enlarging hi Front
insensibly, as his Squadrons gained gtound, he restored the Battle, where his
presence seconded by his Example, inspired his own Men with as much Valor, as
it did his Enemies with terror. The Sultan quickly perceived by the disorder of
his Troops, that he was defeated by a Superior Power. The King of Poland's Hand
became dreadful to them, by the weight of its blows, and every one striving to
avoid them, that prodigious Army vanished in an instant like a Phantome.

Having finished this Digression, I return to my Subject.

The Palatin of Kiow, General of the Artillery, is owned by all Men, to be one
of the bravest Officers and wisest Generals at this time in Poland, and has
acquired an universal Esteem by his Gallant and Prudent Actions. Those who have
seen him in Battle could not but be charmed to behold his Magnanimity in
exposing himself, and taking care to save his Men. Those who have heard him
discourse of Martial Affairs are persuaded, that were he in a Country, where
the Art Military is regularly cultivated, he would be accounted one of the
greatest Captains in Europe.

There is moreover in Poland another Person of extrordinary Merit in that kind,
namely Prince Lubomirski, who is no less expert in War than the Palatin, and
exceeds him much in Temper and Presence of Mind, which contribute so much to
the winning of Battles: so that the same parallel might be made betwixt those
two Polish Generals, that was made betwixt the Prince of Conde and the
Marshall Turenne, the one was incomparable for managing a Campaign, and the
other for fighting a Battle.

I would not that others, whose Names and singular Endowments I don't mention
here, should suffer by my silence. I shall do them Justice elsewhere, but I
thought fit to mention those Great Men here, whose Reputation is generally
known, that I might give the Reader an Idea of the Polish Bravery, of which
those Gentlemen are the Model, as well as the Honor of that Nation. I don't
pretend to rank the King of Poland with his Generals, because he is beyond
Comparison, and above all Encomiums and Titles, but we may without flattery
adventure to call him the Hero of the North.

The Republic has two separate Armies, under two different Generals, who are
not subordinate nor dependant on one another. They encamp separately, and act
in the same manner as Troops of different Countries. When they are obliged to
join in Day of Battle, each General issues his Orders, according to the
Measures agreed on in Council, the one receiving none from the other, neither
as to Command, nor yet as to the Word given to the Troops.

The 1st of those Armies is that of the Crown, or more properly that of the
Kingdom of Poland. The 2d is that of the Grand Duchy of Lithuania, being an
Auxilliary State and Allie to the other, and not a subjected Province, like
those who compose the Kingdom. That of the Crown is to consist of 36000 Men,
and that of Lithuania of 12000. Nor have they in our Days raised any greater
Army on any Expedition whatever. But as that Number is never complete, the Army
is sometimes greater, sometimes lesser, according to the Efforts the Republic
thinks fit to make, as the Case requires, without ever amounting to that Number
of 48000, fixed by the State of the War, which the Poles call Kompout or
Komport.

Each Army has a Great and Little General, the former is called General by way
of Eminence, or General of the Crown; the latter is called Little General, or
General of the Campaign. They encamp the one on the Right and the other on the
Left of the Line. They have both the same Badge of Command, viz. a Great Lance,
adorned at the end either with Feathers, or Knots of Ribbons, or some other
sort of Plume, under a great Ball of some rich Stuff: This the Poles call
Bontchouk or Bunczuk. It is carried by a Man on Horseback before the two
Generals, and by its height discovers their Posts at a great distance, either
on a March or in Battle. The King has one of the same sort, with a Plume
either of Herons or Eagles Feathers or Knots of Ribbons. But when he is at the
Head of the Army, his is only carried aloft, and those of the Generals along by
the Horses Neck, in token of their Submission.

The Generals have likewise a Batoon of Command, which is given them by the
King, together with their Office, as is done to the Mareschals of France; It is
a Mace of Arms very short, having a great Ball at one end, either of Silver or
Vermillion gilt, sometimes adorned with Jewels. This Batoon is called Boulaf or
Bulawa, is seldom carried, but only represented in their Pictures to denote
their Charge, as is done in the Pictures of the Mareschals of France.

They are not Senators by their Office, their Prerogative reaching no further
than the Command of the Armies; but as they are usually very Considerable by
their Birth and Merit, the King makes them always Palatins or Castellans, by
Virtue of which they take Place in the Senate, according to the Rank of their
Province, without any particular Pre-eminence. In the Army their Power is
without Restriction, their Authority Sovereign, and their Tribunal, or Council
of War, Independent on the King. A Great General has power of Life and Death,
puts in and puts out as he pleases, settles Winter Quarters, regulates Marches,
assembles the Army, and appoints the Time and Place of Rendevouz as he thinks
fit, without receiving Orders from, or being accountable to any other than the
Republic, met in a General Diet. He appoints what Provinces shall pay the
Troops, and changes them at pleasure. It Is true, that in the Council held by
the King, with the Senators and Generals, before the opening of the Campaign,
the Expeditions and Designs are concerted, but the executive Power is in the
Hands of the Great General, who acts according to his own Mind and Interest,
and as the Conjunctures require.

The Grand General has an Allowance of 60000 Francs at 10 Sous per Franc, the
Polish Money being less in value than that of France, by one half; and the
Little General has 40000 Francs. Those Salleries are raised upon the
Starosties, the Royal Demesnes and the Lands of the Church, the Cash of which
is carried to Leopold about Michaelmass, that being supposed to be the end of
the Campaign. The Grand General presides at this Assembly, where he distributes
Rewards and Gratifications to the Army, according to Merit, and the Necessity
of the Officers and Gens d'Arms. The Marches and Quarters of Assemblies in
Poland, do equally ruin the Country, and enrich the Officer, and are ordered
by the Grand General, according to pleasure. And as there is neither Inn nor
Road specified, the Commander of a Troop leads it where he pleases, and lives
upon the Peasant at Discretion; so that he provides himself for the Campagn as
he marches, and needs nothing but Carriages and a Purse. As for Example, an
Officer on his way from Warsaw to Leopold, that is to say, about 50 Leagues, (f
he go on straight) will go on the Left, and the Right to all the Villages out
of the Road, make the Tour of the whole Kingdom, if he pleases, and will spend
two or three Months, squeezing and eating up the Peasants at discretion, by
Virtue of a mere Order from the General to go to such a Place: And provided
indeed he come at the time appointed, there is no enquiry made, what way he
takes, or how much time he spends in his Journey. Thus the Officer enriches
himself in his March, or more properly speaking, pillages at Discretion. I have
known those who in a Journey have gathered together 5 or 6000 Francs, without
reckoning Provisions. It Is true indeed, there is no quartering upon Gentlemen's
Lands, or if they do, they must be forced to pay for it, otherwise the Gentry
would make a terrible Noise at the Diet; so that it is only through the King's
Lands, and those of the Church, that the Troops can march, that is to say through
the Villages of the Starosties, Abbeys, Bishoprics and such like, which they
force to contribute also to the other Charges of the War; on which I cannot but
take Notice of the odness of the Humor of the Poles, who extend their Devotion
even to Hypocrisy, and yet don't exempt the Lands of the Church from Military
Exactions, but on the contrary, expose them the most of any to the fury of the
Soldiers and the rigor of Taxes.

Formerly those Marches were more vexatious than at present, being more
frequently allowed to Friends and Officers of the Grand General, by way of
Gratification, but now they are never granted, except in case of necessity, and
the Grand General does all he can to preserve good Order and Moderation in this
Matter, yet he cannot totally prevent the Oppression of the Country, which
suffers more by one march of the Polish Troops, than by an Irruption of the
Enemies, (Burning, Slavery and Rapes excepted) especially in those Parts that
fall to the share of the Lithuanian Army, which is more to be feared than the
Tartars. This is the True Cause of the extreme Poverty of Poland, and of the
inconceivable Desolation of the Kingdom, which is so much wasted since the
beginning of the Campaign of Vienna, that it does not look like the same
Country.

The Grand General settles the Winter Quarters in the same manner, also their
Places of Settlement at the end of the Campaign, cantons the Regiments as he
thinks fit, in the Starosties and Lands of the Church, and oppresses or eases
whom he pleases. By this means a Grand General of the Crown called
Konietspolski, purchased immense Riches for his Family. He obliged the Gentry
to sell him such Starosties as lay convenient for him, and constrained those
that were unwilling to part with them by oppressive Winter Quarters.

At present this Tyrannical Power of the General is much lessened, not only
because the King when he had that Charge, divested himself of that Prerogative
in order to deliver the Nobility from the bad Designs of those that might
succeed him, but also because the present Grand General makes use of his Power
with all possible Moderation; and besides, the Lords, the King himself and the
Queen demand their proper Regiments to be quartered on their own Lands, where
they oblige them to live orderly without ruining the Peasants. This Privilege
the present Crown General denies to no Man, except he be obligd by Necessity to
guard the Frontiers, in which case he distributes them indifferently, in the
most Commodious Places, be they the Royal Demesnes, Hereditary Demesnes or
otherwise.

Besides those two Generals, each Army has an Officer, that commands a
detached Body, called the Vant-guard, which encamps at the Head of the Whole,
about half a League before the Army, and is composed of Dragoons, Infantry and
Light Horse to the Number of 11 or 1200. The first Officer is called the
Stragenick of the Crown, and the second the Stragenick of the Army. Their
Charges are different, the one being properly only for the Nobility on
Horseback, when the Postpolita is called out; the other particularly for the
regular Troops; and the latter refuses to yield to the other either in Command
or Precedence, which Controversy still remains undecided, the Stragenik of the
Crown maintaining his Post, even in the Army at present, being a Man of Quality
and Senator.

The Obogenick is the same with the Quartermaster of the Armies, and their
Pissar answers to the Commissary General, who reviews the Troops at the
beginning and end of the Campaign, and it is according to his Account that the
Regiments are paid at the Tribunal, established by the General Diet for this
end in the City of Radom in Great Poland. As to the Korongy or Standard Bearer
of the Crown, he has no Function in the Army, but only in the Arrear-ban called
the Postpolita Russenia, or the Nobility on their March.

The Army of the Crown, and that of Lithuania is subdivided into two Bodies,
the one all Horse and Natives, distributed into free Companies, like those of
the French Gens d'Arms; this they call the Polish Army. It comprehends two
thirds, that is to say 24000 Horse: The other Body consists of Infantry,
Dragoons and Light Horse. This they call the Foreign Army, because in effect it
is according to the Foreign Model, clothed and armed after the German fashion,
commanded by General Majors, which are like our Mareschals de Camp, divided
into Regiments, and not into Companies. This makes the other third of the
Kompout, that is to say, twelve thousand Men.

Those two Bodies march and encamp apart, or more properly speaking, they
compose the two Lines of the Army. The first is all Foot and Dragoons with the
Artillery in the Center. The second is composed of Polish Horse, or Independent
Companies: And it is at the Head of this second Line, that the two Generals take
their Post, the one on the Right, and the other on the Left, as I have said
already. The King himself encamps in this quarter, when he is in the Army,
together with the Senators that accompany him thither, the first Line being
under the Command of General Majors, and the General of the Artillery, amongst
whom there is a Subordination of Antiquity and Office.

The Polish Army then, consists all of Horse, divided into Troops, commanded by
the greatest Lords, beginning with the King and the Princes his Sons. Those
Troops are of different Sorts and Qualities, some of them real Gens d'Arms,
others Light Horse. The Gens d'Arms are again divided into Hussars and
Pancernes, and some add Peteores, of whom there are more in the Lithuanian Army
than in that of the Crown. These Gens d'Arms are all Gentlemen, especially the
Hussars, and are honored by the King and Generals, with the Name of
Touariches, that is to say, Comrades or Companions: They admit them to their
Table, are respected in their particular Provinces, and most of them Pensioners
of the Generals and great Lords, whom they accompany to the Diets to do them
honor. Nay, I have seen the Referendary of the Crown, a Man of a 100000 Livres
Rent in Starosty's, account it his honor to have the Title and Pay of a
Hussar. The Light Horse are Troops of Poles, Cossacks, Vallachians or German
Troopers. The Army of Lithuania is composed in the same manner.

The Hussars are the first Gens d'Arms of the Kingdom, as the Corpse du Guard
are in France, and without Contradiction the finest Cavalry in Europe* in
respect of the Mein of the Men, the Goodness of the Horses, and their
Magnificent and Noble Apparel. Their Name is Hungarian, and common to all the
Cavalry of that Country, but in its proper Signification it signifies Brave,
for it is supposed, that the Touariches ought to be so by way of Eminence. In
France we suppose, that the Hungarian Cavalry was called Hussars from their Cry
of War in time of Battle, where it is alleged they cry, Houssa! Houssa! as we
say, Tue! Tue! kill, kill; and the Turks cry, Alla! alla! But this Etymology is
unknown in Poland, where they animate one another by crying Bi-zabi: i.e.
Strike, strike him to death. The Hussars never keep Guard, don't go out on any
Parties, Con-voys, etc. and much less in the Strageniks Detachments. They are
reserved only for Battles and other distinguishing Actions. But the present
Grand General being discontented with this sort of Gens d'Arms, who are become
more effeminate and less valiant than formerly he began in the Campaign of
1689. to take away their Lances to arm them with Musquetoons, and to make them
serve like ordinary Troopers on Convoys, Vantguards and other Fatigues of the
Camp without distinction, a certain evidence that those Troops are much
degenerated from their Ancient Splendour, ^^se they would never have endured it.

They are composed of handsome Men, mounted on the finest Horses of the Kingdom,
with diverse other Led-Horses, richly capparisoned, their Bridles adorned with
Plates and Nails of Silver or Vermillion gilt, embroidered Saddles with gilt
Boys, great hanging Houzes, according to the Turkish Manner, with Fringes of
Gold and Silver: A Falchon or very rich Sword fixed to the left-side of the
Saddle under the Horseman's Thigh. Formerly the Polish Cavalry had no Pistols,
but now they are used amongst those fixed Troops. But the Vallachians,
Cossacks, and even abundance of Poles, have none at the Saddle Boys, no more
than the Turks, but carry one or sometimes two at their Girdle behind.

The Equipage of the Hussars is as much distinguished as their personal Habit.
They have two or three Wagons, a great number of Servants, and fine Tents, so
that a Troop of them takes up a great deal of Ground in the Camp, because the
Streets must be large for their Equipage, which is placed in the Intervals, and
not in the Rear, as in France and Elsewhere. The Hussars are armed with Back
and Breast, a scaled Headpiece adorned on the sides, and be hind with Pendants
of Iron Plates quilted, which come down to their Shoulders, where they have
another separate Piece of Armor, with Braces reaching over their Neck to which
there is fixed a sort of a Gantlet of Mail, which covers the back of the hand
only, the Poles not knowing the Use of Gloves, nay, not so much as on
Horseback. Over all this they wear a great Leopard or Tigre's Skin, in form of
a loose Coat made in a Warlike Fashion, which is a very fine Ornament to the
Gens d'Arms. The Lances they carry are no less Ornamental to the Body of the
Troops in general: they are longer than the French great Pikes, round, pointed
with Iron, made of a light Wood; the upper part adorned with a Streamer of
Taffata, in form of a Standard, and three or four Else in length, painted and
gilt from one end to the other. They carry 'em in a Boot fixed in the Saddle,
which supports 'em also when they make use of them in Battle, otherwise there
were no making use of this Machine, because of its Weight. Nor is the effect of
it, so terrible as was imagined. I have seen those Hussars in Action, and
likewise at muster in the Camp, and always found they had a great deal of
Trouble in making use of their Lance, and that their Impetuosity is not so
considerable when particularly enquired into. It Is true indeed, that they never
retire, they ride at full speed, as if they were running at the Ring, so that
they break through all that oppose them. In the Battle of Prag^, on the Wefil,
near Warsaw, where King Casimir attacked Charles Gustavus, King of Sweden, who
was shut up between two Rivers with a handful of Men: There was a Squadron of
Hussars that broke through the first and second Line, as far as the Body of
Reserve, but they could not return, and so were encompassed. That Is the danger
this sort of Cavalry is liable to by the weight of their Arms, and the
difficulty they have to manage their Horses by Snaffles, without Bitts, when
their Mouths are heated. If they had to do with the French, who are expert in
their Motions and Countermarches, they would not kill one Man, nor could one of
themselves escape: There were no more to do, but to open the Ranks, as the King
of Sweden did, and to mix Platoons of Foot in the Intervals of the Squadrons,
to fire upon them as they pass; for if you kill the Horse, you put the Gens d'
Arms out of a capacity to fight; it being impossible for them to raise
themselves again, because of the weight of Iron upon them: So that this sort of
Gens d' Arms is merely in terrorem, as Lowis le Grand judged at first sight of
them. The Marquis de Bethune had Orders, upon his first Journey into Poland, to
bring home a Hussar with all his Accoutrements, to see if the Effect answered
the Reputation: The King being minded to have of that sort of Foreign Troops,
the thing pleased at first, because of its Novelty and their Equipage; but the
Experiment made of them in the Court of the Castle at St. Germans, at a Course
of the Lance, convinced His Majesty that they were of small use, and could do
but little damage; and besides they must have a ground on purpose for them,
i.e. Open Plains, like those of Champagn, to be drawn up in. If after breaking
their Lance, as they do at the first shock, they took their Scimiter in hand,
their Charge would be more dangerous, for then they would break through all that
stood in their Way. The King of Poland has remedied this Inconvenience in the
last Wars, by flanking a Squadron of Hussars, with two others of Pancerns,
armed with Falchons and Musquetoons, who join close after the other are put in
disorder, and possess themselves of their ground to complete the defeat of the
Enemy, whose Order is already broke by the Charge of the Lances.

The Hussars have each two Servants armed, and in pay, who are called Pacolets;
they are mounted much like their Masters, armed with Head-Pieces and Lances,
but without Back and Breast, and Leopards Skin; instead of which they have the
Skin of a White Wolf made like a Coat; and behind their back a very great Wing
made of Eagles Feathers, which gives them a fierce and savage Mein: Formerly
they had two Wings; and we see them painted so in Pictures of old Wars. I am of
opinion that they are very useless, but the Poles pretend that the whistling
they make in the Air terrifies the Enemy's Horses, and helps to break their
Ranks. They left off one of them by degrees, and it is hoped that the Great
General, who has lately eased 'em of their Lances, will likewise take away
this Accoutrement, which is good for nothing but to frighten little Children.

Those Troops form themselves into Squadrons, like ours, three Men deep, and
seventy in Front, more or less, according to the number of the Gens d' Arms and
Pacolets; for every Hussar may have three but no more. The first Rank consists
all of Masters, the other two of Pacolets: And when a Hussar has the Guard of
the Standard, he fixes his Lance by it, and hangs the Wings of his Servants
round it, according to their number, for some have three, and others but one,
and they are paid in proportion.

As those Companies are very expensive, the Republic entertains but few of
them, and give them little enough Pay; but the Lords who have them, make this
up by an augmentation of Pay, as a sort of Pension; and thus they make
themselves Creatures of the Touarizes, and of the Lieutenants that command
them, who are always Men of Note, and fit for Service, to whom they give at
least a Pension of 6000 Francs to bear their charge, because those Officers are
obliged to keep a Table in the Army. The Captain Lieutenant of the King's
Hussars, called Polanoski, was one of the Candidates for the Crown when Casimir
abdicated; by which the Reader may understand that those Places are filled with
Persons of Merit and Quality.

The King has a Company of those Gens d' Arms; Prince James and Prince
Alexander have likewise each of them one; the Chief Senators, the Bishops and
Ministers of State, who will be at the expense of it, have the same: They cost
the Captain above 25000 Francs, besides the Pay of the Commonwealth. The King
makes them a compensation for this Expense, by giving them Regiments of Foot or
Dragoons in the Foreign Army, which cost them little, and bring in a great
deal, as I shall show afterward. The Standard of those Companies is very high,
and almost as large as that of a Company of Foot. The Lance has a gilt wooden
Ball upon the upper end, like that on the Stern of a Ship. The Drums and
Trumpets are placed round the Standard, in March as well as in Battle: For
other things the Order is much the same as ours, only their Trumpets never
found any Charge, or point of War, but always a Fanfare even when on a March.
They have this peculiar in their way of Encampment, that the Officers are
always at the Head of the Company, not far from the Standard, and all the
Baggage in the Streets or Intervals, which is the same in all the other Troops
of the Kingdom.

The second sort of Gens d' Arms is the Pancernes, who are somewhat inferior to
the Hussars, but much higher than all the rest of the Cavalry. They are called
so from their Armor, which is a Coat of Mail, in the Polish Tongue Pancernick,
with an Iron Cap, encompassed with a Network of the same, which covers all to
their Shoulders, and showing only half the Visage, makes them look like Satyrs,
because of the great Mustaches ordinarily worn by the Poles. Those Pancernes
are armed with Falchons and Musquetoons, like Light Horse, as well mounted as
the Hussars, but not so richly equipped: They are upon all Guards that require
fatigue, are formed into Squadrons as the others, with a Standard of the same
form, their Drums are also the same; but in lieu of a Trumpet they have a
certain little Instrument of Copper, not much bigger than a Flagelet, crooked
and hollow like a Cornet, which makes the shrillest and most Savage Noise
imaginable. It is supposed to be the Ltuus of the Ancients. Those Companies
have less Pay than the Hussars, but are on the same footing as to their
Servants, who make up the two last Ranks, and are also called Pacolets. They
pass however for Light Horse, that is to say, Lightly Armed, for in other
respects they are true Gens d' Arms by their dignity, and commanded by Lords;
the King himself and the Princes having each of 'em a Company in the two Armies.

Besides these two sorts, there is a third in the Great Duchy of Lithuania,
armed like the Pancernes, and having Lances as the Hussars, but not quite so
long; nor are their Streamers so large; and from this difference they have
different Names: Those of the Hussars are called Kopies, from the Latin word
Copia, Forces; and those of the other are called Gides, which is a Word in use
in that Country, and also amongst the Turks, as is likewise that sort of Lance.
I saw only four Companies of them in the Lithuanian Army, that of the Crown
having almost none of 'em; but there is nothing finer than those I saw in that
Duchy, the Hussars not being more magnificent in either of the Armies. At
present they have left off their Gides, and are upon the same footing with the
Pancernes; they are called Peteores, and are likewise honored with the Quality
of Touariches.

The rest of the Polish Army consists of Companies of Valachians, Cossacks and
Poles, armed like our Light Horse, with Musquetoons and Falchons, but not so
uniform either in Horse or Habit. Their Standards, March, Drums, and way of
drawing up, agree with the ordinary Custom of the Country. It is this sort that
go out on Parties, guard the Camp, and are made use of for Guards and Convoys.
I have seen Companies of Tartars amongst these, and formerly the Republic had
abundance of that Nation in Pay in their Wars against the Muscovites. The King
of Poland, before he went to the Relief of Vienna, had a mind to try the Pulse
of the Officers of those who continued still in his Service, and all of them
promised him an in violable Fidelity, not only in fighting against the Turks,
but also against the Tartars, offering to leave in Poland one half of their
Number as Hostages for the Loyalty of the other, who should follow his Majesty;
for he had offered to give all of them their discharge, which they would not
accept of, but served in that Expedition with extraordinary fidelity.

That which they call the Foreign Army, has quite another sort of Discipline,
they are Regiments of Foot and Dragoons, Clothed and Armed as those of France
and Germany, with this difference, that the Dragoons are mounted on sorry
Jades, miserably equipped, almost naked, and all of them in different Colors.
The Infantry is of all things the most pitiful, and more tattered than any
Spaniards or Italians that ever we heard of; some of them have Caps, others
Hats; some have Cloaks, others none: They are all without Swords, but carry
long Battle-Axes fashioned like those that were carried before the Roman
Consuls. Those I always took to be of admirable use. The Poles carry them
fastened to their shoulders by a Leathern Thong, they serve them instead of
Rests for their Muskets; and there is nothing in the World comparable to them
for covering a Battalion, and defending them against Horse. Those miserable
Fellows, all in Rags, as I have said, and more like Scullions than Soldiers,
some of them with Cloaks, and others of them with a sort of Gowns of a
scandalous diversity, are nevertheless incredibly stout, which in reasonable
Men I should call Bravery. They resist all sorts of Inconveniences, Nakedness,
Hunger and Blows with an Heroic constancy; bear all the burden of the War, and
undergo all the dangers of it, insomuch that I have seen this Infantry form the
Arreir-guard in a Plain, in dangerous Retreats, when the Tartars pursued the
Camp close, to cover the Polish Gens d' Arms, who retired before them without
any scruple; I have seen those Soldiers, dying with Hunger, and quite tired
out, lie upon the ground charging their Muskets, which they were scarce able
to carry, and yet would keep firing continually. This Infantry don't indeed
pride themselves in their Misery, which is so disproportionable to the splendour
of the Gens d' Arms, but it is they that do the service, and are the safety of
the Army, whereof the others are merely the Ornament.

Though this Army be called Foreign, it is nevertheless composed of native Poles,
with Officers of a Foreign Name and Model, Colonels, Lieutenant Colonels,
General Majors and others. People of all Nations may be employed in this Army,
whereas the Poles only are admitted into the Free Companies. There are Germans,
Curlanders, French and others in the Foreign Army. The King, Queen, Princes,
Generals and other Lords, have Regiments therein of both sorts. The Foot and
Horse Guards, that attend the King's Person, are comprehended in this Body of
the Army, as are abundance of other Free Companies of Horse, Dragoons and
Heidukes, which the Generals have raised for their particular service, and make
the Republic pay for them. Upon which I shall observe by the way, that there
are Royal Lands in Poland, which we call Fiefs in France, given to Lords, and
their Descendants as Hereditary Estates, on condition of maintaining a certain
number of Troops; whereof there are some that are obliged to furnish an hundred
Dragoons: but the Court does not keep those Lords to an exact performance; though
if they would oblige the Possessors of those Lands to it, the Republic should
have in case of need near twenty thousand Men that cost them nothing.

This is the disposition of the Polish Armies, with which that Nation has
formerly made their Neighbors to tremble, even those who now keep them under
the Yoke; of which one essential Reason is, not so much the want of Courage,
though the Poles be in that very respect much degenerated from their Ancestors,
as the want of Money and Discipline, which hinders the completing of their
Troops, prevents their arrival at the place of their Rendesvouz against the
time appointed, and overwhelms them with misery. As to their Discipline, that
is still more irregular than their Pay, there being nothing of any exact
service performed here. I never saw in the Army neither main nor ordinary
Guard, nor Convoy for their Forragers; their Troops going to sleep upon the
moral security they conceive themselves to be in from the stupidity of their
Enemies. Had they to do with French or Germans, not one Forrager should return
to the Camp; nor could there pass a Night without beating up one quarter or
other. There Is nothing but the Body commanded by the Stragenik, composed of all
sorts of Troops, and amongst them Pancernes and Polish Cavalry, which makes a
sort of advanced Guard for all the Army in general, encamping at their Head,
about half a League from the first Line, and the same is reinforced
proportionable to the danger. Besides this Detachment, each Regiment of
Infantry makes one of twenty or twenty five Men, posted about thirty paces
before the Line, for the Guard of the Colors, which are planted all together
at the Head of the Colonel's Company. They do moreover, besides this, when they
are in the open Field, and in presence of the Enemy, enclose their Camp with an
Entrenchment of Wagons, which they call the Tabor, and is certainly an
Extraordinary Rampart against the Tartars. This Tabor marches in order of
Battle with the Army, without breaking: Every Officer makes such an
Entrenchment round his Tents. The number of Carriages is twice as great as the
number of the Men; and a Camp so entrenched has something that is great,
singular and formidable in it. In covered or uneven ground, they make use of
Chevaux de Frize, each Regiment has a certain number of them, they are fixed
to four Wheels like a Wagon, and on a March are drawn by Horses. This is none
of the worst Inventions, and is owing to a Frenchman, called Hoccart, who is
Ingineer to the King of Poland, and has served him for fifteen years with
applause.

The Poles have a particular way of Encamping, viz. in a very large Square,
enclosed on all sides; the first Line consists of all the Infantry, with the
Artillery in the Center, the Dragoons on the Wings, disposed according to the
German manner, the Officers encamping in the Rere, and the Soldiers making
Baracks for themselves. The second Line is formed of the Gens d' Arms, Hussars,
Pancernes, Peteores, all called Touariches. The two Flanks are closed by the
Light Horse, Cossacs, Vallachians and Poles, to whom there is added Pancernes
and Dragoons, as the Number of the Troops will allow, and the Ground requires;
so that the Camp fronts every way, and the middle or space betwixt the two
Lines serves for a Market to the Victuallers, Merchants and Purveyors.

As to the Artillery, which is at the Head, sometimes without the Line,
sometimes in the Center. It has its particular Guard, viz. a Regiment designed
for that purpose, called the Regiment of Artillery. The Strageniks advanced
Guard, is beyond the Square, separated from all the rest, as I have already
said.

The King's Quarters, those of the Senators, Grand General and Volunteers is in
this Enclosure, adjoining to the Hussars, at the Head of the Line, which is
begun by the King's Company, the Lieutenant of which commands all the rest, and
his Drum gives the signal of March; there being no such thing amongst the Poles
as beating to the Watch in the Evening, nor for a General March in the Morning,
during their Encampment.

This leads me to speak of their Tents, which in Poland are extraordinary
magnificent both for Number and Beauty. They are the same with those of the
Turks, that is to say, of a certain coarse Cloth, much like our Tent Cloth,
painted without, and lined with a Cotton Stuff, cut out in Figures,
Flower-Baskets, Squares, Compartments. Their form differs according to the
occasion, some have Pavillions with Porches in form of a Wall and double Roofs;
Some of them resemble long Halls, others are like square Chambers, called
Cotars, made of coarse Cloth, and lined with another Stuff, resembling
Tapestry, with Glass-windows and Deal-floors, and encompassed without by a
great Wall that forms an Ally or Gallery round it, which composes a Wardrobe,
and a Lodging-place for Servants. These Cotars are of admirable use in the
advanced season, and resemble true Stoves.

As the Poles surpass all other European Nations in this sort of Magnificence,
so the Turks do much exceed the Poles; both of 'em affect to show their Pomp
and Grandeur in the richness of those Moveable Houses, as thinking them most
convenient for them. The Quarters of the Polish Generals, and Turkish Pachas,
are encompassed with Walls that have Battlements, flanqu'd with little
Pavillions, or Turrets like Towns; they have likewise Halls for Council,
Closets, Porches to eat in, great Kitchins and prodigious Stables. The Parc or
Quarter of the Grand Vizier before Vienna was as large as St. Denis in France;
that of the Pacha of Egypt resembled a Magnificent Palace, adorned in the
inside with Rich Tapistry, Alcoves and Cushions. The Polish Senators make a
faint Resemblance of this Martial Pomp. It is a very fine fight to see their
Quarter, because of the Variety of Colors, the Gilded Balls on their
Pavillions, the diverse Apartments, and the vast extent of their Lodgings. The
King has so often defeated the Turks, who always leave considerable spoils
behind them, that his whole Quarter or Park is made up of those of the Bassas
he has defeated; and amongst others, of them that commanded the Ottoman Army at
Kotchim, called Soliman and Ussein, whose Tents demonstrate the magnificence of
their Serasquiers, or Commanders in Chief, and of the Grand Senior's
Favorites. Soliman had a Hall for his Council or Divan, the Largeness and
Beauty of which charms me every time I think on it. The Tapestry was of Silk
and Gold, the Workmanship and Figures of which were as agreeable as the Matter
was rich. The Columns that supported it were all gilt, and the Architecture of
them, resembling those of the Columns of a Palace; the Cords of it were of Silk
and Cotton, of a wonderful Largeness and Beauty; and indeed there are few
People of Note, either in Poland or Turkey, but the Cordage of their Pavillions
is of Cotton.

I should here speak of the Pay of the Polish Armies, but have reason to fear
that the Reader will be weary of such a particular account, therefore shall
only say in general, that it would be good enough if the Republic took care to
give it regularly; but they don't much trouble themselves to pay the same
quarterly, according to the order of the Diet. The Colonels, who are absolute
Masters of their Regiments, take less care to distribute to their Soldiers the
little Money which they receive from the Treasury, or from the Provinces upon
which their Pay is assigned; they never clear Accounts with their Officers, but
give them only a Sum in part of what is due, which here they call ad rationem,
or on account; so that the Captain is obliged to keep back the Pay of the
Subaltern, and the Soldiers who starve for hunger, whilst the Captain makes up
his loss by pillaging on his march. Indeed when they are in the Field, he takes
care for the subsistence of his Company; for having neither Ammunition-bread,
nor Sutlers, at least in no great number, the Soldiers would starve, and the
Campagn by consequence come to nothing, if the Captain did not take care to
have Meat and Bacon carried on Wagons for his Men; and this is the reason why
they are obliged to have so much Equipage.

Let the Reader judge then, if any Man of Honor, or Officer of Merit can be
fond of the Polish Service, since he cannot live there without pillaging, nor
have any satisfaction to see himself at the Head of a Troop of Beggars in Rags,
who have neither Mein nor Discipline, all their Exercise consisting in forming
of a Battalion, and discharging their Pieces. If they were to make a general
Attaque, the Major Generals themselves would find it hard enough to manage a
Trench; and yet they are for the most part chosen out of the ablest Officers,
and the eldest Colonels of the Foreign Army. Their Office looks somewhat like a
French Marshall de Camp, but in Poland it is a mere vain Title without Profit,
and Authority without Sallary.

The next thing to be discoursed of, with relation to their Pay, is the
advantages of the Great Treasurer of Poland, because of the dependence the Army
has upon him, and the Compositions which the Officers are obliged to make with
him, who quit part of what is their due, to have the rest in ready Money. Thus
they say Count Morstin enriched himself when he was Great Treasurer of the
Crown. But when this Officer is too rigorous, he may occasion great Disorders,
if not Revolts, which endanger himself. There was an Instance of this in the
Reign of King Casimir, upon Gonchefski, the Grand General and Treasurer of
Lithuania, which may well make his Successors tremble. The Lithuanian Army
being dissatisfied with some Article or Command of the Treasury, they entered
into a Confederacy against this Lord; twenty five Towariches, or sworn
Officers, went to his House, pulled him out of his Bed from his Lady, carried
him to the Field, with a Confessor at his Heels, obliged him to confess himself
speedily, and afterward killed him. This unparalled Crime was only punished
on a small number of those Madmen that were found, whose Heads were cut off;
one of them being condemned to have his Hand burnt off, holding certain Papers
in it; and being daubed over with Pitch, suffered that punishment with as much
Constancy as Scevola, without ever opening his Hand, or turning away his Head.

Since I am come to speak of the Army of Lithuania, I shall only say, that it
is an Auxiliary Body, independent on the Army of the Crown, submitting only to
their own Generals, who acknowledge no Supreme. They assemble the Army, assign
them Quarters, and act with them according to their own Pleasure and Interest;
though in general they regulate themselves by the Councils held at the end of the
Diets, or the beginning of the Campagns; but those Resolves, and their Actions
never keep pace: Their best concerted Expeditions do frequently miscarry for
want of Union and Agreement. For Example during the Siege of Vienna, which I am
going to relate. The King was returning back to Poland, when the Lithuanians
joined him in Hungary. At the Battle of Kotchim, their Grand General Pats
refused a long time to fight, so that the Crown General, then called the Great
Marshall Sobieski, took it upon himself in point of Honor, and resolved to
answer for the Event; notwithstanding all which, Pats would not Charge till
after Sobieski had forced the Turkish Camp, but retired from the Council the
night before, refusing to consent to the Expedition. During the famous Campagn,
which General Sobieski, then King, continued so long in the Winter, the
Lithuanian Army refused to follow him after some days march, which did so much
provoke that Great Prince, that he published Circular Letters to send them back
as useless, which might be called a Casheiring them, if the King had that
despotical Authority in Poland. He completed that Expedition only with the
Army of the Crown, and subdued all Ukrania to the Republic, whose Standards he
advanced within ten days Journey of the Black Sea.

Let us speak at present of the Arms of the Poles in general. Of old they made
use only of Scimiters, Lances, Gides, Javelins, Bows and Arrows; at present
they have added Firearms, and most of them have Pistols, with which they don't
hit very exactly, though they be great Skirmishers. By degrees they lay aside
their Lances and Gides; their Javelins are almost wholly disused, so that they
have nothing of the Old Sarmatian Armor left but the Bow and Arrow. The first
Journey I made into Poland, all Horsemen, of any distinction, and the Gentlemen
belonging to the King, Queen and Senators, still carried them, even as they
traveled through the Country, and made a Noble Ornament of those Arms in time of
Peace. I have seen the King and Princes carry them; they are not unbecoming,
nor unseemly in a Chamber, where the Poles expose them upon a piece of Tapestry
by their Beds side, as a very considerable part of Housholdstuff. Though indeed
this Armor is of no other use to them but for Ornament, for they are not very
dextrous at throwing the Javelin, nor at shooting with the Bow as are the Turks
and Tartars, who use them in Skirmishes instead of Firearms. Yet there are
still some Poles who are very dextrous at this Exercise. The King especially
has a particular grace in managing the same, and a strength accompanied with a
dexterity that comes nothing short of the Nations, that have most experience in
those sort of Weapons. From this use of Arms formerly so common amongst the
Poles, they formed a Proverb answerable to our French Proverb, of knowing the
Sole by the motion of the Foot, to denote the penetration and discerning
faculty of any one, who discovers in another the Marks and Signs of secret
Conduct. I heard a pretty application of it by the King in a Senate, who
speaking to a certain (...) of a contrary Party, that pretended to give advice
for the good of the Republic, but pointed indirectly at some part of the
King's Conduct, which he had a mind to blame; that discerning Prince signified
to him, that he had discovered the Secret, and knew his Design, by telling him,
that when he saw an Arrow in the Air, he could tell from what Quiver it came.

The Poles had formerly Bucklers of Ozier, covered with Skins, of a round
Figure a little raised, pointed in the middle, where there was a piece of Iron,
the use of which is now almost abolished. I have seen some Lords carry them in
a day of Review or Battle, not so much for Defense as for Ornament; for on such
Occasions they fix them to the Saddles of their Led-Horses. When the King
marched to the Relief of Vienna, he had a mind to review his Cavalry in the
Plain of Tarnovitz, the first City of Silesia, before Count Caraffa, who was
sent by the Emperor to receive his Allie at the entrance of his Dominions. The
King drew them up in Order of Battle the morning before his March, that the
Emperor's Ministers might see the Beauty of his Troops. The Polish Senators,
who had there their Troops of Hussars or Pancernes, appeared at the Head of 'em
with all the Warlike Ornaments of the Nation; their Rich Murrions, Gilt
Harness, Magnificent Houzes, splendid Coats of Mail, and some of them had
Bucklers of great price, for so I think we may call 300 Ducats of Gold for a
Buckler of Ozier. It Is true they allege that they are proof against Shot, but
for any thing that appears by them, there is nothing to commend them but a
pleasant variety of Colors, and a Satin Quilt in the inside. The King who has
in the Armorial Bearings of his Household a Buckler of the Roman Form, that is
to say, long and pointed below, with an Orillon on the upper part, had one of
this fashion of Beaten Gold fixed to his Saddle; upon which there was in Bass
Relief, the representation of the Battle of Kotchim very well done. That Prince
used to place the same Buckler, and a Scimiter enriched with Jewels, upon the
Table of the Chamber of Audience, on those days when he admitted the
Ambassadors of Foreign Princes.

The Poles have a Scimiter longer and heavier than those of the Turks, but
don't cut so well, whether the fault be in the Blade or Hand. The Poles
endeavor to accustom themselves to the use of this Heavy Weapon, by the
continual use of certain Battle Axes of great weight, to break their Arm, as
they term it, for the use of the Scimiter. Besides they make it a kind of
exercise, and study to accustom themselves to the use of it, by frequent
fencing with Clubs, to which their Youth is much addicted. There Is constantly
to be seen in the Streets of Warsaw and other Cities, but chiefly when the
Court is there, Troops of Boys, Servants, and others fighting with Clubs; they
challenge those who pass by, and will put Clubs in their hands to oblige them
to fight, as Fleurets are presented in a Fencing-Room to the Spectators that
come in. This general Custom joined to the Natural Animosity there is betwixt
the Poles and Lithuanians, has given rise to a very bad Custom, which the
Public connives at either from a Principle of Stupidity or Policy, as those of
Venice suffer the Quarrels betwixt their Nicolotti and Castellani. During the
Diets the Servants or Followers of the Nobility, who are most of them
Gentlemen, assemble together according to their Country, take the Field with
Drums and Trumpets, take up those they find in the Streets, force them along
with them, and fight bloody Battles, though only with Clubs, the Conquerors
pursue the Conquered, besiege them in the Neighboring houses, and enter as
formally into the Town, as if they were Regular Troops, and this almost every
day, having first chosen a Marshall or President for each Party, which is here
an indispensible Custom in Assemblies of all sorts, which may rather be called
Routs, because of the Confusion that is to be found in those of them that are
the most famous and Regular. This Marshall presupposes that there have been
other Lesser Combats, for in order to become Marshall, he must have conquered
all the other Candidates, and the bravest of those Champions. Antipathy and a
desire of Conquering, have insensibly rendered those Battles very dangerous; for
in 1690. they begun to make use of Firearms, and this Licentiousness rose to
that degree of fury, that there was a necessity of sending the Guards to
disperse this Rabble, who had made several discharges, killed abundance of
People, and besieged the House of a Palatin. Those of the Crown distinguish
themselves from the Lithuanians by a Handkerchief they put in their Hats
instead of a Scarf; and as they are most numerous, they generally come off
Masters of the Field at Warsaw, but then the Lithuanians have also their Tour
at the Diets held at Gr^dno in their Country. This is what they call the
^ombats of the Klopeches, or ^^^pietz, i.e. Boys, which is a Name common to
Servants of all sorts.

Such is the Order of the Armies of the Republic, who might perhaps be as good
as formerly, were they complete, paid, and well entertained, but the want of
those things has dissolved their Military Discipline, and made the bravest of
them indifferent for the Service, which neither desire of Glory, sense of
Honor or Duty, have been able to cure. The General Officer, the Colonels and
Captains go to the Camp as to an unprofitable Drudgery. Nay, the first do now
begin to forbear their attendance without shame, and spend their time at their
Country-houses, or at Court. The Subaltern does not begin his March till two
months after the time appointed for Rendezvous, and the Touarizes don't make
much more haste, so that the Grand General wearies himself out by staying alone
in the Camp waiting for the Troops, and thus is witness to the losing of many
opportunities, and sees the best concerted Designs and Enterprises miscarry by
those disorders and unaccountable mismanagements joined with the Natural
Carelessness of the Poles, and the Impunity to which they are accustomed. The
Palatin of Russia the present Grand General, does indeed begin to make his
Authority valued, and to restore Discipline in the Camp, having ordered several
People to have their Heads cut off at the Entrance of the Campaign of 1688. He
likewise checked the foolish Pride of the Hussars, by taking away their Lances,
arming them with Carbines, and sending them out upon advanced Guards and
Convoys as Light Horse. This he began in 1689, and if he continue, there may be
some hopes of restoring the Ancient Polish Valor; for these Troops are not
really bad, but fight in great and small Bodies, as well as those of other
Countries, if they be well managed. They understand little of the Art of War
during a Campaign, as to know how to seize a Post or Defile. They are yet more
ignorant of the Way of Managing a Party, though they make very large ones; and we
may truly say, they understand nothing of Sieges. All their time is spent in
ordinary Skirmishes and Fights. The Stratagems of War are little known amongst
them. They send out for intelligence or discoveries some Cossack Foot, who Lie
in Ambuscade one by one in Woods, or hide themselves in a hole that they dig in
the ground like Badgers, and fly like Wolves upon any miserable fellow that
straggles from the Camp, or on a March, and this Prisoner they call a Tongue,
because of his informing them of the State of the Enemies Army. After the Siege
of Vienna, I saw one of those Savage Partymen return to the K. with a Turk tied
so as a Huntsman does a great Beast, and push him brutishly into the Tent
without speaking a word. The K. gave those Cossacks ten Crowns for each Tongue,
as they call them; and relied very much upon them for getting such fellows on
occasion, as the fittest persons in the Army for that Trade; as to which I
cannot omit one particular, which may serve to give the Reader a better
Character of those Savage Fellows. A Cossack returned one Evening with a Turk
taken in that manner as I have said, threw him into the Kings Tent, just as if
one should throw down a Bundle upon the ground, and then went to the Treasurer
for his Premium; after which he returned to the Door of the Tent, and thrusting
in his head to thank the K. said, John, They have paid me, God restore it thee,
and good night.

Their great Parties are usually considerable Detachments, or Entire Brigades
of Polish Cavalry. Those Brigades are from 600 to 1000 Men, and are called
Poulk. Thus all the Gens d'Arms are divided amongst the principal Officers of
this Body, as is also the rest of the Cavalry, Cossacks, Vallachians, or Poles,
whose Poulks are composed of 40 Companies. We must except the Hussars, who
don't enter into the Brigades, their Companies serving alone. The Brigadiers of
the rest are twice as proud, but nothing braver than the other Officers. I knew
one of them called Miogensky, that was first Gentleman of the Kings Chamber,
and is now Treasurer of the Court, who hearing some Poles returned from France,
telling Wonders of the Valor of the Troops of the Kings Household, boasted that
he would with his Poulk and a hundred Horse only, beat all those Gens d' Arms
to pieces. This Bravo said, he never returned from a Party without putting his
Enemy to flight, though a whole Garrison, and that he had repulsed the Enemy to
the very Gates of Caminieck: Yet never did any Man fly better than this Person
and his Brigade, on two occasions, especially at the Town of Eperiez in
Hungary, where he was shamefully beat by a Party of Rebels.

I must not forget one Circumstance relating to the Hussars, which is that
every Year they had new Lances given them at the beginning of the Campagn; for
it was supposed for their Honor, that they had broke those of the preceding
Year; and indeed formerly nothing more shameful could befall an Hussar, than to
bring back his Lance from an Engagement, and therefore new ones were always
carried in Wagons with the Camp to supply those that were broken. At the
beginning of each Campagn, when the Captain gave the Hussar, his Lance he used
to give him a Present of 100 Crowns with it toward the Charge of the Campagn,
besides his Pay from the Republic.

There Is another Circumstance no less necessary to be known for the better
discovery of the Polish Genius, and their way of making War, viz. that the
Hussars Pancernes and other Gens d'Arms who are paid their Winter Quarters in
Silver, and have nothing to look for from the place where the Company is
Quartered, spend that time either at home or at their Captains Court, and leave
their Servants only with the Standard. In 1688. the Tartars made an Irruption
toward Volhynia, where they forced some Regiments of Foot into places
fortified with Pallisado's, and carried off whole Companies of Hussars, as was
said in the Gazetts, but 'twas only the Pacolets or Hussars Servants; and
besides, there were several Companies, particularly that of the Great
Chancellor of Lithuania, which had not above seven or eight Servants at most
left to guard the Standard.

Being unwilling to tire the Reader with any more particulars of this nature, I
come now to the particular Account of the famous Expedition of Vienna, which
was so extraordinary in all its Circumstances, so happy in its Success, so ill
disputed by the Turks, and so little expected by the Christians. An Expedition
famous for its Event, considerable for the Number of Princes that came thither
to put themselves under the Command of the King of Poland, whose great Fame
excited a general Curiosity, and laid the Foundation of the Hope of the Empire.
I shall relate the Matter as a faithful Historian, being ready to account for
the Truth of my Relation before those who were present at that great Action.

CAP. II.
Containing the Relation of the Campagn of 1683: being the first after the
Rupture of the Truce betwixt the Emperor and Turks.
THE Ottoman Empire became so formidable under the Reign of Sultan Mabomet IV.
and the Ministry of the two Grand Visirs, Kuproli the Father and Son, that the
least March of the Infidels gave the Alarm to all Europe. The Battle on the
Banks of the Raab, where the Auxiliary Troops of France put a stop to the
progress of the Turks, and saved all Germany, did a little diminish the fear on
that side: But their subduing the Kingdom of Candie in 1669. by taking its
Capital renewed it. The Grand Visir Ahmet Kuproli, according to the Politics
of the Port made a Truce of twenty years with the Emperor of Germany after the
bad success of the Battle of Raab or Saint Gothar. He renewed a Truce with the
Republic of Venice, that stood in need of a breathing after their Useless
Expense and Efforts to preserve the Kingdom of Candie, which that same Kuproli
had just taken from them.

The Sultan bethought himself afterward on other Conquests: He turned his Arms
against the Muscovites upon the mouth of the Boristhenes or Nieper, which he
shut up with his Fortresses to prevent the Incursions of the Cossacs, and their
Entrance into the Black-Sea. He attaqu'd the Poles, Anno 1672. and in person
besieged Caminiec, the Capital of Podolia, and afterward Yasloviets and
Bouchach, advancing further into the Province, which was all subdued or ruined.
These successful Exploits extended themselves into Ukrania, whose Revolt the
Grand Senior favored, and he would have extended his Arms into the very heart
of the Kingdom toward the Vistula if the Grand General and great Marshall
Sobieski, had not ruined all his vast Projects by the Battle of Kochin, where
he defeated a flourishing Army, commanded by two Bassa's of Reputation, Soliman
and Usseyn.

This Defeat put the Turks out of a condition to oppose themselves next Year to
the Irruption of the Victorious Sobieski then chosen King, who in 1674
recovered part of Ukrania, and advanced, as has been said already, within ten
days Journey of the Black-Sea. But being much weakened with that long
Expedition, in the middle of the Winter, during which the Tartars having joined
the Rebel Cossacs under their Commander Doro Chenko, they harassed him
continually, and once shut him up near Bratslavia. Thus the Sultan gained the
upper-hand of him again, and in 1675 repulsed him as far as Leopold, and at
last shut the Polish Army up in their Camp near Jurafno, and attaqu'd them in
their Trenches, where after a very bloody Fight, the two Nations made a Treaty
for many years, and the King of Poland sent an Ambassador to the Port to
Ratify that Peace, when the Turks by a Contravention very ordinary amongst
them, forced the Polish Plenipotentiary to add and diminish what they thought
meet.

The Sultan renewed the War against the Muscovites. His good fortune which
Kuprolis Ability maintained with luster, did not fail him under his Successor
Kara Mustapha Pacha in the beginning of his Ministry. This Visir besieged the
Fortress Tcherrim, and took it in the sight of above 100000 Men who came to its
Relief, which did so raise his Courage and Vanity, that he thought nothing too
hard for him to undertake. He was at that time in favor with Mahomet, whose
Daughter he had married. His Riches were immense. The Sultans Treasury being
filled with the Spoils of Christians, and his Empire increased by considerable
Conquests, he thought there was nothing could hinder his attaining to the
Universal Empire. The Example of his Predecessor served him instead of a Plan
to direct him in his design. Kuproli had formed that of subduing Italy, toward
which he had opened his way by taking of Candie, and which he had in a manner
blocked up on one side by the places he was possessed of in Dalmatia, and on
the other by the Provinces which lie at the back of it, viz. Bosnia, Sclavonia,
and the other Provinces of the Ancient Illyria; and besides this, by the
Fortresses that the Sultan had gained gradually almost to the Gulf of Venice.
On the side of Germany, the Sultan was possessed of the Country from
Constantinople to Styria on one part, and to the Frontiers of Austria on the
other, including the Kingdom of Hungary, and the Provinces betwixt the Danube
and the Dniester, which he had rendered Tributary, viz. Vallachia, Moldavia and
Transylvania, formerly the Country of the Dacae. So that if he could have got
Vienna for a place of Arms, he would have enclosed by a double Crescent Italy
on one side, and Poland on the other. He had sufficiently discovered his design
to conquer Vienna by taking Neuhausel, and afterward attempting Raab, which
commands both the Banks of the Danube, and is within eighteen hours March of
Vienna. The Marquis de St. Andre Montbrun, had perceived his design in regard
of Italy, when after the taking of Candie, which he had defended so long, and
with so much bravery, he wrote into France, That the Grand Visir Kuproli had
opened a Way to Rome, and by what he knew of that Ottoman Generals humor, he
doubted not but he had a design to turn St. Peter's Church into the Grand
Seniors Stables; but the death of the said Visir defeated all those designs.
This Visir was born in a Village of Illyria, called Kuprocu, whence his Family
took the name of Kuprioli, so that he was not the Son of a French Renegado, as
some have falsely given out. His Father Mehemet Kuproli was likewise Prime
Visir, one of the Greatest Men that ever filled that Post, and executed that
Charge with as much success and capacity as ever his Son did, who succeeded him
in the Ministry, and which is looked upon as a Prodigy that two Grand Visirs
should have died in their Beds, and succeeded one another. He left a Brother
behind him, as great a Man as himself, and more learned, whom he consulted in
all his Enterprises. He lived obscurely as Governor of Chio, but in 1689. the
new Sultan Solomon brought him from thence, and advanced him to the supreme
Government of the State which his Father and Elder Brother had enjoyed. But I
return to my Story.

Kara Mustapha Pacha willing to follow the Plan, laid down by his Predecessor,
resolved on the Siege of Vienna, to raise the Glory of his Master and himself
above that of the Grand Solomon, otherwise called the Magnificent, who failed
of taking that place, because of his not daring to Risk his Fortune against
that of the Emperor Charles V. who came to Relieve it with an Army of 80000
Men. Besides this thought his Vain Ambition inspired him with another, which as
several Turks informed me, was to out-rival Louis le Grand, to conquer Germany*
and France, and make himself Emperor of the French, and those Visions of his
were known in the Divan and Army.

Such a Vast Design required Extraordinary Preparations, which the Visir worked
on for seven or eight years with wonderful application, so that there never was
seen such a vast deal of Money, Ammunition, Artillery and Equipage as he
amassed. He thought to have taken Vienna immediately, as he did Tcherryn, being
mightily possessed with an Opinion of his own Valor, and a contempt of the
Germans, whose Valor he measured by that of the Muscovites, and therefore had
provided all necessaries for revictualling the place forthwith, thinking to
make it the place of his Residence, and therefore he had a Magazin and Arsenal
kept apart in his Camp to be thrown into the City after its being reduced. We
must not deny the Visir the Justice that is due to him concerning this design,
and the putting it in Execution since this vast thought was conducted with so
much ability, care and prudence to the very Bastions of Vienna. Never was there
a bolder Enterprise than this, which the Hand of the Lord only did frustrate;
Nothing was ever more fine than the Preparations he made for it; Nothing more
glorious than his first success, so that no General could carry on any thing
further by his own Ability had Foresight, the rest is in the hands of the Lord
of Hosts, who scatters them with his Breath, as he did here this Army of
Infidels.

Besides those Great Precautions Kara Mustapha was not wanting in those
Excellent Qualities which make a Complete General. He had Valor, Elevation and
Capacity, but with those an unconceivable Boldness and Presumption, supported
by his Riches, and the favor of the Sultan his Son-in-Law, which Character he
maintained with all the Grandeur, Expense, Pride and Splendour imaginable. His
Equipage, his House, his Furniture equaled the Magnificence of Kings, and
surpassed that of the greatest of other Princes. That which I saw of it in the
Army was surprising, his Wagons for carrying what belonged to his Chamber were
painted and gilt. His Turkish Coffers, which are ordinarily of Ozier, and
covered with Leather, were covered with Crimson Velvet; his Pavillions, his
Tapestry, his Movables discovered so much Pride and Pomp, as makes what the
Romans said of the Ancient Kings of Persia credible. And as to these things
designed for his own use, never was there any thing seen more beautiful,
delicate, handsome, gallant and rich* especially in his Armor, Scymiters,
Anchars or Daggers, Quivers, Bow-cases, Saddles, Housses, Harness for his
Horses; but still more in things prepared for his own Body, as Girdles, Vests,
Turbans, which were so covered with Jewels, that nothing else was to be seen.
He had 150 Valets de Chamber, who had nothing else to do, but every one of them
to take care of one piece of his Attire, as three of them informed us who were
taken in the Camp before Vienna after he fled. To look upon this surprising
Treasure of Riches and Magnificent Equipage, one would think that this General
came rather to a Triumph than Battle, and so much the more that there, was
found in his Coffers, abundance of rich Standards of Cloth of Gold designed for
a Triumphal Pomp, and some Ceremony of Establishing a Mosque, but the King of
Poland Consecrated 'em in diverse Churches to the Glory of the God of Hosts, as
that of St. Peter at Rome, Loretto, and diverse Churches of his own Kingdom.

I shall only add, to complete the Visirs Character, that he was a handsome
Man, though of a swarthy black Complexion, like those of certain remote Provinces
in Asia, as is signified by his Name Kara, which in the Turkish, is as much as
to say Black. There are diverse persons of this Color at the Sultans Court;
Mahomet IV. himself is so, as was the Caimacan, and the Visir of Buda, the
Visirs intimate Friend, who was preferred to that Post by his means instead of
another who was a Man of sense, and dissuaded the Port from undertaking the
Siege of Vienna, for which sage Advice he was rewarded with the Loss of his
Head.

The Fame of the Great Preparations of the Ottoman Court spread abroad
insensibly; the King of Poland at the same time bethought himself of
Preparations. The Diet of Grodno having left the disposition of the Affair to
him, he sent Ambassadors into diverse Courts of Europe, but the Cabals amongst
them for driving on their private Interests, made all the good designs of that
Prince to miscarry. The Convocation of 1681. terminated in vain disputes. The
Diet of 1681. was broke by the Elector of Brandenburgs Intrigues, so that every
thing was suspended in that Country by the misunderstanding there was amongst
the Members of the Republic.

The Muscovites on the contrary thought of nothing but Peace. The Czar sent one
to Constantinople to treat of it, and at the same time, that he might have two
Strings to his Bow, according to the vulgar saying, he sent an Ambassador to
the Convocation at Warsaw in 1680. to propose a League against the Turks, that
so by threatening the Port with that Alliance, he might obtain the better
Conditions, or assure himself of the Assistance of the Republic in case the
Treaty with the Turks came to break off. But having succeeded in their design
at Constantinople, they recalled their Ambassador from Warsaw, and the
following year, viz. July 1681. the King of Poland sent an Embassy into Persia
to represent to the Sophi, the Advantages he might reap in that conjuncture, if
he would declare against the Sultan, who being taken up with his Vast Design
against the Christians, could not be in a condition to dispute the Conquest of
Babylon with him, which was taken from his Predecessors by Amurat; but the
Sophi would not listen to those Overtures, preferring the Interest of his
Religion to the Aggrandizing of his Empire, though the Turks themselves look upon
the Persians as Infidels, because they follow Alis Interpretation of the
Alcoran. Yet on this occasion he would manifest to the Turks, that though he
erred according to them in point of Discipline, he followed their Essential
Opinions, and was acted by the true Spirit of Mahometism, in sacrificing the
particular Interests of his Glory to their common Sect. Thus Count Siry the
Polish Ambassador returned without having been able to engage the Sophi by the
Natural Motives of Ambition or Grandeur, he loved his Repose and Pleasures
covered over with the pretext of Conscience, better than the Conquest of
Babylon his Ancient Patrimony, and its probable he also informed the Sultan of
it, to assure him against all fears of any such diversion.

The Court of Vienna being more alarmed than the rest of Christendom, labored
with all possible Application to cover themselves from the Storm with which
they were menaced. Count Teckleys Progress in Upper Hungary seemed to prepare
the Grand Seniors path, so that the Imperial Ministers endeavored all they
could to lay some Obstacles in his way. They prevailed in Transylvania, where
Prince Michael Albaffi abandoned the Rebels by degrees; they also engaged the
King of Poland on the Emperors side, and in the mean time until they could pry
further into the Designs of the Turks, the Court of Vienna maintained the War
against Count Teckley with as much Vigor as they could. General Caprara
wandered up and down in Hungary, without being able to save the Provinces, the
Hungarian Count taking Places of importance there every day in spite of him.
The Grand Visir well knowing the importance of the Counts Progress, which made
his so much the easier, neglected nothing to fortify the Malcontents, sent
them Troops instead of the Transylvanians who had withdrawn, and had a mind to
have deposed Abaffi, for which end he was summoned to the Port; but suspecting
the reason, he avoided the Snare by temporizing, and paying his Money instead
of going in Person. The Grand Visir had a mind to Invest Count Teckley with
that Province, until such time as he could bestow on him the Kingdom of
Hungary, of which he enjoyed part already, with the Title of Prince. He was at
the same time declared the Son of the Port. He had an Army assigned him with
three Pachas to act toward Presburg on one side of the Danube, whilst the
Grand Visir was to act with the other toward Vienna in Austria and Bohemia;
one part of his Vast Design being to march directly to Prague after the taking
of Vienna, as the Turks informed me during my Captivity.

Matters being thus stated, the Emperor in the beginning of 1683. sent Count
Albert Caprara to Constantinople, to endeavor to renew the Alliance betwixt
the two Empires, by renewing the Truce concluded after the Battle of Raab, some
years of which were still unexpir'd, and by this means to discover the
Intentions of the Sultan, and the State of his Forces and Affairs. But the
Grand Senior was so far from listening to Count Caprara, that instead of
renewing the Truce, he prepared to break it before the Term was expired, and it
was published to the World, that the Grand Senior had wrote an Answer to the
Emperor in threatening and execrable Terms, the Punishment of which was not long
deferred, since that same City of Vienna, in which it is said he threatened to
exterminate him in spigbt of his Crucified God, was the Rock on which his Power
was shipwrecked, and gave the first Mortal Blow to the Ottoman Empire, by the
terrible Arm of that same God, who overturns the Cedars of Lebanon as the least
Shrub in the Vallys.

The Court of Vienna had no Recourse to any but to the King of Poland, and he
after concluding the League, labored with all possible diligence to raise the
Army that the Republic had resolved to pay, he gave out Commissions to the
Colonels, and sent into Ukrania to raise Cossaes with the Money he had from
the Pope, that Prince relying much upon this People, because of the Ancient
Valor of the Infantry of their Nation. I have heard him a hundred times cry
out upon the slowness of those Troops, for not coming up in time, he did all he
could to hasten their Levies, and recommended it to the Queen at parting, to
hasten their March all she could, as if the safety of Vienna had solely
depended upon the presence of the Cossacs. The King of Poland opened his own
Coffers, a thing which his own Family could never hope for at his hands, and
which Strangers never expected, It is certain that all that passed in those
Preparations of War, was a true Miracle in regard of that Country, where the
Execution is slower than the Resolves. The Emperors Ministers acted also on
their part, and gave out the Sums promised to hasten the Army; every one
discovered their carefulness in this matter, yet Poland could never get
together 18000 Men. Lithuania did very little better; their Generals could
scarcely assemble 6000 Horse, Dragoons, or Gens d'Arms, nor did they artive in
Hungary till the latter end of October; but to say the truth, never was there
any thing so fine, nor well equipped, as all those Troops both of the one and
the other Nation.

The Court, after the Diet of 1683. retired to Villaneuf, where the Queen was
brought to bed of a Prince about the end of June, which was taken for a happy
presage of the prosperity of the Royal Family. The King made an end of his
Consults there, and sent his secret Spies into the Enemies Country to learn
their Motions, and observe their Marches. He sent into Transylvania, whose
Prince Michael Abaffy beforementioned, not being able to dispense with
following the Grand Visir, did nevertheless entertain a strict Correspondence
with His Majesty, and never failed neither in Fidelity or Exactness, writing to
him Regularly even by Express from the Camp before Vienna; informing him of
their Attaques, Losses and Advantages by way of Journal, and all in as good and
pure Latin as any that was wrote in the time of Augustus. I saw all those
Dispatches, and should have published them here in particular, if His Majesty
would have consented to the publishing those Memoirs which are so much for his
Glory; but he has no itch after that Fame and Renown which Men are so fond of
elsewhere.

Count Teckley entertained also a Correspondence with His Majesty, but with
more reservedness, it not being his Interest to favor the League, or the
Germans his Mortal Enemies, though it was to keep in with the King of Poland,
that he might be a support to him, and Moderator for him, in case the Turks
received any considerable Check, besides the Interest he had to preserve his
Estate on the Polish Frontiers, and to secure his Lady, who was shut up in the
Mongatz, a strong Fortress in his Patrimony situated in the Mountains near
Scolia; it being moreover plain, that it was not Inclination, but Policy that
obliged him to serve the Turks. The King of Poland sent a secret Minister in
August 1683. to reside near his person, and to entertain this Correspondence
with mutual promises, that the King should not attack Hungary toward his
Frontiers, and that Count Teckley should not come near Cracow, where he might
have seized the Court after the March of the Poles. The Person thus employed
was one Ghiza, a Polish Gentleman, formerly a Pensioner of France. He was much
addicted to the King's Service, a Man of Intrigue of a good Wit, a reserved
Humor, and fit for the Negotiations of that Country. He had besides some
influence on Count Teckley, having been acquainted with him at the University,
and in effect he confirmed him in the King of Poland's Interest.

He found with the Count a French Gentleman, called the Count de Forval, who
had obtained great Credit in his Court, by the Natural Sympathy and Agreement
there was betwixt his and Teckley's Manners and Temper, being a lively
sprightful pleasant Man, Learned for a Person of Quality, well acquainted with
the World, could Carrouze without being drunk, and was very Complaisant in
pursuit of his Pleasures, even to the ruin of his Health. He came into Poland
with the Marquis de Bethune, Ambassador of France in 1675. and was sent from
thence on the King of France's Account to Teckley, whose Friendship he knew how
to acquire. After having served as a Colonel in the Auxiliary Troops, with
which the Count's Army was reinforced, he resided with him as a Minister, and
had so far gained upon him by his Wit and Conversation, that Teckley was
willing to retain him in his Court, by Marrying him with a Countess, one of the
Richest Heiresses in Hungary.

The Count de Forval, before the Irruption of the Turks, having returned to
France, obtained leave of the King to go and serve Count Teckley, and went to
him by way of Venice, through Bosnia and arriving at Belgrade, Ghiza and he were
much surprised to meet one another there, having been well acquainted before,
when both employed in the French Service in Poland.

During all this Management the Grand Vizier assembled his Army at Belgrade,
and the Duke of Lorrain assembled the Emperor's near Comora and Raab. He was
joined by the Polish Troops in the Emperor's Pay, commanded by the Chevalier
Prince Lubomirski, who had treated with them for three Regiments. The Duke
advanced afterward to the other side of the Danube, where he formed the Siege
of Newhausel, an important Place, the furthest advanced of any belonging to the
Turks, about 8 Hungarian Leagues from Presburg, that is to say 12 Hours March
at least* situated in a vast Plain, Part of which is Marshy, and Part of it
full of Ditches, and hollow Ways, but all of it open and cultivated: It is
bounded on one side by an Arm of the Danube, to which another great River joins
called Waag, and on the other it has a pleasant Edge of little Hills, and
altogether form a charming Lantskip with considerable Towns, frequent Villages,
and generally a fruitful Soil. The Town is small, formerly built of Brick, with
with large Streets, paved in the Hungarian Manner, that is to say, with Borders
raised like a Casway, with 6 Foot of Earth. It had stately Churches, very Lofty
Monastries and Considerable Palaces, amongst others that of the Bishop of
Nitra, Spiritual Lord of Neuhausel, upon which are still to be seen the Arms of
the Bishops that built or repaired it. At present all those Houses are in
Ruins, where the Turks have formed 'emselves Habitations, without restoring
the Buildings, to which they have added other Houses made of Earth and Wood,
according to the Custom of that Nation, who never repair any thing that they
acquire. They have turned the Churches into Mosques, the Palaces into Lodgings
for their Bassas, and others of the first Rank. The Convents were given to the
Soldiers of the Garrison, the rest is inhabited by Merchants and Tradesmen of
their own Nation and Way, for after Ahmet Kuproli the Son took it, not so much
as one Christian staid in the Town, but all of them retired elsewhere.

The Town is regularly fortified with 6 Royal Bastions, according to the Modern
Way, faced with Brick, well terrassed, with a great Parapet of Turf, betwixt
which and the Wall there is a very large Way. The Top of the Platform is also
very large. Each Bastion has a spacious Cavalier capable of containing 500
Men, the Streets of the Place end at the Avenues, and the whole Circumference
is very Easy and Commodious for giving Mutual Assistance to one another. It
has only two Gates; they are well vaulted, but have neither Ravelin nor
Half Moon, this being only the Body of a Fortification, which the Turks never
suffered to be completed. Nay, the Ditches are not all throwly dug, and beyond
'em there is the Draught of a Counterscarp, which shows the Ingineers design,
so that all the Outworks remain about the Height of a Man, and the Place has
no other Defense, but an Inundation, which fills the Ground designed for
Ditches, and leaves a little Space at the Foot of the Walls in form of a Fausse
Braye. This City had a little Suburb going to the Gate that looks toward
Comorra, beyond the little River Nitra, with a sorry wooden Bridge after the
Polish Manner, which is not Unuseful to cover this Front, though it be the
easiest Part of the Town to attack by drawing the Water from the Ditches, and
conveying it away by the River.

As for the rest, the City is encompassed with marshy Medows, through which
there lie Cause-ways, shaded with Trees, and admirable Gardens, from whence, as
also from the River Nitra, the Turks had great Relief, there being no Water in
the Place. It was furnished with Cannon, Arms, Powder and Provisions for 2000
Foot and 800 Horse, the usual Garrison, and defended by two Pachas, the one
being Governor called Aly, and the other his Deputy called Mustapha: The
former was about 60 Years of Age, of a good Aspect, with a venerable, large,
gray Beard, and of more than a middling Stature, of a melancholy Air, lean
Face, of a Carriage genteel enough, but Ignorant to a Progidy, a great Hater of
the Christians, and full of the foolish Vanity of the Turks, who have a mighty
Conceit of their own Nation and Power. The other, on the contrary, was a young
Man of a good Countenanco, fair Complexion, pleasant Look, full Face, of a cold
but easy Access, a Noble Mien, and about 40 Years of Age. The Turks call this
City Oiiy-War, a Hungarian Word for Bishops-Castle. After 'twas taken by the
Grand Vizier Kuproli, it was agreed, that the Christians might build another
City in lieu of it in the same Country; whereupon they erected Leopoldstat,
within 6 Leagues of it fortified much in the same Manner.

The Duke of Lorrain had scarce begun his Approaches before Newhausel, till he
heard of the March of the Infidels. But the Court of Vienna whom he informed of
it, being prepossessed with contrary News, ordered him to continue the Siege,
since the Grand Vizier was still at Belgrade. He obeyed, and very narrowly
escaped being swallowed up by the Ottoman Army, having had much difficulty to
retire his own, and to throw them speedily into the Isle of Comorra, commonly
so called from the famous Fortress at the oint of it, but properly called the
Grand Schit, or Schut, by which he saved the Empire. That we may the better
understand the Importance of this Step, I must inform you, that the Isle of
Schit, is one of the finest in any River of Europe, begins near Presburg, and
lies along for the space of 10 Hungarian Leagues. On the Point opposite to the
Turkish Couutry; as you go down the River, there is a little City formerly
walled, and still a good Town, called Comorra, covered with a Citadel, that is
looked upon as Impregnable, and a Masterpiece of the Art Military, both in
regard of its Situation betwixt two large Arms of the Danube, which wash its
Flanks and join together at the Point of its Bastions, and in regard of its
Fortifications and Works. It has one called Couronne in Mathematical Terms,
whose Extent, Regularity and Outworks are certainly comparable to the finest of
that kind, as is also the Esplanade which separates it from the City, but the
Body of the Place, is nothing answerable. It Is an Irregular Pentagon, because
in order to possess all the Ground of the Point, they were forced to contract
the Fortification toward the end, where there are little Bastions and narrow
Curtains; but that Part is well enough defended by the two Arms of the Danube,
and the height of the Ramparts. But toward the City the Works have their full
Extent, the Ditches, Half Moon, space betwixt the Glacis, and the Crowned Work
answer very well to the rest, but those who are versed in Fortifications, think
the Defenses too near, the Walls too high, and the Flanks ill defended. I
observed one Irregularity here, which is a great eyesore, viz. That the Gate
opens in the Corner of the Curtain, almost touching the Bastion on the Right,
and looks more like a Postern, than the Gate of a Citadel. It Is also very
strait within, and the Lodgings crowded too near together, which would be
hurtful to the Garrison, if it were bombarded, but three Days in the French
Manner, but as for the rest, every thing there is very Magnificent, and well
covered, so that the Place being well entertained might pass for one of the
best of the kind. The Emperor has always two Governors in this Place, the one
a German and the other an Hungarian according to the Privileges of that
Kingdom, as at Raab and other principal Places.

The Isle of Schit has some other Towns that were formerly considerable, and
well peopled, but at present little frequented: There Is abundance of large
Villages in it, and the whole is extraordinary fruitful. It is one of the best
Parts of the Kingdom of Hungary, and a Canton of an enchanted Country, both in
respect of its Beauty and Fertilty. It Is above 20 Leagues in Circumference, and
in some Places above 8 in Breadth, so that I look upon it to be larger than
Malta. Beyond the Danube on both sides, there is such a Country as cannot be
expressed, boundless Plains watered with other great Rivers that come to
enlarge this on the Right and Left, such is the Raab, upon which is settled the
Town of that Name, called otherwise Javarin, near which there is another Island
called Little Schit, by the side of the great one; and the Nitra, which passes
by Newhausel, and about 6 Leagues higher washes, a Town called by its Name,
besides some others no less Considerable.

'Twas into this Island the Duke of Lorrain threw his Army on the approach of
that of the Turks, to secure this fine Country and the Citadel, and to cover
his Troops from the Enemy, without which prudent Foresight that prevented the
Grand Vizier, the Infidels had certainly seized it on their arrival. They
marched up the Danube upon the Bank on the Right, having left on the other side
a great Body of Troops, under three Pachas, to augment the Hungarian Army,
whose General had Order to possess himself of Presburg, that they might be
Masters of both sides the River, and to hinder the Conjunction of the Germans
and Poles, and block up the Way of the latter to Vienna. It is also said, that
Count Teckley, when he had seized Presburg, was to have made himself be crowned
King of Hungary there, with the same Ensigns of Royalty that their former Kings
used to be crowned with: but this is only a Conjecture, without Foundation.

Whilst this Army marches toward the Country assigned them, the Grand Vizier
advances toward Raab, with a Design to build Bridges over the River of that
Name, that he might pass to Vienna. He held, as the Pachas of Newhausel
informed me, a General Council upon this Great Affair, and against the Opinion
of all those who assisted at it, would undertake the Siege of that Capital
City, without amusing himself with little Expeditions. The Visir of Buda
represented to him vigorously, the Difficulties of that Enterprise, foretold
him his bad Success, and laid him under a Necessity of taking the Event of the
thing upon himself, which did so much vex the Ottoman General, that after his
Misfortune he threw the Blame upon the said Vizier of Buda and the Tartar Han,
made the Head of the former to be cut off, and the latter to be degraded. Upon
which those Pachas bewailing the Misfortune of their Nation, sighed for the
loss of the Great Kuproli, and blessed his Memory, remembering with what
docibility he asked the Opinion of old Captains on the least Occasion: Whereas
Kara Mustapha his Successor, believed there was none better than his own.

He advanced, in fine, as far the Town of Raab, which he made as if he would
besiege, and took his Posts round it, the better to amuse the Duke of Lorrain,
and that he might with more ease surprise the Place, which he had only in his
view. Raab, Yavarin or Javarin, is one of the best Towns of that Country, built
in the same Form, and of the same Size with Newhausel, as to the Town, but of a
prodigous Extent, as to the Fortifications, heaped one above another, all good
Pieces of Turf, and the Outworks admirable, but not faced. It Is situated near
that Branch of the Danube, which forms the little Isle of Schit, and has
before its Walls the River of Raab, which falls there into the Danube; so that
it may be represented as in the Point of a Pennisula, betwixt those two Canals.
It has two Governors, as the Citadel of Comorra, and a very considerable
Bishopric, possessed by the Cardinal de Kolonitz.

The Grand Vizier encamped round it, as if he would have besieged it, and
continued there seven whole Days, during which he made three Bridges to be laid
over the River Raab, on the other side of the City, about a quarter of a League
above, without Cannon shot of the Town, which he hid from the besieged, by
seizing himself of the Posts on the Neighboring Hills, that surround it, so
that he missed very little of surprising Vienna unprovided, the Duke of Lorrain
not having perceived that Design t^^ very late, and the Emperor, who continued
there without any manner of Suspicion, had scarce so much time left as to go
out of it: Nay further, the Tartars who were commanded to go and and invest it,
found the People quietly reaping their Harvest in the Fields, within three or
four Miles of Vienna, and Gentlemen and Women traveling through the Country, as
if the Turks had been still at Belgrade* Of those unhappy People surprised on
the Roads, I have seen a great Number, and amongst others Col- Rosemberg's
Lady, who was carried to Boudziac, and ransomed two Years after, from whom I
knew this Circumstance in Poland, whither she was conducted.

The Grand Vizier passed the Raab unexpectedly, as soon as his Bridges were
finished, and marched with great Diligence. The Duke of Lorrain got before him
however, with the same Celerity across the Isle of Comorra, and threw all his
Infantry commanded by Count Staremberg, into the Island of Leopoldstadt
opposite to Vienna; and, in fine, marched them opportunely into the Town with
the General, by the favor of those Islands through which he conducted them; so
that the Turks could never cut off their March. He continued with the Cavalry
some Days in Leopoldstat, but fearing to be shut up there, if Count Teckley
advanced on the other side of the River and entered Austria, by the River
Morave: He thought best to retire from that Place, where he might be starved,
or taken without striking one Blow, being locked up betwixt two Rivers and two
Armies. Thus he secured Vienna by his first March, and by his next March he
saved the Remainder of the Army, marching out of the Island by the great
Bridge, to which he set Fire, as soon as he passed it. His foresight herein was
admirable, for scarce had he reached the other side of the Danube, when the
Tartars sent to invest Vienna, entered that same Island by the small Branch of
the River, which runs along by the Walls of the Town, and was at that time
fordable. They were followed by a Body of Infantry, who marched straight to the
Bridge that the Duke had caused to be burnt, and whilst he put that Great
Exploit in Execution in view of the Enemy, the Janisaries made a terrible Fire
upon him with their Muskets of an extraordinary Size, and entrenched
themselves upon the Bank of the River in the Island, as having a design to
rebuild the Bridge, and indeed that was the Grand Visier's Design, to the end
he might have an Entrance into Austria on that side, and a Communication with
Teckley and Hungary, and that the Tartars by their Incursions into Moravia and
Silesia might stay the Poles in their own Dominions, and lay the Country under
Contribution, as far as Cracovia. Every thing seemed to favor this Design,
every thing was for them on the Way, they had no River to pass, being once over
the Danube, they had no Towns to take, no Mountains to pass, no Forests to
march through, and plenty of Provisions every where in the Country, which they
might have carried to the Camp before Vienna.

All these Circumstances set off the Duke of Lorrain's Conduct in this March,
with the greater Luster, he having by those Motions, saved both Vienna and the
Empire. The remaining part of his Conduct was answerable, for in the following
Part of this Campaign, we shall find him put a stop to the Enemies Projects, in
two or three important Rencounters, the success of which would have stoped the
Passage of the Supplies. We come now to see what happened upon the arrival of
the Tartars before the City.

The Grand Vizier marched them with so much diligence, that they appeared
before the Town at the very same Moment that the Emperor and Empress went out
at an opposite Gate, to make their Escape to Lintz, without having time to
carry either Money or Jewels with them. Most of the Lords of the Court left
their Equipages behind them. The Marquis de Seppeville, Envoy of France, could
not carry off his, and his Gentleman of the Horse, staid willingly behind to
take Care of it. -- He was a Man of Valor, proud of the Opportunity of being
in a Siege of that Importance, but was killed in a Salley. The Bishop of Gratz
buried 400000 Crowns there, that he could not carry off. All those
Circumstances which appeared so afflicting at first, were yet the true Cause of
the Visier's not taking the Town, and that too from the same Motives that
should seem to have made him hasten it. He was informed of the Riches shut up
within the City, and fearing to lose them during the Pillage, if his Army took
it by Assault, he moderated their Efforts, and slackened their Attacks to
oblige the Town to come to a Capitulation, with which all the Officers
upbraided him, for by this means he gave the King of Poland time to arrive,
whereas had he staid but three Days longer he had come too late.

The Court being gone out of the City, the Gates were shut, Cavalry was posted
in the Ditch, and Skirmishers were detached to dislodge the Platoons of the
Turks that had posted themselves on the little Heights about the Town, so that
several little Fights happened at the beginning in sight both of the Army and
City, which wanted not their own use to confirm the Garrisons Courage, and to
accustom them to the Turbans and Scimiters. But at last that innumerable
Multitude of Troops, having posted themselves about the Town, and enclosed it
in form of a Crescent, beginning from the Bank of the Danube, which the Turks
had on their Right, and extending as far as the Mountains on the Left. The
German Cavalry posted themselves on the Counterscarp and in the Ditch, and in
the mean time the Tartars ravaged all the Country for Forage, and extended
'emselves more than 15 Leagues above Vienna toward Bavaria, which obliged the
Emperor, who thought himself not safe enough at Lintz, where he just arrived
time enough to avoid being taken, to retire to Passaw. The Particulars of this
Flight are very afflicting. The Court lay the first Night in a Wood, where the
Empress being six Months gone with Child, could scarce have a little Straw to
repose her self upon. I have seen a Relation of it wrote by the Nuncio Bonvisi
to the Nuncio Pallavicini in Poland, which contained many such Circumstances.

For the better understanding of what I have already said, and am further to
say concerning this famous Expedition. It is necessary to lay down a Plan of
Vienna, and of the Turkish Camp and Army. The City of Vienna being the Capital
of Austria, is situated on an unequal Plain, being cut with Rising Grounds,
hollow Ways, and little Heights, watered by the River of Wien, which gives Name
to the City, runs within 100 Paces of the Counterscarp, and nearer in some
Places, betwixt the Glacis of the Counterscarp, and a Suburb, into which we
enter by two Stone-Bridges of very little use during the Summer, when that
River is almost dry. Behind that Plain toward Upper Austria, there rises a
Chain of high Mountains, which begin at the Danube, and extend thewselves
toward Styria and Tirol, serving as a sort of Rampart and Barrier to the Town,
which is covered by them. Those Mountains descend by Stages, like an
Amphitheatre, to the very Avenues of the Suburbs, being a vast Quantity of
little Hills rough and Stony, deep Pools occasioned betwixt them by Rain, the
Ascent of them steep, and the Heights rugged. There Is abundance of Villages
amongst them, and concealed Houses in the Bottoms, and all round a vast
Plantation of Vines, which fills the Body of the Amphitheatre. Upon the highest
part of the Mountains, where the Chain begins over the Danube, there are two
solid Buildings, each of them situated upon a steep Hill, and separated by a
Valley. The one is a ruinous Castle, called Callenberg, and the other a
Chapel, dedicated to St. Leopold, from which to the Suburbs of the City,
there is a large half German League of descent a cross, those lower Hill, and
above a League to the Glacis of the Counterscarp. The Danube washes one side of
all this Ground, and before the City forms diverse Islands, by the several
Streams, which it throws out to the Right and the Left, the least and
shallowest of which touches the Walls at one end of the City, where there is no
other Ditch, only the Body of the Place, and a very high Wall, which covers the
Entrance of the City, with a Street betwixt both, the Canal of the River over
which there is a fine Bridge, serving instead of a Ditch at that Point. The two
other Arms which are the largest, have each of them a Bridge, of very good
Workmanship for Timber, and massy, such as the Depth and Rapidity of the Danube
requires. Betwixt those Canals there are several small ones, which cut the
Islands, but don't properly make distinct Arms, being only Streams that proceed
from the Inundations of the River. The first of those Islands, and the nearest
to the City, is a second Town, as we may call it, the whole Place being full of
Country-houses, Palaces, Gardens, great Walks of Trees, as those of the Course
le Reins, Enclosures, Thickets, Malls, and other things that conduce to the
Ornament of a Capital City: The whole being enclosed like a Park, with high
Pallissadoes of curious Workmanship. This is that they call Leopolstadt. From
hence we enter the City by a little Bridge, and a great Suburb beyond it, that
joins to the Houses of the Island; in which the Empress some few Years before
had caused a Palace to be built, called the New Favorita, which was the
principal Beauty of the Island, though, to speak freely, all those Houses,
Palaces and Gardens have little Magnificence or Grandeur in them, but the Place
of it self is very much adorned by Nature. The other Island beyond it, betwixt
the two great Branches of the River, is greater than Leopoldstadt, but without
Houses, being only adorned with Walks of Trees and Thickets: It Is called Tabor,
and communicates with the First, by a large Bridge, as it does with the Terra
Firma upon the Austrian-shore by one yet larger. This Canal is properly the
great Stream of the Danube. At the Head of this last Bridge, there is a little
Fort upon the Bank of the River, built only with Turf and Pallissados, which
was useful to the Duke of Lorrain, favored his Retreat, and covered those that
sustained the Party commanded to destroy the Bridge. In all the Letters which
that Prince wrote to the King of Poland about his Retreat, of all those
Islands, he mentions only the Tabor, as if he had confounded it with that of
Leopoldstadt, but it is certain that he possessed himself of the latter
immediately, from whence his Infantry marched to Vienna, and into which the
Tartars and Janissaries entered upon their arrival; so that it was not possible
for him to burn the Bridge, which joins with those two Islands. Yet he left
Coll. Greben there to defend it till he marched his Troops over the Tabor, and
gained the other Bridge of the Great Canal: But the Tartars seized it, defeated
the Detachment and took or killed Col. Greben, who was never afterward heard
of. Then they run to the other, of which the Duke of Lorrain had time to burn
part, and by that means saved the Remainder of the Imperial Army. Those Bridges
are now rebuilt, but to me they don't seem to be in the same Place, and the
Road across those Islands appears to be changed.

The City is encompassed with large Suburbs, which at that time extended very
near the Glacis, and to which the Imperialists had begun to set fire to
satifie, in some measure, the King of Poland, and to show some deference to his
Advice, for the Emperor thought there was no need of it; so that they left in
effect the Walls of the Houses and the Terrasses of the Gardens, which the
Turks made use of to place their Batteries upon, and to make their Approaches;
so that under the Shelter of those Ruins they advanced their Trenches within
60 Paces of the Counterscarp, the first Night that they opened them, which was
the 13th of July, 1683. This fatal Experience has since occasioned them to
remove the Suburbs at a greater distance, when they began to rebuild them after
the Siege. As to the Fortifications some of them are strong and others weak.
There are 12 Royal Bastions, faced with Brick, with Cavaliers, Ravelins,
Half-Moons, and fine Gates, all faced with Bricks, as the Bastions, and adorned
with Wreaths of hewn Stone. The Ditch is large and deep, part of of it dry and
part full of Water. The Counterscarp is very sorry, ill pallissadod, nor did I
see any thing that deserved to be called a Covert-Way, or any detached Works
beyond it. The side on which the Town was attacked, has two indifferent
Bastions, a Ravelin before the Courtin betwixt both, the whole covered with
Brick, with a Cavalier or Platform for Guns, and a large Ditch, but so little
Ground within, and so little space betwixt the Rampart and the Houses, that
there could be no Retrenchment made on it; particularly the Bastion of the
Court, the Emperor's Palace, joining close to it, and the Platform of it
serving instead of a Terrasse for the Appartments; so that when the Turks were
lodged at the Point of it. The Count de Staremberg could not make any more than
one Retrenchment, and told the King of Poland when he showed him the Breaches,
that he could not have held out above three Days longer, notwithstanding
certain Barricadoes he had made at the entrance of the Bastion, and of the
Streets which run into it; but I am of Opinion, as were all those who saw the
Disposition of the Ground, that it might have bin carried in 24 Hours. If the
Grand Vizier, had not despised our Supplies, been less intent upon the spoil of
the Town, and on the Evening before the Battle attacked the weak Retrenchment
of the Garrison, for all Ingineers agree, that he began the Siege like an able
Captain, and one that was well informed of the weak Places of the Town, and
that there is no other Place for carrying on of Trenches, but those of the two
Bastions attacked by the Turks, called the Bastions of the Lion, and of the
Court.

This was the Condition of the Place without, that within was not ill, there
being great Stores of Provisions and Ammunition, abundance of Artillery, the
Citizens resolved on a long Resistance, and vigorously to endure the fatigues
of the Siege. There was a numerous Garrison, for Count Staremberg brought
thither above 1000 Men, and was also seconded by Count Caplier, Commissary
General of the Provisions, who defended the Place longer than the other, that
fell sick of a Dysenterie during the Siege. But notwithstanding all this the
Duke of Lorrain was very much afraid of the Town, and amongst other Reasons he
wrote to the King of Poland at the beginning of the Siege, he acquainted him,
That Vienna, though well fortified with Bastions, ought to be looked upon to be
more a Courtly than a Warlike City, as being defective in Works, and a regular
Counterscarp, that which they had not being large enough in several Places.

It must be owned also, That it was very ill defended, and as feebly attacked,
since the Turks having advanced the first Night within 60 Paces of the Ditch,
were notwithstanding above six Weeks in passing it, though the Place was
battered with seventy Pieces of Cannon, of which there were twenty five of a
prodigious Size, and the Garrison made no great Sallies, but contented
themselves to defend their Ground foot by foot in the common Manner. I saw
nothing in reality in all the Letters from the Duke of Lorrain and Prince of
Transylvania to the King of Poland, that took any great Notice of the Vigor of
the Garifon, who undertook nothing extraordinary, but only sustained the
Enemies Assaults with Bravery, the Cavalry having continued a long time in the
Ditch, without making any attack, either on the Quarters or Trenches. The Turks
on their side did not push on the Attacks with vigor, so that the City, which
ought to have been in Ruins by Cannon and Bombs, was very entire, those Places
excepted that were directly exposed to the Batteries. I neither saw Steeples
beat down, nor many Houses shattered, and much fewer burnt, which confirms the
Opinion of the Pachas, that the Grand Vizier spared, that City for his own
Interest, whilst, by a quite contrary and ill understood Policy, he utterly
ruined all the Neighborhood, as far as from Presberg to 5 or 6 Leagues up the
Danube beyond Vienna. The Tartars in effect left furious Marks of their Rage
and Cruelty in those Parts for they not only depopulated those Countries, but
quite destroyed all the Houses, except one Castle belonging to the Emperor,
which is within a small League of Vienna, upon the great Road to Presburg where
the Turks laid up their Magazins, and which the Grand Vizier preserved out of
Respect to the Memory of the Great Soliman, because that Emperor, having
formerly encamped upon that Ground, when he besieged the same Place. The
Germans built an House there, with a Park, enclosed with Stone-Walls, flankd
with little Towers, looking like Pavillions, representing the Form and
Disposition of the Sultans Tents, whose Quarter was built by way of a Palace or
Seraglio.

Those that are versed in War could not comprehend the Reasons of the Grand
Vizier, who, without any necessity, thus ruined a fine Country of the Conqest
whereof he assured himself and designed to have made it his Residence: Besides
that in ravaging behind him, he not only starved his own Camp, but also cut off
all Possibility of Subsistence, in his retreat, in case of any Misfortune;
whilst at the same time he spared the Country on his left hand toward
Newstadt, and the Mountains of Styria, where the Tartars had scarcely ever
touched. He had pitched his Camp from the Brinks of the Danube; which enclosed
his right Wing, to the Foot of the next little Hills, where the Vineyard was,
taking up a vast Tract of Ground, in Form of a Half Moon; insomuch that the
very sight of it was formidable. The Tartars had advanced further, having
passed the first Arm of the River, and possessed themselves of the Isles
over against the Place: On the first of which there was an Attack, with a
Battery of only six Pieces of Cannon, pointed along the Streets of the Suburbs,
against a Bastion on the outside, which is washed by the little Stream of the
Danube. This took up the width of the whole Street, and could be nothing but a
false Attack, to fatigue the Garrison; for its Works were inconsiderable, though
that Arm of the River was not only fordable but very shallow in that Place. The
other two Approaches were toward the middle of the Camp, full of irregular
Cutts, Turnings and VVindings, after the Turkish Fashion, with frequent Places
of Arms, all well covered and guarded, the Trenches being deep* and the
Parapets raised high; besides which, the laborious Janisaries had made several
Holes like Huts to secure themselves from the Granado's, Firepots and Bombs; as
for Stones they did no hurt there. In a word, all that could be thought of for
strengthening a Trench, and covering a Battery was practiced here. No Body ever
saw such fine Works and Gabions, nor so many Fascines and Sacks of Earth,
particularly on the Brink of the Ditch, from whence they defended the Lodgments
made upon the two Bastions.

The Grand Vizier had taken up his Quarters upon certain little Heights, near
that renowned Palace, called the Favorita, which he enclosed within his Park;
the extent whereof was prodigious: I have heard the King compare it to the
largeness of the City of VVarsaw. He had added Gardens, VVater-Courses and
other Imbelishments to it, and also a sort of a Menagery; for after the Siege
was raised, several Rabbets, live Pigeons, and the Body of the finest
feathered Ostridge that ever was seen, whose Head the Visier's Party had cut
off as they retired, were found there. He was a Man who loved his Pleasures,
and Magnificence in all things, mixing them always with a Representation of
War. The Cares of that Siege did not debar him of his Divertisements, nor
interrupt his Amors. And I know that the Mufti, who accompanied him in that
famous Expedition, often reproached him with his brutal Debaucheries,
threatening him with the Vengeance of God, and Forewarning him, as by a Spirit
of Prophecy, that his infamous Commerce with Boys (which the Turks as well as
Christians, are forbid under very severe Penalties) would be the Cause of the
ruin of the Empire, and of his ill success in that Enterprise.

He had little reason to fear it humanly speaking, for the Ottoman Empire had
never assembled so vast an Army, nor so many Pioneers at once, nor gathered
together such vast Quantities of Ammunition and Artillery. The Camp was an
entire World, as one may say. I have heard some Turks, who pretended not to
exagerate when they said, That it consisted of seven hundred thousand Men,
including regular Troops, Pioneers, Artificers, Domestics and such as composed
the Trains of the Officers. -- When we arrived to the top of Mount Callemberg,
and first saw them, we were struck with Fear and Admiration, at the same time,
which we could not avoid, at the sight of so many Men, and such great Riches,
agreeable to the Grandeur and Puissance of the Grand Senior: But the terror
wherewith we were seized overcame our Admiration; when the King asked one of
his Gentlemen, who advanced to the top of the highest Mountain, to view them,
and bring some News of them, he gave so terrible a Description of them, that
the whole Army trembled at it; which that great Monarch seeing, and fearing
lest such a Prepossession might discourage the Army, he openly derided the
Gentleman's Relation, calling it a Coward's Vision* but when the Business was
over, being himself amazed at his good Success, he confessed, that he had
Reason to speak of it, as he had done, and that his Fear was very well grounded.

Amongst this prodigious Number of People, which I have spoke of, 'twas
computed that there were nigh 300000 fighting Men, without including the
Tartars, and other Auxiliary Troops, as Walachians, Moldavians, Transylvanians,
etc. But according to the just Relation of an Envoy from Count Teckley, who
afterward followed the King of Poland to Cracow, that Number was reduced to an
hundred and sixty thousand effective Turks, whereof 22000 Men were at that time
killed, (being in the Month of August.) The Grand Vizier depending upon his
formidable strength, marched as if it had been to a Triumph, and had carried
the Residents of the Emperor and of the King of Poland, chained as Captives, to
be witnesses of the same, the former was found in that Condition, in the Camp,
after the Flight of the Turks, who had forgot him there. I determine nothing
about the precise Number of this prodigious Multitude of Troops, and pass over
the diverse Relations that have been made of this great Affair. I tell in a
Historical manner what I know from the Original, recommending the Reader to
judge of the thing upon two Circumstances; one of which is, that next Morning
after the Battle there were remaining at ten of the Clock, twenty five thousand
small Tents, after a whole Nights plunder, which began about 7 in the Evening:
If the Turks put 4 Men in each Tent, as we do, it is easy to draw a Conclusion
from thence. The other Circumstance relates to the Tartars, who have no Tents;
besides these a great many were scattered in the Neighboring Islands, the
Grand Vizier had left ten thousand Men to guard his Bridges upon the Raab, to
hinder the Garrison of that Place from burning them; and besides all this the
Sultan, who was advanced to Belgrade, to encourage the Expedition, had sent
him, toward the end of the Siege, a Reinforcement of twenty thousand Men, in
the Room of those that might be killed or dead; but they did not arrive in time.

Whilst he batters the Place with a terrible fury, Count Teckley advances
through Hungary to Presburg, with another Body of about twenty thousand Men,
Hungarians and Turks, the latter commanded by three Bassas. He had brought over
almost all that Kingdom to his Party, and the arrival of the Grand Vizier
augmented the Inclination which those who still adhered to the Emperor, had for
a Revolt: Thus the Town of Comorra was burnt by the Rebbels, under the favor
of this Irruption; and that of Presburg opened its Gates to Count Teckley, and
received a Turkish Garrison of about three hundred Men. The Grand Vizier, being
informed of its Surrender, sent some Troops thither, with Orders to lay a
Bridge over the Danube, to the end that the Tartars or some Turkish Cavalry
might pass over the same, from his Camp before Vienna, into that other part of
Austria, bordering upon Moravia, in order to shut up the Passage of the
Succors expected from Poland. But the Duke of Lorrain, being informed of the
Surrender of Presburg, and fearing what the Vizier had projected as to a
Bridge, he advanced in great Diligence thitherwards, with the rest of the
Imperial Army, which since its March out of the Islands of Leopoldstadt and
Tabor, moved up and down the Plains on the other side the Danube, along the
Roads where the Troops of the Allies were to come. He carefully concealed his
March, and slipped during the Darkness of the Night, into the Thickets and
Vineyards above Presburg, from whence he sent some Horse by break of Day, with
Orders to approach the Castle, and to see whether 'twas still in the hands of
the Germans, to the end he might put some Troops into the same, and afterward
force the Town to return to the Obedience of the Emperor.

Presburg, the Capital of the Kingdom of Hungary, Residence of the Governor
General, called Palatin, and the Place where the States assemble, for the
Election and Coronation of their Kings, was formerly a considerable City, and
an Ancient Roman Colony, founded by Piso, from whence comes the Latin
Denomination of Posonium, which the Turks and Hungarians have corrupted to
Poson. It has only been the Capital of the Kingdom since the Turks took Buda,
which before that time was the Residence of the Kings of Hungary, whose Palace
is yet to be seen, at least Part of that which King Matthias caused to be built
there, and called by his own Name.

Presburg is situated upon the left hand Branch of the Danube, enclosed within
a Chain of little Hills, covered with Vineyards, and the Channel of the River,
which is very broad there, and washes its Walls. Upon one of those rising
Heights, near the City, is a Castle, or more properly a Noblemans House, which
in reality is very large, in Form of a Square, but all entire: It is covered by
a Modern Fortification, with some Works at a distance upon the brow of the
Hill, on that side which commands the City. The Town is only girt with a single
Wall, flanked with great Towers of Stone, and a covered Rampart sufficient to
stop an Army for some Days; The Gates are very broad, but the Ditch is narrow
and not very deep. It Is not very considerable within; there are some Fountains
in it, several Churches pretty well built, some Squares, but small and huddled
up, there is a great many People in the Town, and extraordinary plenty of
Provisions; and above all of admirable Fruit. I have heard the King of Poland
express his wonder at this Plenty, as the Product of a fortunate Country, and
of a Climate cherished by the Heavens, which ought not to surprise us, for he
spoke without doubt in Comparison of that from whence he came, where Nature
overwhelmed with Snow, produces nothing that is delicious; though, to speak
the Truth, there are few Countries in the World, better than the Kingdom of
Hungary.

Notice being given to the Duke of Lorrain by his Men, that the Castle of
Presburg held out still, he advanced thither with his Troops, and summoned the
Town, which delayed its Submission to the Emperor only to gain time for the
Turkish Garrison to march out at an opposite Gate, and to give 'em leisure to
regain Count Teckley's Camp, which was pitched upon a rising Ground, about a
quarter of a League beyond it. This step broke all the Measures of the Grand
Vizier for building his Bridge; for which all the Materials were already got
together in the Town. The Duke of Lorrain did not content himself with having
retaken the Town, but went in quest of the Enemy on the other side, who boldly
offered him Battle, and bore the Shock with Vigor; But at last were broke by
the Imperialists, and pressed upon, in their Retreat, by the Polish Troops
under the command of Prince Lubomirski who signalized themselves on this
Occasion. The Duke of Lorrain having afterward given necessary Orders for the
Security of Presburg, he repassed the Morave, foarding it as he had done before
when he went thither and pitched his Camp at Levenstorf, in the same Plains,
where he had not been long, till he saw the Enemy again. Anchar, one of Count
Teckley's ^^eutenants, returned with a great Detachment of Hungarian Troops,
and passed the Morave burning wherever he came, and ravaging the finest Country
in all Austria. The Duke of Lorrain being informed of this by the Spies
belonging to the Polish Troops, could not refuse Prince Lubomirski, who
commanded them, the Glory of Fighting those Rebels, with the Regiments of their
own Nation only, and the said Prince having obtained leave for that purpose,
led on his Men with extraordinary Vigor, and obtained an entire Victory,
without giving the Enemy time to rally. The Detachment was cut to pieces, and
Anchar himself was killed by a Dart, thrown by a Kettle-Drummer of the Regiment
of Pancernes. This Action was much valued by the Duke of Lorrain, in whose
sight it was done. He wrote a Letter about it to the King of Poland, and in the
same did particular Justice to their General. Pr. Lubomirski is certainly one
of the bravest Men of his Age, being all Fire, and having all the vigor that
can be desired for a brisk Expedition; he despises Danger, is without Fear, a
good Partisan, a Lover of War, but especially of Battles, desires always to be
charging the Enemy, as all brave Men do, who are not answerable for the Event
of an Action. The like Desire of Glory excited him to engage in the Battle of
Jurafno, in the Year 1676. where he gave marks of an extraordinary Valor, which
he also had Occasion for, to make amends for the Fault he had committed by
hazarding, in this Rencounter; the whole Polish Army, as likewise the King's
Person, and without a certain presence of Mind, which accompanied his Bravery
he would have found great Difficulty to disingage him.

After the Defeat of the Hungarians near the Morave the Duke of Lorrain marched
back to the Danube, toward that Place, where he had past the same, in order to
endeavor to inform himself of the State of the Siege. He endeavored diverse
times to throw in some Troops, by the way of the River, and otherwise, but
found all the Avenues shut up, and carefully guarded; insomuch that during the
Siege, it was impossible for him to inform the Governor of the Relief that was
preparing for him: And on the other hand, the Governor could not send any Body
to the Duke of Lorrain, but once a Jew, in disguise, who deceived the vigilance
of the Turks, by tarrying three or four Days in their Camp; wherein the
exactness of the Officers may be admired, and particularly that of the Vizier,
who shut up Vienna so close, as not to leave the least Passage for the
Imperialists, unless it were through the Air. He had shut up the little Channel
of the Danube above the City, and besides it was so low that Year, that one
could not swim under Water. If the whole Conduct of this Ottoman General had
been equal to those Precautions, perhaps the King of Poland would have met with
greater Difficulties in succouring the Place. But in the main, he committed
unpardonable Faults, being ill informed of the Marches of the Christians,
careless in shutting up, and guarding the Passes, and being willing to doubt of
the arrival of the King of Poland, he suffered a Bridge of above two hundred
and fifty Paces, to be made over a very rapid River, and permitted the
Christian Army to march over steep Mountains, where some little Detachments of
Foot might have stopped or at least much encumbered their March. He neglected to
possess himself of those Mountains, and to seize the two Forts, that I have
spoken of, which were very important Posts to hinder their Descent toward
Vienna, and he wanted little of letting the King of Poland fall upon him,
without coming out of his Camp; all out of a vain Presumption and extraordinary
Contempt he had of the Polish Army. The greatest of his Mistakes was his
besieging Vienna; for it is certain, that if he had sat down before Raab or
Comorra, the King of Poland would not have gone in Person to their Succor,
though they be Places of very great Importance, he not being obliged to it by
the Treaty, nor having promised the Pope any thing, but for Vienna.

Whilst he pressed the Town by his frequent Assaults the Duke of Lorrain, who
encamped at Clauster Neyburg, near the Danube, waited with Impatience for the
arrival of the Polish Army, and gave Orders for augmenting that of the Emperor,
which was joined by the Princes and their Troops from all Parts of the Empire.
The Elector of Saxony brought ten thousand four hundred Men thither: The
Elector of Bavaria sent almost as many, and soon after followed them in Person:
Count VValdeck conducted the Troops of the Circles thither. The Elector of
Branderburg did not make such haste, he would first have certain Fiefs, which
the Emperor was obliged to sell him for the Overplus of the Troops, that he was
to furnish, besides his Quota; so that that Body was but just entered Silesia,
when the News of the raising of the Siege past through that Country, being
carried to Cracow, where the Queen of Poland was. On the other side, the Duke
of Lorrain was busy getting together Materials for building a Bridge,
expecting that the King would determine the Place where he designed to pass the
River; and in the mean time the Grand Vizier caused a great Number of Tartars
and Turks to pass the River, some by swimming and others in Boats, who joining
Count Teckley's Army, formed a Camp in the Plains beyond the Danube, not far
from that of the Duke of Lorrain, who advanced to give them Battle. Both Army's
disposed themselves for Fighting. The Duke drew up his in three Lines, putting
the Polish Regiments in the first, and made the Emperor's Cuirassiers and
Dragoons to support the whole. The Turks charged with so much violence and
fury, that they broke the first Ranks, pressed in upon the Polanders, knocked
down all that stood against them, and pierced through to the last Line, where
the Count de Boutlaer was wounded in the Head, with as desperate a cut of a
Scimiter, as could be received without Death. The Germans seeing this Disorder,
opened very discreetly to the Right and Left, that the broken Troops might
pass, and having born all the fury of the Turks, and stopped their Impetuosity
by the firmness of the Squadrons of Cuirassiers, the Dragoons of the third
Line, received the Enemy without firing, charged them in their turn, pressed in
upon them, and the Polanders being returned from their first Disorder, and
having rallyed, seconded those brave Men so well that the whole Turkish Army
was defeated and pursued to the Danube, where the Bassa of VVarradin fell a
swimming through a Shower of Musquetshot, trusting to the strength of his
Horse, which actually carried him over to the other side in sight of every
Body. This Battle was fought on St. Bartholomew's Day 1683. and was the last
Action that happened in those Plains, where the Duke of Lorrain, being Master
of the Field, saved that part of Austria, with those Parts of Moravia and
Silesia that adjoyn to it, by his good Conduct. The People there were in
continual Alarms, they had barricadoed all their Ways, thrown up Retrenchments
before their Town-Gates, and armed all the Inhabitants of their Cities. In a
Word, all was in a Consternation as far as Breslaw.

CHAP. III.
The Continuation of the Campaign, with the March of the King of Poland, and
the raising of the Siege of Vienna.
Whilst the Duke of Lorrain was supporting the Emperor's Affairs, with the
utmost diligence, and the Princes of the Empire were gathering together their
Troops throughout all Germany, the King of Poland hastened the March of his
with all possible speed: The Generals assembled them as soon as they were
levied; and to give the Germans some Comfort of their Expectations, Lieutenant
General Schignafski began his March, with a body of Cavalry, composed of the
Regiments of Hussars, Pancernes, Peteores, and some other old standing Troops,
that were first in condition to March; The Great General followed with the rest
some Weeks after; The new-raised Foot marched separately from their Quarters,
where they were brought together by Regiments, by Companies, and by Recruits,
without any other Rendezvous than that appointed by the King in General, under
the Counterscarp of Vienna; insomuch that Poland was filled with Soldiers and
Equipages, marching in Disorder and with great Precipitation toward Cracow, in
order to enter into Silesia, where the Imperial Commissaries had prepared
Provisions and Forage for them.

The King of Poland regulating his Departure upon the News he received of the
State of his Troops, set out at last about the beginning of July, taking the
Road toward Cracow, which is reckoned to be about forty Leagues from
Villaneuf; He made something more of it, because he had a mind to go to the
famous Devotion of Chenstokova, as renowned in those Countries, and perhaps as
rich as the House of Loretto. Besides the Queen had made a Vow at her lying in,
and the King, whose Piety is equal with his other Virtues, believed that he
ought to beg, in that holy Place, the Protection of Heaven, by the Intercession
of the Virgin, seeing the Enterprise he had undertaken was for the Glory of the
Christian Name, the Defense of the Church, and the safety of the Empire.

From Villaneuf he went to Falenta, a fine Pleasure-House, about a League from
thence, where he tarryed that Day. The third Day he had Advice at Nadazzin,
where he dined, of the raising of the Siege of Newhausel, and the Retreat of
the Imperial Troops into the Isle of Schit, occasioned by the Approach of the
Grand Vizier: He lay afterward at Radgiovick, another renowned House in
Poland; at Rava, the Capital of the Palatin of Great Poland; and at the Abbey
of Vitouf, near Pietrecouf, (the Residence of the Chief Tribunal of the Kingdom
for the first six Months, which begins on St. Francis's Day, the fourth of
October.) He lay afterward at Krotchin which is another fine Country House,
belonging to the Count d'Henof, regularly built with Stone, adorned with a fine
Garden, with several Waterworks, Terras-Walks, etc. therein; and, which is
very rare in Poland, furnished pretty neatly. Next Morning the Court arrived at
Chenstokova, where the King tarryed to perform his Devotions: There he
dispatched some Courriers to the Emperor and Duke of Lorrain, who had sent a
Polish Gentleman, called Glinski, an Officer under Prince Lubomirski, to give
his Majesty an Account of the Turks before Vienna, which they had besieged. The
King of Poland wrote upon that Subject to other Courts to excite the Compassion
of the Princes in favor of the Emperor, who was chased from his Capital City,
and upon the very brink of seeing himself stripped of all his Territories; then
continued his march and arrived at last at Cracow, at a Pleasure-House which
the Kings of Poland have at the end of one of the Suburbs called Lobzouf, where
he staid some Days.

In the mean time his Troops advanced toward the same Place, and some small
Parties of them passed by every Day. Lieutenant General Schignafski came no
nearer than within two Leagues with his Body of Cavalry, which the King went to
see upon the Road, and ordered them to march by the Foot of the Mountains on
the left hand, that they might not fall into the Road, marked out for the Grand
Army, which was to the Right, the General Rendezvous of which was to be at
Tarnovitz, the first City of Silesia, and of the Emperors Territories toward
Cracow, being 12 great Leagues from thence.

The Grand General, who led the Body of the Army in Person from the Frontiers
of Russia, arrived some Days after, and encamped within half a League of
Lobzouf, from whence he continued his March through Bengin; and the King having
seen those two Chief Bodies of his Troops, go before, set out himself on the
15th of Aug. He took his way by the Foot of the Mountains to the Left, and
afterward fell into that of the Great Army at Bengin; where Count Caraffa the
Emperor's General, who was sent per Post to represent, that the danger was
Pressing, arrived two Hours before the Court. The fight of the Camp gave him
some hopes, but he could not yet believe, that the King was there, he being
prepossessed, as was the whole Court of Vienna and several others, that that
Prince would never go out of his Dominions; insomuch that when the Marquis
d'Arquyan, who was the first that visited him at Dinner, told him that the King
was just coming; the Count de Caraffa, as a Man who still doubted it, replied,
Sir, it is said so.

Before I go further, I must observe one Particular, relating to the Person of
Prince James, the King's Eldest Son, whom the Gazetts, through Ignorance or
Malice, have confounded with his younger Brother Prince Alexander, who was then
but 7 Years old; and yet they published, That he followed the King in this
Expedition: I am not ignorant of the Venom hid under this Affectation, and that
most of the Polanders prefer him to the Elder, as well because he was born upon
the Throne, if I may so speak, and after the Election and Coronation, as
because of his charming Behavior, and the fancy of the Nation. However, I
ought to undeceive the Public, as to the Error imposed on them upon this
Occasion, and to leave to Posterity the Remembrance of the first s^^ting out
into the Field of Prince James, Eldest Son to the King of Poland, was at 16
Years of Age. He was born in France, aad held at the Font by Lewis le Grand,
whose Name he also bears, with that of his Grandfather. It Is certain, that the
Polanders don't look upon him as the Son of a King, but only as the Son of the
Great Marshal.

On the 5th of August the King received Deputies from the States of Silesia,
who came to assure him, that the Provisions were ready upon the Road, as also
the Wagons granted by the Imperial Envoy, for carrying 200 Foot. The King, I
say, sent on the 9th Expresses every where, to hasten the new Troops, who began
to march the next Day. That same Day his Polish Majesty dipatched the
Gentleman, of whom I have already spoke, to Count Teckley, to entertain with
that Hungarian General, the mutual Correspondence they had agreed upon, and to
renew the Reciprocal Promises they had made each other, to wit, on the King's
Part, that the Polish Troops should commit no Disorders in Hungary,
particularly on Count Teckley's Land; and on the Counts part, that his should
not come near Cracow, as I have already said; to which I must add, what I have
heard from the King of Poland's own Mouth to Ghiia, when he took his Leave of
him, viz. That he must assure Count Teckley, that if the Malcontents should
burn one Straw in the Territories of Poland, he would go in Person and burn his
Wife and Children in his own House.

The Duke of Lorrain had daily given the King of Poland an exact Account of the
State of the Siege, by frequent Courriers; and Count Caraffa gave him a full
and the last Account of it whilst he was at Dinner at Bengin, as likewise of
the State of the Imperial Army, which was given out to be 14000 Horse and 30000
Foot: Whereupon his Polish Majesty opened his mind to that General, and
discovered to him the Design he had formed, to attack the Turks by way of the
Mountains of Callemberg, which he described to him in the Camp; and from that
Day I observed in the K. a Prophetic Assurance of his beating them, which the
Event has always made me to take for a Celestial Inspiration. Caraffa at the
same time told him how that the Imperial Court had been obliged, in flying from
Vienna, to leave in the Place a prodigious Treasure, in Money and Jewels, the
loss of which would be no small addition to their Grief; and conjured him by
all these Motives to hasten his March, whereof he would be assured before he
returned. In a Word, he followed the Court of Poland to Tarnovitz, and after
having seen the Review of the Army, and taken his Leave of the King and Queen,
he took Post, having ordered Horses to follow him, on purpose that he might be
able to assure the Duke of Lorrain, that he had seen them on their March, for
no Body ever believed that the K. would have led them in Person.

He arrived on the 21st of August at Tarnovitz, in the Neighborhood of which
Place the Army encamped that Day in many separate Camps, which the King caused
to be done, that it might appear to be the greater, not only to the Imperial
Commissaries, but also to an extraordinary concourse of the Nobility of
Silesia, who flocked thither to see this famous King, from whom the Deliverance
of the Empire was expected. They were supplied with Provisions in abundance,
the Polish Money past Current, Wagons were given to the Infantry to hasten
their March; and others got ready for the Cossacks, who were impatiently
expected by the King; in fine, all imaginable Methods of dispatch were formed
out, with such earnestness as the pressingness of the Occasion did rerequire.
Upon which, I find my self obliged to observe, that the Lithuanians have so bad
a Name for pillaging and other disorders in their Marches, that the Imperial
Commissaries prayed the King of Poland, to divert that Plague from off their
Country, and to cause 'em to march over the Mountains of Hungary; which way
they actually took, and failed not to burn, plunder, kill, etc. so that the way
they went might be discovered by their terrible Disorders; of which C. Teckley,
who was assured by the King himself of a kind Neutrality between the
Territories of Poland and those of Hungary, depending on him, testified a great
Resentment. All the Blame was laid upon the Lithuanian Generals, and upon a
Gent. of that Country called Teskievits, to whom the Q. had given the Conduct
of certain Troops, made up of straggling Men, that followed the Army of the
great Duchy of Lithuania, as if they had been their Retinue.

The 22d of Aug. the K. after Mass, went into the Camp in a Warriors Equipage,
having the Bontchouk carried before him, preceded by his Guards and Horses of
War, whose Harnesses were glittering with Gold and precious Stones, and,
without Exageration, with such a Richness, as I never saw elsewhere, or perhaps
it is not valued but amongst those sorts of Nations, as Turks, Persians, and
Muscovites, whose Pomp and Methods the Polanders imitate. The K. had ordered
his Infantry to break up before Day the better to conceal from the Germans, the
smallness of their Number, and the bad Condition they were in. The Artillery
which consisted of 28 Pieces of very small size, followed the first Day for the
same reason; for except 5 or 6 Cannon of a reasonable size, for Fieldpieces,
the rest did not deserve that Name. He would not therefore review any other but
the Polish Cavalry and Dragoons, which were truly extraordinary fine Troops,
all equipped as the best Regiments of Germany, which charmed the Imperial
Commissaries. The Grand General drew them up in Battalia, and the Princes and
Senators, who had Troops of Hussars among them, having posted themselves at
their Head, the King made a Review of them, and at the same time marched at the
Head of all in Person.

I shall not trouble my self here with the particular Description of the Places
along this Road, nor with the Incampments of the Poles during this March; I
shall do it at length at the end of my Narrative, that I may not break the
Thread of my Discourse; and shall content my self at present to inform the
Public, that the King from that very Day quitted his Army, in order to put
himself with all Expedition at the Head of that of the Emperor, where every
Body wanted his Presence, taking with him only a Body of 4000 Horse, and a
Detachment of twenty Hussars out of each Troop, who were instead of his Guards,
and marched about his Person without Lances: He wrote a Letter to the Pope from
Ratibor, to inform him of his hasty March with that Detachment: He lodged in
most of the Towns where they had prepared Lodgings for his Reception; in others
he encamped with his Guards. No Monarch ever received so much respectful Homage
from People of a Foreign Dominion, as the King of Poland received from the
Emperor's Subjects.

He marched through all Silesia, and crossed the Mountains (being seven Leagues
over) that part it from Moravia. He went through this last Province, and was
treated by the old Archbishop of Strigonia in the Town of Brin, which is the
only Place in that Country, that can be called strong, because of its Citadel,
that the Natives reckon to be impregnable. In fine, leaving the Plains of
Austria on his left Hand toward Ekendorf, he marched to Olle Brun, where he
encamped on the 31st of Aug. The same Day the little General of the Crown
joined the King, in his March with the Body of Cavalry, which he had conducted
by the Foot of the Mountains; and the Duke of Lorrain arrived just as his
Polish Majesty was causing those Troops to defile. Thus their first Interview
was in the open Field; the King received him at the Head of those Troops drawn
up, in order of Battle, whose fierce Aspect did excellently well suit with the
Noble and Warlike Air of that Monarch. The Duke lighted off his Horse at about
25 Paces distance from the King, who did the same at about 15, and after a
short Conversation, but very Affectionate, on both sides, both of them mounted
again at the same time, and went together to the Camp, that was marked out at
Olle Brun, where the King treated the Duke of Lorrain at Dinner: That Prince
gave afterward so many Marks of his Consideration and Esteem for his ^olish
Majesty, that the King thought he could never sufficiently testify to the Duke
of Lorrain, the Esteem, and, if I may venture to say it, the Veneration which
his Virtues and extraordinary Merits inspired him with. The Duke of Lorrain in
his Conversation after this Interview, said oftentimes, that the Republic of
Poland had never shown greater Proofs of Judgment than in the Choice they had
made of so great a King; and his Minister, Count Taff, being then present,
added, That the King of Poland himself knew very well, that in the time of his
Negotiation at the General Diet, he had assured him in the Name of the Duke of
Lorrain his Master, that he would desist from his Pretensions to the Royalty,
if he, the Grand Marshal, made any to that Crown.

The Army sojourned two Days at Olle Brun, and during this Interval 500
Dragoons and 1500 Germans were sent to lay a Bridge over the Danube. On the 3d
of Sept. they encamped near Stadeldorf, a Pleasure-House situated on a rising
Ground, wherein the King lodged, and in which the Elector of Saxony, who
arrived the night before, came to salute his Majesty; as Prince VValdeck had
done the Day before. On the 4th they tarried there to hold a general Council,
at which assisted (besides the Elector of Saxony, the Duke of Lorrain, and
Prince VValdec, General of the Troops of the Circles) General Caprara, and some
others of that Rank. On the 5th the Palatin of Russia, Grand General of the
Crown, arrived with the Polish Army, which the King saw defile, and ordered
them at the same time, to march to the Bridge, whither he followed in Person
about 4 a Clock at Night, and where the whole Army encamped upon the Brink of
the Danube. The Bridge was built over against the Town of Thoulon, six Leagues
above Vienna, at a Place where the River forms two Isles, which required three
Bridges, and made the Passage the more secure by a plurality of easy Retreats,
defended by the Arms of the Danube.

On the 6th of September the Army began to pass the Bridges* and the King, in
the mean time, dined in one of the Isles: The Great General of Poland marched
on the Head of all, with his Polish Troops, as if it were to cover the rest;
and it is certain that that Post was their due, the Germans being so dejected
with Fatigues, and Toils, occasioned by the bad state of Affairs, that they
wanted to be encouraged and heartened. The sight of a Turban frightened them,
an accidental Cry of Alla, which the Turks use in War, and signifies God,
allarmed the Camp, which happened twice or thrice, the Night after they had
passed the Danube. This Disposition was the Occasion that the Polish Army had
the right, and that of the Emperor with the Duke of Lorrain at their Head the
Left: the Electors keeping in the Center near the King's Person.

That Night he encamped beyond the Bridges on Thoulm side, where he tarryed the
7th and 8th, that all the Army and Bagage might pass over. The Troops of the
El. of Bavaria, which came that way out of his Electorate, joined us the first
Day, and next Day that Prince arrived by Water in the Camp, a little before the
King left Thoulm. Here the Duke of Lorrain appointed several of the Emperor's
Huntsmen to conduct the Ranks through the Defiles of the Mountains, which they
had often ranged as a Hunting, and knew very well; these Guides led the Army
through the least difficult ways, and over the easiest Hills, though this
Mountainous Country is every where bad for a March; insomuch that they could
carry but very little of their Artillery with them, and that with inconceivable
Trouble, notwithstanding they were so small, that they could mount them with
the help of an Irou Crow.

He had so many Tartars and useless Horse in his Camp, as did nothing but
starve him, and Forage began to be very scarce with him; however our Troops met
no Body in those Defiles, but some Servants of the Army, who were keeping
Cattle here and there, and fled upon first sight of us. But that which happened
to a Colume of Polish Foot will certainly appear to be very odd. A Tartar
Officer commanding a Party of about 30 Horse, happened in his March to fall
into a Closs-Valley, and finding the said Body of Poles there, he came up to
General de Henoff, who was at their Head, not to fire upon him, but cooly to
ask him News, as if they had been Friends; and when he was told, That they were
Part of the Polish Army, which was advancing under the command of the King in
Person, he answered jearingly, That he knew very well that Prince Lubomirski
had brought some Polish Troops to the succor of the Germans: After which he
rode off with his Troop without General de Henoff's, thinking fit to attack
him, or perhaps he could not do it in that hollow Way, or that the Tartars kept
himself at some distance from him.

The Duke of Lorrain having provided the Army with good Guides, made the King
take the shortest Way over the Mountains, and accompanied him almost
constantly; as did also the Emperor's Chief Generals. They decamped from Thoulm
on the 9th of September 1683. in the Afternoon. Next Day they passed half of
the Defiles; and the Court stopped at Night on a great steep Hill, which they
had gained with much trouble: The King had found it so troublesome to get up
that Hill, that he wrote the same Night to the Queen, That the Fatigue of the
March, together with the want of Provisions, had made them lose so much Flesh,
that they were fit to run with a Heart upon the Course. Those who gave out, That
that Prince was brought so low, that he was not able to get on Horseback any
more, did not expect such a plain Contradiction as this Affair gave them; for
they did not cross the Mountains in Coaches; and it is certain, that upon the
Day of Battle his Majesty was almost 12 Hours on Horseback; I don't say, but
that he had some trouble to mount his Horse, for he was forced to make use of a
Stool or some rising Ground at his mounting; But when he is on Horseback, he
finds himself very easy, which stood him in good stead at the Defeat of Barcan.

On the 11th they continued their March, without seeing any Appearance of the
Army, or having had any News of it since they left Thoulm; for which they began
to be uneasy: But on the 3d Day about Noon they discovered the Points of the
Hussars Lances: And the German Cavalry had reached a Valley at the bottom of
the last Mountain, where the King stopped and dined before he marched up the
same. This March was very tiresome to the whole Army, for besides the great
heat of the Season, they wanted Water, Provisions, Tents, etc. the Equipages
staying behind in the Bottom: And the King as well as Generals had only
Muleteers to follow them; so that His Majesty was forced one Day to eat nothing
but Bread, and drink only Water that was in the Flagons of the Bavarian
Soldiery, which they carried at their Sides.

During this Halt, the Army made a shift to gain the top of the Hill: The
Germans on the left made themselves Masters of Calemberg, and there planted
their Cannon; the Polanders on the Right took possession of the Wood, and the
Eminences parallel to that of the Castle. In this Place they encamped the same
Day, being Sept. 11. to give their Troops a Breathing time, and to agree on the
Order of Battle, in a general Council that Evening. The encampment was very
irregular, the Ground not allowing them to make it better. They were cantoned
as well as they could in the Wood; the Infantry being entrenched in a small
compass of the open Country, where they covered themselves with Chevaux de
frise, and with what Artillery was arrived; whilst the Cavalry were Posted very
disorderly and confusedly in other places.

Nothing hitherto appeared to dispute their Passage, though the Grand Vizier
had certain notice of the Approach of the King of Poland, by a Turk and a
Tartar, taken in the Mountains, and sent back on purpose (after they had been
well examined) to give Intelligence of it as Eye witnesses of the matter. But
that presumptuous General never troubled his head about it, and continued the
Siege with the same application, as if he had only the Entrenchments of Vienna
to force. He was lodged in two places upon the Attacked Bastions, when the
Succor arrived; and thinking to force the Place to Capitulate before he could
be brought to a Battle, he only sent below Calemberg, in the Bottoms and
Hollows of the low Hills on the side of his Camp, a Body of about Ten Thousand
Men, Horse or Dragoons; these last fighting on foot, according to the
Disposition of the Ground, as their Janissaries do. Besides he Cannonaded the
City as usual; which was very pleasing to the King of Poland, who upon hearing
this noise, declared that he had a very great esteem for the Turks, since they
were such brave Fellows as to wait for his coming. For in the way it was
sometimes suspected that they would not, but in my mind without grounds; since
the Grand Vizier could be in fear of none but him who defeated him, I mean God
Almighty, to whom alone this success was owing. He had still left above 140000
Men; and the whole Quota of our Armies amounted to no more than 70000. The
Empire with all its Members made about 45000, the King of Poland not above
20000; without reckoning the Volunteers, which upon such an extraordinary
occasion flocked from all parts, and composed a considerable Body. The Marquess
of Parelle, a Savoyard, brought thither at his own charge fourscore Gentlemen
all Horse; But the Volunteers swelled the Armies without reinforcing them; and
were often a greater encumbrance than a strength to them.

On Saturday Night September 11. They made great Fires on the Hill, as a signal
to the City of the Arrival of the Supplies. But they saw nothing of it, no more
than of the Fight next day, by reason of the disposition and unevenness of the
Ground where this great Action passed. After the Siege was raised, the
Governor Staremberg told the King that they only discovered the Lances of the
Hussars with Perspective Glasses, from the Top of the Steeple of St. Stephen's
Church.

In the mean time the King of Poland had caused the Descent of the Hills to be
descried by a French Man that was near his Person; and whom he looked upon as
an Engineer because he knew some Terms of that Art. This pretended Engineer had
a great Opinion of his own Parts; and to show some proofs of it in this
juncture, he was very warm in giving a Description of the Country through which
they were to march to the Turkish Camp; being willing to cry down those, who,
he said, had misinformed his Majesty on this Subject, in telling him of great
Plains, fit for his Gens-des-Armes; whereas there were nothing but Precipices,
Hollow Ways, and Rocky Descents. This Scene passed in the presence of the Duke
of Lorrain, and of other Generals of the Emperor, who were offended at the
disrespectful manner, wherein a Man of this Character dared to extol himself in
such an Assembly.

It was therefore necessary to draw up a Line of Battle according to the
Disposition of the Ground, and to make use of the Cavalry as well as they
could; since this Affair could not be decided but by beating the Enemy from
their Posts, and by particular Skirmishes. Nor did the King of Poland at that
time think of being able to reach the Turkish Camp from the Brow of the Hill,
in less than three Days; and marked out with his Eye the places where they
should Encamp September. 12. and 13th, by driving the Enemy gradually out of the
Posts and Defiles, which they held by great Platoons of Cavalry, or Musketeers
on Horseback, whom I before called Dragoons, from their manner of fighting.

All those matters were settled in the Council of War held September. 11. after
Midnight. A Scheme was drawn of the Mashalling the Forces wherein the Polanders
were to be on the Right, and their Generals to draw up in the form of a Half
Moon in the Wood and Hills, to prevent the Tarters from falling upon the Army
in the Flank or the Rear, whilst it was engaged with the Turks posted (as might
reasonably be feared) before the Camp. The Duke of Lorrain took the Left
toward the Descent on the side of the Danube, by possessing himself of
Calemberg and the adjacent Eminences: By this means he had a less compass to
fetch, to march to the Turkish Camp and the Attacks; so that it was he
(properly speaking) that cleared the Trenches, and Raised the Siege. The Duke
of Saxony drew up his Troops on the Right of the Duke of Lorrain, and the
Elector of Bavaria his on the Right of the Duke of Saxony; each of these
Princes keeping at the Head of his own Body. The King of Poland Posted himself
in the Center of all, animating this great Body with his Presence and Voice;
acting in all places, and giving his Orders, which according to the Emperor's
Command were obeyed with the utmost submission. The Duke of Lorrain sent a
great many Adjutants to be near his Polish Majesty, to receive his Orders and
to convey them to all parts of the Army. To the Infantry were allowed Chevaux
de frise: On the Advantageous Emeniences were planted what Cannon they could
get: But nothing could be expected from them because of their smalness, and the
height of the Place on which they were planted. This inconvenience was observed
in the Battery that was made at Calemberg, which began to fire Sunday September.
12. about Ten in the Morning on the Main Body of the Turks Posted below,
without reaching them. For, as we said before, the Grand Vizier, convinced at
last of the Approach of the Succors, took no other precautions to cover the
Siege, than only to send on Saturday Night a Body of 10 or 12000 Men (whose
Standards we could only see in the Covert or Hollow ways) to take Possession of
the bottom below this Castle.

On Sunday September 12. 1683. The German Troops about break of Day began to
Skirmish with this Detachment of the Enemy; whom they chased from Post to Post;
and there were particular Skirmishes carried on very warmly on both sides.
Among the Rest, the Dragoons of Savoy, those of Crouy, a Regiment of the Army
of Saxony, and that of a small Body of Polanders, commanded by Chevalier
Lubomirsky, signalized themselves particularly. These Troops were insensibly
drawn into fight, and began at last a regular Battle, in the Villages and
Defiles, where the Turks defended themselves vigorously, discharging on Foot,
and afterward mounting on Horseback, which deceived one of these Bodies of
Dragoons, who supposing that the Enemy fled, advanced too forward, and were cut
in pieces. In this Action the Lieutenant Colonel of Lubomirsky's Dragoons,
named Kinsik, was wounded in the Head with a Sabre, who died within three days
after; notwithstanding the Horseshoe that he had in his Hat to defend him from
the Blow.

The Marquess of Parelle desired leave to go with his Volunteers to drive the
Turks out of that Post; but the Duke of Lorrain every time he made the
Proposal, seemed as if he heard him not, and ordered Colonel Mercy to do it,
charging him thrice together not to go without his Headpiece. This was a very
brave Officer, and notable Partyman: He executed the Order with as much Address
as Valor. The Turks were driven out of that Post, and all of a sudden
scattered over the whole face of the Mountainous Country. The Grand Vizier
himself came at last out of his Camp, and posted himself not far from the Lines
of it with a Body of Cavalry, which according to the Accounts that have been
given, and the Relations of those who were in the Action, were upwards of 30000
Men: But the number did not appear so great to those who saw that Body of the
Grand Vizier broken by two Companies of Hussars; one of which, and the first
that made the Onset was commanded by Alexander the King of Poland's second Son.

Before I descend any further to particulars, I must take notice, that the
Janissaries did not appear upon this occasion, none but the Cavalry and
Dragoons, which last fought sometimes on Foot. The Infantry still carried on
the Assault, and maintained the Trenches: For the Besieged have said since,
that they made three Sallies that very day, and took or Nailed up thirty Pieces
of Cannon. The Camp therefore remained still in the same Posture, and the
Conqueror found their Tents spread, as if the Grand Vizier had designed his
March before the Christians for no more than a Walk. But the wiser among the
Turks had other thoughts of the matter. The Cham of Tartary was the first that
took care of his Retreat, The Principal Bassas sent their Equipage away before
hand, with the Camels and Led-Horses; of which there were but a few left, and
scarce anything else considerable, so that the Soldiery had but indifferent
Plunder. This very Day in the Morning we had descried from the top of the
Mountains the retreat of all these Equipages, And whereas they raised a great
Dust in Raab Road, it was thought at first that it was raised by the
Reinforcement of the 20000 Men, which as it was reported in our Army, were to
to be sent to the Camp before Vienna, by the Sultan who was advanced as far as
Belgrade. But of this Reinforcement we could never get any certain intelligence.

The Precaution of these Bassas, and the premeditated retreat of the Cham of
Tartary, were looked upon among the Turks as arising from a correspondence they
held with the King of Poland The Vizier of Buda lost his Head for it. The Cham
of Tartary was deposed by the Sultan's Authority, who gave the Grand Vizier
Orders to do it, upon the complaints that he had preferred to his Highness
about it, after the raising of the Siege. It was likewise reported among us,
that the King of Poland made way for this happy success by a secret
negotiation; as he had done at Kotchim, the evening before the Battle by the
desertion of the Hospodars, Valachia and Moldavia, which he dexterously brought
about by the prevalence of his Promises. But these are conjectures too refined
with respect to the Affair of Vienna; and besides the remainder of the Turkish
Army was enough to have prevented the King of Poland from being Victorious, if
they had but done their duty. Apannick fear infused from on high into all their
hearts, by one of those sudden Motions of which no account can be given, was
that alone which routed this formidable Army, as had been promised in the
Morning by Father Mark de Aviano a Capuchin Friar, famous for contemplation;
and of so great an esteem for his Goodness, as to be said to work Miracles.
This Holy Man we met with at Calemberg, who always attended the Army during the
Fight. The King of Poland heard him say Mass and received the Communion at his
hands in the Chapel of St. Leopold, which is not far from the other Fabric.
This Capuchin afterward gave the Benediction in the name of the Pope to all
the Generals, and assured them in the name of God of a complete Victory, if
they had but the Faith to Trust in him. Si habebitis, says he, Confidentiam in
Deo, obtinebitis Victoriam. These are the Fryar's own words. But to return to
the Fight.

Whilst the German Troops were engaged the Cannon of Calemberg played upon the
Turk, and the rest of the Army began to draw out of the Wood forming themselves
into a Line of Battle. The King of Poland returning from the Chapel of St.
Leopold made an halt in the bottom below that Fortress, where he dined under a
Tent pitched in that place on purpose, and afterward mounted his Horse to
march toward the Enemy, with a design (as I said before) only of beating them
to such an Eminence, where he intended to have encamped on this Day, being
Sept. 12.

The Fight therefore began then on all sides, and it was just past Eleven a
Clock. The Turks being Posted in the Rocky Bottoms fenced with Walls in several
places; and in the high and thick Vineyards, vigorously received the charge at
first, and killed a great many Men. The Company of the Hussars of the Castellan
of Cracow, headed by his Son the Starost of Halich underwent several
discharges, in one of which that young Lord, notwithstanding his coat of Mail,
was shot through the Body with a Musket shot; as was Mondreowsky Treasurer of
the Court, in another Post; or as some say, in passing at the head of the Line
to carry out the King's Orders. It was in these first Motions they began to
descry the main Body of the Grand Vizier, posted in the Lines of the Camp; and
sometime after a small Red Tent which was raised on purpose to take a view of
the Fight in the shade out of the Sun, (for never was there ahotter day known
than this) The Grand Visier's Men have since informed us that he there
apprehended the Caffa with his two Sons, and the Cham of Tartary. No sooner had
the King a sight of this Tent, but knowing it by its Color, he found himself
animated afresh; and being engaged, that he could not set his Eyes on his
Infantry, who were not come up, and to whom he had sent time after time; he
marched at the head of the first Batallions which he met with, causing his
Cannon to play continually on that Tent. But he had no more than two or three
Pieces, which were rolled along on Levers according as they advanced to the
Enemy; and the King promised fifty Crowns for each Discharge. The mischief of
it was they had but few Bullets at hand, and nothing to ram down upon them. I
have heard a French Engineer say, that for want of some other thing to ram
down, he made use at last of his Gloves, his Perriwig, his Cravet, and a great
Packet of Gazets, that were in his Pocket.

At last the Polish Infantry came up. The Battle grew warm on all sides: The
Turks were beat from Eminence to Eminence; and at last the Count of Maligny the
Queen's Brother, with the Grand Squire of the Crown, was the first who gained
that Eminence, where the King had designed to have Encamped this day. But
immediately after his Polish Majesty perceived the Turkish Squadrons to give
ground, which denoted them to be less resolute than before. In effect our
Troops broke them, upon which this Monarch cried out That they were defeated,
by a certain Warlike penetration of thought habitual to him ever since he
fought against those Infidels. He ordered the Duke of Lorrain by the Adjutants
near his Person, to send him forthwith some Troops. He caused his Hussars to
advance, whom we saw to descend down a hollow Way on foot, among the Walls and
Steep Places, where a Footman could scarce stand upright; and at the same time
the King himself fell upon the Visier's main Body recommending the Prince his
Son to the Count of Maligny his Brother-in-Law, whose Valor and good Conduct,
had been experienced in this and several other Rencounters.

Every thing happened according as he supposed: The Hussars of Prince Alexander
fell upon the main Body of the Grand Vizier, routed them, and in that instant
the whole Army of the Enemy retreated without making any resistance: The Grand
Vizier endeavored in Vain to make them stand their ground: He addressed
himself to the Cham of Tartary, What, (says he) will you not stand by me? But
that Man already disheartened as well as the rest replied, That he knew the King
of Poland, and that he could not be safe with him any otherwise than by flying
from him; of which he gave him an Example immediately. The Vizier endeavored
still to rally some part of his Cavalry; and seeing they all fled before the
Hussars, he, with Tears in his Eyes embraced his two Sons, and was carried off
by the Crowd; and quitting his War-Horse which was barded with Steel-Armour,
damask'd with Gold, and quilted with Crimson Velvet; and making his escape with
only one Vest: an instance which I observe to let you know that I was well
informed as to this particular, the which I saw in the Letter of the Prince of
Transylvania; who sent word to the King, that he had lent him one from that
very night.

In the mean time the Duke of Lorrain marched on the left, where he met with no
manner of Opposition; and having a less compass to fetch in order to arrive at
the Camp on that side of it, which lay next to the City and the Trenches, the
German Forces entered it betimes. It was a little past half an hour after Six
when the King of Poland passed through the midst of it, where a young Turk of a
comely aspect presented him with the Grand Visiers Horse, very fit indeed for
the Parade of a Public Entry; but for no other use by reason of the weight of
its Armor. Another Turk came with great have, and one of the Grand Visiers
stirrups in his hand to present to his Polish Majesty, which he sent to the
Queen to be laid at the feet of the Miraculous Crucifix of the Cathedral of
Cracow. A third waited upon him, to inform him of the Place where that Ottoman
General's Tents were pitched; whither the King send his Dragoons, as a Guard,
charging them to forbear pillaging. He likewise ordered all the Army to stand
still in Battalia, for fear the Enemy rallying behind the Camp, should renew
the Fight, and so rob them of such a cheap Victory. This they might have done,
had not a Terror still possessed them, and carried them with the same
impetuosity to the Bridges of the River of Raab. For, spite of the King's
Orders, the Soldiers began to plunder that very Night. The General Dunneval,
who they say was a greedy Lover of Rich Booties, in his Rounds, met with the
Tent of the Bassa of Egypt, very suitable to his Purpose, and a-propos to his
desires. The Emperor's Envoy was hard-by, still in Chains, which he had worn
ever since he had been at Adrianople. In several places of the Camp, they met
with Women and Children, massacred or wounded by those Barbarians, who could
not carry them off in such a precipitate Retreat. One of those Children, of a
very Beautiful Aspect, and wounded in the Head, was brought before the King.

The Duke of Lorrain, seeing the Army absolute Masters of the Camp, sent to the
King, to give Orders for the clearing the Trenches, where they still fired, and
kept playing upon the Town, 'till Ten at Night: But the King, who was unwilling
that the Germans should have the Honor of Raising the Siege, at the first
replied, That it was needless, and that it was better to make sure of the Camp,
against an unexpected Return: And afterward gave out, that he had already
detached some Forces for that purpose. However, either the Germans went thither
of their own Heads, or the Janissaries retreated of themselves; for not a Man
stirred out of the Camp, where the King spent the Night at the foot of a Tree,
lying upon his Horse-Saddle, in stead of a Pillow. About Midnight the Governor
of Vienna, sent out some of his Men, who brought his Majesty some Refreshments
of Sweetmeats, Wine, and other things. It Is an inconceivable thing, the Truth
of which we could never learn, How all that Infantry made their Retreat, in a
Night the darkest that ever was seen. For we discovered neither Stragler, nor
Company, except 23 Janissaries, shut up in that House of the Emperor, where the
Grand Vizier kept his Headquarters, and laid up his Stores. These Janissaries
did not fly with the rest, but were in that place Sept. 14. Attempts were made
to force them; they killed several Dragoons, and would not submit to any but
the King of Poland, when he came before that Castle, out of which they were
allowed to march with Bag and Baggage.

This great Victory, so-compleat, so happy, and so shining, cost but a very few
Men: the Germans lost a Prince of Crouy; the Poles, the two Lords
abovementioned; and the whole Army about 600 Men. A great part never saw the
Enemy: The Palatine of Russia, with his Right Wing, marched all along without a
Rencounter: The Emperor's Cuiriassiers never struck a stroke; the Second Lines
were no more than Spectators, because the Enemy fled before they were come up:
so that, properly speaking, none but the Dragoons, the Infantry, and the
Hussars, bore the Fire, and engaged the Enemy. We cannot tell what happened
particularly on the Left: Each Prince kept at the Head of his own Troops, and
none but Count Waldeck was seen next the King's Person; and that but once, when
the heat of the Battle was near over; upon which he passed this Compliment to
his Majesty, That it was a good Days-work for his Glory, and for the History of
his Life.

From this true Recital, we may Discover the Falsity of that Report, which was
spread abroad, and published even in Poland it self; namely, That the Turks had
forty thousand killed upon the spot. Talenty, the Italian Secretary, whom the
King dispatched to the Pope the next Day after the Defeat, with the great
Standard of Mahomet, found at the Portal of the Grand Vizier, told such another
Story in his Journey; and had the Confidence to tell his Holiness himself, That
in leaving Vienna, he traveled four Leagues together on dead Bodies. Now in
the first place, his Way to Rome did not lie through the Field of Battle, nor
through any part of the Road, by which the Turks made their Retreat, some of
whom were cut off; both this Night and on the Morrow: And besides, it is
certain, that in the whole compass of the Ground, there were not above 800 dead
Corpse to be seen. I do not speak this to lessen the Glory of his Polish
Majesty, which shines bright enough of it self; the Greatness of the
Undertaking, the wonderful Success that attended it, and above all, that
Heroical Resolution, which made him leave his Dominions to come to the Relief
of his Allie, are enough to set it off, without the help of any false Luster.

Most of the Polish Senators and Generals, were likewise for his immediate
Return home, after the Relieving Vienna, that he might preserve an Army, of
which Poland might in the sequel of the War, stand in need. But the King
hearkened neither to these Advices, nor to the repeated Instances of the Queen:
He was for completing the Business, and thereby to lay the Empire under
stronger Obligations to him. It Is upon those Accounts that his Polish Majesty
merits Praise, without the killing of 40000 Men. It Is reported of Alexander the
Great, That he was highly offended with one of his Generals, who, in the
History of his Wars, ascribed false Matters of Fact to him, thereby
endeavoring to enhance his Glory: He threw the Tablets into the River
Hydaspes, (upon which he was, when the Recital was made to him) and upbraided
the Author, for having foisted his own Inventions into such a large Field of
Praise, which Truth alone was sufficient to represent.

On Monday Sept. 13. the King detached Miogensky with a thousand Horse, to
pursue the Enemy, and cut off their Retreat. This Officer, when he was come
over against Presburgh, detached fifty Horse, who advanced as far as Raab,
where they saw the Turkish Army, which began to pass the Bridges very quietly.
It had marched twelve Hungarian Leagues the first Night, and began to defile on
the Morrow, without any opposition. The Garrison of Yavarin, durst not, or
could not undertake the burning of the Bridges; the Grand Vizier, having very
cautiously, left a considerable Body of Men to guard them. They were three Days
and three Nights, in passing over the River, and met with no disturbance. Some
blame the King of Poland for this, who should (they say) have pushed on his
Victory: But this Charge is groundless, since his Troops could not have left
the Camp that Night, without great danger. They had been without their
Equipages for three Days, and could not expect that they could pass the
Mountains in less than three Days more. Besides, the greatest Generals, having
finished what they designed, are well enough satisfied with that, and never
care for running after the Conquered, to whom Martial Policy often thinks it
advisable, to allow Bridges for their Retreat.

After the Departure of Miogensky, the King visited the Camp, and the Tents of
the Grand Vizier; from whence, in a few words, he wrote the News of his Victory
to the Pope, and other Princes. He sent a Gentleman, Express to the Queen, as
an Eyewitness of all that had passed, with several Pieces of that great Spoil:
And for the sake of this Good News, the Imperial Ministers ordered the
Post-Masters to demand nothing of that Courier for his Journey. Afterward the
King overran all the Enemies Works, even to their last Lodgments upon the
Bastions. But in the Interim, some Soldier or other, having accidentally set
fire to some loose corns of Powder that lay about the Magazine, where there
were still nigh 300 thousand pound weight, it caused one of the most dreadful
Fires that could be imagined: The Air seemed to be all in a blaze, the Earth
shook, and nothing could give us a more lively resemblance of the general
Conflagration at the Last Day. However, there was some thing surprising, even
in this terrible Prospect; and his Majesty said, That he had long wished to see
such a Sight.

At last he made his Entry into Vienna, through the Breaches, on the same side
that the Assault had been carried on. There he reaped the full Satisfaction of
his Victory amidst the Acclamations of a City, destined before to a miserable
Slavery, the Chains whereof this Hero broke. The People Huzza'd him; the Crowd
did, as it were, carry his Horse along; and their Acknowledgments rose so high,
as to wish that they had a Master and Emperor, like to this Glorious Monarch.
This they cried out loudly in every Street, transported with such an excess of
Joy and Affection, as cannot admit of Moderation, upon such moving Occasions as
this.

The first thing he did was to return God Thanks for his Victory, in the Church
of the Reformed Augustine Friars, before a Miraculous Image of the Virgin;
where he himself prostrate on the ground sang the Te Deum. However, we could
even then observe the beginning of Ingratitude among the Persons of Quality,
and the Magistrates of that City, offended perhaps that the Obligation was
such, that it was impossible for them to make any suitable Return. Neither in
this Place, nor in any else did we see any one of the Magistrates; and with
much ado, a Priest of this Church was got to assist at the Ceremony. The same
Coldness appeared after Dinner at the Cathedral of St. Stephen, for they
tarried a great while before they could get the Keys of the Vestry, or any
Tapers lighted. Upon the Steeple of this Church, was set up that Crescent,
which Solomon the Great obliged the City to erect, when he drew his Forces from
the Place, at the second Siege which he laid before it, in the Reign of
Ferdinand. The King of Poland told the Duke of Lorrain, That it was requisite
to pluck it down, since Vienna was at present freed for ever from the Yoke,
which the Sultan had threatened it with. Yet this was not done till three Years
after the Siege was raised, as if they thought it necessary to compliment an
Enemy, which dreaded the Fate of its own Dominions. But there was doubtless a
nicer Reason in the Case, grounded upon a sort of Jealousy they had of his
Polish Majesty's Glory, to whom they would not be beholden for the Destruction
of the Crescent. This appears in the Medals which they made after the raising
of the Siege, wherein the Honor of the Success was attributed not only to this
Great Monarch, but together with him to all the Princes, who were at the
Action, to Staremberg, Caplier, the Commissary of the Victualling-Office, with
the Magistrates and Burgers of the City; as was set down in the Reverse. Nay,
the King was not so much taken notice of as the Emperor, who kept up close in
the Mountains of Passau; since the former was only commended for his Presence,
whilst the latter was extolled for his Counsel and Forces.

This very Day the King dined with Count Staremberg, the Governor of the City,
and returned at Night to the Camp, pitched by his Orders, where the Grand
Visier's was before. From this place he wrote to the Queen that ingenious
Letter, which was afterward translated into French, and communicated to
foreign Courts; and has been printed in Fragments. It contained an Historical
Relation of the Matter of Fact, writ in a pleasant Style, rallying very
handsomely on the Grand Vizier, who had left him (says he) his sole Executor
and Legatee. Then he gives the Particulars of the Estate he had left him, and
concludes in a Vein of Rallery on the Custom of the Tartarian Women, who are
offended with their Husbands, when they return Home without a Booty. You shall
not object to me as those Tartarian Dames, you are no Man, for you come to me
empty-handed: But you will find me return at this time loaded with the Spoils
of the Enemy. God be praised (continues he) that he has not permitted those
Infidels to insult over the Christians; but has made them sensible of the Power
of their God, whose Blows they have so lately felt. After this, he added some
Latin words of a Psalm, according to the Polish Custom, who even when they
write to Women, have a sprinkling of Phrases and Sentences of Latin in all
their Letters.

The King of Poland had, that Day he passed the Mountains, sent the Abbot
d'Oliva Hatsky, one of his Chief Secretaries of State, to the Emperor; who
being encouraged at the New of the approach of the Christian Army, returned to
Lints. From Lints he came to Vienna, as soon as he heard of its Relief, and
made his Entry on Tuesday Sept. 14. under the discharge of Cannon, at the same
instant that the Army decamped, in order to remove from the noisome Smells
occasioned by the dead Bodies, and the filthiness of the Camp, which one may
imagine to be infected, by a two Months Encampment of nigh 700000 Men. The
Stench was so great, that this Morning the Elector of Bavaria, dining with the
King of Poland, was forced almost all the while, to stop his Nose with his
Napkin. His Polish Majesty presented that Prince with three very fine Turkish
Horses, two Standards, and some Jewels fit for a Lady's wear; with a design
that the Elector should send them into France, to his Sister the Dauphiness. He
likewise gave him also a Bontchouk of the Bassa of Egypt, adorned at the Top
with an Hair Lace of diverse Colors, with a Tuft of Horse-Tail round the
gilded Crest, which was the Summit of this Bountchouk; which the Turks call
Touk. They are not so high as those of the Polish Generals, but a great deal
more embelish'd in their Warlike Furniture. Upon this Occasion, I cannot but
observe, That among the Ottomans, the Quality of Bassas, and General Officers
is distinguished by the number of those Horse-Tails died in red, which in the
Army are fastened to a Post before their Tent-doors; and in their Chambers are
hung up with the Sabre, just by the place where they lay. For it is to be
observed, That the Turks, even the Sultan himself, never wear their Sabres in
the Street, much less in their Houses, where they lay aside all their Armor
upon returning from the Camp; except the Poignard or Anchard. The very Bassas
in their Government, walking in the Streets, with long Gowns, with a Chaplet in
their Hands, and no Arms; and when they ride, their Sabre and Mace, or
Truncheon, are clapped under the Saddle on each side, with a large Strap to
fasten them. So that, excepting the Poignard (which every one without
distinction always wears by his Side) the Turks may pass for good Burgomasters,
or Gentlemen of the Long Gown.

To put an end to this Digression, I shall here observe, That the Prime Vizier,
and the six Inferior Visiers, have three Horse-Tails apiece: The Becglierbeys
as many: The Bassas by right have only one; but for a Personal Distinction,
when they have done some Signal Service, the Sultan sends another, and
sometimes a third, for each of which they give twenty thousand Piasters, or
Crowns, in forty Bags. I must likewise here inform the Reader, That besides the
Prime Vizier, called by way of Eminence The Grand Vizier, there are six others,
who with him make up the Divan, or Council of State of the Ottoman Empire; viz.
the Vizier of Buda, the Vizier of Bosnia, the Vizier of Bagdet or Babylon, the
Vizier of Bassora in Asia, the Vizier of Silistria, and the Vizier of Messir,
which is Grand Cairo: This last Vizier is called in General from the Name of
the Province, the Vizier of Egypt; whom the Turks esteem as a Sultan, and as
their Emperor, by a particular Distinction of his Dignity. As for the
Becglierbeys, they are the Supreme Governors of the Province, among whom there
are some styled Visiers. The simple Beys are only either Governors of Castles,
or Colonels of the Cavalry. But to return to the Relation.

After the Emperor was come to Vienna, he sent the King of Poland Word, that he
passionately desired to see him, and to thank him in Person, for the Signal
Service he had done him; which one might easily have believed he would have
done. However, one would not have thought, That the Emperor, after such a piece
of Service, would have stood so much upon the Punctilio's and Formalities of
it. In short, it is most certain, that after several Debates upon that Subject,
it was agreed between the Ministers of the Imperial Court, and Guinsky,
Vice Chancellor of Poland, that the Interview of the two Princes, should be in
the open Field, and on Horseback, to avoid those Niceties, upon which his
Polish Majesty was once a-minded to go away without seeing the Emperor. It was
on the Fifteenth of September, when they came to an Interview, about a League
and an half off of Vienna, or a little more. The King of Poland had decamped in
the Morning, and though the Emperor to stop his March, had sent him word, that he
was coming to wait upon him, yet he still continued it, that he might oblige
the Emperor to follow him; and removed his Camp a quarter of a League farther.
The Troops were still a filing off, when they perceived a Body of Cavalry,
which was composed of the Lords of the Imperial Court, who had quitted their
Coaches, and mounted on Horseback, when they were about two hundred Paces from
the Army. The King of Poland at the same time, ordered his Troops to draw up
into a Line of Battle; and afterward advanced toward the Emperor, who was
making to him with full speed. After these two Princes were met, the King of
Poland unvailing his Bonnet, at the same time that the Emperor clapped his Hand
to his Hat, told him in Latin, That he was very glad that he had been able in
such a Critical Juncture, to give him any solid marks of his Friendship. After
this short Compliment, he presented the Young Prince his Son to him, adding,
That he had brought him along with him to teach him how he ought to succor his
Allies: He likewise presented to him the two Generals of the Crown, who saluted
the Emperor without alighting. Lastly, seeing that this Prince was stiff and
mute, without returning a word of Answer, or showing any token of Honor, not
so much as saluting the Young Prince, the King left him very bluntly, and said,
Without doubt, Brother, you have a mind to take a view of my Army; there are my
Generals, whom I have ordered to show it your Majesty. With that he turned his
Head from him, and marched away; and the Emperor with the same Indifference
that he had heard this Discourse, suffered him to depart; whilst he for his
part went to visit the Lines. Two Days after, he sent 3000 Ducats of Gold, to
each of the two Polish Generals, and a Sword set with Diamonds, of about a
thousand Pistols value, to Prince James. As to him, the Emperor willing to make
amends for the Fault he had committed, in not saluting him, of which there were
loud and severe Complaints made, he in my mind committed a fresh one by writing
to the Prince of Poland, a very submissive Letter, wherein he cast all the
Blame of that Disrespect, on the Surprise he was in, in remembering the Danger,
and seeing the Person who had delivered him from it. It Is said, that he wrote
as much to the Castellan of Livonia, Baron of Felkerzen, Prince James's
Governor; but this I am no farther assured of, than that it was the common
Discourse of our Court: but the other Letter, I saw with my own Eyes.

September 16. the Army rested; the Seventeenth it broke up, and encamped at
Fichau, four Leagues off Vienna: and in the mean time, the Bridge of Toulm was
ordered to be brought down, and to be put on the Right Branch of the Danube,
below Presburg, by which they entered the Isle of Schut; which they were to
cross, because the Country from thence to Raab, through which the Turks had
made their Retreat, was all laid waste; and the other side toward Presburgh,
was not in a better condition, by reason of the Encampments of that Body of an
Army, which Count Teckeley, had brought thither in the beginning of the
Campaign, and likewise because of the Neighborhood of Newhausel.

The Army was divided into four Parts, for the better convenience of Forraging.
The King of Poland led the Vanguard of the whole with his Troops, posted about
two or three Leagues in the Front, toward the Enemy. The Duke of Lorrain came
next with the Emperor's Cavalry, marching a little toward the Right. The Count
of Staremberg, being marched out of Vienna, at the Head of the Infantry, which
he had thrown into that Town, led them on the Left side of the Isle by Goutta,
and other Towns that bordered on the Plains of Newhausel. The Regiments of
Croatia, brought up the Rear, at 3 or 4 Leagues distance. The King, by the way,
went to visit Presburgh, when the Army was encamped over against it. He
likewise visited Raab or Yavarin, going out of the Isle, with a small
Attendance, over which a great Party of Rebels (lodged in some Gentlemen's
Houses thereabouts) might have had the Better, being near the place where the
King dined, but they durst not attempt any thing; and the King repassed the
River the same Night, to rejoyn the Army in the Island. The Rejoycings and
Feasts which his Presence occasioned in these two Places, had nothing in them
extraordinary. The Prince of Poland threw a great many Ducats in Presburgh,
among the People that were gathered under the Windows: At Raab, a great deal of
Wine and Powder was spent. The Bishop of the Place harangued the King, whom he
styled the King of Hungary, and their Deliverer. The Governor made him a very
Noble Feast, under the Salvo of an hundred Cannon.

Whilst the King of Poland was crossing the great Isle of Schut, the Elector of
Bavaria, with his Troops, was posted between Vienna and Presburgh: The Count
Waldeck, likewise, made a Halt with those of the Circles; and the Elector of
Saxony drew off all his Forces. But his Polish Majesty, not willing to leave
any thing for the Germans to do, after he had done so much in this Notable
Juncture, continued his March always at the Head of his Army, to put an end to
the Campaign, and to return to his Estates, by the way of Upper Hungary.

During this, he received a Letter from Michael Apaffy Prince of Transylvania,
full of Compliments, upon the Success of his Arms. He sent him word of the
Arrival of the Grand Vizier at Buda, whom the Sultan had pardoned for the
Miscarriage before Vienna, having sent him a Vest and a Sabre, a Standard, and
other Trophies of the Dignity of Grand Vizier, as an Assurance of his being
still in his Favor. The Sultan was likewise for Comforting his Son-in-Law, by
the Example of Solomon the Great, who met with the same Misfortune before
Vienna; where indeed he was not defeated, but only missed of his Aim in taking
it. However, with all these Testimonies of Favor, the Sultan ordered him, to
make amends for this Misfortune, by covering the Frontier Places. He consented
to the Deposing of the Old Cham of Tartary, who was succeeded by one of the
Visier's Relations: and at the Death of the Vizier of Buda, that Post was
filled by Kara Mehemet Pacha, the Grand Visier's Intimate Friend. This Letter
from the Prince of Transylvania, contained likewise several other Particulars,
and concluded with this Compliment to the King: That his Victory was so
complete, and his steady Resolution so commendable, in carrying on his Design
to the utmost; that all Christendom must still remember his Name, and have it
always in their Mouths.

The Emperor for his part, rewarded the Good Services of the Count of
Staremberg, on whom he bestowed the Title of Felt-Mareshal, that is, General of
his Army; but he slighted those of the Duke of Saxe-Laonburg, whose Deserts
were equal to his Birth, and who hoped to have had the Dignity that was
conferred on Staremberg. This made the Prince of Saxony to withdraw in
Discontent, having the Satisfaction only of seeing the King of Poland approve
of his Resentment, and Retreat. That King sent him a very rich Sabre, as a
Testimony of his Esteem, by a Gentleman who waited upon him at Presburgh, where
he had left the Army. Staremberg had likewise the Golden-Fleece bestowed upon
him, and 100000 Crowns, being part of 400000 sent by the Pope, as a supply to
the Army.

Thus have we given you a Faithful and Exact Account of this Great Action,
which will be a more Shining Ornament to the History of our Age, by the
Extraordinariness of the Event, than by the greatness of the Matters of Fact.
For we shall in the Sequel, meet with more Heroical and Considerable
Transactions on one side, as well as the other. I shall now present you with
the Particulars of the March, and Encampments of the King of Poland, from
Tarnowits to Vienna; and set down, upon occasion the several Stages thereof.

The first Country the King of Poland entered, after he had left his own
Dominions, was the Duchy of Silesia. This Province is one of the Hereditary
Countries of the House of Austria; and begins on the side of Poland, at Bengin,
nine Leagues off Cracow.

From Bengin to Tarnowits, three Leagues. This is the Place, which the Poles
call Tarnosky Goury. Most of those Towns of Provinces, subject at present to
the Republic, going under two Names. As for the Leagues from hence to Vienna,
they are to be reckoned as German Leagues of the larger Measure; the swiftest
Courrier not being able to compass a Stage in less than two Hours, and some
will take above three Hours Riding.

From Tarnowits to Gleibwitz, three Leagues, a Stage and an half. In this Road,
you will meet with great variety of Woods, open Plains, Sandy Fields, and
Fertile Grounds, with some Villages, that look better than those in Poland,
though the Houses are made of Wood: The Towns are all walled, even Gleibwitz it
self, which is the least upon the Road; but yet this Town makes some show, has
a great Clock in it, its Gates are guarded, and the Burghers are of a Manly
Aspect. The King encamped at this Place the first Day after he had left
Tarnowits, and dined at Vessolo, a Village between both.

From Glebwitz to Routh, three Leagues, a Stage and an half. You still meet
with the same pleasant Prospect of a mixed Country, which hitherto is pretty
good Traveling, though Sandy. Routh is only a small Village, situated in the
midst of a Wood; but it has a very fine Abbey of the Cistercian Order, and the
Post Office is within its inward Yard. The King dined at Pilikvitze, and lay in
the Abbey.

Duchy of RATIBOR.
From Routh to Ratibor, three Leagues, one Stage and an half. They are very
long Leagues, and the Country very close and sandy; but in going down the Hills
that lie next to the Marshy Plain, in which Ratibor is situated, we discovered
a very pleasant Country. This Marshy Plain makes the Avenues to the Town very
difficult, by reason of the Length of the Causeys made of Faggots. Ratibor has
Suburbs quite round its Walls, and is washed with the River Odar, which we
passed over a Wooden Bridge, into one part of the Suburbs. The Place is very
large, and set off with Stately Brick Houses. It is the Capital City of a fine
Duchy, which the House of Austria often pawns. Casimir King of Poland enjoyed
it a long time, under that Title; and the Heirs of Queen Jews his Wife,
pretended to great Reimbursements after her Death for that Territory, to be
made out of the Emperor's Demesnes.

The King, who dined the third Day at Samotitze just stepped to Ratibor, where
he staid a little with the Lords of the Family of Henoff, who had provided a
Collation for him; and went to lie at Pietrovitze.

From Ratibor to Troppaw, 4 Leagues, two Stages. This is an Uneven Country, but
Champian, and well manured: and this City is one of the finest in the Province,
surrounded with good Walls, with Turrets, and several pieces of Workmanship on
the Gates; the Churches are well built; the Inhabitants of a graceful Mein: It
has a Governor, and a well-disciplin'd Garrison. On that side of it toward
Ratibor, the Suburbs are but indifferent, through which runs the River Oppava,
which gives the City a Second Name, being called by the Poles Oppava, from the
Name of the River. The King dined there the fourth Day.

The Marquisate of MORAVIA.
From Troppaw to Hauff, four Leagues, two Stages. Upon leaving of Troppaw, the
Plains by which it is surrounded, and which are very Champian, go a League
farther; and with them is terminated the Province of Silesia, separated on this
side from the Marquisate of Moravia, by a Ridge of large Mountains of six
Leagues length; which arising from those of Hungary, on the Left, are joined to
those of Bohemia beyond Breslaw on the Right. These Mountains are very high,
covered with large Woods of Fir, and at the Bottoms, washed with Fountains and
Rivulets, where are some Villages ill built, but pretty populous. Such a
Village as this is Hauff which might be reckoned a large Town, and would be a
good City in Poland. It is called in the Polish Language Dwortze.

This Ridge of Mountains is terminated by a long, rough, and steep descent, at
the foot of which is the City of Sternberg, which is properly no more than a
Street, with a Gate at each End; but large, rich, and well built. In the midst
of this Mountain is a Castle of Ancient Structure, very large, and well kept,
as belonging to a Petty Prince, or rather some Great Lord of Germany.

From Hauff to Sternberg, three Leagues, a Stage and an half. The King lay at
the first of these Places the fourth Day of his March.

Moravia, is doubtless the Best of the Hereditary Provinces, and the Richest
Country of Germany. It is fat, fertile, plentiful, populous, set off with Neat
Cities, and adorned with all that Nature can afford, to make it Beautiful;
having variety of Plains, Green Forests, Vales, and Meadows, which represent
very pleasing Prospects to the Eye. On the one side it borders on the Kingdom
of Hungary: It is separated from Silesia by a Ridge of Mountains: On the Front,
it has the Plains of Austria terminated by the Danube; and on the Right, the
Kingdom of Bohemia, whose Language is very like to the Moravian, being both a
Dialect derived from the Sclavonian.

The Capital City of Moravia is Olmutz, called in Latin, Olomucium. It is well
built, and set off with a large Square, a great many Churches, Stately Houses,
wide and clear Streets, strong Walls, which last are flanked with Turrets,
covered with a Mote, and other Modern Works. It is adorned without with
Sumptuous Seats, fine shady Walks; and very advantageous for its Situation,
being at the end of a Plain two Leagues long, bounded on the Left with a Ridge
of Hills, of different Prospects, such as Meadows, Ponds, Thickets, and the
like, of which the City is the Point of Sight. It is seated on a small Rising,
over-looking a spacious Meadow, which surrounds three Sides of it; with a
River, that runs in a winding Stream through the midst: Olmutz is a Bishopric,
whose Bishop is a Prince of the Empire, and has a Right of Coining Money; and I
have seen several fine Ducats of his Coin. He has a new Palace suitable to his
Dignity; yet the Garrison and the Governor, are placed by the Emperor in the
City, and their Discipline is Exact and Great. The King leaving Hauff, dined at
Sternberg, and took up his Quarters at Olmutz, the fifth Day of his March,
being August 26.

From Sternberg to Olmutz, two Leagues, one Stage. From Olmutz to Prostnitz,
two Leagues, one Stage. The Country between is very uneven, wholly Champian, and
of an extraordinary Soil. Prostnitz is situated in a Plain, and is less
considerable than Olmutz; but yet neat enough, being built with Brick, as are
all the Towns of this Marquisate; its Houses are lofty, and its Streets large.
The King dined here, and the same Day encamped at Viska, a Village upon the
Road.

From Prostnitz to Bitchau, two Leagues, one Stage. It takes up in good Weather
near four Hours Time to travel this Stage; and in Winter, it is near a Day's
Journey, by reason of the fat Mountains, and dirty Soil. The Fields are all
open, stretching out toward the Left, and plowed into large Furrows. As for
Bitchau, it is one of the Best Cities of the Country, and its Land is the
Granary of all those Parts.

From Bitchau to Brinn, four Leagues, two Stages. This last City is more
considerable than the former, not only for its Grandeur, fine Houses, and the
Nobility with which it is filled, but also for its Citadel; one of the Best I
ever saw in those Parts. It takes in the compass of the whole Platform of an
high and inaccessible Mountain, whose Extremity at the Top has a Mantling, or
Counterscarp, much like that of Montmidy in Luxemburgh. Besides this, Brinn has
its fortified Walls, though irregular, all covered with a sort of Bastions,
without any Outside, or loose Works. It is situated on a small Prominence, at
the foot of which, round about, it has some Houses in the Nature of Suburbs.
Its Governor is a Noble Lord, very highly esteemed by the Elector of Bavaria,
who came to refresh himself at his House, after the Siege of Vienna was raised.
The King came thither in three Days time from Olmutz.

From Brinn to Pourlits, four Leagues, two Stages* This is a Village in a very
fat Soil, and a Plain, diversified with Meadows, Plowed Lands, and Thickets;
where there are some others more considerable.

From Pourlits to Niklitsbourg (the Germans pronounce it Niklitspourg) two
Leagues, one Stage of three Hours Riding. Moravia terminates at the end of one
League, at a certain Lake, over which we passed on a sorry Wooden Bridge.
Beyond the Lake, Austria begins, and presents us a new kind of Prospect, no
less pleasant for its Variety, than Rich and Plentiful in its vast Extent. On
the Left you see nothing but Vineyards, like those about Lions; on the Right,
boundless Plains, garnished with Villages; manured all over, and of a fat and
fertile Soil.

The Arch-Dutchy of AUSTRIA.
Austria, from whence that Illustrious Family (whose two Branches have swayed
the Imperial Scepter, from the Year 1437. to this Time) took its Name, was
formerly no more than a Marquisate, which the Emperor raised first to a Duchy,
and afterward to an Arch-Dutchy. The Danube runs cross it; and it is separated
from Hungary, on the one Side by the River of Moravia, and on the other by that
of Raab, both which throw themselves into the Danube by opposite currents.
Austria is bounded by Moravia, Bohemia, Bavaria, Styria, and Hungary. It is
full Cities, considerable not only in themselves, but also for the Epochas of
History, which will perpetuate their Names: Among others, we may reckon Passaw,
Lints, and Vienna its Capital City. This last is become the Metropolis of the
whole Empire, ever since Fourteen Emperors of the House of Austria, have
reigned successively; the last of which have Established their Court there, and
have made a Splendid City of it. Besides, Austria is a Country abounding with
variety of Plains, Vineyards, Hills, and large Forests, which afford ample
Diversions to the Emperors, by that prodigious quantity of Stags, and other
large Beasts, with which they are stocked, It Is certain that no Country abounds
so much with the former, as this Province does: You may see them in whole
Herds, like so many Beeves round about Vienna; and it is to be wondered what a
great number of them the Emperor takes every Year, whereof with the weight of
each, an exact Register is kept. This Register is locked up in the Archives of
the Court, and has been lodged there time out of Mind. These Hunting-Matches
are three Months in the Year: The Emperor misses not one of 'em, having stated
and fixed days for this Exercise, as he has for Audiences. His Courtiers make a
Business of State of it; and at the place of Rendez-vous, take each of 'em a
Nosegay of Greens, provided by the Huntsmen, who present the Emperor with a
Crown, and a kind of Scepter made of the same. The Scales are carried along
with 'em, to weigh each Beast they kill, and the Register, to take an exact
Account thereof: and the Emperor himself opens the Belly cross-ways with a
large Knife, before any dare touch it. When the Hunting-Matches are over, they
cast up the Number and the Weight, as set down in the Register, and by
comparing them to former Years, and to other Emperors, they pass a Judgment
from thence on the Glory, and Success of the Reigning Prince, who is either
preferred before, or set below his Ancestors, according to the Event of these
Matches. Herein I have made no Additions, and speak of no more than I my self
was an Eyewitness of.

The City of Niklitsbourg therefore is the first City of Austria, on that Side
of it that lies toward Moravia. It is situated on a Rising, commanded by a
very high Prominence, where is seen a great Pile of Buildings, very
Magnificent, even in their Irregularity. It Is the Castle belonging to the Lords
of the Place, which looks more like a Prince's Palace. The City is but small,
but neat, and encompassed with Suburbs, in one of which the Jews are permitted
to settle (a rare thing in those parts): It is adorned with Fountains, set off
with a chain of little Hills, that do, as it were, embrace it; and by a
pleasant Vale, which lies below it.

From this Place to Vienna, they reckon nine Leagues, and by Stages ten, which
are very large ones. The King of Poland turned off to the Right, that he might
be Master of the Dauube above, over against Toulm, marching to Mederich, to
Orkendorf, to Ollebrun; but the common Road is through Tastorf, Volkestorf, and
other Villages (for upon the strait Road, there are no Walled Towns from
Niklitsbourg to Vienna): The Country is very incommodious by its Eminences, and
by the low Bottoms, in the nature of Valleys: it is fat and fertile, mixed with
Vineyards, with several covert Places: There are a great many Villages along
those Valleys, as well as in the Hilly Country: and every where a variety of
Prospects. The largest Town on this Road is Volkestorf, the last Stage, from
whence they reckon two more to Vienna; though it is only three Leagues, taking in
the Passage of the Danube, from the first great Bridge across the two Islands.
The Road Volkestorf to Vienna is a vast Plain, without Hedge or Bush, at least
for two Leagues together: On the Right it is bounded with small Hills, where
are Villages in the midst of the Vineyard; and on the Left, one may see to the
opening of the Mountains, made on purpose (they say) for an Entrance into the
Kingdom of Hungary, and for the Passage of the Danube, above seven Leagues
distant from Volkestorf. It Is likewise the direct Road from Presbourg, which on
the same Line, is no more than ten Leagues from that Village, without any other
Defile than the River of Moravia, which is fordable in Summer, and at all times
supplied with a Ferry-Boat. These Countries (as I have already observed) from
that River to Volkestorf, were the Seat of War; the Duke of Lorrain being
always encamped therein, ever since Vienna began to be besieged, and having
rendered them Famous by the Bloody Battles, that he fought with the Turks and
Hungarians. The Reader may be the better informed of the Importance of this, by
perusing this last Description of the Road, where he will meet with no Rivers,
nor Fortified Places, nor Forests, nor Defiles: for that Ridge of Mountains
between Moravia and Silesia, is a Road good and easy enough, since the Stage
is performed in a Chariot; and the Ways are broad, commodious, without any
steep Rocks, or frightful Precipices. Nor are the Cities I have mentioned, any
Obstruction by their Situation, since it is not necessary to go through them;
and Travelers leave them on the Right or Left, when they have nothing to do
there. There are no Fortified Places, nor deep Rivers to pass over, nor any
narrow Ways to march through: So that all was open from the Danube to Vistula,
or at least to Oder, which is a large and deep River; but such as the Tartars
might have swam over, or passed by the Bridge of Ratibor, which was left
unguarded.

Such an Incursion would have been a fatal Blow to the Emperor's Affairs, by
ravaging three of his best Provinces; at least Austria and Moravia, may be
reckoned such, as well for the Richness of their Soil, which surpasses Silesia,
by the large Vineyards that are in both; as also for the number of their
Cities, more considerable, and better built than those of that Duchy. The
Wines of Austria and Moravia, are not indeed very rich; they are of an Orange
color, and have a Flavor neither perceptible by the Eye, nor the Palate: yet
they are sold very much in those Provinces, and at Vienna they drink none else.

From Niklitsbourg to Keysselstorf two Leagues, one Stage.

From Keysselstorf to Canschtorf two Leagues, one Stage.

From Canschtorf to Volkestorf two Leagues, one Stage.

From Volkestorf to Vienna, three Leagues, two Stages.

These are all very large Villages, and built either of Stone, or Mud, or
Brick. The first Stage is very long; the next, three Hours Riding at least; but
the last are common ones.

There is also a Stage set up from Vienna to Presbourg; but in time of Peace
there is no need of going through Vienna, but leaving it on the Left, you may
travel in a strait Line, from Volkerstorf across the Plains to the River of
Moravia, and thence to Presbourg, By this means one saves four Leagues of the
Way, and avoids the double Passage over the Danube, once over the Bridges of
Vienna, and again in a Ferry-Boat, over against Presbourg. But because that
Road was not safe during the first Year of the War, by reason of the Inroads
which the Hungarians made into Moravia, I always went by Vienna, in the two
Journeys I made from the Army to Cracow; viz. from Vienna to Fichau, called by
the Germans Wischo, four Leagues, two Stages, which are very short, through a
pleasant Champian Country, wherein formerly there were three Villages, like
those about Paris; which the Tartars levelled with the Ground.

From Fichau to Mutschultembourg four Leagues, two Stages.

From Mutschultembourg to Presbourg two Leagues, one Stage.

In leaving the first of these Places, one meets with a Barrier of high Hills
on the Right, which shut up the Passage, and make a very narrow Defile, between
the Mountains and the Danube. A League farther you pass through another,
straiter than the former; and that is, the Gate or Opening, which is descried
from Volkestorf, composed of two steep Rocks, which on both sides, situate one
over against the other, straiten the current of the Danube. In the midway of
this Passage is a large Town, enclosed with Stone Walls, with a lofty Gate,
through which one enters into the Defile, there being no other Entrance; for
the Danube flows along on the Left, and the Wall reaches on the Right, along
the Mountain to a Tower, that is seated on the Top, the which is very high and
steep. This Place is called Hamburgh, and might formerly have been a well built
City; at present it is all in Ruins, as well as the rest. From thence one
enters into a pleasant and fertile Plain, bounded on one side by the River, and
on the other side by those Green Hills, which opening wider and wider, gives a
large and boundless View of the finest Country that can be imagined. At the
City of Presbourg, situate on the Left across the Danube, you have the most
charming Prospect and Landscape, that any Painter can possibly invent or draw.
One passes the River on a Magnificent Floating-Bridge, large enough for above
ten Coaches, During the first Campaign it was taken away, and a Ferry-Boat only
clapped in its room. The next Year it was set on the River again, and is
certainly the best contrived Machine, and admirably well built; being
surrounded with Ballisters, or Rails on the Four Sides. It Is so contrived, that
one may walk upon it as upon plain Ground, and is guided by the Stream, without
Oars or Helm, only with a Pully, whose Cable is fastened to a train of small
Boats, that lie across the River, at an equal distance from each other.

The Reader will still perceive the Retreat of the Grand Vizier to be the more
surprising, when he here considers the Defiles through which he was to march,
before he could so much as reach his Bridges, which lay at Raab: and he will be
able to judge, Whether Miogensky, that Brave Commander, that Leader of the
Famous Brigade, did not pursue them highly, in being able to come up with the
Rear of the Enemy.

I shall shut up this Chapter with a Latin Epigram, made by the Bishop of Puy,
Brother of the Marquis of Bethune, who had married the Queen of Poland's Eldest
Sister. Those who are skilled in Latin Poetry, say it is smart, and has
something of the Attick Poignancy in it. It Is only a Distich, and runs thus:
Dignior Imperio numne Austrius? anne Polonus?
Odrysias acies hic fugat, ille fugit.


CHAP. IV.
The sequel of the Campaign in Hungary, with a particular Account of the
Battles of Barcan; and the Taking of Grana, or Strigonium.
THE precipitate Retreat of the Grand Vizier from before Vienna, could not be
pursued, for the Reasons assigned in the former Chapter: So that he had Leisure
enough, to pass his Bridges at Raab, and to get to Buda, with the Remains of
his Army. He made a stand at that place, as being out of Danger; and the
Letters which he there received from the Sultan, with new Marks of his Favor,
and fresh Standards, comforted him a little in his Misfortune. But being
ordered to cover the Frontiers, which his Defeat might have laid open to the
Poles and Imperialists; he rallied his Forces, gave some Subsistence to the
Soldiers, roused up the Courage of the Commanders, that they might be in a
posture of opposing the Christians, in case they were minded to prosecute their
Victory, and to lay Siege to any place within the Grand Signior's Dominions.
Though the Army was not well satisfied with the Grand Vizier, who did not duly
pay them, and whose Pay was found in good Ducats in his Chest, that were left
to be rifl'd by the King of Poland; yet they rallied without any more ado,
being animated with a Spirit of Mahometism, which serves that Nation instead of
true Glory. The New Cham of Tartary crossed the Danube over the Bridge of Buda,
and took possession of the City of Pest, with the Country round about it, to
serve as a cover from thence to the Mountains, where Count Teckley was advanced
in the Bottoms. He reinforced the Garrisons of Newhausel, and Strigonium, and
sent a Body of Horse to the latter of these Places, there to pass the Bridge,
and to guard that Pass, where was a Fort of Earth staked and pallissadoed,
called Barcan.

For the better comprehending of those Motions, by the Knowledge of the
Country, you are to take Notice, That the Danube joining its Streams at the
Foot of the Citadel of Comorne, and at the Extremity of the Isle of Schut,
forms one single and large Channel, between great and open Plains on the Left,
and a narrow Mountainous and covert Country on the Right, as far as Buda; being
about twelve Leagues distant from that Isle: That these Plains are full of
Villages, large Towns and small Cities, whose Inhabitans manure the Land under
the Cannon of Newhausel, to which they contribute, and whither they carry their
Commodities to sell. The City is situated in the Center of those Champian
Countries, and is the most advanced Place which the Turks have on that side of
Lower Hungary. The Country on the Right beyond the Danube, is less fertile and
manured, Mountainous and Woody; yet Populous, having several strong Cities or
Castles, which makes the Visiriat of Buda. The nighest of those Places toward
Germany, is Strigonium, seated at the foot of a Hill almost on the Banks of the
Danube; and it is there where the Turks have their first Bridge, to pass over to
the Plains of Newhausel, and by this communication to guard the Conquered
Country. On the same side with Strigonium lies the City of Buda, of the same
situation of the former, but a great deal more considerable, with such another
Bridge to pass to Upper Hungary, and relieve the Places that are on that side,
at the foot of the Mountains. The Passes of those two Bridges are defended on
the Left side of the River; the first by a very great Fort, where are abundance
of Houses, fortified with high Pallisadoes, with two Gates; but uncovered, and
liable to be attacked on all Sides: This Fort is called Barcan. The second
Bridge is defended by a large fortified City, called Pest.

But whereas the Turks had been settled for above 140 Years in all this
Country, which Solomon II. sirnam'd The Great, had in part conquered; those
Places were looked upon as the ancient Patrimony of the Sultan. The Turks never
dreamed of any change either in Religion or Government. Buda was the Capital
City of Turkish Hungary, and by the Forts with which it was either covered, or
surrounded within six Leagues of Comorne, it might pass for the Center of the
Ottoman Empire. Upon this account it was, that the Vizier there made a stand,
and Rendevouz'd his new Army. He took up his Quarters there, with the best part
of the Army, thereby to cover the Frontiers of that Visiriat; and sent the rest
cross the Danube, to guard the Passes of the two Bridges, that they might be in
a Readiness to hinder the Christians from advancing in the Plains of Newhausel,
or toward the Neighboring Mountains. This is the Ichnography of the Country
in General, let us descend to that of the Places contained in it in Particular.

STRIGONIUM.
Strigonium, called by the Germans Gran, by the Italians Grana, by the
Inhabitants Estregon, from whence the Turks have named it Ostrogon, is a City
whose Houses are built with Wood. It is situated at the foot of a large
Mountain, which the Danube washes; enclosed with Stone Walls, pretty well
built, having Turrets and Batteries on them, but without a Trench, or any other
kind of Defense. On the Top is a Fortress, called the Upper Town, where the
Governor and his Garrison are quartered: This Fortress has no other
Fortifications, beside very thick Walls, well built and Rampier'd, defended
with Towers, Angles, and other ancient Flankers, by which the Walls of the
Lower Town are joined to those of the Upper. That side which faces the Danube,
is very pleasant, and the Communication of the Lower City with the Fortress
very easy by paths, than run along the Descent to a small Gate: But the side
which looks toward the Champian Country is very steep on the Top, where is a
Rocky Crest that surrounds the Fort and its Walls; at the foot of which is a
Pallisade in the nature of a Counterscarp; to keep off the Enemy. For as soon
one has gained the foot of those Walls, he is covered from all the Attempts of
those that are upon them. Over against this side is just such another Mountain,
parallel to the former, and called in German Thomasberg, where formerly was a
sort of Fortress, of which nothing is now remaining but the Foundations, and
from whence one might cannonade that of Strigonium.

The Lower City had several Houses in the outparts upon the Plain; a Mosque
upon the Bank of the Danube near the Bridge, to which they went through a small
Gate, opened in the Wall over against it. This Bridge was one of the longest
that ever was seen; the middle built on Boats, the two ends on Piles. The River
is of an extraordinary Breadth, its Banks pleasant, its Current running in a
strait line, the passage all about of wonderful variety. It was formerly a
considerable Archbishopric, whose Title is still bestowed on Prelates of high
Dignity: And of late Years, we have met in the Learned World with an Archbishop
of Strigonium, whose Writings have furnished matter of Dispute to the most
Famous Universities of Europe, and have established a lasting Reputation to
their Author. This City is still the Metropolis of a Country of a large Extent,
which made up one of the best parts of the ancient Kingdom of Hungary.

BUDA.
Buda was the Capital thereof, and the Residence of the King, who had there a
Magnificent Palace. It lies below Strigonium, six large Leagues, and on the
same side, divided into the Upper and Lower Town; the latter seated on the
Declivity and at the Foot of a large Mountain; the former stretched out on the
Top of it, where it stands; being very narrow about the middle, but very long,
and the two Extremities widened out like Places-d' Arms. Neither of these
Towns have any Fortifications: The Lower Town is enclosed only with Walls; the
Upper flanked with round Towers, with a good Trench, a double Circumvallation
in several parts of the Ancient Mode, and with those Palaces of King Matthias
at the end, which enters into the very Substance of the Walls, and make a
principal part of them. The whole is built with Brick, and well rampier'd, yet
of easy Access, the Declivity of the Mountain not being very rough, and the
Top being almost all of it commanded by other Risings, proper to mount Cannon
on. The River runs behind that Hill on which the City stands, so that one
cannot get betwixt them: and to cut off their Supplies, one must either seize
upon Pest, which is on the other side at the Head of the Bridge, or stop up the
Danube below Buda, toward the Isle of Saint Andrews, which is not far from
thence.

The Turks call the Place Boudim, and have made it the Title of a Vizier: I
likewise look upon it as one of the Chief Visiriats by the Extent of its
Government, and the Importance of the Province, which is one of the richest and
largest of the Ottoman Empire; which comprehends the whole course of the Drove,
a very considerable River, upon which or its Marshes on each side, is the
Famous Bridge of Esseck, of near two hundred Leagues Length; and which opens a
Passage into Servia, Bulgaria, Bosnia, and other Ancient Provinces of the
Turkish Dominions. The Province of Buda made a great part of Lower Hungary, and
one of the Ancient Pannonienses, stretching it self from the Danube toward
Sclavonia, and across that River as far as the Mountains of Upper Hungary, and
the River Theysse, taking in the City of Agria, with its Dependencies. At
present it is the most considerable Province of the Ottoman Empire, which
reaches to the Borders of Austria on one side, and to the Frontiers of Poland
on the other.

HUNGARY.
But for the clearer Apprehending the course of this Country, we ought here to
say something in general of the Kingdom of Hungary, one of the largest,
richest, most fertile, pleasantest, and most populous Countries of all Europe.
Though it is in a great measure robbed of those rare Qualifications, and has been
the Seat of War, Revolts, and Bloody Catastrophes for two hundred Years
together; still it is the best of all the Estates that belong to the House of
Austria. It wants nothing, and what it has, is altogether Admirable. Its
Mountains furnish you with Golden Mines, its Coasts with the richest Wines in
the World; for the Best comes not near those of Hungary, made in certain Parts
and of certain rich Grapes dried in the Sun, called Vvae siccae, Vvae passae.
The Fruits of the Country are likewise Extraordinary: You there meet with a
kind of black Plums, of a delicate Taste, and so suitable to the Constitution
of an Humane Body, that the Physicians* say proverbially, That they will do you
no harm, eat as many as you will of' em, unless you swallow down Tree and all.
The other Fruits so much boasted of in hot Countries, grow here in great
plenty: Water Melons, and others on dry Land, without meeting with so much as
one of 'em naught. And there are three or four sorts of them, or of different
colors, being white, green, red within.

Hungary abounds no less in all other things requisite for the Pleasure or
Necessities of Life, so that it needs not to borrow any thing from its
Neighbors, but on the contrary can lend to them of its own stores. This has
rendered it very populous, and enriched it with great Cities, large Towns, and
stately Castles. Most of the first owe their Original to the Ancient Romans,
who planted Colonies in this Country; the Names of which are still retained in
that general corruption of Languages. Such are Poson, Sabine, and Tyrnau, which
are Famous Cities of this Kingdom, founded formerly by Piso, Sabinus and
Tyrnavius. The Inhabitants of those Places still retain the purity of the
Language of their ancient Masters. It Is certain that no place of Europe speaks
so good, so Proper, Elegant and Fluent Latin as Hungary. Even the Language of
Augustus's Time is not degenerated neither in the Style, nor the Pronunciation.
It Is still cultivated with Care in the Universities of this Kingdom (of which
the Colleges of Tyrnau and Cassovia, are the most Famous) and noted as the Best
Universities of France, and the Ancient Conimbrian and Complutensian Academies
of Spain. The Post-Masters are not admitted into that Office, unless they can
speak Latin as well as Hungarian, and in short, the Generality of the
Inhabitants speak it very Naturally.

There is scarce any Kingdom, that has so many considerable Nobility, Rich
Lords, and Powerful Families; which appears from those frequent Rebellions,
that have happened in that Country: and in our Days from that Rebellion raised
by the Counts Nadasti, Fragipani, and Serin; whose punishment contrary to the
Edict of Amnesties and Impunities, has fomented it again in the Person of Count
Teckley, who inherits the Hatred which his Ancestors bore to the Tyranny and
Cruelty of the Ministers of Vienna. Religion was the unhappy cause of it, the
Jesuits the Instruments, and the Turks have made the finishing Stroke, having
ruined this vast Territory; partly on their own Head, and partly to relieve the
Rebels. From hence ensued the Incursion of Mahomet IV. made in the Year 1683.
Afterward the Conquests of Count Teckley, in Upper Hungary, where he took
Filek, Cassovia, Tokay, Eperiez, and other Places, a little before Kara
Mustapha a Bassa fell into Austria. Not only the Genius of the Hungarians, who
are Naturally Treacherous, and inclined to rebel; not only the Riches of the
Lords, and the Fiery and Haughty Temper of the Nation, but withal the
Arrogance of the German Governors contributed very much to those Revolts. All
the World knows what great Generals and Commanders this Country has bred up,
who were for a long time the strongest Bulwark Christianity had against the
Infidels: Histories are full of the Noble Actions, Memorable Battles and
Sieges, which have raised the Reputation of this Kingdom to a great Height, by
the Valor of its Kings or Generals, both Ancient and Modern: So that their
Bravery has been perpetuated in all Ages, and even nourished by the War of the
Turks, who could never have advanced their Conquest so far, had not Rebellion
and Intestine Divisions opened a way to them. Those of Flanders have met with a
Famous Historian [Strada] by whose Help, they have merited the Admiration of
all Ages: But the Wars of Hungary, which are longer and more bloody, would have
been more memorable, if a faihtful and well-inform'd Historian had wrote the
Particulars of them.

This Kingdom formerly contained ten Provinces, whose Standards were set up (as
at present) at the Coronation of the Kings: Sclavonia, Servia, Bosnia, Croatia,
and other Countries of the Ancient Illyricum, were dependent upon it. Vienna
still pretends, That the Principality of Transylvania was one of its Provinces:
but this last is at present a particular Sovereignty of it self; and the Turks
have added the rest to the Empire of Constantinople. So that we are to look
upon the Kingdom in its present State, as it is bounded by Poland, Transylvania,
Talachia, Servia, Croatia and Austria; containing in this vast Circumference,
two different Countries, which the Danube cuts asunder, and wholly separates:
the One called Upper Hungary, which consists of Mountains, Hills, and Valleys;
the other, Lower Hungary, stretching it self along vast, fertile and pleasant
Plains, from the Right side of the River, taking in those great Isles which it
forms from Presbourg. Both these Countries are washed with great Rivers,
enriched with considerable Cities, and fortified with Forts and Castles. But
the best Canton is Upper Hungary, as the Lower is the most pleasant. The
Ancient Romans had possession of the former a long time, and refused not to pay
their Obedience to the Emperors of that Warlike Nation, which costs them no
less than the Gauls. It was Pannonia, a Province of the Roman Empire, where
those Lords of the Universe settled themselves, planted Colonies, and kept up
Armies, being very well satisfied with the fruitfulness of the Soil, the
goodness of the Climate, and the considerableness of its Situation. There are
still to be found a vast number of Medals; the old Ruins are full of 'em; the
Foundations of the Cities were the Treasuries of 'em, where the People
doubtless did hide them, either in time of War, or out of Covetousness, as in
other Parts. Those who would write a History by those Ancient Coyns or Medals,
cannot meet any where else with so many, and so fine pieces, so well stamped
and preserved as are to be met with in this Kingdom, and in Transylvania. In
the Year 1685. I brought to his Polish Majesty above two thuosand Pieces of
Gold or Silver, gathered in that Country, at the Instance of the Marquis of
Bethune, by the care of several Lords of his Acquaintance, and among the rest
of those of Teckley's Party. And when the Germans fortified Nyssa, in the 1619,
Count Veterani collected an infinite number of very Curious Medals, in digging
up the Foundations of the Walls.

Besides this general Division of Hungary; there is another particular one with
respect to its Sovereingty, as it is divided between the Turks and the King's,
the Successors of those who first founded this Monarchy. The Turks have
curtailed Upper as well as Lower Hungary. Of Lower-Hungary they have conquered
all the Country from the Save to the Drove, and from the Drove running along
the Danube, as far almost as the Isle of Schut, or Komorne* This Conquest
reaches on the Left toward Croatia, and Styria, on the Right within Seven
Leagues of Presbourg along the Mountains, and the River Theysse; which is
generally comprised under one Province Governed by a Vizier, called from the
Capital City of it, the Vizier of Buda. In Vpper-Hungary, they carried on their
Conquests beyond the Theysse, skirting on Transylvania, and piercing into the
very heart of the Kingdom, where they took Possession of Temeswar,
Peterwaradin, and other Parts, of which they made a second Province, under the
Title of the first of those Cities. The rest toward Poland and Moravia
remained to the Emperor or the King of Hungary, but very much curtailed by the
Rebels; and the strong places which the Grandees held out: So that when the
Turks came to Vienna, only Zatmar toward Poland, and some other inconsiderable
Cities, which that Fortress likewise covered, were under the Obedience of the
Emperor. The State of War indeed changed the Disposition afterward, as we
shall see; but thus it was in this year I now speak of, after the Raising of
the Siege of Vienna.

Whilst the Grand Vizier rallied the broken Forces of his Army at Buda, the
King of Poland marched victoriously with his toward Lower-Hungary, on the
Right of the River Danube, on which they caused the Bridge of Toulm to fall
down, and to be placed below Presbourg to pass over into the Isle of Schut.
This Isle they traversed from one end to the other in several distinct Camps,
as has been already said, to the City of Komorne, which is at the point of
that Isle: Over against which, and on the left Branch of the Danube the same
Bridge was brought down to pass over into the plains of Newhausel, which they
had a design to besiege. A League lower another Bridge was cast over on
Presbourg side, to maintain a Communication between this City with the Army,
and the Isle of Schut; the only Road that could be Traveled with any safety,
and to facilitate that of the City Komorne, which was seated at the farther end
of the Island.

The King of Poland left the Isle October 3. and Encamped beyond it under the
Cannon of that Fortress, facing toward Newhausel on the Left, leaving space on
the Right for the German Army, who arrived the next Day near the City, and
passed the Bridge the same Day, and all the fifth; which obliged the King to
make a stand in that place to the sixth, that the Duke of Lorrain might have
time to draw over all his Forces. However the Imperial Artillery, and the
Regiments of the Cravatians could not pass over till this Day; and the Army was
forced still to Halt. But our Parties and our Cossacks having brought News the
Night before, that the Turks were likewise passing the Danube at Pest and
Barean, to put a stop to our March, and cover Newhausel, Lewents, and the
Country that lay at the foot of the Mountains; the King resolved upon Marching
directly to the Bridge of Strigonium, to burn it, before the Enemy could all
get over to us, and to carry the Fort which lay at the head of the Bridge by
the Vanguard with Sword in Hand. In the mean time he took a view of the Rounds
of his Camp of Komorne, to descry the Avenues and the Disposition of the
Ground. He sent a French Engineer, named M. du Pont, with a great Party of
Horse toward Lewents, with Orders to advance as nigh as he could to the
Enemies Army. His Cossacks were likewise ordered forth toward the Danube; one
of whom brought a Turk, who was advanced but only twenty paces from the
Main-Guard of the Enemies Camp. The Engineer returned without having discovered
any thing; because his Guides had led him all the Night without coming nigh
either of the Bridges; on the contrary they brought him toward Newhausel, by
the Walls of which he marched. But another Officer committed a greater Error;
for being commanded to go as far Barcan, he stopped in a Village halfway,
where he spent the greatest part of the Night; a Detachment of the Turks
surprised him, cut off his Head, with thirty Horse that attended him, whose
Trunks we saw the next Day as we passed through that Village. So that the King
could never get any certain Intelligence what number of Turks had crossed on
this side of the River, nor where their particular Post was. We could plainly
see the Fires which they made in the Villages upon the Road, thereby to cut off
from us both Wood and Forage, the former of which was very scarce in those
Plains: We were informed by the Prisoners that marched on the side of us; that
the Tartars were advanced by the way of Pest, and were to join the Rebels of
Hungary, led by Count Teckly along the Mountains; but we knew nothing of what
past at Barcan. This Post was very still undiscovered, and the King was ill
advised to think of carrying the Place by his Dragoons and Infantry, without
communicating any thing of his Design to the Germans, that he might let them
see that the Poles knew how to carry considerable Forts by surprise.

Full of this design, he urged the Duke of Lorrain to decamp from Komorne, and
advance toward the Bridges of the of the Turks, under a pretense of burning
them, without letting him know any of his Real intentions. But the Imperial
Army could not yet break up, since their Cannon and part of the Cavalry was
still stopped in the Isle, by the breaking of part of the Bridge, which was
repairing all the fifth Day. On October 6. about Nine in the Morning they
decamped without waiting for the coming up of the rest; and in that very
instant the King received advice that Teckley being informed of his March was
retreated toward Transylvania, having gained the Mountains. This redoubled his
Desire of advancing toward the Enemy, which they did this very Day within two
short Leagues off the Fort of Barcan, having marched three large Leagues.

During these Transactions the Queen of Poland, to whom the King had sent me
with a very large Account of the Particulars of Vienna, dispatched me back
again with her Answers, and ordered me particularly to insinuate to the King,
by means of the Senators that followed the Camp, that it was high time to
return back to his Dominions. This the Poles passionately longed for, because
the Infantry began to be out of Heart, for want of Provisions, particularly
Bread; for which the Germans cannot be excused, having the convenience of the
Danube, by which they might have conveyed great plenty into the Camp; had they
used due Precautions. Besides this, the Poles thought they were at the fag-end
of the World, and longed for their Beer, their Colworts, and their Cacha,
without which they fancied they could not live. But the King would listen to
none of these Considerations, and with a steady Resolution, pursued that
Glorious Carreer, which he had formed in his Mind, from the Banks of the
Danub^^ the Vistula, across all Upper Hungary.

I met with the German Army, in the Isle of Komorne; and because I could not
tell for certain where the Polish Army was, which always marched two or three
Leagues in the Van; I resolved at Presbourg to follow a Courrier from the
Emperor, that was going thence to the Duke of Lorrain, from whom I expected to
receive a Convoy. After 4 Hours march we found the Arrier-Guard, composed of
the Cravatian Regiments: We went afterward by the course of the Country,
toward the Place, where they told us the Main Body of the Army lay; but we
turned too much toward the the Left, and fell in with the Camp of the
Infantry, commanded by Staremberg, which coasted along the Left Arm of the
Danube, and encamped this Day upon the Shore about Goutta, a small City over
against Newhausel. By this means we could not get before Midnight to the Duke
of Lorrain's Camp, posted about the Middle of the Isle, four large Leagues off
Komorne, being two Days March to that City.

On the Morrow, being Sunday October. 3. I waited upon the Duke of Lorrain at his
Levee; who informed me, That the King was this very Day to pass the Danube,
over the Bridge of Komorne, his Army being marched over the Day before. That
Prince ordered me to be conducted thither, by one of his Adjutants, upon Horses
belonging to his own Equipage. I arrived at the Bridge that very Instant the
King passed it: and his Majesty, who had ordered me to rejoyn him by coming
that Road, in which he was pursuing the Enemy, was surprised, and at the same
time glad, to see me arrive so safe to his Camp. During the Halt he made there,
he received an Express from the Prince of Transylvania, with Letters writ in
Ciphers, dated at Buda, which contained little else but the Re-establishment of
the Grand Vizier in his former Dignity, and the Particulars of the whole
Intrigue at Court. Much about the same time there arrived two Envoys from Count
Teckley, their Master being minded to adjust his own Particular Interests with
the King of Poland, when he perceived the contrary Party so apparently to
decline. The Imperial Ministers, who were near his Polish Majesty's Person,
were at first for treating those Envoys as Rebels, and talked of nothing but
hanging, drawing, and quartering them, without any respect had to the presence
of their Deliverer, who had put them into a posture of speaking so big. But the
King, nettled at such a groundless and unseasonable a piece of Arrogance, gave
'em to understand, That he was the Master, and solemn Protector of all those,
who had any Negotiations with Him. Those Envoys quartered in the Camp within
the King's Lodgments, all the time that the Army tarried there, were treated by
the Officers, and sent back with all the Assurances imaginable; which piece of
Civility, Count Teckley afterward repaid Him with Interest.

October. 6. the Army (as was said before) advanced three Leagues beyond Komorne,
and encamped in the open Plains, bounded on the Left by a ridge of Hills, and
on the Right by the Danube: The Duke of Lorrain made a Proposal to the King of
staying there October 7, to wait for the Infantry, who were not yet come up,
and the King yielded to it: So that the Duke of Lorrain retiring about Midnight
to his Quarters, and the Chevalier Prince Lubomirsky waiting upon him for
Orders, he acquainted him with the Resolution taken of staying there; and
accordingly ordered all Parts to go out a Forraging. But a Moment after, the
King changing his Mind, or fortified afresh, by some unknown Circumstance, in
his Design of going to attack the Fort of Barcan, he gave Orders to his
Generals to dislodge the Army by Break of Day, and to send before his Vanguard,
reinforced with Horse and Dragoons, which were to march directly to that Post.
The Chevalier Lubomirsky, retained by some secret Impulse, would not send out
to Forage, without sending again to the Duke of Lorrain's Quarters; and his
Conjecture proved true, the Duke ordering him to march with all speed after the
King of Poland, who was already advanced a great way. Such a desperate
Resolution stunned the German Generals, and was excused by none: However, they
decamped without weighing things, but not without murmuring and inwardly
rejoicing at the Misfortune, which afterward attended our presumptuous
Precipitation.

The Turks had two Days before passed over the Bridge of Strigonium, and beside
those who were lodged in the Fort, there were great Platoons posted in the
Gardens and Orchards round about Barcan: Of this the King of Poland was not
aware, but was well pleased to rob the Germans of the Glory of this Expedition,
and of carrying the Place within their View, and without their Assistance. But
God was pleased to mortify this Hero by a contrary Success, and to let him
know that the Disposal of the whole was in his Hands; having saved his Sacred
Person, by a Miracle no less Remarkable than that of the Deliverance of Vienna,
the Glory whereof, if unblemished, might perhaps have made the Poles too
vainglorious.

The Vanguard was scarce arrived upon the Plains, above the Bottom stretched
out to the River and the Fort, where they were to encamp on this Day, but the
Turks began to draw out of the Gardens, in order to skirmish with our Dragoons.
At first their Number was inconsiderable, but large Squadrons issued out
insensibly: Some out of the Fort, others over the Bridge marching from
Strigonium; and at last the Body of Troops thus increased, came thundering upon
the Polish Vanguard, who had not so much as time to put themselves into a
Posture of Fighting. Horror and Confusion seized their Spirits; no Officer to
be seen, no Word of Command given; and those who did give any, were so little
Masters of themselves, that they ordered the Dragoons some to dismount, some to
remount, without any reason for either of these Counter-Orders. For they were
open Plains, where the Infantry was exposed to the Natural Fury and Impetuosity
of the Turks. They therefore drew themselves up in a confused Line of Battle;
the Troops of Pancernes, Cosacks, and other Cavalry, descended below the
Curtain, whose Brow the Dragoons were in possession of in the same Line: the
Stragenic, who commanded the Body in Person, caused a discarge to be made upon
the Enemy, who bore upon them with an extraordinary violence. The Turks at
first gave ground, but soon returned upon that Body of Horse with the same
Vigor, without fearing the Fire, of which they bore a second Discharge, after
which the Cosacks were broke; the rest endeavored to regain the top of the
Curtain, and terror joined with the Impetuosity of the Turks, routed the whole
Line without resistance. The Dragoons of the Grand General remounted, in order
to fly for it; those belonging to the King, who were on the Right, had not time
to do it, and were all cut in pieces.

However, the King marched on with the Hussars, and the other Troops of Horse,
who were but little prepared for a Battle, which they had no leisure now to
wait for. He saw at a distance the Disorder of his defeated Vant-Guard, which
at first he would have dissembled; but at last, perceiving that they were
vigorously beaten off, he put himself in a posture of defending them. He drew
up his Cavalry in a Line, which upon the first Onset, received the Turks with a
great deal of Bravery, the Hussars likewise charged them twice, and the rest of
the Troops bore some time the terrible Shock of the Enemy, who were animated by
their first Success. But their Squadrons stretching out to the Right and Left,
with a design of surrounding our whole Line, our Left Wing being disordered,
began to give ground, and the Right being routed, at the third Onset, which the
Turks made upon them, with their Sabres in their Hands, (for that was all the
Weapon they made use of in this Transaction) faced about at the same time, to
avoid the Fury of the Enemy. The Grand General, seeing the Disorder, prayed his
Majesty to retreat, whilst he would endeavor to bear the Charge of the Turks,
with some rallied Troops, to cover his Sacred Person. But that Prince, being
seldom used to such a Retreat, received the Proposal very ill, and still fought
on, till the Crowd of those who fled, carried him off in spite of his Teeth.
Never such a Confusion was seen, The Hussars threw away their Lances, the
Cornets their Standards, which one might see heaped up pel-mell, with the
Kettle-drums in the Furrows. The Officers could not be so much as hearkened to:
those Brave Soldiers left the King to the mercy of the Turks, who eagerly
pursued him. Some of the Soldiers were for Butchering the Leaders, that would
have forced them to rally: and others replied to those who upbraided them for
their Cowardice, That their Lives were as precious to them as the King's was to
him; that if he came thither to be killed or taken, they had some thing else to
do with themselves.

In such a precipitate Flight over a Country broke up into large Furrows, and
full of rough ways, it was the Misfortune of a great many Men to be unhors'd,
who were either crushed to pieces by the crowd of those who fled, or beheaded
by the Turks. Prince Lubomirsky, who has been since made Great Squire of the
Crown, was cast upon the Ground, and desired every one that passed by, to save
his Life, for which he promised 100000 Ducats; and was at last assisted by a
Groom, that had a Led-Horse in his Hand, which he had just time to mount. The
Palatin of Pomerania d' Henoff, had not so good Luck, for he was wounded with a
Musket Shot, notwithstanding the Wastcoat he had on, quilted with Taffata
Cotton, 1000 or 1200 times double, which he had preferred before Armor, that
could not be fitted to his fat Corpse. This Lord lying upon his Horse, and
incommoded with his Wound, was assisted in vain by 7 or 8 of his faithful
Domestics, who could not fix him again in his Saddle; he entreated them to
leave him upon the Ground, where he had not rested long, but the Turks came and
cut off his Head. Whereas most of the Turkish Army were Bosnians, whose
Language has some affinity to the Polish, and some of 'em perhaps had learned
it in Slavery, or were Polish Renegadoes; you might hear them cast a thousand
Flouts and Reproaches on our Men that fled: Go, get ye home (cried they) to your
own Country; defend that, and never concern your selves in assisting others.

In this dreadful Rout the King's Person was not only abandoned, but almost
stiffl'd by the Crowd, that carried him along: His Arms and Thighs were
mortified and bruised, by the justling of Horses and Arms, and by the Blows he
accidentally received from those that rushed by him with all the violence
imaginable. At last two Turks made up to him, one of 'em lift up his Sabre
within four Inches of his Neck, and had certainly cut off his Head, if a
Reyter, belonging to the King's Regiment of Guards, had not very luckily
interposed, and knocked the Turk down dead with his Musket. But this
Life-guard's Man did not long enjoy the Glory of such a Signal piece of
Service; for the Turk's Comrade, coming up to him immediately revenged the
other's Death, and cut off the unhappy Reyter's Head, whose Name we could never
get any knowledge of. At the same time the Turk made toward the King, whom he
only took for some great Lord; but the great Squire of the Crown, keeping close
to his Friend and Master, presented a Pistol ready cocked to the Turk's Breast,
which he was not willing to discharge but upon sure grounds; and thus by this
Bold and Daring piece of Bravery, he scared him away.

But this was not the only Danger to which the King of Poland was exposed, on
this fatal Day. He was so bulky, that scarce a Horse could be met with capable
of carrying him such a Journey, Besides, his very Weight was enough to bear
down the strongest Steed, especially in such deep Furrows, through heaps of
Dead Bodies, unhors'd Cavaliers, Lances, Standards, and Kettle-drums, which
being strow'd in the Way, made a sort of Barricade. However, the Horse upon
which his Majesty was mounted in this Juncture, kept up his Spirits beyond
Expectation, and not only leapt over those embarassing heaps, that lay so thick
in the way, with ease and Vigor; but also finished his Journey, without
panting or blowing, without stumbling or halting; and with such Speed, that the
King could scarce breath, much less was he able to keep upon his back.
Whereupon turning toward his Faithful Friend, the Grand Squire, to tell him he
was quite spent; the Squire made him drop the Reins on the Neck of the Horse,
of which he was well secured, and took the King below the Right Arm, and a
Gentleman of Lithuania named Cherkas, took him by the Left, to hold him up in
his Saddle; which those Gentlemen did to the very last, without parting from
their Master, whose Life by this means was saved; especially the Grand Squire,
who with his other Hand held up the King's Head by the Chin, that he might not
be stiffled or suffocated, by letting it lie upon his Breast.

Amidst all the direful thoughts, which doubtless ran in the Head of this
Monarch, amidst those various Chances of an adverse Fortune; he could not get
rid of the Fear he was in for the Prince his Son, ever since the beginning of
the Defeat. Every Moment, he asked the Grand Squire, what was become of him,
who endeavored to keep up his Spirits, by telling him, That the Prince was
safe, though he was not certain of any such thing. It Is true, the Crowd pressed
upon him, and bore him off on the Right, out of the Road, which the King his
Father took. A Turk had already joined him, and caught hold of his Coat; but
the Grand Squire perceiving it, cried out to him to unbutton it, and to clap
both Spurs to his Horse, which the Prince did very opportunely. By this means
he got out of the Hands of this first Turk, and escaped the rest, by marching
more toward the Right, being followed only by one French Gentleman of his
Household, who also took another Road. The Prince reached very seasonably a
demolished Chapel, that lay toward the Hills, where the Grand Squire saw him
arrive, having kept his Eye always upon him, and whither they sent for him
after the Retreat of the Enemy, who pursued the Poles so vigorously for about
half a large Hungarian League.

They had perhaps carried the Pursuit farther, had it not been for the Arrival
of our Infantry, Cannon, and Carriages, whose Main-Body charged them, and put a
stop to their Carreer. However, some of 'em still pushed on in their Chariots,
who returned back with full speed, by marching toward the Danube. In this
unlucky Juncture, a Gentleman belonging to the King being sick, and in a
Calash, was forced to fly for it across the rough Plough'd Lands, and being
bruised with the Jolts of his Litter, died by that time he had drove 100 Paces.
In short, all things were in a dreadful disorder and confusion. The Commanders
of the Artillery, who marched at the Head of the Infantry, caused several
Cannons to be discharged at radomshot, to put a stop to the Impetuosity of the
Enemy. At last, the Imperial Army appeared, and the Turks not daring to engage
any farther with those Forces, that surmounted them in Number, made a gradual
Retreat, over that Curtain where they had begun to defeat the Polish Vanguard,
gathering up in the Fields of Battle the Chief Personages, the Lances,
Standards, and Colors, at the Top of which they fastened all the Christians
Heads, that were killed in the Action, and placed them round the Fort of
Barcan, like so many Pallisadoes.

It Is not possible to describe the general Consternation our Army was in, or
the Sorrow of the Court. The King almost dead with the Fatigue, weak, and out
of Breath, was laid on the Ground upon a little Hay, surrounded with his Polish
Lords that had escaped the Slaughter, all of 'em in a Melancholy posture, with
pale Countenances, and Eyes fixed on the Ground. A sad and mournful Silence
possessed the Troops, who this Day encamped without any Order, being rather
dispersed in the Open Fields, than lodged in a mark'd-out Ground; for, in
truth, we had no other place to encamp in, but that which the Turks had allowed
us to take breath in; a great way short of the intended Camp, which now served
as a Burying-place, to our unfortunate Comrades.

After this the German Generals arrived, who stood round the King, with an
external Aspect suitable to the Misfortune of the Day; but inwardly ravished at
the Loss, which so much eclipsed the Glory gained by delivering Vienna. One
might read even in their feigned and masked looks, a secret Joy which Emulation
stirred up, and which Ingratitude rendered more delightful. It Is possible the
Duke of Lorrain might have more generous Thoughts; and I am persuaded, That the
public Interest, his Polish Majesty's Person, and the Honor of the Christians
Arms, inspired into him a true Sorrow: but the manner whereby this Enterprise
was kept secret from him, That haughty Air which was affected in the Execution
of it, and that Vaunting which had been made of the Bravery of the Polish
Troops, could not choose but make him relish some Comfort, even in the
Misfortune of this Day. The King of Poland could not speak a Word to him, and
with much ado, lifted up his Eyes at the Arrival of the Prince his Son, whom
the Grand Squire had conducted to him, to remove the Dejection of his Spirits.
There was no farther Order given this Night, but only to encamp in the Bottom,
between the Curtains along the Danube, and to take care of interring the Dead
forthwith, to cover the Shame of our Defeat, which was but too considerable in
the Vanguard.

In the mean time, the Turks puffed up with this Success, sent Expresses all
Night to Buda, to acquaint the Grand Vizier therewith, and desire him to send
them a Reinforcement, that so they might conclude, by cutting off the Germans
which they fancied they might do at a cheap rate. They sent the same News to
Count Teckley, who was fortified about the Mountains; giving him to understand,
that if he had reasons hitherto of complimenting the King of Poland, they were
now removed, by the entire Defeat of his Army, in which himself had been
killed, perhaps taken: That none remained of that great Body of Troops, but the
Germans, his mortal Enemies, whom he might easily get himself rid of, if he
would but make haste with his Army, which they earnestly desired him to do.
This News that was sent to Count Teckley and the Grand Vizier, had different
Impressions on the Minds of those two Generals. The Ottoman General forgot his
Flight, and thought he might wipe off the Disgrace of that by a Second Battle.
To this Purpose, he ordered 12 or 15000 Horse to march to Strigonium, with
Anchars, or Dragoons, armed with Carabines, under the Command of Two Visiers,
and Four other Bassas, who had Injunctions to pass the Bridge, and immediately
to fall Hand-over-head upon the Christians, without needlessly disputing the
Ground with them; that so by this bold Enterprise, they might add the last
Stroke to the Pannick Fear of the Foregoing Day. This I learned from one of the
Visiers, who was taken in this Action. Count Teckley received the News of our
Misfortune with contrary Thoughts. He did not desire the Turks should have the
better on it, and looked upon the King of Poland, as one that balanced and
counterpois'd their insolent Greatness. Upon this Consideration, he was
heartily troubled at our Loss; especially when he considered his own private
Interest, and the occasion he had of the Polish Prince, either to make his
Peace with the Imperial Court, or to prevent him from submitting himself
entirely to the Tyrannical Yoke of the Port. He turned those Thoughts over and
over in his disturbed Breast; and opened himself to Count Forval his Intimate
Friend, when he received Orders to march with his Army toward Barcan, to hem
in that of the Christians, whilst the Turkish Cavalry charged them in the
Front. It Is certain, That if this Hungarian General had done all he could upon
this Occasion, and discharged his Trust to the Turks, he would have saved their
Army, and put a new Face upon their Affairs; for he was above thirty, some say,
forty thousand strong.

However, he marched, much against his Will, toward the Champian Country of
Barcan: and the Turks arrived there Friday Night, October 8th. there being but
six Leagues distance between Buda and Strigonium. They passed the Bridge all
Night, left 500 Men in the Fort, and posted themselves beyond the Low Plain, on
the Brow of the Curtain, the very Place where the others had the Day before
charged the Polish Vanguard. On the Morrow, October. 9th. they drew into a Line
of Battle in the Plains above, stretching their Right Wing toward the
Mountains, where is a narrow Valley, covered with Woods and Thickets, through
which Teckley's Army was to pass: Their Left Wing terminated very near the
Curtain, within sight of Barcan Fort. They made but one Line, and one single
Front, very thick; but behind, upon the Brow of the Curtain, there were three
Columns of 14 or 15 Squadrons each, placed behind one another, which were to
open in the Fight, in order to surround our Army, as they had done at first.
This is the Turkish Method of Drawing up an Army, which may perhaps be of some
Use. For they pretend that these Columns are not so easily broke, and rallying
themselves with all the Ease imaginable, their Squadrons thus ranked, can the
better support the First Line, when it is a little shattered. They had on the
Right Wing, Kara Mehemet Pacha, Vizier of Buda; in the Center, the Vizier of
Silistria; and next the Bassa of Caramania, named Ale, with three others of the
First Rank.

Whilst the Turks were thus Preparing themselves for a Battle, the King of
Poland thought of nothing else but Revenging the Disgrace he had received the
Day before. He bestowed all Friday Oct. 8th. in drawing up the two Armies, and
in agreeing upon the Order of Battle in a general Council; the Poles being
eager to regain their Credit, and the Germans desirous to share in the Glory,
which they had in some measure been robbed of the Day before. After this, the
King dispatched a Courrier to Cracow, to acquaint the Queen with his ill
Success, and with the Resolution he had taken, either to make amends for it, or
not to survive the Disgrace: informing her, That he was to march toward the
Enemy on the morrow, and that she must expect to hear News either of their
Defeat, or of his Death. These Circumstances joined to those of the former Day,
wherein his Polish Majesty was in so much danger, together with the Particulars
of what the Palatine of Russia had done to favor that Prince's Retreat, were a
mortal Affliction to the Queen, who was in dread of the Life of her Royal
Consort, and offended that he should be so much obliged to the Crown General,
with whom the Court was dissatisfied, ever since his open Correspondence with
the Marquess De Vitry, the French Ambassador. But let us leave the Queen at the
Altar, loading it with her Offerings, and let us see what the King is doing in
the Plains of Barcan.

On Saturday October. 9. by break of Day he decamped, that he might advance above
the Defiles, in which the Army was posted, and draw it up in Battalia upon that
Champian, and even Ground, which lay Parallel to that which the Turks had
covered with their Squadrons. As soon as we were come upon the Plain, we
discovered their Line ready drawn up: All our Troops were cast into three
Lines, there being no occasion of Stretching them, nor any convenience of doing
it, because of the Ground bounded on the Left by the Ridge of Mountains
abovementioned; and on the Right, by the Curtain which ran along above the
Bottom of Barcan. Our first Line had a larger Front than that of the Turks,
which did not reach our Center, at least not beyond it. In this Line was an
equal Number of German and Polish Troops, the Infantry and Cavalry of both
Nations, together with the Generals, and Trains of Artillery. Thus were there
some of all these in each Post, and all saw the Enemy hard-by, though not many of
'em charged them. The Army was still 50000 strong, and never made a finer
Appearance, not only by the wise Disposition of the Order of Battle, and the
goodness of the Ground; but likewise by the Diversity of the Troops, their
Fierce Aspects, their Regularity in keeping their Ranks as they marched, the
dreadful Sounds of Drums and Trumpets, and lastly by the Number of those Famous
Commanders who led them.

The King of Poland was posted on the Right, to intercept the Turks, between
the Line and the Fort of Barcan, whose Retreat he was minded to cut off: He
assigned the Left Wing to the Grand General of the Crown, attended with some of
the Emperor's Generals, among whom was Count Veterani, who has in the
subsequent Campaigns given the World such Signs of an Extraordinary Valor and
Conduct. The Duke of Lorrain with others, were in the Center of the Line of
Battle. The Polish Artillery was planted in the Spaces between the Battalions
and Squadrons of the Left Wing, because they very wisely foresaw the whole
Force of the Turks would fall on that side, their Line being wholly drawn up
over against them. No sooner did the Cannon begin to play, but the Turks,
undaunted at the Inequality of their Forces, charged that Wing with an
Impetuosity like Thunder, which cannot be conceived nor described. They were
received by our Troops, without giving the least Ground, and with a dreadful
Discharge of Fire and Ball; it being certain, that by the first Firing of a
German Battalion, a prodigious number of Men and Horses fell to the Ground.
Their Fury was not cooled by this; on the contrary they returned with greater
Vigor, the Fight grew warm, and a Bloody Slaughter ensued on all Sides. The
Vizier of Buda did all he could to get the Better of our Troops, and was
wounded in two or three places by a Sabre. The Vizier of Silistria advanced so
far, that his Horse being killed under him, he was surrounded by a Body of
Cavalry, against whom he defended himself a long while, being assisted by 40 of
his Domestics, who seeing him on the Ground, leaped all off their Horses, with
their Sabres in their Hands, to cover their Master. This Heroical Action struck
our Generals with Admiration, and they cried out, that they should spare those
Brave Men, but in vain, the Germans having put themall to the Edge of the
Sword. After this the Vizier, abandoned to the Fury of the Soldiery, and
vanquished, looked about for a General, to whom he might surrender himself,
choosing to die, rather than yield to a less Officer. He perceived the Palatine
of Russia, and was not out in his Guess; for he had the Air and Figure of what
he really was; whereupon the Vizier getting out of the Crowd, advanced toward
that Lord, to whom he presented his Sabre. The Bassa of Caramania, was likewise
wounded and taken in the same place by the Great General's Troop. However, the
Turks still maintained the Fight, the Success whereof was doubtful. But those
who were drawn up in Columns behind the Line, perceiving the Motion of our
Right Wing, guessed at the Design. They gave notice thereof to the foremost
Troops, who retreated gradually, without breaking their Ranks, and at last fled
for it.

The King of Poland foresaw, That the Turks being less extended than our Line,
would use their utmost Efforts to break our Left Wing, and after stretch
themselves upon the Flank, between the two Lines. He therefore suffered the
Fight to grow a little warm, and in the mean time ordered the Right Wing to
advance from the Center, in the form of a Half Moon, with which he gradually
gained the Low Plain, thereby to possess the whole compass of it, and to get
between the Enemies and their Bridge. He ordered the Hussars to trail their
Lances on the side of their Horse's Necks, to prevent the Enemy from perceiving
the Motion. But they having discovered it, and conjecturing truly at the Design
of the King of Poland, left the Field of Battle, that they might gain the Fort
of Barcan, under the Cannon of the Upper-Town of Strigonium, which carried a
great way beyond this, almost as far as the Curtain, though the Danube be of an
extraordinary breadth in this Place, and the Plain beyond it of a vast extent.

The Troops were drawn up in Battalia, that they might march orderly toward
the Enemy, and give the Artillery time to come up with the Battalions, which
opened a little to the Right and Left. The German Generals complimented his
Polish Majesty upon this Day's Glorious Success; at which time one of his
Pages, who had with some Squadrons of Volunteers, advanced very near the
Danube, on the Right side of the Fort, returned with full speed to acquaint his
Majesty, That the Turks were Filing off over the Bridge. This Prince animated
with the Desire of completing his Victory, ordered his Army to march directly
to the Banks of the River, on both sides of Barcan, and himself at the Head of
the foremost Squadrons. The Artillery followed pretty close, some pieces of
which the King ordered to be planted so as to break the Bridge, or graze the
top of it, and encouraged the Gunners, by the Money he gave 'em in Hand, to
expedite the Design. During these Transactions the Turks pressed forwards to
regain the Fort, and their Number hindering their Retreat, they cast themselves
into the Danube, which a moment after became all black, and its Stream covered
all over with Men, Arms, Horses, and Turbants, whose heaps and mixture made an
admirable Picture, being both a dreadful and a pleasant Sight. Those who would
not venture so dangerous a Passage, were cut in pieces on the Bank of the
River; and there were heaps of 'em all along of a Fathom high, which formed a
kind of a Parapet or Breast-work. As an Addition to their Misfortune, the
Bridge was broke by the Multitude of those who fled over it, after 7 or 8
hundred had passed it with the Vizier of Buda. The rest, endeavoring still to
gain the Boats, which lay there, fell by hundreds at a time one upon another,
and were all stifled by the Weight of those that lay uppermost. But whereas
they could not disengage themselves, nor advance one way or other, they were
exposed to the Fire of our Artillery and Troops; yet it is certain there were
fewer killed that way, than by being suffocated.

Whilst the Turks were thus drowned, the Polish Infantry advanced toward the
Fort of Barcan, the Regiments of the Queen and Prince of Poland, arrived
thither the first, and began the Assault. The Count of Morstein being Colonel
of the One, and Sessevin Colonel of the Other, led them directly to the two
Gates, and forced them. The Enemy laid their Arms on the Ground in order to
surrender themselves, and hung out a white Flag. But the Poles either did not,
or would not see it, and fell upon them, without giving them Quarter; who
seeing themselves hopeless, betook themselves to their Arms again, resolving to
sell their Lives at as dear a rate as possible. Thereupon they made so terrible
a Discharge, that our Infantry began to give Ground, and were for regaining the
Gates. A French Gentleman, Mouilly by Name, who was Page to the Marquess of
Arquyen, and Ensign to the Regiment of the Prince of Poland, placed himself at
the Gate on the Left, by which that Battalion had entered, and with his Sword
drove back those who fled thither, and by this Undauntedness much above one of
his Years, he obliged them to return upon the Enemy, of which not a Man was
saved. This was the Finishing-stroke of that Defeat, the most Entire and
Complete that had been known for a long time before. Count Teckley arrived soon
enough upon the adjacent Hills, to be an Eyewitness of this Bloody Scene. He
did indeed appear upon the Brow of the Mountains at the close of the Action,
when the Danube was covered with those unhappy Creatures, and when the rest of
this Army were cut in pieces in the Fort; only 7 or 800, having saved
themselves by passing the Bridge with the Vizier of Buda, before it was broke
down. The Christians at this time could not expect any rich Booty, since the
Turks had brought thither neither Artillery nor Equipages: but to make amends
for it, they did not lose many Men, nor any Officer of Note; whereas the Enemy
left behind them two Bassas taken Prisoners, and three others drowned in the
River, with the Standards of the Visiers, and other Honorable Tokens of the
Victory.

After the Taking of the Fort, they rested a while on the Banks of the Danube,
to take a view of that dreadful Spectacle. Some drew up what the Current threw
ashore, such as Horses, Arms, Men, and other Spoils: whilst the rest played
with the Artillery, that of Strigonium not wounding a Man of our Side. One
single shot, and perhaps the last either from beyond the River, or from the
Fort of Barcan, unfortunately struck between the two Eyes of a French
Gentleman, belonging to the Prince of Poland named Duheaume and forced one of
'em out of his Head. The King endeavored to cheer him up, by all the Marks of
Esteem and Affection, by the Care he ordered to be taken of him, and by the
Present he sent him the next Day of 100 Ducats in Gold. This Gentleman very
well deserved those distinguishing Favors; not only for his constant
Attendance upon the Prince's Person, but likewise for the Present he made the
King, in the Fields of Vienna, of a Tuft of Heron's Feathers, garnished with a
Rose of Diamonds and Rubies, which he found in the Grand Visier's Tent, and was
the same which that Ottoman General used to put on the Head of his War-Horse.

The Army returned upon the Plains above Barcan, and encamped there, by
possessing all the Curtains of the Bank of the Danube. The King with the Duke
of Lorrain, resov'd to pass the River in that Place, and to put an end to the
Campaign by the Taking of Strigonium, which would enhance the Reputation of the
Christian Army, by thus Marching over the Conquests of Solomon the Great. The
Emperor's Generals were with much ado brought over to consent to it, and the
Season being already very much advanced, made the Poles murmur, who began to
Breath after their Country; but the King threatening to leave them, and trust
his Person with the German Troops, each Soldier returned to his Duty, and
murmured no more, unless in Secret. As for the Germans, he gave them to
understand, That Strigonium could not hold outlong, and that the Vizier could
not come to its Relief, after the last Defeat. Besides he was advertised of his
Retreat toward Belgrade, leaving Buda, as soon as Kara Mehemet Pacha, wounded
in the Battle, was returned thither. The Latter stayed four Days after the
Battle in Strigonium, and then went to Buda along the Danube, without any
Obstruction, having left two Bassas in the Place, with a strong Garrison to
maintain the Siege, in case the Victorious Army should attempt it.

It was therefore resolved upon: and all Hands at Work for building a Bridge in
a place where the River made an Island, about half a League above the City.
Beside the Safety of this Post, by the Space which facilitated the Retreat,
from one Bridge to the other, they raised a Fort at the Head of the Latter, on
the Enemy's Side of the River: And moreover, they had not far from Javarin or
Raab, where they might cover themselves, in case the Turks should make any
desperate Sally upon them.

Whilst this was doing, and all things necessary for carrying on a Siege were
bringing from Komorne; General Dunneval marched to seize upon Lewents, a very
considerable City, which facilitated the Communication of the Turks, between
Newhausel and Buda. The Bassa of Newhausel knew nothing of the Matter;
whereupon several of his Parties were surpised, and fell into the Snare
without dreaming of it. The King ordered Barcan to be put into the Hands of the
Germans, who burnt the Houses that were hard-by. At last, the Bridges being
finished by the 19th. of October, the Duke of Lorrain ordered part of his Army
to pass over that Day, and the two next. On the 22d. the Polish Infantry,
commanded by General D'Henoff, Colonel of the Guards, filled off; and the first
who passed over, advanced toward the Lower City, who sent several Detachments
out to dispute the Passes, whilst the Artillery of the Town played furiously on
all sides. The Turks at the first burnt the Suburbs within View of us, and
afterward part of the City it self, on that side which lay toward the Open
Country.

During these Preparations for the Siege, the King, who dispatched a Polish
Gentlemen, named Kaczowsky, to the Queen just after the Battle, to remove that
Trouble and solicitude, which his former Letter had caused in her; dispatched
me likewise with Answers of Importance, and the whole Army charged me with
Commissions from them. The Pole had been sent by the Mountains of Upper
Hungary, and directed to Count Teckley, who took care he should be conveyed to
Cracow: I was ordered to go by the great Road of Vienna. I left the Camp
October 21st after I had, by the King's Order, visited the two Fields of
Battle, the Fort of Barcan, the Banks of the River along the Gardens; from
whence I took an exact Survey of Strigonium and its Fortress, which I observed
to be wholly built upon a Rock: I afterward returned on the Right along the
Danube, toward the German Camp, not being able to go round the Fort by Water,
as I had begun, because the heap of dead Carcasses had choked up, and raised
the Current: and in all this Round, which Count Staremberg often went in his
Coach without regarding the frequent shots of the Enemy; I had no other
Evidence of my Conduct, but an Officer of my Acquaintance, a German by Birth, a
Frenchman by long Service; for he had been Lieutenant of a Troop of Horse in
the Regiment of Bethune, and and had run through other Dangers, with an even
Temper, and a Noble Carriage, without any thing of Vainglory.

At my Return, I found my Dispatches ready, and two Cosacks, all the Convoy
that was allowed me, who did not so much as know the way of Komorne, where I
was to take Post. My Friends advised me to travel on the other side of the
Danube, and to stay till the Morrow, when the Emperor's Envoy would dispatch
his Son-in-Law to Vienna. But the Bridges were crowded, the Imperial Generals
busied in marching the Army over, and my self eager to arrive at Cracow, being
sensible that the Queen of Poland's Life depended on my Dispatch or Slowness,
since the first Alarms had brought her, as it were, to Death's door. But my
Zeal had like to have cost me my Life, I am sure it robbed me of my Liberty. I
set on my Journey with the two Cosacks, and in the Way joined with some German
Horse and Foot, who were going that Road; so that I was at the Head of thirty
Men, when I entered upon the Encampment, which the Army had made when they left
Komorne. The Forragers who returned from round those Parts, never said a Word
to us of any Turkish Party, and I marched on with so little concern, that I
took no Notice at all of a Party that I saw just before me, about 500 Paces
beyond the old Camp, going toward Newhausel. It consisted of about 150 Horse,
in Hungarian Habits, with white Cloaks on, as all the Turks of that Country are
habited, which made me take them for the Cravatians, belonging to the Emperor,
and induced me to ride toward them a full Trot, that I might be the better
secured by this Convoy. They became sensible of my Mistake, and suffered me to
come up within thirty Paces of their Rear, and then returned upon me full drive
with their Sabres in their Hands. Among my thirty Men there were four French or
Flemish Foot, who had deserted the Regiment of Rosemberg, and made such a
vigorous Assault, that they laid seven Turks on the ground, having charged
their Muskets with Hail-shot. This brought their whole Party upon our Men,
eighteen of 'em had their Heads cut off, and the rest hemmed in, so that none
of 'em escaped to carry the News of the Disaster to the Camp. The inequality of
the number made me think of retreating, after the Massacre of my
Fellow-Travellers, and after I had escaped twice or thrice the same Fate, by
the Management of my Horse: For I had seen a Sabre fly over my Head, and had
dropped my Hat and Perruke in the Skirmish. In short, being minded to fly for
it, trusting very much to the Swiftness of my Horse, which was of the Turkish
Breed, and one of the Best in the King's Stables; I was struck on the Forehead
by a Young Cavalier, coming to me with his Spear in the Rest, as one running at
a Ring, and by the Blow unhors'd me, which facilitated my being taken. I knew
very well that it was impossible to make my escape, I only desired to fall into
good Hands, and yield my self to some Officer. Accordingly I marched directly
toward a Turk of a Venerable and Sweet Aspect, who happened to be the
Commander himself of that Party; an Officer of Worth, a successful Partisan,
and a Man of Honor. I surrendered my self to him, who took me by the Hand, and
only ordered me to be disarmed: but in marching, some of the Subalterns whipped
me, and took away all my Letters. Whereas it was now pretty late, it being
within an Hour of Night, Mustapha (for that was the Officer's Name) rested
satisfied with his Booty, and returned toward Newhausel. But in the Way, for
fear of being surprised in his Retreat, he detached four Cavaliers, as Scouts,
to beat the Rounds.

In the Evening he rallied all the Party at the End of a Ruinous Village, and
caused them to march off in a Review, and so did the Prisoners under two Lances
held by two Cavaliers in the form of an Arch; from whence he marched toward
Newhausel very easily. We forded the River of Nitra, that lay in the Road, and
when we were nigh to the City, the whole Party discharged their Pistols in the
Air, an Established Custom among the Turks, when they return with Prisoners. We
were ordered to stay half an Hour at the City Gate, into which we did not enter
before ten at Night: the Party dispersed themselves in the first Street they
came to: One of the Officers brought me into a House, where I left my Horse,
and was lashed a second time, being still in my Boots. He ordered me to be
carried before a certain Person of Quality, whom I looked upon to be the Second
Bassa of the Place, and who would not vouchsafe to speak a Word to me; but
ordered me to go into his Footmen's Room. One of them, who was a Young Renegadoe
Hungarian, and had formerly been a Student at Tyrnau, came by his Master's
command to examine me, and give me a third lashing. He was more lucky than
those who came before, for he found thirty Ducats of Gold that I had saved. The
joy that he showed upon the Discovery of these Pieces, is inexpressible; he
carried them forthwith to his Master, lying then upon his Sopha, regaling
himself with his Pipe and Coffee. After he done examining me, they conducted me
back again to the same Officer's House, where I first alighted. A Young
Cavalier, being one of the Party, and Valet to the Officer, gave me some
Coleworts and Meat to eat, being what was left of his Supper, afterward he
brought me into his Master's Chamber, to ly near him upon the same Floor, where
you may suppose I got but very little Sleep. On the Morrow, betimes in the
Morning, I was carried into the Stable, to rub down and dress my Horse: but
perceiving that I was very awkard in managing the Curry-comb, he very civilly
discharged me from that Office. Afterward I was brought to another Officer's
House, being a Man of Note, where I found all my Comrades, that had been taken
with me the Day before, with the Heads of those that had been killed, fixed at
the end of a Pole, and carried each by one of the Cavaliers. This was a dread
full Sight, and the only Instance of Cruelty to be observed in all the Turkish
Customs; for they are a Nation endu'd with a great deal of Humanity, and
Charity, having a Sweetness of Temper though unpolished, and a Bravery, without
any thing of Fierceness.

Thus were we led on in Triumph to the Prime Bassa's House, where was the
Leader of the Party to present to him the Prisoners, with a great many other
Turks of Note, Officers, Lawyers, and Members of the Divan, or Council. At the
Antichamber, we put off our Shoes, as the Turks did theirs, because the
Chamber-floor was covered all over with a Carpet. The Bassa was upon his Couch,
raised upon oblong Cushions in an Angle between two Windows: and the Couch
being covered with another Carpet of Red Cloth, edged about with a Green Silk
Fringe, was raised half a Foot all round the Walls, and quilted; which served
him instead of a Bed, without a Canopy and Curtains; a Sabre, and a Horse-Tayl,
died in Red, hanging at the Top. The Strangers were seated below the Rails, and
the Officer with the Domestics, standing round the Chamber, with their two
Hands upon their Breasts, which is a Posture of Respect among the Turks. The
Bassa, a Person very old and Meagre, but withal of a pretty venerable Aspect,
caused a German to be examined, and afterward my self, in Latin, by that Young
Renegade Hungarian abovementioned, threatening to cut off both our Heads, if we
did not give a Punctual Answer. After this, they broke open my Letters, and
made me find out that Particular one sent from the King to the Queen of Poland,
which was likewise interpreted by a Polish Renegade. During this, the Bassa
made me sit down on the Ground, and treated me very Nobly with a Dish of
Coffee. He made choice of me, and another French Prisoner, for his Share, and
sent us to his Eldest Son, and his Kiayia, or Lieutenant lodged in another
Brick-House almost as Stately as the Bishop's Palace, in which the Bassa his
Father resided. This Kiayia did not seem to be over inquisitive about us. After
a short Conference, he sent us into a Room, where ten or twelve of his Servants
were eating. There we stayed all Day till Night came, and then were shut up in
a Vault, fastened together by one Foot, or rather in certain Wooden-holds, made
like a Pair of Stocks. The bare Ground was our Bed, without Hay or Straw, or
Coverlet. In the Morning, the same Keeper came to release us, and show us up
Stairs, where we eat some pieces of Bread, and what Scraps those Turks were
pleased to leave us upon their Plates. A charitable Dervis, or Monk, dwelling
in this Family, and very much respected by all the Rest, refreshed me after
Dinner, with an Earthen Pan of Coals; which was no small Comfort to me in my
Misery, my Clothes being very thin, having lost my Cloak, my Peruke and my Hat;
one being taken from me by a Cavalier of the Party, and the others left on the
Field of Battle: so that I spent all the next Winter (which was very starp in
those Parts) bare-headed, having only a sorry Muslin Cravat wrapped about it,
as long as it lasted. I profess solemnly, that I was in a very deplorable
Condition; and that nothing can be a greater Affliction, to a Man of Honor,
than Slavery, not so much by the Sufferings he feels in his Body, as by the
Affronts that are offered to his Spirit; from my own Experience, I can here
testify the truth of what I always looked upon as a Popular Tradition, like a
thousand others, which the ignorant Vulgar attribute to the Turks; Who, say
they, look into the Hands of their Slaves, thereby to discover their Quality or
Employment, by the Fineness of their Skin. This, I say, is very true; for all
that ever came nigh me, the first thing they did was to look into my Hands. As
for the rest, I was pretty easy in the House of this Kiayia, who exacted no
manner of Labor, or Service from me.

In the mean time, the Bassa ordered the King's Letter to the Queen, to be
turned out of the Polish into the Turkish Language; and sent it with all the
rest to the Grand Vizier, supposed still to be at Buda, by an Officer and
twenty Horse; who marched directly to Lewents, and were taken by the Germans,
whom they did not imagine were Masters of that Place. The Germans sent all the
Letters they found about the Turks, to the Duke of Lorrain, who likewise sent
them to the King, being all writ in Polish. The King was strangely surpised to
see his Letter returned, and supposing that I was either killed or taken, he
ordered Enquiry to be made about it of the Turkish Officer, who owned the
Truth, and said that I was at Newhausel, as well as he was at Lewents. Upon
this, his Polish Majesty very generously set himself upon my Deliverance, and
sent the Interpreter of the Grand General, under a Pretense of ransoming
several Touariches and Officers of his Regiments; but in reality to treat about
my Exchange, which he was willing to do nicely, lest the Bassa should prove
stiff, in case he had occasion to suspect that I was a Person of Note. He had
already surmis'd some such thing, from that Honorable Mention which so great a
King had made of a Domestic in his Letter. For the Turks, who are used to Thou
all the World, even their Emperor himself, and who had conceived a great Esteem
for the King of Poland by his last Victory, could not imagine that the Person
whom he distinguished by the Name of Monsieur, and of whom he said so many
favorable Things, could be no more than a Gentleman of the Queen's Household.
They absolutely thought me to be her Brother, not knowing that it was the
French Mode of Speaking. They were confirmed in this foolish Opinion, by the
Money and Jewels which I had about me, and by the Rich Clothes I had on. It was
in vain for me to explain to them the Expenses of the Journey, and the Length
of the Way to Cracow, to let them understand, That all that Money was no more
than necessary for it. The Turks, who are unacquainted with those Matters,
never troubled themselves with these Considerations, and supposed me to be at
least some Lord of Quality. They were farther confirmed in this Opinion, by the
foolish Behavior of one of those Poles that were taken with me, who being
released at ten Days end, came and embraced me by the Knees, according to the
Polish Custom, and thanked me, believing that the King would never have
remembered him, but because he was one of my Company. Upon this Demonstration
of Respect, the Bassa ordered him to be examined concerning my Quality; and
this wretched Creature, thinking to recommend me by raising me above the Rank
of an Ordinary Person, expatiated upon the great Esteem which the King of
Poland had for me, and upon that high Post which I held in his Court, which the
Bassa took for granted, and it cost me fourteen Months Slavery, as I shall
hereafter show.

During this Negotiation, the King of Poland carried on the Siege of
Strigonium, which at first seemed resolved to stand it out. The Elector of
Bavaria was made acquainted with this Design; who ordered part of his Troops to
march on that side, and led them himself. Upon my Return from Cracow, I found
him encamped in the middle of Presbourg; and his Troops a quarter of a League
beyond the Town, from whence they entered the Isle of Schut over the Bridge
that had been raised in that place. But the Elector never came up to the Army,
who carried Strigonium in two or three Days, and afterward dispersed
themselves into Winter Quarters; the Imperialists in the Hereditary Countries,
and the Poles in Upper Hungary, possessed by the Rebels, whom they were obliged
to force thence.

The King of Poland, having ordered the German Army, and part of his Infantry
to pass the Bridges, caused General Staremberg to carry on the Assault, and
remained with half of his Forces in the Old Camp, on this side of the Danube,
being willing by this means to share the Glory of the Conclusion of this
Campaign, between the Poles and the Imperialists. Hereupon the Germans opened
their Trenches, and raised their Batteries against the Upper-Town, that being
all that was left, for the Lower-Town had been burn, and the Turks all
retreated into the Fortress. The Assault was carried on vigorously; they
likewise battered down the Fortifications and the Wall, to facilitate the
Scaling of the Town. In the mean time they were for coming closer to it, and to
spring a Mine: for which purpose, they carried the Pallisade within a foot of
the Walls, with their Swords in their Hands. And whilst they were looking for a
place to make a hole in, for 'twas almost all Rocky, the Town Beat a Parley,
and desired to Capitulate. The Germans who were for taking the Garrison at
Discretion, refused at first the Proposal of the Bassas; but being obliged to
acquaint the King of Poland with it, who commanded the Army with the same Power
as the Emperor himself would have done; this Monarch accepted of the
Capitulation, and the Bassas surrendered the Place into his Hands; out of which
they marched Sunday October. 24. The King would have persuaded them to have
retired into Poland, for fear the Grand Vizier should revenge the Loss of
Strigonium upon them: but they, unhappy Creatures! more subject than Slaves,
persisted in their Resolution of going to Buda, giving out that they had done
their Duty, since they wanted Supplies, in holding out the Place for 3 Days,
against a formidable and Victorious Army. But the Plea stood 'em in no stead,
for upon their Arrival, they lost their Lives, by being beheaded or strangled.

Afterward the King of Poland crossed the River to take a View of the Place,
glorying in having forced the Turks to abandon it, after they had been
Possessors of it for 143 Years, being settled there by their Emperor Solomon
the Great. He put the City into the Hands of the Duke of Lorrain, who left a
Governor, with a very strong Garrison in it. At last all the Army repassed to
the Old Camp, from whence they broke up on All Saints Day; on which the King of
Poland, attended with a Body of Imperial Troops, commanded by General Dunneval,
marched by that Neck of Mountains, which lie on the Left of the Plains of
Barcan, to enter into Vpper-Hungary; and encamped that Day upon a River three
Leagues beyond. The Vizier of Silistria, and the Bassa of Caramania, the Polish
Great General's Prisoners, were conducted along with the Army, and treated very
Honorably by that Lord, to whom the King had granted them as his Prize. Though
several Commonwealths-men grumbled, and said, They belonged to the Republic.
The Great General had at first sent them to his Polish Majesty, as being his
Sovereign, and the Generalissimo of the Allies; and afterward brought them to
Leopold, lodged them in a Neat House, and allowed them as much Liberty as they
could reasonably desire; with Servants of their own that they sent for from
Caminiec, whom this Lord entertained to the number of seven or eight, which my
self saw. He clothed them in Velvet, treated them magnificently according to
their Custom, and ordered the Merchants of the City to supply them with
whatever they wanted: and, I am sure, that 'bating their Slavery, those Turks
fared as well as if they had been in their own Country. Though they had promised
150000 Crowns each for their Ransom, and the Money came not in 7 Years after
their being taken, yet the General spared nothing of his Civility, or Expenses
upon them, which amounted every Year to 12000 Franks of that Sum. It Is true,
they could not be blamed for any Delay in this Matter; since their Ransom was
once brought as far as Caminiec: but the Sultan was so far from contributing
any thing toward it, that even the Bassa of that Place seized upon the Money,
and made use of it to pay off his Garrison, who were ready to mutiny for want
of their Pay. They wrote often to the Port, desiring the Money might be
re-imburs'd, but they were so far from having Justice done them, that on the
contrary, their Offices were afterward disposed of to others, and their
Persons proscribed, though they were men of great Note, and an extraordinary
Merit. The Vizier of Silistria, had a Noble and Charming Aspect, a comely
Shape, a grave Air, Eyes full of Sweetness, a venerable Beard, a Face full of
Majesty and Decorum, with very fine Features. His Carriage was Charming,
Honorable and Courteous, but somewhat Stately, and as of one far above the
inferior Persons of Quality. His outward Form was perfectly agreeable to the
Post he was in, and to his Personal Merit. In the Battle he gave Signs of an
extraordinary Valor; and when he was taken, he showed a great deal of
Constancy and presence of Mind, being so far from concealing his Quality of
Vizier, that he desired to be used as a Prisoner of that Rank, and to be
distinguished from his Comrade, who was no more than a Bassa, with whom he
would not so much as be Quartered. General Dunneval waiting upon him after the
Battle, and representing to him the Rashness of the Turks, who with a handful
of Men, dared to engage an Army of 50000 strong: This Vizier very coldly
replied, That he had followed his Orders without reflecting upon the
Inequality, and would have charged the Christians, though they had been twice as
strong again. His Misfortune afflicted, without sinking his Spirits, and he
bore it with an Heroical Constancy, and never appeared out of Humor, but on
the account of the Great General, whose Civilities he could never repay or
retaliate.

The Bassa of Caramania Ale, is one of a different Character: In all his
Behavior he showed a great deal of Fire, Life, and Subtilty. He was of a less
Stature, had a meagre Countenance, a black and rough Beard, sparkling Eyes, and
a Turkish Air; Fierce without Majesty, Lofty without the attendance of that
Politeness, and Sweetness to be observed in the other: But yet Noble and
distinguished in his Carriage, crafty and subtle in Conversation, asking
Questions of his own accord, and with a presence of Mind. When the Court was at
Leopold, two Years after their Arrival, they all flocked out of Curiosity to
see them; the Queen was there her self masked, attended with other Ladies, that
she might not be known; the Marquis of Arquyen her Father, and other Lords.
They would not so much as cast their Eyes off their Books, or open their Lips
to some; but to others they paid their Complements, but especially to the
Ladies, but with a kind of penetrating Distinction, as if they were informed of
the Difference of the Personages. The Vizier seemed to be between 55 and 60
Years old, and was already turned gray; the other about ten or twelve Years
younger. In my Mind, both of 'em in their proper Posts, might be compared to
the most Illustrious Personages of the Age, as well for the Neatness and
Nobleness of their Make, as for their Behavior and Bravery.

The Duke of Lorrain led the Imperial Army through the Plains of Newhausel,
where he made a Halt for two Days in the Neighborhood of that Place, which he
thought to have taken by Surprise, or at least to scare it by the great
Exploits which had put an End to this Campaign; but he was received with
terrible Discharges of Canon: The Turks likewise fell upon his Rear, and
brought back a great many Stragglers, and Men that belonged to the Carriages
into the Town, most of them being wounded: I was then in the Bassa's House, who
had taken me from his Son's, and put me under the guard of his Porter, a pretty
civil and courteous Man; who lodged me in his Chamber, allowed me a good Bed,
and gave me twice a Day Provisions, more than I could eat. The Chaous who came
to fetch me from the Kiayia's House, brought me at first to this Porter,
waiting for the Bassa's Orders, which were that I should be loaded with Chains.
This was a cruel Addition to the severity of my Slavery. I returned from the
Mareshal's across the whole Town of Newhausel, stumbling at every step I took,
and mortified in my Mind; especially when I saw several charitable Turks offer
me Alms, and threaten me because I refused it. For you must take notice, That
they freely give it to Slaves, and never desire the Civility of Thank You, Sir,
and cannot endure the Haughtiness of a Refusal. In process of Time my Pride was
abated, being so far from refusing, that I was reduced to the Necessity of
begging an Alms of them; and brought to that servile Condition that my bad
Stars had never prepared me for before.

I did not wear those Shackles long; for the Kiayia making a Visit to his
Father three Days after, seemed to be very much offended at this rough Usage,
and by his own Authority ordered my Fetters to be knocked off. The Porter had
afterward Orders from the Bassa to clap me into small Chains, which opened
with Padlocks, only during Night, and to release me every Morning: but by way
of Exchange, he made me sweep the Stairs, and the Passage between the Gates,
which was his Business and my Task.

During these Transactions, the Interpreter of the Great General arrived, with
the Money which the King had sent to bring me to the Army; hoping my Exchange
would have been made without any Demur. The Interpreter managed the Business
very subtly. He first demanded the Touariches and Officers in his Master's
Name; and after he had agreed with the Bassa to give as many Turks, Head for
Head, he asked him what other Prisoners he had taken during this Campaign. The
Bassa answered, That he had a Frenchman taken with Letters, and forthwith
ordered me to come into his Chamber. The Interpreter making as if he did not
know me, examined me of my Quality, and how I happened to fall into this
Misfortune; and afterward offered a Turk in Exchange for me, which was agreed
upon. A Chartel was accordingly drawn up, wherein were set down all those whom
the Bassa was to send back to the Great General of Poland, and those that were
to be returned by way of Exchange. A Captain with twenty Horse went to the
Camp, with the Convoy, that had attended the Interpreter to Newhausel, to bring
back the Turks that were agreed upon, and the Interpreter staid with us as
Hostage. In the mean Time, I was ordered to go into all the Houses of the Town,
to make choice of the Persons who had been taken with me, and it was then that
One of those unhappy Creatures, out of a Transport of Joy and Gratitude,
embraced my Knees, and ruined me by his Over-civility.

Whereas the King of Poland was then upon his March, the Turks were a long time
upon the Road; and did not bring back all the Prisoners named in the Chartel of
Exchange; because three of them, during these Transactions, had made their
Escape from the Camp, and were come to Newhausel. But in their stead, the King
had sent three others, which the Bassa never minding, and besides being
pre-possess'd on my Account, more than was requisite, upon the Demonstration of
Respect shown me by the Indiscreet Pole; he laid hold on this pretense to
detain me with two other Officers, belonging to the Palatin of Russia's
Regiment of Dragoons, and several Hussars, in whose stead he sent other
Polanders, to balance the number. As an Addition to my Misfortune, he commanded
me to send the King Word, That if he did not send 10000 Ducats of Gold for my
Ransom, I should have 200 Blows on the bottoms of my Feet; as Lubomirsky had
done to the Bassa Ibraham, who was taken at the Siege of Vienna. This Ibraham
appeared very unluckily for me, and confirmed the thing; being still in Chains,
and come thither by leave of the Governor of Komorne to negotiate for his
Ransom; which the Bassa proposed likewise in Exchange for mine.

I wrote what he desired, but without any hopes of being heard; and the
Interpreter stayed still at Newhausel, to make an end of the Business: But the
Replies from the Camp were so unsatisfactory, that the Bassa kept his Word with
me; and the Interpreter himself very narrowly escaped the Bastinado. The great
Squire of the Crown wrote to me of the Injustice, and my Friends, to whom I had
sent for Linen and Clothes, fearing that their Kindness would retard my
Deliverance, left me witout a supply, and out of Love, refused to send me so
much as a Shirt. The Great Squire wrote likewise to the Bassa, telling him,
That his falsifying his Word, so uncommon among the Turks, would fall heavy
upon the two Prisoners of the Great General, whose Legs, Arms, and Necks, they
would load with Irons; but he never concerned himself about them: and sending
back the Interpreter with the Number agreed upon, kept me still in Slavery and
Misery.

CHAP. V.
Containing the March of the Polish Army, and it is Conquests in Upper Hungary,
with the King's Return into his Territories, the latter End of the Year 1683.
AFTER the Taking of Strigonium, the Armies, as aforesaid, separated; and the
Turks retired a great way into their Provinces. Count Teckley, at the same
time, gained the Mountains, in order to reinforce the Garrisons of his
Dominions. The Grand Vizier put Buda into a posture of Defense in case of a
Siege, which seemed unavoidable, since the Germans were within six Leagues of
it, had no River to pass, nor any Fort of Consequence to dispute by the way
thither. (For the next Year, when the Duke of Lorrain laid Siege to this
Important Place, he opened the Campaign by taking of Veyssegrad and
Veissembourg, two Forts beyond Strigonium, in the Country that lies round
Buda.) Afterward the Grand Vizier marched for Belgrade, to present his Head to
the Sultan, who though he was his Father-in-Law, yet would not Pardon him this
his Second Defeat. His Death-Warrant was brought to his House, and the
Officers, in presenting it to him, clapped a silk cord about his Neck, with
which he was strangled, after he had kissed the Sultan's Warrant, and the fatal
Instrument of his Justice.

The King of Poland took his March toward Upper Hungary, leaving the River
Theysse on the Right, which separates the Christian from the Turkish Hungary,
and even the Christian Part of that Country was at that time in Rebellion. As
he went along, he attacked the Places which lay in his way; the first was
Zetzen, which the Turks call Setchan, situated on a small Rising in the midst
of uneven Plains, which began by little and little, to rise into Hills, and
then into Mountains, till they made that Chain of Hills, with which Hungary is
surrounded, and separated from the States of Poland. Zetzen is a small Town,
enclosed within Walls, and a deep Trench, but narrow at the Bottom, and easy
to be passed over. The Gate had a Retrenchment of Pallisades, made of large
pieces of Timber, in the nature of a Ravelin, and Guards within, some pieces of
Cannon on the Walls, with a Garrison of about Six hundred Men, Horse and Foot,
commanded by an Aga or Captain, called by the Turks Tchorbaggey, i. e. An
Officer of Foot of great Note.

The Army appeared before this Place, November 10. 1683, and the King took a
View of it in order to attack it the next Day. They saw a place in the Walls,
which had a Breach made up with Pallisades: There, and at the Gate, the
Dragoons and the Infantry, carried on the Assault with Sword in Hand: The
General d' Henoff attacked the Gate, where the Prince's Regiment forced the
Pallisade very vigorously, in spite of a whole shower of Musket Shot, with
which several Officers and Soldiers were killed or wounded. Afterward they
seized upon the Body of the Guards, that were lodged in the Pallisade, and were
just upon breaking open the Gate, when the Aga hung out a White Flag, and
desired to be gone. This was granted him, and the Garrison marched out without
Arms, and without their Bag and Baggage. However, the Capitulation was not duly
kept, by an Accident, that had nothing to do with the Taking of this Town. For
the King was ordering the Garrison to march out, when his Envoy returned from
Newhausel, with News of the Bassa's falsifying his Word with respect to me.
This raised a Resentment in that great Monarch's Breast, and obliged him to
make a Reprisal on the Turks of Zetzen, of whom he marked out 30 with his Cane,
as they went out of the City; beginning with the Aga, his Son, the Priest, and
others of greatest Note, belonging to that Garrison, telling them, That he
detained them as Prisoners, not to forfeit the Promise given them, but to
revenge the Treachery of the Bassa of Newhausel, who detained a Servant from
him, contrary to the Chartel of Exchange. He added, That two of them might go
to intercede for their own Liberty, by obtaining that of the other; and that,
in the mean time, the other 28 should be kept in Chains. The Aga's Son, and a
Janizary were deputed for this Negotiation, which came to nothing. On the
contrary, the Bassa offended that they had delivered up the Town, sent them
away with Threats, upbraiding their Cowardice, and faint Resistance, which the
Sultan would be sure to punish with Death, if ever they should return into his
Dominions: That therefore they were safer in their Slavery, and might tarry
with the Poles, or free themselves by other Exchanges: That the Frenchman was
his Slave, for whom he would have Money, not Men. So that these two Mussulmen
were surpised to see a Bassa prefer his own sordid Interest, before the
Ottoman Blood, and vexed that they could do no good for their Comrades, made
use of that Liberty they had, retiring to Buda, and leaving the rest in the
Prisons of Transchyn, a City of Hungary, upon the Wag, toward the Frontiers of
Moravia, whither the King of Poland had sent them; and where for 14 Months,
they suffered all the Misery imaginable, as I did at Newhausel, being abandoned
to a wild Despair.

I had said before, That the Dragoons together with the Infantry, were
commanded to carry on the Assault of Zetzen. The Count of Maligny, the Queen of
Poland's Brother, who was General, and Colonel in particular of the King's
Regiment of Dragoons, advanced as far as the Pallissade, to animate his Troops,
by his Presence and Example: which was of great use for the carrying on the
Attack with Success; for his Dragoons were without a Leader, their Lieutenant
Colonel Named Galetski being found by the Count, hid behind one of the great
pieces of Timber of the Pallisade, with his Pistol in his Hand, where he had no
need to fear the Firing from the Walls. I was willing to mention this, to give
the World an Idea of the Gallantry of the Polish Officers, who most of 'em
desire to die calmly in their Beds; whereas even Lieutenant Generals, and
Mareshals of France are for falling in the Field of Honor, and at the Head of
their Troops.

The City of Zetzen being thus surrendered was guarded at first by the Polish
Infantry, and the Head-Captain of the Prince's Regiment, Named Des Forges, a
Frenchman, and a Gentleman belonging to the Queen, was placed in it as
Commander in Chief. The King gave the Inhabitants leave to go out with their
Families: A great many Women and Children followed the Soldiery, after which
the King put the place into the Hands of General Dunneval, who took possession
of it for the Emperor, and made a stand there with his Detachment, from whence
he sent them into Winter Quarters. His Polish Majesty continued his March,
after he had spent four Days about Zetzen, and advanced toward Cassovia, one
of the Chief and Strongest Cities of the Kingdom; fortified formerly with a
Citadel, which Count Teckley had won the Year before, and demolished, as he did
the Fort of Fileck. The Emperor had assigned those revolted Cities for Winter
Quarters to the Polish Army, which they must first be obliged to force, though
they were well garrisoned: so that there was no staying in an Enemy's Country
with such a Handful of Men, being continually harrass'd with Hungarian Parties,
and the Peasants, who cut off several of our Army. The Soldiery dead almost
with Hunger and Cold, obliged to pass Rivers half froz'n over, and often
swelled above their Banks, went to dry themselves in the adjacent Villages,
sought for some shelter on every side, and were killed by the Rebels, who
destroyed more of our Army that way, than they had by the Battles of Vienna and
Barcan. Nay, they were obliged to Count Teckley, for that small number which
did at last arrive in Poland: For he being always the King's trusty Friend, and
keeping the Engagements made between them, advised him to draw off betimes,
being not able any longer to prevent the Cutting off of his Passage through the
Mountains: after which the Rebels would quickly make an hand of his Army. The
Turks were in such Expectations of it, that News was brought to Newhausel of
the entire Defeat of the Polish Troops; which infallibly would have been, had
Teckley preferred the Interest of his Party, before the Obligations he had with
the King, to whom his Majesty stood indebted for all the Glorious Successes of
this Campaign, The Turks had so certain an Intelligence of this, that sometimes
after they caused this Ringleader of the Rebels to be arrested, as we shall
show in its proper place.

The King of Poland would not venture too nigh Cassovia, but encamped on one
side out of the reach of the Cannon. The Town fired briskly upon our Troops, as
they marched along within sight of the Place, and the Garrison sallied out upon
the Stragglers. So that staying there only one Night, they the next Day passed
the River above Cassovia, and so to continue their March to Eperies, another
Capital City of Hungary, larger and of greater Trade than the former, but not
so highly Dignified, seated at the Foot of the Mountains of Crapak, upon one of
the Rivers that run to Cassovia. For this City is situate in the very Center
where two large Rivulets join together, which in going through the City, make
but one single River, and thus through the same Channel, disembogue themselves
into the Theysse below Tokay. These two Rivulets spring from those very
Mountains, and form a kind of Peninsula, reaching from the Foot of the
Mountains to Cassovia, being a handsome Tract of Ground. Eperies is upon that
River which is on the Right: The King approached it, in order to besiege it, so
that the Cannon played into his Camp, even beyond the Tents of his
Headquarters. Upon His Arrival, the Garrison sallied out upon our foremost
Squadrons, and skirmish'd with them all that Day. On the Morrow they fell upon
the King's Dragoons at Midday, who quickly mounted their Horses, and repulsed
the Sallyers. On the third Day the King broke up from thence, to seek out
Winter Quarters elsewhere. Instead of Eperies which had been assigned for his
Hussars, and his own Regiments, He led the Army directly to Czebin, three
Leagues beyond in the Mountains, where he arrived the Second Day after he had
left Eperies. From the Camp that lay betwixt, he detached Miogenski with his
Brigade to go and take a View of Czebin, and the adjacent Places. The Horse of
the Town sallied out upon his Troops; Miogenski retreated into several Houses
and Barns, which the Disposition of the Ground had concealed, where he formed
an Ambuscade. Thirty of his Cavalry being detached, advanced further up in the
Plain, in order to draw out the Garrison, who fell into the Snare, and very
vigorously pursued our Men to the Place where they had Orders to face about;
but the rest of the Brigade coming up, they began a regular Fight, which ended
in the Retreat of the Rebels, who left behind them several slain, and several
Prisoners. Miogenski had a Horse killed under him, and his Nephew took an
Hungarian Officer. After this, the King appeared before the Place, where the
Lithuanian Army first joined him. It came to Cracow the latter end of
September, and for two Months together, kept skirting upon the Frontiers, or in
the Entrance into Hungary, leaving every where behind them tokens of their
March, in the open Countries and against the Peasants. This very much offended
Count Teckley, and the Polish Court, who had ordered the Lithuanian Generals to
prevent any Disturbance, or Acts of Hostility from being offered to the
Subjects of that Prince. These Generals began to Cannonade Czebin, when the
King arrived before it, and the Town which held out against the Army of
Lithuania, surrendered upon Articles to his Polish Majesty. He spoke very
civilly to the Officers, exhorting them to return to the Obedience of the
Emperor their lawful Sovereign. But they very freely told him, That they had
rather die, than submit to the German Yoke: begging Leave that they might
follow him, and serve in his Army. Accordingly they did attend his Majesty for
some Days, but after he was advanced a little in his March, they returned back
to Czebin, from whence they beat our Troops, even without charging them. The
same was done in other Places of these Countries, where any Garrison had been
left. At last the whole Army returned into Poland, with the King, who took his
March through Lubownia, the First City of his Territories, and arrived at
Cracow on Christmas Eve. Lubownia is a Starosty in the Mountains, 8 Leagues off
Eperies, and 12 or 15 from Cracow. As to Czebin, it is situated in a Bottom,
enclosed with good Walls and Forts, a large Trench, and several Stone Bridges,
reaching to the Gates. The Inside is vere well built, as are all the other
Cities of this part of Hungary, which is the best Canton of the whole Kingdom.

This was the Conclusion of that Glorious Campaign; after which the Polish
Court met at Cracow, where the Queen had waited for her Royal Consort, and
resided there all the Winter, to the end of March; when it removed into Russia,
in order to take care of its own State, after having saved that of its Allie.
It was debated, Whether they should keep a new Army on foot, to oppose the
Turks, who were incensed against Poland, for having violated the Truce solemnly
ratified by an Ambassador, in Favor of a Prince, from whom they had not the
least Hopes of Succor, when they wanted it. The Sultan conferred the Office of
Grand Vizier, on the Caimacan of Constantinople, who was another Black, called
Cara. He sent as his Serasquier against the Poles, Suleyman, a Bassa, a Man of
Esteem in the Empire, who afterward came to be Grand Vizier; but of the
particulars of this, we shall treat in the next Chapter.

During all these Transactions, and the March of the King of Poland toward
Upper Hungary, the Bassa of Newhausel, tired with waiting for my Ransom, and
beginning to perceive that I was less considerable than he took me to be,
proposed to me the sending a Trooper directly across the Mountains to Cracow,
and offered to release me for 3000 Golden Ducats, and ten Turks, instead of the
10000 he had first insisted upon. Though I was verily persuaded that the King
would never part with that Sum, yet I consented to the Proposal, and wrote what
they desired me, looking upon it rather as a Favorable Opportunity of sending
my News to the Court, and of hearing some from thence, than as an Overture to
my speedy Deliverance. The Turk was dispatched, and fell into the hands of a
Party of Rebels, who perceiving him charged with Letters, directed (says he) to
the King of Poland, brought him before Count Teckley, taking him either for an
Imperialist Hungarian, or for a Deserter. As good Luck would have it, Count
Forval was then with that Prince, who gave him the Packet to read and
interpret. Forval knew my Hand, and came to know of my Imprisonment, of which
he had never heard a Word before. He gave an Account of it to that Hungarian
Lord, praying him at the same time not only to permit the Express to go on to
Cracow, but likewise by his own Interest, to endeavor to redeem me from my
Slavery. Count Teckley promised to do it, and with my Letters sent one to the
King, and Forval wrote another to the Marquess D' Arquyen to offer his Service
in my Behalf. From hence arose a very strict Correspondence between these
Persons: The Marquess wrote to Count Teckley, giving him the Title of Highness;
and the Count answered him very respectfully, and omitted nothing to obtain my
Freedom; not directly by himself, for fear of rendering himself suspected, but
by means of the Bey of Novigrad, his particular Friend, and the Intimate
acquaintance of the Bassa of Newhausel, who was his Superior, the Castle of
Novigrad being under that Bassa's Jurisdiction. Perhaps this Negotiation might
have proved successful, had it not been for the delay of the Express,
occasioned partly by the deep Snows, and partly by the Difficulties of the
Roads, which the Parties sent out on both sides, made almost impassible.
Besides, the Bassa of Newhausel, died the beginning of February, even before
the Trooper dispatched by him, was returned. He brought his Answers to the
Turkish Captain, who had taken me, who commanded in the City till the Arrival
of a new Bassa, or rather of two new Bassas; for the two who were at Newhausel
died the same Month. This Captain sent me a Letter, which the Marquess of
Arquyen wrote to me, and desired to know the Contents, that so he might take
his Measures with the Eldest Son of the deceased Bassa, to whose share I fell,
in the Division of his Father's Personal Estate, betwixt him and his two
Brothers. Mustapha would have bought me at his Hands at a low rate, that so he
might have got the Overplus of the Ransom, if it had been a pretty round Sum.
But seeing nothing was offered in Exchange, besides the Turks of Zetzen, he
left me to make my own bargain with my Patron who was not in a humor no more
than his Father of delivering those Mussulmen to his own prejudice. Thus all
the good Wishes of Count Teckley, and the pressing instances of Forval were
rendered insignificant by the Avarice of this Bey my Patron, formerly his
Fathers Kiayia.

After the Death of the Bassa of Newhawsel, his three Sons made a Dividend of
the Spoil, Household-Goods, Slaves, Horses; and lodged altogether in the Place
wherein the Deceased formerly dwelt, waiting for the Arrival of his Successor.
I was in some hopes of some favorable Turn of fortune by this Death, since the
Bey his Eldest Son, had appeared to me to be more Courteous, Charitable and of
a milder Disposition than his Father. But I was deceived in my Expectations.
For this Covetous Man, who could no longer enrich himself by the Contributions,
in which he had now no share, did almost starve us to Death, and kept himself
but a very stingy Table. So that having now nothing but a piece of dry bread
every day; and some days together, nothing at all to eat, I was reduced to such
a Weakness and Faintness, as brought me within a foot of the Grave. Besides I
was without Clothes in a Vault that had no fire in it, laid on the Ground upon
two Boards without either Hay or Straw, and full of Sores from the Crown of my
head to the Sole of my foot. Thus I lead a languishing Life, having no other
Support but the mercy of God, for two whole Months together; expecting an End
to be put to these my Miseries with as much impatience as I formerly breathed
after Liberty. One day I remember that I went by the door of a Stove that was
kindled, where I stopped a while: The Heat revived my strength a little, and I
perceived my Spirits refreshed by this Help; which gave me to understand, that
my Nature was only weakened; and that when warmer Weather came, I might recover
of that languishing Malady. However, this warm Weather was still to come, and
Provisions began to be scarcer and scarcer every Day. The Duke of Lorrain had
ordered the Garrisons round about, to hinder the Peasants from carrying their
Goods to Newhausel Market, as they had formerly done. A Prohibition was made
against it, under the Penalty of being hanged. The City had no Wood for Firing;
for all the Parts round about were laid waste: Its Magazines were husbanded
accordingly to prevent Necessity: Thus every one suffered alike; Turks,
Officers, Slaves, and Horses. Nothing comes nigh the Frugality of this Nation,
who are contented with a little Meal moistened, with Coffee, Tobacco, Herbs,
and such like Things; and are as happy in this their Fare, as the greatest
Sensualists pretend to be in their most Luxurious Diet. Provided a City has
Bread, it is reckoned a very good City; and when a Turk enters into Discourse of
any foreign Country, the first Question he asks is, Whether it has any Bread;
and if he commends any Country of their own Empire, it is for that Quality.
Honey makes likewise one of the richest Repasts; which they eat with Butter
mixed with it, or else spread upon Bread cold. This they learnt from the Jewish
Tradition, Mahomet having retained a great many of their Customs, as well as
Names, and inserted a great many Passages out of the Bible, in his Alcoran;
particularly this, Butyrum and Mel comedes, ut scias reprobare malum, and
eligere bonum.

Since I am fallen into these Digressions, it will not be amiss to add, what I
observed concerning their Funeral Rites, at the Bassa's Funeral. As to the
Essential Part of them, they are much the same for all sorts of People: For
among the Turks they make no Distinction or Subordination of Quality, Birth, or
Profession. They are all Equal, excepting their Offices, which only make the
Distinction: so that the Sons of a Bassa, and the Grooms of his Stables, when
he is dead, are upon the same Level. They eat all together without any
Difference; the Footman with his Master, and both with the Tradesman; and
nothing seems below them, since as they are raised out of nothing to the
highest Posts, so they fall back again from these Dignities into their
Primitive Nothing.

Persons placed in an Office, are the only distinguished Men among them, and
the Respect and Veneration which is paid to those Officers, cannot be equaled
by any other Nation. However, Death equals them with the rest, and their
Funerals do but very little exceed those of Private Persons in in Magnificence.
Just, as the Bassa died, his Relations and Friends, that were about him, set up
a great Cry, as taking their last Farewell of him. In Turkey they do not weep for
the Dead, nor show any other Demonstration of Sorrow. Afterward a Charcoal
Fire was kindled in the midst of his Palace-Yard, on which they put a Kettle
full of Water, and washed the Body, as it was laid out upon a Table. After
this, they rubbed it over with Yellow Wax; and last of all, wrapped it up with
Cloth Swaths, as they do the Egyptian Mummies. The Coffin in which he was laid,
was covered over with Red Stuff, and the Deceased habited in his usual Dress.
At first, upon going out of the House, the Corpse was carried on the Shoulders
of Four Persons of Quality; but in marching, every one who met the Procession,
offered themselves to carry the Coffin a little way, and were again relieved by
the next that came; for the Turks make a piece of Devotion of this Custom. The
Relations, Friends, and Domestics of the Bassa followed the Bier; whilst the
Priests of the Mosques, the Scholars, and others designed for the Religious
Order of the Mussulmen, went before, chanting forth of Prayers, till they came
to the Churchyard, which is without the Walls, where upon a Stone, raised like
a Pyramid near the Tomb, is set down the Quality of the Deceased, by certain
Figures of the Sabre, the Turbant, and such like.

This, in general, is the Funeral Solemnity of the Turks; after which they all
return to the House of the Deceased, as usual, without any token of Sorrow,
being entirely resigned to the Orders of Providence, which is esteemed by them
as the Irresistible Fate, which the Heathen owned. This renders them more
steady in Adversity, less proud in Prosperity, and more patient in Misery, and
Slavery; which they bear with a dry Eye, and after an Heroical manner. It is
not always the Effect of a great Courage, but often a Blind Refignation to
Providence. There are but few Nations who have a stronger Belief of, and
greater Aw for God, than the Turks. They have his Name almost always in their
Mouths; it is their Signal of Battle: they have a particular Standard, which
they call The Standard of God, and marches at the Head of the Armies. This
Standard is Red, set off with a Border in small Squares, enclosing several
Plumes or Festoons with Crescents: In the midst is a Sabre with two Blades, and
a Double-guard upon one single Hilt, placed like a pair of Compasses, and all
full of Writing; which is a sort of Mysterious Talisman in their Religion. On
the Top is a large Crescent turned downwards, spotted all over with Arabic
Characters, enclosing a Sun betwixt its Two Horns; as do the other Eight, which
are placed Four and Four, on each side of the large Crescent. The spaces
between are garnished with other Figures, and the whole contains Sentences or
Phrases to the Praise of the Living God. There are other Standards which are
wholly plain, of a Red Silk, and a Green Fringe. That which is called Mahomet's
Standard, is Green, and has a Red Fringe; the Chief of which, in the Tents of
the Grand Vizier, is all full of writing, without any other Figure or Finery.
Whether they go out, or come in, or enter into any Discourse, they begin and
end with Alla. When one among 'em relates any extraordinary Story, he who hears
it, asks him, by way of Admiration, Alla Seversen? that is, Do you love God? As
if he should say, Is it certainly true? In short, this Sacred Name is made use
of with Reverence in all the Discourses and Actions of the Turks.

Five Times a Day they have set Prayers, each Mosque having some appointed to
give notice of the Hour of Prayer; by certain Form; which they sing out aloud
upon a Balcony, placed for that purpose round a Tower; and thus they call upon
the Faithful, to take them off from their Worldly Concerns. They begin by
turning toward the Rising-Sun, and afterward turn about as the Sun does,
chanting forth the Greatness and Power of the Most High. On Friday, which is
their Sunday, (made choice of on purpose to distinguish it from the Christian
Lord's Day, and the Jewish Sabbath) the Ministers of the Mosques use some
Extraordinary Ceremonies. Three of 'em get upon the top of the Tower, singing
forth other Prayers, beside the usual Invocation of each Day, which is offered
up only by a single Person. The most Religious go to Prayers at the Mosque,
others say 'em at Home; and others neither at Home, nor at the Mosque, for
there are Atheists and Formalists in all Religions. In the Bassa's House, there
is a Chaous appointed to give, Notice to all the Domestics, by crying before
their Chamber-Doors, To Prayers, Gentlemen, to Prayers; and the Chief of them
go into the Bassa's Room, and there put up their Petitions jointly with him,
with a loud Voice; but on Fridays, he goes solemnly to the Mosque in a Green
Vest, their Prophet's beloved Color, there to offer up the Second Prayer,
which is between Ten and Eleven in the Morning. The Bassa of Newhausel, who
succeeded Ale, my first Master, never failed that Duty, and distributed large
Alms to the Poor of the City, as they made a Lane to him, going and coming. I
can say nothing of their Mosques, for a Christian, much less a Slave, is not
admitted into them, but with extraordinary Precautions: But as to their Manner
of Prayer, since the Turks are not so secret as to that, I can here acquaint
You with the whole Ceremony, at which I have been forced to Officiate a
Thousand times.

In the First Place, You must know, That all the Turks without exception, rise
every Morning by Break of Day, at all Seasons of the Year: That they make
themselves ready for Prayer, by Washing with clean Water their Hands, and Arms
up to the Elbow, their Face, and the inside of their Nostrils, their Mouths,
behind their Ears, the top of their Forehead, and the back part of their Neck.
This they do, by a set number of Rubbings, and with a great many Mysterious
Forms, finishing the whole by clapping their wet Hands under their Feet, and
leaving an Impression of their Five Fingers under their Pumps* and sprinkling
their Privy-parts with Water. All this they look upon as essentially necessary,
and then spread a Carpet or Garment, at the end of which they say their
Prayers, turning their Faces toward Mecca, where their Prophet is interred.

They begin their Devotion standing upright with several Motions of their
Hands, which they clap to their Ears with their Thumbs, afterward lay them
across their Breasts; then letting them hang down, and every now and then fall
down on their Knees, and rise up again, after they have kissed the Ground: They
end all by Saluting the two Angels, which they suppose to be present, and
sitting one upon each Shoulder. This Devotion they pay very regularly Five
times a Day; at Daybreak, between Ten and Eleven a Clock, at Four in the
Afternoon, at Sunset, and when it is quite dark. They always begin with the
forementioned Washings; and on their more Solemn Festivals, they wash their
Legs up to their Knees, especially on the Day of the Great Bairam, of which
more hereafter.

The Arabic, which was Mahomet's Native Language, is that which is most used
among them, as the Latin is in the Church of Rome. All their Books, all their
Prayers, and most of their considerable Expeditions are writ in Arabic, which
few of the Turks do understand, though they can all read it; and it is a sign of a
great Scholar, to be able to explain it. This Language is very difficult, of a
harsh Sound, and pronounced through the Throat, whereas the Turkish is soft,
easy, fluent, intelligible, and comes pretty near the Latin, without Articles,
and those confused Phrases, and ceremonial Circumlocutious; Theeing and Thouing
every Body, even God, and the Sultan himself; with Manly Expressions in their
common Discourse, and moving ones in their Songs and Love. They are as uniform
in their Manners, as they are in their Words. They make no account of the Wall,
salute no Body as they go along the Streets, and scarce take Notice of any
Body; and if two Persons happen to meet, he that comes up first is to pass the
Complement, and the other to return it, but if the first says nothing, the
other is as silent as He. They converse with one another, with a free open air
and a smiling aspect; and the Master of the house passes a Civility upon his
Guests by giving them the upper hand of his Couch, offering them Coffee and
Tobacco, after which they depart without saluting any Person or saying a Word,
only sighing devoutly Alla, which is all the Ceremony. The Turks know nothing
of the Custom of clapping the hand to the hat or mouth, when we expect to
receive any favor; they are for having it received just as they give it,
without any Ceremony or Submission.

The Case indeed is otherwise as to those who are in any Office: for instance,
they pay their Complements to the Bassas or Persons of Note, with both their
hands on their breasts, bowing their heads to the ground very respectfully. They
who wait upon them, before and after discoursing with them, kiss the bottom of
their Garment, bringing it up to their Forehead and Mouth, as they do the
Letters which are directed to them from the Bassas and Visiers. The students do
the same after the Lesson is over to the Hand or the Vest of their Master, and
this is all the Ceremony of Civility which I ever observed among them.

By this it is easy to perceive that their manner of Conversation is very plain;
for beside this jejune or rough way, the Turks know nothing of the Sciences or
of Foreign Countries. So that being only limited to their own History, Wars,
Commerce, and Affairs of their own private Interest or that of the State; their
discourses run only up-these Subjects, without any mixture of Gallantry, less
known than the Sciences themselves, since every one does that at their own
homes with as many Women as they are able to maintain. When they are met seven
or eight in a Room or a Coffee house, The Company desires one among the rest to
tell them a story or Fabulous Tradition; and this Speaker holds forth for an
hour together, all the rest listening very attentively with Pipes in their
Mouths, or Beads in their hands. This is all the Conversation they have, unless
it be a game at Chess which they are great Masters at, but then they play only
for diversion without any stake. So So that it is no wonder if the Turks seek
for Amusements in War, or in Handicraft Trades and Mechanics, in which they
excel even to a Miracle, nothing being comparable, to the beauty neatness, and
delicacy of all that is made use of by them.

It Is not the same with respect to their Table and Buildings. The Turks being
used to, or rather bred up under Tents, never mind having fine houses, nor do
they build any, nor repair those in the Towns which they take. It Is enough for
them to be under shelter, and to have their Couches or Stately Sophas; which is
all the household Goods they mind, having no Tapestry or Hangings on their
Walls* nor any other Pictures unless Rebesk Work, or any Beds or Chairs, but
rich Carpets and fine Coverlets. Good feeding is a stranger to them. They eat
purely to sustain Life, and make it a business of necessity, not of Pleasure.
The Table called Sofra is commonly a round piece of Leather, fastened with
strings like a Purse, which they hang up against a Wall, when they have done
eating. On this Sofra they lay neither Cloth nor Napkin* but some pieces of
bread round about, a single Dish in the middle; out of which every one eats,
which is supplied by another as that is Empty, for they have never two dishes
laid on together. Each Man has his knife hanging by his side, and a
Handkerchief serves instead of a Napkin, the Word Marama in their Language
being used to signify both a Handkerchief and a Napkin.

Their food is no richer than this their Apparatus. They feed very much upon
Rice, upon upon Wheat baked with their Meat, and a great deal of Flesh cut out
into small pieces like a Fricassee. Their Kitchin-Ware consists only in Pots,
and their plate is the covers of those pots made of Tin, deep and large, which
serve instead of Dishes, for they have no other, nor any piece of Plate such as
Spoons, Knives and Forks; for these last are all of Horn or fine Wood, set with
small Pearls. Even the Bassas, Visiers, and others are forbidden to eat in
Plate.

That wherein the Tables of Persons of Quality appear more splendid than those
of other men, is the Number of Dishes: for I saw fifty served up one after
another in the Treat which the New Bassa made upon his Arrival, in the Open
field under his Tents. The Table was a round piece of Tin, with a small border,
placed upon an Iron frame about a foot high: upon it were laid pieces of Bread
with Spoons, and the Guests sat so as not to look into one another's faces,
eating sideways, their Right-hands and sides turned toward the Table. At the
Bassa's Table is served up instead of a Napkin, a great piece of Cotton stuff
died in blue or various Colors, which is throw'n upon the knees of the Guests,
beginning with the Master. This is all the distinction between his and other
private Person's Tables; for they all alike eat very fast without much talking;
One dish does not stay long for another, as soon as it is Empty, the Master of
the feast cries take away, and fifty of 'em are by this means gone in less than
a quarter of an hour. Both Drink and side-board are much of a sort. Persons of
note indeed have their Leathern Bottles, and turned Cups; and the Bassa upon a
Journey has a Man on purpose to carry his Carpet for Prayers, with a Bottle
full of Water and a piece of Bread. There is not much more Ceremony used in
waiting at Table; the Slaves fetch the Dishes out of the Kitchen, and lay them
in the Antichamber, where Grooms of the Chamber called Meter take them, and one
of 'em places them upon the Table.

I have elsewhere observed that the Turks wear no other Arms in times of Peace
and at home, but a Dagger tucked in at their Girdle on the right side: and here
I add that Quarrels are very rare among them. Ralleries, Love-Intrigues,
Gaming, Wine, Suits at Law, Intrigues of Court, Backbiting, and the like; which
occasion quarrels in other Nations, have no Influence over these People: Every
one lives in his own family, without concerning himself with what is done
abroad. They have nothing they can call their own but their Household Goods,
their Money, Horses and Slaves, for all the Lands belong to the Grand Signior.
They never intrude into other People's business; they carry on no Plots with
another Man's Wife or Daughter; for they may keep as many Women as they please;
and what cause then is there of falling out? I never so much as saw any thing
like it in all the fourteen Months of my stay at Newhausel. The Merchants deal
upon the square, The Workmen are paid punctually, and every thing is carried on
among them without Trick or Fraud according to the genuine Law of Nature. Their
Justice is severe, their Obedience blind, their Religion reverenced, and
Robberies are scarce known among them, by the care that is taken to root up the
very seeds of such a Practice: So that they lock up nothing, their Chambers,
Coffers, and Chests do all lie open: And were it not for that sordid Avarice,
to which all the Turks are inclined, and a propensity to a certain dreadful
piece of debauchery, to which they are more addicted than the Italians, and all
other Nations of the World besides, were it not, I say, for these things, they
would equal any other People in their Morals.

The Turks have two Lents in the Year called Ramasan, each lasting a Month or a
Moon, according to their way of Reckoning. The lesser is Discretionary, and
falls out toward the latter end of October or the beginning of November. The
Great Lent (at the end of which is the Solemn Festival of Bairam, looked upon
as our Easter) which is likewise called Ramasan Bairam, is indispensibly
necessary to be observed among them. In the Year 1684, it began August the 12th
according to our Account, which was the first day of the Moon. The fast they
keep at that time was very irksome by reason of the long days; For they eat
nothing till after Sunset, and the Lamps are lighted, which are placed during
all that time upon the top of the Towers of their Mosques. These are lighted
when the day is supposed to be at an end by the Course of the Sun, which
likewise puts a Period to the Fast for that day: and then every body betake
themselves to their Victuals, breaking their fast first of all by large
draughts of Water. Besides this grand Repast, they make another Meal almost as
large as the first, two hours before day: So that it may be said that they Eat*
without sleeping all Night; and Sleep without eating all the next day. During
the Ramasan their Prayers are double, and the most indevout fail not of saying
them every day of this Lent, which is so much reverenced by all persons.

On the Morrow after the last day of Ramasan, they celebrate the Bairam just as
they did the first day of Lent, by discharging all the Cannon, by the sounding
of Warlike Instruments, beating of Drums and the Like. After this by break of
day they wait upon the Bassa with their Music, who after he had washed his
feet (a custom strictly observed by every body on the morning of this festival)
mounted his horse and marched in great State to the Mosque, there to offer up
his first Prayers. Whilst this was doing the Cooks were serving up a great
Treat in the middle of the Square before his Palace all in Earthen Dishes to
the Number of three or four hundred. Several Janissaries were posted at the four
Corners to keep the People off, till the Bassa and his Calvalcade returned from
the Mosque. Then those Guards fell upon the Dishes, and all the crowd at the
same time, take share of the Treat, of which nothing remains a moment after,
besides the pieces of Dishes which are broken between them in the Squabble.
They told me at Newhausel, that the Grand Signior himself celebrated the Bairam
just after the same manner, and that this Repast was called Corban.

The Turks have likewise another Moon which is that of March, in which they
perform several Nocturnal and private Devotions, of which I saw nothing but the
Processions of the Dervis made publicly in the passage between the two Gates
of the Bassa's house. The next confisted in lamentable Howlings and secret
Superstitions of which I only heard the Noise, which was very dreadful in my
mind. They attend at their Devotions at all times with a modesty that is hardly
conceiveable in Persons so addicted to Lascivious Embraces. Their privities are
covered very carefully by a pair of Drawers reaching down to their feet, and
Shirts over them reaching down to their heels. So that a Modest Woman is not
more cautious as to this Point then these Lustful Satyrs are. As often as they
go into their Wardrobe to dress themselves, they always carry along with them a
basin of Water, with which they wash themselves very carefully; besides making
use of the Bagnio's to which they go almost once a Week. The Bagnios of
Newhausel, in which I was five or six times, have a large Room set out with
Couches whereon to undress one's self, a Wooden machine in the midst, on which
there hung linen towels to dry ones self. Before you put off your shift, a boy
belonging to the Bagnio gives you one of these towels to cover your Nudities,
which is not to be taken off till you put on your shirt again. He supplies you
with wooden Slippers, and in this posture you go through two or three small
Vaulted Rooms, and enter into another where are benches on the four sides, upon
which you are placed. Over your head is a Cistern with two Cocks, the one of
cold and the other of hot Water. The Man who belongs to the Bagnio makes use of
a certain liquid Soap perfumed with musk, and a rubbing cloth of course stuff
which scours to admiration. At the close of all he throws on a great deal of
Water, but so cautiously as not to touch the Privities, which he leaves for the
person to wash himself, if he pleases. The Women are under as strict a
Confinement as they are in Italy: Those who walk in the streets are clothed in
a great Gown with large Sleeves and a Veil over their Faces, so that they can
only see their way through the Veil which is commonly very transparent. The Bassa
had thirty Women Slaves shut up in an upper Room whither two old Eunuchs
carried them Provision twice a day, and the Bassa gave them Visits between
whiles; but the Bastile it self has not a Stronger Guard upon it than this
Seraglio, out of which they go once a month attended with two Matrons to the
Bagnio. I only mention such particulars as are not so well known to the World,
and pass by those that every body is acquainted with, and which are to be met
with in several Histories, especially in the Account of an English Gentleman
(Sir Paul Ricaut) who has described the Customs and Government of the Turks
better than any other Writer. All I shall add here is, that Coffee is (as all
men know) their constant Liquor, Pots of it standing always by the Fire in
Gentlemen's houses. Tobacco is as much esteemed among them being very good in
Turkey by being duly prepared and taken in long Pipes, which the Smokers find to
be very pleasant. As for Opium, said to be so much used by the Turks, I am apt
to believe that in some parts they may like it in such quantities as is
related; but yet at Newhausel I never saw any person take it, nor ever heard
the least mention made of it. I took as much notice as possible of their way of
Living, their Customs, their private Transactions and their Family, and I so
often shifted my lodgings and my Master, that I could not but have known
something of this Circumstance, if there had been any thing in it.

The Turks are very industrious, and know how to turn their hands to every
thing that is most necessary for human life. They mend the furniture of their
horses themselves and brighten them; they mend their own Cloths, having always
about them in a leathern Case a Needle, Thread, and other materials proper for
the business. Among such industrious People as these are, a French Gentleman is
a mere Ignoramus, and they looked upon me as a very dull Soul, because I could
not tell so much as how to light a fire; which among them is an insupportable
Fault in their Slaves. They perpetually upbraided me for this my Insufficiency;
and they could not imagine how any Man below a Bassa, or great Person of
Quality, should be so shiftless, as to stand in need of another's Assistance,
even in the minutest matters. They take a special care of their Horses, which
they wash even with Soap. The finest, which are of the Arabian Breed, are never
tied any otherwise than by the Leg to a Tether, without a Halter, Rack, or
Manger; for they give 'em their Oats or Barley in a sort of Bags, called
Tourba. When they alight off their Backs, though they be a hundred in Company,
they will not let 'em be rubbed down, but are walked softly for half an hour, in
the Street, before they are carried to the Stable. This was our Business; when
the Bassa came off a Journey, the Slaves took his Men's Horses, and walked 'em
about the Streets. They Discipline them so as to turn about every way, that so
they may manage the Sabre, or cast the Dart, at which Exercise the Turks are
very expert; nor are they put to much trouble in it, since their Horses are
neatly built, light, swift, of a sound Wind, and admirably well mouthed; being
no skittish, resty, or foundered Jades. The Turks also manage them
extraordinary well, and are fixed upon the Stirrups, which are much like those
of our Women's Saddles, and tied up very short; but yet they sit up very
upright and steady, which makes their Cavalry so good, and so vigorous in the
Charge.

The most considerable Cavalry is that of the Spahi, called in their Language
Spaha, which is composed of Gentlemen that serve at their own Expenses, in
consideration of some Village or Demesne, which they hold of the Grand Signior,
during Life. They are dispersed over the whole Ottoman Empire, and are reckoned
to be 80000 who have those Estates that are called Timars, and 32000
Mercenaries.

The other Cavalry is much like the French, consisting either of conquered
Countries, or of Allies, or of Mercenaries of their own Nation; having Colonels
or Commanders, named Allay-Bey: without reckoning the Militia of the several
Provinces, which are raised upon extraordinary Expeditions. Those last are
called Sangiacs, or Companies of the Arriere-Ban, no less vigorous than the
Regular Troops. They have likewise a sort of Dragoons, armed with Muskets like
those of the Infantry, which are also called Yancharz, from the Name of
Yancharz or Janissaries, who bestow this Title on the Arms which they make use
of. There are two sorts of Infantry; The Janissaries, who are properly the Grand
Signior's Guards, and are a Formidable Body of Men, as well for their Number,
as their Courage; They, like the Spaha, are dispersed over all the Provinces,
and enjoy certain Privileges, which make them to be considerable. This Body of
Foot have a Commander in Chief, of great Authority in the Empire, called
Yanchar-Aga, or Aga of the Janissaries: who marches in Constantinople with a
numerous Retinue at his Heels, and several Executioners of Justice, who carry
Bundles of Rods to punish upon the spot in the middle of the Street, those that
are complained of to him, as he goes along. Both Ancient and Modern Histories
are full of Remarkable Relations, concerning this Body of Infantry, which have
raised such frequent Insurrections, and so many Revolts, even to the Deposing
of Sultans, demanding the Heads of Visiers; and other such extraordinary
Disturbances. It Is said they are about 40000 strong.

The other sort of Infantry, is called by the Turks Seymen, and differ nothing
from that of other Nations; having nothing of Distinction, either in their
Privileges, or in their Habits, wearing a plain Cap hanging down behind, called
Calpac; whereas the Janissaries have a white Turbant, and green Coats; as I
described them before, in speaking of the King of Poland's Guards. The Agas or
Captains of these Seymen, are called Tchorbaggey, of which there is a Commander
in chief, in every Garrison of a Town, honored with the Title of Yanchar-Aga,
and who is properly the Colonel of the Infantry of the Town. This may suffice
in general to give You a Light into those Particulars, of which former
Histories have taken no notice. As to the Places of War, that little Precaution
which the Turks make use of to cover them, may seem somewhat strange. They have
no Body of Guards in the Streets, nor any Sentinels by Day upon the Ramparts
near their Artillery, nor any great number at the Gates. Indeed they have
nothing to fear within, because the Cities they conquer are re-peopled by the
Natural Turks; and in process of Time, the People of the Country become greater
Turks than the ancient Musselmen. This I observed at Newhausel, where the
Hungarians that were turned Mahometans, were the most zealous Defenders of the
Place. There were in the Town but few Janissaries and Spahas of Ancient
Creation, some other Turks, such as Greeks, Asiatics and Levantines, all the
rest were Hungarian Horse, retaining still the Habit and Language of the
Country, with the Religion and Notion of the true Original Turks. It was they
who went out in Parties, and scoured the Country round about: It was they who
guarded the Prisons, where the Slaves were kept; and the Hungarian Infantry
composed likewise the greatest part of the Garrison. The Method of fixing the
Guard consists in those Nightly Rounds, which a Body of Foot make, going upon
the Ramparts with large Lanterns, and stopping at every Bastion, to set up a
hideous Cry, calling upon the Name of the Most Blessed God: and this they do
without any intermission till Break of Day, when they all go off, even the
Sentinels of the Watch-Towers. These last carry their Rugs along with them to
lie on, and their Duty is from time to time, to cry Alla, in answer to those
that walk the Rounds. This was all the Turkish Party of Foot, at least all that
I ever saw at Newhausel, either in the Reviews, or in their Exercise: and I
learnt from several German Officers, That during the Siege of Buda, and other
Places, the Night Round made the same Cries, and had the same Guard.

A great many People believe, that the Office of Vizier is confined only to one
single Person* and till then, I was of the same Opinion: but at Newhausel I was
informed, That besides the Prime-Visier, called likewise Grand Vizier, or
Vizier Asem, there were six others, which composed the Divan, or Council of the
Empire. But of each of these, we have already given a particular Account Chap.
III. Next to the Visiers, are the other Governors of the Province, called
Becglerbeys, who are only two, though frequently he who is no Vizier, has a
larger Extent of Government. For Instance: The Bassa of Temeswaer in Hungary,
has a considerable Province or Becglerbeyat, composed of one half of the
Territories conquered by the Turks in that Kingdom; and yet he is no Vizier.
Next to these, come all the Bassas, which either serve in the Army, or in
places of Importance, who have only one Horsetayl, to which the Sultan, for
some Signal service, adds a second, and a third, for which they pay 20000
Crowns in 40 Purses, as has been already mentioned.

Here I must inform the Public, That the Name of Bassa is a Title of Honor,
belonging to the Person, not to the Office they are in: So that the Ottoman
Empire has a great many Bassas without any Office or Command; and those who
have any such, never take upon them the Name of the Place where they are
Governors, but only their own Personal Title. Thus for Instance; The Bassa of
Newhausel was called Assan Pacha, and not Ouywar Pacha, Ouywar being the
Turkish Word to signify Newhausel; and so of the rest. Besides, this Title in
common Conversation, is by way of Compliment given to Private Persons; and at
the end of my Slavery, when the Exchange was concluded upon, they honored me
with the same Title, calling me Fransous Pacha, as much as to say an
Illustrious Frenchman. Of these Bassas some are made Governors of Provinces and
Cities; others Serasquiers or Generals, and others the General Officers in the
Armies, which are Subordinate to the former, who all of them retain the Title
of Bassa, without taking upon them any new one by their Office. Thus for
Example, The Visiers do not style themselves The Vizier of Buda, of Silistria,
of Bosnia, etc. but rather Boudin-Pacha, Silistri-Pacha, Bosnie-Pacha. The
Becglerbeys, and General Officers of the Army do the same.

The same may be said of the Title of Sultan, which is not appropriated to the
Grand-Signior only, as most People imagine; and only signifies Protector,
Benefactor, Patron, Master. For all the Turks in general, when they discourse
together, give one another this Title, as we do that of Sir, or Master. But
forasmuch as the Grand Signior, the Great Cham of Tartary, and their Sons or
Brothers are reckoned Patrons and Protectors in a higher sense than ordinary,
therefore they are by way of Eminence styled Sultan. Thus they say, Mehemet
Sultan, which is the Grand Signior; Suleyman Sultan, which is his Brother;
Gherei Sultan, which is the Cham of Tartary; Galga Sultan, Nuradin Sultan,
which are his Sons or Brothers. The proper Title therefore which the Turks have
given to their Emperor, is that of Padicha, signifying the Lord and Master of
all the rest: and as a token of Respect, and that particular Esteem which they
have for the King of France, they have conferred upon him only that great Title
of Padicha, or Emperer of the French. England would have given 100000 Crowns
for that Favor, but could not obtain it: as they would have had the Sopha at
the Audiences, granted at last to the Ambassador of Lewis the Great, in the
Person of Mr. De Guilleragues, about ten Years ago. This consists of having a
Cushion-stool set upon the same Floor with the Grand Signior, whereas formerly
they sat below, as the Ambassadors of other Kings do to this Day, that is below
the place, that is raised above the rest of the Floor, particularly called the
Sopha.

The Title of Bassa ought not be confounded with that of Bachy, which the Turks
give to the Chief Persons of every Profession; as to the Head-Gardner, the
Head-Cook, the Chief-Footman, and to all other Principal Persons of what Order
soever. So likewise the Title of Aga, is given to all the Chief Officers of the
Household; to the Tefterdar, who is the Treasurer or Receiver General; to the
Asnadar, who is the Intendant, or Play Master of a Private Family; to the
Silictar, who takes care of his Master's Arms, and is his Squire, or Captain of
the Guards; to the Kiayia, who is the Lieutenant of a Vizier, or Bassa that
Commands the Place, and so of the rest.

The Turbants make several distinctions between Persons and Officers, as may be
discovered both by the Color and Fashion of them. They consist of two parts,
the Bonnet called Cauk, and the Scarf twisted round about called Sarret. The
Turks descended from the Race of Mahomet, otherwise called Emirs, have only the
right of preference of wearing the Green Bonnet. At present indeed there is
some Relaxation of it, as I observed at Newhawsel; but yet it is a Law, as all
the Turks have assured me. As to the Scarf, it is commonly white, of Silk or very
fine Linen. There are some of red, green, and Orange-colour'd Taffata; which
the Bassa made use of, when he went to the War. The Turbant of Quality which
the Visiers, the Governors, and the Sultan himself wear, is red, and the Scarf
white, turned about after a particular manner and of a moderate Largeness. The
Cudis or Men of the Law wear a Turbant pretty large at the Top, and narrow at
the bottom, like the Spanish Hats: The Scarf spread over, covering the Bonnet
almost quite up to the top. The Imans, or Priests of the Mosques wear a Violet
Turbant, very large and deep; The Scarf is plaited into small squares very
artificially. It would be two tedious to particularize the other Distinctions;
but I must not omit two Essential Ones, which give the Nation its Name: It Is
that of the Color of the Turbant which the Persians wear, whose Bonnet and
Scarf are red; which makes the Turks call them Kesel-bach, Red-pates. Their
Religion likewise gives them another particular but scandalous Title. For though
they own the Alcoran, yet they follow therein the Interpretation of one named
Ali, reputed as an Heretic among the Turks; so that they call the Persians and
other People of that Sect, as they do the Christians, Ghiaour, Miscreants,
Infidels. They look upon the Persians as greater miscreants of the two; their
Surname of Daa-Fena signifing the same thing literally. The Turks have a less
opinion for the Jews, though their Religion is the very Foundation of Mahometism,
from whom the Prophet has borrowed several Names, the Circumcision, and other
Essential Points of the Law; The Prohibition of eating Swine's flesh, with the
Prohibition of Pictures and Sculptures: yet that accursed Race is so far an
offense to the Turks, by that miserable Condition to which they are reduced,
being Vagabonds, sordid and Mercenary, that they will not admit any of 'em to
make a Profession, till they have abjured Judaism, and been baptized as
Christians. So that it is not a Jew but a Christian that becomes a Mussulman; and
among their most bitter Reflections which they cast upon Men, that of Jew is
the most biteing, calling the Christian Slaves by that Title, presuming it will
affront them more, than Calling them only Ghiaour or Infidels.

Every body is acquainted with the Manners of the Dervis, which are a sort of
Austere Monks, as they call them; and most People fancy them to be Recluses and
Solitaries. I saw three of 'em at Newhausel, living among other Men, not shut
up in a Cloister or Monastery, but smoking, eating, and drinking with all
manner of Company as the rest of the Turks do. That which distinguishes them is
their habit which is of white Cloth, made much like that of the Bernardine
Monks without a Capuchion; but instead of that they have a hat of whitish Felt,
cut indenturewise round the Brim, which is in a very Ridiculous manner cut into
four Corners. The Dervis go barefoot without Sandals, without Linen; wear on
their Breast a great Medal of something like yellow Amber; They have Bracelets
and Pendants of the same in their Ears, which still render them more
Rediculous. It Is certain that at first sight you would take a fool and a Dervis
running through the Streets for one and the same thing. Their Devotion is
terrible: for in their Fits of Enthusiasins, they burn or tear their Flesh; and
the first that I saw at the Kiayia's House, though a meek-temper'd, honest, and
charitable Man, yet had both his Arms full of Scars. They pray to God by
turning themselves round; at first only leaping and capering, and afterward as
swift as the turning round of a Millstone, which makes them so giddy, that they
dash themselves against the Walls, and fall in a Trance upon the Ground, out of
which they hardly recover. The Turks have a great Veneration for these Monks;
and when they would extol the Piety of any Person, they say that he is of the
Sect of the Dervis; pretending thereby to denote a more perfect Life and
Religion, than that of the ordinary Mussulmen.

After the Death of Ale and Mustapha, Bassas of Newhausel, the Government of the
Place devolved upon the Commanders of the Janissaries and Spahas; the first
styled Yanchar Aga, or Tchorbagey; the other Alay-Bey. In the mean time an
Express was sent to the Port, to receive the Grand Signior's Orders, who sent
thither two other Bassas, to supply the Places of the Deceased; both of 'em Men
of Merit, and who had really grown gray in the Field of Battle: The First,
named Assan Pacha, a Man of Merit, a good Headpiece, of an extraordinary
Conduct, an Albanian by Birth, and consequently a good Soldier. He had served
under the two Cupreolis, and at the Siege of Candy; was about 65 Years old, had
a Venerable gray Beard, a lively though tanned Complexion, sparkling Eyes, and a
rough Aspect: but withal he had a Noble and Charitable Soul, was easy of
Access, Affable and Courteous, a lover of his Nation and his Emperor, an exact
and faithful Mussulman to outward Appearance, but yet one who had got over the
Scruples of their Law; for he drank Wine in secret; loved both Sexes, though he
punished severely others who transgressed in these Points.

The Second Bassa, named Ale, was at least 70, as white as a Swan, dry and
withered, of a sweet Mein, and red Countenance; but his Air old, and his
Physiognomy like a Rabbi, wrinkled through Age and Study. However, he was
strong, sat upright on his Horse, and was as courageous as any Man; as the
Germans experienced him to be at the Assault they made upon Newhausel.

These two Bassas arrived about May with a new Train of Levantine-Turks, some
Courtiers, and such as were more refined than those of the Frontiers of
Hungary, as I found afterward by sweet Experience. All the Garrison, and the
Sons of the Deceased Bassa, with their Retinue, went out by Break of Day, to
give them the Meeting. The Janissaries with their white Turbants went out on
Horseback with their Colors flying, and all the Artillery of the Place
received them under two Salvo's. The three Beys, Sons to the Deceased Bassa,
yielded up the Palace wherein their Father had dwelt, to his Successor, and
encamped with all their Family on a Bastion. This gave me an Opportunity of
taking a full View of the City, and the Out-parts; the Turks not being
suspicious, and suffering the Slaves to walk round upon their Ramparts. My
Master sent me for a Fortnight to one of his Friends named Caplana, an old
Officer, and one of those Veteranes, that have left off War to turn Courtiers.
He was a Man of Pleasure, and very well beloved among the Persons of Chief
Note. I met with two Polish Slaves in his House, who refreshed me with plenty
of Provisions. But this did not last long; for Caplana, being afraid I should
make my Escape, was for ridding his hands of me, and so brought me back again
to the Bastion to my Patron's Tents; who committed me to the custody of his
Cook, a Cosack by Nation, but a Renegado; or rather bred up from his Infancy in
Mahometism. For he had been taken very young, and knew nothing of his own
Country, or the Polish Language, but what he had learnt in Turkey; yet still
retained the Humanity and Goodnature of a Christian. I lay near him in his
Cabin, and lived pretty pleasantly with the sweat of my Brows, for I served in
the Kitchen, washing of Plates and Dishes, and making the Pot boil.

Whereas the Bastion on which we were, had on its Platform a Watchtower, and
surrounded with Galleries, from whence they could descry a pleasant Prospect
toward the Danube, the Isle of of Schut, and the open Country round about
Komorne; the Bassa came very often thither to spend his Afternoons, in playing
at Chess, smoking, and drinking of Coffee: and his Retinue clothed in white, as
the Turks are in Summer, exercised themselves in the mean time upon the Level
of the Bastion, in darting of Sticks one at another, to inure their Arms, for
the Casting of Javelins. I scarce ever saw them draw the Bow, though they wear
them in the War; but it is rather for Ornament than for Service: their Dexterity
being only confined to the Use of the Javelin, and the Sabre. And truly, the
Turks are very expert in managing the latter, whose Blades are very good. I
have seen Heads cut off, without perceiving the Motion of the Arm. The Profit
which they get by it, contributes very much to make the Turks so dexterous at
it: The Officers pay them so much for every Head, which they bring from the
Field of Battle; which occasions nothing but Headless Trunks to be left behind.
You may see thousands of those Heads, planted upon the Pallissades of their
Cities, or upon a great Tree set up at the Gate, and full of Spikes, on which
they hang the Heads of the Enemies. When they return back from the Patrole, the
first Question that is asked of the Party, is, Where is the Head? that is to
say, the token of their Courage.

When the Bassa goes abroad, either on a Journey, or on a Military Expedition,
all the Cavalry and all his Family attend him, in a great and confused Company.
Before him goes the Music, which consists of three or four Hautboys, with a
pair of small pleasant Kettle-drums, which the Turks are very dextrous in
beating: A large Bonchouk after the Polish Fashion, without any Ornament;
another small Kettle-drum, beat now then, with a large Thong of Leather; and he
who carries it upon the Pummel of his Saddle, goes next before the Bassa, who
has always at his Horse's Head a Footcloth-man, clothed like the Pahiques of
the K. of Poland, called Chater-Bacha, who serves to assist him in Mounting and
Alighting off his Horse. He has two or three other Footmen, named Chaous, whose
Business is to draw out Commissions, to carry out Letters and Orders. The Grand
Signior dispatches them to Christian Princes, to his own Subjects for Presents,
or to get Intelligence. The Bassas have three or four of them; and the Badge of
their Office, is a Black Rod, tipp'd with Silver, on the Top of which is a
double Beak of the same Metal; from whence on each side hangs a Chain with
large Balls at the End, which they carry before their Master. These Persons are
very considerable, and of Honorable Employs.

I must not omit another Turkish Ceremony, which is observed when the Bassa
goes out, or returns home; it is a Cry which one of his Retinue makes: upon
going out, to wish him either success in his undertaking, or a good Journey;
and upon his return, to thank God for his safe arrival. I omit a thousand other
circumstances, and pass on to the Relation of the Campaign in the Year 1684.

CHAP. VI.
A Brief Relation of the Campaign in 1684; both in Hungary and Poland.
THE Successes which the Germans met with in the Campaign of 1683, opened them
a door for carrying on considerable Enterprises; but at the same time, they had
exposed Poland to the just Resentments of the Grand Signior, against whom it
had declared War, by an Irruption contrary to Articles of the last Treaty,
concluded at Jarawno, between the two Armies. The Court of Vienna profited very
much by those Advantages it had acquired through the Assistance of its Allies,
whilst the Republic of Poland was taking care to put its Army into a posture
of preventing the Turks from taking any Advantage of its weakness. The Turks
had already ordered the Tartars to march toward the Niester, and had sent them
a considerable Detatchment, with a Serasquier of Note, being the Third Bassa of
those which the Ottoman Empire had left of them, that were reckoned the
stoutest Men. They had lost seventeen of the best of 'em the Year before,
either by a Glorious Death, or by a shameful Punishment, or by the Natural
Accidents of Sickness; including the Grand Vizier, the Vizier of Buda, who was
strangled by the former's Order; the Vizier of Silistria, with the Bassa of
Caramania, who were prisoners at Leopold. They pretended that there were only
three remaining of that Force and Courage, as those whom they had lost were
Masters of; viz. Assan Pacha, sent to Newhausel; Osman Pacha, Vizier of Bosnia;
and Suleyman Pacha, made Serasquier against Poland, who afterward came to be
Prime Vizier. The First was an Albanian, the Other two Bosnians, and there is a
Particular Esteem established among the Turks, in Favor of these two
Provinces; the first of which breeds Men of Valor and Execution; and the
other, Men of Conduct, and Precaution.

The Grand Vizier, Successor to Cara Mustapha Pacha, took particular care to
secure his Frontier-Cities; and raised a Body of his Best Troops, to be as a
Supply to those whom the Germans should offer to besiege; being not in a
capacity of entering upon the Offensive this Year. The Council of Vienna
resolved upon Assaulting Buda, leaving Newhausel behind them, knowing it would
surrender of it self, after the Taking of that Capital City, from whence it had
all its Supplies. For it is to be observed, That notwithstanding the Taking of
Barcan, Lewents, and Strigonium, yet the Turks had free Communication between
Newhausel and Buda, where they had a Bridge. The new Bassas sent to Newhausel
in the Year 1684, arrived there without any obstruction; and the Bey, my
Patron, went once during the Winter to Buda, and returned back as easily, only
making use of the Night, and the Windings of the Mountains. Upon that occasion
I had a Sight of that Famous City, which was the best fortified of any in
Hungary, and was rich, populous, full of Jews and Merchants.

The Grand Vizier, after the Raising of the Siege of Vienna, had put into the
Place his Friend Cara Mehemet Pacha* and appointed for his Assistant a Brave
Soldier, called by way of Exaggeration, The Devil; his Name was indeed Chaitan
Ibraham Pacha, as if the first Word, which signifies Satan, was the Surname of
his Family.

The Duke of Lorrain opened the Campaign be-times, and marched directly to
Strigonium, where his Bridge was laid: Part of his Army passed before
Newhausel, a little on the Left, almost within reach of their Cannon, and
encamped three Days, above, within sight of the City; during which time the
Bassa sallied out with all his Cavalry, to harass the German Army; from whom
they took a great many Men and Women, with Provisions in abundance. After this,
the Army continued its March, passed the Danube, carried in a few Days two
strong Places situated upon the Hills on the Right side of Strigonium, and
afterward went to lay Siege to Buda. Whereas the Imperial Army was not very
numerous; it could not form any large circumvallation, nor could it entirely
surround the Place. There were great Intervals in the Line, by which the Grand
Vizier had several Opportunities of throwing Men and Ammunition into the City.
The Duke of Lorrain assaulted first the Lower Town, where he carried two very
large and well-guarded Trenches: He caused the Town of Pest, on the other side
the Danube, to be carried by Storm, where he broke the Bridge of the Turks, and
left a small Detachment to hinder the entering in of any Succors, that might be
brought upon the River. He had the sole convenience of this very River, which
might have brought all necessary Provisions into his Camp, with Recruits and
fresh Troops, without any danger of being intercepted. Yet the Germans did not
either know how, or else could not take any Advantage from that Convenience;
for the Army wanted every thing at the end of the Siege; Bread being as scarce
with them, as in the besieged City. The Ammunition was scarcer, and I have
heard of very creditable Persons, that they were forced to eat Man's Flesh,
besides that of Horses.

The Lower Town was taken in a short time. The D. of Lorrain continued his
Assaults on the same side, to come up to the Wall of the Upper Town; stretched
(as I observed before) on the Edge of the Hill, widen'd at each end, and
fortified with a double Retrenchment. That Prince omitted nothing that might
make himself Master of the Place, no more than the Bassa did to defend it. The
Jews served him herein very zealously, pushed on with a desire of preserving
their Riches, which was as dear to them as their Religion and Country. The
Supplies of Men and Provisions, which he received by several Reprisals,
refreshed his Garrison; and besides it was but faintly attacked. They carried
their Works to the very bottom of the Wall, and endeavored to undermine it in
two several Places, and the Mine that was made at one of the round Towers, was
charged three times together to make a Breach. The Turks countermin'd it, and
the first time took the Powder out of it; the second, had no effect; and at
last, when it was blown up, it threw it toward the City, instead of throwing
it into the Trench, and so fortified the place on that side. They were no more
successful in other parts: The Assaults were frequent, but always repulsed with
Vigor. The Artillery played constantly, but without success; and they cast in
not above three or four Bombs in a Night. In a word, they spent three whole
Months together before this City, without being able to make the least Lodgment
upon it; and they ruined the Imperial Army, which lost near 28000 Men, among
whom are reckoned 500 of the Bravest German Officers.

The Elector of Bavaria arrived at the Camp toward the end of September, with
his Troops, and took his Post on the Right of the Imperial Army, over against
the Palace of King Matthias, which is the Point opposite to that which had been
attacked. The Council of War, held after his coming, concluded to carry on a
fresh Assault on that side, as being the most easy to batter and force. The
Elector of Bavaria sent beforehand a Trumpeter to the Bassa, to summons him to
surrender. The Bassa admitted the Trumpeter into the City, hearkened calmly to
his Proposal; told him, That he understood of that Prince's Arrival, and had
not failed to have beaten any one, but himself, by Cannon-shot, from an
Eminence, where he was one Day posted, to take a View of the City: but that he
was willing to spare him, and had that consideration for his Person. Afterward
the Bassa ordered him to be shown the Place, and an inner Intrenchment, which
rendered it stronger than at the beginning of the Siege. He showed him his
Magazines, furnished with Provisions and Ammunitions, for above six Months
longer; and his Garrison standing to their Arms, being very Numerous and very
Resolute. After this, the Bassa asked him, upon what account he was obliged to
surrender; and then dismissed him, with a Present of 20 Ducats of Gold.

The Siege therefore continued with fresh Vigor, and new Attempts. In the mean
time, the Bassa of Newhausel made his Advantage of the Enemy's besieging that
City. He had placed Detachments of his Cavalry, for half a League round his
Town, and went often to visit them. Every Week he went out in Parties,
sometimes toward Lewents, another time toward Komorne, and then toward the
River Wag, to Goutta, to Nitria, and to all the Parts round about his
Government, to seek for Provisions, and never returned empty-handed: So that he
preserved his own Stores, and supplied the City very plentifully, with the
Spoils he took in the Enemy's Country. Twice or thrice he advanced toward
Buda, to get Intelligence of the Siege. One Day he entered at Noon into the Isle
of Schut, and ravaged the Borders of it. In a word, this indefatigable Man,
made as good a Campaign as could have been imagined, whilst the Germans
perished with Misery under the Walls of Buda.

When he went out of the City, the Second Bassa commanded in his Absence, and
never failed of coming to compliment him upon his Return, with an extraordinary
submission: It was then that he opened all the Avenues, and brought plenty of
all things into Newhausel, which before was under a kind of Blockade, and so
quite changed the Face of Affairs in that City, from what it was in his
Predecessor's Time.

In the midst of these Transactions, his Polish Majesty, informed by Count
Teckley of the Arrival of this Bassa, and of the Friendship there was betwixt
him and the Vizier of Silistria, then prisoner at Leopold; he obliged the
Vizier to write to his Friend of Newhausel, concerning my Exchange with the 30
Turks of Zetzen. This Letter and Instructions were sent to Prince Lubomirski,
who served with his Polish Regiment in the Imperial Army, at the Siege of Buda.
He had a Commission of offering two Men more for my particular Ransom; because
those that were detained at Transchyn, were only stopped by way of Reprisal,
for my former Patron's Breach of Faith. The Prince sent an Express to Komorne
with all these Dispatches, and a Letter which he wrote to me. From Komorne to
Newhausel a Correspondence was settled, as if it were in time of Peace; the
Peasants on both sides, went and came by an Established Custom. The same thing
was allowed to the Slaves of both Nations, who left a Comrade as Hostage in the
City, where they were attended by some honest Man, still wearing Shackles on
one Leg. Without this it would have been impossible to have concluded upon any
Exchange, or to have negotiated for any Ransom.

The Hungarian Governor of Komorne, named Zamori George, according to the
Custom of that Country of putting the Christian after the Surname: this
Governor, I say, sent by Prince Lubomirski's Order a Peasant to Newhausel,
with the New Proposals of the King of Poland. The Bassa, who never heard of my
Name, informed himself by the old Officers, who the Frenchman was that the King
of Poland demanded, and who was his Master. He afterward sent a Chaous to the
Quarters of the Bey, the Eldest Son of his Predecessor; which Chaous came to
call me in the Kitchen, and commanded me to follow him, without asking any
Leave of my Master, or so much as letting me go to speak to him. In the way he
informed me of the Proposals that were arrived, and the Bassa's Intention of
accepting them. The Bassa examined me very mildly about my Quality, about the
Refusal which his Predecessor made of Releasing me, and what the Pretenses and
Excuses were, that he had alleged for so doing. What I answered him was
confirmed to him by Mustapha-Aga, who had taken me. The time of my Enlargement
being now come, the Bassa consented to the Exchange, and demanded for the two
Men that were offered him, two Spahas of his Acquaintance prisoners in Poland
called Ale Spaha, and Mehemet Spaha. Upon this, the Messenger was sent back
with the Answers; and from that time the Bassa kept me at his own House,
sending one of his Men to fetch my Rug and my Knap sack, from the old Patron's
Cook, without any other Formality. I never fared better than I did this Day.
All the Turks of the Household, being newly come from Constantinople, where they
had been used to Civility, gave me Bread, Meat, and some small pieces of Money.
At Night they brought me into an old ruinous Building possessed by a great many
Soldiers, Spahas or Janissaries, of the Ottoman Race, very sociable Persons, who
received me civilly; especially those with whom I was acquainted in the former
Bassa's House, who waited for an Opportunity of being conveyed back to the
Levant.

On the Morrow, an Aga took and carried me before the Cadis, or Judge of the
Town; before whom they had summoned the Boy, my Master, to consent to my being
made free, by virtue of a considerable Exchange offered to the Bassa. That Bey
sent thither his two Brothers, who disputed a long time about the Reparation,
that ought in justice to be made for a Slave, for whom they said they might
have 5000 Crowns at Constantinople. The Cadis took my Name, and continued
writing in his Register: but they would by no means consent to the Manumission,
and so went away without signing it. Notwithstanding this, the Bassa continued
his Resolution, and detaining me at his House, lie the next Day sent these
three Beys away, with all their Family to Constantinople. He committed me to
the care of his Valets de Chamber, who were six young Levantines, well shaped,
and lodging all together, who were allowed four dishes at a Meal out of their
Master's Kitchen; and they always left me enough, with Bread that I had every
Morning, hot out of the Oven; for a comfortable Subsistence. The Turks do not
bake as we do; they make thick Cakes, rather than Loaves, and bake every Day,
according to the number of the People among which they are to be distributed.
But that which restored me perfectly to my former Health, were the Melons and
Ice. I have already observed, That the Melons of Hungary are extraordinary
good. There are whole Fields full of 'em round about Newhausel, from whence
they bring ten Cartloads a Day into the City: besides which, the Bassa orders a
small Cart of 'em to be brought every Day after Dinner, for the use of his
Family, out of his own Private-Garden, which he cultivated very carefully, and
caused to be watched every Night by one of his Men, in their Turn. Out of this
Cart, thirty are picked out for his own Table, the rest fell to the share of
the Footmen and Slaves: So that I did eat 10 or 12 a Day, like so many Apples.
I drank Water, and Water-Ic'd; for the Turks have no other way of refreshment,
than to put large pieces of Ice into a Pitcher full of Water, whose Mouth is
stopped with another Isicle, that drops into the Water by little and little,
and of this they drink.

I began to feel my self in a comfortable condition, which increased upon the
hopes of seeing a speedy end put to my Misery. The Bassa ordered a Cloth Coat,
two Shirts, and a Cap to be given me; and charged his Valets de Chamber, not to
put me upon waiting: so that they would not let me so much as carry the Dishes
to the Kitchen, for fear the Patron should chance to meet me. He being a Man of
Courage, and desirous of being better instructed, took an occasion by my stay,
of informing himself of all things that I was able to give him an account of,
both with respect to the Countries, and to the Courts of Princes. I then took
Notice, That the Grand Visier's Design was, after the taking of Vienna, to fall
into Bohemia: All the Questions of this Bassa were about the City of Prague;
what Passes, Cities and Rivers lay between: He inquired likewise* very much
about the King of Poland, and his Family. In a word, all that could be of any
Service to him, he made the subject of our Conferences, which were held almost
every Night after Supper, in the presence of two or three of the Principal
Officers of the Cavalry, and the Curate of the Mosque, whom he very highly
esteemed, inviting him every Night to Supper. The more I advanced in the
Knowledge of the Turkish Language, the more he liked my Company, and the
greater was his care of me. He asked, Whether I had Bread enough allowed me by
his Steward, and upon my Reply, ordered me two Loaves a Day: But the Valet de
Chamber, whose Business it was to distribute the Bread to the rest, kept back
the Moiety for his own use; and his Knavery being found out by the Bassa, he
commanded an hundred Blows to be given him upon the Soles of his Feet.

The Turks have several sorts of Coin, beginning with the Ducats, or Turkish
Sequins, called Altom. The Crowns of every Country are of the common Value: In
the Levant they are called Piastres, in Hungary Rixdollars, and of these they
make up the Purses, which contain 500 each. This is their peculiar way of
reckoning considerable Sums, as they do by Aspres, in the ordinary course of
Trade. Besides the Crowns, they have Lion-dollars, of a less value, called
simply Cara-groch, made almost like the Dutch Crowns, with a great Lion on one
side. There are a great many of these Pieces in the Frontiers of Russia,
because all the Commerce of Valachia and Constantinople, through those
Provinces that ly between the Niester and the Danube, is carried on by
Lion-dollars. At Newhausel they have small Silver Pieces of the Emperor's Coin,
worth 5 German Groats, or 10 French Sous, stamped with the Arms of the King of
Hungary on one side, and on the reverse with a Nostre-dame encircl'd with Rays.
The Tinfes of Poland of the same Value, are likewise current here: And the
smallest Coin used in Domestic Affairs, were the Para, and the Atche. The
first of these are very thin, and of very fine Silver, about the bigness of a
French Denier, having several Arabic Characters on them: 48 or 50 of them go
for a Crown, and 40 for a Lion-dollar. The Atche is the smallest Coin the Turks
have, which yet is worth about 4 French Deuiers; and with these Pieces they pay
off the Troops, and go to Market; it sounding big to hear them prize such or
such a Commodity, at 4 or 500 Atches or Aspres.

In the mean time, Prince Lubomirski having received our Answers, dispatched
them away to the King of Poland; who sent him back an Order to take out of the
Prisons of Transchyn, the 28 Turks which had been sent thither by way of
Reprisal. This spun out a long time, by reason of the great Distance there was
betwixt Buda and the Niester, where the King of Poland then was: it was further
protracted by the Knavery of a Secretary belonging to the Prince Lubomirski,
who instead of going to fetch the Slaves, stayed at Niklitsbourg, where he
consumed the Money that had been given him, and a thousand Crowns that he had
borrowed in his Master's Name. So that after two Months waiting for News from
him, they were forced to send another Messenger, who brought the Turks at last,
about the beginning of November, to Komorne. At their Arrival, two of the Chief
of them came to Newhausel, to cast themselves at the Bassa's Feet; and to beg
for my Liberty, and their own. This Man affected with their Misfortune, and
desiring to render a considerable Service to the Grand Signior, in delivering
such Brave Soldiers, was at first for frightning them, by telling them, That
they must make him amends for the Ransom he was like to lose for me. These
unfortunate Creatures represented to him, That they could give him but little
satisfaction at present, being so long prisoners: but assured him, that they
would make him an ample Return as soon as they should get into their own
Country. The Bassa smiled; and commanding their Fetters immediately to be
knocked off, which they had always wore to this time, told them very freely,
that he did not pretend to exact an Aspre of them, thinking himself
sufficiently happy in being able to do that piece of Service to his Countrymen,
and the Sultan.

I was afterward called into his Chamber: He told me, That indeed the Turks
retained at Transchyn were arrived, but that there were still wanting two more,
that were proposed for my personal Exchange. I replied, That they could not as
yet be brought from Poland, or that they might be delivered without sending
them so far into Hungary, by the Bassa of Caminiec. Upon this Overture, the
Bassa of Newhausel, reflecting upon the Distance of the Country, and willing
besides to demonstrate his Generosity and Confidence, told me, that he would
trust to my Word without waiting for any farther News, and would remit me upon
the Promise, which I made him, of immediately delivering the two Spahi of his
acquaintance, specified in our Letters. I gave him a Note under my Hand for it,
writ in Latin; to which, for want of a Seal, I clapped my Five Fingers. And
here it is to be noted, That all the Turks wear a Ring, engraved with Arabic
Characters, which they make their Seal, making the Impression of it in a Letter
or a Deed, by the side of the Superscription, to attest the Truth, and Validity
of the Contents. Besides this Note, the Bassa made me swear to the same thing
upon my Prayer Book: and these Assurances I ratified to him by an honorable
Promise of Returning back to Newhausel, in case these two Men were not set at
Liberty. In pursuance to this, the Bassa ordered my Fetters to be knocked off;
for you must take Notice, That the Bey, the Kiayia of his deceased Father, who
had taken them off at first by his own Authority, put them upon me again two
Months after the Bassa's Death, in order to oblige me to be more urgent for my
Ransom.

There was nothing now more to do, than to appoint a day with the Governor of
Komorne, and the Officer who had brought the Turks from Transchyn, to make our
Exchange in the open Field. They sent on each side Pasports, and they agreed
to have 30 Men of a Side, and the Place they fixed on, was to be not far from
the Danube, near the Village of SanPetre. But the Execution of it was put off
to the 14th of November, through two Scruples of Interest, that were as
Unintelligible as Unreasonable. The Officer of Prince Lubomirski, to whom
several Polish Slaves had writ during the Goings and the Comings of the Express
from Komorne to Newhausel, thought of delivering two or three others, with my
eight and twenty Turks; pretending that this Number was too extravagant for a
single Man. It was to no purpose for me to write that his Polish Majesty
detained 'em only upon my account; That zealous Patriot was hardened to this
Project; and I believe he would have stopped the Exchange, had he not received
fresh Orders from Vienna, whither Prince Lubomirski was returned, being wounded
in the Camp before Buda. The King of Poland being tired with the Delay,
redoubled his Instances; and that Lord did the same to his Envoy, with Orders
at the same time, to give two of his own Prisoners, which he had at Komorne, in
case that the Bassa of Newhausel made any Scruple upon the two Spahis, that had
not yet been sent.

The other Pretension was started by the Keeper of the Prisons of Komorne,
named Lasko. That covetous Officer was for exacting of those miserable Turks
the Fees of the Prison, settled on both sides at a Ducat a Head; as if for
fourteen or fifteen Day's stay in his Prison by chance, for want of a more
secure Place, they ought to have paid a Fee, which the Governor of Transchyn
never demanded of them. The Bassa of Newhausel perceived the Pretension of
Lasko to be very unjust, and appeared very much concerned to me; and the more
because for one Ducat that he might demand of me, he must give 28 for these
unhappy Creatures, who had nothing in the World. However, he very generously
completed his Design, and paid the whole Fees; so boundless were his
honorable Intentions. This Noble Bassa, whom I shall never forget, loaded me
with Favors upon my Departure; gave me a Coat, and Money to buy me what I
wanted besides at Komorne. He entrusted me with more, to send him several Toys
and Tobacco from thence; embraced me very joyfully and affectionately, and
ordered me to be conducted to the Place of Rendezvous, by a Colonel of
Hungarian Cavalry, with thirty of the Best Horse belonging to his Garrison or
Household, my self being mounted on one of his Arabian Horses, of which he had
thirty very Rich Ones.

The Exchange was made with all the Fairness and Honor imaginable. We arrived
the first at the Rendezvous. Prince Lubomirski's Officer put his Turks into a
large Boat, with thirty Foot Solders, as a Guard, allowed him by Zamori George
Governor of Komorne, and passed the Danube over against San-Petre. When he saw
this Body of Turkish Cavalry, having as many Led-horses as there were Men, he
feared some Foul-play; he therefore put his Prisoners into the Thickets, and
placed his Foot in a Covert way before his Boat, to secure a Retreat, in case
of any accident. But Maiar-Alay-Bey, who commanded that Troop of Horse, ordered
them to alight, and advanced himself to dissipate the Fears of the Pole. Lasko
advanced likewise toward Alay-Bey, whom he knew particularly. They sat down on
the Grass, and entered into a Friendly Conference, which lasted a quarter of an
Hour. At last Alay-Bey seeing his Countrymen in Chains coming out of the
Bushes, for whom he had provided several Wagons; he took me by the Hand, and
gave me to Lasko and the Polish Officer, assuring them over and over, That I
was the King of Poland's French Gentleman. Each Party took their Leaves, and
went on his own Way. The Footmen marched in good Order toward the Boat;
Alay-Bey caused the Priest, or Otge of Zetzen, (who was one of the Turks that
had been detained, and particularly recommended to him by the Bassa of
Newhausel) to get upon the Horse that brought me thither. He doubtless was very
glad to see his Brethren arrive, as I was to see once more Komorne, and the
Christian Country, where I took up my Lodging for that Night.

On the Morrow, I punctually discharged the Commissions of the Bassa, and laid
out all the Money he gave me in small Toys, which I presented to my Good
Friends of Newhausel, of whom I received a thousand Tokens of Friendship at the
latter end of my Slavery; and whom I would certainly have seen again, had not
the Imperialists besieged that Place the next Year. They broke up the Siege of
Buda at the same time. The very day of my Departure, part of the Army passed
the Bridge of Barcan, in order to encamp on the Plains, between that Fort and
Newhausel. The Elector of Bavaria arrived at Komorne, just as I got on Shore,
and was received under the Discharge of all the Artillery of the Citadel; which
I took at first for a Rejoicing for the Taking of Buda. On the Morrow I waited
upon that Prince, and the Duke of Lorrain, to recommend to them the German
Slaves which I had left behind me in Chains. Besides, the Bassa had given me in
charge, to propose in his Name, a general Discharge of the Prisoners of both
Nations, Head for Head, wisely foreseeing that he should want Men; and choosing
rather to spend his Provisions on Turks, who were of use to him, than on
Slaves, that were only a Burden.

I cannot sufficiently commend the Vigilance and Bravery of this Officer; nor
his Conduct and Skill in matters of War. He was better versed in
Fortifications, than the most Skilful of his own Nation. Newhausel had several
Defects in the Fortification, which lay on the side of the Komorne Gate, by
which it was attacked. That Governor discovered them, and ordered them to be
repaired, in opening the Angles, enlarging the Breast-works, and strengthening
with Fascines the back Part of the Open Curtains. He made all his Cavalry march
out one Day, to cut down a large Thicket, which lay about a League off the
City, over against Goutta. Another time he carried off all the Wood of the
Neighboring Villages, depriving the Enemy by that means, in case of a Siege,
of that Supply with which he furnished his Garrison.

I was very sorry to hear of the Loss of that Brave Man; though I was the cause
of his being besieged: For upon the Report I made to the King of Poland of the
state of that Place, in the presence of the Pope's Nuncio Palavicini; and his
acquainting his Holiness with it; It was resolved upon at Vienna, through his
Solicitations, to bestow the next Campaign on that Undertaking. For which
purpose, General Heyseler was detached, with a Body of Troops this Winter, to
block up the Place, and to prevent them from receiving any Supplies from
Abroad. But this Blockade did not hinder the Bassa of Newhausel from making
Sallies upon the German Quarters. The Germans had during Summer taken a Town
named Schoran, a League off that City; from whence the Turks had been forced to
withdraw. They afterward made some Provisions at Nitra, in Preparation for the
intended Siege. The Bassa, after my Departure, retook Schoran, and went to burn
upon the River of Nitra, at the very Gates of that City, the Boats which the
Germans had caused to fall down with Provisions.

These were the Transactions of Hungary this Campaign: The King of Poland on
his side did all he could, to oppose the Incursion of the Turks and Tartars,
commanded by the Serasquier Suleyman Pacha, who was advanced as far as the
Niester; and by this march crossed the Designs of the Polanders, who had
Thoughts of entering into Valachia, and by the Way of Boudziac, to have pierced
as far as the Black Sea.

The Court removed from Cracow at the end of March 1684, and had gained the
Frontiers toward Leopold, to be in a Readiness for any Enterprise. Whilst the
King waited at Yavorouf for the Coming up of his Troops and Recruits, Count
Montecuculli arrived there, being sent by the King of Spain, to Compliment his
Polish Majesty, upon the happy Success of the preceding Campaign. The Emperor
sent thither the Count of Valestein, as his Ambassador Extraordinary, with
Order to follow the King and his Army, whithersoever they moved. Lastly, the
Republic of Venice, being willing to enter into a League against the Turks,
and to take Advantage of these Favorable Junctures, nominated the Procurator
Morosini, to go into Poland with that Character, who likewise made the Campaign
with his Polish Majesty.

The King of Poland opened it, by spoiling two or three Retreats, which the
Turks had preserved on this side Caminiec, on the Confines of Podolia and
Russia: The nearest, that lay toward this Capital City, was the Castle of
Yaslovietz, situated on a Hill, surrounded with others more large, and almost
encompassed with a River, which washed the Bottom. There was an Aga, with a
Garrison of about 120 Men, detached from Caminiec; some small Pieces of
Artillery, and Fortifications proportionable. The Army encamped on the
Eminencies which commanded that Castle, and summoned the Aga to surrender. The
Aga desired for his Honor's sake, to see some Cannon play upon the Place; it
being pretty strong by its Situation, and by its ancient Walls. M. Dupont,
Engineer to the Republic, caused two Batteries to be raised, which Beat down
all the Front of the Castle, which faced the Army. They had scarce fired ten
times, when the Garrison desired to march out. The Aga, being well acquainted
with the Customs of his own Country, which reckons no Man innocent that is
unfortunate, was not for exposing himself to the Test; and so retired into
Poland, where the Queen made him Keeper of one of her Country Houses. His
Lieutenant likewise stayed with the King, and served him as an Hussar, and
their Janissaries, were dispersed here and there about the Country.

The Aga is a Man of a good Mein, and a Venerable Aspect, of a Warlike Air,
even a little rough, which Adversity smoothed afterward. The other is a mere
Soldier, very Fat, of a Low but Brave Mein, as appeared by those dreadful Scars
with which he was full; especially that which he brought from Candy, by a
Bullet shot into the back part of his Head.

The Surrender of this small Castle, made just as I have described it, did
however inhance the the Reputation of the Polish Arms in Foreign Parts. They
talked as big in France of this Expedition, as of the Taking of Valenciennes:
so true is it, That Fame raises Matter of Fact in Proportion to the Distance of
the Climates, where they are done. The same News being brought to Newhausel,
cheered up the Hearts of the Polish Slaves so much, that I believed it had been
Caminiec that was taken by the King. And my supposition was the more probable,
because I knew that the Republic had undertaken the War, only with Intention
of retaking that Place from the Turks; being the most considerable which they
held in Poland. But my News-monger Suleyman, the Bassa's Coffee-man, undeceived
me, and told me the truth of the Business.

The Queen attended the King as far as Yaslovietz, and was present with her
Court at the Assault of that Place, which in truth deserved no other than an
Army of Females. The Turks, who marched out, were very much surpised, having
never before seen such Luggage follow the Camp. But the Queen, after this
Exploit, retired to Leopold, from thence to Yaroslave. The King marched
directly to Zwaniec, there to pass the Niester. His Design was to enter into
Valachia, to make himself Master of that Province, and there to winter his
Army, in order to cut off the Communication between Caminiec and the Turks, who
had no other way thither, no more than the Tartars. By this means that place
would have been immediately blocked up, and reduced at last, for want of
Supplies, to surrender within six Months, without so much as discharging a
Cannon. Besides, the King of Poland made a considerable Diversion to facilitate
the Taking of Buda by the Germans, and to relieve one another from the Niester
to the Danube. But neither were the Germans minded to share the Glory, and the
Fruits of their Conquests with the Poles, nor were the Poles in a capacity of
finishing this great Design. They could not in 3 Week's Time so much as lay the
Foundations of a Bridge, having neither Boats, nor other things necessary. And
after they had spent above a Month's Time, in casting Baskets of Stones,
Fascines, and other Materials in the Water, an Inundation of the River,
occasioned by the Rains that fell, carried away all the Work.

Whilst these things were doing, the Tartars appeared on the other side the
Niester, to the number of near 40000 Horse, from whence every Day Detachments
were sent out, who swam over the River, a little below the Polish Camp, between
Cotchim and Caminiec, and came to skirmish with the Poles, who likewise crossed
the River sometimes with the same Vigor; so that all was reduced into
particular Skirmishes, the two Armies looking on at the same time, and
disputing for the Ground and Forage, at the Expense of some unhappy Creatures,
whom the Tartars carried off every Day. There were likewise several Interviews
between the Officers of the two Armies, having the River in the midst. The
Chancellor of the Cham, who had formerly been at the Polish Court, to treat
about ransoming his Brother, came one Day on the Bank of the River, and desired
to speak with one of the King's Touariches, who accordingly was ordered
thither: He desired them to tell his Polish Majesty* That he desired to see
him, to thank him again, for all the Favors he had formerly shown him. The
King was very glad of that Encounter, and ordered this Answer to be given to
the Tartars, That if he would come into the Camp, he would send him not only a
Convoy, but Hostages. This Gentleman very frankly replied, That his Polish
Majesty did him wrong to think that he forgot, that his single Word was more
worth, than all the Hostages of the Army; and that he would come to him on the
Morrow upon his Parole. But he could not execute his Design, because the Enemy
decamped.

To enter into the the Particulars of this Campaign, which in general passed
without any considerable Action: You must know that the King of Poland, in
Decamping from Yaslovietz to march toward the Niester, committed the Vanguard
to be led by the Castellan of Cracow, Little General of the Crown, with fifty
Troops all Horse, Hussars, Pancernes, and Valachians, who had Orders to advance
as far as Caminiec, to take a View of the adjacent Places, to observe the
Motions of the Garrison, and the Marches of the Tartars.

The Castellan was to amuse the Enemy, and to cover the the March of the Army,
as well as the Design of the Bridge. He stayed for some time before that City,
where his Hussars marched frequently to skirmish with the Turks, who made small
Sallies on the Polish detachment. In the mean time the King posted himself at
Zwaniec on the Banks of the Niester, where he had his Right Wing, stretched out
a little beyond that Castle toward Caminiec, which was not above two Leagues
lower, and on the same side.

To cover the Building of the Bridge that he was willing to make in that place,
he sent over on the other side the River, all the Dragoons, and some Troops of
Cossacks and Valachians, part in Barges, part swam over, and the rest forded it
a little above the Camp, where was a small Island.

These Troops were retrenched on the other Bank, and remained there a long
time, but the Tartars having harassed them several times, by the small Attacks
which the Poles bore with great constancy, and the Rains having ruined their
Bridge, the King ordered them to repass the River, intending to march toward
Caminiec.

He was joined before by a Body of Troops, which the Elector of Brandenburgh
had sent to the Republic, as his Quota, consisting of two Regiments of
Infantry, the one commanded by Prince Alexander Cowrland, the other by the
Count of Dona, with a Regiment of Dragoons; the whole under the Command of
General Troucz, which composed about 2000 Men.

Whereas the Tartars came frequently into the Camp, and stayed there without
being discovered, one could not be secure from them. The Equipage of these
Brandenburgh Troops was all carried off the first Night, which obliged the King
of Poland to order all the Poles to wear a white Handkerchief, twisted round
their Left Arm, to distinguish them from the Tartars, who were always mixed in
the Camp, and at Forraging, with the Valets of the Army.

The Army then decamped from Jouanietz, after having tarried above three Weeks
to no purpose, having known that the Tartars had been joined by the Serasquier,
with a great Body of Turks, which the common Report of the Camp gave out to
amount to forty thousand Men, but which in effect was not above ten thousand.
The Enemy passed on our side, at first by Detachments of three or four hundred
Horse, who approaching the Polish Camp amused their Troops by frequent
Skirmishes, carried off the detached Parties, who were ordered to patrol along
the River to secure its Banks, and by this means deprived the Polish Army of
the Knowledge of their Motions: In fine, all theirs had passed without being
discovered, they having no need of a Bridge for that end, and carrying neither
Artillery nor Equipages with them.

The better to judge of this Action, we must note, that Jouanietz is an Ancient
Castle of Stone-Work, but very much shattered, situated upon a rising Ground,
about one hundred and fifty or two hundred Paces from the Dniester, which is
very rapid at that Flace and almost as broad as the Seine at Paris, but not so
deep by much, with steep Banks, covered with thick Bushes. This Castle is
inhabited by some Families of Valachians, of the Number of those who retired
into Poland, by whom certain Places of these Frontiers of PODOLIA have been
peopled. Over Against this on the other side of the River, but a little lower,
toward Caminieck, is that of Cotchym. This is much of the same Structure,
pretty good and Massive, but much ruined. There was heretofore a Bridge which
saved some of those that fled at the Battle of Cotchym when the Turks, who were
encamped at this Place, were defeated. This Bridge at that time fell down by
the Numbers of Fugitives that crowded over it, was afterward rebuilt and broke
down again, taken and retaken by both Parties. The King of Poland designing to
march into Wallachia, had posted himself under Jouanietz, which he left behind
his Camp, taking up all the Ground between that Castle and the River. The
Tartars advanced to Cotchym, and after having roamed a long time on its Banks,
as I have said, swam over the Dniester a little below that Castle, but very
secretly, to keep the Polish Army on their own Country, and to divert them from
their design against Walachia.

The King of Poland having by this means missed his Aim, formed another
Project, which was to draw the Tartars to a Battle, in some disadvantagious
Place. He was forced to move cunningly from Post to Post as at a Game at Chess.
The King went directly to Caminieck, advanced upon the Hills near that Place,
from whence he saw into the very streets, and tarryed there some time, by way
of Bravado, within Cannon-shot, above 500 of which they shot from their
Platforms and Towers, the Pieces of a middle-size or bore, carrying beyond his
Army. After which he left that Place on his his left Hand, marching as if he
designed to return into Poland, and moving from the Dniester, which was behind
him. The Tattars followed the same way, and daily presented themselves either
upon their Flanks, Front or Rear. -- In fine, the King posted himself behind
the Ruins of a demolished Town, where there were still some Walls, with the
Terrasses of an old Castle, which was rased, on which he planted his Standard.
This Place was in a Bottom, enclosed by steep Hills and a River. The Lithuanian
Army stayed at the top, and the Tartars being deceived by this Lure, rusht into
this Bottom. The KING seeing them thus ensnared, according to his Desire,
rejoiced to have catched his Prey in a Trap, and would have given them Battle,
and the rather because the Tartars must suffer in retiring precipitately from
this Cutthroat Place, flanked by the Polanders; But the Generals opposed the
same, alleging the Approach of the Night and Fatigue of a long March; hiding
under those seeming Reasons a spiteful Jealousy of the K's Glory, whose Name
would have swallowed every thing as at Vienna, without leaving any share of the
Success to the Generals. They proposed a Council of War: But the King saw into
their Hearts, and reproaching them with this Aversion for the Public Good,
which they made to give Place to a secret Partiality for a Politic Interest, he
retired to his own Quarters, full of a just Indignation, and mortal Anger
against those Enemies of their Country, which at this Juncture lost such an
Opportunity as they could never get since. In a word, the Tartars, being
sensible of the disadvantagiousness of the Post, retired, and appeared not
again in two Days after. Thus ended this Campaign, called in Poland, The
Campaign of Jouanietz, which decided nothing on either side; only the Enemy
drew this Advantage from it, that they hindered the King of Poland from entering
into Valachia, as the Grand Vizier on his side, had frustrated the Projects of
the Germans under the Walls of Buda. The Duke of Lorrain was so obstinately
bent upon that Siege, that after he had retired with his Army, it was given out
in Foreign Countries, That he carried on the Siege. The Count de VValesteine,
Imperial Ambassador to the King of Poland, maintained a long time, That they
had only sent away the Sick and Wounded, to Comorra and Raab: But when I
arrived at Zolkiew, where the Court was the beginning of December, I undeceived
them of this Error, by assuring them that I had seen the Duke of Lorrain and
Elector of Bavaria, the same Day I came out of Slavery, who were actually
retired from before Buda, and had been pursued a great way, in their Retreat,
by the Turks of the Garrison, who very much galled the Imperial Army, which was
weary and worn out, by the Labors of a long Siege.

The King of Poland having retired much about the same time, Procurator
Morosini the Venetian Ambassador, having dispatched his Affairs, returned Home,
leaving his Secretary called Alberti, as Resident at this Court, during all
this War, into which the Republic had just engaged themselves. This Alberti
was ten Years in the same Station at the Court of England, a Man of wit,
cunning and sly after his smooth-way, falsely simple, sober, secret, speaking
little, and communicating himself less, prying into another's Affairs, as it
were out of Complaisance, but in order to draw some Advantages therefrom, such
as Juvenal mentions to be practiced by those Greeks newly arrived at Rome, and
patronized by the Grandees, whom they found the Secret, to make them stand in
awe of them, by the knowledge they had of the Affairs of their Familys. Alberti
arrived some time after the Ambassador, having lost all his Equipage by Fire
near Cracow. -- A little Compassion at first assisted him at Entry into Poland.
His Modesty, his Submissions, managed with Address, without stooping too low or
being too starched, his Assiduity in giving his Attendance even at Hours when
he needed not, his Inventive Genius, for certain little Mechanic Works, gave
him all the facility imaginable to compass his Ends. The King was very curious,
full of Questions, and much addicted to learned Conversations of all sorts; so
that he must have such a Man as Aesop to answer every thing. Secretary Alberti
was capable enough in some Respects to act that Part.

He was backed by another hidden and secret Minister, near the King's Person,
from the Court of Vienna, who arrived in Poland much about the same time, in a
Jewish Habit, and under the specious Title of a deputed Missionary into
Muscovy, for reuniting the Russian Schismatics. It Is the famous Father Vota, a
Savoyard by Birth, Austrian by Inclination and by Profession a great Talker,
but speaking well: A Courtier, educated in the fine Politics of Italy, and
brought up to the Intrigues of the Closet, as well for managing of Sovereign
Princes, as Republics, whose Interest and Designs he knows better than any
Man. He has, with his great Experience, a lively, piercing and clear Wit, an
admirable Memory, furnished with all that is most rare and most particular in
Ancient and Modern Histories, with all that is most exact in Chronology, and
with a true Genealogy of all the great Families of Europe, a great Divine, an
excellent Geographer; and, in a Word, an Universal Man. He utters himself in
Latin, French and Italian, with equal Facility, is dextrous to divert a nice
Question, and to prevent before he answer him who proposes it, by flattering
Insinuations in his favor, by way of doubting it, and to make the Discourse
fall on other common Places, from which he also diverts the Questions, insomuch
that he stuns him, is beforehand with every Body, and appears in every thing
to be the Champion, speaking always without giving another a Minutes time to
reply; for he neither blows his Nose, spits nor coughs. Just like a Machine
that goes only the length of its Spring; for when he once enters upon any
Subject, he never cease so long as he has Auditors; he is a News-Monger
beyond compare, who values not to whom he distributes his Gazettes. I have seen
him busy reasoning on Politics, and the Accidents of War, with Footboys and
poor Women, and expose himself thereby on the usual Days, to be teazed by all
the Footboys of the Court, by all the Underlings of the Kitchen, and by all the
Curious Impertinents, which he valued as an essential Thing. He had the Fault
that is annexed to the Cassock of the Society, to love above all things the
Conversation of great Men, Honors, Distinctions, the first Place in
Illustrious Companies, the Carresses and Civilities of Crowned Heads.
Furthermore, he was a Man of good Manners, sober, satisfying himself many Days
with less than was necessary, eating only in Company, and sitting down at Table
merely for Discourse sake; insomuch that he never thought himself more welcome
than when People hearkened to him. Upon which the Marq. d'Arquyan, methinks
made a very good Remark, when he said of Father Vota: That he had a particular
Advantage, to cause Digestion in eating by the Interval of his Discourses. This
famous Man is also very Religious, fearing God, devout without Bigottry, rigid
without Scruples, simple without Affectation, void of all wordly vanities, and
a truly honest Man.

The Emperor could not have made a better Choice for the design he had to
induce the King of Poland to engage in the League. He knew that that Monarch
loved the soft Amusements of wit, Knowledge and the Intrigues of the Republic
of Letters; that he must have a Breast Plate of Conversations, a Scavantas to
the utmost; but at the same time a SPIRIT, that was Pliable, Subject, bearing
Reproaches, Injuries, unseasonable times, Labor and the Troubles of this Life.
This Jesuit was born with all these things; I have seen him him a hundred times
upon the Floor of an Antichamber, that he might not miss his Opportunity of
conferring with the King. By this means he made himself useful; insomuch that
that Monarch could have no peace, if he had not Spoken with him. He had a Hand
in all Nice Affairs, and became the only Channel through which the Nuncio's of
the Pope and the Ministers of the Emperor arrived at the Cabinet of his Polish
Majesty, and he became Master of all Secrets and Business.

The Court of Vienna would have made him Preceptor to the King of the Romans,
and doubtless he was very capable of the same, not only upon Account of his
profound Knowledge without Pedantry, but also of his Noble Education and high
elevated Thoughts: But at the same time 'twas thought they had occasion for him
in more important Affairs, which was to keep the King of Poland, who was very
much moved with the frightful Ingratitude of the Germans, in their Interest.
They sent him through Moscovy, under Pretense of a Missionary to the
Schismatic Russians. He went thither with the old Baron Jorosski, whom the
Emperor sent to the Czar the beginning of the Year 1684. to sound that Prince
in favor of the Holy League, in order by that means to give the Crim Tartars a
powerful Diversion. Upon their return, Father Vota stopped in Poland, to wait
there for a more favorable Conjuncture to his pious Design, giving out that
the Czar had not hearkened to his first Overtures. The King received him very
pleasantly (all Novelties are pleasing to the Learned, and above all at this
Court, where every thing runs in the Excess, as the Heat and the Cold) he
carried him to the War, lodged him, defrayed him, and at last made him his most
intimate Secretary.

Much about the time of the arrival of all those Persons extraordinary, each in
his Sphere, arrived also one from France, no less illustrious, distinguished,
besides his Personal Merit, by his great Birth. 'Twas the Marquis de Bethune,
heretofore Ambassador Extraordinary of France in Poland; who returned thither
without any other Character than that of Brother-in-Law to the Queen, and
without any other Design than to follow the King into the Army, being out of
Employment in France, where the Peace had just extinguished the new Differences
between the two Nations, after the taking of Luxemberg, in the Year 1684. which
the Marshal de Crequi joined that very Year to the Conquests of Louis le Grand.
The Austrian Ministers being naturally suspicious, according to the Genius of
the Germans, believed that the Voyage of the Marquis de Bethune comprehended
some Politic Mystery. Count Wallestein dropped some Words to that purpose in a
Conference with the Marquis d'Arquyan; who telling him one Day that he, Count
Wallestein would doubtless be glad to see a Lord in Poland, whom he had known
at Vienna, and honored with his Friendship; that Minister answered smiling,
That he had rather see him elsewhere; but the Marquis d'Arquyan replying, That
his arrival was without Mystery, and only upon the Score of a Relation, who
came to see the King his Brother-in-Law, after the happy Success of his
Campagnes; the Count de Wallesteine added, with the same Tone, That the
Pretense of his coming was very plausible, and the Color well contrived.

However, all those illustrious Persons lived in this Court in a perfect Union
of Civility and honest Correspondence. There had not been so great a Number of
Foreign Grandees at that Court of a long time: The end of the Campaign also
increased it more with Officers of the Elector of Brandenburg's Troops: Besides
the young Prince of Courland; his Brother Prince Ferdinand also repaired
thither from Germany to get some Post in the Army; The Rendezvous of those
illustrious Persons was in the House of the Marquis d'Arquin, who kept an
excellent Table, and made a Figure worthy of the high Rank of Father to a great
Queen. They played a great Game there all the Winter, whilst the King of Poland
was taken up about calling of the General Diet, whose Session happened in the
following Year 1685. It ought to have been held in Lithuania, as being the
third, according to the Regulations made for that purpose; however, the King of
Poland with the Advice of most of the Senators, assembled them at Warsaw, on
the sixteenth of February, 1685. to save the Nobility the Trouble of a long
Journey, after so tedious a Campagn, and that they should not be at so great a
distance, from the Frontiers, to the end that they might be in a readiness to
repair thither betimes upon all Occasions.

This raised great Difficulties in the Republic, by the obstinacy of the
Lithuanians, as we shall see in the Second Part of these Memoirs. In the
interim, Count Wallestein returned to Vienna, leaving the Care of Affairs to a
Resident called Chemoski, a Relation of the Baron Jarowski, who came afterward
and took it upon himself. Secretary Alberti fixed himself also in this Court,
and Father Vota began his Intrigues in favor of the Confederate Princes.

This was the Face of the Court and of the Affairs of Poland, when I arrived
there after I came out of Slavery. The Officer that Pr. Lubomirski had sent to
Comorra to make the Exchange, conducted me to Presburg by the Isle of Schit,
and from thence to Vienna. I found the Country Peopled with new Inhabitants,
who were rebuilding the Villages; and the Flying Bridge of the first of those
Towns, was re-established. I tarried in the other five or six Days, with my
Deliverer, who filled up the Measure of his Kindnesses to me, by solid and
effectual Services, my Acknowledgment whereof, can never be sufficiently
testified.

It is certain, that without the pressing Solicitations of the Marquis
d'Arquin the Queen's Father, and without the Intercession of Prince Lubomirski,
who negotiated my Liberty at his own Charge (which cost him above 400 Pistols,
whereof the Court of Poland, repaid him nothing, and of which he would not
suffer me to reimburse the least Penny) without these two Lords, I say, I had
been killed at Nehausel, either by Famine or by Arms; for that Place having
been besieged six Months after, there was only found therein about 40 or 50
Slaves, of nigh 1400, that I left in the Place, as well in the Prisons as in
private Houses, the rest having been killed upon the Ramparts, and in the
Breach where the Bassa's exposed them to work, to cover the Turkish Soldiers.
The Germans also massacred a great Number of them in the general Storm, without
distinguishing them from the Enemy in the heat of the Conflict. At this Rate my
Deliverance cost nothing to the King nor Queen of Poland, all the Charge of it
fell on Pr. Lubomirski. Indeed the King had a great deal of Trouble to find the
two Spahi's demanded by the Bassa: He called Mehemet was found with a Polander,
of whom his Majesty bought him, to put him into the Hands of the Marquis
d'Arquin: The other, who was called Ali Spaha, could not obtain the same
Liberty; Miogenski who had him in Custody, refused to release him. The first
had all reason imaginable to praise his Bondage, not only because of the good
Treatment, that he received in the House of the Queen's Father, but also
because of the fair Dealing that was observed for his Interest: I had been
exchanged with 28 Turks of Zetchin, and had signified it so from Vienna,
without specifying any thing of the Conditions I had sworn to: Upon the first
News the Marquis d'Arquin, not knowing what I had promised, thought to procure
me an advantage by causing this Mehemet to ran some himself, it being said that
the French Man, for whom he was designed to be exchanged, had obtained his
Liberty by other means. The Spahi offered 500 Crowns; and a Turkish Envoy who
was detained at Leopold by way of Reprizal for him of Poland at Constantinople,
paid the same: After which he retired to Caminiec, with all imaginable Security
and Convenience. At my arrival the Marquis d'Arquin presented me with that
Sum; but I explained to him the Circumstances of my exchange; and thanking him
for his good Will, I convinced him that I ought to restore that Money to
Mehemet Spaha, as I afterward did.

I departed by Post from Vienna, and arrived at Cracow; where a Canon,
Chancellor to the Prince of Poland, a Man of great Merit and sweet Behavior,
kept me three Days, and treated me admirably; after which I reached Reetchouf,
a Castle belonging to Prince Lubomirski, the Podstarosta or Captain whereof
gave me a Calash, which brought me to Yaroslave; and there I found the
Equipages of the Queen's Father, with one of his Gentlemen, who brought me in
three Stages to Zolkief, where the Court was. It Is eleven great Leagues from
Yaroslave in a straight Line, leaving Yarvorouf on the Right. I had found at
Przevorska, a City belonging to the great Marshal of the Crown, Prince
Stanislas Lubomirski, about two Leagues above Yaroslave, the Troops of the
Elector of Brandenburg, which two Commissaries of the Republic were conducting
to the Frontiers of the two Estates; and this was the only Rencounter worthy of
Remark for me, because of the Kindnesses shown me by the Officers; and above
all the General, who made me a Present of a Case of Pistols, of great Price,
which I bestowed as a small Mark of my Acknowledgment upon Pr. Lubomirski, who
liked them so well that he has always worn them since out of his Goodness, and
by an obliging Distinction, which heaps further Obligations upon those I owe
him already.

The End of the First Part.
SOME LETTERS AND OTHER PIECES, Whereof mention has been made in this first
Part.
The two first Letters which I put here, may at first seem to have no Reference
to what is related in those Memoirs; but they are not useless to give an Idea
of the Genius of the Port, under the Ministry of the Grand Vizier, who besieged
Vienna; and they will also serve to expose the haughty and scornful Humor of
that Ottoman General.

A LETTER FROM Monsieur De Guillerague, Ambassador of France at Constantinople.
Wrote to the Marquis de Vitri, the King's Extraordinary Ambassador in Poland.
Dated at Pera, from the Palace of France, August 8. 1681.
I Had resolved to send away my Family, but just as they were ready to imbark,
a Messenger sent by the Consul of Smyrna, acquainted me, That on July 18. M. du
Queen, anchored at the Mouth of the Harbor of Scio, with six Men of War and a
Fire-Ship; and that after a very short Negotiation to oblige the Governor of
the Castle to turn out some Tripolins, who had sheltered themselves under his
Canon, he fired so furiously for 4 Hours together, that he shattered them. The
Castle also fired some Guns, to which M. du Queen answered; Some Houses were
damaged, many Tripolins killed, as also several Turks of the Town, and some
Mosques were pierced through in many Places.

This Action has caused great Commotions at the Port; several Councils have
been held, to which the Mufti and all other great Officers were called.
Janisaries were sent to the Castle of the Dardanelles; Couriers were sent to
several Places. The Captain Bassa had Orders sent him to return into Port as
soon as possible with the Galleys. The Consternation they were in, cannot be
imagined; Some were of Opinion to arrest me, and some Officers advised more
rigorously: They threatened to hang me, and all the French within their
Dominions. They sent to Scio for the particulars of the Damages, and of the
Enterprise. I have Notice given me that I shall be called to Audience, I shall
perpaps speak as I ought, and I have good Reasons to allege which are drawn
from the express Terms of the Capitulations. I have supported the Affair
hitherto without indecency, and I hope that notwithstanding all this terrible
Image of Preparations to destroy all, I shall terminate the Matter to the Glory
of the King.

Perhaps, Sir, you may find something of a Gascoigners Security in what I wrote
to you: But, in fine it is good to act with cold Blood. The Turks fancy that
the King inclines to declare War with them: I assure them, that his Majesty
will entertain the Ancient Alliance, if the Port is disposed thereto, and that
he has no other design than against Rovers and the Rebel Subjects of the Grand
Senior, who ought not to be received into his Ports. The Affair of the Mosques
does above all things vex the Mussul-Men, who are extremely bigoted to their
Religion, and to every thing that relates to it externally. I tell them, That
some chance shot might have done them some damage, but that if the French had
done it designedly, the Disorder would have been much greater. It is also true,
that M. du Queen had no Design to shoot against the Mosques, and that he
thought only of battering the 7 Tripolin Vessels. I still hope notwithstanding
their Menaces that my Family may depart in 8 Days time, and that my Reasons
will be heard.

Another Letter from M. de Guilleragues, to the Marquis de Vitry.
Dated the 8th of September, 1681. from the Palace of France at Pera.
IT is proper to inform you, Sir, That the continual Piracies of the Tripolins,
have obliged the King to send a Squadron of Men of War into those Seas, under
the command of M. du Quesne, with orders to attack those Robbers, even in the
Harbors of the Grand Senior. M. du Queen anchored the 23d of July in the Mouth
of the Harbor of Scio: Having known that eight Tripolin Ships were there, he
signified to him who commanded in the Fortress of the Grand Senior, that he
came as a Friend, and that the Emperor of France was an Ancient Allie of the
Emperor of the Turks: But that he had express Orders to extirpate the Pirates,
who by the Terms of the Capitulation were called Rebel Subjects, and abandoned
to the Vengeance of our Emperor. The Governor gave no Answer. The Tripolins
were very numerous. They had made themselves Masters of the Town and Harbor.
M. du Queen after having tarried* in vain for an Answer, let fly his Cannon
among them. He shattered the Tripolin Ships, several chance Shot damaged the
Houses and Mosques, and killed 200 of the Inhabitants. The Fortress fired upon
the King's Ships; they answered and beat down a part of it.

This News caused a great Commotion at the Port: I acquainted them that the
Difference was only with the Tripolins: That the Emperor, my Master designed to
entertain an Amity between the two Empires: That the Men of War had done
nothing contrary to the Capitulation: That if they should do the least hurt to
a French Man, it would be taken as a Declaration of War, the Consequences
whereof would be terrible; and that there was no Appearance that the Grand
Senior would break a Peace, which has been anciently established between the
two Empires, to support Robbers.

Several Councils have been daily held: Orders were given to augment the
Garrisons of all Places of Strength: Such great Commotions were never seen, nor
such an Alarm. In fine, after having done all things possible, in vain, God be
thanked, to frighten me, I was called some Days ago, to an Audience of the
Visier's Deputy. Our Conversation lasted an Hour and an half. He talked to me
of the unheard of Temerity of this enterprise; and of the extreme Anger of the
Grand Senior; and at last told me, That he gave me Notice as a Friend, that
perhaps I might be so happy as to buy off my own and the Blood of the French
for a great Sum of Money. I answered him, I was as secure at Constantinople as
at Paris, because his Emperor was just, and mine very potent: That I would not
give one Denier toward repairing the Damages sustained at Scio: That it was
the Tripolins part to pay it. I added several things, which certainly the
Turkish Minister had never heard before. The Countenance and Tone, wherewith I
pronounced them, were a la Gascogne: I spoke of all that the Emperor of France,
would do in this Country, if he were exasperated; and I concluded with telling
him, That if the French were troublesome to the Grand Senior or the Vizier, I
would carry them all back into France, where they would soon forget Turkey. The
Deputy treated me very civilly. He told me, That he exhorted my Prudence to
take other Resolutions, and went immediately after to give the Vizier an
Account of our Conferences, being much surprised at my stedfastness.

I do not know what will become of this Affair, I shall certainly support it to
the end, nay, to the last extremity. M. du Queen is still before Scio, where
the Tripolins design to refit. They have done no sort of Violence, nor made no
Threats to any French Man. It Is certain, that if such a like thing had happened
to any other Nation, it would have been the utter ruin of them. I was told
about six Days ago, That they expected News of the Captain Bassa, who is to go
to Scio with the Grand Senior's Galleys. I wait the Consequences, and the
Success of his Interview with M. du Quesne, with impatience.

I am, etc.

A Letter from the Duke of Lorrain to the King of Poland.
Most Serene King,
I received, with a due Respect, the Letters which your Majesty was pleased to
do me the honor to transmit to me; dated the 25th Inst. And from them I
understood how much your Majesty's Royal Mind is moved, to accelerate the
Succor of the City of Vienna, and how much inclined to the Defense of the
Christian Empire, and Austrian Territories: Of which, indeed, I have been
always so much persuaded, that in relation hereunto, I have received, from your
Majesty's Letters, nothing new, nor what I did not before believe. In the mean
time, I esteem it a great Favor and honor to me, that your Majesty does not
vouchsafe to trust to your own most prudent Judgment in these things that are
still to be done. I have hitherto endeavored to guard my self against the
Watchfulness of the Enemy by the Situation of my incampments; which though
indeed I did not look upon as walled about, yet I have thought them to be as
good as such from the Situation of the Rivers and the disposition of the
Ground they take up. I have provided for the Security of the Bridge of Crems,
and am advising the building of a second about Tulm, a Place nearer to Vienna,
and which is reckoned to be secure. That which is hardest to me is, that I can
scare send any Person into the Town; nor on the other hand, receive any News
from the besieged. But seeing I understand, from the magnificent Marshal of the
Court of the Kingdom of Poland, that the particular Relations of what things
are acted in the Imperial Army, do not displease your Majesty, I have
communicated something to your Majesty in Writing, which has Relation to the
same; from which and from the said Marshal's Letters, your Majesty may
distinctly understand every thing; particularly what was done against the
flying Rebels and Turks, about Presburg, on the 29th Instant, by Prince
Lubomirski and his Polish Officers and Soldiers alone, most prudently,
valiantly, and with the natural Vigor of the renowned Polish Nation. Your
Majesty will also understand in what Condition this Army is, and also the
Progress of the German Auxiliaries. It is my Hope and Prayer to see the
Christian Army defeat this most inveterate Enemy, and deliver the Austrian
Territories under your Majesty's Conduct, being sensible that in such a Field,
I shall have an Opportunity of further deserving your Royal Majesty's Favor
and Benevolence, to whom I wish a healthful and long Reign, from the very Heart
of,

Your Majesty's, most Humble and most Obedient Servant and Allie, Charles, Duke
of Lorrain.
Dated in the Imperial Camp near Mayerech, the 31st of July 1683.
The Duke of Lorrain's Account (whereof mention is made in the foregoing
Letter) given to Prince Lubomirski, to be sent with his Dispatches to the King
of Poland.
THE Turks having opened their Trenches on the 14th instant before Vienna,
pretty near the City; from the 16th they advanced their Works to within 60
Paces of the Counterscarp, and took Post in an Island of the Danube
over against Vienna, called Tabor; from whence I was obliged to retire. I would
willingly have kept that Post, to have had Communication with the City; but
this Island extending about two Leagues, and the Arm of the Danube which runs
near the City being almost fordable every where; and the Squadrons and the
Infantry being able to pass in Battalia in many Places of the Fords, the Banks
on that side where the Turkish Camp was, being raised, and their Cannon
commanding the whole Island, even to the Bridges; which being broke down by
their Artillery, there was no other retreat left me, but the City, or to swim
over the Danube, which were two Extremities equally dangerous: And though the
Bridges had been covered, it was in Teckley's power to come and post himself at
the end on this side, I remained in the Island without Forage and Subsistence;
insomuch that that Post not being tenable, and particularly with Cavalry alone,
having been obliged to put the Infantry into the City to defend it, I thought
that I was obliged to pass the Danube with the Imperial Cavalry, in order to
preserve them for their relief. The Communication being thus cut off, we have
had no News of them since the 22d. when the Enemy had advanced their Works to
the Palissado's, which the besieged defended with dint of Sword; They extended
their Works to the Right and Left, and had already made them reach three Points
of the Counterscarpe. They had not yet begun to batter the Walls, and had only
10 or 12 great Pieces of Cannon mounted in Battery.

Having received Advice of the Auxiliaries of Poland by the Count de la Tour, I
endeavored to send some Persons into the Town to acquaint the Governor
therewith; but I have as yet no Advice of their being got in; not having
received any Letters from the City, nor seen any of the Signals by which I had
ordered them to let me know that they had received my Letters. The
Communication with the City is the more difficult that I understand they have
posted Watches at every ten Paces distance. Just now we hear their Cannon
battering the Place, though from the Report there appears not to be 20 or 25
Pieces of great Cannon.

On the 25th Instant, having had Advice that the Rebels advanced, and that they
burnt all toward the Morave: I resolved to march to the River Mark, which is
pretty good, having nevertheless first given Orders to the Imperial Troops that
are in Stiria to advance into the Mountains, into inaccessible Places, and
endeavor to incommode the Forages of the Turks. I gave Orders to General
Dunewald, who covers Upper Austria toward Saint Peld, to assemble all the
Peasants, and to post them in the Woods for the same purpose. I sent General
Lessie to Crems, to wait for the Bavarians that ought to be arrived there by
this time, and to keep the Bridge. I left in the Retrenchments of the Bridges
of Vienna, two Regiments to hinder the Turks from passing on this side by
Boats, and to endeavor as much as possible to communicate News to the City,
and to receive, Advice from them.

Upon my arrival on the River Mark, I had Advice, that Presburg had desired
Teckley's Protection; and taken in a Garrison of the Rebels: That he was
marching with his Hungarians, and the Bassa's of Agria and Waradin, with
Artillery to storm the Castle; That the Grand Vizier had ordered the City to
make a Bridge of Boats, with all Diligence: And that he had already sent a
Detachment from his Army, to join Tekey by means of the Bridge that was making
at Presburg.

I thought my self obliged, upon those Advices, to attempt the breaking those
Measures; since if they succeeded, not only the Countries of Silesia, Moravia
and Bohemia were unavoidably exposed to Fire and Sword; but besides this
Communication of the Enemies two Armies seemed so dangerous to me, that I had
reason to fear they might force me to retire to Crems; cut off my Communication
with the Army of Poland; bring up their Bridges as far as Vienna, and render it
impossible to succor the Town; for the Grand Vizier might make very great
Detachments from his Cavalry, which being joined to the Body of the Rebels,
that was marching toward this side of the Danube* might post themselves every
where and withstand the succors from Poland, or at least keep them further off.

So that I determined to pass the Mark, to put some more Foot into the Castle
of Presburg, and to destroy all the Materials which that disloyal Town was
preparing for a Bridge to the Enemy. I left the Infantry and the Baggage in
Mayerek, and began to pass the River with the Cavalry about three in the
Afternoon at two Fords. I marched on the 28th all Night and stopped at a Defile
about half a League from the Town, having sent some Dragoons before, backed by
Polanders, to possess themselves of the Hill of the Vineyards, within
Musket Shot of the Town, that the Foot might march with safety. The Dragoons
having secured the said Hills, I caused the Infantry to march into the Castle;
and having been told, That the Fire in the Enemy's Camp was feen within a
quarter of a League of the Town, I thought my self obligd' to summons it the
better to destroy the Preparations of the Turks for the Bridge; not doubting
but that, seeing the Germans in the Castle, and the Emperor's Army in a
Condition to destroy them, it would surrender, which is did at first summons,
delaying only so long as was requisite to save the Garrison of the Rebels, to
the number of three hundred, who fled in Disorder to their Camp.

This Facility persuaded me that there was some Weakness in the Enterprise of
the Enemy, who had put themselves in Battalia so soon as they perceived me,
without offering to advance toward the Town; and this face of Affairs made me
resolve to march toward them. I caused the Dragoons immediately to possess
'emselves of the Vineyards, Hedges and Places that were covered with Trees,
that I might draw up the Cavalry in Battalia behind them; which was done in
four Lines, the Ground allowing it.

As the Lines were formed, I made them advance to give Ground to others. At
first the Turks began to skirmish, which I hindered that I might not engage
before I was in Battalia: Being formed, I made them advance toward the Enemy,
who immediately retired something back to a sort of a covered Place, where I
believed the Body of their Army, and their Infantry might be. And continuing to
march, I saw them retreat soon after; which obliged me to pursue them; and to
give Orders to Prince Lubomirski, to detach Part of his Polanders to engage
them. They followed them with so much vigor, that the Turks and Rebels, who
fled with as much Precipitation and Confusion, were obliged some of them to
betake themselves to swim in the Arm of the Danube, which forms the Isle of
Schit; others fled into the Woods, and the Body toward Tyrnau, without having
ever faced about, but at a little pass which they abandoned immediately. I
caused all the rest of the Polanders to advance, to back the first; and
afterward all the Imperial Dragoons to advance into these Posts, where the
Turks made show as if they had a design to turn into.

The Disorder of the Turks was so great that they were pursued near to Tyrnau;
their Bagage taken; and six or seven hundred Men killed, without the loss of
one Man on our side.

Seeing them thus flying, and my Cavalry fatigued enough, and not able to come
up with them; I recalled the Polanders; not being willing to suffer them to
pursue them too far without being at hand to second them; however, some pursued
them even almost to the very Walls of Tyrnau.

I encamped them afterward near the City in the Camp of the Turks; who I heard
were retired to Schintaw; and having refreshed themselves a little there,
retired further toward Lewens and Newhausel; they and the Rebels having
separated, being dissatisfied with each other.

All the Cavalry of the Emperor was marching to the Engagement with
stedfastness and joy: But the whole Action was done by the Polanders alone, who
left nothing for the Germans to do. I cannot sufficiently praise the Constancy,
Vigor and Conduct of Prince Lubomirski; and of the Officers and Soldiers of the
Body which he commanded.

All the Prisoners and Deserters say, that Tekeli had retired the Night before
with the Canon, and the Infantry, and that there was a Misunderstanding between
him and the Turks. They talk variously of their strength, some making them
amount to 60000 Men, others to 40000, and others to 25000. But from their
Incampment, I cannot guess that they could be above 16 or 18000 Men.

I hope this Action secures Presburg for the present; and will cut off the
Communication which I apprehended with so much reason; That the Rebels will not
easily present themselves before this Army; That Teckley's Troops will be
deserted by a great Number of Hungarians, who will not rejoin him, and that the
Misunderstanding between him and the two Bassa's will not be disadvantagious to
him.

In the mean time, after having ruined every thing that might serve to make
Bridges; I thought it advisable to rejoin the Infantry and the Bagage; and to
put my self within reach to cover the passage of the Succors from Poland, and
to hasten the others.

The News I have of them are; that the Bavarians ought to be arrived near to
Krems, where I believe there may be 15 or 16000 Foot, as well Bavarians as
Imperialists, within these few Days. I believe that the Troops of Saxony and
Franconia are upon their march; and I hasten them as much as I can: I cannot
deny but that I very much doubt the holding out of Vienna; for though I may
very well hope, that it is strong enough with a good Garrison and good Troops;
yet the forwardness of the Enemies Approaches; and the Accidents that may
Occasion a Confusion in a City that did not expect to be besieged, oblige me to
hasten the Succors, that they may show themselves to the Besiegers, etc.

A Letter from the Emperor, to the King of Poland.
LEopold, by the Favor of the Divine Clemency, chosen Emperor of the Romans
always Augustus, King of Germany, Hungary, Bohemia, Dalmatia, Croatia and
Sclavonia; Archduke of Austria, Duke of Burgundy, Stiria, Carinthia, Carniola
and Wirtemberg, and Count of Tirol. To the most Serene and most Potent Prince,
John III. King of Poland, Great Duke of Lithuania, Russia, Prussia, Masovia and
Samogitia, our most dear Brother and Neighbor, greeting and mutual Friendship.

Most Serene and most Potent Prince, our most dear Brother and Neighbor. In
this most calamitous Condition, into which the Treachery of the Hungarians and
the most impetuous Barbarity of the Turks, has cast our Country of Austria.
Your Serenities most kind Letters wrote to us on the 7th of July, have
wonderfully refreshed us. It was indeed a most joyful Message to us, when we
understood, that your Serenity having laid aside all other Military
Expeditions, was marching your Army with utmost Diligence to rescue Vienna,
which is so closely besieged, out of the Jaws of the Barbarous Enemy. With how
grateful and true a Sense we accept this Readiness to assist us, (as not
proceeding only from the League betwixt us, but from your Serenities kind
Affection, and Inclination which you have toward us and our Interests) and
with what Returns of Kindness, we shall acknowledge this obligation, which
tends to the safety of Christendom. We have given Orders, to our faithful and
beloved John Christopher Free Baron of Zieroua Ziorouski, our Envoy, and
magnificent Counselor to us, and to the Sacred Empire, to explain more at
large. He has also Instructions to acquaint and submit to your Serenities
sublime Prudence, what we have thought necessary and useful on the present
Occasion for the more vigorous carrying on of the War, and raising the Siege of
the said Town: Wherefore out of friendly and brotherly confidence, we obtest
your Serenity, to give entire Credit unto our said Envoy, in every thing he
shall say to you in our Name, and that you would cheerfully prosecute what you
have begun, whereas by this Assistance and delivering and rescuing the City of
Vienna, you will purchase Glory and eternal Fame, and more and more engage our
Affection, (which has long ago been fixed upon your Serenity) unto your Royal
Offspring. To which end we pray, That God would vouchsafe you the height of
all sorts of Felicity. Given at Passaw, Aug. 3. 1683. of our Reigns over the
Roman Empire the 26th, over Hungary the 29th* and over Bohemia the 27th.

Your Serenity's Brother and Neighbor.

The Reader may observe from this Letter, that the Emperor does not give the
Title of Majesty to the King of Poland; nevertheless he did it once in an
Italian Letter, wrote with his own Hand, which is preciously kept in Poland, as
a Piece upon which they may found their Right of Pretensions for the future.

A Letter from the Duke of Lorrain, to Mons. Yablonowski, Great General of
Poland. Dated from the Camp at Angres, the 16th of August, 1683.
SIR,
THE Count de Caraffa, General of the Battle, set out Yesterday, in order to go
to the King: I have given him Charge of a Letter for your Excellency; wherein I
signified to you that the Counterscarp of Vienna was, after having held out
twenty three Days, taken by the Turks, under the Covert of three great heaps of
Earth, which they had cast up to clear three Points; from whence they entered
into the covered way: And after having lodged themselves there, they applied
themselves to the Descent of the Ditch which they sounded on the 8th of this
Month. Although the Garrison chased them them thence with loss, yet the Enemy had
time to fix their Miners to the Ravelins, which they blew up on the 12th, and
there assaulted the Place. They were repulsed; insomuch that they think of
nothing but mining, and blowing up the Bastions which they attack. Your
Excellency who knows what it is for Places to be besieged, may judge of the
State of Vienna; which the Turks think fit now only to attack by Mines; and as
they are already in the Ditch, you may easily comprehend the Danger, and the
Importance of not loosing one Minute of coming to the Succor of a Place which
is of so great Moment to the common Cause; and to all Christendom. I have given
your Excellency all these Particulars, because that knowing how much you
understand the State of all things, I should have done an Injury to your Merit
and Zeal, if I did not tell you the true State of the Besieged, and the
Importance of hastening to their Assistance. I pray the King to succor us; his
presence alone is worth an Army; so I beg him to advance his march with the
first Troops: By the same reason, I pray your Excellency to hasten your march
to join me. I should be overjoyed to see you; both for the Advantage I promise
my self from the Troops you command; and for the Satisfaction that I hope to
see so great a General as your Excellency with us. Count Oberstoff will tell
you more particularly how much I pray your Excellency to join us, with all
possible diligence, how much I esteem you, and how much I am,

SIR, Your Excellency's most Affectionate Servant, Charles de Lorrain.
I pray your Excellency to march directly toward the Bridges of Vienna; from
whence you shall hear further from me. You will do me a pleasure to give an
Account of Your march so soon as the Count 'dOberstoff shall have joined You,
being impatient to have it in my power to testify to Your Excellency the
Esteem I have for Your Person.



A Letter from the Emperor, to the King of Poland, wrote by his own Hand.
Dated at Passaw, Aug. 24. 1683. To the most Serene Lord, the King of Poland,
my most dearly beloved Brother and Neighbor.
I Have seen, by Your Majesty's Letter wrote with Your own Hand, dated the 15th
Instant, how that You have already sent a good part of Your Army before; and
given order that they shall join very speedily with the Troops of Lithuania and
the Cossacks; and that You had begun Your march on that great Day of the Feast
of our Lady, with Your whole Army, to come and succor with all Your might, my
City of Vienna; which is ready to surrender, being closely besieged by the most
powerful Army of the Turks. So puissant and opportune a Succor, makes me
sufficiently to see the brotherly Love You have for me, to preserve my
Dominions; as well as the Zeal You have for the Good of Christendom. So I
return You most hearty Thanks, and shall endeavor upon all Occasions to
acknowledge Your brotherly Love. I have been also willing to confess the same
by this my devout Acknowledgment, which will be presented by the Count de
Schafsgoutz, who will acquaint You, that I am to set out to Morrow for Lintz,
in order to be nearer the City, and have News of it the sooner, and to have an
Opportunity to consult more easily with You; to whom I wish a perfect Health
and all Prosperity.

Your Majesty's most Affectionate Brother, and Neighbor, Leopoldus.

A Letter from the King of Poland, to the Pope.
Dated at Ratibor, Aug. 24. 1683.
This Letter, properly speaking, is only the rough Draught, drawn by the King
himself, and wrote with his own Hand, from which I copied it: For he afterward
gave this rough Draught to an Italian Secretary, who translated it into his own
Language, with the Ceremonies and Titles agreed on.

LAst Year I ordered the Imperial Minister at my Court, to acquaint his Master,
That Vienna would be besieged the beginning of this, because I had Advice of it
from good Hands. So soon as the Confederacy and the Diet were over, I caused my
Secretary to write to Cardinal Barbarini, that in case Vienna should be
besieged, I would go in Person to succor it. I received the News of its being
besieged on the Twenty Third of July between Warsaw and Cracow. In a Months
time I have raised an Army without Money; for the Provinces have scarce begun
to pay their Contributions. I gathered together the Troops that were in Podolia
toward Caminiec; and those which cover the Frontiers of Ukrania: I caused them
to make long marched insomuch that in a little time they have marches, above an
hundred German Leagues, without having had Rest or Intermission. And seeing I
have Advice, every Moment that the City, which has been besieged only forty
Days, and defended by a whole Army, is notwithstanding reduced to a great
extremity; I send part of my Army before, with the Lieutenant General, who will
join the Duke of Lorrain the Day after to Morrow. But seeing every Body wants
my presence, and that my Hussars, Cannon and Infantry can march but four German
Leagues a Day, I take this Day some Troops of light Horse with me, and by the
Blessing of God shall be upon the Banks of the Danube, by the last Day of this
Instant, to see and determine with the Duke of Lorrain and the other Generals,
how and by which way we shall succor Vienna; and we shall forthwith pass the
River, which we wish to render yet more glorious, by the defeat of the
Infidels. Let your Holiness now judge if you ought to give Credit to those who
would have made you believe that the Polanders would do nothing this Campaign;
and that the King would never go out of his own Kingdom The King and his Army
shall be sooner at the Gates of Vienna, that one could have expected to have
heard of his departure out of his own Territories. And then you may reflect
whether or no one can do more for a Friend and Allie; but in so far as it
concerns the good of the Church and Christendom, I and my Kingdom shall be
always ready to shed the last drop of our Blood, as a true Shield of
Christianity.

AN ACCOUNT OF THE Raising of the SIEGE OF VIENNA. Written by Order of the
Queen of POLAND.
THIS Account is properly an Abstract of the Letter, which the King of Poland
wrote to the Queen by the ordinary Post, five or six Days after the departure
of the Courier, which he had sent the Day after the raising of the Siege, who
only carried the News by Word of Mouth; whereof the King afterward made an
ample Relation to the Queen. This is an Abstract of the Circumstances, and
particularly of the very Words in which the King wrote them, connected
together. The Reader may observe some Verbosity and extravagant Praises
therein; but it is the Genius of the Nation and of the Polish Language, which
is full of Periphrases and Circumlocutions, which in that Country they reck on
to be great and sublime; so that they make a Harangue at saluting one, or for a
Compliment of nothing.

The Victory which the King of Poland has obtained over the Infidels, is so
great and so complete that past Ages can scarce parallel the same; and perphaps
future Ages will never see any thing like it. All its Circumstances are as
profitable to Christendom in general, and to the Empire in particular, as
glorious to that Monarch. On one hand we see Vienna besieged by three hundred
thousand Turks; reduced to the last extremity; its Outworks taken; the Enemy
fixed to the Body of the Place; Masters of one Point of the Bastions, having
frightful Mines under the Retrenchments of the besieged: We see an Emperor
chased from his Capital; retired to a Corner of his Dominions; all his Country
at the mercy of the Tartars, who have filled the Camp with an infinite Number
of unfortunate Slaves that had been forcibly carried away out of Austria. On
the other hand, we see the King of Poland, who goes out of his Kingdom, with
part of his Army, and hastens to succor his Allies, who abandons what is
dearest to him, to march against the Enemies of the Christian Religion willing
to act in Person on this Occasion, as a true Buckler of Religion; and will not
spare his eldest Son, the Prince of Poland, whom he carries with him, even in a
tender Age, to so dangerous an Expedition as this was. That which preceded the
battle is no less surprising. The Empire assembles on all sides, the Elector's
of Saxony and Bavaria come in Person to join their Troops with the Imperialists
under the command of the Duke of Lorrain. Thirty other Princes repair out of
Emulation, to one another, to the Army, which nevertheless, before they will
enter upon Action, stay for the presence of the K of Poland, whose presence
alone is worth an Army.

They all march with this Confidence. The King passes the Danube first, and
leaves no Troops on the other side to cover Moravia from the Incursions that
the Malcontents under Count Teckley might make into the same, as the Duke of
Lorrain had proposed; because, says the King, he had wrote to that Hungarian
Lord, that if he burnt one Straw in the Territories of his Allies, or in his
own, he would go and burn him and all his Family in his House, so that this was
enough to protect that Country during the distance of the Army. He leads them
afterward through unfrequented Defiles to the tops of the Hills of Vienna, and
in sight of the Turks, who drew out of their Camp to put themselves in order,
and even attacked the Imperialists by break of Day on Sunday the 12th of
September, before the King of Poland had made an end of forming his Order of
Battle, and extending his Lines, in which his Majesty had mixed his Hussars,
and other Polish Troops among those of the Empire.

In the mean time, the Turks leave their Trenches well provided with
Janisaries, with a considerable Body at the Posts and at the Attacks, to hinder
the besieged from sallying out; hoping to continue the Siege at the same time
as the Army should make head against the Succors of the Christian Princes; and
truly they had wherewith all to back this proud Resolution; having above 300000
Men, according to the King's Account, who found above 100000 small Tents in
their Camp, wherein apparently according to the manner of disposing their Men,
there were at least three Men in each; and his Polish Majesty has reduced the
common Report of 300000 Tents which would infinitely augment the number of
Soldiers to that of 100000.

The Battle was fought on the 12th, it lasted 14 or 15 Hours; the slaughter was
horrible, and the loss of the Turks inestimable, for they left upon the Field
of Battle, besides the Dead and Prisoners, all their Canon, Equipage, Tents and
infinite Riches that they had been six Years gathering together throughout the
whole Ottoman Empire. There was found in their Camp above a Million of Powder,
Bullets, Balls and other Ammunition, without reckoning the Powder that the
Servants burnt by inadvertency in several Places of the Park of the Artillery
the flame whereof made an Emblem of the terrible day of Judgment, with the
Earthquakes that will accompany it; and that thick Mass of Clouds that will
obscure the Universe: A Loss nevertheless which ought to be called a great
Misfortune, seeing it is above a Million more, as the King assures us in his
Letter, that he wrote himself to the Queen, from which all these Particulars
are extracted.

The Battle ended by the Infantry of the Trenches, and of the Isle of the
Danube, where the Turks had a Battery. The Night was spent in slaughter, and
the unhappy Remnant of this Army saved their Lives by flight, having abandoned
all to the Victors; even an infinite Number of Wagons, laden with Ammunition,
and some Fieldpieces, that that designed to have carried with them; and which
were found next Day upon the Road they had taken; which makes us suspect that
they will not be able to rally again, as neither having where withal to incamp
themselves nor Cannon to shoot with.

So soon as the Grand Vizier knew the Defeat of his first Lines, he caused a
red Tent to be pitched at the Head of his Main Body, where he resolved to dye
for the Ottoman Empire, but his last Efforts were to no purpose; and the Wing
of the Imperialists, which he attacked with all his might, was so opportunely
succored by the presence of the King, who brought part of the Troops of his
left Wing thither; that all fled before him. So soon as he perceived the red
Tent, knowing by it that the Vizier was there in Person, he caused all his
Artillery to fire upon that Pavillion, encouraging the Activity of the Gunners
by considerable Recompenses promising them fifty Crowns for each Cannon-shot;
and these leveled their small Pieces so well, that they brought down the Tent
of the Grand Vizier; and the Troop of Prince Alexander his second Son, had the
Advantage to break through that Body of Cavalry, at the very Place where the
Vizier was, who was dismounted, and had much ado to save himself upon another
Horse; having left, among the slain, his Kiayia, that is, his Lieutenant
General, ad the second Person of the Army; with abundance of considerable
Officers; all the Standards; the Marks of his Dignity that are carried before
him, or that are set up before his Pavilions; even the great Standard of
Mahomet, which the Sultan had put into his Hands when he set out upon this
Expedition; and which the King has sent to Rome by the Sieur Talenti, one of
his Secretaries, to be a Testimony to the Pope, of this great Victory.

The King understood afterward by Deserters, who come every hour in Troops to
surrender themselves to him, as well as the Renegadoes, that the Vizier seeing
the defeat of the Army, called his Sons to him, embraced them, bitterly
bewailed their Misfortune, and turned toward the Han of the Tartars, and said,
And thou, wilt not thou succor me? To whom the Tartar Prince replied, That he
knew the King of Poland by more than one Proof, and that the Vizier would be
very happy if he could save himself by flight, as having no other way for his
Security, and that he was going to show him Example.

The Grand Vizier being thus abandoned, took the same way, and retired in
Disorder with only one Horse; that which he had in the Battle, and was armed
all over with Steel, having fallen into the Hands of the King with all the
Equipages of that Ottoman General; who has left his Majesty Heir to all his
Riches. In effect, his Letters were dated from the Tents of the Grand Vizier,
the Park whereof was of as large Extent as the City of Warsaw or that of
Leopold; enclosing his Baths, Fountains, Canals, a Garden, a kind of Menagerie
or Place for strange Beasts and Birds, with Dogs, Rabbets and Parrots. There
was found an Ostridge of an admirable Beauty, which had been taken from one of
the Emperor's Country-Houses, and whose Head the Visier's Men cut off in their
Retreat, that it might not serve to adorn the King's Menagerie. This Precaution
would have been of greater use if they had taken it with Respect to the
Standard of Mahomet, and of that prodigious Quantity of Riches, Bows, Quivers,
Sabres set with Rubies, and Diamonds, precious Movables and Equipages of great
Value, that were left with the Tents to the King of Poland; which made that
Monarch say very pleasantly in his Letter to his Queen, You will not tell me at
my return, what the Tartarian Women tell their Husbands when they see them
return from the Army without Booty; Thou art not a Man, seeing thou returnest
empty handed; for doubtless he was the first in the Battle, who returns laden
with the Spoils of the Enemy; the Grand Vizier having made me his Universal
Legatee. The Booty that was taken in this Action is infinite and inestimable:
The Field of Battle was sowed with Gold Sabres, with Pieces of Stuff, and such
a prodigious Quantity of other things that the Pillage which has already lasted
three Days, will scarce be over in a whole Week, although the Besieged are come
out of the Town in great Companies to partake of the Booty with the victorious
Soldier; both the one and the other being scarce able as yet to persuade
themselves that this happy success is real, it is so extraordinary: Insomuch
that the whole Army, which nevertheless has done its duty very courageously,
cannot forbear to attribute this great Victory to the mighty God of Battles, who
would make use of the Hands of the King of Poland to overthrow the Enemies of
his Name; for which let him be honored and glorified for ever and ever.

The King did not taste all the Joy that Christendom will feel, as well because
his great Spirit is accustomed to Victories, as by the Reflection he made upon
the lamentable Spectacle, wherewith he was pierced when he entered into the Camp
of the Turks, at the sight of an infinite Number of Slaves, whose Throats the
Infidels had cut after their defeat, and whose Bodies yet chained were extended
confusedly amongst the dying and the wounded. The King was particularly touched
with a Child of about four Years of Age, who seemed to be admirably beautiful
notwithstanding he was coverd all over with Blood from a wound he had received
on his Head.

The Desolation was nothing less in the City of Vienna, where the King entered
the Day after the Battle, and found heaps of Ruins, rather than Houses, and
even the Emperor's Palace reduced to Ashes, hy the Cannon and Bombs: but he was
eased of the Grief which this dismal Spectacle had occasioned, by the
Acclamations of the Inhabitants, who thinking no more of their past Calamities,
were transported with Joy for their unexpected Deliverance: The City not being
able to hold out two or three Days more. Some kissed his Hands, some his Feet
and others his Robe: And all cried out, that they might be permitted at least
to see and admire the Hand that had delivered them from the Bondage they had
been so near reduced to: They called him their Savior: And some of them dropped
out that they must have such an Emperor as this magnanimous King. His Majesty
would have willingly put a stop to those Acclamations, and desired the German
Officers to silence the People, but all in vain, for it was impossible to stop
the Current of the Burgers who repeated their Cries of Long live the King!
wherever that victorious Monarch went.

After having visited some Churches, where he returned thanks to God for the
happy deliverance of Vienna, he dined with Count Staremberg the Governor where
he was no less fatigued with Embraces than he had been with the Acclamations in
the Streets. The Elector of Bavaria, the other German Princes, the Officers and
all the Army* as one may say, run thither, as soon as they had Notice of it, to
see him near at Hand, whose valor they had so much admired in the Battle. The
Princes embraced and kissed the King, with such Transports as are easily
pardoned in ecstasies of Joy, where Respect is a little neglected, which cannot
be attributed to any want of Considaration, for they had given him very great
Marks of it, by the Submission with which they had always obeyed him, and which
that Monarch had wrote to the Queen, was with more promptness and less reserve
than that of his own Troops. He returned afterward into the Camp, followed by
the Princes, where he was joined by the Duke of Lorrain and Elector of Saxony,
who had not seen the King since the Morning before the Battle, because they had
been always employed at the head of the left Wing.

The King was afterward obliged to change his Camp and to remove it two
Leagues beyond the Field of Battle, because the stench of the dead Corpse began
to be infectious. He proposed to himself at the same time to pursue the Enemy
close, to give them no respite in their flight; and was so pushed on with the
Ardor of his Zeal that he could not give himself a Minutes rest. In the mean
time the Emperor advanced in great diligence to see him, and arrived at Vienna
two Hours after his Majesty departed thence: But the King did not retard his
March for it, preferring the Security of his Victory, and the Interest of of
the Party to the Joy which doubtless he would have had to see the Emperor, who
likewise ardently desired to see him. He marches then directly after the Enemy
whom he had resolved to pursue into Hungary whither he had directed his flight;
the Electors of Saxony and Bavaria resolved also to follow his Majesty, even to
the end of the World, as they themselves told him* those Princes having joined
themselves in strict Frindship to his Person, as had the Elector of Bavaria to
the Prince of Poland in particular, with whom he would have divided his Spoils.
This victorious Army may justly be compared to that which Godfrey of Boulogne
led in triumph through the Holy Land; and ought to be the more satisfied with
their Glory, for that the Victory, though bloody, cost them but very few Men of
Note, among whom is reckoned only the Prince de Crouy of the Germans; and of
the Polanders the Starost Halitski, Son to the Castellan of Cracow, Potoski;
and Mordreoski Treasurer of the Court; whom the King particularly regretted.
This surprising success ought also to be attributed to a visible Protection of
the Lord, according to the Vision of Father Marc d'Aviano, a Capuchin of a very
Holy Life, who administered the Sacrament to the King, and the Prince his Son on
the Morning of that memorable Day; who positively affirms, that he saw a white
Dove fly in a Circle over the Christian Army during the whole Action; and it
was observed during the King's march, that an Eagle followed his Majesty 7
Leagues, and proportioned its flight, so as to be always over his Head. One may
observe an Effect of this Protection, upon the sacred Person of this Hero, who
exposed himself (like the meanest Soldier) and upon that of the Prince his Son,
who was always by his side, wherever he went. The same may be also said of the
Elector of Bavaria, who in the most dangerous Places testified a Courage worthy
of the Origin he comes of, and who was always by the King's side during the
Battle. I ought not to forget the Count de Maligni, the Queen's Brother, to
whom the King in his Letter gives an Account of the Valor and good Conduct of
that French Lord, whereof he was an Eyewitness.

Let us conclude this Account as the King has done his, and let us return
Thanks to God for this memorable Victory, in which he did not suffer the
Infidels to scoff us, nor to ask, Where is the God of the Christians? seeing
they have felt his Power upon this Occasion.

Every thing shows the greatness of the Victory which the King obtained; and
the sole Number of the things that were found in the Enemy's Camp, renders it
still more considerable.

Here follows a LIST, or State of the Ammunitions of War, that was found
untouched, afther the Defaet of the TURKS, as Count Staremberg himself
confessed; besides what was embezled.

400000 Weight of Powder, besides the like Quantity that was burnt by our Men
after the Battle. 400000 of Lead. 18000 Hand-Granadoes, of mixed Mettle. 20000
Hand-Granadoes of Iron. 100000 Pick-Axes. 30000 several Instruments for the
Mines. 4000 Spades. 4000 Baskets. 600 Pound of Match. 5000 Pound of Pitch. 1000
Pound of a kind of Oil for Workmanship, and a Quantity of Linseed-Oil. 5000
Pound of Cordage, of different sizes. 200000 Sacks made of Hair. 100000 Sacks
made of Cloth. 6000 Pound of Nails for Horse-shoes. 5000 Pound of several sorts
of Nails for the Cannon. 20000 Powder-Bags. 16 large Anvils; a Quantity of
great Cordage for the Carriages of the Artillery. 1000 Caldrons to boil the
Pitch and Gums in. 20000 Pound of Thread made of Hair and Lint. 20000 Halbards.
4000 Sythes. 5000 Muskets of the Janisaries. 600 Sacks full of Cotton, spun and
unspun. 30000 Pound of Grease or Suet. 20000 Powder Horns for the Janisaries. 4
Pair of Great Bellows. 5000 Pound of new Iron. 200 Wagons for the Artillery. 4
huge Bars of Iron for the great Cannon. 8 Great Iron Wheels for the same use.
8000 Wagons for Ammunition. 1000 Great Bombs. 18000 Ball for the Cannon of a
Middle bore. 20000 red Bullets. 160 Pieces of Canon, among which were many 48
and 24 Pounders.
It Is said, that all this was set apart with a design to be put into Vienna,
after they had taken it; The Vizier having taken Care to provide it with
Ammunition all at once, in order to put it in a state of Defense, in case the
Christian Princes should have a mind to retake it, after having not been able
to hinder its being taken.

This Account was wrote in Polish and Latin, and translated into French. 'Twas
printed in Holland in French, but as it is much disfigured by the Alterations
they have made (sometimes by diminishing and other times by adding to it) I
thought the Public would be glad to see it in the Original, as it came from
the Hands of the Polish Author, and the French Translator.

AN HARANGUE Made to the POPE, September 27. 1683. By the Abbot d'Henoff, Envoy
Extraordinary from the King of Poland; when he presented the Great Standard of
Mahomet, which was sent by his Majesty to his Holiness, in the Presence of the
Sacred College, Ambassadors, Prelates and Lords of the Court of Rome.
Most Holy Father,
IT has been a Custom no less Ancient than the Time of Hero's, to lay the
Colors of a conquered Enemy under the Feet of the Victors; in order to conduct
them, by so beautiful a Path, to the Temple of Glory, through the Acclamations
and loud Praises which they have merited.

But John III. King of Poland, my Master, entertaining no other than elevated
Thoughts, forgetting himself, had no other Object in view by the Victory he has
so lately obtained, but the advantage of the Church; as his Piety toward God,
and his Respect to your Holiness and the Holy Apostolic See, equal his Valor;
it is also at your Feet, most Holy Father, that he would have me lay the great
and principal Standard of the Infidel Army, which his Royal Hand has snatched
from the Turks, in the middle of their Camp; and in this Standard, he, by my
Ministry, abases all the Pride of the Ottoman Power, before you.

This great King came, saw, and conquered: He came, I say, but how? He left his
Dominions, he quitted and almost abandoned the Queen his Spouse, and the
Princes his Children, and hastened to the succor of Vienna besieged; in order
to deliver it, and to save the Empire; but the merit of this extraordinary
Action, redounds, Most Holy Father, even to you, who incited my King to the
Enterprise; and it is the Glory of that Prince to have rendered to your Holiness
an unparalled Obedience. He also saw, but without being appal'd, the
redoubtable Squadrons of the Infidels; and the extreme Danger, wherewith all
Europe was threatened; but your Holiness had foreseen, that this Prince was the
Buckler, that must oppose the infinite Darts of so terrible an Enemy; and by a
particular Inspiration of the Holy Ghost, knew, that he was designed of God to
be the Defender of the Christian Religion. In fine, He conquered; and to tell
it in a few Word, his Arm swift as Thunder, but overthrew so prodigious a
Number of those Infidels, that when they lay upon the Ground, the Field of
Battle could scarce contain them.

Et tu vois dans cette Victoire,
Rome, de tes Cesars renaitre les lauriers,
Jean Troisieme te rend, laiseul toute la Gloire,
Des triomphes des tes Guerriers.
But, most Holy Father, this great Victory was obtained under Your favorable
Auspices: You have both of You conquered: You with Your Prayers and my King
with his Sword: You by lavishing your Treasures for this Holy War, and my King
by exposing his Blood and Life. Cast Your Eyes, most Holy Father, upon this
Standard, receive it with Pleasure, seeing in future Ages, it will be the
Ornament which will show forth the Glory of your Pontificate: And may you long
enjoy this Glory upon Earth, as the Fruit of your Virtues, and of the
invincible Monarch, who makes you this Present.

A LETTER FROM The Elector of Brandenburg, TO The King of Poland. Written upon
the Subject of Raising the Siege of VIENNA.
Most Serene, and most Potent King, Lord, Kinsman, and most Honorable Brother.
When it was published throughout the World, That the most numerous Army of
the Turks and Tartars, had been happily beaten off by the Christian Forces,
(and chiefly by the Valor of your Royal Majesty) from the Siege of Vienna, and
defeated; we thought it no small Argument of your high Esteem and good Will
toward us, that it should please your Royal Majesty not to let us understand
the same merely by common Fame, but also by Your most kind Letters dated the
14th Instant, from the Visier's Tents. Which as we received with a most
grateful Affection, as we ought to do, so we heartily congratulate Your Majesty
on this illustrious Addition to Your Great Merits, at the Hands of Christendom,
and do sincerely rejoice at this Your Increase of Splendour and Glory; praying
God always to assist with his Divine Blessing Your Royal Majesty's Generous
Design of pursuing the Enemy, to render the Course of Your Victories, for
establishing the Security of the Christian World, and augmenting your own
Glory, both most happy and perpetual; and to preserve Your Royal Person long in
Health. Given at our Castle of Postdam Sept. 24. 1683.

Your Royal Majesty's, Fredrick William, By the Grace of God, Marquis of
Brandenburg, Arch-Chamberlain of the Holy Empire, and Prince Elector; Duke of
Prussia, Madgenburg, Juliers, Cleves, Bergs, Stetin, Pomerania, of the
Cassubii, Silesia, Crosna, Carnovia and of the Vandals, Burgrave of Norimberg,
Prince of Alberstadt, Count of Minden and Caminam, Mark and Ravenburg, Lord in
Rauenstein, Ravenburg and Butau. Most Affectionate Kinsman, Frederick William,
Elector.

The Superscription on the Cover of this Letter was thus: To the most Serene,
and Potent Prince, and Lord, John III. King of Poland, Great Duke of Lithuania,
Russia, Prussia, Muscovia, Samogitia, Livonia, Podolia, Podlachia, Kiovia,
Volhinia, Smolencia, Severia and Czernichovia, Lord, Kinsman, and our most
Honorable Brother.

A LETTER FROM Aubeleire, Bassa of Alleppo, and Governor of Strigonia, to the
most Great King of Poland. October. 26. 1683. At Midnight.
AFter having offered our Vows to the Honor of the Great King of Poland,
having been summoned to surrender the Place, we signified to You, That we were
to hold a Council with our Bassa's, and the Ancients, and that then we would
declare our Intentions: But the new Command which we have just now received in
your Majesty's Name, is so pressing that our Council is scarce broke up before
we begin to treat with You. And though Your Majesty's Seal is not affixed to
the Letters which you have sent us, yet we are fully persuaded, that you will
keep your Word with us* because the Name of the King of Poland is Great and
Glorious throughout the whole Earth.

The Whole of the Matter is this: We supplicate Your Majesty, 1. To give a Free
Passport to the Man who shall deliver our Letters to you, to go and come,
conform to Your Word which you gave us this Day. 2. That we shall march out
without the loss of one Man belonging to our Emperor, without Arms, or Bagage
whatever; that we shall be allowed a Guard to conduct us safe to the next
Ottoman Place. We desire the same thing of the Generals of the Imperial Army,
and of all the Senators of your Council, as Your Majesty shall think fit; to
the end that after having surrendered up the Place, and brought back our
Infantry, we may have wherewithal to justify us before our Emperor.

Aubeleire, Bassa of Aleppo, and Governor of Strigonia.

A LETTER FROM THE SENATE OF VENICE TO THE KING OF POLAND.
Most Serene King,
SInce Your Majesty invited us to enter into a League against the common Enemy
(upon which our Republic made it appear, how much Veneration was due to the
generous Sentiments of Your Majesty, as You may have understood by our Answers)
there happens now a Motive, from what has been represented to us by the
Imperial Ambassador, which has induced the Republic to think it necessary, to
make no longer delay, to testify their Readiness to do all on their side that
may be Advantageous to the Good of Christendom. We consider (though the Republic
is still sensible of the great Damages they suffered in the late War of Candia,
wherein they spent immense Sums, with the Blood of their Citizens and the
Substance of their Subjects) that we must trust to the Help of God, to the
Assistance and Zeal of the Sovereign Bishop our common Father, and to the
Continuation of so Holy a League as this, which will grow daily stronger and
stronger, especially being assisted by Your Majesty's puissant and strong Arm
which has over thrown the Turks, and put them to flight with so much Valor and
Courage, and which continues still in that constant Course of defeating them,
as we have just now heard with great Joy. We communicate to You the Disposition
of the Senate, which is very willing to enter upon this grand Affair, which
being well examined, We may consult to do that which shall be thought most
convenient for the good of the Catholic Religion, and seeing the Republibk
professes a singular Respect to Your Majesty, who is to have so great a share
in this Alliance; they were willing to acquaint you with it forthwith; firmly
believing that You will heartily approve of it. In the mean time, we shall
expect Your Majesty's Answer, that we may give the necessary Orders to advance
and establish so important a Treaty. And desiring Opportunities to testify the
good Will which we bear to Your Royal Person. We wish Your Majesty long and
happy Years, and the continual Blessing of God upon the Valor of Your Arms.

Given at the Ducal Palace, under the Seal of St. Mark, and of the Manual Sign
of George Quirino, Grand Counselor, the 21st Day of January, the 7th Year of
the Indiction. 1684. Anthonio de Negry. Secretary.

FINIS.

