A DIALOGUE BETWEEN FRANCISCO and AVRELIA, Two Unfortunate ORPHANS of the City
of-London.
Guild Hall, November 3. 1690.
Francisco. A Good Morning to you, Madam, -- You're an early Riser, I see;
though I as little suspected to meet you here, as to find a Quaker behind the
Scenes in the Playhouse.


Aurelia. Why, Sir, think you that Young Women have no Business in Guild Hall?


Franc. Yes, Madam, but hardly so early in a Morning. Had it been the
Fourteenth of February, I should have suspected you came hither to Select one
of the Aldermen for your Valentine.


Aurel. You're pleased to be merry, Sir -- What Merits have I to deserve an
Alderman?


Franc. You cloud your own Worth by your singular Modesty; it is well known,
that some who have worn the Purple have taken their Cook Maids into the Bed
with them; and, I hope, Madam, their Deserts ought not to be named with yours.


Aurel. You seem to be better Acquainted with me, than I am with my self; but,
Sir, I hope you have not so ill an Opinion of our Sex in General, or of me in
Particular, to think, that in Affairs of that Nature, Women are used to make
the first Advances.


Franc. Yes. In a little foolish Gallantry like this, a Lady may go a great
way, before she treads upon the heels of Modesty.


Aurel. Yes, and that little foolish Gallantry, as you are pleased to name it,
shall be called fondness on our Part; for it is the admirable Temper of most of
your Sex, if you observe any thing in a Woman's Conversation, which you can
Interpret to your Advantage, the nearer you find her Approaches, the farther
you fly from her, and tell it in Company over a Bottle -- The truth en't is,
Jack, I could Love Mistress such a one, but she is so coming, that --


Franc. No more, no more, good Madam.


Aurel. Yes, one word more, and then as silent as you please. Modesty on our
part serves to whet and highten your Desires; for it is a Virtue of such
Reputation, that where you cannot find the Original, you Dote upon the Copy.
Witness the Truth of what I say in the Conduct of the Lewdest Women of the
Town, whose counterfeit Virtue allures you to an Intrigue; whereas an open
Declaration of their Infamous Way of Living, would frighten you from an Amor.


Franc. But in this Discourse, of Modesty and Intrigue, we have lost our
Alderman.


Aurel. What have I done, that I should be haunted with Aldermen? You are not
so ill a Philosopher, as not to know, that Content or Happiness are not always
the Attendants on a Plentiful Fortune; which I am neither so vain to wish, nor
have Merits to deserve, however some of my Sex may be pleased with the Title of
an Alderman's Lady.


Franc. Now, by this Aversion of yours to an Alderman, I humbly conceive,
Madam, you are one of the Orphans of the City of London.


Aurel. You are much in the right, Sir; and, if I mistake not, by meeting you
here so often, I suppose you are one of the same Unhappy Number.


Franc. It Is certainly so, Madam; for, like the Widow Blackacre in the Plain
Dealer, I am forced to Solicit my own Cause.


Aurel. I come hither upon the same melancholy Account, but have as much Luck
in the Attempt, as a Poor Fellow that Sues for an Estate in Forma Pauperis.


Franc. Well! there is certainly a Pleasure in Rehearsing ones Misfortunes,
especially if the Person to whom they are told, can oblige one with a like
Relation. Please you therefore, Madam, to Repose your self upon this Seat, and
allow one that is not a perfect Stranger to you, a quarter of an Hours
Conversation, since we are fallen upon a Subject that equally concerns us both.


Aurel. The Pleasure of that Conversation will be wholly on my part, Sir.


Franc. Good Madam, let us not talk, as if we were in a Dancing School, but lay
all Complements aside as superfluous, as fine Clothes at a Funeral.


Aurel. The Subject, I confess, is almost as Melancholy; for were our Bodies in
as desperate a Condition as our Fortunes, I fear Jesuits Powder would do us but
little good.


Franc. The truth on it is, we have lived upon hope a long time -- A fine, thin,
cooling Diet, and as necessary in our Circumstances, as Water Gruel to a Man
troubled with an over heated Liver.


Aurel. I think we may not improperly call this Place, The Land of Promise,
where we are treated with all the Civility possible. Indeed, Madam, I think of
your Petition. Truly, Sir, you will not fail next Court Day. I profess, Madam,
I don't neglect your Business. And all this is nothing but Ceremony and
Complement, acted with so much Gravity, that on a Court-Day I have fansied my
self to have seen Mr. Bays his Grand Dance in the Rehearsal.


Franc. Indeed, our daily Attendance is somewhat like the Story of the Fellow,
that made Love to an Invisible Mistress.


Aurel. But 'pray', Sir, give me leave to enquire of you the Reasons, or
Occasions, of the Practice of putting the Orphans Money into the Chamber of
London; by what Authority demanded, and whether our Deceased Parents were not
influenced by Custom, and had a wrong Notion of the Matter; for could they have
foreseen what has since happened, they would as soon have ordered their
Executors to have laid out their Money in Ruffs and Farthingals, as to have put
it into that bottomless Pit, the Chamber.


Franc. A Place somewhat resembling Michael Angelo's Picture of Hell, from
whence the Pope himself could not redeem a Cardinal, there painted. But not to
run too far from your Question; the Reasons of the Practice were at first
intentionally Good and Pious; for --


Aurel. So were Religious Houses in the Times of the Primitive Persecutions,
but Posterity improved the Matter into Monasteries and Nunneries, though since
Nurseries of Luxury and Idleness.


Franc. Your Digression is pithy enough, Madam, but 'pray' give me leave to
proceed: As to the Authority by which it is demanded, it is well known, that the
City of London being, by Virtue of Magna Charta, a Body Corporate, they have a
Power or Commission to enact petty Laws and Customs among themselves, as they
shall see most fit, for the better Government of the City --


Aurel. Yes, Sir, such as ordering the Assize of Bread, or Penny Loves, for the
use of School Boys, and Journeymen Tailors.


Franc. Still you will be Facetious. But to proceed. Amongst other Customs this
was Enacted by Common Council, no doubt, that every Freeman dying, and leaving
a Widow and Children behind him, for the better Security of what he left them
(least having their Fortunes in their own Power, they might embezzle it, or
else be betrayed to very unequal, if not scandalous Matches.) The Money, I say,
was paid into the Chamberlain's Office, the Sum Registered, and his Note given
for Security; the Lord Mayor, for the Time being, and the Court of Aldermen
becoming Guardians or Trustees to the said Widow and Orphans, either of which
were not to Marry without their Consent first had and obtained.


Aurel. With Submission to their Authority, I shall never trouble 'em with the
Question.


Franc. Heaven be praised, at present the Condition of that Obligation is void;
I Thomas may take thee Abigail without that License; nay, invite the Aldermen
to Dinner, and they never be offended at it.


Aurel. But granting the Intention was Good and Pious, did it ever Answer the
end proposed?


Franc. Yes, unquestionably, for several scores of Years; for I love to do
Justice to the Memory of the Dead.


Aurel. I wish my Thoughts would allow me that Liberty to the Living. But how
comes it to pass, Sir, that the Bank is not in that Reputation as formerly, the
City being much more Rich and Populous.


Franc. Now, Madam, you ask a very knotty Question; but to the best of my
Memory, the Exchequer, being shut up sometime before the Bank you speak of,
languished in esteem about the Year 1681. yet, with Submission, I believe we
may go higher, even as far as the Year 1641. London being esteemed by some at
Westminster, what was said of England formerly at Rome, that it was Puteus
inexhaustus, A Well never to be drawn dry: Something went to the maintaining
that Unnatural War, besides Bodkins and Thimbles. The prosecuting of the then
miscalled Godly Cause, calling for vast Sums from the Chamber, which all the
since received Money could not repay again; they being oftentimes forced to pay
one Man's Interest with another's Principal. And though the Fatal Consequences
were not known till of late, yet some Observators about Guild Hall discovered,
that a Late Chamberlain, famous for his Skill in Military Discipline, finding a
Cloud gathering at Court, and that he was like to fall under the Displeasure of
a Great Man at Whitehall, gave private Notice to some of his own Party to draw
out their Money; and those who wanted that kind Intelligence are the chief, if
not the only Sufferers now; for, you know, it is like the Practice of Bankers,
who being blemished in their Repute, their Creditors coming so thick upon them
to call in their Money, they are forced to stop their Payments, in order to a
Composition.


Aurel. But, Sir, I have been told, that those who come a little nearer to our
Memories tell us, they have observed a Tall Building upon Fish-street Hill, a
Ditch not far from Ludgate, and several Conduits, to be Built with Mortar
tempered with a Sort of Brackish Water, known to the Virtuosi, by the Name of
Widows and Orphans Tears.


Franc. No, Madam, that was not so, your Judgment has been misinformed, those
Public Structures being wholly Built at the City Charge, by Money raised upon
a Tax upon Coals, etc.


Aurel. I could have wished the Wisdom of the City would have converted those
Fonds into other Uses. For the Payment of the Orphans would have Eternized
their Memories more, than if they had erected Monuments and Mum-glasses in
every Street of the City.


Franc. For my part, though I would have the Second Day of September never to
be forgotten, yet I have wondered what that Monument was intended for, except by
Day for a Landmark for Travelers, that lost their Way upon Shooters-Hill; and
it is pity that some Invention is not found out to make a Lanthorn of that
Flaming Ball at top, for Poor People cannot go to the Price of Hemmings his New
Lights; and Coals, they say, will be very dear this Winter.


Aurel. I heard, Sir, that a Gentleman the other Day asking his Friend, What that
straight bodied thing might cost building, was told, about 18000 Pounds. Did it
so, says the other; I know a Gentleman of my Acquaintance has lent the City
just such a Sum, I think they had best make a Mortgage of it to him for
Security.


Franc. And very good Security too. Well, let the Monument stand till a Country
Fellow wants Two Pence to see it, I care not; and what a pretty Account that
Ditch you speak of comes to, after so many Thousand Pounds Expended in the
Building it, when the Vaults and Cellerage belonging to it, are now offered to
be Rented for One hundred Pound per annum. A very pretty Interest for so large
a Principal. Nay, I am told, that a certain Conduit near Foster-lane, has
already gotten a Rhenmatism, for want of a Night Cap. There have been some fine
Treats at Guild Hall, and supposing there wanted a little Sum to buy Shrimps
and Oysters for a Dish of Fish, I hope 'twas no such great Crime for the
Caterer to put his Hand into the Orphans Bag to purchase 'em.


Aurel. But methinks it would have been Civil, to have invited us to eat part
of the Fish, when our Money paid for the Sauce.


Franc. No, no, there is meaner Provisions suitable to our Condition. Lord!
Madam, I smile to think how we Laugh till our Hearts ache, and divert our
selves with our very Misfortunes; as Prosperity never Exalted our Thoughts,
neither does Adversity Depress them. It Is a Practice of Philosophy which few
attain to, and the little proficiency I have made in it, is wholly owing to
your generous and sprightly Conversation.


Aurel. Sir, I Would return your Complement, but at present I am out of Stock --
For my part, I know no Divine nor Humane Law forbids innocent Railery; if the
worst come to the worst, it is but reasonable Losers should have leave to speak,
though it is dear jesting at the Rate of Eight Thousand Pound. But to be
serious, is it not Deplorable, that a Gentleman well Born and Educated, should
for want of that Money of his which lies in the Chamber of London, be exposed
to all the Indignities of Fortune, accept of some mean Office, to keep him from
starving, List himself a Common Sentinel, to stave of his Importunate
Creditors; or, perhaps, take the Highway, and make his Life as Desperate as his
Fortune: Whereas, if he enjoyed what was justly his own, might make no
Contemptible Figure in the World, where he now lies windbound for want of Money.


Franc. To show you the Reverse of the Medal. Is it not pity that a Young
Gentlewoman, whom Nature and Education have made a finished piece for want of
those Bags which lie sleeping in the Chamber, betake her self to some mean
Employ, or at best to wait upon some Finical Lady, who, excepting her Fortune,
is not worthy to be named with her for Accomplishments; or, at last, it may be
she is Married to some inferior Fellow; or, if I durst be familiar with Female
Virtue, perhaps, by reason of her Poverty, exposed to the Solicitations of
unlawful Love, from which Attempts the Possession of her Fortune would secure
her.


Aurel. I have wanted neither Lawful nor Unlawful Offers; for the first, I am
resolved never to disgrace my Father's Ashes by a sorry Marriage, and from the
latter Heaven will, I hope, defend me.


Franc. As Despicable as my Fortune may be at present, I am resolved not to be
Despicable in my own Thoughts: And I will for once, Madam, make you so far my
Confessor, as to assure you, I loved a Mistress, Fair, Rich, and Virtuous; nor
was I (pardon my Vanity) treated with Contempt, and we had certainly Married,
had not Fortune on my side forbid the Banes.


Aurel. But is there no Hopes of recovering our Fortunes?


Franc. Much such Hopes as a Dying Patient has, when he sees his Physician
shake his Head; but however we do not absolutely Despair.


Aurel. I heard the City were about Selling some of their Lands, in order to
raise a Fond for the Payment of their Debts, did that come to any thing?


Franc. Sell their Lands, they would as soon sell their Charter. No, Madam, all the
hopes we have is from the present Parliament.


Aurel. 'Pray Heaven they prove not so tedious in their Votes, as the last
Sessions.


Franc. The greater Concerns of the Nation, as the Wars with France and
Ireland, took up so much of their Time, that smaller Matters was put by, all
private Interest being to veil to the public Good; but my prophetic Hopes
tell me, that the present Parliament will have the Matter under Consideration,
and I doubt not, but those Worthy Members of the City will be powerful
Sollicitors in our almost sinking Cause.


Aurel. Then I think my stay here needless, for the Judges Pictures are able to
afford me as much Consolation as I am to expect from any here. I wait with some
Impatience the Motions of the Parliament, but must, Sir, after my humble Thanks
to you for your extraordinary Company, be so rude as to leave you.


Franc. 'Pray', Madam, let me wait on you Home.


Aurel. Sir, I am not often attended; but I should be Uncivil to deny my Hand
to a Person of such engaging Civility.


Franc. Madam, your Servant. You do me too much Honor.


LICENSED,

November 4th 1690.
FINIS.
London Printed, for Randal Tailor, near Stationers' Hall. MDCXC.


