THE DEVIIL INCARNATE, OR A SATYR upon a SATYR; Being a Display of the Hairy
Devil, Countess of BEDLAM.
She Is a thing at first sprung up out of the bottomless Pit, was poked out of
Hell with a Tailors Yard, and is indeed the Devil every way, as Ugly and as
Envious. She Is an Old Charcole that's kindled at the lower end, and will be
burnt out ere long with a Pox to Her. She Is an Ugly Pus, a bundle of soul
Stuff, a filthy Mass of Guts and Garbage, that lives upon the sucking of Her
Ale-Taps, and the nick and froth of Her penny black Pots. She Is a Gallimautry
fars'd up with as many ill ingredients as if B^lzebub and all his legions had
spent their whole time and study to compose Her. She Is the Devils Firebrand
wherewith he keeps a continual fire in the Hell of Her house: and when He
casts her abroad into the open Air, She flies about lightning, so that the
whole Neighborhood is like to be in a Combustion. And if this were not the
fire of Hell even unquenchable fire, so many Tuns of Ale as in one day are
powered down that unsatiable Gulf of Her Throat, would certainly be enough to
quench it. But I remember that very strong Ale will burn when it touches the
fire, which it must needs do when it comes into that Furnace of her Body which
is seven times hotter then that which was heated for the three Children. And in
this She thinks her self very Politic, that of plain Ale She can so easily
make burnt Ale; but She may thank the Devil for that faculty.

He that has come once by her door, has been in the Suburbs of Hell; but he
that comes into her house, will find an Hell upon earth: I hope no man that is
wise will come there, unless he desire to have a cure wrought upon his body by
sweating; for it is no other then a Stews or Hot-House, the fire being
continually burning: in which reguard it might serve for a Chemists Shop, or a
Glass-House; but She rather deals in B^ass and Copper, as I Will tell Her to Her
Face.

Mr. Airy, the sure that side of your house next Her be made of Freestone (and
She loves Free-stones) for if it be made of combustible matter, I am sure it
stands in much danger. She Is no convenient neighbor to border so near upon the
Front of a College, for it must needs be offensive and prejudicial to all
Students, to have the Sun perpetually shining in their faces She Is beneficial
only to her self, for her Face will supply the want of fuel in the Winter: if
she does but look upon the Pot, its enough to make it boil: and she needs not
use any candle either day or night, the light of her Countenance is so
glorious. Wherefore she is an utter enemy to all Chandlers, there is no candle
can burn in her presence, for the greater light always puts out the lesser:
She burns daylight, lights a Torch to the Sun, and serves for a Lanthorn at
Queens College Gates in the winter nights. She is the Comer or Blazing-Star,
which appears over against Queens College; and sometimes would seem to portend
strange things, but they always prove false: or, she is the morning star, viz.
Verus, and loves to be in conjunction with Jup-it-her; and that is the reason
some of her progeny are so Venereal.

Her Face would make a fit Meddall in Copper, upon which for a Motto there
should be in Capitalls ingraved IMPUDENCE. Her eyes are two gogling sparkling
Globes, between which and her mouth there is a pretty speckled painted jewel,
from whence there daily flows a Cream-pot of Nectar. By her Omega's nose, she
should have been Related to the late Tyrant Oliver; and its no great wonder to
see such a copper Nose upon a brazen Face: or, by some other parts of her, she
should have been related to the Hairy woman, I warrant one might get many a
pound by showing her naked at Market Towns and Fairs; for no man can easily
imagine there is such a Monster in Nature, unless he see it.

She can sing, Drunk and Sober again, three or four times a day: the Pot and
the Pipe are her sole delight, and seeing they are such loving companions, she
seldom parts them, and is seldom without them: For her mouth is a bottomless
Pit, from whence the smoke continually ascends both day and night: and out of
it withal, worse then the Locusts, Words sharper than Arrows, a Tongue more
sharp then a two edged Sword: And its always wandering about the Town; its
worse then a vipers, is like a sharp Rafor that cutteth deceitfully, is set on
Fire of Hell, and full of deadly Poison. It is nothing but a burning Link,
whose flames will kindle upon all things that come near it.

Her Teeth she borrowed of some Horse or Elephant which had got the Rot, and
therefore they will be gone out of Town ere long; her Nose and her Chin intend
to meet about it:

Her Chin is double like her Tongue; it is such a mass that if it were tried,
it would afford grease enough to make two or three pound of kitchin-stuff.

But to conclude concerning her Face, it must be a precious thing, for it is set
so thick with Rubies and Carbuncles, that it would dazzle the eyes of an Eagle
to behold it.

Her Head stands upon a stately Pillar as white as the Reddest-Corall: And a
little lower are two great bosses made of leather bottles as big as Gogmagog
Hids, from which there hang two such Labells or Teats as if the Devil had been
sucking the Witch.

Her Bum is bigger than any barrel, which she drags after her with a great deal
of gravity. As for her belly I cannot describ that, because I cannot come at
it, for its convered with hair; which every year she shaves off, enough to make
forty Merkins: and it is longer than ordinary, or else they are liars that have
seen it. But least I should come too near her Copyhold, I Will go up again to her
Hands; for she loves that Hands and Belly should come together. She has pretty
little hands, which will serve her for small use; but its not much matter, for
as it seems she was made rather to be handled then to handle. To come a little
nearer, Her Belly is a Butt, for all that come to shoot at, ( Cupid has often
shot her between wind and water) and they may have a foul (I had almost said a
fair) mark, which they may easily hit if they please: yet I will not say they
may easily hit the the white, for there is no such thing there.

Her Thighs are not much bigger than the Pillars in St. Mary's Church; and her
Legs are proportionable, which makes her stand to her tacklings so well, even
as she would have others Stand to her. And now I am come to her Foot, I Will
trace out her good qualities, which are every whit agreeable to the comely
proportions of Her Person.

If you know the nature of the Devil, you know hers exactly; for all her study
is calumny and slander, in which she takes more delight then in eating her
daily bread. She would indeed do all other kinds of mischief if it were in her
power; but the cursed Cow has short horns. And seeing she has no other
Instrument then her tongue that stands her in much stead, she puts that to the
most use that may be, and lets it always be wagging.

Her Throat is an open Sepulcher, wherein lie buried many honest peoples
Reputations. It is so wide that no kind of ly will choke her, though never so
monstrons. And in this Art her wit is as pregnant, as if she had lately been at
the Devizes: but her Tongue always runs, before her Wit, even as her Invention
before her Judgment. She Is the most abominable of all liars: she will lie both
backward and forward: the Devil himself the Father of liars cannot out ly her,
though any man may easily over lie her when he pleases. It should seem as if
she did it for a wager; for she tells the biggest and most monstrous she can
devise, and then lies again in forswearing them: So that her word and her oath
are both alike; for none that knows her will believe her for either any farther
then they can see her. It was never known yet, that any that ever came near her
has escaped the lash of her slandrous Tongue, which now in all peoples account
is no slander. She Is a perfect Flatterer, and a secret Enemy: she will saun upon
you like a Spannel, and yet endeavor to cut your Throat. Oh! how she hugs her
self when she has gotten something that she thinks is a slanderous report by
the end. She makes it her next business to augment it and blaze it abroad: Or
rather than fail, she will presently raise a scandal upon any body; and when she
has done, kneel down and imprecate bitter things upon her self, and utterly
forswear her words. O, the horred imprecations enough to make sober people fear
the house would come down upon their heads, or that the earth as weary of such
a sinful burden, would open her mouth and swallow them up. But if all this
will not serve, but that she must needs confess something, she will turn Cat in the
Par, and quite alter the story: or if there be such witness, that its
impossible for her to evade any part of it, then she cries that she spoke it in
her Ale, or in her Anger: but she shall be made to suffer for it, when she is
Sober or not Angry. And when the lavishness of her tongue has brought her into
some danger, she can easily command Crocodiles Tears, (with which she would
seem to wash away the foulness of her offense) when she has most mind to
devour you.

The chiefest accusations with which she charges every one, is concerning their
honesty: And the reason why she so much misdoubts others, is because She had
never much her self. Her chiefest spite is against all young women that live
honestly; for she would fain have them like her self, that so they might not
have so much cause to complain of her.

All men that are seen at any other house then hers, (though never so sober or
honest,) shall be presently termed either Drunkards or Whore-masters; but in
her house they may be both if they will, without offending her. And all young
women in her opinion are Whores, and she will not stick to say so; but The
veriest Whore cries Whore first. She Is an ugly snotty Whore her self, and has
given many a snotty nose to others; but more especially to Mr. E. who before he
could make it clean, blowed out his life: And Mr. Price the Chirugion was fain
also to dose her with a Medicine to cool her Aquavitae. The Daughter also
begins to follow the Mothers steps pretty exactly: for She Is of the Lemman
breed, and right Lemman color, which (what ever others think,) she takes to be
no stain in her reputation. A few arguments will prevail; she will prove a
windfall with the least breath. I could name several that have done what they
would with her upon the bed by the fire side. She begins already to wear the
badges of her trade: its none of her goodness that buds out so fast, that
she is fain to wear four or five black Patches upon her face at once to cover
the Scabs: the heat begins to fly up into her Nose, which perhaps may bid her
adieu ere long. I am sure her extraction cannot any way entitle her to the
Imitation of a gentlewoman; for she was at first sucked out of the Taphole, to
which she naturally returns like a Bitch to her vomit, and like a Sow to her
wallowing in the mire. But why should I be so Satyricall? I hope for the future
she will take heed of bespewing her silk Gown again: Her Mother gave hea sound
rattle for it, and called her Whore, and told her she could sit all day at the
Pot and the Pipe, and yet not commit such a gross absurdity so visibly. In a
word, this young Landaprides would fain make her self that which God nor Nature
never intended; for if melted grease upon turd-colour be handsome, then she may
be called Handsome: But if I were desired to give a Character of her, it should
be in short, much to this purpose; She Is a thing that sometimes appears in a
silk Gown, with black patches on her face, (marry come up here,) and would
fain seem to be a Gentlewoman, but is indeed nothing but a Tap-wench that's
newly sprung up out of the froth of a black pot; and having passed once through
her Mothers Alembick, is Chymically converted into the more salacious froth,
Venus; so that I need not tell you what she is in plain English, for her very
extraction entitles her to levity, and the foulness of the Subject I am now in
handling induces me to brevity, (intending another time to give her a whole
broadside unless she mends her manners,) that I may return to the business
from whence I have made ^ome digression.

Do but ask the old Devil if she ever knew Colonel Zouch, (I could name
several others which I willingly omit,) and mark if her fiery face be not
tinctured with a double dye: if she says she never knew him, I say he has
known her too often, if his own confession be a sufficient testimony. She was
served but a Sly trick when one of her companions falling out with her, told
her; Oh, she had it in her head, she had it in her head, she would go make her
husband a Cuckold too, that she might have some body to take her part. She sent
the poor man out of this miserable world with so great a pair of horns on his
head, that probably he could hardly get to heaven; for the way thither is said
to be but narrow, and therefore no horned beasts to come there. Neither did it
make much for her credit when her husband went half way to Bill, and making a
shorter return then she expected, came home and found another man in bed with
her. She Capricorn'd his Coxcomb, and congratulated his return with a
Chasing-dish of Hornicombustulated Metaphor's. But he told her, if she used to
play him such lessons on the Horn-Pipe, he would play to her on the
Baggage-Pipe, and make her dance out of doors. Some Whores use to draw men's
Lips into their mouths, as if they should say I would have you within me: But
she uses also to thrust her Tongue into men's mouths, as intimating that she
would have them do her a courtesy by thrusting something into her mouth
beneath. If she denies any of these things I Will swear that She Is a more
impudent liar then the Devil, and that her Face is nothing but the Bo's of a
great Brass. Andiron bespangled with Glow-wormes, and set upon the rotten
Standard of a putryfied body qualified with those conspicuous Virtues of
natural Dishonesty and artificial Dissimulation, such as becomes none but her
Country-folks the inhabitants of Hell and such as was never known to proceed
from any less Devils then Lucifer and Beelzebub to whom she is great Grandame.
But her kissing is done at her upper lip, because there is nothing to cover the
deformity: and almost at her lower lip too; and they that have had most at
either, do now loath her as much as ever they did the stinking carcass of an
old Whore roasted with the fire within her own bowels.

But alas poor woman, she should now be an object of my pity, not upon whom I
should wreak my fury; wherefore I would willingly speak a good word for her to
help recover that credit which is lost: but if I should call her a proper
woman, it would be false Grammar; for she was never known to be Proper, but
always Common. One might imagine her to be right in all her dealings; in some
she is sure enough as right as one's leg, for she has always been ready to do
with other men as she would have them do with her. She should seem to be
valiant, for she will bring down three or four lusty men upon their knees, and
more too if the first should not stop her course. The way how she so easily
overcomes, is thus; she fights like a Bear lying on her back, and if any man
comes at her with a single Rapier, she draws him in presently. Thus she thinks
to fright men by giving them the forked end: And to speak truly, I believe she
has something there that is enough to frighten any man that would possibly be
frighted. I pray you object not that she is poor and beggarly, for she has made
shift to get her Daughter a silk Gown, though she be but old Mother Red-Coat,
herself: and you onght not to blame her, seeing she cannot now so much as she
used to do, lie backward her self, and let out her fore-roomes; especially not
at so high a rate as when Oxford was beseiged: that was then a great part of
her livelihood. But yet she has a colts tooth, she will lap as much as two young
kitlings if any man would give it her: she will milk the Bull as well ever an old
Cow in this Shire: She Is never satiated, as you know the fire will devour all
things, and burn them too, if they come there. I might commend her for a great
linguist, for she has a double tongue, and and as much language as would serve
half a dozen women: and she speaks The French as perfectly as any woman in
Turnbull street. She would surely make a good Trumpeter, for she has a strong
breath: Neighbors, pray you keep your doors and windows close shut, for when
she opens her lips, there comes forth a stench more noisome then that of a
Charnell house, the sent of her rotten trunk is more infectious then the
pestilence. You may know where she is before you see her, for you may smell her
long before you come at her; but I think he that has seen her once, will never
desire to see her again. Thus when I go about to commend her, I am apt by
sisting a fresh, to find some other faults: Yet I might say she is pleasant and
lightsome; but you will say she is light all: and I know she is light enough in a
double sense, but it serves only like an Ignis fat^^s to mislead men running
between the legs. Nay, if you knew all, you might think her a Witch, because
she is burnt alive: but rather she should seem a Phanatick, because she is
always led by the light within her; and therefore can seldom err, for for if
she does but follow her Nose, she follows Torch-light: or, for failing, her
Belly may serve for a dark Lanthorn, for she always carries a pocky fire in
it. She may be thought a Pharisee, for she affects (more then becomes
tap-wives) the highest seat in the Church: Nay, she is so delighted in climing,
that when she is at home, she will clime up sometimes ten Steries high, and like a
Jugler, always present you with false things instead of true. But what ever
our misapprehensions may be, she will be found at last to be a Fisher: Yet I am
sure she is no Kings Fisher; for when she appears, it is more the sign of a
Tempest then a Calm. But she is a Fisher of Men, she catches flesh far oftenest:
and if they have but half a Crown to pay sees, all is fish that comes to her
Net. But what do I talk of? She Is a Planet, both a Deceiver and a Wanderer, the
Character of a Whore; for her feet abide not in her own house. If you ask what
Planet, I answer she is very Martial, fierce and full of contention: yea, she
should be altogether Mars by that rubified bespangled constellation of her
countenance: yet from some of her qualities I might term her Verus, but that
she is none of the Fortunes, nor none of the fairest, and is always combust
under the Sunbcames.

But for all this that has been said, I think she has a better opinion of her
self then others have of her; otherwise she would never ly? so ecure at open
guard, and lay her self open to the world that all men may do what they will,
but that she deems her virtuous actions (though they be but few,) may redeem
her credit (which is but small) which yet she imagines not so much diminished,
because (whatsoever he actions he) she thinks she may do what she will because
she has alwaves a good color for it.

But now I Will make have, because I begin to perceive in her some Symptoms of
mortality: her good name is already buried before her; I suppose her carcass
will follow ere long, for she stinks above ground. Yet rather then want a Name,
she shall have a bad one, and she shall be rebaptized for it is Styx the black
river of Hell, that so the pitch that shall stick upon her forehead, may be a
worse brand of her infamy then that of Cain's. She shall be named
Alecto-Tysiphone-Megaera, for all the three Furies joined together make up but
one Mrs. Fisher. A wisp, a wisp, and a cuckingstool for the Butter-whore: all
the Hucksters at Carsax and Oyster-women at Billings-gate cannot be heard so
far as she by a quarter of a mile. She is not composed of the Four Elements
like other creatures, she owes her original only to fire and water; and they
two meeting in one, may be the reason why the Thunder and Lightning come so often
from her Coasts. The predominancy of the Sulphur is a sufficient indication of
the inequality of her composure, by which she cannot live long: nay, she had
never survived hitherto, but that Atropos with a dull knif vowed to give her
many a sore scotch ere she should be put out of her pain. But the stench of her
corpse does so anoy me, that I am now forced to forsake her, and leave her to
the next ditch or dunghill, having already according to her own deserts laid
her open to the world.

There Is a great deal more behind, which I omit at Present, being unwilling to
defile any more clean paper with so foul a subject. I am only sorry that I have
so taken my farewell of the University, that I cannot be there present to give
Verbal testimony to what I have here written. But all that know her, know all
I have said to be true, and a great deal more, which you shall have next
opportunity.

FINIS.

