A GENERAL EPISTLE TO BE READ IN THE Fear of God. In and amongst the ASSEMBLIES
OF HIS PEOPLE.

By William Dewsbury.

LONDON, Printed for Benjamin Clark in George-Yard in Lombard Street,
Bookseller, 1682.

A GENERAL EPISTLE TO BE READ IN THE Fear of God. In and Amongst the ASSEMLIES
OF HIS PEOPLE.
My Dear Friends,
IN the Light of the Lord all Watch and Pray, that you may receive Power
through Faith in the Name of Christ to Reign over your own Thoughts and Wills;
then will you Delight in taking up the Daily Cross to the Mortifying of the
Earthly Members: That your Conversations may be as becomes the Gospel of our
Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, which will make you Manifest to the Witness of
God in every Conscience, that you are the Salt of the Earth; that have kept
your State and Habitation in God, and does retain the Sweet Savoury Spirit of
Life, which Seasons all your Words and Works, and Ministers Grace to all with
whom you have any concern; to the Exalting Gods Blessed Truth over all that
Watch for Evil which will cause their Eyes to fail, and frustrate their
Expectations for ever, Amen.

And Dear Friends,
I Beseech you be Faithful upon all Accounts, for the Service of the Blessed
Truth of God; to meet together in his Holy Fear, that you may receive the Holy
Inspiration of his Spirit to Exercise you in what Service God is pleased to
call you unto; whether in Prayer to God, or in Exhortation to Build up one
another in your most Holy Faith; to raise up the the Life in all, that every
one that is Overcome with the Powerful and Heavenly Motions, cast their Mite
into Gods Treasury, and give him his own Advantage; so will you feel the
Increase of his Government in you that are Faithful, in the true Measure of
Light and Life; more and more he will give unto you, to the Edifying of one
another in love: So will you become Epistles written in one another hearts,
with the Pure Spirit of the Living God; which will bind you up in the Unity of
the Spirit, and Bond of Peace; and what Exercise soever is met withal, whilst
you are in the Mortal Body, Pray to the Lord to keep you in the Life of his own
Spirit; that Patience may have its Perfect work, that if you be Smitten on the
one Cheek, turn the other Cheek to the Smiter also, and if you be Reviled,
Revile not again; but in deep Humility and Patience Wait in the Pure, Meek, and
Peaceable Spirit of our Lord Jesus who was made perfect through Sufferings: So
are his Dear and Chosen Jewels, who bear his Name in Righteousness and have
their Eye to the God of their Help, and their Confidence in the Lord alone.

Oh ye Blessed of the Lord,
BE Glad in his Name, who will not let any of you Suffer (whose Confidence is
in him alone) any more than he will give Strength to Bear, and will Sweeten the
Cup of your Tribulation with his Blessed Presence, which will cause your Hearts
to Rejoice and Sing in all your Trials; and will give you your Portion for ever
with the Blessed Assembly, that John Spoke of in the seventh of the
Revevelations: A number that no man could number, that had passed through the
Great Tribulation, and washed their Garments, and made them white in the Blood
of the Lamb: Therefore are they before the Throne of God, and serve him day and
night in his Holy Temple; and he that sits on the Throne shall dwell among
them, and Feed them and lead them to the Living Fountains of waters, where God
will wipe away all Tears of Sorrow from their Eyes for ever.

And this is your Portion, you Dear Children of the Living God, who in true
Love to him have waited upon him, in the Light of Christ, To be Buried with him
in his Spiritual Baptism, and made conformable to him in his Sufferings and
Death; Notwithstanding your Strict walking in Observations [which must be done
according to what the Lord manifests to you, or else you perish Eternally]
without True Repentance.

And in the Deep sense of your Present Strait, being made Conformable in
Measure to our Lord and Savior; you Cry as he did upon the Cross, My God, my
God, why have thou forsaken me (when he bare the Sins and Transgressions of his
People) Even so do you his Dear Children in your Measure passing through the
Great Tribulations, being made of the Number of the Slain of the Lord.

Here is first a passing Through the Great Tribulation, and to be made of the
Number of the Slain of the Lord; and being truly Humbled into his Blessed Will,
in the Deed Sense of the Poverty of Spirit, there Wait upon the Lord, until he
Create you to a lively Hope, and give you a Possession of his Blessed Life,
that is Hid with Christ in God, and so marry you to himself in his own
Righteousness, which he gives you for to be your Wedding Garment.

And now this Love of God constrains you to walk in all Strict Observations
that are Required of you to be done; but no more to Lean upon them for Life,
but have now all your Obediences accepted of God through Faith in the Light,
Life, and Name of Christ, in whom you now are the Righteousness of God for
ever, in Giving up Freely to be Guided by his Spirit in Faithfulness to the end.

Oh you ever Blessed and Happy People! Who does Witness Fulfilled in you what
is here Written; Lift up your Heads and Rejoice in the Lord, and in the
Almighty Power of his Humble, Meek and Pure Spirit, which makes Self of no
Reputation, but through your Obedience to Christ Jesus the True Light, in whom
you come to Witness the Lord to be One, and his Name One; and you that never
had Power to Believe in his Name, until he gave you Power to Believe; you are
One in the Lord for ever. And here is the Joyful and Eternal Unity with the
Father in the Son, and one with another in the Love of Christ which bought us
with his Blood, which the Gates of Hell can never Prevail against.

And all you my Ancient Brethren and Sisters, that have Obtained this Blessed
Dominion and Everlasting Inheritance. I Bless God for you, whom I do Believe
will take Care to Answer the Desire of my Soul as before-written: For the
Comfort of the Young and Tender Babes, for whose Sake I had this Concern upon
my Spirit, to lay before them the True Passage into the Footsteps, where the
Tribulated Companions have Traveled that are Married to the Lord of Life, and
have upon them their Wedding Garment, that they may not come Short that are
upon their Travel toward the same Inheritance in Christ the True Light, as
before expressed.

And I Dearly beseech you, whom God has Sealed up (with his Holy Spirit to
your full Assurance of Gods Everlasting Love in Christ Jesus) that you Watch
over the Tender and Tribulated ones; and in what possible can be done, to
Strengthen their Faith, that they may come into the Heavenly Unity with the
Father in the Son; and Sit down with all them, that have been made Conformable
to Christ in his Suffering and Death, that in the Heavenly Resurrection;
Blessed and Everlasting Peace, they may Sing Halelujah, and High Praises to the
Lord their God, over all the wrath that is in the Children of men; which will
come to an end, and vanish away like Smoke, before you whom the Lord has
called in meekness and Patience to bear his Name in Righteousness, in the Sweet
Savoury Spirit of Jesus Christ, over all Blessed for ever, Amen. In which the
Lord keep you all, with my Soul, Faithful unto the end; is the Breathings of
the Spirit of your Brother and Companion in the Kingdom of Patience and
Tribulation in the Lord Jesus Christ.

William Dewsbury.

ANd further, I have this to communicate to my Friends and Brethren; that what
has come to pass these late years, for want of Watchfulness to be Guided by
the Spirit of the Lord: Love has been quenched in many, that Offenses has
entered, and Separation followed; which has Deeply wounded my Spirit, who have
endeavored to the utmost of my Power in the Love of God to prevent such
Proceedings; and so have I done in many years past, in preventing Papers ready
to be Printed from being Published, that were of a tendency to quench the Love
of one toward another: And when Ieffery Bullocks Papers were published in
Print, which would appear to the Reader of a tendancy as to the Breach of
Unity; (which would cause the Enemies of God to Rejoice, it did so wound my
Spirit, that for many Weeks, they that saw me did not expect that I would
continue long in the Body: But God in his Mercy Restored Strength in his
Appointed time.

And when I did hear that some in the West, did intend to Publish in Print some
Friends Weaknesses: I Bore my Testimony against such Proceedings, and told one
that did Favor what was intended, That I would have my Hand Cut off, before I
would Exercise it in such Undertakings (as the state of Friends was at that
time.) And desired him, To speak to W. R. that he would not proceed in
Publishing any thing of that Nature; for if he did, it would be a prejudice to
Truth, and would produce very sad Consequences that would follow, and my Spirit
would be deeply wounded, as it is this day, through these Proceedings; that
voluntarily through want of Love, casts away the Judgment, that is given to the
people of the Saints of the most High God (to keep all sweet and savoury
amongst us) into the Hands of the Enemies of God, as an inlet for them to come
into the midst of us, to sit as Judges and trample upon us.

So to Clear my Conscience of all False Reports Cast upon me, as that I have
Encouraged what is Brought forth as before written; and to Satisfy all Friends
in God, I have Labored according to the Ability God has given me, to Prevent
the Publishing all things of that Nature, as aforsaid; and have Endeavored
with all concerned, that I could meet with: to have a care of watching for
Evil, lest they Provoke one another to Wrath, and so Quench the Love: But
rather Look at the Good one in another, and in the Love of God, Minister, to
Preserve them forth of any Weakness they did see lay near to attend them; that
so the Pure Holy Spirit of Light, Life and Love, that first Gathered us into it
self, to be a People in God, and in his Blessed Authority to reign over what
was, and is contrary to his Blessed Nature, may again Restore, (where it is
wanting) in the Universality of its Blessed Power, to make up the Breaches, and
to Restore the Desolate ones, in causing every one that Professes the Biessed
Truth of God, to love their Neighbor as themselves; and so to do unto all, as
they would have others to do unto them; that so all concerned in the Exercise,
in the Measure of the Grace of God in Christ, (that seeks the Peace of his
People) may Stand as Saviors upon mount Sion, to the Honor of the Name of the
Lord our God, and the Eternal Comfort of all that Love not their Lives unto
Death, to serve the Lord, and his Dear and Chosen People, in the Meek, Patient,
and Peaceable Spirit of our Lord Jesus Christ.

In which the Lord keep you all with my Soul; that in his Pure and Peaceable
Dominion, we all Reign, and throw down our Crowns before his Throne. and all
Unanimously Sing, all Glory, Honor, Praises, Thanksgiving, and Dominion be
given to him, who is found worthy to sit upon his Throne in all our
Consciences, Christ Jesus the True Light, and hope of our Glory, even so be it
withal that Professes his Blessed Truth: Says my Soul in the Name of the
Lord.

From Warwick the 8th. day of the 3d. Month 1682. W. D.


