DEVOUT REFLECTIONS On TIME, And ETERNITY: With various Considerations and
Counsels, to assist our Victory over this Present World, and help us to
prepare for an Everlasting State.

An Introduction is prefixed concerning the First Day of the Year: how it was
observed by the Jews; and in what manner a Serious Christian may employ it to
the best Advantage. Most of the following Meditations are suited to that
Purpose.

AMSTERDAM. Printed for Jacob vande Velde, Bookseller. In the Year. 1687.

TO THE READER.
THe visible Decay of Piety, and Evangelical Holiness, is a common subject of
Complaint: and hardly ever was it more justly so then now, with respect to the
Generality of Churches, and par^^cular Christians. All serious ^^d considering
Persons must needs reckon themselves obliged on that account both to Mourn and
Fear. The causes (...) serious Mourning are too many, and too notorious, to be
unobserved, by Those who have any Knowledge of the pre^^^t State of the
Christian Relig^^n in Europe, even among the most Reformed. The general
unacquaintedness with the Mysteries of the Gospel; the Reproach of the solemn
Assemblies by the Corruption of its Doctrines and Worship, and the dishonor
cast upon its most sacred institutions; the late terrible Desolations of the
Temple and Sanctuary, and grievous sufferings of our Brethren in several parts
of the World; the shameful Apostasy of so many Thousands from the doctrine and
worship of the Gospel to Popish Idololatry; and other considerations of this
kind, which might be named, do carry with them a loud Call to Humiliation and
mourning.

But the Practical Degeneracy of Professing Christians unto Worldliness,
Profaness, and Sensuality, does not only afford matter of Lamentation for the
present but too much ground to Fear, that the bitterness of Death is not past;
God's Anger is not turned away, or his Controversy ended with the Protestant
Churches. And after we have known so many Thousands to renounce and abjure
their Religion in an Hour of Temptation, and see so many more, yea the far
greatest part, in a preparedness to Revolt, on the like or lesser Trials, by
reason of their vicious Lives, and estrangedness from the Power of Religion,
(because they receive not the Truth in the Love of it,) what can we reasonably
expect, but farther Tokens of Divine Displeasure.

And how little of any encouraging prospect is there, by the serious
Reformation of Persons, Families, and Churches to turn away his wrath? where
are there any Symptoms of the Recovery of the Power of Godliness, from whence
in our Age there is so undeniable a Declension? (and acknowledged by all
Parties that there is so.) How little is to be seen of any such thing, among
those who are most forward and zealous in espousing the Reformed interest? even
such as would be thought of all Others to be most concerned for its
Preservation, and have suffered not a little for it?

The distressed case of our Brethren (especially in France,) cannot but move
our Bowels of Compassion, when we read or hear from time to time the Relation
of the barbarous proceedings of their Persecutors. But the sensual wicked Lives
of professedly Reformed Christians, is certainly a more dreadful object to be
considered; and ought so to be regarded by us, as the consequences of it are
much more to be feared, then of the feircest Persecution by open and avowed
Enemies. For the Curch of Christ never lost either Truth or Holiness that way:
it has rather been a considerable outward Means, for the preservation and
increase of Both. (Tho this cannot be said, but the direct Contrary, concerning
Protestants persecuting one another for lesser differences)

And what ever Expectations we may and ought to have, from the unfulfill'd
Prophecies, of God's rebuilding Sion, in the latter days, and destroying her
Enemies; (which we have no reason to question but he will most gloriously
effect, and ought daily to pray that he would hasten it, for his Names sake:)
yet can we never hope to see any thing considerable of that kind, in our Time,
without a great Repentance, and Reformation, and the more Plentiful Pouring
out of the H. Spirit for the healing os the Nations. I therefore wish that the
confident Expectations of a speedy deliverance of the Church, may not divert us
from the present Duty we are called to, as the proper appointed Means, to which
God has directed us for that end.

And are there any hopeful Beginnings of such a Thing, within view? is there
any thing on foot to be observed, like such a Retrieving of Gospel Holiness in
the Hearts and Lives of men? Does not the Name and Thing grow more and more
into Contempt every day? and who can tell how far it may proceed, to procure
Judgment upon any particular Place or Country, that is guilty of so general,
and provoking a Defection?

It concerns us therefore, every one to look to himself; to Repent, and do our
first Works, and make our Peace with God, that we may be found within the small
number of those, who shall be thought worthy to escape the almost Epidemical
infection, and to stand before the Son of Man. On which Account, any thing that
is likely to awaken Men to the Consideration of the great acknowledged
Principles of Religion cannot be unseasonable. Yea in such a case the meanest,
and weakest Endeavors may be of some use. The subjects of the following
Reflections are most of them of that kind, necessary to be attended to by all
sorts, of Persons; and so cannot be too often pressed, tho in different Manners.

The usefullness of the subject Matter, and the smallness of the Bulk, are two
things which are wont to recommend a Book to most Readers. For which reason, I
may Hope, this will be read by several, who suffer much better, because bigger,
books to ly by them neglected. Some may possibly give it the reading, as a
New Years Gift. And who even shall be so far persuaded by it, as to set a part
some Time in the beginning of the Year, for Self-examination, Confession of
Sin, Repentance, Thanksgiving, and solemn renewall of his Covenant with God,
(which several of these Reflections may not only excite to, but are intended to
direct and assist him in,) I am persuaded he will thank me for putting him in
mind at least, of so seasonable an Exercise. The greatest part of these
Meditations were begun on a New Years Day, tho some others are thought fit to
be inserted, as tendign to promote the same design. But knowing how much easier
it is, to stir up other men's Devotion, then to command and keep alive my own;
it is desired that some of the most devout Thoughts contained in these papers
may be looked upon as what the Author aims at, and would persuade to rather then
what he has already attained: as what he knows he ought to be and do, and
does seriously endeavor, rather then what he is, and has been: heartily
lamenting wherein he has been faulty or defective in such Duties, as these and
the like Reflections do oblige to, and enforce upon All who shall read them, and
therefore much more upon him self.

That they were penned at several times, and in occasional retirements for
Spiritual Exercises, will with the difference of the subject be a sufficient
excuse that some are larger, and others shorter, and that the style is in some
places more neglected then in others. If I may hereby render any service to
then Souls of men, if any secure Sinner, any self deceiving Hypocrite, or
backsliding Christian be hereby awakened, or any serious Believer's Devotion be
quickened and advanced, I hope God will accept it. To his Blessing I humbly
recommend it, for those Ends.

THE CONTENTS.
THe Introduction. From what Time the Jews reckoned the Beginning of their
Year: The difference between their Sacred and Civil Account. The feast of
Trumpets on the first Day of the Year: Its Institution, nature, and Design: the
Traditions and Customs of the Jews respecting that Day. page 1 Section I. Of
the Changeable State, and Short Duration of Earthly Things; especially of Man:
how little it is considered and believed: how necessary it should be so. p. 16
II. Of the Change in Men's Inclinations, Opinions, and Actions, which one Year
shows. How observable it is in Others: how much more discernable in our Selves.
Honor: and Reputation, etc. how uncertainly preserved, and how easily blasted.
p. 23 III. The Uncertainty of Living to the Period of Another Year. The Vanity
of this Life: the Swiftness of Time, and how it ought to be improved. p. 30.
IV. Of the seeming Difference between so many Years Past, and the same number
of Years considered as Future. p. 36 V. The little Portion of our Time on Earth
considered, by a Computation of the Life of Man, from the Number of Years and
Hours. p. 39 VI. Of the Redemption of Time: how precious and valuable a
Treasure it is, and will be thought to be, when it is too-late. p. 54 VII. Of
the Ordinances of Heaven, Day and Night, Winter and Summer, Seed Time and
Harvest: their order and succession, as established by God, is the effect of
Infinite Wisdom and Goodness. What thy may teach us. p. 48 VIII. Of Evils to be
Expected in this one Year: the wisdom and Mercy of God in concealing from us
the Knowledge of future Events. p. 55 XI. The Supposition of dying this Year
should be improved: the Consequence of Redeeming Time, and providing for
Eternity farther pressed. The Folly of Elder Persons is condemned and checked from
the Example of Children. It Is advisable to familiarize the thoughts of Death,
and to imagine before hand, what Apprehensions of Things we shall then have. p.
60 X. The Brevity of Life considered as a Fruit of Sin. There are but three
ways of leaving this World; as Abel, Adam, or Enoch. A diligent Improvement of
Time farther pressed; and the neglect of it bewailed. p. 68 XI. Of the
Expectation of Another Life. The Vanity and Misery of Man, in his Best Estate,
if there be none The Satisfactory removal of that Supposition, by the thoughts
of God, and of Eternal Felicity in his Blessed Presence. p. 73 XII. The
Consideration of the Death of Others, especially of Relations, Friends, and
Acquaintance, how to be improved. what Instructions we may learn by the sight
of a Dead Corpse, or a Deaths-Head, and the usual Motto on it: and what by the
Death of Holy Christians, to quicken our Desires to be as They. p. 83 XIII.
What Influence the Consideration of ETERNITY would have upon our Hearts and
Lives; if soundly believed. Especially, if the Supposition of DYing this Year
be annexed to it. p. 93 XIV. How a Good Man may improve, and encourage himself
under, the Supposition of Dying THIS YEAR even in the most uneasy and
undesirable Circumstances. p. 101 XV. Of Dying in a Foreign Country, and of
Dying Young, Considerations proper to reconcile the mind to both. p. 111 XVI.
The Contemplation of our Approaching Change may assist us, to mortify the
Lusts of the Flesh, the Lust of the Eyes, and the Pride of Life, to cure
Ambition, and promote Contentment. p. 119 XVII. The same Argument considered
farther, as a dissuasive from Worldliness and Earthly mindedness: and as proper
to confute the Vanity of Long Projects, and great Designs for this World. p.
125 XVIII. The Consideration of the Certain and near Approach of an
EVERLASTING State amplifi'd, and pressed, to enforce an Holy Life. p. 131. XIX.
The Punishments of the Damned considered, as Intolerable, and EVERLASTING, and
unquestionably Certain what the Reflection upon HEL-Torments may, and ought
to, teach us. p. 142 XX. The Eternal Blessedness of HEAVEN considered, as the
Perfection of Holiness: to quicken our Desires and Endeavors after greater
Meetness to possess it. p. 159 XXI. A devout Meditation upon the Psalm 73. v.
25. Whom have I in Heaven but Thee? And there is none upon Earth that I desire
besides Thee. p. 180 XXII. The Glorious Appearance of J. Christ to Judgment
considered as Certain: The Terror, and Astonishment, Confusion and Despair of
the Wicked, to behold the Judge; and hear his condemning Sentence to
EVERLASTING Destruction. p. 194 XXIII. Meditations of the Glory of Christ in
his Glorified Saints, and of the Thankful Admiration of Believers, when he
shall come again from Heaven: which shall be continued to all ETERNITY. p. 205
XXIV. Concerning the Examination of a Man's Heart and Life: the Reasonableness,
Advantages, and Necessity of it. Some Directions and advice concerning the Time
and Manner. That we may know in what Preparedness we are for ETERNITY. p. 223.
XXV. How Christians ought to examine their Decays of Grace and Piety: The
greatness of their Sin, and of their Loss under such a Declension. God's
displeasure and departure from them considered to awaken present Endeavors of a
Recory. In what manner the Faith of Adherence may be acted by one who has no
Assurance. p. 242 XXVI. Confession of Sin, Humiliation, and Repentance must
follow upon self-Examination. Advice concerning Repentance of some particular
Backsliding. The great Perplexity and distress of a Penitent Sinner represented
as a Caution against returning to Folly. p. 261. XXVII. The Necessity of
Christian Resolution, to upright, persevering Obedience: how full and extensive
it ought to be, and yet humble. By what means we may be assisted to Perform
that which we Resolve. p. 279 XXVIII. The Import and obligation of our
Baptismal Covenant. The Renewal of it by a solemn Dedication of our selves to
God, the Father, Son, and H. Spirit, exemplifi'd and recommended. p. 289 XXIX.
Practical and Consolatory Reflections on the preceding self-dedication, or
Covenant with God. p. 301 XXX. Thanksgiving to God for his Innumerable
Benefits, and Mercies, particularly in the Year Past. With some directions and
advice concerning it. p. 314
THE INTRODUCTION.
From what Time the Jews reckoned the Beginning of their Year: of the
difference between their sacred and civil account. The Feast of Trumpets on the
first day of the year, its Institution, nature, and design: the Traditions and
Customs of the Jews respecting that Day.
UPon the deliverance of the Jews out of Egypt, the first month which began
with the new Moon next to the vernal Equinox, was to be acounted the Beginning
of Months, Exodus 12:2. it answers to the latter end of our March, and the
Beginning of April; and is sometimes called Nisan, and sometimes Abib. It was
ever after that Deliverance, reckond the First month of the year, in their
Sacred or Ecclesiastical Acount. Therefore the Passover kept in this month, is
said to be observed in the first month: and the Feast of Purim, which was kept
in our February, is said to be in the last month, that is, of the Sacred year.
A Period so remarkable and extraordinary, as that was to the Jews, deserved
very well to be particularly remembered and taken notice of: and might justly be
acounted the First, or chiefest of their months. And by comparing Exodus 12.41.
with Gal. 3.17. it may be concluded that Abraham received the Promise, on the
fifteenth day of this month: and 't is computed that about the same time of
the year Isaac was born; and the Tabernacle afterward erected in the wilderness.

As that Redemption of Israel from their Bondage in Egypt, was but a type of a
more glorious one by the Messiah, (which all the World are concerned in as well
the Jews) he was pleased to suffer Death in this month. 18. John. 28.
According to this computation, the month Tisri, which began with the first new
moon next to the Autumnal Equinox, is in several places of H. Scripture called
the Seventh month. Tho as to Civil and Political Affairs, this was the First
month of the year: and so accounted both before and after their coming out of
Egypt. For this reason, the Feast of Tabernacles, (or the Feast of Harvests,
on the 15. day of this month, when the Fruits of the Earth were gathered in,)
is said to be in the end of the year. Exodus 23.16. This month Tisri answers to
part of our September, and part of October. About this Time of the year is most
commonly reckoned, the Creation of the world; the Birth and Baptism of J.
Christ, the Head of the second Creation; the consecration of Solomon's Temple,
and other remarkable Events: from hence they computed their years of Jubilee;
and the seventh year for their Land to rest, etc. There were as many Feasts and
religious Solemnities Appointed to the Jews in this month, as in all the year
besides. The Eighty first Psalm, composed by Asaph, for the first day of this
month, or the Feast of Trumpets, is supposed to have been in remembrance of
that Deliverance of Israel out of AEgipt: Hammond. in loc.
the sounding of Trumpets being a token of liberty.

This Feast of Trumpets; on the first day of the new-year according to their
Civil Acount is thus commanded, Levit. 23.24. Numb. 29.1. and 10. cap. 10. that
it should be, a Sabbath, and a Memorial of blowing of Trumpets, an holy
Convocation, etc. Some think it is called a Memorial of Trumpets to preserve
the memory of Isaac's Deliverance, God^an univer. Hist. de l'Eglise. Tom. 1. c.
1.. 6.
by the substitution of a Ram to be sacrificed in his stead; to this purpose it
may be alleged that it is sometimes called by the Jews, the Binding of Isaac:
which they suppose to have been in the same day of the year. By others termed
Festum Cornu, the Feast of the Horn. But it is more probable, that this name
was not given, with any respect to Isaac, but on the account of that kind of
Trumpets, Hospinian. de Fest. Judaic.
which where then sounded, viz, such as were made of sheeps or rams horns.
Others think it to have been Appointed as a grateful remembrance of former
victories which God had afforded them. But the most likely acount of it is
this: that it was intended to solemnize the Beginning of the new-year, to mind
them of the Beginning of the World, and to excite their thankfulness for the
fruits, and blessings, and Benefits of the year preceding. The extraordinary
Blowing of Trumpets by the Priests at this time, (in all their Cities, as well
as at Jerusalem, where two silver Trumpets were also used at the Temple,
Lightfoot. Temple Service. chap. 16.
as well as these of Horn, and the Levites sung the 81. Ps.) might serve both
to stir up the People to bless God for the favors of the year past,
acknowledging his Goodness in preserving them to the beginning of another; and
withal excite them to pray for his Protection and Blessing, for the new year on
which they now entered.

Maimonides, the famous Jewish Rabbin, thinks the sounding of Trumpets at this
time was designed to signify some such Exhortation as this, Arise O ye
sleepers, Canones de Poeuitent. cap. 3. can. 6.
out of your sleep, and you that slumber awake out of your slumbering. Search
your works, and turn by Repentance. Remember your Creator, you that have
forgotten the Truth, and have exchanged it for the vanities of the world; and
have all your lives wandered after vanity, which will not profit or deliver you.
Consider your souls; consider your ways, and works, and let every one of you
forsake his evil way, and his thoughts that are not good.

Some have imagined a typical Representation of the two Covenants in this
Feast. The old Covenant figured by the year passed; and the Covenant of Grace,
or the Gospel state by the new year then began, and that by the sound of
Trumpets was prefigured the future preaching of the Gospel, according to that
of the Apostle, Their sound went forth unto all the Earth, and their words unto
the end of the world; and so the Feast of Trumpets is abrogated by the
preaching of the Gospel, if that were typically signified by it. Without
supposing any Type here, in a strict and proper sens; we may ye farther
consider the Parallel, and observe, how the Joy and Gratitude that these
Trumpets did excite, is exceeded by that greater rejoicing, promised and
foretold by the Prophets, when the Glad tidings of the Gospel of Salvation by
the Messiah should be published to the world. 54 Is. 1. 2 Luke 11. 4 Gal. 27.
which has been in part accomplished: and will be more complete, in that Kingdom
of Peace and Purity, which Christ will establish upon earth, toward the end of
the World: and shall be finally perfected at the end of Time: when Days and
Years, and Time thus measured, shall be no more. But the Messiah, our B.
Savior, having finished his mediatory undertaking as to what concerns Earth,
shall come again from Heaven, with the Trump of God, to raise the Dead, and
summon all the world to their final Judgment. Then shall he deliver up the
Kingdom to his Father: and the Faithful enter into the Joy of their Lord, and
be for ever with him.

There is a Tradition among the Jews mentioned by Maimonides, Canones Poenit.
cap 3. can. 5.
that on the first day of the new year, God enters into Judgment for the sins
of the year and Life past. That every ones Faults are weighed against his good
works. He that is found Rightous is sealed unto Life: and he that is found
wicked is sealed unto Death.

And 't is a general custom that has obtained among the Jews, for the ten
first days of the new-year, to rise out of their Beds in the night, and to
continue in their Synagogues praying and worshipping, until break of day. The
superstitious and ridiculous Ceremonies of the Vid. Ceremonies and Cout. parmi
les Inifs d'aujourdhuy part. 3. c. 5.
modern Jews on this Day, I shall not repeat. However vain and groundless,
superstitious, and absurd many of their Customs, and Practices are on this day:
yet this blind Devotion of the Jews may justly shame and condemn the Christians
of our Age: who commonly spend the Beginnings of every year worse then any
other parts of them; and instead of any solemn Retirements for Prayer and
Meditation, which might assist them to number their Days, and prepare for
Eternity; instead, I say, of such seasonable Exercizes, how do vain and
hurtful Sports and Pastimes, or trifling and unedifying mirth, and fruitless
conversations consume the greatest part of the Days, (and nights too) of the
Beginning of the year! And thus when the first fruits of the year are offered
up to sin and vanity, 't is no wonder if the following parts of it are employed
to no better purpose: without any due concern for the Soul, and an Everlasting
State.

To Endeavor some Remedy to those disorders, and give some assistance to them
who desire seriously to make Religion their Principal Business, is the end of
publishing these Reflections. I most heartily beseech the God of a-Grace to
influence by his H. Spil rit, the Conscience of every Reader, that some such
effect may be attained. Having found the Practice recommended, to be of use to
my self; and my own Heart warmed in composing the substance of these Papers,
(tho without any Intention at that Time of exposing them to the world,) it is
not unreasonable to hope, that what has been beneficial to one, may be
helpful to another. It cannot certainly be unadvisable or improper to Begin
the year with God, with whom we should begin every Day. 'T is decorous and
becoming, to Dedicate our selves to Him, in a more solemn manner then ordinary,
at such a Time: Thankfully to acknowledge the Favors and Blessings we have
particularly received the Year Past: and to recollect the Sins we have been
guilty of; to aggravate them with Humility, Contrition, and deep Remorse: to
renew our Covenant with God: to repeat and fortify our Resolutions of living
better: imploring his Grace to assist us in it: to reflect seriously on the
mutability, frailty, brevity of our present Life: to consider the swiftness,
uncertainty, irrecoverableness, and consequent value of our Time: to look
forward to a Blessed, or miserable Eternity, one of which we must share in; and
to confirm our Faith in the Certainty thereof, and consider our near aproach to
such an unchangeable State: to think what improvement we should make of the
Death of others, especially of Relations: and Friends, who have lately been
called home: To make the Supposition in good earnest, that we may follow them
this year, and dye before another new years day; to imprint such a Thought on
our Hearts, and the inferences that may naturally be deduced from it: to beg of
God, to enable us to Redeem our Time, and discharge the Duty of our particular
places; and prepare us for all the Events of the following year; and so
effectually Teach us to number our days; that we may apply our Hearts unto true
Wisdom: least we be surprised by an unexpected Death before the period of
another year. And lastly to pray for our Relations, and Friends, Families and
Neighbors, and our Enemies too; and plead with God on the behalf of Sion, and
the afflicted State of the Reformed Churches. To some of these and the like
Purposes, I hope what is here offered, may be subservient: if considered with
seriousness and application, after humble Invocation of the Blessing of God,
and the aids of his Spirit; composeing our minds and thoughts as in his most
awefull and holy Presence.

I have only this farther to request: that if any one soul shall find any real
Benefit in this kind; he would so far requite my charitable assistance of him,
that when his heart is most serious, his Spirit most composed and devout, and
his affections most vigorous and lively, he would not forget, to put up one
Prayer to Heaven for me, for Greater Holiness and Abilities to Honor God, and
persevering Faithfullness to his Truth and Interest, what ever Temptations to
desert it may be employed by the World, the Flesh, and the Devil: the three
Great Enemies of thine and my Salvation.

DEVOUT REFLECTIONS On TIME, And ETERNITY, This World, and the Next.
I.
Of the changeable State, and short Duration of Earthly Things: especially of
Man, how little it is considered and believed: how necessary it should be so.

WHen I consider that yesterday was the Conclusion of the last year; and that I
now am entered on another; it is seasonable to reflect on the mutable condition,
and short Duration of all Things in this world, which are measured by Time.
That as they have their Beginning, so they have their End: and that the
distance, or space of Time between the one and the other is very little. Let me
not then, o my soul! Rejoice and please my self to much in New Enjoyments;
remembering a Change may be at hand, and the End is certain.

Many who were Rich, and Flourishing the last year may be reduced to Poverty
and deep distress, before the end of this: who are now in a capacity to relieve
others, within a few months, or a shorter space, may be objects of other men's
Charity. The thing which has been, is that which may be: and that which has
been seen in one year, may happen in another: so easily so quickly may a Change
be made! Riches may unexpectedly change their Owners, and borrow wings of a
thousand Accidents, where with to fly to Heaven for a new Disposal. 1 Cor. 7.
v. 29.
They therefore who possess should be as if they possessed not: for the Fashion
of this world passes away. Innumerable casualties may effect that change,
which no humane Art or skill can possibly foresee or hinder. afflictive
unexpected Evils attend us every where, we cannot promise our selves
Tranquillity for a Day, much less an Year to come. they lay in wait for us on
every side, enter at every crevice, and commonly overtake us, when we are least
apprehensive of their approach. Job. 9.25.
Man that is born of a woman is of few days, and full of Trouble: He comes up
as a flower, and is cut down: flees as a shadow, and continues not. What then
are Riches, Beauty, Strengh, and Honor, the accidents of this Substance, which
is it self but a Shadow! His Life is but a vapor, on which they all depend;
then how much less are they? to how speedy an alteration are they subject! what
numberless Instances of this does one years experience furnish! what sadning
Disapointments and unexpected Calamities have befallen many since this Day
Twelve month! and multitudes who are now at ease, and think their mountain
too strong to be removed, shall meet with sharper Trials before the end of this
year. Alas! how few consider or believe it, till they find it so? All men
should count upon trouble and Disapointment, suffering and sorrow in this
world: and he that has the least share is reckoned the most Prosperous man:
and yet he knows not how soon his Portion may be doubled. We reckon our Joys by
the absence of some degrees of sorrow and Calamity, that others meet with: and
before the end of this year, our condition may be as disconsolate as theirs. O
my soul! tho I know this to be true; tho I cannot, I dare not deny it; yet how
difficult is it to conquer the Love of this world, and of this Body, to that
degree I ought! to undervalue the intrest of a short, a mutable, uncertain,
and troublesome Life, in comparison of the permanent possession of an
Everlasting Good! tho I know that what is earthly and temporal must needs be
thus changeable and fading: and that it is as true of Man himself as of any
thing under the sun; yet how do I forget what Man is! how do I live, as if all
this were as certainly falls, as it is unquestionably true? admire, love, fear,
trust in Man, as if he were the direct-contrary to what he is, and seek for
immortality upon earth, and act as if I were assured of it, and were not liable
to any change: tho I acknowledgd and know the contrary. Tho the last years
experience, and the observation of every day does convince me of it; tho all
history and all the records of the Grave attest it; tho all mankind in every
Age have found it so; tho it be a manifest notorious truth, legible in the
various changes and calamities, but especially in the Dust and ashes of all who
have lived before us, (our Graves being often made of our Predecessors Dust,
and the Earth we bury in having once been living) yet how little is it
believed, how seldom considered. The Confirmation of it which one year gives us
has little Influence on our Hearts of lives, with respect to the next. We
ought therefore to accustom our selves to these thoughts, before such changes
Happen, to which our Final change shall ere long succeed. They will be less
efficacious, if never admitted till our minds are oppressed and feebled by the
weight of Affliction. We shall then want that vigor of Reason which should
cooperate with the remedy: and which if used before hand would help to support
and stay our minds under all subsequent revolutions. For those Considerations
may be able to fix and stay our minds under changes, that may not be sufficient
to recover and raise our spirits after they are dejected and fallen.

II.
Of the change in men's Inclinations, Opinions, and Actions which one year
shows. How observable it is in Others: how much more discernible in our selves.
Honor and Reputation etc. how uncertainly preserved, and how easily blasted.

WHat a discovery does one year make of the mutability of Man, not only of his
outward Condition, but of the Man himself, his temper, his Practice, his
Inclinations, his Aversions, etc. He abides not at one stay: every breath of
wind turns him to another shape. We despise to day, that which we admired
yesterday: and to morrow hate the object of our present Love. We begin
friendships, and cancel them on slight occasions: and a mortal enmity often
succeeds to a tender affection; the very Persons, who are in one year our
darling Friends, and possibly deserved to be so, may yet be open Enemies the
next, and seek our Ruin. Lord! what is man? How deceitful and mutable the
Heart of man! we know not what other men are, or will prove to be, till a
trial; and we are equally Ignorant concerning our selves, till an hour of
temptation. How patiently do we think we could bear Afflictions till we feel
them! how Partial and mistaken a Judgment do we make of our wisdom and strengh
in reference to the future! we counsel others to submission and resignation in
the most difficult trials, and wonder they complain so loud; when we our
selves despond and sink under half their Burden: and send up our more impatient
murmurs to Heaven, when God thinks fit to prove us by a lighter Stroke. We
censure and condemn others, who are in an higher Station, and are called to
more difficult work then we; when by a little Advancement, and the like
Temptations, we discover that we are as bad as they. They who were reputed
Humble Temperate and Religious, when they have been exalted higher, become
Proud, sensual, and ungodly. Had some been told a twelve month since, what now
they are, and speak, and act, they would have made Hazael's answer, Am I a Dog,
that I should do this? A change in the public affairs of the State, and by
that means of particular Intrests, or some alteration of our own more private
Circumstances (calling us to new Duties and exposing us to new Temptations)
discovers us more to our selves, and to other men, then was expected, and proves
us to be very different from what we appeared to be. Such a change, for
Instance, as from Poverty to Riches, from Sickness to Health, from obscurity to
Honor, from Privacy to a Public charge etc. or on the contrary. May we not
fear, that some, who a year since dared not live a day in the neglect of Closet
and family Devotion, do now omit it, for many Days and weeks together? And that
some, who once were careful to improve the whole Sabbath to religious purposes,
now place the whole of their Religion in attending the public worship, and
think it enough, not for that Day only, but for the whole week. Under the
afflicting hand of God, or some apprehensions of an proaching change, or sens
of Guilt upon Great Transgressions, the convictions of sin are lively,
Conscience is sensible and awake, affections warm, Resolutions strong, etc. but
alas! how soon does the case alter! our Spirits cool, our zeal abates, our good
Purposes untwist and dye, and come to nothing. By degrees we return to Folly,
and boldly venture on that sin, we lately trembled at. Through the want of
continued smart afflictions, or of a serious awakening Ministry, and friendly
faithful admonition: or through the Temptations of vain Company, and the
remaining power of fleshly Lusts. So that we falsify our most sacred Promises
and Resolutions, violate our holy vows, cancel the bonds of God upon us,
suffer the Devil to reenter and prevail again, to take possession of our
hearts, and yield our selves an easy prey to his Temptations, till our latter
end be worse then our Beginning. Oh what a change does one year let us see! in
Persons as well as things! in our selves as well as other Men! And as it is with
Man himself, so with every thing that he values himself upon, or for which he
is esteemed by others: and even this esteem and Reputation is also changeable
and uncertain. Not to Instance in Riches, but in what is nobler, Learning, and
the Improvements of the mind by study; how soon may the violence of a Diseas
disturb or stupifie the Brain to that degree, as shall reduce the greatest
scholar to the Pitied condition of a Fool, or Bedlam? and where is his
Reputation and Renown, in such a case? But much less then that, will blast the
fairest Reputation, with the far greatest part of the world: it may be lost by
unwary mistakes, by falss reports, by envy and malice, by the subtle hatred of
Enemies, or by the weakness and credulity of Friends, (who will listen to every
Backbiters story) or by one or two indiscretions of the man himself; and no man
can be certain to secure his Reputation, while he lives: much less after he is
dead. People will talk of us as they please: and their opinions very often
change from one extreme to the other. But he who has the loudest Fame shall
only be talked of a little longer then his Neighbors: and that by a few dying
Men, that must themselves be ere long forgotten. And how small a part of the
Inhabited world, is acquainted so much as with the name of the greatest men in
Europe? and how different and Contrary are men's Opinions and Discourses of
them, where they are known, and talked of. And how many holy excellent persons
are buried in oblivion, or misrepresented as unworthy to live on earth, whose
names will be found in the book of Life. Our Life is yet as mutable and
uncertain as any of these. Our Breath is in our nostrils, and tho there be room
enough for it to go out, we have no assurance that we shall have power to draw
it in again.

III.
Of the uncertainty of Living to the Period of another Year. The vanity of this
Life: the swiftness of Time, and how to be improved.

I Now begin another year: but what Assurance have I to out live it? I cannot
say how soon my Sovereign Judge may call me hence, and summon me to appear
before his Righteous Bar. Oh let me not defer my necessary preparations for
Death, which may be nearer then I imagine! let me mind the Great things first,
which are of absolute necessity, to be done, sometime or other before I dye!
This perishing Body which I have pamperd and indulged, at the expense of so
much cost and Time, may be putrefying in a silent Grave, before half this year
be past. Lord! bless this thought, to awaken my diligent endeavors to secure
the Blessedness of Eternity! to mortify the desire of Great things for my
self, in future years; by the considered possibility of dying before the end of
this! For no glass is more brittle, no Bubble more vanishing, no Ice more
dissolving, no Flower more sading, no shadow less substantial, no sleep or
dream more deceiving, no sound more Transient, nothing more vain, and more
uncertain then Life, on which all other things in this world depend. We sleep
every night in the outer chambers of Death: and in some diseases, sleeps, which
is the image and picture of death is taken away, to give place to the Original,
and make way for death. And every year, every week, every day are hastening to
our final change: which may overtake us ere we are aware. Every word we speak,
is formed of that Breath whereby we live; and we may not live to pronounce
another sentence: but the lamp of life be extinguished and blown out by a sudden
blast. Every thing we do carries away some sands of our little Glass of Time;
and how little may remain? Or how soon may the Glass be broke? our souls are
in our bodies, as a little air enclosed in a thin bubble: how easily is that
broken, and where are we? How many who are now a live, in health and vigor, who
deliberate on their meat and drink, and are curious of air and exercize, to
maintain themselves in health, and pleas themselves with the dream of years to
come, shall never see another New Years day? it may be not another month, or
week, or morrow? When I lie down to sleep, I hope to rise stronger, and
fresher, and fitter for work, but I know with all, I may rise no more. And may
not my name be on the Roll of those who shall next be called, at least some
time this year? Let me not then neglect or foolishly delay my Principal
Business; to provide against a change, which is inevitable, but the time of it
altogether doubtful. Ought not my first and chiefest care be employed to make
my Peace with God. (He alone can be my Happiness: to his final Judgment I am
hastening: His Favor alone can give me support and Joy in a dying hour: To his
mercy I must trust, when I leave this world, and can have no advantage more by
any thing in it:) that he may mercifully receive my soul at Death and be my
everlasting Portion. Do I know my Life is thus vain and transient? and shall I
not seriously improve it to such a Purpose? Shall these thoughts leave no
Impression upon me? Do I breath continually in this Element of vanity? and yet
forget where I am? and remain insensible of so near a change? Shall these
thoughts pass away as a vanishing Cloud, and distill no softening drops on my
soul? Shall the Image of Death, which meets me every where, be only like an
appearing Ghost or Phantasm, that startles and scares a little, but is
presently gone, and no more considered? Oh! let me now remember to make God my
friend, and secure an intrest in his Eternal mercy, while the Day lasts; yea
while my Reason and understanding are free, and not disturbed and clouded by
Fear and pain, and the disorders of the Body, as commonly they are in
sickness, if God should vouchsafe me that warning which yet I may not promise
my self to have, for I may be cut off by a sudden stroke, before the end of
this year, I now begin.

IV.
Of the seeming Difference, between so many Years Past, and the same number of
Years to come.

WHen I look back on the preceding years of my Life, how easily can I grasp
them all at once? they are even as Yesterday when it is past. But so many years
to come has something great and vast, which fills my thoughts, and affects my
mind, after another manner. Such is the difference between past Enjoyments, and
the Expectation of future. Let me suppose the same term and duration of Years,
and yet how different are my Apprehensions of what is past, and of what is yet
to come! Things past by a remembrance of some remarkable passages when they
happened, seem to be present with me: but not knowing what may happen in the
same number of years to come, I have nothing whereon to fix my thoughts. Or the
reason of this difference may rather be, that men in this degenerate and
necessitous State, (with unsatisfied desires reaching after Happiness, and
sensible nothing present can afford it, and knowing by Experience that nothing
past could have done it,) are eagerly desirous of Felicity, and because we know
not but what is to come may procure it, we hope it will; which makes the Time
seem long by reason of our Expectation and desire of Good. Whereas the foresight
of Evil, and the Expectation of that, some years hence, makes the Time rather
seem short and near at hand: So many years to come; in the Expectation and
desire of Good, are long and tedious, such Hope deferred makes the Heart sick:
even tho it is of that, sort as must needs fail our Expectations. Prepare me,
Lord! for what thine unerring Counsel shall pleas to order, as to the
remainder of my time on earth: and suffer me not to count upon a great number
of Years to come, since this for ought I know may be my last; neither let me
expect Rest and Happiness in this world, which nothing Temporal can afford.
This is not the state or season, wherein, by any promise of God, I am
encouraged to hope it. And if fifty or threescore years to come, be thought so
great a matter, and really is so, as to our stay on earth; Oh what
apprehensions ought I to admit concerning an endless, Everlasting State!
especially being as certain of the latter, after death, as I am uncertain
about the former; wither so many years be yet to come before my death?

V.
The little Portion of our Time on Earth considered, by a Computation of the
Life of man, from the number of Years and Hours.

THink o my soul! how short is that Life at longest, made up of years and
months and days: such little parts, and yet in number few. Well therefore may
it be expressed as I find in holy writ by years of number. That is, such as may
soon be numbered. 16. c. 22.12. Ezekiel. 16.10 Isai. 19.
When a few years are come, says Job, (or the years of number, as in the
original,) I shall go the way, whence I shall not return. By the years of on
Hireling, which were not above three. 16. Is. 14. We usually compute Threescore
and ten years, to the Life of man: let me suppose four score. The Bed with most
imploys one half: and hardly one in Thirty does reach the Age of Seventy Years.
And they who live to such an Age, Winter Evening Conference. Conf. 1.
do yet complain how soon it is done. Ignorant child hood, and Heedless Youth,
and Infirm old Age may be supposed to take up be a third part of that Time. In
either of them very little of the great Ends of Life are answered. We
ordinarily begin to reckon our lives from our Birth: whereas for a good while
after we know not wither we are alive or no, but are beholding to others to
make the account for us. When we first come to the steady use of Reason, or
what we call the years of Discretion; how few are there but from the prejudices
of Education, from the corruption of Humane Nature, from the want of
Experience, from the Infection of bad Company, how few, I say, but spend their
younger years in those things, which afterward they are ashamed of, when
Experience has taught them the Wisdom of men. How great a part of our
remaining Time is taken up in the necessites of Nature about food and Raiment,
and in lawful cares, to support the Body? and how much more then needs, in
pampering dressing and adorning it? out of the small remainder, how much is
employed in the concerns of a Family, and near Relations, in particular
Callings, in necessary Civil Business, and in getting, keeping, or improving an
Estate? Besides all the Time that is spent in Recreations, visits, unprofitable
discourse, impertinent thoughts, journeys, sickness, and innumerable other
occasions, some allowable and many needless? After this, how little Time
remains wherein to Cultivate and improve our minds, by Languages, Arts and
Sciences, or the knowledge of a Trade, etc. How little then after all, may we
say, is left for the the matters of Religion! for Devotion to God, and serious
preparation for another world! Alas! how small a number of years make up the
Life of Man! and how small a Portion of that, is employed about the Principal
Business, for which we were born, and for which we live? We divide Time into
Past, Present, and Future: but the Past is not now ours; the Future is not yet,
and the Present now is past, ere the sound be pronounced And yet this is all
the Time alloted us, wherein to secure the Blessedness of Eternity. How many
Hours more of our little Time might be improved then commonly are by the Best?
In every year there are eight thousand seven hundred seventy five Hours: if we
allow the greatest half for sleep, and necessary attendance on the Body, and
take but four thousand Hours for our work and business of consequence: how poor
an acount can most men give of all these four thousand Hours, in every year? not
one hour in seven, not one in ten, is ordinarily devoted to God, and the
purposes of Religion. Should it not affectus, seriously to consider this?
especially if we remember, at what an uncertainty we are, how small a number of
Days and Hours do yet remain. This year, this month, this week, this day, or
hour may be my last. What an unsuspected accident or a sudden diseas may do, I
know not: but this I know that there is scarce any thing that has not killed
some Body; an hair, a feather, a vapor, a breath has done it, and when the
Apostle James asks the question, What is your Life? he answers, It is even a
vapor, that appears a little while, and then vanishes away.

VI.
Of the Redemption of Time, how precious and valuable a Treasure it is, and
will be thought to be, when it is too late.

IS the Life of men so short and fleeting, our days on Earth so few, and so
uncertain, how careful should I be to manage every hour? indevoring to match
the swiftness of Time by my celerity and diligence to improve it! As there is
no Covenant to be made with Death; so no Agreement for the arrest and stay of
Time; it keeps its pace wither I redeem and use it well or not. The greatest
part of our life is designedly employed to avoid death, we eat and drink and
sleep and labor and rest, that we may not dye; and yet even by these we hasten
to death. Every Breath, every pulls, every word leaus one less of the number
which God has appointed me, and carries away some sands of the glass of Time;
and yet how little care is taken to employ it well. We seldom value it, till we
can no longer use it to any advantage: and tho we know it can neither be
retarded in its motion, or recalled when past, yet of nothing are we more
Prodigal. Yea how many complain of it as a Burden; and know not what to do
with their Time, are excedingly at a loss wherein to employ it; what to do to
be rid of it. But alas! how near is that change, when they shall think nothing
too dear to purchase some few grains of that sand, which now seem too many,
while they are passing through their Hourglass? Did we consider it as we ought, we
should not foolishly throw away so much of it in trifles, and things
Impertinent, or what is worse? How much more might we redeem then commonly we
do! to how much better purpose might we husband it! how much more work might
we do, were we never Idle, or did not loyter! we might walk far, did we not
often stand still, or go out of our way. We see it plainly by the great and
excellent effects of some few men's Industry in every Age. Art has found means
to set spies and watches as it were on the Sun; that He cannot look out, but
they take hold of his shadow, and force it to tell how far he is gone that day:
and yet while we are curious in making time give a just account of it self to
us; how little do we consider the account of our Time which we must shortly
give to God. Oh that such a thought might effectually persuade me to redeem it!
that I may not tarry till the end of Time to know the worth of it, Let me not
undervalue it, while it is given me to be used, that I may not eternally regret
my folly, when Time shall be no more.

VII.
Of the Ordinances of Heaven, Day and Night, Summer and Winter, Seed Time and
Harvest, their order and succession established by God, is the effect of
Infinite Wisdom and Goodness. What they may teach us.

WHen I consider the Beginning of another year, I can hardly avoid reflecting
on its several parts, summer and winter, spring and fall, and day and night,
and their alternate Turns. This calls me to observe and admire his Eternal
power and Godhead, Wisdom and Truth, who is the Great Author of this admirable
variety. Who has fixed the Earth with his Foot, and hanged it on nothing, and
settled the Luminaries of Heaven for Excellent Ends: The Sun to rule by day, and
the Moon by night, thereby to distinguish Times and Seasons, to separate Day and
Night, Winter and Summer, and consult the convenience and coin full of Man and
Beast by their do succession. The Day is thine, the Night also is thine, thou
make Summer and Winter. How wonderful is their order, Beauty and constant
course! that when the sun withdraws, and the shadows of the Evening cover the
Earth with darkness, to conclude the Day; the Moon and Stars supply the place
of the absent Sun during the Night: and that tho they differ in length, yet
gradually lessen till they are both equal at the years end, and have made the
same circuit. How excellent a work of God is that quick succession to one
another. The supposition of a perpetual night, is a dismal gloomy thought, O
what will the Everlasting Darkness of the Infernal prison be! The Sun by day
inlightens the Earth, directs our motion, guides our way, governs our Travail,
assists conversation, awakens Industry, warms the Earth and Air, gives life,
and vigor, and fruitfulness to all things under the Sun, and makes the whole
Inferior Creation to rejoice. An Emblem of God's universal Goodness, who is
kind to all his creatures. How admirable is its Luster! how glorious is its
Light! how loudly does it proclaim his power and wisdom! who made this, and the
other Lights of Heaven, by his powerful word, and preserns them hitherto by his
daily Providence. If God be now so glorious, contemplated in his works,
considered in the luster of the created sun, viewed only through the windows of
s^ns; how much more glorious will he appear hereafter, when we shall see him
face to face, and nothing interpose betwixt us and his incomparable Light? If
mine Eyes darle to look upon the meridian Sun, in what inaccessible Light must
he dwell, who is the Father of Lights? If this lower world, the common
receptacle of his Friends and Enemies, have so much of his Glory vouchsafed
them by the Heavenly Bodies; O what a place will Heaven be, where shall be no
Sun or Moon nor need of any, but the Glory of God shall lighten it, and the
Lamb be the Light thereof. While I thus consider the Sun and the Day, I must not
think the Night is use less: which discovers another part of the Heavens, not
discernible by Day, viz the Stars and Planets, refreshing the Earth, cooling
the air, giving necessary rest to the Creatures, etc. their order, motions,
aspects, oppositions, influences, are all useful, and Instructive. The
agreeable mixture of Light and Darkness, the regular succession of Day and Night
within a few hours, are exceeding wonderful, and advantageous. In other parts
of the world, where the Sun beams are more direct and its he at excessive, God
has made amends by the length of the night, (under the Equinoctial line it is
allways 12 hours) and in the more northern parts, where the Influence of the
Sun is weaker, the days are proportionably longer. So good is God to all his
Creatures, in all parts of the world! As the morning and evening answer to the
day of 24 hours, so does Spring and Autumn to the 12 months of the year: that
we may not pass immediately from one extreme to another; but gradually be
disposed for so great a change, as is between summer and winter, between winter
and summer. So merciful and gracious, and infinitely wise is God in all his
works! so that we cannot say, one part of the year is more necessary then
another. The winter is as useful for the good of the universe, as the summer:
in this we are supplied with what is necessary to maintain us in that, and the
admirable situation of the Sun, (most probably) in the center of the world,
seems much to contribute to it. If it had been at a farther distance from us,
our earth would have been in a manner desolate; because the influence of the
sun could not have been considerable: and if it had been nearer, the stars
above would have wanted Light, and this Earth in under been burnt up. The
Excellent order which it has now obeyed for above six thousand years, is also
wonderful. The sun never stood still but once, and that by a miracle. tho much
inferior to that of its daily Progress. What a subject is here to admire the
Power, goodness, Wisdom, and Faithfulness of God? Lord! what is man! for whom
then do all this? and because I find every year that the Day dies into night,
the summer into winter, and herbs and plants lose their beauty and verdure, and
shed their blossoms; may I not hence learn to consider and prepare for my own
approaching Change? In prosperity, health, and ease, and life, to expect, and
make provision for trouble, sickness, pain, and Death? as every wise man in
summer would do for winter; and work with all my might, while it is called to
day, while the Light continues, because the night of darkness is at hand, when
none can work.

VIII.
Of Evils to be Expected in this Year the wisdom and mercy of God, in
concealing from us the knowledge of Future Events.

NOt only few, and uncertain, but Evil likewise are the days of the years of
my Life, may every one say, with the Patriarch Jacob. A sufficient portion of
evil for every year may well be expected, when our Lord tells us, there is a
certain measure alloted for every day. Sufficient to the day is the evil of
it. Not only is our Life short, but troublesome, full of vexatious mixtures. We
can not sing a Requiem to our souls, when one Great Calamity is past; for we
know not, in this Region of Changes, but another, a greater may be at hand. one
messenger of ill news may succeed and out do another, as it was with Job. We
come weeping into the world in a most helpless forloen state: and if we escape
the dangers of Infancy, and the casualties of childhood; and after that, out
live the snares and follies of youth; we are tossed upon the Pikes of Time and
Chance, and sadden and disquiet our selves with a thousand griefs and sorrows,
by inevitable and unexpected occasions, tho we increas the number of needless
Cares and Fears, and discontents; till at length a sudden stroke arrests us, we
fetch a groan, and dye. Who can give a Catalogue of the Afflictions and
Calamities, Perplexities and Disapointments, encumbrances, crosses, and Evil
accidents of Humane Life? by means whereof millions are disconsolate and sad,
mourn and complain, weep and sigh, and from day to day are fed with the Bread
of Affliction, and the water of Adversity. Not to mention men's fluctuating
restless thoughts of Heart, importunate, desires, bafled projects, defeated
Purposes, which suppose or bring vexation. A good share of these is not to be
avoided; and yet very few can be particularly fore seen. who could
prognosticate a year ago the Evils which have happened since? public and
private, personal and relative, to the Countries, Cities, Families, and
persons we are concerned for? and who can certainly foretell the Events of this
insueing year? God has intermixed Good and Evil in the Life of Man: he has
set Prosperity against Adversity, says Solomon, to the end, that man should
find nothing after him. 7. Eccles. 14. that he may not know what shall come
next, wither a Prosperous or a Calamitous Event. What a change may be made in a
year by the mere Casualty of humane Events? by the Treachery of friends, or the
malice of Enemies, or the more immediate hand of God? We know not what shall be
on the morrow, much less what a twelve month may produce. Because what ever
may be disposed to happen, from natural causes, or Civil counsels, may be
altered by a particular decree of Providence. Prepare me Lord! and every of
those in whose Felicity I more especially take part, for all the Calamities and
Sorrows, thine Infinite Wisdom shall think fit to exercize us with, this
following year: and by thy merciful Providence, and gracious Conduct, cause
them to work for Good Furnishing us with suitable strength and wisdom, to
acquiesce in thy good pleasure, and obey they Will. I thank thee, O Heavenly
Father! that thou have reserved the knowledge of future Times and Seasons to thy
self; and hid Events from men. Least by considering them certain, we should
presume in case they are Good; or should despairingly afflict our selves, by
foreseeing the Evil we know to be inevitable. Did we certainly foreknow the
Good that would befall us, we should not Trust in thee to bring it to pass, or
heartily implore thy Care and conduct. Did we forsee the Evils we shall
suffer, before they overtake us, we should be overwhelmed with diffidence and
Despair. Many a Mother who rejoiceth at the Birth of a son, would mourn to
foresee what a man, what a Son he will prove. Such an increas of knowledge would
increas our sorrow such a Prescience would transport and discompose us, by
unseasonable Joys and Sorrows, born out of Time, make us Remiss in our Duty to
thee, and weaken our Dependence on thine unerring Wisdom, Truth, and Power.

IX.
The Supposition of dying this Year, should be improved: the consequence of
redeeming time, and providing for Eternity farther pressed. The Folly of Elder
persons is condemned and checked from the Example of Children. It Is advisable
to familiarize the thoughts of Death, and to imagine before hand what
apprehensions of things we shall then have.

THe longest Life is but a day multiplied: and who can certify or assure me,
which will be my last? He only who was God as well as man, could say, Mine Hour
is not yet come. Is all my Life given me to resolve this Question? Whither I
shall be in Heaven or Hell for ever? And have I any time to lose, and squander
away, as superfluous? have I any more then needs? It Is no impossible or
unreasonable supposition to make, that I may dye this year. Let me admit that
thought, and imagine my self on a bed of sickness, wearied with pain, and
ready to leave this world: the Physicians gone, despairing of my recovery: my
friends about me weeping: and all things in a doleful melancholy posture,
suited to such a state: feeling within my self the presages of Death: expecting
the final stroke, in an hour or two more. What is then the value of sensual
Pleasures, can I then relish or savor them? what then is Honor to me, who
shall never go abroad more to receive it, till carried to my grave? will it
then comfort me to have lived in Reputation, and Applause, if my Heart was not
humble under it, and the Honor of God promoted by it? can Riches and a great
estate support me, when I am just packing up for a removal to the other world?
in that hour will it be any satisfaction, to have made a stir and noise for a
few years upon Earth, to be talked of for a while longer then other men? are
these the things my dying thoughts will be most concerned to reflect on? These
dignities pleasures and possessions offered to a dying man, would rather opraid
then tempt him; they come too late, as a Princes pardon to a man whose head is
off. Dye I must, and appear before my Judge, to answer for all that I have
received and done in the body. Fool that I was, (shall I then too justly say to
my self,) not to have considered this, much sooner! not to have provided for it
at a better rate! my sins stare me in the face, my conscience tells me I am not
ready for such a Trial: I have lived a stranger to such thoughts as now I
cannot refuse, and which should have been admitted sooner. But if to such a
state any hope of mercy may be granted, (tho it be unspeakably little,) yet I
cannot promise my self any such warning by sickness. The sleeping virgins were
called at Midnight, and so may I. where can I pitch my Tents on Earth to be
secure against a sudden remove? Lord! make these thoughts effectual to prevent
my loss of precious Time, which at such a season, will be esteemed precious,
tho now it be not. O how swift, how short, my Time of Trial in order to
Eternity! how difficult, how important a work is it to prepare for an
Everlasting state! what is all this world, how little, how mere a nothing, to a
departing soul! and shall I after such reflections, continue to pursue shadows,
and pleas my self with empty dreams? when being so near my final Judgment, the
common wisdom of a man requires me to mind it in good earnest; and be more
sollicitous about it then for any Thing Temporal? O in what manner will Death
open mine eyes? by shutting the windows of sens, how shall I then see the
nothingness of what is but Temporal, and the reality of what is Eternal! We
sometimes laugh to see the vanity of little Children, who are greatly pleased
with painted toys, and busily employed about trifles. It extorts a smile to see
them eager, and industrious, and mightily concerned in their childish sports:
to see them fight or weep for little things which we despise: to observe with
what solicitude and care theyl raise a little fabric which three moments
after they themselves pull down, or would otherwise tumble of its own accord. We
laugh at these, but should weep over our selves, as the greater and Elder Fools:
who are every whit as Silly, yea infinitely more so: that considering we know
the frailty of our present Life, and can look beyond the Grave to another
world, should yet mispend our precious Time on things which cannot profit; and
pleas our selves with what is so unsuitable to our Age and State; and suffer our
passions to work with violence, for a thing of naught; and our greatest
diligence, care, and zeal to be exercized on things impertinent and vain; that
are perishing in in themselves, and can contribute nothing to our Eternal
welfare. And is it not thus with reference to all that men toil and labor for
with the neglect of an immortal State?

The voluptuous Sadducee will not refuse the present gratification of his
sensual appetite, because he is uncertain of another day. Let us eat and drink
for to morrow we dye. Should not the same motive quicken my diligence in a
better work? and because my Lord may come suddenly as a thief in the night,
immediately prepare to meet him? Let me now therefore, o my soul! look forward
to the end of Life and Time! and so let me esteem and seek, and choos, and do
every thing in the first place, which then I shall wish I had! Let me do
nothing now, which I verily believe I shall then be ashamed, or sorry to
reflect on: that by thinking what a condition I shall then wish to have my soul
in, I may now provide my self, much better then I have done thitherto. That
while I am in the greatest probability of living, I may suppose my change to be
near, and so not dare do any thing, but what I would or might do, if I were in
the present expectation of Death. To this end, let me go down to the Potters
house, descend to the consideration of my mortality, and dwell among the Tombs:
remembering the Egyptians built themselves better Tombs then Houses, because
they were to dwell longer in them. Let every nights repose serve me as a
memorial of my last sleep! and let my Bed stand for the model of my Coffin!
This is the only way, to be dead to this world, to be able to judge of things
now, as we shall do after death, according to immutable Eternal Truth.

X.
The Brevity of Life considered as the fruit of sin. There are but three ways
of leaving this world, as Abel, Adam, or Enoch. A diligent improvement of Time
farther pressed: and the neglect of it bewailed.

THe shorting of our Days is the fruit of sin. We dye because we have sinned,
and yet we should not sin as now, if this were not forgot, that we must dye.
From the First Transgression of Adam we derive our death: and therefore some of
his Posterity lived longer then he. Which proves that the lengthning of our
Days is the peculiar Gift of God; and yet it is such a Gift as was more desired
formerly, then since the apearance of Christ: for we read of none in the New
Testament, since Life and Immortality is brought to Light by the Gospel, who
desired a long continuance here on earth. Were we delivered from sin, the sting
of Death, by having made our peace with God in the Blood of Jesus, Death would
not be frightfull, or put on such a ghastly vizor, as to most it does. But we
are uncertain of our Justification, we waver between hopes and Fears as to our
Final Sentence; and are conscious to our selves that we are not ready for our
great Acount. This makes Death ^o terrible. Considering with all that it is
inevitable: the way of all the Living. For tho the curs be removed, and the
sting be taken out by our H. Savior; so that the Souls of Believers are safe,
and shall not be touched by the second Death: yet God has not taken away the
stroke of it from the Body: tho a Christian is assured of deliverance from
Hell, he is not exempted from the Grave, as his passage to Heaven.

Prepare me, Lord! by the free Remission of all my sins, and make me meet for
the Blessed Inheritance, by sanctifying grace; and then thy Time is best; Thy
Holy will be done. No matter then, wither my Death be violent, or what we call
Natural. It will be one of the two, for I cannot expect to be Translated, by a
miraculous change, as Holy Enoch was, and as they shall be, who shall be found
alive at the world, when our Glorious Judge shall come again. There are but
those three ways of leaving Earth: and the Three First Men of whose departure
we read in Scripture, are Instances of all Three. Abel of a violent Death, Adam
of a natural one, and Enoc of a Translation. The variety and order of their
Departure, as one observes, is very admirable, and deserves to be considered.
For all mankind must follow one or other of those three Examples. Every man or
woman, that is born into the world, must leave it by one of those three ways,
Either be cut off by a violent Death, as Abel, the first man who dyed: or dye a
Natural Death, as Adam did, who was the second: or be translated, as Enoc, who
was the Third we read of.

But tho I know that within a few years at farthest I must leave this world by
one or other of these ways; tho I have been dying ever since I began to live;
am Dead to the last year, and to all the preceding Portions of my Time; and
know withal, that what remains will quickly pass and be gone, after the same
manner; yet how have I overloved this Body, as if I should never live out of
it! and set my Heart and affections on this world, as if I should never remove
to another! and trifled away my precious Time and Life, as if a change would
never come!

That few do seriously admit such thoughts is too evident, by the general course
and practice of their Lives. For to what hazards do men expose themselves? what
pains will they take? what Inconveniences will they bear? with what unwearied
Industry will they toil and labor, to get a little money, or honor in this
world, to they know not but they may be called out of it, before the end of
this year? And yet the same persons are remiss and slothful about a future
Life; negligent and unconcerned about an Eternal state; careless and
indifferent, yea sottishly stupid, about the welfare of their Immortal Souls.
Henceforward, o my Soul! what ever others do, let me resolve to live in the
expectation of a change, which I know is certain, and may be very near.

XI.
Of the Expectation of Another Life. The vanity and misery of man in his Best
Estate, if there be none. The satisfactory removal of that supposition by the
thoughts of God, and of Eternal Felicity in his Blessed Presence.

LEt me retire a little, o my Soul! and bethink my self, what a world this is:
what men design and seek, and do and suffer: with what false and feigned Joys
they are pleased, being only happy by comparison: and with what real sorrows
then are afflicted: what innumerable disapointments, sicknesses, (and as
troublesome remedies,) dangers, labors, pains, and calamities of all sorts;
multitudes groan under, and lodely complain of: and what little unworthy ends
are pursued by all that do not seriously seek Eternal Rest? and how often
frustrated? and withal consider the cares that disquiet us, the errors that
deceive us, the many Temptations that assault and overcome us: how busy we are
about vanities, how often dejected; and melancholy for the breaking of a
bubble, how eager and industrious to pursue a shadow; active and in earnest to
destroy our selves, and one another; and then reflect on the malice, and
cruelty, the filthiness, and impiety, and great corruption, which abounds every
where; whereby God is dishonored and provoked to anger. After this what a
Theater of Tragedies, must this world appear? what an Hospital of sick, and
diseased, or rather distracted Persons? How should I be tempted to say, Lord!
why have thou made all men in vain? If I could not look from this sea of
troubles, to the Haven of Rest: from this dark Prison, to the Region of Light:
from this deceitful, troublesome, and defiling Earth, to a Blessed,
Everlasting Heaven. For verily, if there be no world but this, every Man in his
Best estate in this world, is altogether vanity, Selah. 39. Ps. 5. It Is a
certain undoubted Truth, the prefixed verily tells us so; and that it deserves
to be well considered, we learn from the concluding Selah. Every man is vanity.
Not the Inferior parts of the Creation only, But man the Lord of all and Every
man, every Adam from himself, to the last man that shall by ordinary generation
descend from him. Not the Ignorant, poor or wicked only, but all the
Individuals of this Species. Young or old, strong or weak, beautiful or
deformed, rich or poor, high or low, good or bad, in respect of the Body, and
this present Life, every one is vanity; and this is true, suppose him in his
Best Estate, not only in helpless Infancy and childhood, or in decrepit old age
not only in pain, and poverty, and disgrace, but in his most settled, most
flourishing, most envied, and admired condition upon Earth, in the midst of
strength, and wit, and honor; when at best, as to body, and mind, and outward
Circumstances; when he looks fairest, when he shines brightest; in the height
of all his glory, with the greatest likelihood of a Continuance: yet then he is
but vanity. In his frame, in his temper, constitution, inclinations, actions
and employment; he is a mere shadow, an empty mutable inconsiderable thing, and
not to be acounted of. His Heart, his head, his imaginations, reasonings,
desires, purposes, projects, hopes, and fears, are all vanity; and altogether
vanity, in all the parts, and kinds, and particulars of it. He not only may be,
but he is so, in his best estate: if this world be his Best; If this be our
all; and nothing more to be expected after death. And how should such a
Reflection strike me to the Heart, to suppose that after a few years are ended I
must return to my first nothing, and my very being be swallowed up of Eternal
Death! V^d. Mr. Howes vanity of Man as Mortal.
what satisfaction can I then take in any present Enjoyments, if an eternal
annihilation be at hand when I must bid adieu for ever to all that I now
possess? What delight can I have in the ordinary comforts of Life, with this
belief, that within a year or two, it may be to morrow, I shall sink into dust,
and exist no more? What pleasure in any thing with this dismal expectation? The
more flourishing my condition in this world, the more should I dread to lose
it, if nothing, better nothing at all, can be enjoyed after Death. Some
Philosophes have ignorantly urged such a consideration as an Antidote against
the fear of Death: but the admission of it may rather deprive a man of all the
Comfort of Life. What then is the advantage of a wise man above a Fool? the
exercize and improvement of our noblest Faculties would render us more
miserable then others, if nothing be expected, and certain, when this Life is
over. Not only sensual but Intellectual Pleasures would be disturbed and
destroyed by such Thoughts; that very shortly, the next Year, or Day, I must
disappear; and all my Enjoyments and Hopes be utterly and for everlost, with my
very Being. Were the case thus, (which such Consequences evince it is not,) it
were better for most men they had never been born; wither their condition here
be Prosperous, or Afflicted. For what Comfort or quiet can any man have in
Plenty and Prosperity, when this frightfull apprehension of an approaching end
is ever present? and what consolation can it yield a man who is afflicted and
Calamitous, and yet loves his Life above all things; to think that he shall not
ceas to be miserable, but by ceasing to be? And what is become of all Religion,
if such a thought be entertained? all devotion to God is thereby extinguished,
all the restraints of vice removed, the flood gates of Impiety, opened, the
encouragements of virtue, the rewards of Holiness, the foundation of Patience
in Tribulation, and suffering for Righteousness sake; all at once taken away.
Lord! confirm my belief of the invisible future state of Rewards and
Punishments! and let not Sadduceism and Infidelity damp my zeal in thy service,
or rob me of the comforts of this Life, which, if I have any solid ones, must
suppose the hopes of a Better. Let others therefore, o my Soul! who expect not
an Everlasting Heaven beyond the Grave, place their affections on Earthly
things and mind this world, as if there were no better, no other. Let them who
doubt, or disbelieve the promised rewards of Eternity, take up with what they
must shortly leave, and labor for the Bread that perishes. But since I profess
to believe and seek the Life Everlasting; let me daily intertaine my self with
the hopes of it, and let all the flattering dreams of what is desirable upon
Earth, give place to nobler and better Thoughts. Let me derive my principal
Joy, from the promise and expectation of that future felicity, and endeavor
nothing more then a meetness to partake of it. O my God, my God! thou art my
Life and Joy, and Portion; in thee, and in thy love, all my desires, and hopes
are answered, and all my wants supplied. How ever Evil this world is made by
sin, yet thou art the infinite and supreme Good. How mutable, how uncertain,
how perishing soever are all sublunary things, yet thou art the rock of Ages,
the fountain of Everlasting Life, and have appointed another world, and another
Life, when this is ended, wherein thou will be better known, and loved, and
served, and honored, and communicate thy self more abundantly then now, to
those the desire of whose souls is toward thee, that believe and love thee,
that partake of thine image, and are devoted to thy fear. The assurance of this
and nothing else, will answer the objection of the present vanity and misery we
are subject to.

XII.
The consideration of the Death of others, especially of Relations, Friends,
and Acquaintance, how to be improved. What instructions we may learn by the
sight of a Dead Carcass, or a Deaths-head, and the usual Motto on it: and what
by the Death of Holy Persons, to quicken our desires to be as they.

Has divine Patience added one year more to the number of my Days, when so
many others were removed by Death the last year? Others, whom a few months
since I knew in vigorous health; wiser, stronger, more likely to live, and to
answer the ends of Life then me: some of them, my near Relations, and useful
Friends; in whose converse I took delight, and promised my self advantage by
their Company and Exemples; But they are taken, and I am left. Thy Holy will, o
Lord! is done: and they, who were prepared, are infinite Gainers by this my
loss. Quicken my preparations by following their piety, to meet them in thy
Heavenly Kingdom. Let thy long suffering lead me to Repentance; and suffer me
not to slight thy warning by the death of others, to expect my own. Lord! cure
my Earthly mindedness, and practical unbelief? and by all such admonitions of
thy Providence, teach me to possess, and use this world; as knowing I must
shortly leave it, and let not the thoughts of my mortality wear off, as soon as
the funeral of my Friends is over.

Every year some or other of our Acquaintance drop into the Grave, we attend
them thither, and lament, it may be, for a few days, their departure and
removal; but consider not, that others will ere long do the same for us; it may
before this year is ended. Oh how soon do we forget our deceased Friends, and
our selves, who are likewise dying! and count upon a long life, which we cannot
reasonably expect! and hug the enjoyments of this transitory world, as if our
present state would last for ever! Will nothing but our own dissolution
effectually convince us of our mistake, and folly, in this particular?

Tho the arrows of Death fly continually round about us; sometimes over our
heads, when Superiors are taken away; sometimes fall at our feet, when Children
and Servants and inferiors dye; sometimes on our left hand, when an Enemy is
cut off; and while I am pleased with that, in that very hour, it may be,
another arrow on our right hand strikes the Friend of our bosom and delight:
and can we see all this, that great and small, high and low, friends and foes
are all vanity, and drop down dead round about us; and shall we not consider,
that we are as vain as they, and must shortly follow? shall we not by a
Christian Chemistry extract Spirits out of these dead Bones? and by these
Examples learn the End of all Men, and lay it to heart?

When ever I see the funeral of another, let me think thus with my self; why
might not I have been that man or woman, that is now carried to the Grave? If
we had been compared a few days since, it is probable I should have been thought
as likely to have been his monitor by dying first as he mine. By such an
improvement of these warnings, the request of Dives to Abraham were in great
measure granted; for it is a call from the dead that speaks loudly to us, to
consider our selves, and prepare in time for so great a change: and say, as the
Prophet to Hezekiah, Set thine house in order, for thou shall dye.

Can we look upon a Deaths-head, and not remember what we shall shortly be? may
not much be learnt from its common motto? Sum quod Eris, Fueramque quod Es. I
am that which thou shall shortly be, and have been that which thou art now:
that is, I have been as gay and jocund, as brisk and merry, as proud and vain,
as rich and great, as careless and secure, as honorable and as much esteemed,
as beautiful and as well beloved, as witty and as learned, as thou art or
can be now. I valued my self as much upon my estate, and trade, and health,
and beauty upon my education, profession, employments, parts, friends, family
etc. as thou have ever done, or can do: I lived in ease and pleasure, in
mirth and jollity; I minded the world as much, and indulged my self as much in
sensuality; and was as careful of my body, and pampered and pleased my flesh
as much as thou, and thought as little of a sudden death, and prepared as
little for such a change, as thou do: but now my dry Bones are looked upon
with contempt and scorn, but thou shall shortly return to dust, and be as vile
as I am.

It cannot but affect us, did we consider it, to see Diverse snatched away in
their Youth, and outward Prosperity; and in the midst of their sin and folly,
without any visible signs of true Repentance: or in terrible anguish and horror
for their past crimes: and yet how few do take the warning, carefully to
prevent the like unhappiness? O Lord! preserve those strong Convictions, those
serious thoughts, those holy Resolutions, those lively apprehensions of the
Life to come, of the Evil of sin, and the Terrors of thy wrath, which the
Sight of dying persons has at any time awakened in my soul! O the Eloquence of
a dying sinner to persuade to Repentance! even when he has lost his speech,
and lays gasping, and trembling, on a bed of sickness; breathing out his last
faint breath, and passing into the other world, to answer for the crimes and
follies of a wicked Life! Lord! revive these thoughts upon my soul, and let me
feel the power and influence of them, in the hour of Temptation, and in every
time of need! And let the consideration of the death of Believers, the
Blessedness they are thereby entered into, and the Holiness they are to possessed
of, quicken my desires and diligence to prepare to follow. When I think where
they are, and what they are doing, what is their work, and what their state,
what their continual employment, and what their Enjoyments; and how different
from ours: I cannot but wish to be with them: to be as they are, and do as they
do, to know and love and praise God as they. They are not hindered by such a
clog as this body is to us; or tempted by their senses, appetite, and fancy, to
sin against him: they complain not of a seducing flesh, unruly passions, low
and disordered thoughts, of Temporal afflictions, spiritual desertions, the
snares of the world, and the malice and subtility of the Devil: we who are
Pilgrims and Travelers are exposed to these difficulties, and storms which
they are freed from. They are now rejoicing in the light of God's countenance,
and shall never question his love more, while we are in Tears and sorrows,
groaning to be delivered.

But think, o my soul! that they were lately such as we are now. They were
members of the militant Church, before they entered into joy and Triumph. They
had their conflicts and difficulties, their hour of Temptation, and time of
trial, as we have ours. They were slandered, and persecuted, and sadned, and
disapointed, as their Followers are: They went to Heaven the same way, and got
the victory after the same manner, by Repentance, and Faith, and humble
persevering Obedience. They were once imperfect as we are now; and complained
of the Body of Sin and Death, and struglings of unmortified lust, as we do:
and were sometimes in the dark about their intrest in the promise, and walked
heavily by the hiding of God's face, and endured Temptation, even as we. And as
we have nothing to do, or suffer, but what they met with; we have the same
encouragement, that administered to their support: the same God and Savior, the
same way and rule, the same assistance, by the aids of his H. Spirit, offered
us; the same promises, and the same rewards proposed, which they enjoyed, first
in faith and hope, and afterward in fruition. Yea they passed through the dark
valley, and so must we: their Earthly Tabernacle was dissolved, and so must
ours be. We must expect to go the same way to Rest and Glory; and wait God's
Time for our admission. We must finish first the work which God has for us to
do and suffer; and then all Tears shall be wipt from our eyes, we shall grieve
no more, we shall sin no more, but be as the Angels in Heaven, or as the
Spirits of the Just made Perfect.

XIII.
What Influence the consideration of Eternity would have upon our Hearts and
Lives, if soundly believed and considered. Especially if the supposition of
Dying this year be annexed to it.

WIth what Humility, mortification, and self denial, what seriousness,
watchfulness, and resolved constancy, would every Christian live on Earth, did
he act allways under the influence and power of a confirmed Faith, concerning
the Life to come? We should not then grudge at a little labor, or boggle at a
few difficulties in our way. What tho I meet with injuries and affronts,
hardships and inconveniences: being now in a foreign country, and every day I
live, one days journey nearer my Eternal Home! Shall I not patiently bear
momentany sorrows, while I believe I am hastening to Eternal Joys? Did I look
more to the Everlasting World, should I not make the pleasing of God, in order
to my Eternal welfare, the great Business of my Life? Should I not serve the
Lord with more fervency of Spirit, and be better fortified against the Fears of
man, who can but hurt and kill the Body, nor that neither, without the
permission of God? Should I not order all my affairs, answer all Temptations,
mortify in ward Lusts, live in the Exercize of Grace, and in circumspect
persevering Obedience, in order to it? Should I not watch more over my Heart,
and Lips and Ways, be more diligent to trim my Lamps, more dead to this world,
more careful to call my self frequently to an account, to renew my Repentance?
Would not my converse be more useful and edifying, my discourses more savory,
and full of Religion, my Prayers to God, more humble and earnest, my charity to
men more unfeigned and extensive, and my preparations every way more suitable
to such a Faith, and to such apprehensions of an Everlasting State? Could we
carry the thoughts of Eternity about with us every day, and often admit them in
our civil and secular affairs, did we repeat it frequently to our selves, at
least every morning, as soon as we are awake, that we are near Eternity; this
grain of Incense would perfume the whole Temple; and be an Antidote against
inward Lust, and impure thoughts, against the Infection and defilement of bad
Company, and the snares of worldly Business, and do much to prevent vain and
sensual actions, and to cure vain affections.

Did we believe it, and believe it near, should we not take as much pains to
secure Eternal life, as we see men do to get Riches? Should we not use the
same diligence, care, and circumspection, the same prudent foresight,
watchfulness, and perseverance, to prevent Everlasting destruction as others
do to provide against Poverty, and to live in Plenty a little while on Earth?
Should we not rejoice as much in the promise and hopes of it, as others do in
the prospect and expectation of some Earthly Advantage? Lord! I confess and
bewail the weakness of my faith. How often have I concluded, and said, that
Heaven alone is the place of Happiness, and yet my carnal Heart is too much
affected with Earthly Things! How often have I resolved, (upon the conviction
of the certainty of the Eternal world,) to mind this less, and to affect and
seek it no more as I have done! and yet my foolish Heart is hankering after it
still. O crucify my affections to things below! and let the believing Thoughts
of the next Life, render me victorious over all the Temptations of this. Pardon
and cure the staggering trembling Thoughts of an unbelieving Heart, by greater
measures of a lively Faith. That my desires may be strong and urgent; and my
diligence and stedfastness in the way of Truth, be some way correspondent to
the important Article. Let me live only for Eternity, hope for nothing but
Eternity, design and intend nothing as my chief end, but Eternity, and seek and
mind nothing in comparaison with Eternity! Did we believe it, how would every
thing in this world be looked upon as eligible, or fit to be refused, as it is
like to be an help, or an hindrance, with reference to Eternity! we should then
endeavor to do nothing unbecomming such an Expectation. Considering this world
as our passage, and the invisible future world as our abiding Country; where we
are to dwell forever; what ever we meet with here, wither sweet or bitter, easy
or troublesome, pleasing or ungrateful, we should not much matter, but as it
relates to hereafter.

And were I certain I should have no longer time of Trial in order to this
Eternal State, then this one year, which is now begun; if a Messenger from God
should convincingly assure of it; what would I not do to prepare for Death,
and secure the Intrests of Eternity? with what remorse and deep Repentance
should I reflect on the Follies of my past Life? with what importunate cries
should I beg Forgiveness? how patiently should I bear Calamity, for so short a
time? how little should I value the favors or frowns of men? how circumspect to
improve every Season of doing and receiving good? how careful to avoid
Temptation, and how resolute in resisting it? Did I verily believe I had no
longer time to live on Earth, then this one year at most: how insipid would be
the offer of carnal mirth, vain pastime, sensual diversions, idle company
etc.? how should I value every hour, every inch of my little Time, under the
apprehension that Eternity is at hand? O my soul! shall I make no provision
against the possibility of such a case? is not my change as certain, as if it
were this year, as if it were to morrow? tho I am not certain it is so near,
nor certain but it may be. Let me then seek first the Kingdom of God, and his
Rightcousness: let me fix it well, and make it clear, that I have secured my
great Concern, and am ready for a sudden summons.

XIV.
How a Good man may improve, and encourage himself under the supposition of
dying this Year, even in the most uneasy and undesireable circumstances.

I May dye this year: then all my cares and fears, if I am Rich, all my sorrows
and calamities as to this world, if I am Poor, will die too. I may dye this
year: then I shall have no more Enemies, no more sickness, and which is
infinitely better, I shall sin no more. I must shortly dye, it may be, this
year: but there is no other way to come to a Blessed Life but by dying, and my
Savior has dyed for me, and he that believes in him, shall never see death: he
lives who was once dead, yea he lives for ever more, and has promised, that I
shall be with him to behold his Glory. He has the Keys of Death and Hell: He
is the Resurrection and the Life, he has removed these thing of Death, and I
need not fear a conquered Enemy. If I dye this year, I must quit the company of
all my dearest Friends on earth; but I shall go to better Company above: and
if they are the friends of Christ, we shall shortly meet again, and love one
another in a better manner then now, and never more be parted. I may dye this
year: my Friends, and Enemies may dye to. Let me enjoy the one as mortal dying
persons, that must ere long leave me or I them: and not fear the other, who may
so soon perish, and quickly be incapable of doing me or others mischief. I may
dye this year: let me not then think much of Temporal sufferings, of any Evils
which may so soon be over. Oh what would condemned sinners in the other world
give to be able to believe and say so of their sufferings! I may dye this year:
and can I wonder that I am sometimes Sick, and in pain, and my Body out of
order. Am I not mortal, and dwell in an house of clay, which must shortly
moulder into dust? and is it any thing strange, that such a crasy Building does
sometimes shake, and need repair, and threaten a dissolution? It Is a greater
wonder, I am any time well. That such a Body, compounded of so many little
parts, and so easily disordered by innumerable accidents, should be in health,
is hardly less to be admired, then that an Instrument of a thousand strings
should be kept in Tune. I thank thee, o Heavenly Father! for the many
advantages of sickness, to weaken the power of sin, to humble my Pride, and
cure my worldliness and sensuality, to reduce me from wandering, to empty me of
self conceit, to awaken the consideration of Death and Judgment, to impress the
Thoughts of the vanity of this world, and the Eternity of the next, to assist
me to mortify the flesh, to rule my Passions, to exercise Patience, and
quicken Prayer, and try my faith and love, and excite my diligence to redeem
Time, and convince me of the worth and uncertainty of it, and thereby promote
my preparations for my final change. The Great Apostle by dying daily, had as
many victories over this world, as he lived Days. Oh that I might so far walk
by the same Rule, as every day to think of providing for my last! and in health
to do that which in sickness I shall wish I had done!

I may dye this year: it may be by some tedious painful Sickness, some
troublesome and loathsome Disease. But God has promised his Grace shall be
sufficient: he will make my bed in my sickness: and put under his Everlasting
arms, for my support; and not suffer me to be tempted above what I am able: he
will increas my Patience and carry me through the pangs of Death, and the dark
valley, and when Heart and flesh fail, be the strength of my Heart, and my
Portion for Ever.

I may dye this year: what if it should be by an hand of violence; if for
Righteousness sake, in defense of the Truth, for a good Cause, and a good
Conscience, and my peace be made with God, and am accused for doing well, or
innocent of the Evil which is laid to my charge; there is ground enough for
encouragement and support. Thousands of my Betters have met with the like,
whose names are precious and renowned. Innumerable Christians have dyed by the
sentence of a Judge, with more chearfullness and Joy, then others, or it may
be, then they themselves, would have done, by the sentence of the Physician. The
Torture of many diseases is unspeakably more formidable as to the mere pain:
and for all the Rest, the Righteous Lord who loves Righteousness, will clear
my Integrity, if it may best subserve his own Great and holy ends: at least he
will stand by and help me, when all forsake me: and if he speak Peace, and give
inward Consolation, who can speak Trouble: and his final Judgment, which is
near at hand, will distribute rewards and punishments to all, according to
their works.

Suppose farther, that I should want a sepulcher, after Death. There is nothing
I could better be without. If God receive my Soul, and will raise my Body at
the last day, wither it putrify and consume under ground or above it, is no
great matter. They who are alive will be more concerned in that, then I shall
be; Graves are for the sake of the Living rather then the Dead. The Sun, the
Rain, the Air, Birds, Beasts, Worms, will all contribute to give me Burial, if
men deny it. The only difference is, that it will be a little longer ere I am
buried. If my soul rest in the Bosom of my Savior, and by persevering in the
love and practice of the Truth, I have secured my Reputation with wise and Good
men, I need not be sollicituos what become of my Body. My Almighty Judge will
raise me a glorious Body, like his own, and reunite it to my soul? As easily,
as certainly, as for any of those, whose Bodies were preserved in Caves and
Vaults, in Proud Sepulchers, and under stately Monuments.

I may dye this year: and shall not then have the satisfaction to see my
Children or nearest Kindred educated and provided for, settled and disposed of.
But is not the Everliving God the same? cannot he as well take care of them
when I am gone, as now? answer all my prayers after my deceas? and exercise
that Fatherly care, wisdom, and love, which shall dispose of their conditions,
save them from Temptations, and supply all their wants, and exceed all my
desires, in reference to them? and fulfill his Covenant promise from
generation to generation, to the Childrens of them that fear him? O how weak is
my Faith, that cannot trust God in so common and plain a case!

Lastly, I may dye this year: and not live to see the Ruin of the
Antichristian Kingdom, and Interest, and the accomplishment of many Excellent
Promises, which concern the Rest, and Peace, and Purity, and Glory of the
Churches of Christ on earth, in the latter days. But have I not deserved by my
provoking unbelief, Ingratitude, and Disobedience, to dye in the Wilderness,
and not behold the promised land, or see the Peace of Jerusalem? and will not
the strugglings of Satan to support Babylon, infer a dismal night of darkness
and distress, before the expected morning of deliverance? so that it may now if
ever be truly said, Henceforth, Blessed are the Dead who dye in the Lord. And
if God will take me to himself in the other world, I cannot possibly be a
looser; tho I should not see the Beginnings of a New Heaven, and a New Earth,
in this. However I rejoice in Hope, and pray incessantly for the Resurrection
of the Witnesses, and the rebuilding of Sion, and the more plentiful Effusion
of see the H. Spirit, (the great comprehensive promise of the Latter Times) to
effect a glorious Kingdom for Christ on earth: and my Faith assures me, I shall
hereafter the Son of God revealed from Heaven, clothed with Majesty, sitting on
a cloud, leading the Heavenly Host, raising the Dead by his powerful voice,
summoning all the World to appear to Judgment, gathering his Elect, and finally
destroying death, and him that had the power of it, the Devil, condemning the
wicked to Everlasting Destruction, but acquitting, honoring, and rewarding his
poor members, with infinite and Eternal Bliss.

XV.
Of Dying in a Foreign Country, and of Dying Young. Considerations proper to
Reconcile the mind to both.

I May not live to the end of this year; God in his Providence having called me
abroad, I may never see my Native Country more. Let me still remember, o my
Soul! that wherever I am, I am traveling toward the Grave, and passing to
another world: that I may live in all Places, as a Pilgrim and Stranger here on
Earth; with Affections suited to my condition, becoming one who is traveling
in a Strange Land. Let me bear the Inconveniences I may meet with in this
world, as Strangers in their Travells are wont to do. Let me not repine at the
ill accommodations of an Inn, where I am to lodge but a night or two: but
encourage my self with the assurance of better Entertainment at home, when my
Pilgrimage is ended, and my Journey over. One of my dearest holy Friends, Mr.
Thomas Bent, who dyed, at Geneva, May 10. 1683.
and Fellow Travelers, (whose memory will be ever precious, with those who
knew him) quickly arrived to his Journeys end, and is entered into Rest betimes.
Which of his Companions shall next follow, we know not, or how soon. Lord! make
me apprehend the nearness of my change in every place: and if I am prepared for
dying, no matter where it be. There is no one Country farther from the Presence
of God then another. The whole world may be considered as one Great House, and
the several Kingdoms and Countries of it, but as different Apartments in the
same house: and they who tarry at home are no more exempt from Death, then they
who Travel abroad.

The Presence of my Gracious Father is every where the same: in some measure,
Blessed be my God, I have hitherto found it so. And may I not rejoice in God in
a desert, in a Wilderness, tho all the World should forsake me; tho all the
world should be against me? Should I have no other Friend or Helper; is not
God, an infinite God, Enough? and without his favor and Presence; what can all
this world do for me? If I am sick, and in danger of Death, among my Relations
and Friends, if the comforts of the Allmighty do not refresh and delight my
soul, they cannot: and if I want not these in my last agonies, no matter in
what part or corner of the Earth I breath my last, If the word and promise of
God be my Foundation, an holy Hope my anchor, Christ my Pilot, and Heaven my
Country, I shall not fail of being landed there at last. Suffer me not to
forsake thee, o Heavenly Father! while I live; and do not thou forsake me, in
my last Hour; and let it come when and where thou will! If my Blessed Savior
will receive my departing soul at death, I am not sollicitous in what Country,
or part of the Earth it be.

And that I may not be unwilling in the flower of my Age and Time, in Youth and
Strength, to leave this world; let me think often, that no one age or part of
Life is more privileged against the stroke of Death then another. If I have
done my work betimes, as my deceased Fellow Traveller had, is it not better to
receive the Blessed Recompense, then to tarry longer, in a world of sin and
suffering, absent from the Lord? Shall I not thereby escape a multitude of
Temptations, sins and sorrows, which others by living longer are exposed to. If
my Peace be made with God, what should make me willing to live at this distance
from him? what shoul render this world so desirable, where God is so
dishonored, where I am so often tempted to displeas him, and so often yield to
such Temptations: and may I not fear least I should fall into such scandalous
and grievous sins, that may bring a public reproach on the Gospel of Christ,
and sadden the Hearts of all my Aquaintance who love the Lord Jesus in
sincerity. And tho I should maintain my Integrity, yet in this world my
highest love and obedience to God, and my sweetest communion with him, is but
imperfect. How many Impediments and Diversions do I daily meet with, that
deaden my Heart to Heavenly contemplations and affections? what disapointments
and sorrow full disasters, to convince me this is not the place of Rest and
Happiness? what smart Afflictions may some of my Relations prove? what
dangerous snares may attend me in the remaining Portion of my Time? what
opposition and hatred from men may the steadfast professing of the Truth, and
fidelity to God expose me to? what public national calamities may I have my
share in etc.?

But if I consider old Age it self, which we do desire to reach, what and how
many are the Infirmities and Griefs, and troublesome Circumstances which attend
that state, which dying young will prevent? are not most men who reach a very
great old Age, helpless objects of Pity? a Burden to themselves, and to all
about them? And, (which commonly happens,) may I not then be as unwilling to
dye, as at present? as loath then to leave the world as now, tho in a manner it
will have left me? for how many old men, past the relish of sensual Pleasures,
are yet inordinately fond of a longer Life!

Have I not been told by Heathens, as well as Christians, that it is not the
length of Time but its improvement, that does really make a Long Life? If I
have anfwered the ends for which I were born, it is not too soon to dye. No man
ever miscarried as to his Everlasting Intrest, because his Life was short, but
Evil. He that is prepared for Death, has lived long enough: and should thank
God for a speedy call to the possession of that Felicity, which the Holiest
Saints on Earth desire and breath after. Gideon lost nothing by returning from
victory, while the Sun was yet high. If I have wrought but a few hours in the
vineyard, and done but a little service for my Lord and Master; and yet am
dismissed, and rewarded, before the Rest of my Fellow Laborers, shall I repine,
and think my Lord does not be friend me? If he has any farther Service for me,
he will prolong my days, and make me diligent, I hope, and contended. Otherwise
I pray he would make me ready to dye, and make me willing, and desirous to
depart this Life. For to be only content to dye, that I may be perfectly Holy,
and fully Blessed, is me thinks too low for a Christian who acts like himself,
believing the Certainty of his anowed Principles and Hopes, and knowing that
while we are present in the Body, we are absent from the Lord.

XVI.
The contemplation of our approaching change may assist us to mortify the
Lusts of the Flesh, the Lust of the Eyes, and the Pride of Life to cure
Ambition, and promote Contentment.

ALL that is in the World, says the Apostle, is the Lust of the Flesh, the Lust
of the Eyes, and the Pride of Life. The dust and ashes, of our own mortality
duly considered and applied, will help to dead and extinguish each of these. By
Pride of Life, we lift up our selves against Heaven, and despise our Maker: by
the lust of the Flesh, we overlove and indulge the body, and study to gratify
the sensual Appetite: by the lust of the Eyes, our Desires are immoderate after
Temporal and External Goods. The thought of our approaching End has a tendency
to oppose and mortify these Lusts: to humble us before God; to take us off
from the inordinate love of the Body; and to moderate our passions to Earthly
Things. It may help us against Pride, by showing us the infinite distance
between the Eternal self-sufficient God, and such poor Dust as we: who are but
of yesterday, and if he uphold us not, and maintain our souls in life, shall
be laid in the dust to morrow. It will mind us of his Justice against Sin, the
Parent of Death, and of all the miseries of our mortal state; and convince us
of our weakness to resist his will, or avoid his wrath. As to our fond
affection to the Body, it may instruct us, that it deserves not to be so much
accounted of; it will open our eyes to discern the preference of our Immortal
souls, and what concerns them, to the interest of a perishing Body. It may
convince us, that we are cruel and unkind to our very bodies, by overloving
them, because we thereby contribute to their Eternal sufferings: and so teach
us to love and use our bodies, as Servants to our Souls in this world; and as
expecting to share in Glory with them, after the Resurrection. It may also help
to moderate our desires after Earthly Good, and so cure the Lust of the Eyes,
by letting us see the vanity, uncertainty, and short duration of these things,
and their insufficiency to make us Happy, and give us true Content.

The Thoughts of an approaching change may, if any thing will do it, damp the
mirth of the Luxurious Epicure, and strike him into a fit of trembling, as did
Belshazzar's handwriting on the wall. It may discover the distraction of living
in pleasure, and of care to please the senses, and the fleshly appetite, when
the End is so near. If may likewise check the folly of Ambitious Designs: that
men should make so much a do to get into slippery places, from whence they may
so easily fall. Where being puffed up with vain applause, they forget themselves
and their latter end, till their Life, and Glory expire together. Where are now
the Great, and Mighty, and Honorable, who have made such a noise in the world?
what is now the difference between the dust of an Alexander or Caesar, and that
of their meanest slaves or Captives? Could their dignities and earthly Glory
preserve any of them, from the stroke of Death, or the Judgment of God, or
without Repentance, from his condemning Sentence?

Think, o my Soul! how little it will shortly signify, wither I have been
known and honored among men or no; any farther then God may be glorified by
it. How should it suppress vain Glory? to think of being one day esteemed, and
worshipped, reverenced, and applauded by dying men, and laid in the Grave the
next? Let me rather seek that Glory and Honor, to which Immortality is annexed:
and labor to be accepted with God, at whose Bar I must be judged, endeavoring
to keep the testimony of a good conscience: and then it is not much wither I
pass through good Report or Evil Report: no contempt, or frowns, or threatenings
of men need then discourage me. Tho I should be trampled on by the foot of
Pride, while others are happy in a dream for a little while; and it may be have
a prossperous passage to damnation; I Will rather thank God for delivering me
from their Temptations, and giving me the opportunity, and call, to hasten my
Preparations for a Better World. Let God dispose of my Condition here, and
Reputation too, as best shall please his Sovereign will: only be pleased to
keep me upright, and to preserve me from Everlasting shame and confusion of
Face, after the general Resurrection, and final Judgment! vouchsafe me a
portion now in thine approving love, and own me for Thine at last, in the Great
and Terrible Day of Reckoning; that then I may hear the Blessed Euge, and enter
into my Lords Joy!

XVII.
The same Argument considered farther, as dissuasive from Worldliness, and
Earthly mindedness: and as proper to confute the vanity of long Projects, and
great Designs for this World.

ARe the years of my Life but few, and they hastening to a Period, and may this
be my last? Let me not then greedily covet riches and abundance, and wast my
little time to scrape together large Provisions, for many years to come; when I
have no assurance to see the end of this. Is it becoming such a belief, to toil
from day to day, that I may lay up that which I must so soon leave? as if I
were to spend and Eternity here on earth? and in the mean while neglect the one
thing Necessary. Am I not upon the shore of Eternity? may not the next tide
carry me off? and shall I spend my whole Life in Diversions from the maine
Business of it? have I nothing else to do, but to gather shells, (if they were
Pearls the absurdity, were still the same) and pile them upon heaps, till I am
snatched away past all Recovery? Shall I be regardless of an Eternal State, and
run the hazard of being undone for ever, by sollicitous care about pretended
Necessaries for a long abode on Earth? Much less for superfluities; when I am
not certain of the possession, this one year? Shall I magnify and admire what
is so soon to be parted with? value my self upon these things, so as to despise
those that have less, and envy such as have more, and suffer my mind to be
distempered, and my passions immoderate on every change of these things? Tho I
know besides my own mortality, that to enforce the argument, there is a
principle of Corruption in all these things; that our very Manna here in a
little while will stink, and Bread, which is the staff of Life, moulder, our
richest garments wax old and rot, silver and gold rust, and the greatest Beauty
wither, and every thing that is Earthly decay and perish. And shall not this
teach me to sit loose from all such Things? Can I imagine, that in my last hour
it will be easier to part with much, then little? or better in the day of
Judgment to have a great Estate to answer for then a lesser one? We read
concerning the Patriarch Abraham, (who rightly understood the transitory nature
of riches, and his own mutable Condition,) that the only purchase he made with
his riches, was a Grave: choosing to take possession of the land promised him,
rather by a mark of his parting with it, then of his Possessing it. Did I think
oftener and more seriously, o my Soul! of tarrying here but a littte while; I
should more easily be persuaded, that a little of this world were sufficient to
carry me through it. I should consider more that my Heavenborn soul is made and
designed for another, an endless World; and therefore should not so far forget
his own People, and Fathers house, as eagerly to pursue and seek what is suited
only to the Body, for a little while, and whereof a little with Contentment
will be sufficient.

The same Reflection may be useful to contract our Thoughts to present duty;
that we may not perplex our minds with long designs and projects; which if we
dye this year, will come to nothing. Our great Business in this world is
adapted to the little portion of Time, which is allowed us. Not that good
Designs for the public Benefit, may not be begun by one, and finished by
others: or that we are not obliged prudently to provide for those who shall
come after us, by attempting many Things of probable Advantage to Posterity.
But considering the shortness, and uncertainty of Life, not only should the
most necessary Things be first minded, and not put off by prosecuting such
designs as may signify some what to others, when we are dead: but we should
not now omit that which we may hope to compass ourselvs, to begin such things,
whose accomplishment must depend on the Pleasure of our successors.
Consideration and faithful Counsel would in this case have prevented the
fruitless expense of many men's Time and Money, which if otherwise employed
might have turned to good account to themselves and others.

And this heightens our folly, that while we pursue great projects in reference
to this world, and dye without effecting them, our preparations for Eternity
are neglected: and so we are suddenly cut off in the midst of our Folly, and
all our Thoughts perish: how easily, how soon may they do so! the difference
and distance between Death and Life, being no more then that of a Candle
lighted, from its being blown out, and if it is exposed to all winds, how
quickly may that Happen?

XVIII.
The consideration of the certain near Approach of an Everlasting State
amplifi'd, and pressed, to in force an Holy Life.

IN this world we begin a Year, and quickly come to the end of it; and ere long
the little number of our years, and days, will be expired. But when death
conveys us into the World of Spirits, the day of Eternity shall never be closed
with an Evening. Of how fearful consequence is that Death, by which an
Eternity must be decided! What attention, what seriousness, what diligence,
what care, does the decision of so important a matter call for! ETERNAL! what
will be the next word, o my soul! how much am I concerned to know it! will it
be Blessedness, or Misery? will it be Life or Death? This one word is the Joy
of Angels, and the Horror of Devils; the unspeakable Delight of blessed Saints,
and the confusion and Despair of condemned Sinners.

At the Creation of the World, Time got the start of us, and was five days
elder then we: but our Immortal Souls shall endure beyond the utmost limits of
Time, and last as long as the Everlasting Father of Spirits, of whose duration
there is no end. Shall I then exist and live, tho my Body perish and see
corruption? Shall my soul, my self exist beyond the Grave, in Felicity or
Misery, and that for ever and according to my present Actions? what am I then
most concerned to mind? what am I to choose? What am I most to fear, to wish,
to do? What is a shadow of honor and reputation among dying men? What are a few
drops of fleshly Pleasure for a moment, to eternal Rivers of Pleasure, at God's
right hand? What are the sufferings of an hour or two, to the pains and anguish
of Eternity? What can the World, Flesh, or Devil give me, comparable to Eternal
Life? What can I suffer in the way of Holiness, that may be set in the balance
against an Everlasting Hell? And yet how often, o my soul! how boldly, how
unconcernedly, how foolishly, do I hazard the one, and forfeit the other, for
the sins and vanities of this world! Whereas one prospect of Eternity should
make every thing that is Temporal appear little in my eyes: the highest
elevation of earthly Greatness, abundance of Riches the great Affairs,
Business, and Employments of the World, Pomp, and Splendour, and Reputation, and
all that now flatters the senses, and the vanity of Mankind.

Oh that I could but live as believing and expecting an Eternal State! as
having it in my Eye, managing all my affairs with a visible reference to it:
discovering to all the world by my Behavior and Deportment, that I do in
earnest believe it certain? for be it never so Certain, if I do not
apprehend, and consider it as such, it will no more affect me then a Fable.
Neither is it enough to consider it as certain, but as Near: for the most
weighty, the most terrible things, apprehended as at a great distance, will
little move. Thinking of the long Interval between, the advantage of being
exempted from such evils for so long a time, will please me more, then such
distant Calamities will affright.

Let me therefore endeavor to impress the consideration of Eternity at hand,
more deeply on my heart: that I may walk, and live, discourse, and pray, and
demean my self in every thing, as near an unchangeable State. Am I not
convinced that this is Certain, from the nature and operations of my soul,
from the reflections of Conscience, from the Righteousness of God, in his
Government of the world, from the present unequal Distributions of Good and
Evil by his Providence, and from the plain and frequent assertions of his
Revealed Will? I have nothing to object, nothing to reply; but I find a
necessity of inculcating and urging the consideration of it in order to its
influence. I find it needful to reflect often, how near I am to such an
Endless State: that in one Instant, by Death, I enter upon it: and that this
instant may be as near me, as my next Thought. That the H. Scripture describes
the two contrary Conditions after death, (and every man and woman in the world
shall share in one of them) as both Everlasting: the one, by Eternal Life,
Eternal Glory, an incorruptible Crown, that fades not away, an incorruptible
Inheritance, an House Eternal in the Heavens, etc. the other, by unquenchable
Fire, a Prison whence no escape, Eternal Damnation, Everlasting Burning,
everlasting Punishment, everlasting Destruction, a worm that never dies, wrath
that is ever to come, blackness of darkness for ever, etc.

Think, o my Soul! that in one of these two contrary States, I must abide for
ever. In endless Joy, or sorrow: Blessed in the presence of God, or forever
banished from it. And who ever thou art that read this, apply it seriously to
thy self, it is thine own case. Yea I tell the from God, that Holiness of Heart
and Life is absolutely necessary to the former, and that without it thou shall
never see his face, but be punished with Everlasting Destruction from the
presence of his Glory.

Is this an unquestionable Truth? O let me consider it, till I feel the power
and efficacy of so important a Principle! let the impression be deep and
lasting! let it pierce and enter into my very soul! to cool the heats of lust,
to quench sensual and earthly desires, and to mortify all in ordinate
affections to this world; and fix my resolutions to mind and seek Eternal Life
with all my Heart!

These are not difficult and perplexed Niceties, which wise and holy men differ
and disagree about. They are not metaphisical Subtleties, which few can
understand; but the express word of God, and the daily dictates of my own
Reason and Conscience: which all Christians, and all most all men, in their
wits, except in an hour of great Temptation, confess and own; or whither they
will or no, are forced to expect and Fear, if they are not in a condition, to
consider them with a joyful Hope.

Lord! cure the unbelieving doubts concerning these Great things, which
notwithstanding the plainest Evidence, the Devil may at any time suggest! let a
confirmed Faith, be the Reality of what is thus future, that my soul may be
influenc't by them, as it is wont to be by things present! Let it be the
Substance of things hoped for: and the Evidence of things unseen, and as yet at
a distance: as if the Day of Judgment were already come, and there were no
intermediate Time to pass between this and that.

O Eternity! Eternity! the more I consider it, the more unfathomable still I
find it. Unchangeable Blessedness, or remediless Endless Torments! An Eternal
blissfull Day, or Everlasting Horror, Darkness, and Despair! Life or Death,
Glory or Destruction, to last as long as the Immutable Living God! None of the
Patriarchs who lived longest arrived to the period of a Thousand years, which
in comparaison of God's Everlastingness is set forth but as one day. But
strictly considered, millions of years and ages have no proportion with it;
because no multiplication of them will amount to Eternity. Whereas one hour
has some proportion to an hundred thousand years, because a certain number of
hours will amount to so many years. But no number of years or Ages, never so
often multiplied, will make up Eternity: as no substraction of Millions of
years will lessen it: an in tire Eternity will be still to come, and will ever
be to come. When innumerable myriads of years are past, Eternity shall then
seem but to begin; because when as many more are over, it shall be as far from
an end. Oh that the Thoughts of Eternity may be powerful and prevailing above
all others! that I may Judge of every thing by its relation to it, by its
influence upon it! Choose now, o my soul! whither Everlasting Joys, or Miseries,
shall be my Portion: but consider well, that thine Eternity is concerned in thy
present choice: and that this choice must be pursued with stedfastness and
Constancy, as long as I live: and what are a few years to prepare for an
Eternal State: were we obliged to spend several hundred years in serious humble
preparation for it, with the greatest strictness and severity of Life, during
all that Time; it were infinitely less then to spend an hour or two, in
preparing for the greatest Dignity and Employ on Earth, which can be enjoyed
but for a few years at longest. For to these an hour has some proportion; but
an hundred or thousand years have none, with an Everlasting Duration. Therefore
to consider how many years of toil, and pains, and diligence, many bestow on
the probable prospect of some Temporal Good: should reprove and shame my
negligence and remisness in providing for Eternity!

XIX.
The Punishments of the Damned considered, as intolerable, and Everlasting, and
as unquestionably certain. What the Reflection upon Hell Torments, may and
ought to teach us.

THe Fear of the Lord is the Beginning of Wisdom, the entrance into the way of
Life, as it is ordinarily one of the first means to awaken the soul to a
serious concern for Eternity? let me therefore first consider the Endless
Punishment of the wicked, in the other world, before I enter upon the Ravishing
Prospect of the Blessedness of Heaven, promised to the Righteous. And with what
serious trembling d^^^ld I think of the Terrors of (...) Everlasting
Destruction, which (...) Lord shall be revealed from Heaven to render, to All
who know not God, and obey not the Gospel. When the wicked shall go away into
Everlasting Punishment; as the righteous into Life Eternal. The Dreadfulness of
that Punnishment, the endless Duration of it, joined to the consideration of
its unquestionable Certainty, deserves the most attenitve Thoughts of every
man, who loves his soul, and would manifest he does so, by securing his
greatest Interest.

The description of that misery, under insupportable and Eternal Torments,
demands more then a transient view: because no words can sufficiently express
the Horror of that State. What is it, o my soul! to be banished from the Blessed
Sight and Presence of God for ever, and all the Impressions of his holy Image
and likeness? and to know that this is the fruit of my own choice, that I lost
it by my own Fault and Folly; that I deserved to lose it; that the sentence is
as Just, as it is irrevocable? Who can fully imagine the dismal Despair of a
condemned Sinner, under this anguish of a Guilty self-accusing Mind? while
under the stroke of God's Allmighty revenging Justice; with a distincter view
and knowledge, then now, of God and his Excellencies, of himself, and his own
vileness and malignity, which must greatly increas his rage and Torment: add to
this, his being enraged by the accusations and cries of wicked Acquaintance,
and Relations: and his being mocked, and insulted over, and tortured, by
malicious damned Spirits; with a clear understanding of that glorious Felicity
he despised, refused, and forfeited; with a deep sense of his former Madness in
preferring the sinful Pleasures and Advantages of this world: and this after
so many warnings, and invitations, and calls from God, to have prevented it;
never to be diverted one moment from the consideration, sense and feeling of
his misery, and the duration of it; to have all his Passions let loose with the
greatest violence and nothing to satisfy them; and continually to preserve an
Hell of wickedness and Horror in him self; and to endure the reproaches
convictions, regrets, and stinging Reflections of Conscience, the Gnawing worm,
which shall never dye? who can conceive the unspeakable misery of such an
accursed State? So great Calamity, and yet Everlasting! How long does one Day
or Night now seem, to a man, under some violent racking Pain, in any one part
of his body, tho he be under the means for cure, and have his friends about him
to pity, comfort, and assist him, with the hopes of ease in a little while,
and the certain knowledge that it cannot last long? Vide Mr. Baxters Saints
Rest. part. 2. chap. 4.
Oh what then will be the dismal state of tormented sinners in Hell! how
infinitely must it exceed the most Terrible Idea we can now frame of it! to
languish out a long Eternity in that Gulf of Darkness and Despair, under
unpitied intolerable Torments, without Intermission, or hope of End! Miseries
without measure! Judgment without Mercy! Pains and sorrows intense, and yet
Endless! without the least succor or relief, relaxation or remedy, diminution
or change! without a drop of Comfort, without a moments Rest, without the
smallest beam of Light, or the least glimmering of Hope! Perpetually dying, and
never dead! under unsufferable Wrath, which yet will be for ever Wrath to come!
seeking Death, and never able to find it, but Eternally to endure all that
Calamity, which the Conjunction of Death and Life together can render
dreadful! what Groans and Cries will these Thoughts, and these sufferings
wring from their Hearts? But no Refuge will then be found, no excuses admitted,
no prayers, no entreaties will then prevail, no Tears move pity. He that made
them will show them no mercy, and he that formed them will show them no favor.
When once delivered over to that prison of God's wrath, they shall no longer be
prisoners of Hope. Judgment shall be brought forth unto final victory: and the
Redemption of the soul shall cease for ever.

Might we but suppose, that one of those Miserable Souls in the place of
Torment did let fall but one Tear, in an hundred thousand years; and if after
he had by this means wept so much, as that his Tears would equal the drops of
water in the whole Sea, his Misery should have an end; this were Hope, this
were Comfort. But alas! after that period, his Misery will be as far from an
end, as when he first began to feel it. It will then be but the Beginning of
sorrows, which will never, never, never End.

Think, o my Soul, that this is the Portion of the Sinners Cup: this is the
wages of Sin: and the certain doom of final Impenitence and unbelief. It Is no
politic Cheat, or melancholy dream, but the express repeated word of God, and
Christ, the holy Prophets, and Apostles. and the voice of Reason too, supposing
but the Immortality of the soul, and the power of self-Reflexion: the
punishment of Sinners must needs be Everlasting, as carrying continually an
Hell within them, unless God work a miracle to prevent it, which there is no
ground to imagine he will, or shadow of reason why he should. God has pawned
his Truth, and his Eternity, Deuteronomy. 32. c. 40, 41.
to execute this sentence of his threatened wrath. He is a God of infinite
mercy, it is true, but he has told us how far his Mercy shall extend. He will
not exercise one Attribute to the dishonor and the disparagement of the rest.
That obstinate and impenitent Sinners, shall thus perish, is not because the
Goodness and mercy of God are not infinite, but because his other Perfections
are so, viz. His Holiness, Justice, Truth, Sovereignty, and wisdom. Was it
wisdom and goodness to annex such a penalty to the violation of his law, and
can it be inconsistent with them, to inflict his threatened wrath? Shall we
suppose God to uphold his dominion and government by a Falsehood? to keep the
world in awe by the menaces of such Punishments, as shall no where, never be
executed? Is it unlikely, that God should exercise so much severity? and is it
not as improbable, that his repeated word and Oath should prove falls? Is it not
a righteous thing with God, as the Governor of the World, thus to punish the
obstinate Despisers of his Grace? who slighted his Authority, disobeyed his
Law, affronted his Sovereignty, derided his Power, denied his Truth,
contradicted his Holiness, and joined issue with the Devil, to pull him from
his throne; who abused his Patience and Long suffering, and scorned all his
threatenings; who thrust away their own Happiness, and would not take warning;
who burst all his bands a sunder, and broke through all obstructions, and would
not be stopped in their course of vanity and folly, or so much as consider their
danger; who rejected his calls to Repentance, and refused his mercy, when it
was offered; and preferred a Lust before his favor, and the pleasures and
profits of this world before the Heavenly Glory; and notwithstanding all the
methods of his Grace, and the checks of his Providence, and of their own
Conscience, they would go on, they would Dye? Let me, o my soul! adore the
Sovereign Justice of God in all his Judgments; and tremble at the threatenings
of that Eternal Wrath, which so few consider or believe, till it is too late.
Let the foresight and the fear of such an intolerable endless Punishment, be a
means to save me from it! let me herein read the Evil of sin, and learn to
abhor and avoid it. Let me pity, and warn, and counsel, and pray for those of
my Relations and Acquaintance, who live in sin, and run the hazard of this
Eternal Ruin. Let me not envy the foolish Mirth, and momentany Prosperity of
the wicked, whose present Joy must ere long expire, and an Everlasting
Destruction succeed in its room. Job. 20. c. 4.5.
How short is the Joy of the Hypocrite, and the Triumph of the wicked is but
for a moment. Let me fear and dread every thing, that leads to this dismal
issue: and improve every thing that may help me to escape it. And by
consequence, let me less value all the Good and Evil of this present Life:
judge of all things by this light: be patient under Temporal Calamities, and
thank God that it is not Hell: and thank him more, that present sufferings do
help to save me from Eternal ones.

Did I believingly consider an Everlasting Hell, Qut non expergiscitur ad hac
Tonitrua, jam non dormit, sed mortuus est. S. Augustine.
I should not think much of any thing that is required to prevent it, the
severest exercises of Religion, the strictest Temperance, the nic^st Chastity,
the largest Charity, the greatest selfdenial, all the Hardships of Repentance
and mortification, and continuance therein to the death, tho for many years
more then I am like to live, would be reckoned Easy, as well as Just, if set in
the balance against the Eternal Mischiefs of the Damned.

What will not men do, and suffer to prevent a Temporal Death? They will endure
a painful course of Physic; tear out their very bowels, by purges and
vomits: and are content to be cut and scarified, and to suffer any thing almost
to save their lives: but how little will they do, to be saved from the wrath to
come! One would think, they should have no Rest, or Peace, or be able to live a
quiet hour, till they had made some Provision against the hazard of this
Eternal Destruction: and look upon all men as their Friends, or Enemies,
according to the help, or hindrance, they received from them, in reference to
it. But the direct Contrary is every where apparent. Men are careless and
secure, jovial and merry, in the way that leads to Hell, and esteem, and love,
and choose that Company, that will help to bring them to this place of torment.
Yea such is their stupidity, and strange Perverseness; that they will not suffer
to be told of their danger. If you tell them, that by such a course, or such an
Action, they will lose so much money, or their lives will be in in danger, they
reckon it an obligation, will take it kindly, and return you thanks. But when
they are told by such Courses and Actions, they will lose their souls, and the
favor of God, and the hopes of Heaven, and must perish for ever; this they will
not receive, they despise the message, and scorn and hate the Messenger; are
displeased and angry at such Faithfulness.

O Bless the Lord, o my Soul! for any good hope, through Grace of escaping this
Intolerable and Endless Misery. And let all that is within me, bless his holy
Name. And let me heartily compassionate the delusion of those multitudes of
deceived, perishing Souls, whose Eyes are blinded by the God of this world; who
will not believe it, till they are convinced by the Light of that Fire which
shall never be extinguished. Yea when I read or hear of ten or twenty thousand
men slain in a War, (whither of Infidels, or Christians,) let me think of it,
with other apprehensions then formerly I was wont to do. Considering that
many, it may be the most, of these shall never have any Comfort or Mercy more:
fearing least the same sword or Bullet, that gave them their mortal wound, has
fixed them under God's Everlasting Wrath: and that by dying, they are undone for
ever. In very many other cases, the Faith of this Article would rectify my
opinions, and direct my Actions; if seriously considered, and improved. This
would make me think of Death, under another Notion, then it is commonly
considered. For without the consideration of Hell annexed to it, it is not so
very formidable, but that Heathen have been able to despise it. The most
contrary Sects among them, on different grounds have been able to do it: but
consider Death, as a passage to Eternal misery, as the Gate of Hell, as the End
of all Comfort to a wicked Man, and the Beginning of an Endless Calamity, and
nothing can be imagined more dreadful to a Guilty unholy Soul. Some of my
Acquaintance, it may be, who dyed this last year, are now among those Hopeless
Despairing Wretches, who expect the final Judgment of God, to consummate their
insupportable Misery. If they were permitted to come, and tell us, what they
suffer, and what they know; what a terrible consuming Fire God is; what Vanity,
Lust, and Folly brought them to this place of Torment; what diligence they
would advise us to, while in a state of Hope, to prevent the like; if we have
any love and kindness for our selves, any bowels of Compassion to our own
Souls; what a change do we think it would work upon us? But if we will not hear
Moses and the Prophets, Christ, and his Apostles, neither should we believe,
tho one came from the Dead.

XX.
The Eternal Blessedness of HEAVEN considered, as the Perfection of Holiness:
to quicken our desires and endeavors after greater Meetness to possess it.

Does one year after another hasten me to the end of Time? and does the
Blessedness of Eternity depend, on the Communications I now receive from God?
on the preparations I now make, and the meetness I can now attain for Eternal
Felicity in the presence of my God and Savior? O with what Intenseness of
mind, should I now prosecute that glorious object! with what unwearied
diligence should I run the race that is set before me? Least I fall short of
the Incorruptible Crown of Life? how should every thing be undervalued, and
rejected, that would divert, retard, or hinder me from pursuing this end? Lord!
be not a stranger to my soul in this distant Wilderness state! Let me see more
of thy light! be transformed more into thine Image! experience more of thy
Love! feel more of thy vital Presence, and quickening Spirit! let the divine
life in my soul be more powerful! and the characters of thy Likeness be more
legibly stamped upon it! by the daily exercise of Faith, and Hope, and holy
Affections, carry me through this World! till my Pilgrim state be over, and thou
have brought me to perfect Everlasting Holiness! And let the believing
forethoughts of it, fill all the powers of my soul, with Joy, and wonder,
Desire, and Love!

Give me, Lord! to think aright of the Heavenly Glory: as a confirmed State of
positive perfect holiness; of heavenly Light, Love, Liberty, and Joy: with the
satisfying vision of God, in the face of Christ, and his impressed Likeness:
dwelling forever in the direct and steady view of his transforming Glory: with
complete conformity of the soul, to Eternal Goodness, Truth, and Love, as its
perfection: esteeming nothing, desiring nothing but that God and Christ may be
glorified with an entire subjection to his will, adherence to him, Rest and
Confidence in him: swallowed up in the love, admiration, and praise of God, and
our Lord Jesus: living in joyful repeated Acts of Subjection, Adoration, and
acknowledged Dependence: ravished to behold the Glory of God, in the Face of
Christ? see his blessed Image perfect in every one of the Saints, etc. When all
the present Blindness of our minds, the errors of our Judgment, the Perverseness
of our Will, the disorder and rebellion of our Passions, the remaining
Aversation from God, and disaffection to him, which in this world we complain
of, shall all be done away. The Flesh shall no more lust against the Spirit; or
the Law in our Members against the Law of our Minds, but an Everlasting
Tranquillity and holy Peace take place: a Peace, which passes all
understanding; without any outward Molestation, or inward cause of disquiet.

Our corrupted Nature shall no more cast forth mire and dirt as now: we shall
have no more vain or wicked Thoughts; no more sinful Fears, or foolish Hopes;
unbecoming Heats, unruly Desires, sensual Inclinations, Earthly Affections,
feeble, slothful, Spiritless Duties, dead and heartless Prayers cold Thanks
givings, etc. but as we shall then know God without Error, and see our Lord
Jesus face to face, so we shall love him without reserve, more then now we can
think; and serve him without dullness and distraction; and praise him without
weariness; the spiritual actings of our souls shall have no allay of dross.
And thus shall we be with him, and admire and enjoy him, without end.

Thus when Death is swallowed up in victory, and what was imperfect is done
away, and what was corruptible and mortal has put on Immortality; God in
Christ shall be All in All, And when it is truly and perfectly so, Then it is
Heaven. A Word, tho commonly used, as little understood, as Holiness; which is
one of the greatest Mysteries in the World. But will hereafter be fully and
delightfully understood, by the Blessed Saints: as the Malignity, and
intrinsic Evil, of Sin shall be, by the Damned Spirits.

Oh that I might now feel more of this Heavenly Life begun, and carried on in
my soul, by a farther participation of his holy Image, and conformity to his
will! by more vital effects of his indwelling Spirit, in my soul, forming it to
be a Temple to himself, for his own delightful residence! that forgetting
that, which I have received, I may still be Covetous and desirous of more:
forgetting what I have attained, I may press on with an holy Eagerness and
Fervency toward the mark!

When I seriously examine my own heart, had I nothing else to prove the weakness
of my Grace, and the sinful remainders of unbelief, but the low desires, and
few confortable Thoughts, the seldom joyful prospect of this Blessed State,
how sad an Evidence were it? that I breath with no more Impatience, after that
Blessed holy Rest, in the enjoyment of God and Christ; and labor no more in
preparing for it? when all the Desires of our Souls shall be fixed on Him, and
filled with him, as our Infinite and supreme Good: and all the Expectations of
Faith and Hope, swallowed up in endless admiration, gratitude, and Joy: being
fully satisfied and at Rest, in the Presence and vision of God; without the
least Inclination or Desire of change. And by consequence,

There will be no need of Novelty, as now, to give a relish to our Happiness.
All Happiness in this world is by comparing a man's present Condition, with his
past, or with that of some Inferiors. But the Intrinsic Good, Felicity, and
Joy of Heaven, will need no such foil to set it off; no such comparison to
make it prized. The Blessed Spirits will never lose the lively sense of that
low and miserable Condition, from which they were raised to so great a Glory:
and so will ever equally rejoice in the Happiness of their Translation and
wonderful change. And what was at first delightful, will for ever be so; and
not be disdained or lessened by a continuance: as it happens in this world,
from the Emptiness, shallowness, and vanity of the Creature. An Affectation of
variety, and desire of change, proceeding allways from a sense of want. But
Holy Souls shall never be weary of seeing, loving, and enjoying God; his
blessed presence will afford us undecaying, and endless satisfaction:
Pleasures, never to be interrupted, or abated, and never to ceas. The blessed
object is absolutely Infinite, and so will be allways new to a finite
understanding, and continual fresh Communications from his infinite fullness,
must needs make our subjective Happiness to be allways new, and Eternally So.

Let me by such Thoughts quicken and excite my diligent endeavors, after a
greater meetness to enjoy so Great a Bliss. And to that end consider whither
any of those happy souls, who have finished their course, and obtained the
Prize, do now regret their utmost diligence, patience. and perseverance, during
their short abode here, to secure the Blessedness of an Endless Life, No, no,
they are far from repenting the Time they spent, the trouble they were at, the
care they used, the difficulties they met with, the sufferings they endured: to
conflict with the world, and the flesh, to resist temptation, to watch over
their Hearts, and words, and ways, to work out their Salvation, to please God,
and be faithful to him, etc. They find to their unspeakable comfort, and
Everlasting Joy, that Heaven makes amends for all they could do or suffer in
order to their coming thither. Yea they find, that they were not diligent, and
humble, and patient, and circumspect enough. That they did not love God, and
seek his glory, redeem their Time, and improve all their Talents and
opportunities of doing and receiving good, and give up themselves entirely to
prepare for Heaven, to that degree, they should have done. They find, by the
transcendency of the Blessed Recompense, that it deserved infinitely more then
the most active zealous Christian upon earth did ever do, in order to it.

Lord! quicken my Resolutions and Endeavors, by such thoughts as these? inspire
my sluggish carnal Heart, with holy Light, and Life, and Zeal, and fervor! that
looking to the things, which are not seen, which are Eternal, I may lay up a
good Foundation, 1 Timothy 6. c. 19.
against the Time to come, and so lay hold of Eternal Life!

But alas! how much have I neglected the great Duty of Holy meditation? how
little skill and experience have I in it, how tastless and insipid oftentimes
are my Thoughts of God! how confused and unsteady! how little Pleasure or
advantage have I by contemplaing his Highest Excellencies? Yet methinks, could
I but retain the same awakened lively thoughts of Heaven, and Eternal Life,
which sometimes I have had; might I continually feel the sweet and sacred
Influence as for a little season I have sometimes felt it; how little, how very
a Nothing, would all this world be to me! how comparatively weak, its strongest
and most alluring snares, to draw me off from. God! with what an unshaken mind
could I refuse and resist'em! with what an unconcerned indifference could I
look upon all its most charming Glory!

Could I maintain such a frame of Spirit, as I have sometimes had for a little
while; in the serious contemplation of divine mysteries, in fervent Prayer, and
other solemn duties of Religion; when the acts of Faith were strong and lively,
my heart set on fire with love to God, and holy breathings after him, admiring
his matchless Grace to fallen Sinners; (and to my Soul in partilar:) when he
brought me to the very suburbs of Heaven, (tho alas! how seldom,) by the
delightful Thought of what the Blessed Spirits above enjoy; in being where
Christ is, and beholding his Glory: when I was ready to say within my self,
It Is good to be Here: this is no other then the gate of Heaven; Oh when shall
Mortality be swallowed up of Life! But when I thought at any time to fix and
settle in such sweet Contemplations, how quickly did my lazy backward Heart
fly off! how soon did the flame decay, and dye away! how soon did I find my
self fallen down to Earth again! sunk down from the bosom of my Lord,
presently forgot my self, and Heaven, to dwell among the Pots, and embrace a
dunghill! 'Twas not on my own wings, o Lord! that I soared so high: but I hope,
by the breathings of that H. Spirit of Light and Love, who blows when, and
where, and how long he lists. Who gave me at any time any such first fruits
of the Spirit; who convinced me of the Certainty of the Heavenly Inheritance,
by a lively believing foresight of it; who made me earnestly desire the wings
of a Dove to be gone, and appear before God in Sion; made me pant, and groan to
be delivered, and to be with God, and Christ, with inexpressible desire and
joy, unconceivably mixed together with sighs and Groans. O my God! let not this
experience be only such a Taste of the Powers of the world to come, as is
consistent with final Apostasy! only the seeming zeal of the stony ground! the
rapturous Joy of an hypocrite! from the power of Imagination, and an heated
Fancy; from the workings of mere natural self love; upon mistaken apprehensions
of God, and a falls Opinion of Heaven! but by the holy effects, let me be
assured of the cause and Principle; that it was of God!

Teach me from the sweetness of a Spiritual Communion with God now in any of
his appointed Ordinances, to argue to my self what that most ravishing
satisfaction will be, that the Enjoyment of God in Heaven will afford the soul.
Our Holiness is now imperfect, to what it shall be: and therefore our
Consolation, Peace, and Joy, is but in part, and incomparably less then we are
assured it will be, when we shall be admitted to behold the Glory of the Lord.
It Is now at most but as the Break of Day, to the luster of the. Meridian Sun.
But if in this low imperfect State, we can sometimes obtain so near a view of
his Glory, and feel such sweet communications of his Grace; how much more of
this consolation and Joy is reserved to Heaven? If in this Pilgrim state, the
gifts and graces, and comforts of the H. Spirit are so refreshing; O what has
God prepared beyond the Grave, for those who love him! If now he sometimes shed
abroad his love in our Hearts, after such a manner; how much better shall I
love him, and feel the influence, and evidence of his Love to me, when I shall
be with him, and see him face to face? If the apprehensions of this future
Blessedness, do now encourage, raise, and animate my drooping soul; O what
shall I know, and see, and how shall I rejoice when the vail is removed! If a
Sacramental Communion with God and J. Christ be sometimes so sweet, and so
affecting; what will the Blessed Communion with God, and all his Saints above
amount to! when I shall sit down with all the Children of God, in the Presence
of the Bridegroom, at the last Great Supper of the Lamb in Glory! If the
earnest of our Inheritance be so reviving, what will be the full Possession of
it! If the Hopes of that glorious day, by holy meditation, be so transporting;
what will be the end of our Faith and Hope? If a Grape or two in the
Wilderness, be such a cordial; what will be the whole vintage in the Land of
Promise!

Shall I after all this forget my own Experience, and run from God and Heaven,
to embrace or seek a perishing Toy? Shall I hide my self, with Saul, among the
stuff, and lumber of this world, when God is calling me to a Glorious Crown?
Art thou, o my Soul! a Kings Son, an Heir of Heaven, an expectant of such Great
Felicity; and yet stoop so low? Hope for Heaven; and yet grasp this Earth, and
hugg the vain Appearances of Earthly Good? Hope to be like to God: (and oh how
Glorious an Hope is that!) to partake of his Image, and live Eternally with
him; and yet be sollicitous, anxious, and disquieted about Honor, and money,
and a Tempora! Interest? and mightily concerned about the momentany
gratifications of the Flesh, and the Enjoyments of this World? Art thou a
Pilgrim, and Stranger here; and traveling home to the Heavenly Country, and
yet Eager and passionate about Earthly Things? Should an Heart, that is set
upon Heaven, (or may be so, and ought to be so,) should it burn with such
kitchen, such common Fire? and neglect the unconceivable Riches, and Pleasures,
and Immortal Honors of the other Life? and the dawnings of that Glory upon my
soul, by the foretasts of it in this? Should I not live, as seeking such
things? as expecting such a Glory? And are careless and indifferent thoughts,
sleepy heartless prayers, faint and weak endeavors, becoming in such a case?
Shall I not mend my pace, and double my diligence in my preparatory work? When
I can believingly foresee the Blessed Recompense; Waiting for that Everlasting
Light of the Sun of Righteousness, which no Eclipse shall ever darken or
obscure; for that Eternal Glorious Day, which shall never be closed with an
Evening. When I shall see the face of God, in Christ, and be like him,
participate more of his image, rest in his love, and dwell for ever in the
light of his Countenance: according to the Prayer and Promise of my Blessed
Savior. And ought not such a prospect to sweeten the Bitterness of all our
intermediate sufferings? we are now oftentimes in heaviness, and sorrow; but
Eternity will be enough for an interrupted Joy. When we shall exchange all our
troubles for Everlasting Rest; our prisons for perfect liberty; our Poverty for
the Riches of God; darkness for Light; discord for love; deformity for beauty,
our weaknesses, and present languishings, for strength and vigor; folly for
wisdom; disgrace for Glory; sickness and pain for Eternal Ease and Health; the
Animal for the Angelical Life; imperfection and pollution for consummate
Holiness; our Sighs, and Tears, and Sorrows, and complaints, for triumphant
Everlasting Praise; our losses, affronts, disapointments, perplexities, fears,
groans, and Death, for crowns and scepters, hymns and Hallelujahs, light, and
life, and Bliss unutterable; and such great things, as are fit for us to hope,
but too Great to be now particularly understood and talked of; while we know
but in part, and see through a glass darkly: yea it seems as if it were not
lawful to utter'em. 2 Cor. 12.4. and now they can not be expressed, or fully
known; for Eye has not seen, or ear heard, or can it enter into the Heart of
man to conceive that prepared Glory.

XXI.
A devout Meditation, upon the 73 Psalm 27. Whom have I in Heaven but thee? and
there is none upon Earth that I desire besides thee.

WHat is there in Heaven or in Earth, o Lord! but Thy Presence to be valued,
loved, desired, chosen, sought, or delighted in? there is nothing in either
world desirable without Thee; nothing certainly above Thee; nothing in
Comparison with Thee. In Thee alone I trust. On Thee I depend. In Thee I repose
my confidence and hope. From thee I expect all my felicity, and Salvation. What
ever I can lose, yet with the continuance of thy Favor, which is my Life, I
have still Enough. With that I am Rich, and without it I am poor and miserable.
And if I want the Love of God, all that Heaven and Earth can give besides will
not make my Happy. In Thee, therefore I would terminate all my affections, all
my devotions! There is nothing of Heaven to be had on Earth, but in thy favor,
image, and love, and the reviving Sense of it. And all the Heaven I expect
hereafter, it is in the more full and immediate communications of these, in thy
blessed Presence. I can desire nothing, upon Earth; I can enjoy nothing in
Heaven, but Thee! both here and there, thou art, and shall ever be my all
sufficient satisfactory Portion, my Everlasting All! None else can be the
Portion of my soul. Nothing else can fill up all its wants, answer all its
cravings, be suited to all its capacities, appease and charm all its restless
motions, and give complacence to all its Desires, and be the proper object of
all its Affections.

What is there else can justly claim my Love? or pretend to my supreme
Affection, in comparison with God? Thou art alone the proper center of it.
Thine infinite and incomparable Excellencies, (who art Love it self,) deserve
my choicest Love: and thy numberless mercies and Benefits challenge it, as a
just debt: as a piece of Homage due from All, and of special Gratitude also
from me. Oh that I could love thee above all Things! who alone art worthy of
all my Love! O that Divine Love might be the ruling Principle within me! to
inspire all my Thoughts, to regulate all my desires, to set all the Powers of
my soul on work! O that it might take the full possession of my Heart, and so
animate and order all my Actions, to please him, whom my Soul Loves! If as yet
I cannot say with thine Apostle, Lord! thou that know all things, thou
know that I love thee. Yet I can say, Lord, thou know, that I would love
thee! Thou have provided for our Happiness, by that first and great command, of
loving thee with all our hearts, and souls, and strength. But alas! how
backward is my sluggish carnal Heart, to this delightful exercise? tho I have
so often been told, that God is Love, and that he that dwells in love, dwells
in God, and God in him. O shed abroad thy love into my Soul! that I may feel
the vital power and influence of it, and live continually in the love of God,
and that nothing may ever be able to separate me from it.

Whom have I in Heaven or Earth, to Hope in, but Thee? I expect more from
Creatures, then they can or will perform: but God can do for me more
abundantly, then I can ask or think: exceed my largest thoughts, outstrip my
highest expectations. And no man was ever disapointed who made Thee his Hope.
When I meet with crosses, and wrongs, unfaithfulness, contempt, hatred, and
persecution from men; I need not wonder. I was never told by God, it would be
otherwise here. Did I look for less from Creatures, and expect more from God:
did I reckon this World to be a state of Trial, and not a place of Rest and
Satisfaction: my Faith and my desires, would be stronger with respect to God,
and Heaven; and temporal Calamities and disapointments less afflictive and
vexatious.

And what is there, o Lord! in Heaven, or in Earth, my soul can desire besides
Thee? is there any thing desirable, but as it is thine, of thee, and from
thee? and bears some impression of thine Excellence, or brings some intimation
of thy Love? and what can I reasonably desire; what, that is worth desiring, or
having, but thou art able to be, and do, and give?

In whom, or what, shall I Rejoice? but in Thee, o Lord! shall I solace my self
in transitory Goods, that slip between my fingers, and perish in the using? or
relish carnal Joys, which pollute and debase the soul? when I may and ought to
rejoice in Thee at all Times, as the only Source of perfect Everlasting Joy.
Let me then stir up my drooping, desponding, unbelieving Heart, to rejoice in
God: who takes pleasure in the cheerful service and obedience of his children:
who delights in those, who delight in him. Vid. Mr. How, of Delighting in
God.
Is not Delighting in God, a most essential vital part of Religion? should it
not be my constant Frame? has not God sufficiently provided, that it may be
so? Can I say and believe, that God is the Portion of my Soul; that he is my
God, and I hope to live with him for ever, and not rejoice? or can I consider
the grace of the New Covenant, the matchless Love of Christ, and the precious
promises of the Gospel, and not see reason to rejoice? yea does my soul love
God, and endeavor to please him. And is not the very act and exercise of holy
Love, mixed with unspeakable sweetness.

Whom is there in Heaven, or in Earth, or Hell, that I ought to Fear, but Thee?
who have a negative voice in all the designs men and Devils; an hook in their
nostrils; a bridle in their mouths; to make them fulfill thy pleasure, and in
every thing accomplish thy Sovereign Decree.

Is there any Other, in whom I may repose my Trust, but in Thee, o Lord! the
Rock of Ages? the might of thy Power, the unsearchableness of thy wisdom, the
Righteousness of thy Nature, the stability of thy Truth, the riches of thy
Grace, and the immutability of thy promise, are a sure foundation, for my soul
to trust to, and rely upon. Thy word stands firm for ever: and the Truth of
thine ability, and readiness to help in every Time of need, endures the same
through out all Generations. At all times, and in all places, my soul may trust in
thee, and find relief. And they who know thy name will do so: for in the Lord
Jehovah is Everlasting Kindness and Strength. To answer all my doubts, to
supply all my wants, to fill all my desires. May not God take it unkindly, that
I trust him no more? And is it not a criminal unkindness? that I give him not
the glory of all these Excellent Attributes, which are the grounds of Trust: by
a constant steady entire dependence on him for all that I need.

I have none in Heaven but Thee, o Lord! as the object of my Invocation and
Worship. Let other Christians have recourse to new Mediators, and call upon
other Gods: I will-make mention of thy name, and of thy Righteousness only. And
ask of thee whatsoever I need, for the sake of thy Christ, my only adorable
Mediator. Him thou hear allway; with him thou art allways well pleased. I
honor the holy Angels, as glorious Attendants about thy throne: and bless
thee for them, as Ministering Spirits, for the good of thy Servants but I dare
not invoke, or worship 'em, because they are Fellow Servants. On the same
account I honor the memory of Departed Saints, but neither invoke them, or pay
them religious worship. That Glory, thou will not give unto another. I have no
precept in H. Scripture to direct, no promise to encourage, no Example to
authorize the invocation of any other but Thee; in whom I believe, and Trust.
10. Romans 14.

Having such a God in Heaven, what can I need on Earth? His eyes behold me, his
wing is over me, his hand can supply me, his Grace provide for me. I can want
nothing that is Good: unless I should need somewhat, which God, the infinitely
Blessed and Allsufficient God, cannot bestow. If thou art the Portion of my
Soul; all mine Enemies cannot make me miserable: unless they can void Heaven of
the presence of God, hinder his care, bind up his hand, or obstruct his Love.
But tho my Enemies cannot, I fear my Sins may. They alone can separate between
God, and my Soul. And considering the multitude and aggravations of them, and
thine unspotted Holiness and Justice; I should have too much reason to fear and
tremble, yea and utterly despair, if I had none in Heaven but Thee. But thy
word assures me, that I have a Mediator there: a faithful and a compassionate
High Priest, Jesus Christ the Righteous; whom thou have exalted to be a Prince,
and a Savior, to give Repentance and Remission of Sins. Who lives for ever in
Heaven, to make Intercession, till he has brought me there, to behold his
Glory, and partake of it.

That Glory, o Lord! thou have reserved for Heaven: in this world we only
desire, believe, and hope to enjoy it Whom have I in Heaven? that is the place
of Fruition. What can I desire upon Earth? This world is the place of Desires,
as the other of full Enjoyment: most of that which men call Enjoyment in this
Life, consists but in desire. Desire or Lust is all that is in the wicked
world. 1 John. 2. c. 13. the Riches of a Covetous worldling makes him desire
more: and the great mystery of Intemperance is to create and increase desires:
and Desires of another kind are the portion of good men in this world. O that I
could breath after a state of perfect Fruition in Heaven with more importunate
desires! Who will give me to be in Heaven with Thee? On Earth I desire nothing.
So one version. Let me, o my Soul! think of Heaven, as such a place, or state
of blessed Enjoyment! speak of it, seek it, long for it, prepare for it, as
such. And let J. Christ, who is the desire of all Nations, (through whom all
divine communications are made to fallen Sinners) be the great object of my
present desires and love! Let me desire nothing but as in him; and for him!
that believing his word, obeing his Law, adoring his person, imitating his
Example, trusting his promise, constrained by his love, pertaking of his Image,
filled with his grace, and comforted by his Spirit; my meditations of him may
be sweeter, and my love stronger, and I may have nothing more left to desire
for my self, but that God who has raised and exalted him, would keep alive my
faith, and hope, and holy desires, till he has made me meet to be with him;
and after having guided me by his Grace, and Spirit, and counsels, here on
Earth, would receive me to his most blessed and Glorious Presence in Heaven.
Amen, Amen.

XXII.
The Glorious Appearance of Christ to Judgment considered as Certain: the
Terror, and Astonishment, Confusion, and Despair of the Wicked, to behold their
Judge; and hear his condemning Sentence to EVERLASTING Destruction.

WHen our Blessed Savior shall appear to judge the world, I read that it shall
be, in his own Glory, the Glory of his Father, and of the Holy Angels. If by
the glory of his Father, be meant that of the Divinity, as the Original and
Author of all things in nature, as Creator of the World: and by the Glory of
his holy Angels, be understood that of the Legal administration: the Law being
given by the disposition of Angels: and by his own Glory, that of the Gospel,
as he is the Messiah: that in the Glory of all these, he shall come to
Judgment, we have a summary account of the three different Revelations. which
God has made of himself to mankind; by the Light of Nature, that of the Law,
and the more manifest one of the Gospel. According to which every man is to be
judged at the last day.

Tho we cannot distinctly tell what or how great our Lord's Glory will then be;
we may be certain, it will be suitable to the dignity of his Royal person:
suitable to the grandeur of his Fathers Majesty: with the splendour of a
Triumphant Prince, who is Heir of all Things, and has all power in Heaven and
in Earth committed to him, the Great Lord of both Worlds, Head of Angels an
men: and suitable to his glorious office, as Mediator, and the appointed Judge
of Quick and Dead.

If at his Transfiguration his Face shone, and his Raiment was white and
glittering, how much more splendid will his last Appearance be? When the Bodies
of his Saints shall be seven times brighter then the luster of the Sun? and if
his Members shall then be so glorious, how transcendently more so will their
Head, their Lord appear? If the delivery and promulgation of the Law, on Mount
Sinai, was accompanied with such circumstances of terrible Majesty, how much
more may we suppose the Great Assize will be attended with? When he comes to
judge for the violation of the Law, and the contempt of the Gospel. And if even
Moses did then exceedingly quake and fear, what will be the consternation and
trembling of the wicked World at the Coming of Christ? When he shall be
revealed from Heaven, in flaming Fire, with a glorious retinue of his mighty
Angels, as so many bright Stars about the more glorious Sun of Rightousness.
The lights of Heaven shall be Ecclipst: the visible Sun shall vail its blushing
head as infinitely out shone: the present glory of the Creation be all
benighted, by reason of his transcendent Brightness. Yea the Heavens shall be
wrapped up as a scrol; the Elements melt away with a mighty noise; the Earth and
all its works be burnt up; and the whole universe as one great Bonefire, to
adorn the Triumph of our Lords Appearance. And this ushered in by the voice of
an Archangel, proclaiming his approach: and the voice of God supplying the use
of a Trumpet, to raise the Dead, and possess mankind with an awefull Reverence
of their Judge.

Thus in triumph, as a Conqueror and a Judge, shall he come again, who once
appeared in the form of a Servant to be judged and condemned by Man. Then he
was called King in scorn: now he will appear as much above all Earthly and
Humane Greatness, as once he stoopt for our sakes beneath it. Then the Contempt
of Nations, and no way esteemed Desirable, when he came from the womb of his
Virgin Mother: now the Terror of the World, when he comes again from the right
hand of his Father. No more to be subject to a state of Meaness, but to render
vengeance to all, 2 Thessalonians. 1. chap.
who know not God, and obey not the Gospel: and to be glorified in his Saints,
and admired in, and by all them that believe.

The Holy Scripture does frequently and expressly assure us, that he will thus
come again, and for these ends. He is exalted, and gone to Heaven, as the Head
of his Church, and the King of Glory, and when he foretold his Ascension, he
gave a promise of his Return. The Heavens are to contain him till the
Restitution of all things. By his Providence, and by the H. Spirit, he now
carries on the designs of his Death: and when these are accomplished, he will
appear to the Joy of Believers, and the confusion of the Wicked. He is entered
as our Forerunner, Heb. 19, ^^ 10. c
within the vail, to prepare Mansions, and to take possession for us: and will
not allways leave us in this dark and defiling World. He knows our sorrows,
and hears our prayers, and bottles our Tears, takes notice of our groans, and
in all our Afflictions he is afflicted. Being reconciled by his Death, at his
first Coming, we shall be saved by his Life: since he lives to make good his
word of coming again.

How confortable is the news of it? how joyful will be the meeting, to such as
expect and prepare to see him? When the Sea and the Graves shall yield up their
Dead; and all the Prisoners of Hope lift up their heads, arise go up, and meet
the Lord in the Air, and ascend with him to the Heavenly Glory. But who can
express how dismal a Sight this will be to the secure and the Impenitent, to
all who dye in their Sins? to behold their Judge, (who formerly offered to be
their Savior,) upon a glorious Throne, and all the Children of Adam summoned
to his Tribunal! to have nothing to answer against his charge, and no way to
escape his condemning sentence! they despised him as a Lamb, offered in
Sacrifice, to take away the sins of the World: but shall no longer do so, when
he comes as the Lion of the tribe of Juda, to devour and destroy the Enemies of
his Cross. Now, they will not own him for their Lord; but shall then find he
is so, by the vengeance he will execute. As a Jesus, as a Savior, they
rejected him, making light of his Salvation, despising his Mercy, refusing his
Grace; but the neglected Gospel will then be a more killing Letter then the
Law. He who by his Ambassadors does now entreat Sinners to be reconciled; will
then be as deaf to their Entreaties, as they have been to his. Because they
would not turn at his Reproof hearken to the call of his word and obey its
voice, they must hear the sentence of Condemnation, and feel the Execution of
it, wither they will or no. Yea the blood of his Cross will upbraid, accuse,
and plead against them. And what ever foolish Evasions they now make, to
continue in security, they shall then be speechless and self-condemned. Nothing
will be able to hide them from the amazing Presence of their Judge, or from the
Wrath of the Lamb. Who will inflict an intolerable and righteous vengeance, an
Everlasting Destruction, upon all the Ignorant and ungodly World. The Greatest,
the Stoutest, the boldest of them shall then be humbled, and stand before
Christ's Tribunal, upon an equal Level with the meanest: seized with horror,
filled with Guilt, Anguish, and Despair: and find to their Eternal Confusion
that the Judge is no respecter of Persons, but every man shall receive
according to his w^rks. The Mighty shall not be spared for his Greatness, nor
the mean man for his Poverty. O Fool! o Wretch that I am, shall many then say,
who now brave it out in Pride and vanity, unconcerned about a future Judgment!
not to be persuaded by the Terrors of the Lord, which I was so often warned and
foretold of! what refuge of Hope can I now fly to? what can I say for my self?
what can I do to escape, to dye, to exist no longer? I would have no
compassion on my own Soul; I would not so much as consider its Danger; I shall
now find none from Christ, I can expect none! his Mercy is gone, and gone for
ever! I am lost, undone tormented, and must Eternally be so! O the amazement,
Horror, and Despair of self condemned Sinners in that day of Vengence!

O my Soul! what is there of greater Consequence, or of greater Certainty from
the word of God, then that I must appear to Judgment, when Christ shall come
again? Lord, teach me to believe it firmly, to consider it often, to lay it
seriously to Heart, to act under the influence and power of it, as long as I
live; that at the Great Resurrection from the Dead, I may lift up my head, with
a joyful Hope, and find the Judge to be my Friend, my Advocate, my Jesus, and
not my Enemy, and Destroyer.

XXIII.
Meditations of the Glory of Christ in his Glorified Saints, and of the
thankful Admiration of Believers, when He shall come again from Heaven, which
shall be continued to all ETERNITY.

THe Terror of our Lords Appearance to Judgment cannot be greater to the
wicked, then the comfort and Joy it will be to the Saints. When they shall see
him whom their Souls love, ascend with him to Heaven, and be wellcom'd,
according to his promise, with those indearing words, Matt. 25.
Come the Blessed Children of my Father, inherit the Kingdom prepared for you,
from before the foundation of the world! 'Twas for your sakes, I assumed flesh,
lived on Earth, and dyed on the cross, to purchase this Glorious Kingdom for
you, which I now come to give you the Possession of. 'Twas for this I prayed,
and suffered on Earth, for this I interceded ever since in Heaven: I was heard
in that prayer, accepted in those sufferings, and my Intercession granted, that
where I am you may be also, to behold my Glory. Come therefore Good and
Faithful Servants, enter into your Lords Joy. O what Ravishing words will
thees be! what an Ecstasy of Love and kindness is implied in them? What matter
of Rejoicing may it now give me, to admit the Hope, that my Blessed Saviout
will say such words as these to me? and bid me stand upon his Right Hand, among
his sheep? O what an exulting frame of soul will such Expressions raise! how
shall all my doubts and fears and sorrows be scattered in a moment, and cease
for ever! O Glorious Day! when my Blessed Lord shall thus publicly acknowledge
me for his own, and plead my cause against all the accusations of Satan and the
malicious Calumnies of all his Instruments! when I shall be able to say of all
my Sins and sufferings, as my Lord upon the cross, It is Finished, It is
Finished. My warfare being accomplished; being more then Conqueror over all,
through him, who loved me, and dyed for me, and now is come to wipe away all Tears
from mine Eyes, as it were with the Napkin, that was bound about his Head, when
laid in the Grave: all being the fruit of his Meritorious Death. Then shall I
have nothing more to fear, or wish, or beg. I shall offend, provoke, and
dishonor him no more; or by my folly and scandal discredit his holy name and
Gospel. But by consummate Holiness be fitted to Rejoice in his Presence Love,
and celebrate his Praise for ever. I shall never more lament his Absence, or
complain of his Anger: never see a cloud on his Face, or a Frown in his look
any more. Now I must wait and pray, struggle and strive, labor and suffer,
desire and expect, believe and hope, etc. but then perfect Rest and Holiness,
love and joy, vision and fruition, bliss and glory unutterable and everlasting
shall take place.

All the Attributes of God, all the wonderful Perfections of Christ will then
be glorified in Believers, and admired by them. His invariable Truth will then
be honored, which they trusted to, and waited for, for now they shall know and
find they did not wait in vain, they hoped in his word, and ventured their
Salvation upon it, and now they shall receive the End of their Faith and Hope,
infinitely beyond what they ever expected or believed.

The Glory of Divine Wisdom will then appear, when the Constitution
Administration and design of the Mediators Kingdom shall be fully known: in the
admirable order and beauty of every part of it, with the exact tendency of all
the particulars to one Glorious end: and the whole undertaking crowned with so
blessed an issue. What is now a mystery even to Believers themselves, and has a
vail upon it, shall then no longer be so: all the riddles of Gods Graee and
Providence be plainly understood. O how transporting a view must it needs be,
when the Glory of all the divine Attributes which God intended to accomplish,
in and by Christ, shall be manifest to his Redeemed Saints. The whole method of
our Salvation will then appear to be the fruit of unscearchable Wisdom. when we
shall all see the reality and substance, and entire scheme, of all that God
designed in and by him; all that was typified of him, and foretold concerning
him, in the old Testament. How will it all appear to be the Manifold Wisdom of
God. Ephesians. 3. c. 10.

As in uniting Heaven and Earth together in the Person of our Mediator:
fullfilling the Truth of a terrible Threatening in his death, and by the same
way accomplishing many gracious Promises: Vid. Mr. Charnock of the Div. Attrib.
Wisdom.
Satisfying Justice, and at the same time showing Mercy: manifesting infinite
Grace and kindness by shedding of blood: conquering Death by dying; and
disarming the Law by obedience to it, etc. afterward subduing the world to the
Faith of the Gospel, by the foolishness of preaching: making men wise to
Salvation by the knowledge of the Cross: and spreading that Faith the more by
all the opposition made against it, etc. how wonderfully will a clear view of
these things discover, and glorify the Wisdom of God.

But the Love and Grace of Christ; the infinite Goodness and Compassion of God,
will then be magnified in an especial manner. What but Sovereign Love in the
whole Contrivance and Counsel of God about our. Redemption? what admirable
Love and Grace in the whole management of that design? what unparrallel'd
kindness in the accomplishment of it by the sacrifice of the son of God? and
how glorious will this Love appear, when he shall come again to give us the
full Harvest of all his Purchase? with what admiring Thank fullness shall
Believers then contemplate the unskearchable Riches of his Grace? in all the
parts and instances of his Humiliation, from his conception to his Crucifixion
and Burial: in all the Evidences and discoveries made of it, from the first
Promise to it is completion: yea from before the foundation of the World, in the
Covenant of Peace between the Father and the son, until his second Coming, to
Judge the World, and deliver up the Kingdom to his Father.

How shall we then admire and adore his Powerful Grace? which snatched us as
fire brands out of Everlasting Burnings; that effectually shined into our minds
by Heavenly Light; conquered the opposition of our Stubborn Wills; Sanctified
our Carnal Hearts; rescued us from the tyranny of Satan, and the dominion of
lust; giving, cherishing, and preserving the holy Seed of Grace, and making it
Spring up to Eternal Life; defeating the malicious and subtle endeavors of the
Devil to destroy it; inabling us to endure Tribulation, and persevere to the
End; giving us victory over Death; conducting us through the dark valley; raiising
our Bodies, reviving and reuniting them to our Souls, and rendering them
glorious like his own Body; and at length raising our imperfect Services with.
Eternal Life. yea tho our best services were mixed with sin, our holiest duties
spotted, our most courageous sufferings mixed with unbelief, yet rewarded with a
Blessedness that has no alloy of Evil, but all the ingredients of a perfect
Felicity, and nothing to lessen and interrupt it. How shall we then admire the
Bounty of our Gracious Lord, the freeness, tenderness, riches, and the
exceeding Greatness, and Glory of his Infinite Goodness and Grace to poor
Believers?

With what ecstasies of Joy and Gratitude may we imagine that our Lord will be
then admired by all his Redecmed ones?

Saying, This is He, who made our peace with God, and reverst the Sentence of
Damnation, which we were under: who bought us with the price of his most
precious Blood, bore the Wrath of his Father, and submitted to an infamous and
cursed Death for us: he assumed our nature, that we might partake of his:
became the Son of Men, that we might be made the Children of God; for our sakes
he became poor, that we through his Poverty might beeome Rieh: stoopt to bear the
greatest Ignominy and reproach, to conferr honor on us: was for a time
forsaken of his Father, that we might not be so Eternally: felt the stroke of
his Anger against sin, that we might not perish under it. Was a man of sorrows,
and acquainted with griefs, that we might rejoice: his agonies and bloody sweat
were for our Refreshment, and by his stripes we are healed: he bowed his head
on the Cross, that we might lift up ours in Triumph: and because we had eaten
of the forbidden fruit, he hung on the accursed Tree. 'Twas for us that he
suffered the frowns of Heaven, the enmity of Hell, the rage of Devils, the
hatred and persecution of the world: He was judged, that we might not come into
Condemnation: he was crucified, that we might be glorified; and he is now Come
again finally and fully to effect it.

O the height, and depth, and length, and breath of the Love of Christ, which
passes knowledge, but calls for admiration, and Everlasting Gratitude! This is
the Blessed Day, we longed and waited, and prayed for! This is our Gracious,
our Glorious Lord, whose love melted our Hearts, whose Promise was our Support,
whose Word was our Rule, whose Spirit was our Comforter, whose Cross was our
Crown, and the hope of his Appearance our chief Consolation!

Lord! what am I, what was I, that the ever Blessed Son of God should do and
suffer and purchase all this for me? I can remember when I was ignorant of God,
a Stranger to him, at Enmity with him, under the power of Darkness, and the
Devil, serving diverse lusts and Pleasures, hastening to Hell, and liable to his
Wrath. But he chose me out of the world, stamped his Image upon me, pardoned my
Sin, and embraced me in the arms of his unchangea^^^ Love. O Happy Change! a^^
yet how little did I prize his Grace, admire his love, and express my own, or
pomote his glory, and honor him in the Eyes of others? how did I dishonor my
profession and holy Calling, as his Disciple, by agravated Apostasy? but he
recovered me by Repentance, and healed my Backslidings, and received me
graciously, because he loved me freely. O admirable Grace! to pardon, and save,
and bring to Glory such an unthankful Wretch, as I have been! to make such a
difference between me and others, whom I knew on earth! that the same Power,
which makes them Miserable, now makes me Blessed! that when they are banished
from his Presence into Everlasting Destruction, I am admitted to behold his
Glory, and shall dwell with him for ever!

O how much ^^^e do I now see and find then ever I believed, of the Love of
Christ, and his promised Salvation! how much more glorious is the Person of my
Redeemer! how much more Excellent is the Heavenly State, then ever I thought or
expected! I could not have imagined the thousandth thousandth part of that
which I now see and feel. I cannot but admire and spend an Eternity in
admiring, and praising the Incomparable Grace and Glory of my Blessed Redeemer.

Such holy admiration will certainly produce the most thankful Adorations of
our Lord Jesus. Saying one to another, I Bless the Lord of Love and Glory! who
humbled himself so low, as our Mediator, and has exalted us so high, as the
blessed fruit of it! how can we ever enough adore and praise him, who
condescended so far, and has done and sufferd so much for us? See how the Holy
Angels worship this King of Glory! and have not every one of us more reason to
do so? O let all the Quire of Heaven celebrate his glorious Love! and let us,
his Redeemed, his Glorified ones say continually, Let the Lord be magnified:
who has loved us, and washed us from our sins in his own Blood, and made us
Kings and Priests unto God, his Father, and through him ours.

O Merciful Savior! O glorious Change! O Happy Society! with whom we shall
Eternally adore our Common Lord. We can some of us remember when we lived
together on Earth, how we wept, and praid, and fasted, and mourned together,
when we suffered, and complained, and sinned together. O the Mavelous change
our Redeemer has now wrought for us, and in us! These Bodies, these Souls,
this Life, this Place, this Company, these Enjoyments, are not like those in
yonder World. But alas, who can describe what Believers shall then think and
say to extol their Savior! how small a portion is it we understand of that
World? How little can I conceive, and much less express? Blessed be God we know
so much, as the matter of our joyful Hopes: and forever Blessed be God, who
has promised and provided such a Glory for us, as cannot now be fully known.

What inexpressible sweetness might Believers taste by rejoicing in Hope, did a
more lively Faith realize all this to their Souls? we might listen as it were
to the shouts and Acclamations of the Saints above, and say Amen to their
Thanksgivings. We might behold them about the Throne of God, and of the Lamb,
with Palms of victory in their hands, a Crown of Glory on their heads, and
songs of Triumph in their mouths, saying Allelujah; Worthy art Thou, o Lord,
Rev. 4. c. 11.5. c. 12.13.
to receive Glory, and Honor, and Power, for thou have Created all Things, and
for thy Pleasure they are, and were created. And worthy is the Lamb that was
slain, to receive Power, and Riches, and wisdom, and strength, and honor, and
glory, and Blessing. And again, Blessing, Honor, Glory, and Power be unto him
who sits upon the Throne, and to the Lamb, for ever and ever.

Whence is it, o my Soul! if indeed I believe and expect all this, that I can
hear, and read, and think, and speak of these great Things, with no more ardent
affections, suitable preparations, importunate prayers, and vigorous desires?
How should the believing Thoughts of that Day promote my Heavenly mindedness,
self-denial, contempt of the world, patience, and perseverance? quicken my
zeal, secure my stedfastness, and give life and spirit to my Prayers for the
hastening of it? how should my soul rise toward Heaven, by holy Love and
desire, ascend and meet him, get as near him as I can, breath after more of his
presence, and beg him to prepossess my Heart, to anticipate his second Coming
by clearer discoveries of his Love, and fuller communications of his Grace.
Even so Come Lord Jesus!

XXIV.
Concerning the Examination of a man's Heart and Life: the Reasonableness,
Advantages, and Necessity of it. Some direction and advice concerning the Time
and manner. That we may know in what Preparedness we are for ETERNITY.

I Am hastening every year, every day, to the period of this Life: I must
shortly appear before my Glorious Judge; and experience these Terrors or
Comforts, this Blessedness or Misery, which I have now read of. Shall I not
therefore inquire, which of the two belongs to me? Is it not worth considering,
wither I must go, and how I shall fare, when I quit this Body? what is like to
be my next Habitation? to which of the two unchangeable States I shall be
adjudg'd? Shall an Inquiry of so much consequence be put off to an indefinite
Hereafter? do I not desire to know the worst, while a remedy may be found? or
am I content to dye, through an unwillingness to discover that I am Sick? The
question to be resolved is of infinite weight. Shall I not spend a few hours to
know what will become of me for ever? An error is more then possible, 't is
easy to mistake: and the hazard of doing so is unspeakably great. How many
thousands perish eternally, even under the light of the Gospel, who never
suspected their danger? how ordinary, how common a thing is it; for men to be
thus deceived? how successful is the Devil in this Stratagem against the
Souls of men? Is it not then a most criminal stupidity, to be contentedly.
Ignorant and unresolved? Wither I am reconciled to God or no: Wither I am led
by the Flesh or the Spirit; wither I am in the broad or narrow way, which lead
to such contrary Ends; that is, wither if I dye in this condition, I shall be
saved or perish. Can such an Inquiry be frivolous, or indifferent? Is the
subject of it so contemptible, and my concern in it so small, that it merits
not to be attentively considered? Shall I never ask my soul, till I am leaving
this world, (the unfittest Time of all to begin so important an affair,) what
am I? to whom do I belong? whose Image do I bear? how have I lived? and what do
I do? what do I love most? what do I most constantly desire, and choose, and
seek? how does the Pulse of my soul beat? is it quickest toward God, or
toward the world? wither am I goeing? what will be final upshot and issue of
my present course? Is it Heaven or Hell I must be translated to by Dyeing? what
Security have I got for Eternal Life? what provisions have I made? what
foundation have I laid?

How strangely infatuated are most men, who talk of an Everlasting Life as an
Article of their Creed; and say they count upon it, that they must dwell in
Happiness or Misery for ever; and that seldom or never bethink themselves in
good earnest, and for any Time, with a settled composed exercize of Thoughts,
Which of these Two is like to be their Lot. Or If they begin to search and try
themselves, they come to no Conclusion, or conclude too hastily: they pluk off
the plaster, as soon as it begins to smart; they are either frighted with the
horrid prospect of past Crimes, or, having escaped the grosser Pollutions of
the world, judge too favorably of their own case. They commonly do the work
but by halves, and so go from the glass and forget what manner of persons they
were.

Let me therefore, o my Soul: Sequester my self from the world, to commune with
my own heart to reflect upon my past Life, and look in to my present strate, to
recollect and review the most considerable passages of my course and Time
hitherto. O how neglected and disused a Practice is this! which does challenge
and require our principal and most Serious concern about it, and how many begin
it and are discouraged, and leave off without reaching the End of such an
Enquiry.

How much wiser, in this respect, are the Children of this world, in their
Generation, then the Children of Light? who is so Exact in his accounts between
God and his own Soul, as Tradesmen in their dealings with one another? who is
at the pains to write down his Sins and his Mercies? the grounds of his Fear,
and the encouragements of his Hope? or keeps a Journal and Diary of his
Spiritual State? who does at set times, once a month, or once a Quarter, or
even once a year, take a just view of him self, his Heart, and Life, and State,
as a Christian? that he may see what he has received, and done; what he owes,
and what he may expect: that he may know wither he thrive or decay; wither be
increase or decrease, wither he go backward or forward; wither he be Richer or
Poorer, this year then the last: And is it not a symptom that you are
declining, when you love not to examine your Accounts? Is there not ground of
Jealousy and Suspicion, that you are behind hand, because you are loath to
inquire, whither you are or no? and unwilling to know the worst of your
Condition. Nevertheless, without Such Enquiries, and bringing the matter to a
determination, at what uncertainties must we live? and how unconceivable an
haszard do all Hypocrites and unrenewed Sinners run? and how reasonable, how
necessary is it that we should know, and in order to it, prove our selves? we
must therefore bestow Time and serious Diligence about it, that we may examine
matters to the bottom, and come to some Result, that we may form a right
Judgment concerning our own case.

He that would do it to good purpose, must endeavor to understand clearly the
terms of the Covenant on God's part, and on ours: and take care not to Judge of
himself by, mistaken rules; by a false Standard, that God will not justify; or
by any, such characters as will not conclude. But most men are unwilling to
bring themselves to a Trial, or let Conscience deal plainly and faithfully with
them. They are stupidly secure, and see not the necessity of this duty. Or do
not suspect themselus. They presume they need not be at that Trouble: or are so
taken up with the World, that they cannot find Time and leisure ^^r it. And
many men dare not bring their Hearts and ways to a Trial. There is commonly
some seeret Lust indulged, which they are loath to let go. But most go on in
sin, and perish Eternally, because they think there is no danger of perishing:
and never repent, and make their Peace with God, be cause they fancy and
presume it is done already.

Therefore let me beg of thee, who ever thou art, who read this, to put the
case to thy self seriously to admit the doubt, wither you are not mistaken;
make the supposition, tho you have not hitherto sufficiently considered the
State of your Soul. You are confident that all is well; and thereupon are
unwilling to examine farther: but for that very reason you ought to question,
whither it be so or not? do but ask your self seriously, what is the ground of
your good Opinion concerning your self? for what reason can you thus conclude?

Did you ever seriously lay to heart the Characters and description, which the
Scriptures give, of those whom Christ will own, at the last day, and of such
whom he will reject and reprobate? with unfeigned application to your own case,
have you therewith proved your selves? and come to a settled Judgment, after a
deliberate Enquiry? And was the Conclusion to your comfort, and Joy? If so,
what influence has it since had upon your Heart and Life? has it promoted
Purity, Thank fullness, Heavenly-mindedness: contempt of this world, and
stronger Desires after the Image, love, and presence of God, and the Glory of
Christ? Moreover, consider.

Is it not this a good while a go? how have you behaved your self ever since?
have you not reason to look back with shame? If you but slightly examined your
self formerly, resolve to do it more effectually now: review the sins you have
been since Guilty of. And if you have not done any thing considerable of this
kind, you ought now to begin. It is seasonable to begin the year by such an
Exercise, and it will be found of great use, in all the following parts of it:
especially when you come to examine your self afresh, in order to the Lord's
Supper. For we ought frequently to renew the sad remembrance of our former
Sins, that from time to time we may renew our Repentance, which is the work of
our Life, and not of one day. And he that comes to the Sacrament, and will look
no farther back, then to the last Communion, may possibly presume too much,
that all was then as it should be, and not be humble enough.

If any one therefore resolve in good earnest up on an holy Life, and seriously
design to prepare for Eternity, as it is necessary to make a general review of
his Life, so I desire to afford him the best Counsel I can, in order to it

It may be advisable, Vid. Mr. Baxter's Saints Rest. p. 3. chap. 7:8:9.
if you have not formerly begun this work, to employ one hour at least in a
Day, for several Days following, in writing down the most considerable Passages
of your Life you can remember, desiring God's Assistance therein; and keeping
your Eye upon your End, in the whole; that is, thinking seriously that it is in
order to Eternity, that you now examine your self. Choose a place of
Retirement, and the most convenient Time, that you may not be interrupted, and
when your Heart is most serious. Every man may divide his Life into several
parts, as from Infancy till he left off goeing to school, or was bound
Apprentice, or settled in any way of education. From thence 'till fixed in some
Employment: til a married person, till entered into that Condition. And from
thence to another remarkable Period, or to the present Time. It may better
assist some persons memory, to consider the several Places of their abode, and
compute according to them. In each portion of time, recollect what sins you
were most addicted to: in what Instances, in with what Frequency, and with what
other various aggravations you committed 'em: and what have been the effects
and consequences of those sins, to your selves, and Others, in order to
Repentance, and godly sorrow. Which must not be judged of by Tears, but Grief,
and inward hatred of Sin. Remembering that no man is the better merely for being
examined, if there follows nothing after it. It Is in order to a Judgment to be
passed upon our selves. It Is to seearch out our own Iniquity, our Beloved sin,
in order to the mortification of it. That Goliath must first be Slain, if ever
the other Philistims are conquered. In some it is Pride, in others Worldliness,
in some Uncleanness, in others Drunkenness Gluttony etc. That you may discover
it, observe

What sin it is you are most unwilling to part with: which you could even wish
were not forbidden.

Which you have formerly been most apt to plead for, extextenuat or excuse, and
hide.

The thoughts whereof do most frequently occur; especially when Alone: first in
the morning, and last at night: and are most distracting in Prayer and worship.

Which an awakened Conscience has most plainly told you of; under a Sermon, or
at a Sacrament or under some heavy affliction, or on a sickbed etc.

Which you can least bear to be Reproov'd for.

Which the Temperament of your body does most incline to.

Which your Calling, employment, Company, and converse, administer the greatest
Temptations for.

That especially which has the Throne of the Heart, and sets all the faculties
a work to contriue fuel and opportunities for its Gratification.

Observe likewise what Passion was most Predominant in each Period: or is yet
so; and what ill effects it has produced. Consider farther what dangerous
Temptations you have met with: how you have fallen by 'em, or been enabled to
resist. Consider withal the Time and the Means, whereby God has at any time
formerly awakened, convinced and humbled you: what Purposes of Amendment, and
Promises of Reformation you have ever made, and how far you have, or have not,
performed 'em. Recollect likewise all the special Mercies, you have received
from God, in every State and Period of your Life; in order to Thankfullness.
The last section of these Papers may give you some assistance therein, and
consider what Retrun's you have made to God, for all his Kindnesses.

You may do well to consider your self also in the Relations you have stood to
others; as Inferior Equal, or Superior: in family, Church, or State; in your
Calling, profession employment, etc. And examine in what more notorious
Instances, you have been faulty in your Relative Duties. How you did ordinarily
Carry it in your Place and station: for that is the best the truest Picture of
a man, which is like him in his ordinary every-day's habit. Perticularly
reflect upon the sins you have committed in Company with Others. By whose
Example you have been drawn to sin: who may probably have been tempted by
yours, and bewail it, and if the persons are living, admonish them to Repent:
and if you have injured and wronged any, acknowledge your fault, and to the
utmost of your power, make speedy Restitution. If any of your Companions in sin
are dead, and you fear dyed without Repentance; humble your self particularly
before God for having contributed to their Damnation. I know of some who have
made such a Catalogue of their Sins, with the most observable agravations of
them; which they constantly preserved; and frequently reviewed, to keep them
Humble, Penitent, Watchful, and Thankful; and on some occasions of secret
Humiliation, have spread them before the Lord (as Hezekiah that of his enemy)
Covering them selves with shame and Confusion of Face, by considering what they
have been, and thence admiring the Riches of free Grace, in the forgiveness of
such Crimes, through the Blood of Christ.

Examine me, o Lord, and prove me; try my Reins and my Heart, for thy Loving
kindness is before mine Eyes, and I will walk in thy Truth. Thou have searched
me, o Lord, and known me: thou know my Thoughts a far off: all my secret
Sins are in the Light of thy Countenance: and thou art acquainted with all my
ways: set my Sins in order before me, that I may Repent, and for sake them.
Show me mine Infirmities, and weaknesses, that I may watch against them. And
teach me to Judge and condemn my self, that I may not be judged of the Lord.

XXV.
How Christians ought to examine their Decays of Grace and Piety. The greatness
of their Sin, and of their Loss under such a Declension: God's displeasure and
departure from them considered, to awaken present Endeavors of a Recovery. In
what manner the Faith of Adherence may be acted by one who has no Assurance.

IT cannot but be of use to Believers also, at stated Times to examine
themselves, concerning their Languishings and Decays in Grace, Falling from
their first Love to a spirit of in differency and Lukewarmness, disorderly
walking, or unfruitfullness: wither Gray Hairs are not here and there upon
them, and they know it not. For God may withdraw by degrees, so that his
departure may not presently be perceived: and some kind of Activity in Duty may
be continued upon false Principles, and from Common Assistance, while a
Christian, as to his spiritual State, may be under a dangerous Consumption.
It Is not difficult for others to observe it some times, and would be visible
enough to themselves, would they spare a few hours to examine the matter. The
Punishment of such Backslidings, the loss of the quickening and comforting
presence of the H. Spirit, deserves likewise to be inquired into, in order to a
speedy remedy, and should enforce the Counsel.

I mean not barely the ebbing of Affections in the duties of Religion or the
want of life and quickening from sensible Consolations, which new Converts,
(especially such as have been reclaimed from a course of notorious Impiety,)
have more of at first then afterward. Which doubting Christians should
particularly take notice of, by the Instance of the Prodigal, who was
extraordinarily feasted at his first return, but was doubtless contented
afterward with the ordinary Provisions of his Fathers house. Neither does God
dispense the same measure to all alike, nor to any alike at all Times: some,
who are called to greater services, and sufferings then others, or had greater
Conflicts before Conversion, may have a greater share then the rest of their
Brethren. Neither will the same degree of Grace imparted to some persons, so
discernably move and comfort, as it will do some others of a different Temper.
It Is not therefore so much to be the matter of our Enquiry, (if at all it need
to be so,) wither we have more or less of sensible joy in the performance of
duty. But

Wither we are not fallen and declined, as to the inward vital Acts of Grace,
and in the outward Fruits of Holiness. Wither we have such clear convincing
Apprehensions of divine and spiritual Truths, and the mysteries of the gospel,
as formerly: wither our minds are not become more vain and heedless: wither
our knowledge of God, and of the Revelations of his will be as powerful and
efficacious upon our Hearts and Lives, as heretofore: wither there be not less
frequency, less Consistency, less inward satisfaction in holy serious thoughts
then formerly. You were wont to pray and endeavor, that God might be first and
last in your thoughts every day, and by frequent Ejaculations in civil
affairs, to maintain a daily converse with God; but now you mind not wither
it be so or not, yea you cannot but know, that it is not thus with you still.
It was once your Burden to be pestered with foolish, filthy, wordly, vain
Thoughts, especially on the Lord's Day, or in the worship of God, you rejected
and disowned them, you lamented and prayed against them: do so much as examine,
wither it be thus still.

Consider all your Affections, and their several objects; and see wither a
criminal Lukewarmness has not diffused it self in to every of them. Examine
every Grace: and see wither your Faith, Hope, Love, holy Desires, and Delight
in God be not miserably abated: as to the strength and vigor, the efficacy, and
frequent exercise of every of them: so that your Thoughts of God are few, cold,
and lifeless, without desire, delight and love.

Consider the Opportunities and solemn Occasions of approaching the divine
Presence: Are they as much the Desire of your souls, and the rejoicing of your
Hearts as once they were? Are you not more easily diverted from them, less
satisfied and refresht by them? are not all Gospel Ordinances less powerful
and quickening, and your profit and advantage thereby unspeakably less then
formerly? Do you hunger and thirst, and pant as the Heart after the water
brooks, to draw nigh to God, and come into his Courts? do you make Conscience
of preparing before hand? do you come with a real desire, and design, and
expectation of profiting, and bettering your Spirits? do you join in every part
of divine worship, with that attention, seriousness, and composure of mind, and
taste the sweetness and benefit of such solemnities, as formerly? are such
services performed with that Awe of God, with that Humility, Fervency, and
Intensness of Spirit, as some times they were? are you not more Negligent and
unconcerned before and after, wither you find any thing of this or no? your
Desires weak, your Hearts flat, your Thoughts wandering, your Spirits trifling?
so the work be done, and the duty be over, (in how formal, customary, and
careless a manner, soever it be,) you consider it not, you lay it not to Heart,
you reflect not upon it, you bewail it not, or at least are better contented
and sooner quieted, and take less notice of the frame of your Heart in such
Duties then formerly?

Examine farther how it is with you as to the great distinguishssing Duties of
an upright Christian, (if performed as they ought to be,) I mean Secret Pra er
and meditation: Are you as strict and careful, constant and Conscientious,
frequent and abundant in these, as formerly? may not our Closets and places of
Retirement witness against us? our former humble and importunate Prayers
joyful Thanksgivings, and sweet Contemplation of the Mysteries of Religion,
compared with our present daily practice, will testify that we are declined
and fallen.

Moreover consider the Evil of Sin, and how your Heart stands affected to it.
Is not your Hatred of Sin and Zeal against it much decayed? especially with
respect to inward Spiritual sins, such as the secret workings of unbelief, and
distrust, pride, envy, uncharitableness, etc. Do you bewail it, shire against
it, and shun the occasions, and fear the Temptations, that may lead you unto
Sin, as once you did? Have you not lost much of that tenderness and holy
Jealousy over your heart and ways, you formerly had? Do you not now make more
bold with Temptation? Are you not of oftener conquered? and with less
Reluctance? and by small Temptations etc.

Are you not more Unserviceable? Root and Fruit in a withering condition? God
less Honored, and Others less profited and edifyed by your Example and Life?
do you not adhere more to the world? conform to it, and comply with it in many
things, which formerly you durst not have done? and are every day waxing worse?
Make a pause a while and bethink your self what this will come to at last? even
the little Good that remains is ready to dye.

May I not ask such Christians, or desire them to ask themselves, what is all
ready the effect and consequence of this declension? Is not God's Spirit
removed, and the Light of his Countenance Ecclipst? yea as to many of them, are
they not under Sad apprehensions of God's displeasure? do they not feel the
terrors of the Lord? do they not walk heavily from day to day? they that could
once converse with God on all occasions as a Friend, and a Father, do now think
of God and are troubled: thick Darkness does incompass them round about: they
have lost the sense of his Love, the comforts of his presence, and their Song
in the night, and see no relief. This is a more hopeful case however, then
theirs, who are under great Backslidings and Desertion, and hardly sensible of
it. To awaken and affist both, Consider I beseech you, whence you are fallen,
and what you have lost, and what will be the issue of this, if Sickness, or
some smart Affliction overtake you, or if you should dye in this condition. And
inquire seriously, and presently, into the cause of all this Evil: for a few
transient thoughts will not affect the Heart and persuade to Action. And do it
presently, because by every delay your work will be the harder, your danger the
greater, and your Recovery the more difficult. Reflect upon the Sinfullness as
well as Affliction of this case: know you have displeased God, and run from
him, neglected his Presence, and grieved his Spirit, and in what Instances you
have done so; that have made him weary of his dwelling: what Ordinances you
have slighted; what Duties you have omitted; what sins you have given way to;
in order to Repentance and deep Humiliation.

Can you contentedly sit still, with this dismal State of Things? while God
has somewhat (yea a great deal indeed,) against you, for having left your
first Love? will you not endeavor to remove that which has made such a
separation between God and you, and brought you thus low? what Communion with,
God, what communications of his Grace, what influences of his Spirit, and
Evidences of his favor have you lost? and will you not acknowledge your
Iniquity, and abase your selves in the Dust, and return to the Lord, and do
your first works? that he may heal your Backslidings, and receive you
graciously; that you may again take hold of his Covenant, and be at Peace with
him.

But to be at Peace with God, is not the whole of your Concern, you need not
only a Pardon, but a Physician to heal you; as does a Malefactor, that is not
only liable to the Law, but desperately sick. Your State is sinful and
dangerous, as well as troublesome. From performing duties in such a manner as
you now do, you may quickly be Tempted to let them altogether alone. God may be
so far provoked to suffer Satan to make attempts upon you of that kind: and he
is forward enough to make use of such an opportunity, to try all his Snares and
Stratagems against you: till he prevail with you, to think hardly of God
himself, Vid. Mr. Gilpiu of Temptations. p. 2. chap. 6.
unthankfully to overlook all his former kindnesses, to put the worst
Interpretation that can be upon all his Providence, to distrust and quarrel
with him, as if his faithfullness had failed, and his Mercy were clean gone for
ever, and there were no hope left, for one in your case: and so run into
Desperation, and through the subtlely and violence of Satan's Temptations, try the
most foolish and unlawful means for ease and cure, either open Licentiousness,
or it may be, self Murder.

Therefore speedy present Repentance is necessary, to find out and mortify
every Corruption, and that especially, which Conscience tells you, you have
most indulged, from whence your Distress does principally arise: Confessing
your sin freely, fully, and without reserve, and waiting on God in the
diligentuse of all means, for the recovery of that which you have lost: and
Justifying God in his Righteousness, Truth, Wisdom, Holiness, in all his
Rebukes. That you may regaine a Spirit of Prayer, and taste the sweetness,
virtue, and efficacy of every duty, and of every ordinance; and God may give
you the Garment of Praise for the Spirit of Heaviness, and the Joy of the Lord
may be your Strength, for future service and suffering.

In the mean time do not cast away your Hope, but tho you have (too justly)
deprived your self of the Faith of Assurance, yet endeavor to maintain and
exercise the Faith of Adherence. Vid. Dr. Owen on 130 Ps. 2.
Say unto God, that because there is Forgiveness with him, therefore he is to be
feared. My sin is not too Great to be forgiven. It Is not the Unpardonable Sin:
fer I desire to repent, and am resolved to return. I will still cleave to the
Lord, and wait upon him, and follow hard after him, and take no other course
for Deliverance and comfort. Mine is not a single Case: I am not the only Soul
that has been so distressed, and yet found relief, by seeking unto God. This
therefore good for me to hope, Lam. 3 c. 26.
and quietly wait for the Salvation of God. I will draw near to God, I will lay
at his foot, and continue in all ways of Worship and Duty, wherein I may hope to
meet with the quickening and comfort of his Spirit. I will seek relief from no
other; I will keep as near him as I can; wither else shall I go, he alone has
the words of Eternal Life; he alone can create (what is the fruit of his own
lips) Peace, Peace.

I will encourage my self in the consideration of his General Grace, Vid. Mr.
Baxter's method for Peace of Conscience.
and the probabilities of his special Love: I will recollect my former
Experiences, when I had some good hope, through Grace, concerning my Adoption: I
will remember the years of the right hand of the most High. If God will give me
so much Grace as to continue waiting, I will hope still; and tho I walk in
darkness, and see little or no Light, I will stay my self upon the Lord. And if
by the want of sensible Consolation he will make me more humble, and keep me in
a greater Submission to his will, I will bless his holy name; and derive more
comfortable hope from thence, then from the most sweet and sensible
Consolations I ever had; and look upon Humility, self denial, Dependence on
God, Resignation to him, and Hatred of sin, as a better sign of his Love, then
the highest fervors of Affection in his service can be.

Oh that I had formerly done as much for Holiness, as I have for Comfort! by
the joyment of the one, I should have had more of the other: the exercise of
Grace would have discovered the Truth of it. Let me therefore accuse and condemn
my self; but still trust, and love God, and wait upon him. Let me resolve never
to choose a new Lord or Master. Or take up with any Portion beneath God him
self; or any of Hope or Salvation, but by J. Christ, my only Savior, neither
let me forsake the way of Faith and Holiness, for all the hopes and Happiness
of this world, if put to my choice. But be allways able to say, Blessed be God
I now can, that I will return to my former Husband, for then it was better with
me then now. I had peace and refreshment in my former ways, I will return to
them. Lord, forsake me not utterly! keep not thine Anger for ever: cast me not
away from thy presence, and take not thy H. Spirit from me: Restore unto me the
Joy of thy Salvation, that my Heart may be in larged to praise thy name, and to
run the way of thy Commandments.

XXVI.
Confession of Sin, Humiliation, and Repentante must follow upon
Self-Examination. Advice concerning Repentance of some particular Backsliding.
The great Perplexity and Distress of a Penitent Sinner represented, as a
Caution against returning to Folly.

THat we may turn unto the Lord, is the end of searching and trying our Ways.
Lord, I have been searching my Heart, and considering my ways, but can find
little or no good; neither can I discover all that is evil in both. But I find
enough to make my own Heart condemn me, and Thou, who art greater then my
Heart, and know all things, may much more condemn me. I am altogether
unclean, polluted, and abominable.

If I go about to enumerate the Sins of my Thoughts, words, and actions, in
all the periods of my Life hitherto; if I consider my omissions of Duty, and
daily Crimes by actual commission; if I reflect upon my Sins according to their
respective objects, as either against Thee, o God, and against my Neighbor,
and against my own Soul; or compare my Heart and Life with thy strict and holy
Law, and think in how many Instances I have tansgrest every of thy Righteous
Commandments: I find they are more then the hairs on my head, they can not be
numbered. who can tell how often he has offended? many of my sins make little
Impression on my Memory, do I observe them not, I remember them not: but this
hinders not but they may make deep Impression on my Conscience, which will one
day be awake, and set them in order before me, and they are all written in thy
book of Remembrance, in order to my final Judgment. All my sins are before
thee: but thou requirest my humble Confession of them in order to Repentance
and as a part thereof that I freely acknowledge their heinous aggravations to
shame and humble my self the more before thee whom I have offended and provoked.

How long did I serve diverse Lusts and Pleasures, with the neglect and
forgetfullness of God? How sad a prospect may I take of the far greatest part
of my Life past? especially of my younger years, which have been trifl'd away
in vanity and folly? And since I have known the way of Truth, how shamefully
have I prevaricated with God? I am confounded to consider, how often I have
despised the Commandment, and rebelled against the Light; against the
Principles of education, and the checks of Conscience, frequent warnings from
God, and reproofs from Others; contrary to my Profession, and Experience,
contrary to the obligation of peculiar mercies, solemn Promises, Resolutions,
and Engagements and a nearer Relation to God then of many others; which sins
have more dishonored my Lord, discredited his H. Gospel, gratified the Devil,
scandalized the world, and strengten'd the hands of the ungodly, then the sins
of others. And alas! How much of my precious Time is thus gone, which if duly
improved, would now afford me comfort to review.

How much Guilt have I contracted every year, particularly in this last? I now
begin another which will soon be gone as that which was concluded yesterday.
And shall I only advance in Age, to increase the number of my sins, and
heigthen my Account against the Day of Reckoning? In Temporal and Civil
Affairs Day unto Day utters knowledge, and Night unto Night teaches Wisdom.
We are Taught by Experience many useful lessons which we should not else have
learnt; to reform many Errors and mistakes, to correct many rash and foolish
Actions and Speeches, etc. And shall I not learn wisdom by the Experience of
another year, in what concerns my greatest, my Eternal Interest? shall not the
reflection on my past sins prevent my Commission of the like?

How many Years has God vouchsaf't me to work out my salvation? but how little
have I done toward it? had I dyed this last year, how unprepared must I have
made my Appearance before his Tribunal? what opportunities of doing and
receiving good have I let slip? have I not made it more my business to seem
Religious, then really to be so? how much of the Patience of God have I abused?
refusing his calls to Repentance, resisting the strivings of his Spirit,
smothering my Convictions, and turning the grace of God into wantonness? In
stead of returning gratitude for all his Love, I have repeated my
Transgressions after Forgiveness: and gone in a circle of Repenting and
Sinning, even to this day. Lord, I am Ashamed and lay my self in the dust
before thee. To me belongs nothing but shame and confusion of Face. If God
should condemn and punish me as a Rebel, and a Traitor, and give me the
Portion of Hypocrites, I cannot but own his Justice; even in Hell I must do it,
with my flaming Tongue and Breath.

O Spare me for thy mercies sake! Enter not into Judgment with thy servant, for
in thy sight shall no flesh living be justified: if Thou lay Judgment to the
line, and equity to the Plummet. Give me Repentance unto life, never to be
repented of, never to be retracted again. Bring me to the Blood of Jesus,
which cleanses from all sin. Behold the sighings of a contrite Spirit: For I
acknowleg my Transgressions unto thee, against whom I have sinned; o Lord;
forgive the Iniquity of my Sin. I am unworthy to lift up my hands and Eyes
toward Heaven, unworthy to be called thy son, or thy servant: I am vile in
mine own eyes, because I have made my self vile in thine. For this I am
troubled, and mourn, and my Soul is grieved within me.

O thou Heavenly Physician of Souls! from thy Pity alone I expect my cure. I
am miserable and undone without thy Compassion, and expect no relief but from
the Treasure of thy Grace. I must perish, and sink under the burden of Sin, if
thy merciful hand do not save me, and lift me up. I am entangled and ensnared
by the Devil and my Lusts, and without thy Succor can never hope to get free.
O Lord for give my Sin, and heal my Soul: deliver and save me for thy mercies
sake!

May I not yet hope in thy mercy? thou have mercyfully born with me hitherto:
thou call me to repent: thou command me to return, and promisest to
forgive those Sins which are confessed and forsaken: O do not cast me out of
thy Sight and Presence, now I desire from the bottom of my Heart to return to
thee! I abhor my self in dust and ashes, for my past Iniquities. But alas!
such is the hardness of my Impenitent Heart, that I am even ashamed of my
humblest Repentance: how much more may God despise and reject it? But have thou
not given thy H. Son to dye for Sinners? and exalted him to this very end, to
be a Prince and a Savior, to give Repentance, and Remission of Sins? And by
the word of thy Grace, thou beseechest all, (even the Greatest Sinners,) to
accept of mercy; and art more willing to pardon, then we can be to Repent. It Is
thy Delight and Glory, agreeable to thy nature, and declared Name, as a God
gracious, and merciful, slow to Anger; and of great Kindness, fergiving
Iniquity, Transgression, and Sin. O Pardon mine Iniquity for it is great, and
receive an humble Penitent, who implores thy Grace, according to the Tenor of
thy new Covenant, flying to the arms of thy Mercy, through the merits of Jesus
Christ, who is able to save to the uttermost all that come unto God by him.

Lord, hear my Prayer, and let not the mixture of my weaknesses and
unworthiness turn it into Sin: but graciously vouchsafe to look upon a
returning Prodigal; and cause me to hear the voice of Joy and Gladness, that my
sorrowful Heart may be comforted, and my life be directed to thy Praise. Lead
me into the path of life, that I may no longer err from the way of thy
Commandments: Teach me to do thy Will, o God, and write thy Law upon my heart,
that I may never more return to Folly. I am convinced of the Evil of Sin, of
thy Right to govern me, of the equity and Justice of thy Law, of the sweetness
and rewards of keeping thy precepts: O sanctify my Heart, and make me Sound in
thy Statutes, that I may hate every false way, and be devoted to thy Fear, the
remainder of my Life.

If there be any particular Lust or Wickedness, which through the power of
Temptation, and the deceitfullness of Sin you have fallen into; that has
wasted Conscience, and robbed you of your Peace, and provoked God to write
bitter things against you; be sure to humble your self without delay in an
especial manner for that Backsliding: Confess it freely, with its aggravations.
Consider wither it was not after some special manifestation of God's Love,
after some special warning, some strong Conviction, under or soon after some
great Affliction from God, or some more then ordinary kindness of his
Providence, etc. and impress such Thoughts, to humble your self the lower,
search into the grounds and causes of such Apostasy, such as the abatement of
your watchfullness, the neglect of serious closet devotion, making bold with
Temptation, too great compliance with vain Company, venturing too far in
lawful or indifferent Things, too much Confidence in your own Wisdom, Strength
and stedfastness, not fearing sufficiently the Approaches and Beginnings of
Sin, or avoiding the fuel, incentives, and occasions of it, etc. Palliate and
disguise nothing, that may make your sin exceeding sinful, least by some
little Art of the Devil, you deceive your self by an half-Repentance; and the
Evil Spirit, you think to be cast out, return again with seven worse then
himself, and so your latter end be worse then your Beginning. For if the sin be
not truly hated, but only covered over with penitential Ashes, it will quickly
flame out again, when it meets with combustible matter, and a strong blast of
Temptation.

But if you are grieved to the very Heart, and abhor the Sin, and resolve to
quitt it, you need not doubt of God's readiness to receive you to Mercy. His
Spirit is yet striving with you, if you are willing to Repent, and return to
God. He sought you, and called you to return, when you were wandering as a lost
sheep in the broad way; and can you think, he will not be found of you, if you
seek him with your whole Heart? Therefore renew your Repentance, and beg more
earnestly a Spirit of Humility, Holy Fear, and Watchfullness: and every morning
implore divine succors against that Sin, and all Temptations to it. ( Which, as
much as possible, you must avoid.) Constant and fervent Prayer, after
Repentance, must be your refuge, and your Remedy. If you let fall your hands,
this Amaleck will prevail again: as soon and as far as you fail in the
constancy, and fervency of that Duty, your Sin will get strengh, and
successfully attempt you another Time. But by this practice, God may turn Evil
to work for Good, make you gain by your loss, stand the faster by your Falls,
and become stronger by the discovery of your weakness, and better established
for the future.

But take heed that you pervert not the Grace of God, and encourage your self
to sin again by the supposition, that if you should Fall, it is but to Repent,
and renew your Resolutions, and all will be well. This is a subtle Artifice of
Satan, but such methinks, as should take with none, who have ever known by
Experience, what it is to Repent. Luke 23. c. 30 17. ^^ 2.
Who have felt the burden of Sin to be heavier then a Millstone; then the
weight of a Mountain. Who have tasted, how evil and bitter a thing it is, to
depart from God. Who have loathed and abhorred themselves, with deep Remorse,
and sorrow, and Anguish of Spirit: wishing with all their Hearts, that they had
not sinned, and if it were in their power would give all the world to retrieve
it, and would rather dye then commit that Folly again, they then repented of.
Let those who have not their own Experience to confirm this, read over (and
consider the case of David, when he wrote) the Penitential Psalms. How many
like him have roared and cried out under the sense of sin, of stings and furies
in their Conscience, of the poisoned Arrows surrounding them wherever they
went: from the weight of sins Malignity, the apprehensions of God's Anger, and
the consequent Fears of his Wrath. Serious Repentance after great
Transgressions is another Thing then most imagine it. When their aggravated
Sins shall besett them behind, and before, be placed in order before their
eyes, and set in array against them. It Is allways a work of Difficulty as well
as Importance, to crucify corrupt affections, to tear a beloved Lust from the
Heart, with self-indignation to abhor and cast away what before you loved and
delighted in. How did David's sin stare him in the Face, it is continually with
me, it is ever before me, says He. It haunted him like a Spectre, or like
Belshazar's handwriting on the wall, it still appeared before him in some
horrid shape.

How ever Sin may smile in its first address, and bespeak us in flattering
language, and promise Pleasure, and Profit, and great Advantages and
Satisfaction; These are but fair Appearances; This is but the outside of the
Cup, and the color of the Liquor: it will prove Gall and Wormwood, and a
mixture of deadly Poison, if ever God set it home upon the Conscience, and
awaken us to a true sense of it. And the Continuance of daily Repentance for
Sin, Which all Christians are called to, is no such easy matter neither.
Constant self-abasement and Humiliation before God, from a sense of his Majesty
and Holiness, and of our many Sins, and pollution thereby: the imperfection of
our best duties continually to be bewailed, inordinate affections to be still
mortified, always resisting and opposing Sin, in its Root and branches,
conflicting against the whole Intrest of the Flesh, the world, and the Devil,
seeking after more Holiness, to be derived unto us by the Grace of Christ, to
be wrought in us by his Spirit, and maintained by his power; and making daily
applications to the Fountain of all Grace, for spiritual strength, to continue
our warfare against Sin, in all Instances of outward duty and inward Actings of
Grace, even as long as we live; all this is included in it. Due Apprehensions
concerning Repentance, would teach us to beware of Sin.

XXVII.
The necessity of Christian Resolution to Upright, Persevering Obedience; how
Full and extensive it ought to be, and yet Humble. By what means we may be
assisted to perform that which we Resolve.

HAving acknowledged my Transgressions unto God, and begged forgiveness, and
experimentally learnt the Evil of Sin by the bitterness of Repentance, I
resolve for the future to watch against it more narowly, and against every
thing that leads to it: endeavoring to please and honor my God and Savior by
an upright obedient Heart and Life: And for the Remission of my former
contracted Guilt, I trust to J. Christ according to the Revelation made in the
Gospel, of what he is, has done, and suffered, and continues to do in Heaven,
for the salvation of Repenting Sinners, who desire to come unto God by Him.

But how often, o my Soul, have I mocked God, and deceived my self, with formal
and faint Purposes of amendment? my good Resolutions have been all of them as
the morning cloud, and the Early dew, which quickly passed away. One fresh
assault of Temptation has swept away all my good Purposes as a spiders web. I
have falsified so many, and broke my word so often, that I dare not trust to
any thing I now resolve, or rely on any promise I should farther make. Succor
me therefore o Lord, by thy Powerful Grace, that what was defective in my
former fruitless Resolutions, may be now rectified. Let me be more Humble in
the sense of my weakness, more dependant on thy Grace, and more heartily seek
it from time to time. Strengthen me with Strength in my Soul, with might and
power in my inward man, that I may so resolve and purpose, as to perform: that
I may not be one day hot, and the next cold, zealous in the Beginning, but
faint and lukewarm in the Progress, fervent and serious only in Resolving, but
weak and impotent in the Execution.

Having chang' my Master, my End, and my Hopes, by returning unto God, from
whom I had gone astray, I firmly resolve, through the assistance of his Grace, to
change my course of Life. That old things being done away, all things may
become new: that being made free from Sin, by pardoning Mercy, Romans 6. c. 22.
and become the servant of Christ, I may have my fruit unto Holiness, that my
End may be Eternal Life. In the interim wither I live or dye, let it be unto
the Lord, resolving both in Life and Death to be absolutely His. And to that
purpose, O my Soul, let me seek for continual supplies of Grace from Christ my
Head, to enable me to yield ready obedience, in the most difficult, hazardous,
painful and humbling duties. In vain do I resolve it, without the assistance
of his mighty Power, to strengthen my Heart and hands, when ever I am called to
such a Trial of my sincerity. Without it I shall never recover my Liberty, or
break a sunder those bonds and cords, wherewith I have formerly been held
Captive, as the Servant of Sin and Satan, such is the weakness and treachery of
of my own Heart, the influence of ill Examples, and the subtlety and cunning of
the Tempter, that otherwise I shall quickly change my mind, and return to
Folly, as the Dog to his vomit. The Spirit is so weak, and the Flesh so frail,
the snares of the World so many, the power of remaining Corruption so strong,
and of my self I am so unsettled and wavering, fickle and unsteady, and prone to
Backsliding, that all my strongest Purposes will not be sufficient, without
daily strength from above. My senses are so deceitful, my Passions so
ungovernable, the Rule and Law I am to walk by, so strict, and spiritual, and
extensive, Criminal Omissions may be so frequent, and easily overlook't, so
many several and difficult Duties are to be performed, and by every change of
my Condition, or of God's Providence so many new dangers, and new duties may
arise, that I fear the issue of my firmest Resolutions. So strict a watch must
allways be kept, such humility and Caution is every where to be practiced, such
speedy Repentance required after every fall; with thankfullness and contentment
in every State, under all Calamities, be they never so many or never so
pinching, and perseverance herein absoluty necessary, tho never so many
stratagems be used to discourage me from proceeding, or to entice me to go
back, or turn aside to some other Path, that if God had not promised me his
Continued presence, and that his Grace shall be sufficient for me, and that I
shall not be Tempted above what I am able to bear; I should utterly despair of
making good what I now resolve.

But besides these promises to encourage my resolved obedience, he has left
upon record in his word, many glorious Examples of his assisting and rewarding
the courage and resolution of his servants to continue faithful: as in the
case of Joseph, Daniel, and his Three, Friends, etc. If Christ stand by and
strengthen me, I know I shall be able to do all things: I shall not then be
flattered, or frighted out of the way of my duty: no wind that can blow shall
then turn me to another point: nothing shall then be able to prevail for my
consent, to a wilful and deliberate forsaking of God; no Argument, no
Temptation; tho Privacy, Opportunity, Impunity from men, with rewards of wordly
Gain and Honor, should all concur to enforce a Temptation. But by that
heavenly mind, I shall be preserved Humble, Temperate, Chaste, patient,
Thankful, self-denying, crucified to the World, and hold fast my Integrity
till I dye: still perfecting Holiness in the fear of God, growing in Grace, and
in the Knowledge of my Lord and Savior J. Christ, waxing stronger from day to
day, be seldomer surprised, offend less, and repent more quickly, and watch
more narrowly afterward: till at last I receive the Crown.

Fix therefore I beseech thee, most Gracious God! my unfeigned Resolutions of
cleaving to thee, with full purpose of Heart, and show thy strength in my
weakness, by inabling me to do what I now resolve. To that end, teach me to
watch over my Heart, to keep it with all diligence, to be more conversant with
my own Thoughts, examining the motions that arise in my Heart, whence they
come, and whither they go, and what they tend to, that I may suppress the
beginnings of Sin. Let me live no longer as a stranger to my self, but by
self-reflexion dwell more at home, reckoning my principal Work to be within
doors, to keep my own vineyard. Teach me to watch over my senses, to guard the
door of my Lips, to govern my Passions, to be wary of my Company, to be
circumspect in every step of my daily walk, to call my self frequently to a
reckoning, to cast up my accounts at the foot of every page, by every days
review of my Actions, to live allways as in God's presence, and be awed every
where by the thought of his Holy Eye, to shun the occasions and appearanees of
Evil, etc.

And because no place, no Condition, no Employment is exempted from
Temptations, let me fortify my self every morning, against all Assaults for
that day, by Serious Prayer, as Holy David was wont to do. My voice, (says he)
shall thou hear in the morning, O Lord; in the morning will I direct my Prayer
unto thee, and will look up. Psalm. 5. v. 3.4. Let the law of God be my daily
and delightful study: that I may be able presently to bring my words and
Actions to the Touchstone; and know how to manage the sword of the Spirit, on
all occasions, against the fiery Darts of the Devil: that knowing the rule, I
may not be doubtful or at a loss, when ever I am Tempted: I may not make a
stand to parley, but immediately, summon all my forces to resist, and reject
the snare; being assured from God, that the Continuance of this warfare shall
end in a most Glorious Victory. He will shortly tread down Satan under our
feet. Thanks be to God, through Jesus Christ, my Lord.

XXVIII.
The Import and Obligation of our Baptismal Covenant. The renewal of it by a
solemn Dedication of our selves to God the Father, Son, and H. Spirit,
exemplifi'd and recommended.

ALl this, O my soul, which I have now resolved on is no more then what I am
obliged to, by my vow in Baptism: to renounce the Devil and his works, the
Flesh and the Lusts thereof, the World, and conformity to it, that I may Love
and Serve the Lord: agreeable to the undoubted Right which God has in me by
Creation, Redemption, and his innumerable other Benefits. But The outward
washing of Baptism, and a visible profession of obedience, will not save me,
without the Answer of a good Conscience toward God. 1 Pet. cap. 3. v. 21. May
I not by the consideration of my Baptismal Covenant suppose God speaking to my
Conscience, to this effect? Will you take me for your whole Portion and
Felicity? and my Law for the constant Rule of your obedience? and fight against
the world, the flesh, and the Devil, to your lives end? will you believe in
Jesus Christ, and receive him as a Prince and Savior? and adhere to the faith
and obedience of the Gospel, how hazardous and difficult soever, the profession
and practice of it may be? Will you receive the B. Spirit, as your Teacher
Sanctifier, and Comforter? and cherish all his Motions, to inlighten, purify,
confirm, comfort, and assist you? It Is my hearty consent to these Terms, and
resolved compliance with them, which Baptism obliges to? and this is the
Answer of a good Conscience toward God.

I have often renewed this Covenant on several occasions; but did I ever duly
consider the tenor and obligation of it? How have I lied unto the God of Truth?
dealt deceitfully whath Him? and been False and Fickle, treacherous and
unfaithful to what I promised? O let me now again repeat it, and give up my
self once more to be the Lords, more unfeignedly, more firmly then ever I have
hitherto done! that the bonds of God upon me may be strengthened, and my soul
more thoroughly engaged to be the Lords. O help me to do it with the greatest
seriousness, as the most important Affair of my whole Life! by thine aid and
grace alone shall I be sincere and cordial in this surrender and Dedication of
my self. O breath upon my soul, most H. Spirit, (the Power of the Highest,)
that there may be no Hypocrisy or Reservation in this so weighty and solemn
Transaction between God and me!

O most Blessed and Glorious TRINITY! Father, Son, and H. Spirit, Thy favor is
my Life, and thy Loving kindness is better then Life: Thy Will should have been
my Rule, thy word my Law, thy Glory my end, to please thee my principal
Business, and to enjoy thy Love and Presence my ultimate Felicity. But I am one
of thy revolted Creatures, who have lost thine Image, and rebelled against thy
Law, slighted thy Authority, and rejected thy Grace, and deserve to be cast out
of thy sight, and banished from thy Presence for ever. Nevertheless, O most
merciful God, and Father, upon thy gracious invitation and call, I now return
to thee my rightful Lord: acknowledging thee, as my Allmighty, Wise, and
Bountiful Creator, my absolute Owner my Righteous Governor, my End, my
Happiness and Chief Good. I now accept thine offered Mercy; I now submit to the
Scepter of thy Grace; and give up my self to Thee, as my King, and my God; to
rule and sanctify me now, and be my Everlasting Portion. I desire to be no
longer my own, but Thine, to whom of right I belong, and ought to be devoted. I
yield my self to Thee, O my Lord! Accept and possess that which is thine own. I
lay my self at thy Foot, at all Times, and in all Conditions, to be at thy
dispose, and in every thing to acquiesce in thy Good Pleasure. Deliberately
resolving, with unfeigned and free consent of my Will, to walk before Thee in
Holiness and Righteousness all the days of my Life. Hereby I consecrate and
devote my self to be thy perpetual avowed Servant: Lord, I am thy servant, I am
thy servant, the Son of thine Hand maid. Tho other Lords have had dominion over
me, I will now make mention of thy Name, and of thy Righteousness only, by
Jesus Christ.

O Blessed Jesus, my All sufficient Savior! Thy dying Love, infinite
Condescension, and matchless Grace has at last overcome me, and constrained me
to resolve to be wholly Thine, who have redeemed and bought me with thy most
precious Blood. I now acknowledge and own Thee, as my Lord, and my Jesus, my
Prophet, Priest, and King, my Sacrifice, Surety, and Ransom, to satisfy for my
sins, and reconcile me unto God, to instruct me in his will, and teach me the
Mysteries of his Kingdom, and the way to the Father. How often have thou opened
thine arms, and called me, yea beseecht me to come unto thee, and accept of
Life? but I refused, to come. I adore thy merciful Condescension, that yet
thou will receive me on such easy Terms. O thou Lord of life and glory now
accept of an unworthy helpless Sinner, who flies to Thee as his only Refuge and
Hope: who is convinced that None but Christ, None but Christ can make his Peace
with God, and save from wrath come. I acknowledge thy Title to me, and my
obedience, and to all I have, by dying for me. I desire to take thy yoke upon
me, for it is Easy; and thy Burden, which is Light. I desire to be entirely and
for ever thine, in an Everlasting Covenant, never to be broken: to take up the
Cross, and follow thee, whither so ever thou shall lead me, through the straight
Gate, and the narrow way. I will reserve no Lust, refuse no Labor, grudge at no
suffering, stick at no difficulty, so I may please, and honor thee, and
continue in thy Love. Os head abroad more of thy Love in my Heart, to make all
Things easy for his sake, who has loved me, and washed me from my Sins in his
own Blood.

O God the Holy Ghost, I acknowledge Thee as my Great Teacher and Sanctifier,
and give up my self to Thee, as the Author of all saving Knowledge and Holiness:
By Thee I have been convinced of my Sin, against the Law of God, and the Gospel
of Christ, and of my necessity of his merit, satisfaction, and Righteousness,
to Justify my guilty Soul, by procuring the Forgiveness of Sin, and my
acceptance with God; and of the freeness of his Love, the Riches and all
sufficiency of his Grace, toward all who come unto God by Him. I adore Thee, O
most Blessed Spirit, as proceeding and sent from the Father and the Son, to
renew all the Powers of my Soul, and restore the divine Image there; to
enlighten my mind, to know and receive the Truth, as it is in Jesus, and
purify my Heart: and to sanctify all the Members of my Body, and make them
Instruments of Righteousness unto Holiness, which before were servants unto
Sin; and gradually to deliver me from the power, the defilement, and abode of
Sin; as from the Guilt and Punishment by the blood of Jesus. And as the Witness
of God to the Truth of the H. Scriptures; and as the Great Paraclete, to
comfort and establish the Hearts of Belivers, sealing them up to the day of
Redemption, and giving them the Earnest of the Heavenly Inheritance. O Blessed
Spirit, be thou my witness, that tho I have violated the Law of God, and
defaced his Image, and formerly undervalu'd the Love of Christ, and the Grace
of the Gospel, yet by thine aid I now accept what I have so long neglected:
and thankfully devote my self hence forward to be the Lords in a Covenant
Relation.

But fearing and distrusting my self, I give up my self entirely to the conduct
of thy Grace, depending upon it for my establishment and perseverance. O form
my Heart into an obediential Frame! that in every thing I may endeavor to
answer the Ends and Obligations of this Devoted State.

To this One God I have once again dedicated and resigned my self; to serve,
and please, and honor Thee, in Thought, Word, and Act, to the last moment of
my Life: in the Performance of all Duties, even those whic I have been most
averse from; in the mortification of every Lust, and the forsaking of every
Sin, even those which I was once most addicted to: Resolving deliberately to
allow my self in nothing, great or little, secret or open, which I shall know
or believe to be contrary to thy holy will, making it my business to be
fruitful in good works, to the praise of my Redeemer: waiting in the use of
all his appointed means for higher measures of Grace and Holiness, to be more
victorious over inward Lusts, and outward temptations, still pressing toward
the mark for the prize of my high and holy Calling, even eternal Life.

I call Heaven and Earth, O Lord, to witness this day, that I own and avow this
to be my Mind, and the settled Prevailing Purpose of my Soul. This I again
ratify and confirm, with out any Clauses, or Exceptions. So help me, O my God.
Glory be to God the Father, God the Son, and God the H. Spirit.

XXIX.
Prastical and Consolatory Reflections on the preceding Self-dedication, or
Covenant with God.

I Have this day solemnly avouched the Lord to be my God, Deuteronomy. 6. c. 17.18.
to walk in his ways: thereby to fortify my Resolutions, that I and my House,
(and All that I can persuade to be of my mind,) will serve the Lord. I intend,
desire, and hope never wilfully to violate the Faith, I have now plighted in
the presence of God: but to continue steadfast unmovable, all was abounding in
the work of the Lord, etc.

Should I undertake any new Employment, or enter into any new Condition, or
change the place of my Abode, where I might see more of God's dishonor, and
meet with more and stronger Temptations to Sin, and be called to the
performance of more difficult duties, greater Watchfullness and self denial,
etc. I would hope hereby to engage the presence of God with me, and his
Blessing on all my Affairs, on which depends the success of all that I
undertake: and would hope the better to preserve my Integrity, not only This
Year, but in all the remaining portion of my Time, by the abiding sense of my
Covenant with God, thus seriously renewed.

This is the method, I have been often advised to, for Peace of Conscience,
under doubts and scruples concerning my spiritual State: to put the matter out
of doubt, by again accepting the offered mercy and Grace of the Gospel, and
heartily consenting to the new Covenant: giving up my self to God in Christ, to
be ruled and saved by him. Blessed be God, I have now done so. Lord, say Amen
to thy part of the Covenant, that Thou art and wilt be my God; as I desire
unfeignedly to do to mine, that I will be thy Servant.

But because Articles are sooner consented to, then made Good; (tho I seriously
intend never to disown this my solemn Act and Deed, but firmly to adhere to it,
as long as I live; that having sworn, I will endeavor to perform it, that this
shall be my Everlasting Choice, never to be recanted or altered, yet)
considering the sad Instances of my former weakness, and the vigilance and
subtle malice of my Great Adversary, I again implore the succor of divine
Grace, to keep it for ever in the purpose of my Heart, that it may be as the
Laws of the Medes and Persians, never to be reverst. I have given up my name to
be Thine; O put thy Fear into my Heart that I may never depart from Thee.
Imprint thy Laws upon my Heart, that my obedience may be uniform and universal,
unwavering and perpetual; suitable (...) so honorable and near a Relation to
Thee. I am sensible I want Wisdom and Strength to that purpose, but thou have
bid me ask it of Thee, who give liberally, to All without desert, and
upbra^^est not, with present unworthiness or former faults. O lead me not into
Temptatien, but deliver me from Evil. Stand by and strengthen me in the Hour
of Trial, least I forget my vows, and deny Thee. O that my Soul may never draw
back, least Thine have no Pleasure in me. I can serve no better Master: O let
mine Ears be bored to the door of thine house, as the Token and Assurance of my
being thy Servant unto Death I know it is my Duty, I am sensible it is my
Priviliedge, and Honor, I am convin'd, that it is my Interest and Felicity; my
Soul, my Life, my present and everlasting Welfare and All depends upon it,
that thou should be my God for ever: O conduct me by thy H. Spirit of Grace,
that I may walk and Act, as having heartily consented he should be so: and
direct my Heart into thy Love, and the faithful keeping of thy Commandments.
That when so many Professors make shipwreck of Faith and a Good Conscience, and
discredit the Religion of my Lord, by their shameful Falls, thou may make me
to stand, and improve the warning of their Examples, to walk humbly, and while
I stand to take heed least I fall.

Having thus surrendered my self to God, what is there o my Soul, that is ever
like to prevail with me to go back, and revolt from him? Is the gratification
of a Lust, the securing of an Estate, compliance with a Friend, the pleasing of
a Superior, living in Ease and Honor, and outward Prosperity for a little
while, the saving my Body from suffering, or my Life from violence, (or what
ever else be the Motive of my ufaithfullness to God, and Apostasy from Him,) Is
Any, is All of these any way considerable, compared with the Blessedness of
having God to be my God. For thereby I have the forgiveness of all my Sins; and
the Assurance of his Favor, the certainty of present Protection, and Provision,
all Creatures reconciled to me, and to be employed for my Good, as the Friend
of God; All things to work together for my Advantage; and by the evidence of my
Adoption, a well grounded hope of Eternal Life. God as my Sun and Shield, will
give Grace and Glory, and with hold no Good Thing. So unspeakably Comprehensive
are the Priviliedges of so near a Relation to God in Christ. O happy are the
People, who are in such a case! Blessed are the Persons, whose God is the Lord.

Do I resolve to abide by my Choice, and to trust in Christ, for persevering
Grace, and shall I not, ought I not to take Comfort in it? Shall I not give God
the Glory of his infinite Goodness, by adhering to him and rejoicing in him,
notwithstanding all Temptations to the Contrary? Casting all my care upon him,
and quieting my self in the All Sufficiency of my Heavenly Father: having a God
in Covenant, who will supply all my wants, and take care of me as his Own.
Shall I not give him the glory of his Truth and Power, by trusting him in every
Condition? by confidence in his Promise, Dependence on his Word, Faithfullness
to his Interest, and Constancy in his Service to the end? Is it not a most
encouraging Thought, that God does never Abandon any, who do not first forsake
him? And after such strict Engagements as I have laid upon my self, shall I
ever strike the fatal stroke with my own Hand? shall I be off and on, say and
unsay, promise and retract? and after I have proceeded thus far, shall I
forsake the Fountain of Living Waters, and turn again to broken Cisterns?

After I have examined my self, considerd my ways, confessed my Sins, and upon
serious Deliberation am come to a Resolve, and in pursuance of it have devoted
my self with such solemnity to be the Lords, shall I ever after this, forsake
Him, and my own Mercies, and lightly esteem the Rock of my Salvation? Now I
have learned in some mensure what Sin is, by the sorrows and anguish of an
Hearty Repentance; now I have discoverd so much of the Snares and Devices of
Satan, whereby I have formerly been betrayed: now I am sensible of the dangerous
and powerful influence and Infection of bad Company, the Treachery of fleshly
Lusts, the bewitching Temptations of the World, and have tasted a little, by my
own Experience, of the Pleasantness of Wisdoms Paths, the Peace and
satisfaction of Devotedness to God, by the present Rewards of a calm
Conscience, the communications of divine Grace, and the Encouragement of an
Holy Hope, etc. and am perfuaded of the Stability of his Word, and the
Certainty of Eternal Life to all who continue in well-doing; shall I after all
this ever break with God again? shall I ever cancel this Engagement? violate
this my Vow? and falsify so many repeated Promises and Resolutions? Oh that
his Power may rest upon me! and his Grace work in me both to will and to Do!
that this God may be my God for ever, and my Guide unto Death. Let me never
reassume this Gift and Surrender of my self, or defraud God of his Right and
Propriety. His I am, and Him I will serve: living wholly to Him; using all I
have for him: being willing he should do what he list with his own, and
consequently dispose of me, and of all that any way belongs to me, as shall
seem Good in his Eyes. I am Thine, O Lord save me. Command me my work, apoint
me my Duty, direct my Station, order my Condition; let me be Thine, tho imploid
in the meanest service, and the most! aborious selfdenying work. Tho I should
be but a Doorkeeper in thine House, an Hewer of Wood, or a Drawer of water: Tho
I must pinch the flesh, and swim against the Tide, and renounce what before I
valued: yet This God shall be my God for ever.

By this means when I come to Dye, (if God should add more years to the little
number I have past, besides this I have now begun,) I may be able to say with
Upright Hezekiah, Remember Lord, how I have walked before Thee in mine
Integrity. That in the face of Death, and the Grave, in the view of another
World, and the near prospect of Eternity, I may be able to Rejoice in Hope, and
Say, Lord Jesus, Receive my Spirit. Thou art my Savior, and I have waited for
thy Salvation. I have sought Thee with my whole Heart; I have chosen thy Favor
rather then Worldly Grandeur and Prosperity; I have prized thy Love, and
endeavored to obey Thee, (as the best Expression of my own) tho with many
Imperfections, which I bewail; I have delighted more in thy Service and
Presence, then in the Pleasures of Sin and vanity; thy Testimonies have been
the Joy of my Heart; I took no delight in the Company of the ungodly, after I
was devoted to Thee; O let me not have my Portion with them in the other World!
Fortify me now against the King of Terrors, strengthen me in this my last
Conflict, enable me to triumph over Death by the Cross of Christ, (my
victorious Redeemer,) and carry me through the dark valley, at the divorce of Soul
and Body, and grant me an abundant entrance into thine heavenly Kingdom; Let me
be numbered among thy Chosen, and my Body wait in Hope, 'till the general
Resurrection, that I may then see thy Glory, and dwell with Thee for ever.

By voluntary consent and Choice, thou art my God; and thy Presence in Heaven,
my ultimate Felicity; I have trusted to thy Gracious Promise, to prepare me for
it, and bring me to it; O fulfill thy Word unto thy Servant, wherein thou have
caued me to hope, and mercifully receive my departing Soul, that seeks Thee,
that loves Thee, that breaths after Thee, and desires nothing but to know Thee
better, and love Thee more, and be more entirely conformed to thine Image, and
live allways in thy B. Presence. Amen, Holy Father, be it unto me according to
thy Word; through the Merits and Intercession of my Allsufficient Savior, J.
Christ, the Faithful and True Witness, in whom all thy Promises are Yea, and
Amen.

XXX.
Thanksgiving to God for his Innumerable Benefits and Mercies, particularly in
the Year Past: with some Direction and Advice concerning it.

HOw precious and delightful are the Thoughts of thy Benefits? O Lord how
great is the sum of them? Should I count them, they are more in number then the
stars. Shall I not observe an^ consider them? maintain a grateful sense of 'em
and publicly acknowledge them on all occasions? that I may Bless the Lord at
all Times, and his Praise be continually in my mouth. More especially should I
conclude and begin the Year with solemn Praises to my Great Benefactor and
Preserver. I ought to begin and close every Day with it, thereby to make the
outgoings of the Morning and the Evening to rejoice in God. Every year, every
Day, every Hour, every Moment offers me an occasion to praise Him: because he
is every minute gracious; and has been so ever since he gave me my Being.

Almost one half of my Time has been spent in Sleep, when I remember not God,
nor my self; yet does He, who never slumbers or sleeps, remember me in Mercy,
and watch over me for Good. Yea tho in the other half, by Day, I have forgotten
him in a worse sense, by casting off his Fear, and not remembering that his Holy
Eye is upon me, yet has he not forgotten to be Gracious. Therefore I will
Praise the name of God with a song, and will magnify him with Thanksgiving,
and never forget his Benefits. With which Sacrifice, he is better pleased then
with an Ox or Bullock, that has horns and hoofs.

He has prolonged my Life this last Year, when so many others, of his more
useful servants, have been removed by Death: and given me farther Time and
Space to Repent, when multitudes have been surpised in their Impenitence. Yea,
it was He, who formed me in the womb, and brought me safely into the world; by
whose Providence I have hitherto been supplied: in Him I live, and move, and
continually exist, To his undeserved Goodness I am beholding for all the Good
of any kind, which I ever enjo'yd: to his Bounty I am indebted for all that I
now have; and must depend upon it, for what ever I can here after exspect.

Through Infancy and Childhood he was pleased to preserve me; Psalm. 69. v. 30.
favoring me with many advantages in my Birth and Education; prividing for me
a Competent Livelihood; disposing the Circumstances of my Condition, Relations,
Places of Abode, etc. more advantagiously then he has done for Thousands:
affording me many helps, for the Improving of my mind, and the increase of
Knowledge: and preventing my Necessities, and even my Desires, with numberless
Blessings which I never so much as asked for. He has caused Several of my
Relations to yield me Comfort, when they might have been sore Afflictions. He
has raised up Strangers to befriend me, and show me kindness. How many favors
have I received from God, by the Instrumentality of other Men? to whom God gave
the Will, and the Power, the Opportunity, and the Inclination.

How often has he delivered my Soul from Death, mine Eyes from Tears, and my
Feet from falling, by seasonable Preservations? so that I do yet walk before
Him in the Land of the Living. He has rescued me from the brink of many a
Precipice, which, through Ignorance or Inadvertency, did not apprehend or Fear.
When I knew not which way to turn, he has made my Path plain. Under sinking
Disapointments he has commanded Succor; and been a present Help in the time
of Trouble. In Great Perplexities, his Eye has been my Guide, and his own Arm
has brought Salvation: it may be by the Ministry of his H. Angels, obeing his
order, and giving unusual Intimations of very great, and otherwise unsuspected
Dangers: or sending Relief and Deliverance, by such small, unlikely, and
unexpected Means, as carried the name of God visibly engraven on them.
Innumerable Calamities he saves me from, which Others groan under: and as many
Blessings am I favored with, whereof they are destitute. He Spreads my Table,
and fills my Cup, and gives me All Things richly to enjoy, when many Excellent
Persons, of whom the World is not worthy, are fed with the bread of Affliction,
and the Water of Affliction. Others have only Necessaries, or but few
Conveniences, in Comparison with the Plentiful Provisions God has made, for
my Cheerful Obedience to Him. And shall I not Praise Him for the precious
Things of Heaven, the blessings of the Earth, the dew, and the deep? and more
especially for the Goodwill of Him, who dwelt in the Bush, to sanctify and
sweeten All: Whereby Common Mercies become the pledge and forerunner of better
Things; as the fruit of his Special kindness, the witness of his Truth, and the
seed of Peace and Joy, and Righteousness, and Praise; by reason of his Blessing
on all that I possess, which otherwise would prove a snare, and a Temptation,
and be intermixed with a Curse.

And besides the ordinary and Continued Bounty of every Day, in the midst of
how may Difficulties and Dangers, Deuteronomy. 33. v. 13.14.
have I felt the dear obligations of his Preserving Mercy? abroad and at home;
in foreign Countries, as well as my own; in the midst of Enemies, and among
Friends; in all Places, and at all Times.

He has prolonged my Health, or made my Bed in Sickness. He has often granted
the Desires of my Heart when ever it was for his Glory; and contradicted my
wishes, and disapointed my Endeavors, in other Instances, when it was more to
my Advantage. From how many Mischiefs has he saved me, by such Things as I
deprecated, and would have hindered? How many Evils has he turned for Good?
He has heard my Cry in the day Adversity, and set my feet in a large Place. He
has Chasten'd me for my Profit: His Rod and his Staff have comforted me: He
has spoken comfortably to me in the Wilderness. Affliction has been useful
and necessary Physic; made an Instrument of Virtue, and so a token of his
Love. Therefore I will sing of the Mercy of the Lord for ever, and with the
voice of Thanksgiving, will make known his Faithfullnes.

He has all along conducted me by his Wisdom, guided me by his Providence, and
the Angel of his Presence has directed my Path, and ordered all my Goings. He
has been a Cloud to me by Day, and a Pillar of Fire by night: he has helped
me in my Straits, and supplied my wants, and comforted me in all my sadnesses:
His powerful and gracious Presence has been my constant Guard; and his
Sovereign never-failing Goodness has compast me about with Mercy on every
side. For which, O most Merciful Father, my Soul, and all that is within me,
desires to speak thy Praise. Ps. 89. v. 1.


The advantageous Circumstances of many divine Favors do raise their value, and
deserve to be particularly observed and and acknowledged. How suitably, how
seasonably, how wisely has he conser'd his Benefits? with what Tenderness and
Kindness? with what Freedom and Readiness? Of his own bounty and goodwill,
without any Necessity, or Obligation on his Part; without any desert, and
Sometimes without so much as a Prayer on mine. And what is more,
notwithstanding my Ingratitude and Forgetfullness of Him, and great
Provocations, heigthned by the abuse of so much Mercy: demanding nothing after
all, in requital of so much Kindness, but my Acceptance of his Love, and
grateful sense of his Goodness, and the sweetest and most reasonable
Expressions of it, by Thankful Obedience.

More especially, would I Bless the Lord, for Inlightening my mind in the Great
Mysteries of Religion: disposing in wonderful Wisdom the several means and
methods, whereby he brought me to the Knowledge of the Truth, by Parents,
Ministers, Friends, Acquaintance, Books, Afflictions, etc. Beginning with me in
Childhood, awakening and cultivating the inbred notions of God, and natural
Religion, of Good and Evil, Rewards and Punishments, by the careful
Instructions of Parents, or others concerned in my Education: giving me the
advantage of Good Examples, Counsels, and Encouragements, to know and do well;
with more assistance, and less hindrances, and diversions, then to many Others.
Particularly, for the Excellent Privilege and inestimable Blessing of his H.
Word and Sacraments; the liberty of the Christian Religion, in the Purity of
it, in most of those Places, where God has been pleased to cast my Lot.
Causing me to lay, down in green Pastures, and leading me beside the still
Waters: Instructing me in the Revelation of his Will and Grace by J. Christ:
acquainting me with the sublime Principles and Articles, Precepts and Rules,
Promises and Hopes of the Gospel, in order to Eternal Life.

I bless Thee, O Lord, and shall for ever do so, that with any or all these
advantages and helps, thy H. Spirit, has taught me to know the Truth as it is
in Jesus, heartily to believe and obey it. That by thy Grace, I have been
convinced of Sin, and brought to Repentance; showing me the necessity of a
Savior, to make my Peace with Thee, the All sufficiency of his Grace, the
fullness of his merit, the freeness of his Love, and his readiness to receive me
to mercy; inviting and calling me to it, and enabling me to accept his gracious
Invitation, and obey his Compassionate Call: making me willing, by a Powerful
and Victorious Grace, drawing me with Cords of Love, and so effectually
persuading me to consent to thy Covenant, and comply with thy message, on the
gracious terms of the Gospel. Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord J.
Christ, who, through his abundant mercy, has begotten me again to a lively Hope:
having humbled my proud Heart, and conquered the perverseness of my Stubborn
Will, and brought my Soul to an entire Subjection to himself. Who took pity on
me, when he saw me in my Blood, spread his skirt over me, cast a mantle upon my
nakedness, washed me from my Sins, and put his own Comeliness upon me, by
sanctification: who opened my Eyes when I was leaping blinfold into the pit of
Destruction: who healed my Soul, when I was fick unto Death: who rescue'd and
recovered me from the slavery of the Devil, when I was led Captive by him at
his will. Shall not a ransomed, redeemed Slave, be thankful to his Deliverer?
shall not a miserable undone Sinner, who is received to mercy, be thankful for
a Pardon? A wake O my Soul! and utter a song of Praise to Him, who forgiveth
all thine Iniquities, and heals all thy Diseases, who redeemeth thy Life,
(thy Soul,) from Destruction, and erowneth thee loving kindness, and tender
mercies.

Has he made thee pertaker of his own renewed Image and likeness? given thee
his Son, his Grace, his Spirit? and taken such a wretched Creature into so near
a Relation to Himself, and promised to be thy God and Guide, thy Portion, and
thine Inheritance, thy Friend, and thy Physician, thy Sun, and thy shield, and
thine exceeding great Reward? Ps. 103. v. 2.
and shall not my Soul speak aloud his Praise? Has he been merciful to my
unrighteousness, and blotted out my sins? has he gathered me with his arm, and
carried me in his bosom? has he been my Savior and Redeemer, adopted me into
his Family, and promised to make me Blessed in his Glory, with the H. Angels?
the Curse being removed, and the hand writing against me cancelled, the Price
paid, the breach made up, the mouth of Justice stopped, and the condemning
Sentence of the Law exchanged for a gracious pardon, through the Sacrifice of my
B. Lord Jesus? and shall I not praise his incomprehensible Love and Grace?

I likewise thank Thee, most Holy Father, for saving me from Guilt and Ruin,
when assaulted by powerful and dangerous Temptations: that by preventing
mercy, or Restraining Grace, Esa. 43. v. 14.
thou have kept me from many Scandalous and presumptuous Crimes. I thank Thee,
for making the Sins of Others, a warning and a Caution to me, an argument to
humility, and a motive to watchfullness: for preserving my Judgment from many
Errors and delusions, by which others are seduced: for enabling me to improve
any opportunities of doing Good: and making me in any thing useful to Others:
yea I thank thee for all thy Mercies to other Christians; for all the Gifts and
Graces and usefullness of any of thy Servants, wherein, as a member of the same
Body, I desire to rejoice: for any support and comfort to me, or Any of them,
under honorable Sufferings for thy name sake.

I desire unfeignedly to bless Thee, for any Succor, relief and victory, with
respect to the snares and buffetings of Satan, and the vilest of his
Temptations. When he has tempted me to Apostasy, and Infidelity in Speculation
and practice; to question the Truth of the H. Scriptures, and the Life to come;
to doubt of the foundations of the Christian Faith; or to despair of the mercy
of God, and give up the Reins to sensual Lusts; or to draw me from God, by the
love of the World, and the praise of men, by Evil Company, Intemperance, secret
wickedness, etc.

I bless Thee with my whole Soul, for calling me back from any of my
Wanderings, and by infinite Goodness recovering me after great Falls; enabling
me to return, when I had gone astray, and seek thy forfeited Favor, that thou
may heal my Back slidings: giving me, in order to it, a deep sense of my own
Sin; and of thy Sovereign Grace; leading me to a Savior, whose Blood cleanses
from all Sin, when my guilty, defiled Soul so much needed its pardoning and
cleansing virtue: awakening me to make holy vows, and calling upon me by thy
word, and Spirit, and Providence to perform them.

I Bless Thee, who have guided my feet into the way of Peace, when by the
terrors of an accusing Conscience, and the sense of unpardoned Sin, and the
apprehensions of thy deserved wrath, I was ready to despair. That tho thou
did most justly hide thy Face at any time, it was but for a little while; but
did seasonably, and in mercy return, to wipe off my Tears, restore the Joy of
thy salvation, and chase away the clouds and darkness on my Spirit, by the
reviving presence of thy own. Thou who art the Author, wilt be the finisher of
my Faith: and therefore tho thou have visited mine Iniquities with a Fatherly
Rod, yet thy Lovingindness thou have not taken from me, or suffered thy
Faithfullness to fail, or thy Covenant of Peace to be removed, but have
refreshed me with hidden Manna, after great Perplexities, saying unto my Soul,
I am God, even thy God: making me to hear thy voce, which was sweet, and to
taste thy Love, which is better then wine; enabling me to say with thine
Apostle Thomas, My Lord, and My God. And to have any Communion with thee since,
in public or private Duties.

For all these innumerable Mercies, I desire to praise Thee, which yet are but
in order to greater, to Everlasting Kindness in Heaven. These are but the
taste, and earnest of what thou will bestow hereafter. O how great his his
Goodness, that he has laid up for Those that fear Him? And now Lord what wait
I for? my Hope is even in Thee. I thank thee, who have thus put it into my
Heart, to render thee solemn Praise, and once more to renew my Covenant what
thee.

I will magnify the Lord, and my Spirit shall rejoyee in God my Savior.
Return unto thy rest, O my Soul, for the Lord has dealt bountifully with me.
While Psalm. 104.33.
I live I will praise Thee, and sing praises to my God, while I have a being. O
come and behold the works of the Lord, what he has done for my Soul! the Lord
lives; Psalm. 18.46.
Blessed be my Rock, and let the God of my Salvation be exalted. Let my Heart
be glad, and my Glory rejoice, for the Lord is not ashamed to be called my God.
Thanks be to God, who has caused me to triumph in Christ Jesus. Sing unto the
Lord, O ye his Saints! and give thanks at the Remembrance of his Holiness. Ps.
30.
I cried unto thee, and thou have healed, and saved me: I will give thanks to
Thee for ever. Psalm 119.62.
I will show forth thy Lovingkindness in the morning, and thy Faithfullness
every Night. For the Lord is Good, his mercy is Everlasting, and his Truth
endures throout all Generations. O enter into his Gates with Thanksgiving, and
his Courts with Praise: be thankful unto him, and bless his name. Bless the
Lord all ye his works in all places of his Dominion, Bless the Lord, O my Soul.

Let me add for a Conclusion; that the particular Deliverances, Supports, and
Consolations, which at any time God has given in cases of great Exigence, or
in answer to importunate Prayer, ought never to be forgotten. Many experienced
Christians have been wont to write down such remarkable Appearances of God for
them, with the particular Circumstances, that did recommend and enhanse the
mercy, (wither Spiritual or Temporal,) as an encouragement to trust in God, in
future difficulties: and have afterward found the Comfort and Advantage, of
being able to have recourse to such Papers. This practice I recommend as what
has been useful and Consolatory to diverse Christians, for many years
afterward: and to some others, of their more intimate Friends, to whom they
might without vanity be imparted. What experiences might be recorded of signal
returns to Prayer, and seasonable manifestations of the Truth, and Goodness,
and wisdom of God, if all the Instances thereof were duly recollected and
preserved? And how sweet and pleasant would the work of Prayer and Praise then
be? with what rejoicing and delight should we set about it, and live in it? if
the constraining Goodness and Love of God, and a Thankful sense of his
unspeakable mercies did bring us to him, and indite and animate every word?
what support and comfort, and probable hopes (at least) of the special Love of
God might we derive from the various passages of his Compassion and kindness?
And hereby we may be able more heartily to give him thanks for Pardon,
Sanctification, and Adoption, which we commonly mention with too much doubt and
fear.

It may likewise be advisable to examine and record, the workings of your own
Spirit, under such Dispensations. What Thoughts you then had of God? what acts
of Faith, Love, Thankfullness you did then manifest? what Evidences of God's
favor, and what discovery of your own Sincerity, you have had at such Times?
when and how, and by what means you were cured of your uncomfortable unbelief,
and raised from your despondency? what Promises you had recourse to for relief?
what Considerations were most helpful to you? what Frame of Spirit you kept up
in Prayer, before and after? what Resolutions and Engagements you made to God,
to love, and trust, and praise, and serve him, and give up all to his dispose
for the future? and what consequent obligation may be inferred from thence, to
acquiesce in the Will of God and resign our selves entirely to Him saying, This
God is our God for ever and ever, and He will be Our Guide unto Death.

THE END.

