THE Word of the Lord TO SION the New JERUSALEM, The Bride the Lambs Wife, the
Excellency of all the Glory that is amongst the People; Though she be now in
deep Sufferings, in fullness of time God will clear the Innocence of her
Children; and all the Natitions of the Earth shall call her the Blessed of the
Lord, yea, the holy City, in whom the Lord dwells, to manifest his Glory upon
the Earth amongst the Children of men for ever.

LONDON, Printed in the Year, 1664.

The Word of the Lord to Zion.
O Sion, who is brought forth in the beautiful and glorious Birth of the
morning of the Day of the Almighty God, thou Jerusalem, the Bride, the Lambs
Wife, O what tongue can express of what is felt in the heavenly Treasures and
Fullness of the Most High, who watches over thee for good, and not for evil, in
this day of thy great Trial, wherein Judgment is begun at the House of God,
that he may prove you, his People, in the sight of the Nations, and manifest
his mighty Power for your deliverance in the presence of the People, to the
astonishment of all the proud and stout-hearted among the children of men. In
the ability of the strength of the Lord I declare his Word to thy tender
Children, O Sion, whom the Lord God beholds, how you are compassed about with
the ravenous Beasts of the field, and given up by the Children of men, for to
be laid waste, and to race up the Foundation of your strength if it were
possible, that so the pure and living Worship of God in the Spirit, may not be
known in the Earth.

O dear and tender Children of the Immortal Birth, which makes Self of no
reputation, whom the Lord has called and chosen to be his living Witnesses
upon the Earth, to bear Testimony of his great and glorious Name amongst the
people; fear not Man whose breath is in his nostrils, neither regard evil
tidings of what men intend to do with you: O be faithful upon your watch, that
you may stand in a good Authority in the Light and Life over all the appearance
of evil in the Inward-man, that would draw your minds from staidness in the
Power of the Lord God, that so the evil spy of the mind may never have power,
that would run forth in the reach of your reason, to judge of what will come to
pass in the sensitive part, and so cause fainting and feebleness of mind;
through the dark Judgment, which is out of the Light and Power of God; as the
evil Spies did in the days of old, who brought evil tidings of the good Land:
Therefore all you Servants of the Most High God, stand fast in his Counsel, who
says, I am God Alsufficient, walk before me, and be ye perfect, in that to
reign over all, what ever is contrary to the will of God, that so in the free
resignation of your wills, with all that you have and are, you may be a living
Sacrifice upon his Altar, with singleness of heart, standing approved before
the Throne of his Glory, with boldness and holy confidence, without the least
doubting or wavering of mind, but that the Lord will go before you, and with
joy and gladness of heart carry you through, what ever he has determined, to
the perfecting his Praise and Glory of his Name for ever.

And dear Friends in God, you are not ignorant of the the tender Love of our
Father, who in the Authority of his own Spirit, sent to proclaim this day of
trial in your ears certain years ago, that every Child might look up to the
Power of the Lord, to be prepared to meet him in the day determined, which now
is manifest in the sight of all people that love the Lord; To whom I declare in
the Authority of the same Spirit and Life, that your deliverance is sealed in
the Eternal and Unchangeable Decree of the Most High God; let all the power of
darkness do what they are permitted, fear not you chosen Vessels, for not any
more of the wrath of man shall have power then you shall have ability in God's
Sufficiency to rejoice, triumph, praise and magnify the Name of the Lord,
through and over all the wrath of man, all your days, until your Change come,
and for ever when time shall be no more; and God will be the God of your
families and tender Children, who never did nor will forsake the Righteous,
neither suffer their Seed to beg their bread.

Therefore lift up your heads in the Power of the Lord, you chosen Vessels, for
you shall prevail and overcome through the Blood of the Lamb, and the Word of
your Testimony, and no more shall love your lives to death, that you may do and
suffer whatever the pleasure of the Lord is, who was made perfect in suffering,
and did go before us unto the Father, and now is come again to receive us unto
himself; therefore all in the Light behold Him, behold Him, who ascended over
all the power of Hell, and Death, and Darkness, who now in like manner is
descended, whose coming we behold in the Clouds with Power and great Glory.
Therefore dear Children of the Lord, with the Light judge whatever would cloud
or vail you from beholding his glorious Appearance, so shall you reign over all
the evil attendances of the mind; though they be never so strong or many, you
shall in the Power of the Lord trample upon them in the Name of Jesus; whose
coming is in the Clouds, to deliver every Lamb forth of the evil that assaults
the mind, through the Manifestation of his Appearance; For as the Lightening-is
from the East unto the West, so is the Appearance of the Son of Man; and as the
Serpent was lift up in the Wilderness, so is the Son of Man lifted up in this
his Day. O let your eyes be all fixed on Him, and your hearts steadfastly
believing in his Name, without wavering, though the Devil tempt, and all the
Power of Darkness do what it can, in the meek Life of Jesus you shall trample
upon the head of the old Serpent, and reign in the powerful Authority over all
the enemies within and without for ever.

And as to the Clouds that arise outwardly from men, who lay their Plots in the
deep, and fetch their Counsel out of the bottomless Pit, etc. I beseech you all
in the bowels of love, consult not with flesh and blood, but walk close with
the Lord as at other times; as our brethren, Daniel, Shadrach, M eshach and
Abednego did in the days of old, for whom the Lord appeared through all the
clouds and power of Darkness, to the confounding the pride of Babylon in that
age and generation, etc. And certainly the Royal Birth of the Immortal Seed,
which makes Self of no reputation, shall see Christ coming through all the
Clouds, with Power and great Glory, and in as great Majesty as ever since the
world was made, for the Deliverance of his own Birth, that seeks not any thing
but to glorify his Name, with the loss of all, life it self, if the Lord
requires it at their hands, to seal the Testimony of their peaceable and holy
Conversation in Christ Jesus, which is in meeting, watching and waiting, to
receive the heavenly Vision. And dear beloved Children, steadfastly believe in
the Name of the Lord, that the Birth of the one pure Will may be raised into
its dominion in you all the Father may fill you with his sanctifying Word; and
when you are sweetly refreshed, take heed of being hasty to utter words before
the Lord, but sink down into the Eternal Power, and as it overcomes you with
the forceable Power, and move^ in you, to make mention of the Name of the Lord,
whether in Exhortation, Prayer, or Praises, O take heed of quenching the motion
of the Spirit, but give freely up to the Power of the Lord, to order you in his
own Will and Wisdom, what he will manifest through you, that so you in true
obedience cast your mite into the Treasury of God, and give the Lord his own
with advantage, which proceeds from a broken heart and a contrite spirit, whom
our God will not despise, but will enlarge our borders for our faithfulness,
that so all the Assemblies of the Lord's People, may be as the Assemblies of
Prophets of the Most High, freely offering up to him the fruit of his own
Vineyard, in the holy return of Praises, Praises, in the pure Demonstration and
Power of his own Spirit, that the everlasting Praise and Glory of the Name of
the God of our Consolation may be exalted over all, who has and is established
in his pure peaceable Kingdom in the hearts of his People, and of his Dominion
there is no end; For the Heathen shall be given Him for his Inheritance, and
the utmost ends of the Earth for his Possession; Swords shall be beaten into
plow-shares, and Spears into pruning hooks, for he will break the battle out of
the Earth, who is God over all to rule and reign for ever and ever; Princes
shall be in love with Him, and the Mighty of the Earth shall submit unto Him,
and all the Nations that are saved, shall walk in his Light, and call him
Blessed, who was dead, but now alive, calling to all people to come, and
believe in his Name, that Eternal Life may abide in them for ever. But all that
reject his Counsel, the Light, to be led in the strait way of self-denial,
their blood will be manifest to be on their own heads, in the day of the fierce
wrath, when he will be revealed in flames of fire, rendering his eternal
vengeance upon all that know him not, and obey not the Gospel of our Lord Jesus
Christ, etc.

Therefore does the Word of the Lord sound through me, in the heavenly
Proclamation to all the Children of Light, with all whose faces are set toward
Sion; Stand fast in the Faith, and in the Light, come boldly to the Throne of
Grace, where the Fountain of the fullness of the great refreshings you will
enjoy, that you may buy Wine and Milk without money, or without price: O come
away, come away, in this day of your invitation, wherein the Spirit and the
Bride says, Come, and every one that it hears says, Come, and every one
that is athirst, come, and every one that will, come, come and drink, drink of
the Fountain of the Water of Life freely, that by the virtue thereof the weary
and heavy-laden may be eased, and all your putrified wounds cleansed, and all
the issues of blood healed, and all the stains of the garment washed, that all
the bowed-down heads may be lifted up, and the soul that has been as a
desolate widow, and as a stranger without a dwelling in God, and as a child
without a father, now in your faithful obedience to the Light, the Lord will
manifest himself to be the Husband of the desolate Widow, and an Entertainer of
the Stranger, and with him the Fatherless shall find mercy; which shall cause
the lame to leap as an Heart, the blind to see, the dumb to speak forth the
high praises of the most high God, whose Mountain is, and shall be more and
more set up a top of the mountains, and established above all the hills, and
all Nations shall flock to the Mountain of the Lords House, in obedience to our
God, who is taking to him his great Power, to manifest himself to be the safety
of them that trust in his Name, whom he will hide in the hollow of his hand, as
in a munition of Rocks, to the confounding the Enemies of Sion, and staining
the pride of the glory of all Flesh, who shall vail and bow before him, and
confess to the glory of his Majestical Power, That there is not any GOD like to
him in whom we trust, and who will plead our Cause, and answer our Expectation,
according to his own Determination.

Therefore dear Servants of the most High, let not any of us be weary in
well-doing; and above all things love the Lord Jesus, yea, love the Lord Jesus
Christ; and in his perfect Light, Thought and Will, all in stedfastness and
staidness of mind, keep your habitations, in perfect peace, that the Birth of
the one, pure, holy Will may rule and reign over all that stands in the will of
man, that so high Praises, Praises, may wait upon the Lord in Sion, and
Hallelujahs in heavenly harmony may be sounded within the Gates of Jerusalem;
who is made this day a Burdensome Stone to the Nations, but is and shall be
more and more the Praise of the whole Earth for ever, and it shall be known
more and more: Assuredly the mouth of the Lord has spoken it, through your
dear and loving Brother, who blesses and praises the Name of the Lord for you
all who love the Lord Jesus Christ, and seek his glory alone, and nothing for
self in all that you do and suffer upon the account of the Testimony you bear,
in profession of his Truth, in the sight of all people: O blessed, blessed are
you, you Self-denying-People! for what is before expressed, is your Inheritance
for ever and ever: In which fare you well, fare you well, says my Soul, in the
Name of the Lord.

And all dear Friends, be dear and tender over the weak, and all that has
strayed forth of the footsteps of the Flock of the Companions, in what you
can, draw them, and gather them in the Bowels of tender Love, that the
scattered may be gathered into the Unity, to lie down with us in the pure Rest,
to the praise and glory of God for ever.

W. D.

THE END.

