TO ALL THE Faithful Brethren BORN OF THE IMMORTAL SEED OF THE FATHER of LIFE,
And sent forth in the great Commission, and Power of the King of Eternal Glory,
to gather his Elect from the Winds of the Earth, forth of all Nations and
Kindreds where they are scattered; This to you is the Word of God.
DEar Brethren of the Royal Birth, of the Noble Seed, born in the Life of Love,
Crowned with the Innocent Power of the Mighty Jehovah, whom the Lord has
Clothed with the Garment of Excellency, to follow the King of Glory, with the
loss of all things in this Mortal Life; so that your lives are not precious in
your eyes to serve the Lord God, and to seek the lost sheep, and gather the
scattered of Israel from the Winds of the Earth. Oh you Royal Brethren and
Sisters, born of the Birth of the Morning of the Glorious Eternal Day of the
Dreadful God, which shall shake down and lay waste all that withstands the
Light and Life of God, girt up your Spirits in the Majesty of the Power of the
Son of Righteousness, that you may shine as Morning Stars in the Nations where
you are led to enlighten the People, that the Nobility of their understandings
be cleared, to receive the Power of the endless Life, to Bury and Baptize
down all Mortality in the Death, tha^ a Glorious Resurrection of the Birth of
the Morning be brought forth to reign in the strength of the Son of God the
King of Eternal Glory.

Dear valiant Vessels of the Host of the mighty strength of Heaven, let no
thing lie hard or difficult before you, in stillness, in the safety under the
shadow of the Power of the Lord of Life and Glory, rest in Peace, in pure
subjection to the motion of his Spirit, feel the conquering King of Sion, in
all things lead and go before you with the Sword of his mouth, which will open
in the Authority of his Life in you, he will cut down and lay wast all that
oppose him, and with the breath of his lips confound and scatter all that lift
a tongue against him; so go on you striplings in the Might, Power of the Mighty
Omnipotent God; in his Name you shall skip over all the Mountains of this
World, and leap over the highest walls of the fenced City of Babel, upon the
Wings of Angels you shall be born to follow the Angel of the Covenant, abide in
him, there shall be nothing too hard, for the decree is sealed with the
unchangeable God, the overthrow of Babel is determined, in vain it is for her
to seek to uphold her self, for you are elected of the Lord you Sons of the
day, in the might of his Power to come forth of the North to spoil Babylon
according to the Scripture; In the Word of the Lord I say unto you Babylon is
fallen, is fallen, in the eternal decree, the Lord God has heard the cry of the
blood of his Saints, and with dreadful vengeance will he plead the cause of his
dear Lambs, who has and is willing to be slain for his Names sake; So in the
strength of the Day you Sons of the Morning go on and prosper over all the
Earth as moved of the Lord, cry aloud, spare not, let the Nations hear the
living Voice, and the Isles that wait for his Law be refreshed and established
in the Word of his Holiness, for the King of Glory will cloth you with the
Garment of his strength, and with the Armor of his safety he will cover you in
all he leads you unto, let the burning word proceed forth of your Mouths, and
the Sword of the living Word which slayes the Nations, and divides between the
Precious and the Vile; go out in the majesty of his strength, for you are the
Angels sent to the Winds of the earth, to cut down and reap in the Authority of
the Lord of the Harvest; let the dread of the Majesty of the Mighty King of
Glory be retained to keep you all in his Dominion, all the mighty of this world
to the beggar on the Dunghill must be subject to the instrument put into your
hands, for the reaping of the great harvest of the Mighty God is come; all you
ministering Angels sent forth in the strength of the day, know your places where
you are commissionated in your labor in the Vineyard, to the Countries and
Islands over the face of the earth, the dreadful day of his vengence is come,
for the abominations that is done among the Children of men, and the violence
to his Seed, for which the Mighty God will not spare the inhabitants of the
Earth any longer.

So all you that are sent out in the Commission of the Eternal King of Glory,
in the Authority of his Life, keep what is committed to you, and be not weary
of the Service of God, neither do the work of the Lord negligently; you
Ministering Angels fly in the Majesty of the Powerful Dominion, cover the earth
as moved of the Lord, and in the joy of his Life, endure the Travels, you will
see the Lord blessing his own work in and through you, for the Birth of the
morning cries in the Nations, and mourns for the knowledge of the true God
amongst the People, let your hearts be glad in the Power of the might, the Lord
is hasteniug to gather our brethren from far, and our sisters from the ends of
the earth, and they shall praise the Lord that ever you were born of the Birth
of the Day; you valiant Champions who flies over the earth in the Angelical
Life, the Mighty Powerful Jehovah girt you all up, and lead you all in his
eternal feeling Power, that you may raise the dead, and enliven that which is
ready to die, set free and bring forth the Prisoners, open the blind eyes, and
cause the lame to leap as Hearts, and loose the tongue of the dumb, and to speak
a word in due season to the weary fainting Soul; and the everlasting God cover
your heads in all Tumults, Distresses, Temptations, Affl^ctions and Jeopardies
by Sea and Land, and fill you with the virtue of the River of Pleasures, you
Trees of the Righteous Planting of the Lord, and cause your leaf to abound
with virtue, that the Leaf of your Tree may heal the Nations, in the Power and
Life of Jesus Christ where ever he leads you, to the ends of the earth.

The Almighty, Eternal, Infinite God, Lead, Guide and Preserve You with the
Power of his endless Life, and prosper you in whatever he calls you unto, to
the gathering the numberless number of his Sons and Daughters to glory in the
Power and Majesty of his strength; The Lord God keep you faithful unto the end,
into whom my Life is powered as a River in the strength of the Love of the
Father, in which I am given up with all the Babes Immortal, with Life to Death
in the Will of God, Farwell.

Your Brother and Companion, W. D.
In York Castle, given forth from the Spirit of the Lord, the 26th. day of the
second month, 1661.
To the true Church of the firstborn of the holy seed of God, to shine in his
glory as lights of the world, to witness against their evil deeds, in your
faithful bearing his name in Righteousness, where you are scattered ov^r the
face of the earth, amongst all Nations and People, these with understanding
read in the fear of God.
DEar Brethren and Sisters born of the birth of the Son of the morning, of the
everlasting day that is risen amongst you in the Northern Countries, and sprang
up ^o you in Barbados, New England, Virginia, Bermudoes, and the Countries and
Islands there awaies, and elsewhere, which the Lord has visited in this day of
mercy; Oh! prize the Love of the Lord God, who has brought you to know the
voice of the Son of the everlasting day to baptize and bury the mortal into
death, that he might raise up his immortal Child, the birth of the morning in
all your hearts, to receive his heavenly virtue in the Resurrection of his Life
to reign and have Dominion, in his infinite strength to stand living witnesses
of the name of the King of glory; Let this infinite Love which he has
manifested in you, constrain every one in particular to watch and pray, that
the birth of the morning of the mighty day in you all rule and reign in every
heart, to guide you in the light, as he is in the Light, that in the deep love
in his Life you grow up together in the pure close union one with another in
him, that the birth of the night be trodden down in every one, and be crucified
upon the Cross in your faithful obedience to the Lamb of God, who in the light
is come to crown you with his glory, and cleanse you with his blood, and fill
you with his innocence, that in the oneness in the holy birth you grow in
eternal unity all as one in the measure of his life, to follow the Lamb
wherever he goes, and let no straitness be upon your Spirits, nor any thing
difficult in what you are called unto, over all the walls of the fenced City of
Babel you shall leap in the Authority of God, and a top of all the mountains of
opposition shall you skip as innocent Lambs, and amongst all the Armies with
their confused noise, you shall run through them as the Angels of God; yea now
is the day that one in the authority of God shall chase a thousand, and five
put ten thousand to flight (without a carnal weapon) for the fiery flaming
presence of the Lord goes before his birth, for which sake the Lord is risen to
smite the hearts of the Heathen with fear, and to give to the mighty of the
earth a cup of astonishment, in vain it is for them to seek to save themselves
that seek to destroy the birth of the day, the decree is gone out against them,
and the arm of the Lord is stretched out according to his counsel, which he will
never draw in, till he has caused his birth to reign and bring to naught all
that resist his appearance; you chosen generation, feel the virtue of the Son
of God in every one, and abide in him; let your vessels be filled with the
comfort of his Life, that you may tread upon every thought, and every
imagination that is contrary to the Light; and all take heed of being hasty at
any time of uttering words before him; Let his government be upon all your
Spirits, that you may have the infallible seal of his Spirit in all your
exercise, and in your meetings and all times feel the glory of his life
crowning the holy birth with the joy of his Salvation, and when he fills you
with his overcoming virtue, and moves you in the strength thereof, be obedient,
quench not the Spirit, and keep within the bounds of the Spirit, that you may
retain the salt and savor in yourselves, and in all with whom you are, that
none strive further then the Lord leads, and moves in his life, and all feel
the honorable babe in Dominion, that makes self of no reputation, and humbles
self to the Cross, and is the least in its own eye, whatever the Lord does
with it; and let the strong serve the weak, and bear its burden, and all feel
the healing restoring Spirit in you all, to improve every gift God gives you to
the glory of the Lord, and gather you into the life of truth, that there be not
found any serving themselves with the gifts of God, and putting the jewels on
the false birth, which the Father gives to the true Child of his immortal seed;
I say in the word of the Lord, let not such a thing be found with any, for it
grieves the Spirit of God; let the true birth in you all, the innocent Child
reign over the son of the bondwoman, so will you all be clothed with the
Kings garment, in his Light and Life to walk in singleness of heart, who will
fill you with the beauty of his holiness at all times, which will make you run
together in faithfulness, who will fill your cups with the joy of his
Salvation, which will cause you with broken hearts and contrite Spirits offer
up an acceptable Sacrifice on his holy Altar in his Sanctuary, and the assembly
of his holy people, before whom all Nations shall fall, and the people that
know not God from the highest to the lowest shall be confounded to the ends of
the earth, and the scattered seed shall come out of the Nations with joy to
behold the glory of the Lord, in the mountain of his holiness, which he has
and is, and will stablish a top of all the mountains of this world, and all
Nations shall flow unto it, saying, Come let us go unto the mountain of the
Lord, and to the house of the God of Jacob, he will show us his way, and we
will walk in his paths, and the Law shall go out of Sion, and the word of the
Lord from Jerusalem, Righteousness shall run through the earth with a mighty
stream, and Babylon that has shed the blood of the Saints shall be thrown down
before the glory of our God, as a stone into the Sea, and shall never rise
again, the mouth of the Lord of Hosts has spoken it.

You innocent Lambs and redeemed people of the Lord Jesus, who has passed
through great tribulations, and has washed your garments, and made them white
in the blood of the Lamb, in the innocence of his life; Rejoice, praise the
Name of the King of Sion, stand unmovable upon his holy Mountain, that you may
sing the new song of the high praises of our God, which none can learn, but who
are redeemed from the earth, that in the Authority of his Life you may magnify
the Name of the Lord for ever; the presence of the Lord God lead you with his
out stretched arm to the perfecting of his praise over all in his Dominion.
Amen.

W. D.
In York Castle, given forth from the Spirit of the Lord the 26. day of the 2.
month, 1661
DEar faithful Friends in God, who has known the day in your travail, that not
any thing has been dear to you, not life it self, that you might enjoy the
light of the countenance of God, which he has now manifested in the
everlasting Covenant of his Light in Christ, which now constrains in the
power of our royal life, born of the noble seed, to stand out, over and above
all flattering tongues, and all threatenings and wrath of men, which will be
more and more manifest before this day of trial be over, and what wrath ever
the Lord suffers to arise in the powers of the earth, without the Lord move, do
not any seek to stop it, let God have the glory, the wrath of man turns to the
praise of God, and the remainder he will restrain, while the royal babe which
is in meekness and patience stands still, and gives glory to God in faithful
obedience with life to death if the Lord call for it, who has blessed the
labor of all he called into the vineyard of God, in whom my bowels is enlarged
in the strength of the life I have received of the Father; oh feel me, for I am
with you filled with joy in the Lord, that his Royal birth is brought forth,
and the captive set free, the tongue of the dumb loosed, and in the living
power of God raised, to offer up living praises on the holy Altar of God, in
the Assembly of his Saints; oh lift up your heads, be glad in the strength of
the Lord, in this day of gathering the good ripe fruit, in the vineyard of the
Lord how does the vines abound with virtue, laden with clusters of the purest
grapes fully ripe, which drops abundantly with the wine renewed in the Kingdom
of the Father; Oh fill your cups, be not straightened in your Spirits to receive
of the fullness of God, in whom I am constrained to say unto you in the Light,
drink, drink abundantly, let the thirst of the immortal birth earnestly in the
Light reach forth it self, to draw more and more the infinite Life, that it may
comprehend you in the power of it self, that in its strength your hearts be set
free over all below, and your Spirits in the Light and Life raised in the
heavenly harmony, to praise and glorify the Name of the Lord in eternal unity,
to the astonishment of all that know not God, whose hearts shall fail before
the Life of God, which keeps all that abide in it, with what ever he gives low
in his fear, that neither heights, nor depths, nor tribulation, nor distress,
persecution, or famine, or nakedness, peril or sword, life nor death, things
present, nor things to come, can ever separate the Royal birth from its
faithful obedience to Christ Jesus the Light; dwell out of time, and place, and
over all Creature-enjoyments, in the unlimited power to guide, that your words
be few, and savoury at all times, whether in bonds or out of bonds, to minister
grace to the hearers, and be tender affectionate one toward another, in the
pure chaste Love of God, all to lie down together in the eternal unity, one in
the fullness in the most High God over all blessed for ever. Farewell.

Your Brother W. D.
From the Tower in York the 25. of the first Month, 1661.
THE END.
LONDON, Printed for Thomas Simmons, 1661.


