THE Devouring Informers OF Bristol, etc.
Being an Additional Account of some late Proceedings of those Ravenous Beasts
of Prey, against Dissenting-Protestants.
Bristol April 22. 1682.
FOr these two days our Old Informers Mr. Helliar and Accomplices, Lugg,
Tilley, Casse, Patrick, Hoar and Watkins with their Assistants, have been
Levying Distresses upon several Protestant-Dissenters, and in the Management of
it, behaved themselves with that Fury and unp^ralel degree of Violence and
Arbitrary Force, that it fills our Hearts with Sadness, and our Thoughts with
no less Terror then Amazement.

Part of them, (for they divide themselves in two Bodies) that is, Mr. Hell^ar,
Tilley, Lugg and Watkins, the Marshal, with their late Assistant Summers the
Butcher, came to the House of Mr. Richard Marsh ^n Cornstreet, who is a person
known to be one of the Considerablest Merchants of this City. These entering his
House to make a Distress for 10 l. broke open his Count^r Door, and searched
for Money, and then went into an Inward Counter, and there seized and carried
away his Journal, Leiger, Cash, Invoyce Books, and several other Books of
Accounts to the number of thirty, also a Bundle of Written Papers, and several
sorts of Household Goods. Not content with this, they seized also the Provisions
of Victuals then in the House, being three pieces of Pork and two pieces of
Beef, two Pullets, 4 Neats-Tongue, all which they carried away; besides this
they seized a Gammon of Bacon, and other Victuals and Drink which they Consumed
on the place, spending near three Hours time in Commanding his House, and
Ransacking several Chambers, particularly the Chamber of his Wife, then Lying
in: During this stay in his House, their Behavior were so Insolent, that they
greatly affrighted not only his Servants, but all those Spectators, whose
occasions and Respect called them into his House. The Servants they Hectored
and Treated in Language to this purpose. How dare you touch any thing now we
are here. Of the Spectators, one a Butcher, another a Butter-Woman, bringing
Meat, and Butter into his House being Market day, was forced to carry away
both, and escaped with difficulty of their having it taken from them. This
Gentleman Mr. Marsh had formerl^ taken from him, a Tun of Wine worth 20 l.
which they Sold for 4 l. and to make up the Distress 10 l. they forced
themselves into his Man^ Counter, and took from him in Cash 6 l. odd Money; He
is not alone under this Oppression. For these Informers have made several
Distresses upon others, to the value of several Score of Pounds; a certain
Account of Particulars you may expect by the next. Their manner of Levying of
Distress is as follows, viz. When they enter a Shop, albeit there is abundance
of Goods in view, yet they break open Chests, Counters, etc. And thence take
away the Money, if no Money to be had, then they take either Shop of Household
Goods, and of them generally to double the value; if any durst speak to them by
way of Reproof for these unreasonable Proceedings, they then Huff and Threaten
to send them to Prison, which Power they assume to themselves commonly when
they go to disturb the Quakers Meetings, thinking no doubt, but that-they are
privileged to it by their Office of Constable, and the example of their Grand
Abettor, and Brother Informer Sheriff Knight, as these Actions bring great
Anxiety and Fear upon several of His Majesty's Subjects, to think what is the
thing there designed; so they are aggravated the higher in the Breast of many
on this Consideration, that its generally believed by the long date of the
Warrants, these Distresses have been Levied for Convictions, made Clandestinely
in a Tavern, which was what the May or and some of the Justices last Sessions
gave a public Reproof to, and would have taken up the Warrants, but were
denied by Sheriff Knight, who was menaced deservedly with the good Behavior
for it: One thing is more observable, that the great Havoc made in these two
days Distress, is, that the Fines they Distrain for, are for a Meeting, where
there is no Preaching, Praying, or any actual exercise of Religion to
distinguish it from the Liturgy of the Church.

The Malice of the Informers are so great against Mr. Chapter Jones Junior, that
all their Family is likely to suffer for it. Yesterday and this day, they took
from his Father, and himself, and two Brothers, about 80 l. value in Goods:
Great are the Consternations of the People on these Proceedings. For further
Information, the Reader is referred to the late Printed Letter, Entitled, More
Sad and Lamentable News from Bristol.

I rest Yours, etc:


