A DIALOGUE Between the Confederate Princes Concerning the Present AFFAIRS of
EUROPE.
The French King to the Jesuits. Psalm. 33. v. 9. Es. 46. v. 10.

FOR I speak, and it is done -- my Counsel shall stand, and I will do all my
Pleasure.


The Jesuits to King James. Psalm. 22. v. 8, 9.

The Protestants trusted on the Lord that he would deliver them, Let him
deliver them seeing he delighted in them.


The Vaudois and the French Protestants. Jerem. Lam. c. 4. v. 19.

Our Persecutors are swifter than the Eagles of the Heaven, the persu'd Us upon
the Mountains, they laid wait for Us in the Wilderness.

Revel. 6. v. 6.10.

How long, O Lord, Holy and True do thou not Judge and Avenge our Blood on
them that dwell on the Earth.


The Church of England speaking by the Mouth of the Bishop of Bath and Wells.
Mich. 7. v. 18.

Rejoice not against Me, O mine Enemy: If I am fallen, I will arise; if I have
sat in Darkness, the Lord will enlighten Me.


The Lords and Nobility of England. Ps. 22. v. 18.

The Jesuits and the Monks part our Garments among them, and cast Lots upon our
Vestures.


Geneva and the Suisse Protestants. Amos 5. v. 13.

Therefore the Prudent shall keep silence, -- for it is an Evil time.


The Bishop of St. Asaph. Mat. 8. v. 26. Heb. 10. v. 37.

Why are You fearful, O, Yea of little Faith? -- For yet a little while, and he
that shall come will come, and will not tarry.


An Angel to the Prince of Orange. Revela. 14. v. 15.

And another Angel came out of the Temple, crying with a Loud Voice, to the
Prince of Orange, Thrust in thy Sickle in England and Reap; for the time is
come for thee to Reap; for the Harvest of the Earth is Rine: Then he thrust in
his Sickle on the Earth, and the Earth was Reaped.


All those Princes and People that France Tyranizeth over. Revela. 12. v. 10.

Now is come Salvation and Strength, and the Kingdom of our God, and the Power
of his Christ; for James the Friend and Slave of Louis the Fourteenth is cast
down.


The Duke of Savoy. Phil. 2. v. 13.

For I am in a strait betwixt Two (that is to say, Cazal and Pignerol) having a
desire to depart and to be with the Emperor, or with the Spaniard, which is
far better.


The Preachers of Passive Obedience to King James. Judge. 9. v. 14.

Then said all the Trees unto the Bromble, Come thou and Reign over Us.


All True Englishment. 1. Sam. 8. v. 20.

But now so it is, that we have another King over Us, to Judge Us, and go out
before Us and Fight our Battles.


The Bishop of London to the Parliament. 1. Kings, 1. v. 20.

Now as to Thee, the Eyes of all Israel are upon Thee, that thou should tell
them who shall sit upon the Throne.


The Pope apprehending the Exploits of King William. Jerem. 4. v. 6.

Ah! the Evils and great Calamities of the Holy See come always from the North.


King James speaking to the Jesuits in the College of Clermont. Eccl. 1. v. 2.

Vanity of Vanities all is Vanity.

Psalm. 84. v. 10.

For a day in thy Courts is better than a Thousand elsewhere, and I had rather
be a Door keeper to the Jesuits, than to wear a Crown amongst the Tents of the
Wicked Heretics.


Hamborough. 1. Epist. St. Pet. 5. v. 8.

Mine Adversary the Devil walks about me, as a Roaring Lion seeking to
Devour me.


Brandebourg and Lunebourg to Hambourg. Psalm. 91. v. 13. 2. Cor. 12. v. 9.

Thou shall tread upon the Lion and Adder -- We will make perfect our strength
in thy Weekness.


The King of Denmark, of the Duke of Holstein. Psalm. 35. v. 25.

Ah! ah! Our Soul, We have swallowed him up.


The Duke of Holstein. Jerem. 51.44.

I will bring forth out of thy Mouth, that which thou have swallowed up.

Jerem. 6. v. 4.

He shall restore what he has taken away by Force, and what he shall take by
force, or what he has taken by Circumvention.


Monsieur Mazius an old Preacher of the King of Denmark. Luke, 5. v. 5.

Master, We have Toyled all the Night and have taken Nothing.


The good Cannons of Cologne. Acts, 1. v. 25.18.20.

We have chosen Clement of Bavaria, that He may take part of this Ministry and
Apostleship, from which Judas, the Cardinal of Furstemberg by transgression
fell, that he might go to his own Place; for he having purchased Voices with
the Reward of Iniquity, His Bishopric let another take.


Cardinal Fustemberg. Isa. 26. v. 18.

I have Conceived, I have been in Pain, and I have brought forth nothing but
Wind. --


The Parliament of England to King James upon his Abdication. Job, 8. v. 13.14.

So shall it befall all those that forget God; and the designs of all
Perfidious and Perjured persons shall perish, their hopes shall be Cut off, and
their Trust shall be a Spiders Web.


The Parliament to the Prince of Orange. 1. King. 1. v. 39.40.

And all the People said God save King William. And all the People came up
after him, and played upon Flutes, and rejoiced with great Joy, to take the
Oath of Allegiance to him.


To the Arch Bishop of Canterbury, 1. Sam. 16. v. 1.

And the Lord said unto Samuel, how long will thou mourn for Saul, seeing I
have rejected him from Reigning over Israel.


All People concerned (...) Liberty of Europe and for the True Religion. 1.
Sam. 10. v. 24.

See you him whom the Lord has Chosen, for their is none like him among all
the People.


God touching King William. Psalm. 4. v. 3. 1. Sam. 16. v. 12.

But know that the Lord has Chosen his well-beloved, And the Lord said unto
Samuel, Arise, Anoint him; for this is He.

Ezech. 2. v. 6. c. 3. v. 8.

And thou, Son of Man, be not afraid of them, neither be afraid of their words,
tho Briars and Thorns be with thee, and thou do dwell among Jacobites,
Preachers of Passive Obedience: Inventors of the distinction between a King de
Jure and de Facto; be not afraid of their words; for behold, I have made thy
Face strong against their Faces, and thy Forehead strong against their Forheads.


England with Roses in her hands. Canti. 2. v. 12.

The Flowers appear on the Earth, the time of the singing of Birds is come.

Eccl. 50. v. 2.8.

Under William have been laid the Foundations, which defend the Temple of the
Lord, He is as the Flowers of Roses in the spring time.


Ireland holding her Harp. Psalm. 137. v. 1.2. Ps. 108. v. 1.2.3.

We wept when we remembered Sion, We hanged our Harpes upon the Willowes; but
now my heat is fixed. Awake Psalter and Harp; I my self will awake early, I
will praise thee O Lord among the People: and I will sing Praises unto thee
among the Nations.


Sco^ and with her Thistles. Judge. 8. v. 7. Mat. 7. v. 16.

Thou shall, like Gideon, tear the Flesh of thine Enemies with Thorns and
Thistles; but my Thistles shall bear Figgs to thee.


King William to the Highlanders and Fanatics in Scotland. Heb. 6. v 8.9.

That Earth which bears Thorns and Thistles is rejected, and is nigh unto
Cursing, whose End is to be burned. But beloved, we are persuaded better things
of You, and things that accompany Salvation.


The Duke of Savoy. Psalm. 2. v. 3.

Let us now break the Bands of France asunder, and cast away his Cords from Us.


The King of England to that Duke. Ruth, 1. v. 16.17.

Whither thou go I will go, and where thou lodgest I will lodge; thy People
is my People, and thy God is my God; where thou die, will I die, and there
will I be buried, the Lord do so to me, and more also, if ought but Death part
Thee and Me.


The Emperor hastening to Crown his son King of the Romans. 2. Mac. 9. v. 25.

And considering moreover, that all the Neighboring Potentates are at War round
about me, wayring for an Opportunity, and expecting what may happen, I have
declared my son, my Successor.


The house of Lavembourg. Amos, 3. v. 15.

And the great houses shall have an End, says the Lord.


The three branches of the House of Brunswick. Eccle. 4. v. 12.

A threefold Cord, is not quickly broken, and we will take care of Lyvembourg.


The Electors of Mayence, Treves, and the Bishop of Liege; to the Emperor.
Psalm. 80. v. 6.

Thou have made Us a strife unto our Neighbors, and our Enemy the King of
France laugheth at Us.


The Dake of Wirtemberg, the Marquis of Dourlack, the Bishops of Worms and
Spire. Haba. 1. v. 13.14.

Hold Thou thy Tongue O Lord, when the wicked French King devoureth the man
that is more righteous than He; and have thou made men as the Fishes of the
Sea, where the great Ones devour the


All the Confederates to the Emperor. Judith, 7. v. 24.

Let God be Judge between You and Us; for You have done Us great Injury in not
having made a Peace with the Assyriens, (Turcks.)


Lorrain upon the Death of her Prince. 2. King. 1. v. 12.

Oh my Father! my Father!


The Germans, and Confederates upon the death of the same. O the Chariots of
Israel, and its Horsemen.


The Emperor to the King of Poland. 1. King. 22. v. 4.

Will thou go with me to Battle to Ramoth-Gilead? (the Port.)


The Venetians to the King of Poland. Luke, 9. v. 62.

No man having put his hand to the Plough, and looking back is fit for the
Kingdom of Heaven.


The Hollanders to the King of Danemark. Revel. 3. v. 15.16.

I know thy Works, that thou art neither Cold nor Hot, for the League, so then,
because thou art luke warm, I will spue the out of my Mouth.


The Confedarates to the King of Sweden. 2. Tim. 4. v. 10.

Demas has forsaken Us, having loved this present World.


The King of England to the Suisses. 1. King. 18. v. 21.

How long halt Ye between two Opinions? If the Lord be God follow him: But if
Baal be God -- then follow him.


The Vaudois. Psalm 46. v. 7.

The Lord of Host is with Us, the God of Jacob is our Refuge.


The French concerning the Vaudois. Exodus 3. v. 25.

Let us flee before these People for the Lord Fights for them.


Louis the XIV. to the Duke de Chaulnes. Luke 13. v. 32.

Go you and tell that Fox, Pope Ottoboni, that he ought to have respect for Me;
for behold I cast out Devils, driving out of my Country, Cartesians,
Jansenists, and Huguenots.


The Pope to Cardinal Fourbin. Mat. 4. v. 9.

All these things will I grant to the King of France, if he will fall down and
worship Me.


The French King to Tourville. Jos. 6. v. 17.

Let the City of London be accursed, and all the things that are therein, only
Rahab the Harlot (the Duchess of Mazarin) shall live, she and all that are
with her in the house, because she carefully hid the Spics that we sent.


The Hollanders to Torrington and the Red Squadron. Ps. 6. v. 6.

The Children of Ephraim turned their backs in the day of Battle.


The true English. Josu. 7. v. 8.

O Lord! what shall We say when Israel turns their backs before their
Enemies! For the Canaanites, the French, the Jacobites, the Drs. of Passive
obedience shall hear of it, and shall environ Us round, and Cut off our Name
from the Earth!


King William concerning my Lord Torrington. 1 Kings, 1. v. 52.

If for the time to come He will show himself a Worthy Man, there shall not an
hair of him fall to the Earth: But if Wickedness shall be found in him, He
shall dye.


The Duke of Saxony, to the Duke of Bavaria Tobit, 7. v. 11. Luke, 12. v. 19.

Eat, drink and be joyful, and take thy Rest. Eat, drink and be merry.


Prince Lowis of Baden, concerning the Army on the Rhine. Matt. 9. v. 36.

I saw the German Army scattered upon the Rhine, as Sheep having no Shepherd.


The Duke of Bavaria. 2 Cor. 2. v. 16. Exodus 3. v. 11.

Who is sufficient for these things! Who am I, that I should go against the
Pharaoh of France, and that I should bring forth the Germans out of Egypt?


The Count de Castanaga, concerning the Amy of 66000 Men encamped at Hall. Genesis
24. v. 54.

And Brandenbourgh and Waldeck did Eat and Drink, they and the Men that were
with them, and tarried there all night (in the Spanish Netherlands.)

Judges, 9. v. 27.

And they went out into the Fields, and gathered their Vineyards, and trod the
Grapes and made merry, and did Eat and drink and cursed Abimelec (the French
King) and that was all that they did.


The Landtgrave of Hesse concerning the same Army. Mat. 9. v. 37.

The Harvest truly is plenteous, but the Laborers are few: Pray Ye therefore
the Lord of the Harvest, that He will send forth Laborers into his harvest.


The French King to the Protestans Cantons. 1 Macch. 10. v. 25, 26.

The King of France to the Nation of the Suisse sends Greeting; Where as Ye
have kept Covenant with Us, and continued in our Friendship, not joining your
selves with our Enemies, We have heard hereof and are Glad.

v. 27.

Wherefore now continue still to be faithful unto Us; and we will recompense
You, for the things you do in our behalf.

v. 28, 29.

I will bestow Pensions upon You, and will abate the Price of Salt.

v. 36, 37.

I will raise 30000 Men amongst You, under good Pay, I will send them into the
best Garrisons, and let them walk in their own ways and be governed by their
own Laws, and their Captains shall be chosen from amongst themselves. They
shall likewise be furnished at the King's Expense for fortifying the Passage of
Aoust.


The Cantons. v. 46, 47.

When they had heard these words, they believed them not, and would not accept
of them; because they remembered the great Evil that he had done among them,
and that he had greatly oppressed them, in usurpeing the Franche Comte; and in
building Huningen. But with William the III. they were well pleased, because he
was the first that entreated of true Peace with them.


The English to the Queen Dowager. Prove. 27. v. 10.

Better is a Neighbor that is near, than a Brother a far off.


The Princess of Denmark, concerning Mary of Modena. Esa. 66. v. 7, 8.

Before she travailed she brought forth: before her pains came, She was
delivered of a Man-child. Who has heard such a thing! Who has seen such
things!


Same Dutch-Merchants. Acts. 19. v. 25.

Who being met together said, Sirs, You know that our Wealth proceeds from
Trade. Now You see and hear, that our Craft is in great danger to be set at
naught, if we continue to War with France.


Saint Didier. Mat. 5. v. 25.

Agree quickly with thine Adversary Louis the XIV.


The Count a Avaux. 1 Macc. 6. v. 56.

Now therefore shake hands with the Hollanders, and make Peace with them, and
with all their Nation.

1 Thessal. 5. v. 3.

And when they shall say Peace, and Safety, then sudden destruction comes upon
them, as travail upon a Woman with Child; and they shall not escape.


Mine Here van Cirters to the Hollanders. 1 Macc. 6. v. 61.62.

The King of France shall swear unto You, and will soon after break his Oath.


Mine Here Odyke. Ps. 28. v. 3.

Have no Dealings with the Wicked, nor with the Workers of Iniquity who speak
Peace to their Neighbors, but mischief is in their hearts.


Monsieur Hope. Isa. 57. v. 21.

There is no Peace, says my God, to the Wicked.


Monsieur Dickvelt. 2 Cor. 6. v. 5.

What Concord has Christ with Belial?


Monsieur Hensius. Eccl. 13. v. 19.

What Agreement can there be between the Wolf and the Sheep, muchless between
the wicked, and that him seareth God?


The trusty Blancart to the French King. Acts 13. v. 10.

O full of all Subtlety and all Mischief, thou Child of the Devil, thou Enemy
of all Righteousness, will thou not cease to pervert the Right ways of the Lord?


The Dutch to the English. Mat. 12. v. 24.

Every Kingdom divided against it self is brought to Desolation; and every City
or House divided against it self shall not stand.


The Elector of Brandenbourg to the Parliament of England. Gal. 3. v. 3.

Are You so foolish? having begun in the Spirit, are you now made perfect by
the Flesh?


The Torys to the Whiggs. Gal. 5. v. 13.

Brethren you have been called unto Liberty; but use not Liberty for a Cloak to
Wickedness.


The Whiggs to the Tories. Deuter. 27. v. 26.

Cursed be He that confirms not all the words of the Law, to do them.


A Trimmer. Geness 13. v. 8. Mat. 26. v. 15.

Let there be no Strife between Us, I pray thee, for We are Brethren; but what
will you give me, and I will deliver him unto you.


A Wigg. Mat. 26. v. 8. Is. 8. v. 20.

But in the beginning it was not so. To the Law and to the Testimony.

Job. 8. v. 8.

For, enquire, I pray thee, of the former Age, and prepare thy self to the
search of their Fathers.


A Patron of the good Old-Cause. Is. 59. v. 9.

Cloth thee, Cloth thee, Cloth thee with force, to Arm of the Lord; awake thou
as in ancient days, as in Ages past.


A Tory. Eccl. 20. v. 30. 2 Cor. 3. v. 6. chapter 5. v. 17.

Defile not your selves in the Steps of your Forefathers. The Law is a
^ainistry of Death; for the Letter kills, but the Spirit gives Life. There
where the Spirit is, there is Truth also, the Old things are passed away and
all things are made New.


A Trimming Clergyman. Acts 5. v. 38, 39.

For if this Counsel, or this Work of William the III. be of Men, it will come
to naught: but if it be of God, Ye cannot overthrow it.


Dr. Tillotson to the People. Gal. 5. v. 15.

But if you bite and devour one another, take heed that ye be not consumed one
of another.


The same to the King. Exodus 18. v. 21, 23.

Thou shall provide out of all the People, able Men, such as fear God, Men of
Truth hateing covetousness; and place such over them, and give such
Employments, so shall all the People go to their Place in peace.


The Prayers of Europe against the French King. Ps. 74. v. 12, 13, 14.

O God! who art my King of old, working Salvation in the midst of the Earth,
destroy thou this Behemoth, and break the Head of this Leviathan.


The Jansenists, the Protestants and the Cartesians, concerning the Fall of
Behemoth. Is. 14. v. 13, 14.

Thou have said in thine heart, I will ascend into Heaven, I will exalt my
Throne above the Stars of God. I will be like the most High.

v. 12.

How art thou fallen from Heaven, o Lucifer, Son of the morning? how art thou
cut down to the Ground, which did weaken the Nations.

v. 16.

They that see thee, they shall narrowly look upon thee, and consider thee,
saying, is not this Louis the Great that made the Earth to tremble, that did
shake Kingdoms?


The Venetians, and the Duke of Tuscany, whispering him in the Ear. Nahum. 3.
v. 19.

There is no healing of thy Bruise: thy wound is grievous: all that hear the
bruit of thee shall clap the hands over thee: for upon whom has not thy
Wickedness passed continually?


The Jacobites, the Preachers of Passive Obedience, the Inventors of the
Distinction of a King de Jure and de Facto, the Murmurers, the French
Pensioners. Revel. 18. v. 9.

They shall weep and wayle and put on Mourning for the fall of Behemot, beating
their Breasts and saying; alas! how in one instant so great Richess are come to
Naught!


The Emporour touching Belgrade. Eccl. 38. v. 28.

Mine yesterday, the Turks to day.


The Duke of Lorrains Ghost to the Emperor. Haggai. 2. v. 5. Eccl. 22. v. 6.

Yet now be strong, says the Lord, and leave off Music in the time of
Mourning.


Prince Louis of Baden to his Imperial Majesty. 2 Cor. 11. v. 13. Esdras 4. v.
15.

2 Macch. 4. v. 50.

The Jesuits are Deceitful Workers; They allways cause vexation, and trouble to
Princes; and by reason of those that are in great Place and credit they
continue daily in their Power, increasing in malice, and being great Traitors
to your Majesty.

Eccl. 40. v. 9, 10.

Murders, Strifes, Battles, Assaults, Famine, Destruction, Punishments, all
these things are ordained for the Unjust, and by their Fault is the Deluge
come, which has overflowed Hungary.


Monsieur Hofman, the Emperors Secretary, concerning the English Court. Kings
22. v. 14.

What I have heard is true, and as true as God lives.


FINIS.
LONDON. Printed for H. Hills, in Blackfriars, and T. Jones, without
Temple Bar. 1691.


