A General Epistle.
By William Dewsberry.
DEar Friends, whom the Lord has in this his Glorious Day visited, and in his
Light plucked as Brands out of the Fire, to wait upon him, that his Great Work
of Regeneration may be perfected in all of you, to your Eternal Comfort, and
the Glory of the Name of our God forever, etc. And my dear Friends, seeing many
are Called, and few Chosen; many Convinced, that are not Converted; and many
come forth with us, and go forth from us, that are not of us, as by sad
Experience has been witnessed, etc. and from the deep Sense of this working of
the Enemy, I am constrained to send this Epistle amongst you, knowing the
Kingdom of God is compared unto Ten Virgins, Five Wise and Five Foolish, who
had all Lamps, and slumbred in the Secure Mind, until they were awakened to
enter in with their Lord, then were the Foolish Virgins made manifest, that
though they had Lamps like the other, yet wanting the Oil, they neither did or
could enter, etc. Oh! dear and tender Friends, let all Dread the Lord, who make
mention of his Name in the Light of Christ; for this Parable is to you, unto
whom the Lord has sent to preach to you and in you the Word of his Kingdom.

And this is upon my Spirit, in the Word of the Lord to you all convinced of
the precious Truth of our God, truly to examine and search your Hearts with the
Light of Christ Jesus, that you may have a certain Knowledge, how it is with
you, and how you escaped the subtle Wiles of the Enemy, which have hindered so
many from the Possession of the Life of Truth; and that you may truly discern,
how the Enemy draws into the foolish Conceitedness, in the Outside and Formal
Profession of the Truth feeding upon the Knowing Part, and so stops the
Hunger that should reach the Life; and then in an Exaltedness says, I See,
Know, am Clothed, and want Nothing; when they are Blind, Naked, Miserable and
want all things, and this is the State of all the Foolish Virgins, who dwell in
the Outward Court, and place all their Confidence in the Form, and Outside, and
Profession of Truth, and so has lost the Sense of that Heavenly Hunger, which
must possess the Life hid with God, or else it must mourn out its days in
Sorrow. Therefore all dear Friends, watch dilligently to the Heartsearching
Light, that this Mystery of Iniquity you may all discern, that so the Enemy may
not prevail against you, to turn you aside, either to the Right Hand or to the
Left, that whatever the Lord has convinced you of to be Evil, you may wait upon
him for Strength, to preserve you out of it, that so you may Answer God's
Witness in the Regulation of your Conversation in the Uprightness of your
Hearts, so you may stand clear before the Lord, that you are willing to do and
suffer whatever the Lord should call you to; and when you have done all this,
then be you watchful to the Heart-searching Light, that the Enemy does not draw
your Minds to place your Confidence in the Work of Righteousness you have done,
as the Ground of your Hope and Calling in Christ, and want Faith in him, and so
cause you to rest in your Services, and so come short of the hidden Life,
enjoyed through Faith in the Light and Life of Christ, our Righteousness. I
beseech you, dear Friends, Wait to know your Passage in this great Mystery,
where the Entrance is into the Straight Gate, where all the Foolish Virgins,
though their Lamp in the Outward Profession be never so Glorious, yet through
Pride in their Seize, never entered into this Rest; and here is the
farthest that ever any come, that make a Profession of Truth, that go from us,
and are not of us. So tender Friends, that truly seek God's Glory, and so love
his Light that you are willing to give up Life and all to do his Will; and when
the Enemy would draw you to rest in what you have done, and so take the Jewels
of God and play the Harlot, and deck Your Selves; you Dread the Lord, and in
his Light you see more Light; and you see, That all that you have done is your
Duty and your reasonable Service which you must do, or otherwise you perish
eternally, and yet your poor Souls in the ^ight travail on in the Footsteps of
the Flock of the Mournful Companions, who are weeping in Secret, and inwardly
seeking the Lord God, to be Married unto him in that hidden Life which is hid
with Christ in God; and until you enjoy the Marriage-Union, in deep
Humiliation, you wait in the Light, for the Lord to create you to a lively Hope
in Christ Jesus, the Second Adam. And you tender Children of my Father, who can
understand in your Heavenly Travail and Exercise of Spirit what is here
written, Lift up your Heads, and stay your Mind; in the Light of the Lord
Jesus, which ransacks your Hearts, and does not only keep you in Holiness of
Conversation, but makes you weary of living under the Dominion of your own
Thoughts and Wills: Therefore I beseech you in the Name of the Lord Jesus
Christ; watch to the Heart-searching Light, that discerns your Thoughts and
Intents, and judges your Thoughts, and all Fearfulness and Unbelief; and wait
in the Measure of the Light and Life, that quickens your immortal Souls, and
has begotten heavenly Breathings, Hungerings and Thirstings to eat the Flesh,
and drink the Blood of the Lord Jesus. Oh thou blessed Birth! let not
Streightness be upon thy Spirit; for the Bowels of the almighty God yearn
toward thee, which cannot be satisfied with any Thing but the pure Presence of
Christ to reign in thy Heart, and to exercise heavenly Authority in his Throne
in thy Conscience: Oh tender Babe born of the immortal Seed! lend not thy Ear
to any of thine own Thoughts, Doubts and Unbelief; neither to the Accuser, who
seeks every way to discourage thee, for trusting in the Name of the Lord; but
diligently incline thou thy Ear to the righteous Counsel, which is the Light
and Life: The Lord will satisfy thy hungry and thirsty Soul with his
everlasting Loving Kindness in Christ Jesus, and will create thee to a lively
Hope, and marry thee to himself in his own Righteousness, where thou will
receive Dominion to reign over thy own Thoughts and thy own will, and to walk
in his Strength in the Word of Faith, which will give thee Victory over the
world within and without; so will thy Heart be kept pure, thy Conscience clean,
and thou clothed with the glorious Garment, a meek, low and a quiet Spirit,
and so become the Righteousness of God in Christ Jesus, the second Adam, and
the Lord of Life and Glory; and here is the Dewlling Place of all the Sons and
Daughters of Sion, Citizens of the new Jerusalem, who walk in the Light as he
is in the Light, and so are Par takers of his Divine Nature, and as he is, so
are we in this present world, bearing his Name in his righteous Power, guiding
us in his Light, Thoughts and Will, which keeps us in the heavenly Fellowship
with the father in the Son, and one with another in him.

So all my dear Friends; Brethren and Sisters, who do witness proud ambitious
Self buried in this heavenly Baptism, in Conformity to Christ in his Death, and
you made alive through Faith in Christ our Light and Life, as you have received
Christ, so walk in him, in all Humility, and godly Fear, and true
Watchfulness, that your own Thoughts Will and Unbelief, have no Dominion over
your Spirits; but every Minute of Time as they appear, through Faith in Christ
the perfect Light and Life, keep your Dominion, and reign over them: And thus
in Christ being victorious over all Self in you, you will reign as Kings, in
the Authority of the glorious Truth of God, over all the Power of Darkness
without you: So whatever you suffer for the Testimony of the Name of Christ, he
takes it as done unto himself; and better a Millstone were hanged about their
Necks, and they cost into the Sea, then hurt or offend the least of you my
Brethren and Sisters, who are regenerated and born again, and your Confidence
is in the Lord alone: So in all your Sufferings, whether spoiling Goods, or
imprisonments, or whatever your Trials be from the Sons of men, that you meet
withal for your Testimony in the blessed Truth of God; let nothing Discourage
you, but judge all your own Thoughts, and in the Glorious Light and Life in
Christ Jesus rest in Peace in the pure Contentation within the Gates of Sion,
where your Faith and Patience will so abound in you, that you shall weary out
all your Persecutors, and the Blessing of the Almighty God will be upon your
Families, who are rent one from another to fulfill the Sufferings of the Body,
and you shall wear your Crowns, who thus patiently wait in a Quiet Mind and
Resigned Will; And in the Word of the Lord I declare it to all you, who suffer
Imprisonment, as is before written, That all the Wrath of the Bower of Darkness
shall not be able to keep you an Hour longer then the King of Eternal Glory
has determined for the Renown of his Glorio is Truth on Earth, and your
Comfort forever: Therefore let Patience have its perfect work; for; in Peace
are we to Conquer, and in Quietness to Prevail over all that resist the rising
of the King of Glory, who lives in us, who has been Dead but now Alive; in
whose Life keep your Habitation in the Word of Faith, which is in our Hearts
and in our Mouths, and this the Word of Faith we preach unto you, and which
you are to contend for against all Evil Attendances both within and without;
for by this Word of Faith are the Armies that would alienate your Souls from
the Enjoyment of the Lord within you beaten back and overcome, and the Mouth of
the Roaring Lion stopped, and all the Fiery Darts of the Devil both within you
and without you quenched; therefore, as the Valiants of Christ Jesus, in his
Name and Nature contend for the Faith which is delivered unto us his Saints;
for this is our Victory that overcomes the World, even our Faith, as it was
with our Brethren of old, in Ages past, I have fought a good Fight, I have kept
the Faith, henceforth is laid up for Me a Crown of eternal Glory: And here is
our Fellowship with the Father in the Son, and one with another in him; and all
dear Brethren and Sisters, in this Word of Faith keep your Meetings, both
valiantly and faithfully, that so none of you be found forsaking the assembling
of yourselves, as the manner of some is, who are out of the Word of Faith; but
as the Lord has counted you worthy to be his Dewlling Place on Earth, and his
Tabernacle amongst the Children of Men, Prize every Opportunity the Lord
affords you, to meet together in his Powerful holy Name, with the Loins of
your Minds girt up with the Word of Faith in you, which will empty you of Self,
and clothe you with the Garment of deep Humility, and fill you with the Riches
of his Everlasting Love and Endless Mercies; for God dwells with the Humble,
but the Proud he beholds afar off: So, without Faith in the Name of Christ and
a Humble Spirit, the In-dwelling Presence of the King of Eternal Glory you
cannot enjoy: Therefore I charge you in the Name of the Lord, Hearken not to
any Suggestions within you, nor Counsels without you, that would draw you to
slight or forsake meeting together in the Name of the Lord Jesus; but let
every particular Member know your Service in the Body, that by your
Faithfulness others be encouraged to meet with you, to wait in the Light, to
feel the Living Refreshings of the Lord; and when you are refreshed with the
Income of God's sweet Presence, be watchful, that not any utter words rashly
before the Lord to spend your Talent in a forward spirit, to satisfy the Lust,
that would appear further then the Lord would have them, as some have done,
which has brought them under a great Vail of Darkness, and have lost their Way,
and returned with Sorrow, to the burdening the hearts of the Righteous; but
Tender Plants, wait to know and truly discern between the Milk of the Word, and
the Word; for the Milkof the Word is a Sweet Stream in the Refreshing, to the
Nourishment of this heavenly Birth, that it may grow thereby; and some the
Enemy has drawn to speak forth that which they in a retired Silence were to
feed upon, and grow up in its Nature. Therefore, dear Friends, wait in the
Light, that the Word of the Lord may dwell plentifully in you, as it is
written, so are we VVitnesses; If any have my Word, let him speak my Word
faithfully; is not my Word like a Fire and a Hammer, that breaks the Rocks in
pieces? which seals up the Testimony God calls unto in the Heart of his
Disciples: Therefore all be very circumspect in this weighty Matter, that
whatever you feel of the Refreshings of God in you, that you do not let any
thing come forth, either in Words or Sounds, or any Noises, but what is brought
forth in the Authority of this Living and Powerful Word; then will the Blessing
of the Lord attend what is brought forth, be it much or little, either in
Words, or Hymns, or Joyful Sounds, do not quench it, but answer the Lord in the
Authority of the Word of Eternal Life; and the Sons and Daughters of the Lord,
who are thus exercised, will not burden any, but it will be a Stream of
Refreshing in the Hearts of all the Righteous; thus will every Vessel be
preserved in the Life of Truth, and not go but as the Presence of the Lord goes
before them: Therefore let all dread and fear the Mighty God, who have received
any Gift, to see that the True Birth possess the Gift, which Birth makes Self
of no Reputation, that so the Lord of Life may exercise every one in the
Improvement of their Gift, to the Comfort of his People and his Eternal Glory,
and none go further then they have Assurance they are called of the Lord, and
his Heavenly Powerful Presence goes before them; so will the Lord bless the
Travail of every Soul, and the Body be kept in the Pure, Sweet, Seasoned and
Savoury Life, which e^^^^^^h the Body in the Love and Life of God, which cannot
be expressed; and all that will not wait thus to be exercised, as is here
written, but go out of their Places, burden the Life, weary the Faithful, and
if they do not give over, and submit to the Government of Christ to reign in
them, and wait in true Silence, that they may speak no more of him but as he
utters his Voice through them; my Soul pitieth them; for they will be as
Wandering Stars, and Darkness will come upon them; therefore be Warned, whose
Consciences witness what is here written to be your Conditions, etc.

And all tender Friends, Be very watchful and careful to keep your Meetings
upon all Services on Truth's Account, both Sons and Daughters, born of God,
that there may be no Confusion, but a sweet Submission to one another in the
Light and Life of Christ Jesus, that as the Lord has blessed your Meetings and
Labor of Love for the Body's sake, keep your Minds stayed upon the Lord, out
of all Consultings with Flesh and Blood, or any Strivings to appear to be any
thing but what the Lord is in you, to keep you all in Humility, in a pure
Subjection unto Christ, that he may Silence all the Counsel of Flesh in you,
and keep you in his holy Dread and pure Fear, to receive Wisdom from him, to
guide you to determine all Matters brought before you, so that every one have
your Eye to the Lord, to eye his Glory in all your Words and Works; so will
Love abound, and the Blessing of the Lord will be in the midst of you, to guide
you all in his pure Fear to do to every one as you would be done unto, and
watch over one another with a Pure Single Eye at all times, that your Single
Eye may be to the Good in one another, and your Tenderness in the Love of God
in all Humility to reach to the Measure of God, to raise it up, and thus will
you stand in the Heavenly Nature Saviors upon Mount Sion, to bring again them
that stray, and so restoring them with the Spirit of Meekness; and here is
Christ and his Disciples Washing one another Feet in all Humility and Heavenly
Condescension (one unto another) the Strong bearing the Burden of the Weak, and
gently leading them forth, out of that which burdens the Pure, into the Light
and Path of Life, where the building up one another is in the most holy Word of
Faith, where we sit together in our Heavenly Places in Christ, where Self is
made of No Reputation, but every one Serving the Lord, casting down our Crowns
before his Throne, and with one accord singing the Sons of the Redeemed from
the Earth; all Glory, all Honor, all Praises and Thanksgiving Dominion be
given unto him, who is found worthy to sit upon the Throne in our Consciences,
to feed us with the Bread that is sure, and refresh us with the Water that
never fails; so we that are many are made one Bread, eating the Flesh of
Christ, and drinking his Blood, where we have Life, and that abundantly, and we
comforted together in our Heavenly Mansions, in our sweet and pure Fellowship
of the Gospel in Christ our Righteousness, who is One, his Name and Nature One
in all his People; and Salvation is unto us for Walls and Bulwarks; and here
have we Peace, in this Holy City, New Jerusalem, which the World knows not,
neither can they take it from us; and here is no Strife nor Contention within
her Gates, but we witness the Promise of the Lord fulfilled, I will make
Jerusalem a Quiet Habitation: In this City there is no more Curse, but the Name
and Image of God is written in the Foreheads of them that dwell therein; that
all that have to deal with them, as they mind God's Witness in any Measure,
will confess, These are the People of the Most High God, born of the Righteous
Seed, which the Lord has Blessed. And in this Heavenly Government, dear
Brethren and Sisters, all keep your Meetings, and the blessed Presence of the
Lord fill all your Hearts, and enlarge his Love in you and amongst you, to your
mutual Comfort one of another, and the Honor of his Great Name, who is over
all God blessed forever.

So will you, dear Friends and Brethren, comfort the Hearts of all Travailing
Friends and Brethren, who have not loved their Lives to Death to serve the
Lord, and gather you home into this Heavenly Rest; the very Sense of their
faithful Labors and Travails, seeking nothing for Themselves, but the Honor
of God and your Establishment in this Rest, it takes deep Impression upon my
Heart, both they that have finished, who here did wear the Garments of
Humility, and now the Crown of Eternal Glory, and my dear Brethren that are yet
on this side the Grave, who are laboring in the Service of the Lord, in
Faithfulness, in the Gospel of the Lord Jesus; dear Friends, let your Hearts be
affected as mine is, that the End of their Labors may be answered in your
Faithfulness, in keeping your Meetings according to all the Exhortations that
you have had through the Faithful Laborers and is expressed in this Epistle,
that you may grow up as an Holy Priesthood, offering up the living and holy
Sacrifice in your faithful Testimony and pure Unity of Spirit and Bond of
Peace, where my Soul is bound up with you in this Heavenly Rest in Christ Jesus
our Light and Life over all exalted in us to Reign, who is worthy for evermore,
in whom I rest;

London, the 14th of the 11th Month, 1675. Your Dear Brother, William
Dewsberry.

THE END

