QUEEN ELIZABETH IN PARLIAMENT
A. L. Chancellor. B. Marquises. Earls and C. Barons. D. Bishops. E. Judges.
F. Masters of Chancery. G. Clerks. H. Speaker of ye com^ons I. Black Rod. K.
Sergeant at Arms. L. Members of the Commons house: M. Sr. Francis Walsingham
Secretary of State.



THE JOURNALS OF ALL THE PARLIAMENTS During the REIGN of Queen ELIZABETH, BOTH
OF THE HOUSE of LORDS AND HOUSE of COMMONS.

Collected By Sir SIMONDS D'EWES of Stow-Hall in the County of SUFFOLK, Knight
and Baronet.

Revised and Published By PAUL BOWS, of the MIDDLE TEMPLE LONDON, Esquire

LONDON, Printed for John Starkey at the Mitre in Fleetstreet near Temple Bar.
1682.

TO Sir Willoughby D'Ewes, Baronet.
SIR,
ALthough none can have so good Title to your Father's Labors as your Self,
and the improvement of his Posterity by them was his great desire; yet he did
not intend to confine them to his own Family, but his Study tended to the
public good. Amongst those very many and large Volumes Written by his own
hand, and his Servants, I made choice thoroughly to revise these Journals, in
the Collecting of which, the most indesatigably Industrious Author employed
much Time, Labor and Cost, constantly endeavoring to find out the Truth, and
faithfully and impartially relating the same. In his own Preface (to which
there needs no other to be added) he does declare his Credentials and
Vouchers^, and also the Usefulness of the Work. But there are several other
good purposes, to which these Journals are very conducible, not particularly
mentioned in his Preface: Yet I shall name but two, The one to be a discovery
of the true intent and meaning of some Acts of Parliament of those times which
are now controuerted; The other to be a just representation of that Sincerity,
Perspicuity and Unreseruedness with which the Members of Parliament then
expressed their Minds and gave their Advice, that there was no difficulty to
understand them. The Authority and substantial Excellency of these Collections
(especially since the Original Journal Books are not now extant) and their
rarity do sufficiently recommend them to all Judicious Persons, and did
abundantly convince me, that I could do no better service to my Country, nor
greater Justice to the Memory of my Worthy Uncle, than to publish this Monument
of his Fame; Nor do I know how duly to express my thankfulness to you otherwise
than by this public acknowledgement; as of your many other Favors, so in
particular for my free access unto, and use of your well stored Library, which
has furnished me with this opportunity to subscribe my self

Your most Obliged Humble Servant, PAUL BOWS.

THE PREFACE OF Sir Simonds D'Ewes BEFORE THE ENSUING JOURNALS OF ALL THE
Parliaments and Sessions of Parliament during the Reign of Queen ELIZABETH:
Wherein are expressed the several Materials and Authorities out of which the
said Journals were extracted and drawn; As also what Method and Form has been
observed in the transcribing of them, together with the excellency and use of
them.
IN respect that these ensuing Journals both of the Upper House and House of
Commons, during the Reign of that Incomparable Princess, and Virgin Queen,
Queen Elizabeth, whose memory will ever remain dear and precious to the Church
of God, are Collected and Framed up by my exceeding great pains and diligence
out of several Materials, and do contain in them Incomparable Historical
matters both touching the Church and State, as well as matters of rarity and
Precedent incident to the Orders, Privileges, or Usages of either House; It
shall not be amiss shortly to touch those Heads, that so they may serve as a Key
for the better Direction and Guidance in the use of the Journals themselves.
First therefore I will set down briefly all those Materials out of which I have
Collected these ensuing Journals. Secondly, the Method I have constantly
observed in the causing them to be Penned or Transcribed. And thirdly, the rich
Treasures of rarity and knowledge contained in them.

First, for the Materials out of which I drew these ensuing Journals of either
House, they were for the most part rare and invulgar, viz.

1. The Original Manuscript or Journal-Books of the Upper House of every
Parliament and Session of Parliament of the Queens Reign, remaining in the
Office of the Clerk of the same House; and these are absolute and undeniable
Records, and therefore could not be removed out of the said Office, but I was
enforced as often as I had occasion to use them, to repair unto the same, to
which I had most free and respectful access always offered me (as also to the
Bundles of Original Acts and Petitions reserved there.)

2. A large Manuscript Abridgment in Folio of all the said Original Journal
Books of the Upper House during her Majesty's Reign, very faithfully for the
most part collected and transcribed with his own hands by Robert Bowyer
Esquire, who continued Clerk of the said House ab an. 6 Jacobi Regis until the
eighteenth year of the same King.

3. The Original Journal Book Manuscripts of the House of Commons of every
Parliament and Session of Parliament during her Majesty's Reign.

4. Another help which I had for the perfecting of these Journals were the two
Manuscript Volumes of Fragmentary and Imperfect Journals, or rather Collections
of the Parliaments and Sessions of Parliament of Queen Elizabeth's Reign, which
remained in Sir Robert Cottons well known and much famoused Library, in the
said Years 1629, and 1630. out of which I had most of the Speeches of Sir
Nicholas Bacon Knight, Lord Keeper of the Great Seal of England. Out of these
also I had passages which did excellently serve to enlarge and beautify some of
the Journals of the House of Commons, as is fully mentioned in their proper
places. In which two Volumes of Parliamentary Collections which then remained
in Sir Robert Cottons Library as asoresaid (who since Deceased on Friday the 6.
day of May, Anno Domini 1631.) many things being either ignorantly or
negligently referred to other times than in truth they belonged unto, are here
rectified and enlarged according as the occasion it self required.

5. And another means to enlarge these Ensuing Volumes were Manuscripts or
written Fragments I had by me of Parliamentary Speeches, Petitions and such
like Passages, especially touching the House of Commons, all which served most
fitly in their due places to supply those things and matters in which the
Original Journal-Books themselves were defective.

6. A further material for the furtherance of this present work was a
Manuscript Treatise which I had by me Entitled Modus tenendi Parliamentum apud
Anglos, Compiled especially as I conceive by Robert Bowyer Esquire, and
afterward enlarged by Henry Elsing Esquire, at this present Clerk of the Upper
House of Parliament, in which were many good Collections touching Proxies,
Summons, Receivors and Tryors of Petitions, the Commons Prolocutor, and other
matters incident to the Passages of the Journals of either House, and those
especially gathered out of Records; of which Treatise there is very much use
chiefly made in the two Journals of the Upper House and House of Commons in the
Parliament held in An. 1 Regin. Eliz.

7. And lastly one other unusual or invulgar help for the raising up of this
ensuing Structure was a Manuscript Diary I had in my Custody of the greatest
part of Queen Elizabeth's Reign penned by the Lord Burleigh first Principal
Secretary and afterward Lord Treasurer; which said Diary did serve very well
to the clearing of some things needful to the perfecting of these ensuing
Journals.

And for Printed helps I made especially use of William Camdens Annals of Queen
Elizabeth's Reign, penned by him in a fluent and good Latin Style (the errors
whereof in these Journals are likewise discovered in their due places) and of
the Printed Books of Statutes as often as occasion requires, in which also
some errors and mistakings which escaped in them are fully and plainly
convicted and rectified.

These foregoing materials both in Manuscripts and Print I made use of in a
general nature for all these ensuing Journals more or less. Now there were also
many particular helps I used for several occasions.

And first for the Journals of either House in An. 1 Regin. Eliz. they are all
Illustrated with so many quotations of all manner of Records, that it would be
too tedious to discuss or treat of them at large; only it shall here suffice to
have given this touch upon it, that such as are most frequently vouched are
Parliament Rolls, Patent Rolls and Foreign Rolls kept within the Tower of
London, all which will best appear in the perusal of them. Where also I had
some help out of two Transcripts, the one in Latin, the other in French, of an
old Treatise Entitled De modo tenendi Parliamentum in Anglia tempore Regis
Edwardi filii Etheldredi.

For sundry Parliaments also I had several private Journals of the House of
Commons, in An. 13 Regin. Eliz. very imperfect, and another in An. 35 Regin.
ejusdem moderately exact, each of them taken by some Member of the House. Two
other I had, the first a Journal of the Passages of the same House in An. 39,
and 40 Reg. Eliz. exceedingly defective, and the last de an. 43, and 44. of the
same Queen stored with excellent matters. Out of all which, not only the
Journals of the said House of Commons, but even of the Upper House also of
those Parliaments, are much augmented. And for the Lord De la Wares Petitions
inserted verbatim in the Journal of the Upper House, de an. 39, and 40 Regin.
Eliz. I caused it to be transcribed out of the Bundle of Acts of that
Parliament remaining in the Office aforesaid of the Clerk of the Upper House,
and carefully examined it thereby.

And thus much shall serve for the materials out of which these ensuing Volumes
were collected and transcribed, which are all of them for the most part so
authentic, but especially the Original Journal-Books of either House, as there
can be no Exception against any thing that does follow out of them.

For the second thing, touching the Method I have constantly used, it has been
thus. First before every Journal I have prefixed the just days or times of the
Beginning, Proroguing, Dissolving or Adjourning the Parliament or Session of
Parliament; and next under it a Summary draught of the chief scope or Argument
thereof, or at least of some special matter that concerned it. I have in like
manner placed all actions of the first day of the Parliament, as Commissions of
Prorogation or Adjournment, or the solemn passing of her Majesty to the Upper
House, in the Journal of the same, as most properly belonging unto it; as
likewise all Speeches of that day which passed in the said House, on that day
on which the Speaker was presented. And I have in the third place constantly
inserted into the Journals of the said Upper House also all Commissions of note
at large, all Proxies that were more rare, the presence of the Lords on some
special days, and the names of the Receivers and Tryors of Petitions; and there
is no one day on which the House sat and did any thing, but some Passages
thereof are mentioned.

In the Journals of the House of Commons also are all things inserted and
referred unto their due days, and I know not any thing that is doubly set down
in the two Journals of both the Houses in the same Parliament, or Session of
Parliament, but only the Titles sometimes of such Bills as were sent up from
one House to another; and that constantly the manner of the beginning and
ending of the Parliament, and of the Presentment of the Speaker, which is
largely set down in the Journal of the Upper House, is shortly touched in the
House of Commons.

And because I know the Original Journal Book of either House to be more
judiciously observed, and more to be esteemed than the Collections of any
private men, therefore I have distinguished by some Annotation or Animadversion
what is taken out of them, or what out of any other material whatsoever. Nor
are those Animadversions of mine own at any time added without some necessary
motive, or upon some good ground. Very Copious indeed they are in the two first
Journals of the Upper House and House of Commons in An. 1 Regin. Eliz. because
all matters of form were to be once for all discussed: In all the other
Journals they are more succinct and infrequent.

I confess it cost me many days besides other expenses to bring these ensuing
Volumes to that perfection, in which I now enjoy them. In which besides the
abundance of the knowledge in this kind especially gained by it, which Sir
Edward Cook Knight a Learned Writer of this Age calls Lex Parliamentaria, I
have as I much desired, done some Honor to the Memory of that Glorious Queen
England's Royal Elizabeth, in that I have Collected in one body the sum of the
agitations of all her Parliaments, or at least so much of them as could
possibly be gotten, being a work not only singular in respect that I am the
sole enjoyer of it, but also because I rest confident that never any other man
attempted it, much less brought it to perfection. Which I the rather believe,
because when I was one day discoursing with Sir Robert Cotton the Prime
Antiquary of this our Age not long before his Decease, touching the two
aforesaid Volumes he had of the Journals of this Queens Reign, that I wondered
he would treasure up in his Library such Fragmentary and Imperfect stuff, he
made me no other Answer, but that he was compelled to store up them, because he
knew not how to come by any better. And certainly if this work which I have now
by Gods Providence finished, had been performed by any other, it could not have
been hid from him who was a very sedulous gatherer, as of other rarities, so
especially of Parliamentary Passages for about the space of forty Years before
his Death.

Touching the rarities and treasures of knowledge contained in these ensuing
Volumes, to omit many things, thus much it shall not be amiss to premise, that
there may not only hence be gathered whatsoever almost concerns the
Privileges, Customs and Usages of either House, but Historical matter also
touching the Church and State; and in the whole frame may be frequently seen
the admirable wisdom of her Majesty and this her Great Council in the happy
quenching of such emergent differences as arose, and in their timely provision
against the ambitious Spaniard, the restless and irreconcilable Enemy of her
Majesty's Religion, Person and Realms.

In all Parliaments and Sessions of Parliaments the Journals of the House of
Commons do for the most part much excel those of the Upper House in variety and
abundance of observable matter, and in their copious and orderly relating each
days Passages.

I shall not need further to enlarge my self, but here to shut up this present
Discourse, this instant Friday the 3. day of February Anno Domini 1631. That
though through Gods Providence I have finished these Volumes, which are
intended chiefly for my own private use, and my Posterities, yet I have already
entered upon other and greater labors, conceiving my self not to be born for my
self alone, according to that old saying, Melius mori quam sibi vivere; Or this
ensuing Distich:

Qui vivat sibi solus, Homo nequit esse beatus.
MALO MORI, nam sic VIVERE NOLO MIHI.
But before I speak further of any future works intended, it shall not be amiss
to add somewhat touching the true transcription of these ensuing Volumes; for I
am not ignorant, that not only the greatest part of our ancient Manuscripts,
but all new written materials, for want of able Writers, and especially for
lack of comparing the new Copy written, with that out of which it was taken,
are exceedingly faulty and defective: and therefore it was my care to examine
with my own Eye, the presence of the Lords, the Returns of the Proxies, the
Tryors and Receivors of Petitions, the Commissions and such like entire and
most material things.

Neither wanted there just cause of my frequent assistance for the true
discovery of the very Handwriting it self of all the Iournals of the House of
Commons during her Majesty's Reign, except of those in the thirteenth,
fourteenth, eighteenth and twenty third Years of the same Queen, which four
Iournals were very fairly written into one Volume in Folio; but as for the
three first Iournals of the same House de An. 1, 5, and 8 dictae Regin. they
were written in a hand of that time, and had also many obscure abbreviations in
them. And as touching all the other Iournals of the House of Commons, with some
part also of the said Iournal of the twenty third Year of her Majesty's Reign,
being entered and bound up together in one Volume, they were exceeding difficult
to be read, and were certainly the very notes taken and entered into the said
Volume by Fulk Onslow Esquire then Clerk of the said House during the
Continuance of the Parliament, or Session of Parliament. In all which the said
Notes being written in a fast running hand, and in every Page almost much
interlined, and sometimes enlarged by several Additions, disposed into such
vacant places as the page afforded, often distant each from other, it required
and took up much time to discover, and find out not only what was written, but
also how each particular was to be disposed into its due place and order. The
like difficulty happened in the transcription of some Speeches I had my self by
me, being the very Autographs or first Copies penned by such as spoke them, as
did evidently appear by their many interlinings. But for all other materials
out of which these said Iournals or those of the Upper House were Collected,
there was no difficulty at all in reading of them, but only what to collect and
insert out of each days Passages, and what to omit, as matter not worthy the
transcribing.

The chief of the Works before mentioned, and by me intended for the public
good, are these ensuing.

A general History of Great Britain from the first Inhabitants to the present
Times, to be drawn especially out of Record and other abstruse and exotic
Monuments, for the reformation of all the Chronicles or Histories of this kind
yet extant, which will require several Volumes.

The Survey of Norfolk, Suffolk, Essex and Cambridgeshire, out of Records or
Original Deeds.

The Antiquity of the Municipal or Common Laws of the Realm before the Norman
Conquest, out of Record also for the greatest part, or other invulgar
materials: To which I have a desire also if my time will suffice for
Collection, to add a second part out of the Itinerant and Plea Rolls, chiefly
remaining in the Treasury at Westminster.

These I have proposed to my self to labor in, besides diverse other smaller
works as well Theological as Moral, like him that shoots at the Sun, not in
hopes to reach it, but to shoot as high as possibly his strength, art, or skill
will permit. So though I know it impossible to finish all these during my short
and uncertain Life, having already entered into the thirtieth Year of my Age,
and having many unavoidable employments and cares of an Estate and Family, yet
if I can but finish a little in each kind, it may hereafter stir up some able
Judgments to add an end to the whole, in the same way and search I shall have
waded in before them. In the mean time I shall always pray as I do sincerely
desire, that by all my endeavors God may be glorified, the truth divine or
humane vindicated, and the public benefited.

Sic mihi contingat vivere, Sicque mori.

SIMONDS D'EWES.

The several Days on which every Parliament or Session of Parliament during the
Reign of Queen ELIZABETH began, as also the several Days of the Dissolution and
Prorogation of the same.
THE Parliament held in the first year of Queen Elizabeth began on Wednesday
the 25th day of January Anno Domini 1558. and was dissolved on Monday the 8th
day of May Anno Domini 1559.

The Session of Parliament held in the 5th year of Queen Elizabeth began on
Tuesday the 12th day of January Anno Domini 1562. and was Prorogued on Saturday
the 10th day of April An. Domini 1563.

The Session of Parliament held in the 8th and 9th years of Queen Elizabeth
began on Monday the 13th day of September Anno Domini 1566. and was Dissolved
on Thursday the 2. day of January An. 9. Regin. ejusdem.

The Parliament held in the 13th year of Queen Elizabeth began on Wednesday the
2. day of April Anno Domini 1571. and was Dissolved on Tuesday the 29th day of
May ensuing.

The Session of Parliament held in the 14th year of Queen Elizabeth began on
Thursday the 8th day of May Anno Domini 1572. and was Adjourned on Monday the
13th day of June ensuing.

The Session of Parliament held in the 18th year of Queen Elizabeth began on
Wednesday the 18th day of February Anno Domini 1575. and was Prorogued on
Thursday the 15th day of March ensuing.

The Session of Parliament held in the 23. year of Queen Elizabeth began on
Monday the 16th day of January Anno Domini 1580. and was Dissolved on Friday
the 19th day of April Anno Domini 1583.

The Parliament held in the 27th year of Queen Elizabeth began on Monday the
23. day of November Anno Domini 1584. and was Dissolved on Wednesday the 14th
day of September An. Domini 1586. Anno 28 Regin. ejusdem.

The Parliament held in the 28th and 29th years of Queen Elizabeth began on
Saturday the 29th day of October Anno Domini 1586. and was Dissolved on
Thursday the 23. of March Anno 29 Regin. ejusdem.

The Parliament held in the 31. year of Queen Elizabeth began on Tuesday the
4th day of February Anno Domini 1588. and was Dissolved on Saturday the 29th
day of March Anno Domini 1589.

The Parliament held in the 35th year of Queen Elizabeth began on Monday the
19th day of November Anno Domini 1592. and was Dissolved on Tuesday the 10th
day of April Anno Domini 1593.

The Parliament held in the 39. and 40. years of Queen Elizabeth began on
Monday the 24. day of October Anno Domini 1597. and was Dissolved on Thursday
the 9th day of February An. 40 Regin. ejusdem.

The Parliament held in the 43. and 44th years of Queen Elizabeth began on
Tuesday the 27th day of October Anno Domini 1601. and was Dissolved on Saturday
the 19th day of December ensuing Anno 44. Regin. ejusdem.

The Names of the Lord Keeper, Lord Chancellor, or others who supplied their
places as Speakers of the House of Lords during all the Reign of Queen
ELIZABETH, as also all the Names of all the Clerks of the said House of
Parliament, together with the Names of the several Speakers of the House of
Commons and Clerks of the same House during all the Parliaments of the said
Queens Reign.
The several Years of her Majesty's Reign in which the said Parliaments or
Sessions of Parliament were held. The Names of the Lord Keeper, Lord
Chancellor, etc. and of the Clerks of the House of Lords. The Names of the
Speakers of the House of Commons, and of the Clerks of the same House. IN the
Parliament held in the first Year of Queen Elizabeth Sir Nicholas Bacon Knight,
Lord Keeper of the Great Seal of England, whose place was supplied Mar. 4. by
the Marquess of Winchester Lord Treasurer of England. Sir Thomas Gargrave
Knight Speaker. Francis Spilman Esquire Clerk of the Upper House...... Seimour
Gent. Clerk of the House of Commons. In the Session of Parliament held in the
fifth Year of Queen Elizabeth The same Lord Keeper. Thomas Williams Esquire
Speaker. The same Clerk. The same Clerk. In the Session of Parliament held in
the ninth Year of Queen Elizabeth The same Lord Keeper and his place supplied
for diverse days during his being sick of the Gout, First by the Marquess of
Winchester Lord Treasurer of England, after by Sir Robert Catlin Knight Lord
Chief Justice of the Kings Bench. Richard Onslow Esquire the Queens Solicitor. The
same Clerk, who either died or surrendered his place before the next Parl. began
in An. 13 Reg. Eliz. The same Clerk. In the Parliament held in the thirteenth
Year of Queen Elizabeth The same Lord Keeper, and his place supplied for diverse
days during his sickness by Sir Robert Catlin Knight Lord Chapter Justice of the Kings
Bench. Christopher Wray Sergeant at Law Speaker. Anthony Mason alias Wilkes
succeeded Francis Spilman in the place of the Clerk of the House of Lords. Fulk
Onslow Gent. Clerk of the House of Commons. In the Session of Parliament held
in the fourteenth Year of Queen Elizabeth The same Lord Keeper, and his place
supplied in his absence for diverse days by Sir Robert Catlin Knight Lord Chief
Justice of the Kings Bench. Robert Bell Esquire Speaker. The same Clerk. The same
Clerk. In the Session of Parliament held in the eighteenth Year of Queen
Elizabeth The same Lord Keeper, and his place supplied for diverse days in his
absence by the Lord Burleigh Lord Treasurer of England. The same Speaker. The
same Clerk. The same Clerk. In the Session of Parliament held in the twenty
third Year of Queen Elizabeth Sir Thomas Bromley Knight Lord Chancellor. John
Popham Esquire the Queens Solicitor Speaker. The same Clerk. The same Clerk. In
the Parliament held in the twenty seventh Year of Qucen Elizabeth The same Lord
Chancellor. John Puckering Sergeant at Law Speaker. The same Clerk. The same
Clerk. In the Parliament held in the twenty eighth and twenty ninth Years of
Queen Elizabeth The same Lord Chancellor, and his place supplied for diverse
days during his sickness by Sir Edmund Anderson Knight Lord Chief Justice of
the Common Pleas. John Puckering Sergeant at Law Speaker again. The same Clerk.
The same Clerk from Oct. 29. to Dec. 2. 1589. And the same Clerks Kinsman W.
Onslow Gent. from Febr. 15. to March 23. ensuing. In the Parliament held in the
thirty first Year of Queen Elizabeth Sir Christopher Hatton Knight Lord
Chancellor. George Snagg Sergeant at Law Speaker. The same Clerk. The same
Clerk. In the Parliament held in the thirty fifth Year of Queen Elizabeth Sir
John Puckering Knight Lord Keeper of the Great Seal of England. Edward Coke Esquire
the Queens Solicitor Speaker. The same Clerk. The same Clerk. In the
Parliament held in the thirty ninth and fortieth Years of Queen Elizabeth Sir
Thomas Egerton Knight Lord Keeper of the Great Seal of England. Christopher
Yelverton Sergeant at Law Speaker. Thomas Smith Esquire succeeded Clerk of the
Upper House to Anthony Mason alids Wilkes. The same Clerk. In the Parliament
held in the 43 and 44 Years of Queen Elizabeth The same Lord Keeper. J. Croke
Esquire Recorder of London. The same Clerk. The same Clerk.

THE JOURNAL OF THE House of LORDS, Ao 1o Regin. Eliz. A. D. 1558 and 1559.
The Journal of the Proceedings of the House of Lords, in the Parliament holden
at Westminster, Ao 1o Regin. Eliz. Anno Dom. 1558. beginning there after one
Prorogation of the same on Wednesday the 25th. of January, and then and there
continued until the Dissolution thereof on Monday the 8th. day of May Anno Dom.
1559.

QUeen Mary Deceased on Thursday the 17th. day of November, in the year of our
Lord 1558. and the Parliament then Assembled in the 6th. and last year of her
Reign, thereby immediately Dissolving. the thrice Excellent and Prudent
Princess Queen Elizabeth, according to her right and Hereditary Title, without
any opposition or difficulty, King Philip being then very happily absent beyond
the Seas, Succeeded to all the Realms and Dominions of Mary her Sister,
excepting Callais and those other inestimable places in France, which had been
most dishonourably and vainly lost in the time, and toward the end of the
Reign of the said Queen, and finding also the Innocent Blood of Gods Saints,
shed for the Witness of the Truth, to have stained the former Government with
the just Brand and Stigma of persecuting and Tyrannical: And that her Realms
and Dominions were much impoverished and weakened; whilst in the mean time her
Enemies every where abroad, were increased not only in Number, but in Strength
and Power; She therefore in the very entrance of her Reign well considering and
foreseeing that the surest and safest way to Establish the Truth, to abolish
all Foreign and usurped Authority, to repair the breaches and weaknesses of her
said Realms and Dominions, to strengthen her Kingdoms with Shipping and
Munition, and to revive the decayed Trade thereof, was by the common advice and
Council, and with the Public assent of the Body of her Realm, did Summons
herfirst Parliament to begin on Monday the 23th. day of January, having before
made and appointed that wise and able Statesman Sir Nicolas. Bacon Knight, Lord
Keeper of the great Seal of England.

In the setting down of this Journal of the upper House in An. 1. Reg. Eliz.
An. Dom. 1558. Summoned to begin at the day and place aforesaid; I have caused
to be Transcribed many things at large out of the original Journal Book. Some
things also of Form I have added to it, which are in the very Original it self
omitted in this regard only, because they were but matters of Course, and not
much material: yet I was much desirous both in this Journal of the Upper House,
and in that also of the House of Commons, in this first year of the Queen, to
supply once for all the whole matter of Form, that so I might the better omit
it in the following Journals, and have ready recourse hither unto it, being all
framed into one Structure or Body. In this Journal of this first year is set
down the ground, form, and return of the Writs of Summons, with their usual and
common differences, the Commission for Prorogation, and the form of Proroging
the Parliament to a surther day, The manner of the beginning of the Parliament,
with the Sitting of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, The places of Peers under
age, and of Noblemens Sons, their Fathers living and the difference, The whole
form Verbatim of the Receivers and Tryers of Petitions. And lastly for what, or
by whose License, the Lords both Spiritual and Temporal, may absent themselves
from the Parliament House, and send their Proxies, the forms of Proxies, the
cause of a Vacat, the several observations upon the return of such usual or
unusual Proxies, as were this Parliament returned, the returns of which are set
down at large, out of the Original Journal Book it self, with diverse other
things of the like nature, and are digested as the following Passages of this
first Parliament of Queen Eliz. into an orderly and exact Journal.

Before the Writs for the Summoning of this Parliament were sent forth, the
Queens Majesty did send her Warrant to Sir Nicolas Bacon Knight, Lord Keeper of
the great Seal of England, commanding him speedily to cause the said Writs to
be made, as in like cases had been formerly accustomed, the usual Form of which
Warrant being by Bill Signed, is as follows.

Elizabeth, by the Grace of God, Queen of England, France, and Ireland,
Defender of the Faith, etc. To our right Trusty and right Wel-beloved Nicolas
Bacon Knight, Lord Keeper of our Great Seal of England, Greeting.

Whereas we by our Council, for certain great and urgent Causes concerning us,
the good Estate and Commonwealth of this our Realm, and of the Church of
England, and for the good Order and continuance of the same, have appointed and
Ordained a Parliament to be holden, at our City of Westminster, the sirst day
of April next coming, in which case diverse and sundry Writs are to be directed
forth, under our Great Seal of England, as well for the Prelates, Bishops, and
Nobility of this our Realm, as also for the Election of Knights, Citizens, and
Burgesses of the several Counties, Cities, and Buroughs, Towns of the same, to
be present at the said Parliament, at the day and place aforesaid.

Whereupon, We Will, and Command you, forthwith upon the receipt hereof, and by
Warrant of the same to cause such, and so many Writs to be made, and Sealed
under our Great Seal for the accomplishing of the same, as in like Cases has
been heretofore used and accustomed. And this Bill Signed with our own hand,
shall be as well unto you, as to every such Clerk and Clerks as shall make and
pass the same, a sufficient Warrant or Discharge in that behalf given.

Upon this Warrant the Lord Keeper sends out the said Writs of Summons
returnable the 23th day of January, being Monday, and bearing Date at
Westminster the 5th day of December, in the first year of the Queen, the form
of which Writ is as follows.

Elizabetha, Dei Gratia, Angliae, Franciae, and Hiberniae, Regina, Fidei
Defensor, etc. Clarissimo Consanguineo suo, Thomae Duci Norfolciae, etc.
Salutem, Quia de advisamento and assensu Consilij nostri, pro quibusdam ardius
and urgentibus negotiis, nos, statum, and defensionem Regni nostri Angliae, and
Ecclesiae Anglicanae concernentibus, quodd am Parliamentum nostrum apud
Civitatem nostram Westmonasterij vicessimo tertio die Januarij proxime futuro
teneri ordinaverimus, and ibidem vobiscum and cum Prelatis, Magnatibus, and
Proceribus dicti Regni nostri, colloquium habere and tractatum, vobis sub fide
and ligeancia, quibus nobis tenemini, firmiter injungendo Mandamus, quod
consideratis dictorum negotiorum arduitate, periculis imminentibus, cessante
excusatione quacunque dictis die and loco personaliter intersitis, nobiscum and
cum Praelatis, Magnatibus and Proceribus praedictis, super dictis negotiis
tractatur', vestrumque consilium impensur', and hoc sicut nos and honorem
nostrum, and salvationem and Defensionem Regni and Ecclesiae praedict',
expeditionemque negotiorum dictorum diligitis nullatenus omittatis. Test me
ipsa apud Westmonasterium quinto Die Decembris Anno Regni nostri primo.

The Writ to the Archbishop of York (for the Sea of Canterbury was now void by
the Death of Cardinal Pool) was after this Form ensuing.

Elizabetha, Dei Gratia, etc. Reverendissimo in Christo Patri, Nicholao
Archiepiscopo Eboracen' etc. And so to the end as it is in the Duke of Norfolks
Writ, unless perhaps after the word Mandamus, the words following are, in fide
and dilectione quibus nobis tenemini, etc. instead of these words to the
Temporal Lords, Sub fide and Ligeancia quibus nobis tenemini.

The Writs that were directed to the two Marquesses of Winchester and
Northampton, and to all the Earls Summoned to this Parliament, differed nothing
from that, by which the Duke of Norfolk was Summoned.

The words of the Writs that were directed to any Bishop, this Parliament, were
Verbatim the same with the Archbishops, only differing in the Style which is
set down before their Christian Names, being added in these words, Reverendo in
Christo Patri, instead of these words inserted into the Writs directed to the
Archbishops, viz. Reverendissimo in Christo Patri.

The Writs to the Viscounts and Barons are thus directed, viz. Dilecto and
fideli suo Anthonio Vicecomiti, etc. and then all the rest agreeing with the
aforesaid Writ set down as directed to the Duke of Norfolk.

The Writs, by which the Judges are Summoned are directed thus, Dilecto and
Fideli suo, etc. and differ from the Peers Writs in these words ( tractare and
Consilium suum impendere, but not ordinare) and the same Style is inserted in
the Writs directed to the Queen's Council, and the rest who are to attend in
the Upper House.

The Parliament being Summoned to begin, as appears by the foregoing Writ set
down as directed to the Duke of Norfolk, on the 23th. day of January, it was
upon the said day farther Prorogued, in manner and form following.

Memorandum where the Queen's Majesty by her first Writ, Summoned the
Parliament to be begun and holden at Westminster the 23. day of January, as by
the same Writ bearing Date at Westminster the 5th. day of December in the first
year of her Reign it more plainly appears. Her Highness upon certain great
and weighty Causes, and considerations, her Majesty especially moving, by the
advice of her Privy Council, and of her Justices of both her Benches, and other
of her Council Learned, did Prorogue and Adjourn this said Parliament until
Wednesday now next following, being the 25th. day of this instant Month, by
virtue of her Writ Patent Signed with her own Hand, Sealed with her Great Seal,
bearing Date the 21th. day of this present Month, whereupon at this said 23th.
day of January, the Lord Keeper of the Great Seal with diverse others her Lords
and Counselors, repaired to the Parliament Chamber commonly called the Upper
House, and there in the presence of the whole Assembly of the Lords Spiritual
and Temporal, the Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses Summoned to the same
Parliament, did open and declare, that the Queens Majesty, whose preservation
in Health gives safety and surety to the whole Public Wealth, not feeling her
self in good Disposition of Body, nor unmindful of the Peril that by her too
much boldness, by coming abroad might ensue, sent for the Lord Keeper of the
Great Seal, the Lords and others of her Highness Council, unto whom she
declared her Estate, and the fear she had to adventure going to Parliament this
said prefixed day being the 23th. day of January, requesting them to signify
her Estate unto the Assembly, and that by virtue of the said Writ of
Prorogation she had Prorogued her said Parliament from the first said Summoned
day, until the 25th. day of the same Month. All which matters being notified to
the said Assembly according to her Highness request and pleasure, the said Writ
for the said Prorogation in the presence of that Assembly was there then read,
by the Clerk of the Upper House publicly and openly, the Tenor whereof ensues
Verbatim.

ELizabetha, Dei Gratia, Angliae, Franciae, and Hiberniae, Regina, Fidei
Defensor, etc. praedilectis and fidelibus nostris Praelatis, Magnatibus, and
Proceribus Regni nostri Angliae, ac dilectis and fidelibus nostris Militibus,
Civibus and Burgensibus dicti Regni nostri ad Parliamentum nostrum apud
Civitatem nostram Westmonasterij 23. die instantis Mensis Januarij inchoand'
and tenend' convocat' and elect' and eorum cuilibet Salutem. Cum nos, pro
quibusdam arduis and urgentibus negotiis nos statum and defensionem dicti Regni
nostri Angliae, and Ecclesiae Anglicanae concernen' dictum Parliamentum nostrum
ad diem and locum praedictum teneri ordinaverimus ac vobis per seperalia brevia
nostra apud Civitatem and diem praedict' interesse Mandaverimus ad tractand'
assentiend' and concludend' super his quae in dicto Parliamento nostro tunc and
ibidem proponerentur and tractarentur. Quibusdam tamen certis de causis and
considerationibus nos ad hoc specialiter movend' dictum Parliamentum nostrum
usque 25 diem hujus instantis Mensis Januarij duximus prorogand' it a quod nec
vos, nec aliquis vestrum ad dictum 23. diem Januarij apud Civitatem praedictam
comparere teneamini, seu arctemini; volumus enim vos and quemlibet vestrum;
inde erga nos penitus exonerari Mandantes and tenore presentium firmiter
injungendo precipientes vobis and Cuilibet vestrum ac omnibus aliis quibus in
hac part intererit, quod ad dictum 25. diem Januarij apud praedictam Civitatem
Westmonasterij personaliter compareatis and intersitis, and quilibet vestrum
compareat and intersit ad tractand', faciend', agend', and concludend', super
his quae in dicto Parliamento nestro de Communi concilio dicti Regni nostri
savente domino contigerit ordinari. Test me ipsa apud Westmonasterium 21.
Januarij Anno Regni nostri primo.

This day also although the Parliament begun not, nor any Peers sat in the
Upper House, but the Lord Keeper and some others of either house met only in
the Parliament Chamber to Prorogue the Parliament until the 25th. day of this
instant Month as aforesaid, were diverse Proxies returned from many of the Lords
both Spiritual and Temporal, who in their absence did Constitute others of the
said Upper House to give their voices for them. And because no Lord could be
absent, without License from her Majesty first obtained during this Parliament,
it will not be impertinent amongst other matters of Course, to set down the
form of the said Licenses, which were as follows.

RIght Trusty and Wel-beloved, We Greet you well, Whereas we are informed that
by reason of Sickness, you are not able to make your repair hither to this our
Sessions of Parliament, to be holden at Westminster; We have thought good by
these our Letters to dispense with you for your absence, and do License you to
remain still at home for this time. So nevertheless that you send up your
Proxy to some such Personage, as may for you, and in your name give his voice,
assent, or denial to such matters as shall be Treated and Concluded upon in our
said Parliament, and these our Letters Patents shall be your Warrant in this
behalf. Given under our Signet at our Palace at Westminster the first day of
January in the first year of our Reign.

Upon the obtaining and receipt of this aforesaid License from her Majesty,
granted to every absent Lord in particular, they sent their several Proxies, of
which the first that was returned this day was the Proxy of William Lord
Dacres, which said Proxy is entered in the beginning of the Original Journal
Book, remaining with the Clerk of the Upper House, in manner and form following.

23. Januarij Introductae sunt Literae procuratortae Willielmi Domini Dacres
qui procuratorem suum constituit Anthonium Vicecomitem Mountacute.

This Proxy was delivered to the Clerk of the Parliament, or to his Servant or
Deputy; for the Course (as I suppose) has been, and is at this day, that the
Proxy may be delivered either in or out of Parliament, And the Delivery
thereof is good, only the Clerk of the Upper House does usually Register or
enter the same in the beginning of the Journal of that Session or Parliament,
with the direct day of the Month on which he received it, and sometimes sets
not the day down, the form of which Proxy may be conjectured to have been as
follows.

OMnibus Christi Fidelibus ad quos hoc presens scriptum pervenerit Willielmus
Dominus Dacres Salutem. Noveritis me prefatum Dominum Dacres per Licentiam
Serenissimae Dominae nostrae Reginae a presenti hoc suo Parliamento tent' and
inchoat apud Westmonasterium etc. sufficienter excusatum abesse, nominare,
ordinare, and constituere dileitum mihi in Christo and honorandum virum
Anthonium Vicecomitem Mountacutum meum verum, certam, and indubitatum factorem,
actorem, Atturnatum, seu procuratorem per presents; eidemque procuratori meo
dare and concedere plenam Authoritatem, and potestatem, pro me, and nomine Meo,
de, and super quibuscunque causis and Negotiis in Presenti hoc Parliamento
exponendis, seu Declarandis tractandi tractatibus, achujusmodi, mihifactis.
seufaciendis consilium and auxilium nomine meo impendendi Statutisque etiam and
ordinationibus, quae ex Maturo and deliberato Judicio Dominorum tam
Spiritualium quam Temporalium in eodem Parliamento Congregator' mactari seu
ordinari contigerint nomine meo consentiendi eisdemque si opus fuerit,
subscribendi caeteraque omnia et singula quae in premissis Necessaria fuerint
seu quomodolib' requisita faciendiet exercendi in tam amplis Modo et forma, ut
ego ipse facere possem, aut deberem, si praesens personaliter interessem, Ratum
et gratum habiturus totum et quicquid procurator' meus statuerit, aut facerit
in premissis; in cujus rei testimonium presentibus subscripsi Sigillumque
apposui dat' etc. Anno Regni Dictae Dominae nostrae Elizabethae Dei Gratia
Angliae Franciae and Hiberniae Regina, Fidei Defensoris etc. Primo.

Here under the Proxy is usually the name of the Lord that sends it
Subscribed.

Note, that this is not the direct Copy of the Proxy sent by the Lord Dacres,
but only his name added unto it, being set down according to the form, observed
both in these times, and in ours which have since followed; for if these Lords,
who do constitute Proctors, have their Proxies drawn by the Clerk of the
Parliament's direction, which is the best and most usual course, then are they
always drawn in manner and form aforesaid.

But if any Lord, by reason of his far distance from the place where the
Parliament is held, or by some other occasion, does make his own Proxy, then
the form does usually differ from that which is before set down, and is in
manner and form as follows, to which I have added the name of the Bishop of
Peterborough, because the Spiritual Lords do most usually venture to make their
own Proxies, and because the said Bishops Proxy is entered the 23th. day of
January in the Original Journal Book of this first Parliament of the Queen,
next after the Proxy of the Lord Dacres before set down, the entrance whereof
is as follows.

23. Januarij Introductae sunt literae procuratoriae David Episcopi Petriburgi
qui procuratores suos constituit Nicholaum Archiepiscop' Eboracen' Edmund'
Episcop' London, and Radolph' Episcop' Coventr' and Litch.

This Proxy that follows being of a new form, and different from that which
is before set down, is here added, as sent by the Bishop of Peterborough, for
the reason above expressed.

PAteat universis per presents, Quod ego David permissione Divina Peterburgen'
Episcopus Licentia Regia in ea part prius obtent' Necnon diversis Arduis
impeditus and detentus Negotiis, quo minus in presenti Sessione Parliamenti
hujus inclyti Regni Angliae personaliter comparere debit' praestare obsequium
ac in ea part inservire Valeam, Reverendissimum in Christo Patrem Nicholaum,
providentia divina Eboracen' Archiepiscopum totius Angliae Primati and
Metropolitano et Reverendos in Christo Patres Edwardum Episcop' Londinen' and
Radolph' Episcop' Coventr' et Litch' et eorum utrumque conjunctim et divisim,
meos veros, legitimos actores, factores, atturnatos, et procuratores facio et
constituo; eisdem que procuratoribus meis, et eorum utrique conjunctim et
divisim plenam in Domino do et concedo Authoritatem, et potestatem, per me, et
in nomine meo, in dicta presenti Sessione Parliamenti compend' et de, et super
quibuscunque Negotiis in eadem presenti Sessione Parliamenti exponend'
declarand' et tractand' tractatibus hujusmodi mihi fact' seu faciend' consilium
nomine meo impendend' Statutisque etiam and ordinationibus, quae ex maturo et
deliberato judicio Dominorum, tam Spiritualium quam Temporalium, in eadem
presenti Sessione Parliamenti congregat' mactetari, seu ordinari contigerint,
nomine meo consentiend' caeteraque omnia singulaque in premissis, seu circa ea
necessaria fuerint seu quomodolibet requisita faciend' perimplend' and
exercend' in tam amplis modo et forma, ut ego ipse facere possem, et deberem,
si presens Personaliter interessem, Ratum et Gratum habens' et habitur' totum
et quicquid procuratores mei praedicti statuerint aut fecerint, seu alter eorum
statuerit aut fecerit in premissis. In cujus Rei testimonium. Sigillum meum
magnum et Episcop' presentibus apponi, feci, dat' etc' Anno Domini Millesimo
Quingentessimo Quinquagessimo Octavo.

I do observe it to be very usual, yet not always observed) in the return of
Proxies, to suppose the Parliament to be begun, although they be returned
sometimes before it begins, as these, and diverse others which now follow
(according to the entrance of the returns of them) were in this first
Parliament of the Queen. Besides, the said Proxies are many times Dated diverse
days, nay weeks, before the first day on which the beginning of it is limited
by the Summons: by which means it may also fall out, that if there be any
Prorogations, the said Proxies may be both Dated and returned many Months
before the Parliament do hold, but the reason, I conceive, of this Clause in
every Proxy, may be, because, before any use can be made of it in the Upper
House, or that be called for, the House must of necessity be set, and be in
agitation of Business, and then the Course is, if any thing come to the
Question, the Clerk of the Parliament, or his Deputy, is to search the Journal
Book, to see whether such Lords as give their Voices, for others that be
absent, be indeed nominated, and appointed their Proctors.

This same day were many other Proxies both usual and extraordinary returned,
of which, and of the nature and forms of Proxies, more shall be presently said,
after the setting down of the return of the said Proxies, inserted at the
beginning of the Original Journal Book of this first Parliament of the Queen,
in manner and form as follows.

Eodem die (viz. 23. die Januarij) Introductae sunt Literae procuratoriae
Johannis Domini Mordant, in quibus procuratores suos constituit Henricum
Comitem Arundel, et Franciscum Comitem Bedford.

Vacat. Eodem die introductae sunt Literae procuratoriae Thomae Tresham prioris
Sti. Johannis Jerusalem in Anglia, qui procuratorem suum constituit Nicholaum
Archiepiscop' Eboracen.

Eodem die introductae sunt Literae procuratoriae Willielmi Domini Paget, qui
procuratores suos constituit Henricum Comitem Arundel and Franciscum Comitem
Bedford.

Eodem die introductae sunt Literae procuratoriae Cuthberti Episcopi Dunelmen',
qui procuratorem suum constituit Archiepiscopum Eboracen.

Eodem die Introductae sunt Literae procuratoriae Johannis Comitis Bathon', qui
procuratorem suum constituit Henricum Comitem Rutland.

Eodem die Introductae sunt Literae procuratoriae Georgij Domini Zouch, qui
procuratorem suum constituit Franciscum Comitem Bedford.

Eodem die Introductae sunt Literae procuratoriae Henrici Domini Aburgavenae,
qui procuratorem suum constituit Franciscum Comitem Bedford.

Eodem die Introductae sunt Literae procuratoriae Thomae Episcopi, Ely in
quibus procuratores suos Constituit Nicholaum Archiepiscopum Eboracen'
Episcopos Cestren' et Lincoln. And Note that the Christian Names of these two
Bishops are omitted in the original Entrance.

Introductae sunt Literae procuratoriae Willielmi Domini Burgh, in quibus
procuratorem suum constituit Edwardum Dominum Clinton, Admirallum Angliae.

Introductae sunt Literae Procuratoriae Edwardi Domini Windsor', in quibus
procuratorem suum constituit Edwardum Dominum Clinton, Admirallum Angliae.

Introductae sunt Literae procuratoriae Willielmi Domini Euers, in quibus
procuratorem suum constituit Edwardum Dominum Clinton, Admirallum Angliae.

Introductae sunt Literae procuratoriae Gilberti Episcopi Bathen' and Wellen',
qui procuratores suos constituit Nicholaum Archiepiscopum Eboracen', Edmund'
London', et Davidem' Petreburgen', Episcopos.

Introductae sunt Literae procuratoriae Henrici Episcopi Meneven' in quibus
procuratores suos constituit Nicholaum Archiepiscopum Eboracen', ac Davidem'
Petreburgen', Episcopos.

The Proxies introducted this day, and entered in the beginning of the Original
Journal Book of the Upper House, as the constant use is, are referred by me
always to those days on which they were entered to have been returned, unless it
be in such Journals, where the day of the return is not entered, as in the
Original Journal Book, A. 39. Regin. Eliz. from which time to this day, the
same Course has been observed.

And because I have desired to make up a work somewhat exact and perfect, of
the Journals of the Reign of this most Gracious Queen, and once for all to make
some Animadversions upon all matters of form in this Journal of her Majesty's
first Parliament, that so all other may be referred unto it, therefore I shall
now add a little, touching the nature, kinds, and use of Proxies, as I have set
downbefore, touching the Writs of Summons.

A Proxy therefore is no more than the constituting of some one or more, by an
absent Lord, to give his Voice in the Upper House, when any difference of
Opinion and Division of the House, shall happen, for otherways, if no such
Division fall out, it never comes to be questioned, or known to whom such
Proxies are directed, nor is there any the least use of them, save only to
show, prove, and continue the Right which the Lords of the Upper House have,
both to be Summoned, and to give their Voices in the same House, either in
their Persons, or by their Proxies; And when the Voices of that House are to be
divided, then the Clerk of the same, if he be present, or his Deputy, gives
notice of such Proxies, as have been introducted and delivered unto him, and to
whom they are directed, that they may give them accordingly. And as many
Proxies as any Peer has, so many voices he has besides his own, and if there
be two or three Proxies constituted by one absent Lord, as is frequent, then
always the first named in the same is to give the Voice if he be present, and
if absent then the second, et sic de reliquis.

It is plain by that ancient Manuscript Entitled, Modus tenendi Parliamentum,
of which I have a Copy both in French and Latin, Cap. de inchoatione Parl. that
if a Peer neither came to the Parliament, nor sent a Proxy upon his Writ of
Summons he forfeited 100 l. if an Earl 100 Marks, if a Baron which was after
qualified, viz. Rotulo Parliamenti A. 31. H. 6. Number. 46. And a Duke for such
default was fined 100 l. an Earl 100 Marks, and a Baron 40 l.

And it is plain, that Anciently the Lords Spiritual and Temporal were often
absent without the King's License, and did then only send the Expression of the
Cause of their said absence, in their said Proxies, as did the Abbot of Selby.
A. 26. Edw. 3. as appears, ex Registro ejusdem (...)' alleging only this
reason, Quia impedimentis variis et arduis Negotiis concernentibus
reformationem status Domus nostrae simus multipliciter impediti etc. and so
likewise in A. 36. H. 8. the Cause of the Abbot of Shrewsburies absence is thus
expressed in the Original Journal Book of the Upper House, A. codem 20. die
Parliamenti relatum est Quod Abbas Salop' gravi infirmitate detinetur quod hic
interesse nequit, ideo constituit procuratores suos Episcopam Coventr' et
Eitch' et Comitem Salopiae conjunctim et divisim, but always then the Proxies
were directed to the King, and did in truth contain in them as well
supplication for his Pardon of their absence, as a Constitution of their
Proctors, as does plainly appear by this Proxy following, of the Abbots of
Thorney, which I have the rather inserted at large, because the very Original
it self under Seal remains with me amongst many other precious Originals in
my Library.

EXcellentissimo Principi et Domino suo singularissimo Domino Henrico Dei
Gratia Regi Angliae et Franciae, ac Domino Hiberniae, suus humillimus et
Devotus Robertus Dei patientia divina Abbas Monasterii beatae Mariae sanctique
Botolphi de Thorney subjectionem, et fidelitatem omnimodas cum orationibus
assiduis et devotis ad comparend' pro me et nomine meo, in Parliamento vestro
coram vestra regia celsitudine vicessimo die Mensis Januarij prox' futur' post
datum presens apud Westm' favente gratia Spiritus sancti felicitor inchoand' Ne
personali comparitione in eodem penes vestram regiam celsitudinem quoties opus
sucrit excusand' precipue pretextu adversae valetudinis nostrae caeterisque ex
causis justis veris et probabilibus quod interesse non valemus prout
affectamus: Qua proptervestrae Regiae humiliter celsitudini supplicamus
quatenus absentiam nostram personalem in hac part excusatam gratiose dignetur
habere vestrae Clementia Majestatis, et ut vestro Mandato in quantum possumus
in omnibus pareamus, Reverendos in Christo Patres Sancti Albani Sti' Edmundi de
Bury, Sti' benedicti de Ranisy, et Sti' Gutlaci de Coland' Abbates conjunctim
et divisim, et little quemlibet nostros veros, et Legitimos procuratores
Atturnatosque fideles tenore presentium constituimus et ordinamus, promittens
me ratum gratum et firmum perpetuo habiturum quicquid praedicti pro me, et
nomine meo, fecerint vel alter fecerit in premissis seu aliquo promissor'
vestrae Regiae celsitudini humiliter supplico quatenus absentiam meam
personalem hac vice ex Regia mansuetudine habere dignemini gratiose excusatam.
In cujus Rei testimonium Sigillum nostrum Commune present' est appensum Dat'
apud Thorney praedict' decimo quarto die Mensis Januarij An. Regni Regis
Henrici Octavi Quinto.

Sometimes also the said Sickness, or cause of Absence is Testified by Oath, as
appears in the Original Journal of the Upper House, A. 6. H. 8. Feb. die 12.
where James Marshal servant to the Lord Scroop made Affidavit of his Lord's
detention by Sickness.

But even Anciently, if the Parliament were to be Assembled by reason of some
great and extraordinary occasion, And that the King declared in his Writ of
Summons, that he would not admit of any Proxies ista vice, then none did
presume to send them, but upon the King's License first obtained, as appears,
ex Rotulo Parliamenti A. 6. Ed. 3. die 27. Januarij A. 22. Ed. 3. die 20.
November. A. 6. Ric. 2. die 2. Jan. ct A. 11. Ric. 2. die 20. Martij.

But of later times, since the 38th. year of H. 8. the Lords in their very
Proxies, do express their absence to be by the King, or Queen's License, and
oftentimes the Clerk of the Upper House does insert the Memorial of their
return, with their expression of their absence by the said License. And in
making of Proxies it has always been at the free Choice and Election of a
Spiritual Lord, that sent the said Proxy to constitute some other Spiritual
Lord, or a Temporal Lord, or both, and so likewise mutatis mutandis has the
liberty been of a Temporal Lord, although there appears but three Presidents
thereof, during her Majesty's Reign, of which, the first was in A. 5. Regin.
Eliz. where William Bishop of Exeter, constituted for his Proctor Francis Earl
of Bedford. And the second in A. eodem Regin. ejusdem, where Thomas Archbishop
of York Constituted the Earl of Bedford his joint Proctor with Richard Bishop
of Ely, and Rowland Bishop of Bangor. And the third and last in A. 28. and 29.
Regin. praedict', where Hugh Bishop of Bangor did Constitute William Lord
Burleigh Lord Treasurer of England his joint Proctor with John Archbishop of
Canterbury, but in former time the Presidents of this nature, are more frequent.

For there was so little observation kept in this kind, as sometimes the Lords
Spiritual, and Temporal did Constitute the Judges and Barons of the Exchequer,
being but attendants on the House, for their Proctors, and sometimes Strangers,
as the Abbot of Selby in Edward the third's time Constituted John Goldale, a
Monk of that house, and William R. Clerk his Proctors, and these also were
sometimes appointed Tryers of Petitions jointly with the Lords, as appears A.
14. Ed. 3. and sometimes Committees with the Lords, prout patet ex rotulo
Parliam' de A. 14. Ed. 3. N. 13. 14. and 18.

These Animadversions being thus premised of Proxies in general, now follow
some others that concern the Particular Proxies foregoing, and the residue that
were returned at this Session, on Saturday the 4th. day of February ensuing,
and on Wednesday the 8th. day, and on Saturday the 18th. day of March
following, and on Tuesday the 4th. day of April ensuing.

And therefore in the first place, it shall not be amiss to make remembrance,
that in the Journal of this Parliament, I have caused the entry of all Proxies
whatsoever, as well ordinary as extraordinary to be Transcribed, because it is
the first Parliament of her Majesty, whereas in most of the residue, I have
only caused those to be inserted into my Journals, which were extraordinary and
unusual.

And whereas the word ( Vacat) is added at the beginning of the entrance of the
return of the Proxy of Thomas Tresham Prior of St. John's of Jerusalem in
England, as also before that of William Lord Euers, which are before, amongst
others set down. The reason of the first I cannot possibly Guess, because
neither the Archbishop of York, to whom the said Thomas Tresham had sent his
Proxy, was himself absent, nor the said Prior present, nor dead before the
return of his said Proxy, as may easily be gathered; but for the other, it is
plain that the Lord Clinton, whom the Lord Euers did Constitute for his
Proctor, was absent at the beginning of this Parliament, and did himself send
his Proxy, which is entered at the beginning of the Original Journal Book of
the Upper House, to have been returned on Saturday the 4th. day of February,
although the word ( Vacat) be prefixed also before the entrance of the return
of the same, because he afterward came to the Parliament himself, and served
in Person in the Upper House, the greatest part of the continuance thereof, and
from these examples may be gathered the true Causes, both why, and when a
Proxy that is returned becomes void, either when the Peer, or Lord that sends
the Proxy dies himself, or comes to the House in Person before the end of the
Parliament, or that the Proctor or Proctors, whom he constitutes, do die, or be
otherwise absent, and send their Proxies themselves; for in this latter case,
those Proxies are to be repealed by the Lord Chancellor, as there is a
President for it in the end of the Original Journal Book of the Upper House, A.
33. et 34. H. 8. in the case of Nevil Lord Latimer, for though the absent Lord,
or Lords, to whom the Proxy is directed, do constitute other Proctors, yet
they cannot execute such Proxies as are directed unto him: for a Proxy is but
an Authority to give another man's assent, which cannot be transferred to a
third person; yet does the sending of one Proxy sufficiently excuse any absent
Lord, although the Peer, to whom it is directed, be not present himself, but as
soon as that absent Lord shall have notice that he, or they, whom he
constituted for his Procurators, do themselves send their Proxies also, by
reason of their absence, then may he send another Proxy, and constitute one
other or more Proctors for himself and in his stead, to give his voice de Novo,
as the Lord Vaux did in A. 18. Jacobi Regis.

After those Bloody and Intestine Civil Wars, which had been raised in England
in the year 1642. and that Robert, Earl of Essex, General of the Forces raised
by the two Houses of Parliament against the King, had (by the Power of the
Independent Faction, over ballancing those, who desired the settling of the
Presbyterian Government) been laid aside, and Sir Thomas Fairfax Knight placed
in his Room; the opposition between those two Parties in either House of
Parliament, growing every day higher and higher, the Aged Earl of Mulgrave,
being an Enemy to all Faction and Innovation, was much troubled that William
Viscount Say and Seal, the chief Promoter of the Independent Novelties, did
make use of his Proxy for the acting and passing those particulars, which were
contrary to the Judgment and Conscience of him the said Earl of Mulgrave: And
therefore, my advise being desired by some of the Members of the House of
Commons, for the reminding him. thereof, I drew the Letter and Instrument
ensuing, being not only the first, but the sole President also of this King,
which yet remains upon Record in the Office of the Clerk of the House of Peers.

To the Right Honorable, the Speaker of the House of Peers, pro Tempore. My
very good Lord,
I am humbly to request of your Lordship, to communicate this my present
Instrument, under my hand and Seal to the House of Peers, that it may be
publicly there Read, and remain upon Record in the Office of the Clerk of the
same House:

Kenzington. April 1646. I am Your Lordships humble Servant.


TO all Christian People to whom these presents shall come, Edmund Earl of
Mulgrave, Greeting. Know Ye, that Whereas I the said Edmund Earl of Mulgrave,
have formerly constituted the Right Honorable William Viscount Say and Seal,
etc. my lawful Actor, and Procurator for me, and in my name, to give my Voice
and Suffrage upon all such emergent Occasions, as the same shall be requisite,
by the ancient Orders and Constitutions of the House of Peers, That I do now,
by these presents Revoke, and Vacate the Proxy by which I did formerly
Constitute the said William Viscount Say and Seal, my lawful Actor and
Procurator as is aforesaid; and do hereby declare the same Proxy to be utterly
Annulled, Vacated, and Revoked, to all intents and purposes whatsoever. In
witness whereof, I have Signed and Scaled these presents, this day of April in
the 22th. year of the Reign of our Sovereign Lord Charles, by the Grace of God,
of England, Scotland, France, and Ireland, King, etc. An. Dom. 1646.

This Instrument was written, and engrossed in Parchment as a Deed Poll is, and
to it in a Libel of Parchment, was the Seal of the said Earl of Mulgrave
affixed, and it was read and allowed in the House of Peers.

Soon after the allowance of the aforesaid Instrument the said Earl of Mulgrave
sent this ensuing Proxy to the Earl of Essex, who made use of it in the House
of Peers, and it was there allowed of, without any the least question, or
dispute.

OMnibus Christi Fidelibus ad quos hoc presens Scriptum pervener it Edmundus
Comes de Mulgrave Salutem. Noveritis me prefatum Edmundum Comitem de Mulgrave
per Licentiam Serenissimi Domini nostri Regis a presenti hoc suo Parliamento
inchoat' et tent' apud Westmonasterium etc. sufficienter excusatum abesse,
nominare, ordinare, et constituere, dilectum mihi in Christo et honorandum
Virum Robertum Comitem Essex, meum verum, certum, et indubitatum Factorem,
Actorem, seu Procuratorem per presents, eidemque procuratori meo dare, and
concedere plenam Authoritatem, and potestatem, pro me and nomine meo, de and
super quibuscunque causis and negotiis in Presenti hoc Parliamento exponendis,
seu declarandis tractandi, tractatibusque hujusmodi inibi factis seu faciendis
consilium and auxilium nomine meo impendendi statutisque etiam and ordination'
quae ex maturo and deliberato judicio Domincrum in eodem Parliamento congregat'
inactitart seu ordinari contiger int nomine meo consentiendi Caeteraque omnia
and singula quae in praemissis necessaria fuerint, seu quomodolibet requisita
faciendi, and exercendi in tam amplis modo and forma, ut ego ipse facere
possem, aut deberem, si presens personaliter interessem, Ratum and Gratum
habiturus totum and quicquid Procuratormeus statuerit aut fecerit in
praemissis. In (...) rei testimonium praesentibus subscripsi Sigillumque
apposui.

Neither will it be impertinent to set down here how many Proxies were sent to
some special Peers at this Parliament, it having been my usual course to make
some short remembrance of them in all their Journals of Queen Eliz's Reign,
upon the first day that any extraordinary Proxies were returned: and I have
caused not only the Presidents of this kind to be inserted here at large, in
respect this was the first Parliament of her Majesty's Reign; but also because
they are more full and direct, than any other that ensue, to prove what has
been the ancient use and Privilege of the Peers of the Upper House, in the
matter of sending, and receiving of Lords Procuratory.

At first, Nicolas Archbishop of York (for the Sea of Canterbury remained still
void since the Death of Cardinal Pool,) was constituted the sole, or joint
Proctor of David Bishop of Peterborough, Cuthbert Bishop of Durham, Thomas
Bishop of Ely, Gilbert Bishop of Bath and Wells, Henry Bishop of St. David's,
and of Thomas Tresham Prior of St. John's of Jerusalem; all which Proxies are
entered at the beginning of the Original Journal Book of the Upper House, to
have been returned on Monday the 23th. day of January, on which this present
Parliament was Summoned to have begun.

Francis Earl of Bedford was also Constituted the sole, or joint Proctor of 15
several Peers. viz. of John Lord Mordant, William Lord Paget, George Lord
Zouch, and of Henry Lord Aburgaveny, all which Proxies are entered at the
beginning of the Original Journal Book of the Upper House, to have been
returned this present Monday the 23th. day of January. He was also constituted
the joint Proctor of Edward Lord Clinton, Lord Admiral, Thomas Lord Sands,
William Lord Vaux of Heredoun, William Lord Gray of Wilton, and Henry Earl of
Cumberland, all whose Proxies are entered in such order, as they be here set
down, in the aforesaid Journal Book, to have been returned on Saturday the 4th.
day of February. The Proxies also of Edward Earl of Derby, John Earl of Oxford,
Henry Lord Strange, Thomas Viscount Howard of Bindon, and Henry Lord Morley, by
which the said Earl of Bedford was Constituted their sole, or joint Proctor,
are entered in the same order they are Transcribed, in the before mentioned
Original Journal Book, to have been returned on Saturday the 18th. day of March
ensuing.

And lastly, the said Earl of Bedford was Constituted the joint Proctor (with
Edward Lord Clinton Lord Admiral) of Oliver Lord St. John of Bletto whose
Letters Procuratory are entered to have been returned on Tuesday the 4th. day of
April ensuing.

Edward Lord Clinton Lord Admiral, was Constituted the sole Proctor of William
Lord Burgh, Edward Lord Windsor, and William Lord Euers, whose Proxies are
entered at the beginning of the Original Journal Book of this Parliament, to
have been returned on this Monday the 23th. day of this January. He was also
Constituted the joint Proctor of William Lord Gray of Wilton, whose Proxy is
entered, as aforesaid, to have been returned on Saturday the 4th. day of
February ensuing, the Proxy also of Francis Earl of Huntington is entered, as
before, to have been returned on Saturday the 18th. day of March following, by
which he Constituted the said Lord Clinton his joint Proctor with Henry Lord
Hastings; And for the Proxy of John Lord Darcie of Darcie entered there, as
before, to have been returned on this day likewise, he is Constituted his sole
Proctor. And lastly the said Lord Clinton Lord Admiral was Constituted the
sole, or joint Proctor of William Lord Willoughby of Parham, Edward Lord
Hastings of Louthbury, and of Oliver Lord St. John of Blestoe, whose Proxies
are entered to have been returned on Tuesday the 4th. day of April ensuing.

By these three foregoing Presidents, it does plainly appear, as also from all
other Presidents of former and latter times, that any Member of the Upper House
by the ancient usage and Custom of the same, is capable of as many Proxies as
shall be directed unto him, although there were an Order made in the said House
to the contrary, upon the day of Anno Regis Caroli An. Dom. 1626. That no Lord
cr Member whatsoever, of the Upper House, should for the time to come, be
capable of above two Proxies at the most, which said order was occasioned, in
respect that George Duke of Bucks, both the favorite of the King deceased, and
of King Charles now Reigning, this present year 1630 did, to strengthen himself
by voices, not only procure diverse persons to be made Members of that House but
also engrossed to himself near upon 20. several Proxies.

And now, if this doubt or conceit should arise in any man's mind, that
therefore the Lords have a greater Privilege, than the Members of the House of
Commons, because they can appoint others to serve in and supply their places in
their absence, which the Commons cannot, they are much deceived and mistaken,
for it is plain that the chief end of a Proxy is, that the Upper House may
have all its Members either in person, or by representation, and therefore the
Lords Spiritual and Temporal, who are Summoned thither, in their own right have
anciently had, and still do retain, the liberty of Constituting their
Procurators, whereas every Member of the House of Commons appears, and does
serve in the right of that County, City, Borough, and Port for which he is
Elected and Chosen, which being a Trust and Confidence reposed in them, can be
no more transferred from him to a third person, than can the Proxy of the
Lords be from him to whom it is directed, if he shall be absent likewise: and
therefore if any Knight, Citizen, Burgess, or Baron, after he is Elected and
returned, shall before the meeting of the House, be disabled by Sickness,
Attainder, or other Cause, from serving in the same, then presently order is
given from the House to the Clerk of the Crown, for the sending thither a
second Writ for a new Election; so that the said House may not remain without
any Member that appertains unto it. And this I conceive Tantamount unto a
Proxy, which cannot be granted, but when the absence of the Lord that sends
it, is perpetual during that whole Parliament or Session, for which he
Constitutes one or more Proctors: for if he repair to the Upper House any time
after, and serve in Person, his Proxy is presently void.

On Wednesday the 25th. day of Ian. the Parliament was held, according to the
last Prorogation thereof on Monday the 23th. day of this instant January
foregoing, and therefore this day is to be reckoned the first day of the
Parliament, and it was the error of -- Seimour Esquire at this time Clerk of the
House of Commons, that in the Original Journal Book of the same House, fol.
186. a. he accounts, and sets down the Parliament to have begun on the
aforesaid 23th. day of January, when it was only prorogued, by which he would
make that to be the first day thereof.

True it is, that Anciently if the Parliament had been Prorogued on that day,
to which the Summons thereof had referred, in the beginning of it, they were so
far from accounting that day the first of the ensuing Parliaments, that new
Writs of Summons were thereupon sent forth, and a new day appointed for the
beginning thereof, as appears in the Parliament Rolls. Anno 23. Edw. 1. die 20.
November. An. 60. Edw. 1. die 11. Decembris A. 33. Edw. 1. die 13. Julij and A.
11. Edw. 2. die 3. Martij.

But yet it has been the constant usage most Anciently, and does doubtless
hold at this day also, that if the King do come in Person to the Parliament, on
that day to which the Writs of Summons do refer, and there cause it to be
referred to another day in his own presence, then shall that day be accounted
the first day of the Parliament; of which there are many Presidents also, in
the Parliament Rolls still remaining in the Tower of London, prout in A. 6.
Edw. 3. Octobris Sti' Hillarij A. 14. Edw. 3. tempore Quadragessimi and A. 15.
Edw. 3. Quindena Paschae; and of diverse other Parliaments in his time, and in
the time of King R. 2. his Successor.

And thus also the last day of the Parliament, or of any particular Session, is
counted to be that on which the Royal assent is given, to one or more Acts of
Parliament, yet if that Parliament or Sessions be adjourned to another day, on
which the Sovereign does again come in Person, and cause it to be dissolved or
further Prorogued, then that latter day is to be accounted the last day
thereof, of which there is one only President during all the Reign of Queen
Eliz', viz. in the Original Journal Book A. 18. Dictae Reginae on Thursday the
15th. day of March.

The Presence of her Majesty, the Lord Keeper, and the Lords Spiritual and
Temporal, is not at all marked in the Original Journal Book of the Upper House,
although this entrance following of the said day be there thus Recorded, viz.

Die Mercurij 25. die Januarij proceres, tain Spirituales quam Temporales,
quorum nomina subsequuntur, presents fuerunt.

But before this Title there is nothing specified, touching the presence of her
Majesty, or of any of the Lords, for the Letters which should be set at the
beginning of the names of such Peers as this day attended her Majesty in the
Upper House, are not at all prefixed to any of them, which doubtless happened,
through the great negligence of Francis Spilman Esquire at this time Clerk of the
Upper House.

Yet most certain it is that her Majesty, Sir Nicholas Bacon, the Lord Keeper,
the Duke of Norfolk, and diverse other Peers were present; but the direct manner
of the ranking of them, in respect of the negligent omission of setting the Pr.
as aforesaid at the beginning of every Lords name that was present, could not
be orderly and and directly entered in his place, although this was the first
day of this first Parliament of her Majesty, nor on Saturday the 28th. day of
this instant January, being the second day of the same, because by like
negligence of Francis Spilman Esquire at this time Clerk of the Upper House, there
is no presence of any Lords there set down in the Original Journal Book of the
same House, nor any mention of the Speakers presentment by the Knights,
Citizens, and Burgesses of the House of Commons; and therefore of necessity it
could not be supplied, until the third day of this foresaid first Parliament of
her Majesty, being Monday the 30th. day of this instant January; on which day
the names of all the Lords Spiritual and Temporal being entered, the Letters Pr.
are prefixed before the name of the Lord Keeper, and of such Peers as were then
present: (as see at large on the said Monday next ensuing) and therefore that
President there so expressly Transcribed, may serve as a Pattern for all the
residue that follow in all the Journals of the Upper House during her Majesty's
Reign: in which there are no other names inserted, but of such Lords as were
marked to be present, unless it be upon Thursday the 21th. day of March
following, in the afternoon in this present Journal, and on Friday the 15th.
day of January in the Session of Parliament. A. 5. of her Majesty in the
Journal of the Upper House.

And although the names of her Majesty, and the Lords that attended could not
be exactly set down, yet it will not be impertinent in the next place, to
insert the manner of their sitting in the said House, which being not at all
mentioned in the aforesaid Original Journal Book of the same, A. 1. Reg. Eliz.
I have therefore partly supplied it, according to 3 other Presidents in these
ensuing Journals on which the first was on Thursday the 12th. of Jan. in the
Session of Parliament, A. 5. Reg. Eliz. the second, on Wednesday the 2d. day of
October. pomerid', in the second and last Session of that Parliament, being held
in A. 8. Reg. (...). and the third, on Monday the 2d. day of Apr. in the
Parliament A. 13. Regin. praedict' all which do follow in the several Journals
of the Upper House, Annis praesatis, and it is partly supplied also out the
Printed Statute, A. 31. H. 8. C. 10. and partly out of that elaborate written
Treatise, entitled Modus tenendi Parliament' apud Anglos, first confusedly
gathered by Will. Bowyer Esquire as I conceive, and now lately digested into a
Methodical Treatise, and enlarged by H. Essing Esquire at this time Clerk of the
Upper House, viz. in A. 1630. L. 1. C. 3. de loco and modo sedendi. Sect. 3. of
the manner of sitting in Parliament at this day.

Her Majesty sat in the Chair of Estate, and when she stood up, her Mantle was
assisted, and born up from her Arms by two Noblemen, or others of Eminent Rank
thereunto appointed.

The Two Seats, on the right, and left hand of the Chair of Estate, were void,
in respect that the first was Anciently for the King of Scots, when he used to
come to our Parliaments: and the other, on the left hand, is for the Prince,
the immediate Heir of the Crown.

On the Form on the right side of the Chair of Estate, which stands on the
North-side of the Upper House, sat the Spiritual Lords, the Archbishop of York
beginning the Form; and the Abbot of Westminster ending it. Who was the last
Abbot that ever sat in the said House in England, since this first Parliament
of her Majesty. But at this day the two Archbishops sit upon one Form by
themselves, and then the other Bishops in order upon two Forms, on the right
hand of the State; the Bishop of London sits first, the Bishop of Durham
second, and the Bishop of Winchester has the third place, and then all other
Bishops, according to the Antiquity of their Consecrations.

On the left side of the Chair of Estate, which is on the South Side of the
Upper House, upon the foremost Form, sat all the Temporal Lords, above the
degree of Barons. The Marquess of Winchester Lord Treasurer of England,
beginning that Form, and the Viscount Bindon ending it.

The Barons sat on the second Form, on the left hand of the State, and it
should seem at this Parliament (as it fell out also in the next Sessions
following, in A. 5. Regin. Eliz. on Tuesday the 12th. day of January) that one
Form held them all, so as the Lord Clinton, Lord Admiral of England, began the
said Form by reason of his Office, and the Lord St. John of Bletsoe ended it.
But at this day the number of Peers being much increased, diverse of the Barons
do sit upon other Forms, Places, Cross-ways, at the lower end of the House.

Sir Nicholas Bacon, the Lord Keeper, because he was under the degree of a
Baron, as also her Majesty's chief Secretary, being but a Knight, were to have
been placed at the uppermost part of the sack in the midst of the said House,
upon one Form, by the fore recited Statute, A. 3. H. 8. Cap. 10. But at this
present Parliament as also at this day, during her Majesty's being present, the
Lord Keeper stood behind the Cloth of Estate, on the right hand; and when her
Majesty was absent, then his Lordship sat on the first Woolsack which is
placed athwart the House, the Seal and Mace by him.

On the Woolsack on the North-side of the House, and of the right hand of the
Estate, sat the two Chief Justices, and diverse other Judges.

On the Woolsack on the left hand of the Estate, and on the South Side of the
House, sat the Master of the Rolls, the Lord Chief Baron, the Queen's Learned
Council, and others. And note, That all these may properly besaid to sit on the
Inner-side of the Woolsacks, and the Queen's Learned Council on the outside of
the Woolsacks, next the Earls.

The Masters of the Chancery sat two of the same side, and two on the other
side, next the Bishops.

The Clerk of the Parliament, and the Clerk of the Crown, sat on the lower
Woolsack, and had a Table before them.

And the Clerk of the Parliament had his Clerks under him, who kneeled behind
the Woolsack, and wrote thereon.

All those Peers (as appears by the Journal of the Upper House. A. 8. Regin.
Eliz. the 2. day of Feb. being Wednesday, which follows after in its due place)
who are before mentioned, had their Mantles, Hoods, and Surcoats, (being of
Crimson Velvet, or of Scarlet) furred with Meniver, their Arms put out on the
right side, and the Duke of Norfolk had four Bars of Meniver. The Marquess of
Winchester, and the Earls three. And the Viscounts, and the Barons, two.

Henry, Earl of Southampton, and the Lord Dacres, of the North, were, as I
conceive at this time, both under Age, and in ward to her Majesty, and if they
were present, (as many times such were admitted upon such Solemn days as
these,) then doubtless they did either stand besides the upper part of the
rail, at the higher end of the Parliament House; or else were admitted to kneel
at the upper end of the said House, near the Chair of State, for no Peer is
called to sit as a Member of that great Council, or to have his free voice,
until he have accomplished his full Age, unless by the special grace of the
Prince, and that very rarely, unless they be near upon the Age of twenty at the
least. The Sons and Heirs apparent of Peers, that sit in the House, stand, on
ordinary days, without the upper Rail.

These Animadversions being thus premised, touching the places, and Robes of
the Peers; now follows the coming up of the Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses,
of the House of Commons, into the Upper House, which, being not found in the
Original Journal Book of the same, I have supplied with some additions out of
the Original Journal Book of the House of Commons, A. primo Regin. Eliz. and
with it the Speech of Sir Nicholas Bacon, Lord Keeper, at large, out of a Copy
thereof I had by me.

The Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses of the House of Commons remained sitting
in their own House till notice was brought them by..... (according to the
Ancient Custom and usage,) that her Majesty, the Lords Spiritual and Temporal,
and the residue were set in the Upper House, expecting their repair thither,
whereupon they went up immediately unto the said House, and being set in, as
many as conveniently could, and standing below the Rail or Bar, at the nether
end of the said House, Sir Nicolas Bacon, Lord Keeper, after he had first
privately, in the presence of them all, conferred with her Majesty, went and
stood behind the Cloth of Estate, on the right hand, and there spoke as
follows; viz.

MY Lords, and Masters all, The Queen's most excellent Majesty, our Natural and
most Gracious Sovereign Lady, having, as you know, Summoned hither her High
Court of Parliament, has commanded me to open and declare the chief Causes and
Considerations that moved her Highness thereunto. And here, my Lords, I wish
(not without great cause) there were in me ability to do it in such order and
sort, as is beseeming for her Majesty's honor and the understanding of this
presence, and as the great weightiness and worthiness of the Matter does
require it to be done. The remembrance whereof, and the number of my
imperfections to the well performing of it, does indeed (plainly to speak)
breed in me such Fear and Dread, that as from a man abashed, and well nigh
astonished, you are to hear all that I shall say therein. True it is, that some
Comfort and Encouragement I take, through the hope I have conceived, by that I
have seen and heard of your gentle sufferance by others, whereof I look upon
equal cause, equally with others to be partaker: and the rather, for that I am
sure good will shall not want in me to do my uttermost, And also because I mean
to occupy as small a time as the greatness of such a cause will suffer,
thinking that to be the meetest Medicine to cure your tedious hearing, and mine
imperfect and disordered speaking. Summarily to say, the immediate cause of
this Summons and Assembly, be Consultations, Advice, and Contentation. For
although diverse things that are to be done here in Parliament, might by means
be reformed without Parliament, yet the Queen's Majesty, seeking in her
Consultation of importance, Contentation by assent, and surety by Advice; and
therein reposing her self not a little in your Fidelities, Wisdoms and
Discretions, means not at this time to make any Resolutions in any matter of
weight, before it shall be by you sufficiently and fully debated, examined and
considered. Now the Matters and causes whereupon you are to Consult, are
chiefly and principally three points. Of those the first is of well making of
Laws, for the according, and uniting of these people of the Realm into an
uniform order of Religion, to the Honor and Glory of God, the establishing of
the Church, and Tranquillity of the Realm: The second, for the Reforming and
removing of all Enormities, and Mischiefs, that might hurt or hinder the Civil
Orders and Policies of this Realm: the third and last is, advisedly and deeply
to weigh and consider the Estate and Condition of this Realm, and the Losses
and Decays that have happened of late to the Imperial Crown thereof; and
therefore to advise the best remedies to supply and relieve the same. For the
first, the Queen's Majesty having God before her Eyes, and being neither
unmindful of Precepts and Divine Councils, means and intends in this
Conference, first and chiesly there should be sought the advancement of God's
honor and Glory, as the sure and infallible foundation, whereupon the Policies
of every good Commonwealth are to be erected, and knit; and as the straight
line, whereby it is wholly to be directed and governed; and as the chief Pillar
and Buttress, wherewith it is continually to be sustained and maintained. And,
like as the well and perfect doing of this, cannot but make good success in all
the rest, so the remiss and loose dealing in this, cannot but make the rest
full of imperfections and doubtfulness; which must needs bring with them
continual Change, and alteration; things much to be eschewed in all good
Governances, and most of all in matters of Faith and Religion; which of their
natures be, and ought to be, most Stable.

Wherefore her Highness wills, and most earnestly requires you all, first
and principally, for the Duty you bear unto God, whose cause this is; and then
for the Service you owe to her Majesty, and your Country, whose Weal it
concerns universally; and for the Love you ought to bear to your selves, whom
it touches one by one, particularly, That in this Consultation, you with all
humbleness, singleness and pureness of mind, confirm your selves together,
using your whole endeavor and diligence, by Laws and Ordinances to Establish
that, which by your Learning and Wisdom shall be thought most Meet for the well
performing of this godly purpose: and this without respect of Honor, Rule or
Sovereignty, Profit, Pleasure or Ease, or of any thing that might touch any
Person in estimation or opinion of Wit, Learning or Knowledge; and without all
regard of other manner of Affection. And therewith, That you will also in this
your Assembly and Conference clearly forbear, and, as a great enemy to good
Council, fly from all manner of Contentions, Reasonings and Disputations, and
all Sophistical Captious and frivolous Arguments and Quiddities, meeter for
ostentation of Wit, than Consultation of weighty Matters, comelier for Scholars
than Counselors; more beseeming for Schools, than for Parliament Houses.
Besides that commonly they be great causes of much expense of time, and breed
few good Resolutions. And like as in Council all contention should be eschewed,
even so by Council provision should be made, that no Contentions, Contumelious,
nor opprobrious words, as Heretic, Schismatic, Papist and such like names,
being Nurses of such Seditious Factions and Sects, be used, but may be banished
out of men's Mouths; as the Causers, continuers and encreasers of Displeasure,
Hate and Malice; and as utter Enemies to all Concord and Unity, the very Marks
that you are now come to Shoot at.

Again, as in proceedings herein great and wary Consideration is to be had,
That nothing be advised or done, which any way in continuance of time were
likely to breed, or nourish any kind of Idolatry, or Superstition; so, on the
other side, heed is to be taken, that by no Licentious or loose handling, any
manner of Occasion be given, whereby any contempt, or irreverent behavior
toward God and Godly things, or any spice of irreligion might creep in, or be
conceived; The examples of fearful punishments that have followed these four
Extremities, I mean, Idolatry, Superstition, Contempt and Irreligion in all
Ages and times, are more in number than I can declare, and better known than I
can make recital to you of. And yet are they not so many, or better known than
by the continual budding benefits and blessings of God to those that have
forsaken those extremities, and embraced their Contraries. And for your better
encouraging to run this right and strait course, although that which is said
ought to suffice thereto, I think I may affirm, that the good King Hezekiah had
no greater desire to amend what was amiss in his time; nor the Noble Queen
Hester a better heart to overthrow the Mighty Enemies to God's Elect, than our
Sovereign Lady and Mistress has to do that may be just and acceptable in God's
sight: Thus forced to this by our Duties to God, feared thereto by his
punishments, provoked by his benefits, drawn by your love to your Country, and
your selves, encouraged by so Princely a Patroness, Let us in God's name go
about this work, endeavoring our selves with all diligence, (as I have before
said) to make such Laws, as may tend to the honor and Glory of God, to the
Establishment of his Church, and to the Tranquillity of the Realm.

For the Second, There is to be considered what things by private men devised,
be practiced, and put in ure in this Realm, contrary or hurtful to the
Commonwealth of the same, for which no Laws be yet provided; and whether the
Laws before this time made be sufficient to redress the Enormities they were
meant to remove, and whether any Laws made but for a time, be meet to be
continued for ever, or for a Season: Besides, whether any Laws be too severe or
too sharp, or too soft and too gentle; To be short, you are to consider all
other imperfections of Laws made, and all wants of Laws to be made, and
thereupon to provide the meetest Remedies, respecting the Nature and Quality of
the disorder and offense; the inclination and disposition of the people; and of
the manner of the time.

For the Third and last, (a Mavelous matter) I cannot see how a good true
Englishman can enter into the consideration of it, but it must breed in his
breast two contrary effects; Comfort I mean, and discomfort; joy, and sadness;
for on the one part, how can a man (calling to his remembrance, that God of his
divine Power and Ordinance, has brought the Imperial Crown of this Realm to a
Princess, that so Nobly, diligently, willingly and carefully does, by the
advice of all the Estates of the Realm seek all the ways and means that may be,
to Reform all disorders and things, that be amiss; to continue and make firm
that that is good, to detect and discourage those that be dishonest and evil;
to execute Justice in all points to all persons and at all times, without
rigor and extremity, and to use Clemency, without Indulgence and fond Pity.

A Princess, I say, that is not, nor ever means to be, so Wedded in her own
will and Fantasy, that for the satisfaction thereof, she would do any thing
that was likely to bring any servitude or Bondage to her people, or give any
just occasion to them of any Inward Grudge, whereby any Tumult or stirs might
arise, as has done of late days, things most pernicious and Pestilent to the
Commonwealth; A Princess, that never means or intends, for any private
affection, to advance the Cause or Quarrel with any Foreign Prince or
Potentate, to the destruction of her Subjects, to the loss of any of her
Dominions, or to the impoverishing of her Realm; A Princess, to whom nothing,
what Nothing? no, no worldly thing under the Sun is so dear, as the hearty Love
and good will of her Nobles and Subjects, and to whom nothing is so Odible, as
that they might cause, or by any means procure the contrary.)

How can (I say) a man remember this wonderful benefit, but of necessity he
must needs heartily rejoice, and give God thanks for the same! But, my Lords,
the handling of the Princely virtues of this Noble Princess, the cause of our
rejoicing, of purpose I pretermit, partly because I ever supposed it not
altogether meet for this presence; but chiefly, for that it requires a
perfect, and Excellent Orator, in whom both Art and Nature Concurs, and not to
me, a man in whom both fails. Marry, I wish in my heart, an Apt person might
often have meet presence, and just occasion, to handle this matter, as the
weightiness of the Cause requires: But as the Causes of our Rejoicing for such
respects be (thanks be to God,) both many and great; so for the causes of our
sadness and discomfort, they be neither few nor little.

But here upon great cause, as a man perplexed and amazed, I stay, not knowing
what is best to be done; very Ioth I am to utter that which is much unpleasant
for me to speak, and as uncomfortable for you to hear: but because sores and
wounds be hardly cured, except they be well opened and searched, therefore
constrained, of necessity I see I must trouble you with these sad matters. What
man, that either Loves his Sovereign, his Country or himself, that thinks of
and weighs the great decays and losses of Honor, Strength and Treasure, yea
and the peril that has happened to this Imperial Crown of late time, but must
needs inwardly and earnestly bewail the same? Could there have happened to this
Imperial Crown a greater loss in Honor, Strength and Treasure than to lose
that piece, I mean Callis? which was in the beginning so Nobly won, and has so
long time, so Honorably and Politickly, in all Ages and times, and against all
attempts, both Foreign and near, both of Forces and Treasons, been defended and
kept? Did not the keeping of this breed Fear to our greatest Enemies, and made
our faint friends the more assured, and lother to break? yea, has not the
winning and keeping of this, bred throughout Europe an honorable opinion and
report of our English Nation?

Again, what one thing so much preserved and guarded our Merchants, their
Trasfick and entercourses, or has been so great a help for the well uttering
of our chief Commodities, or what, so much as this, has kept a great part of
our Seacoasts from spoiling and Robbing? To be short, the loss of this is much
greater than I am able to utter, and as yet, as I suppose, is able to be
understood by any: and yet, my Lords, if this were the whole loss, then might
men have some hope in time to come to recover that, that in time has been thus
suddenly and strangely lost; But when a man looks further, and considers
the Mavelous decays and wast of the Revenue of the Crown, the inestimable
consumption of the Treasure, levied both of the Crown, and of the Subject, the
Exceeding loss of Munition and Artillery, the great loss of diverse valiant
Gentlemen of very good Service, the incredible sum of Moneys owing at this
present and in honor due to be paid, and the biting interest that is to be
answered for the forbearance of this Debt, therewith remembering the Strength
and Mightiness of the Enemy, and his Confederates, and how ready he is upon
every Occasion, upon every side, and in every time, to Annoy you; And how the
time most Meet for that purpose draws on at hand again; if a man consider the
Huge and most Wonderful charge, newly grown to the Crown, more than ever has
heretofore been Wont, and now of necessity to be continued; as first, the
maintenance of Garrison in certain places on the Seacoasts, as Portsmounth,
with new Munition and Artillery, besides the new increased Charge for the
continual maintenance of the English Navy to be ever in readiness against all
evil happs; the strongest Wall and defense that can be against the Enemies of
this Island; And further also, the new Augmentation or Charge, for the
maintenance of a Garrison at Barwick, and the Frontiers Northward. Indeed, I
must confess that in those matters mine understanding is but small, and mine
experience and time to Learn, less: But in mine opinion, this does exceed the
Ancient yearly Revenue of the Crown. Besides, that double so much is of
Necessity to be presently spent, about the fortifying of those places in
Buildings. When I say a man remembers, and considers these things, it makes
him so far from hope of Recovery of that, that is lost, without some aid or
Contribution of the Subject; that he will Judge all to be little enough, to
make and prepare good defense for that that is left.

Here perchance a Question would be asked, (and yet I do Marvel to hear a
Question made of so plain a Matter) what should be the cause of this? if it
were asked, thus I mean to answer; that I think no man so blind but sees it,
no man so deaf but hears it, nor no man so ignorant but understands it.
Marry withal, I think there is no man so hard hearted in thinking of it, but
for the restoring of it would adventure Lands, Limbs, yea the Life. But now to
the remedies, wherein only this I have to say; That, as the well looking to the
whole universally, is the only sure preservation of every one particularly; so
seems it of all congruence and reason meet, that every one particularly, by
all ways and means readily and gladly, according to his power, should concur,
and join to relieve and assist the whole universally. Neither can I see, things
standing as they do, how any that loves his Country, or has wit to foresee
his own surety, can be withdrawn from this. Is there any, think you so Mad,
that having a Range of houses in peril of fire, would not gladly pluck down
part, to have the rest preserved and saved? Does not the wise Merchant, in
every adventure of danger, give part to have the rest assured? These causes
well compared, small difference shall be found. And for all this (a strange
matter and scarce Credible) with how deaf an Ear, and how hardly the Queen's
Majesty may endure to hear of any device that may be burthenous to her
Subjects, I partly do understand, and diverse others partly perceive. Is not the
cause Mavelous Pityful, that the Necessity and Need of this Ragged and Torn
State by Misgovernance, should by force so bridle and restrain the noble Nature
of such a Princess, that she is not able to show such Liberality and
Bountifulness to her Servants, and Subjects, as her heart and Inclination
disposes her Highness unto? What a grief and Torment this is to a Noble Mind!
What a grief? surely such a grief, as but to a Noble Mind who feels it, it
cannot be understood. But for the more plain declaration of her highness's
disposition in this matter, her Highness has commanded me to say unto you,
even from her own Mouth, that were it not for the preservation of your selves,
and the surety of the State, her Highness would sooner have adventured her
Life, (which our Lord long preserve) than she would have adventured to trouble
her Loving Subjects with any offensive matter, or that should be burthenous or
displeasant unto them; And for the further Notifying of her Highness's mind
herein, she has commanded me to say unto you, That albeit you your selves see,
that this is not matter of will, no matter of displeasure, no private Cause of
her own, which in times past have been sufficient for Prince's Pretenses, (the
more Pity!) but a matter for the universal Weal of this Realm, the defense of
our Country, the preservation of every man, his house and Family particularly;
yet her Majesty's Will and Pleasure is, that nothing shall be demanded or
required of her Loving Subjects, but that, which they, of their own free wills
and Liberalities, be well contented, readily and gladly, frankly and freely to
offer; so great is the trust that she reposeth in them, and the love and
affection that her Highness bears toward them, nothing at all doubting, but
that they will so lovingly carefully and prudently consider and weigh this
great and weighty Matter, that such provision out of hand be taken therein, as
her Highness shall be preserved in all Honor and Royal Dignity, and you, and
the rest of her Loving Subjects, in common quiet and surety.

Now, to make an end, The Queen's Majesty's pleasure is, That you, her
welbeloved and trusty Knights of her Shires, and Burgesses, according to your
laudable Custom, shall repair to your Common House, and there deliberately and
advisedly Elect, or rather, amongst so many already Elect persons, select one,
both grave and discreet, who after he be by you presented, and that
Presentation by her Highness admitted, shall then occupy the Office and Room of
your Common Mouth, and Speaker, and of your day of presentation the Queens
Majesty gives you.

As soon as the Lord Keeper had ended his Speech, and the Knights, Citizens and
Burgesses retired to the House of Commons, to Elect and choose their Speaker,
Francis Spilman Esquire Clerk of the Upper House, stood up, and read the Names of
Receivers, and Tryers of Petitions in French, according to the Ancient and
unusual manner. And because I resolve in all the ensuing Journals of the said
House, during the Reign of this most Sacred Queen, only to set down their said
names, without tying my self to the express Form or Language; therefore I have
in this place, once for all, Transcribed the exact Form thereof, as it is
entered in the Original Journal Book of the Upper House, A. isto primo Regin.
Eliz. with this difference only, that whereas it is there entered before the
beginning of the said Journal, here I have caused it to be referred unto, and
placed in that day, to which it more properly belongs. After which also, diverse
Animadversions touching the Ancient use and nature of the said Receivers and
Tryers, are inserted.

Recepveurs des Petitions d' Angleterre Ir'land Gallee et D'Escoce.
Messire Robert Catelyn chl. chef. Justicier. Et ceux qui veuleut delivrer leur
Petitions, les baillent dedans six jours prochainement ensuivants. Messire
Guillame Cordell chl. garden des Rolls. Messire Umfrey Brown chl. et
Justicier. Messire Rich. Reed chlr. Docteur Lewis Docteur Harnye.

Recepveurs des Petitions de Gascoigne et des autres terres et pais de per de
la mer, et des Isles.
Messire James Dyer chl. et Justicier. Et ceux qui veuleut delievrer leur
Petitions, les baillent dedans six jours prochainement ensuivants. Messire
Edward Saunders chl. le chief. Baron. Messire Anthony Brown Justicier. Messire
Johan. Vaughan Docteur Mowse.

Et sout assigns trieurs des Petitions d' Angleterre Ireland Gallee et d'
Escoce.
Larcheresque de York Toute eux ensembles, ou quatre des Prelattes et Seigneurs
avaunt ditz appellants auecque eulx Mons. Le Garden du grand-Seal et Le
Thesaurarier, et ausi les Serians de la Roigne, quand besoigne sera, et
tiendrout leur places en la Chamber du Chambrelain. Le Marquisse de Winchester
Thesaurar. de Angleterre. Le Duc de Norf. Conte Marescalle de Angleterre. Le
Cont de Arundel Le Cont de Rutland Le Cont de Bedford Le Cont de Pembrooke Le
Baron Clinton et Say Le Grand Admiral de. Angleterre. Le Baron Rych.

Et sout assigns Trieurs des Petitions de Gascoigne, et de autres terres et
pays per de la mer et des Isles.
Le Marquess de Northampton. Toute eux ensembles, ou quatre des Prelates et
Seigneurs avant-ditz appellants a-vecques eulx les Serjeans de la Roigne, quand
il sera besoigne, et tiendrout leur places en le Chamber de Thesaurarier. Le
Conte de Shrewsbury. Le Conte de Sussex. Le Conte de Huntingdon. Le Evesque de
London. Le Evesque de Carlisle. Le Baron Howard d'effingham, Chambrelaine de la
Roigne. Le Baron Stafford. Le Baron Willoughby. Le Baron Williams de Them. Le
Baron North.

The Knights, Citizens, Burgesses, and Barons of the House of Commons, having
Notice about one of the Clock in the Afternoon, (of this foresaid Saturday
being the 28th. day of Jan.) That her Majesty, the Lord Keeper, and diverse
Lords, Spiritual and Temporal, were set in the Upper House, expecting their
attendance, they repaired immediately thither, with Sir Thomas Gargrave Knight,
their Speaker Elect, and being let in as many as conveniently could, the said
Sir Thomas Gargrave was led up to the Rail, or Bar, at the lower end of the
said House, by two of the most honorable Personages of the House of Commons;
where, after three Reverences made to her Majesty, he modestly and submissively
excused himself, as being unable to undergo the many and great difficulties of
that place: to which, by the Grace of the Queen, and the undeserved favor of
the House of Commons, he had been chosen; Alleging withal, that there were
many Members in that House more worthy of the honor, and more able to undergo
the Charge of that service, than himself; And therefore desired, and humbly
advised the Queen's Majesty, to free him from that employment, and to commend
to her Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses of the House of Commons, the Choice of
some other of their more able Members.

But notwithstanding all these reasons and excuses, according to the usual
form, by the said Prolocutor alleged, Sir Nicholas Bacon Knight, Lord Keeper
of the Seal, by her Majesty's Commandment, both encouraged him to the Careful
undertaking of that Service, and assured him of the Queen's acceptance, and
admission of him, by this Oration following.

SIR Thomas Gargrave, the Queen's Majesty does right well perceive and
understand your Comely and Modest manner, in the disabling of your self for
this Office, and room, whereunto her Trusty and Wel-beloved Knights and
Burgesses have Elected you, and do now presently present you, and therewith
also has heard your Petition and Suit, made with all humbleness and reverence,
for your discharge in this matter; for answer whereunto, her Majesty has
commanded me to say unto you, that She her self right well does understand,
that by the Orders and Rules of good Government and Policy, Power and
Authority, to receive or refuse any Office of Service in any Commonwealth,
should not be permitted to be in the Arbitriment of him, who is thereunto
Orderly called, or appointed, nor that the Judgment and discerning of Ability
and disability in service, pertains to the person called, but to her Majesty,
asdoth right well appear by a Similitude that is old and Common, but neither
unapt nor untrue; that is, like as unto the head of a natural body pertains
the appointment, and as it were the Marshalling of every Member of the same
Body to the particular Service, and Office; So to the Head of every Body
Politic, be it Emperor, King or less State, belongs, mediately or
immediately derived, the assignment and admitting of every Member of the same
body, to his Ministry and Duty, and as the contrary doing in the first, were
Monstrous in nature, so surely the contrary doing in the second, were Monstrous
in reason. Now her Majesty having this Authority in her, as Head of the
Politic Body of this Realm, and therewith being credibly informed of your
approved Fidelity, wisdom and discretion, and of the long experience that you
have had in Parliament matters, thinks, that if her Highness should assent to
your Desire, it would be prejudicial to her Majesty, and the Commonwealth of
the Realm. Besides also, for as much as you have been chosen, and enabled to
this Office and place, according to an Ancient and Laudable Order, by so many
wise, sage and discreet Knights, and Burgesses, to whose Judgment and opinion,
her Highness thinks it meet and convenient for her to have great regard, and
to give much credit; and says, that for that respect also, her Majesty may not
conveniently grant your Petition.

Again, your self, seeking in humble and reverent manner your own discharge and
disablement, have indeed, by well, comely, modest and orderly doing thereof,
given no small cause, whereby you are to be enabled; and therefore her Majesty,
upon these respects and diverse others, does now presently admit this Election,
and presentation made of you, nothing at all doubting, but that you will, with
such diligence, faithfulness and circumspection, use and Exercise your Office,
as thereby the good hope and expectation, that her Majesty has received of
you, by that she has heard of others already, shall be by that her self shall
see and hear, not only confirmed, but also increased and augmented; And so, as
her Highness's Loving Subjects of her Common's House, shall neither have just
cause to repent their Election, her Majesty her admission, nor you your self
the assumption, and taking upon you this Charge.

Unto which Speech of the Lord Keepers Sir Thomas Gargrave humbly submitting
himself to the undergoing of the Charge and service imposed on him, made a
discreet and submissive answer, in which he expressed the great blessedness now
accrewed to the Realm, and all conditions therein, by her Majesty's attaining
the Crown; being a Princess so Richly endued with Piety, Wisdom, Mercy, Justice
and tender Care of her people's good and safety, and with all other gifts of
mind and body, requisite for the Government of so great a Kingdom.

Then he proceeded to many hearty Prayers, and feeling Expressions of the good
success of the Parliament, and for the uniting of their Councils in one Issue,
and to the repairing of the many losses, and preventing of many dangers, now
imminent over the Realm. And lastly, he came, according to the usual Form,
first to desire Liberty of access for the House of Commons to the Queen's
Majesty's presence, upon all Urgent and Necessary Occasions. Secondly, that if
in any thing himself should mistake, or misreport, or over-slip that which
should be committed unto him to declare, that it might, without prejudice to
the House, be better declared, and that his unwilling Miscarriage therein might
be pardoned.

Thirdly, that they might have Liberty and freedom of Speech in whatsoever they
Treated of, or had occasion to propound and debate in the House. The fourth,
and last, that all the Members of the House, with their Servants and necessary
Attendants, might be exempted from all manner of Arrests and Suits, during the
continuance of the Parliament, and the usual space, both before the beginning,
and after the ending thereof, as in former times has always been accustomed.

To which Speech of the said Speaker, the Lord Keeper, without any long
pausing, replied again in manner and form following.

MR. Speaker, the Queen's Majesty has heard, and does very well understand
your wise and discreet Oration, full of good meaning, good Will and good
Matter: the Effect whereof (as I take it) may be divided into three parts; of
those the first contains the commendation of the Queen's Highness, The
Second, certain good wishes and desires of yours, very honorable, profitable
and Commodious for the Realm to be followed, and put into Execution. The third,
diverse Petitions concerning the Exercises of your Office, and the Liberties and
Privileges of the Commons House. For the first, the Queen's Majesty gives you
most hearty thanks, as for a good Exhortation made to her Highness, to become
such a one as you have commended her for; but not acknowledging those virtues
to be in her Highness, Marry, confessing that such as she has be God's graces.
And therewithal, her Highness wishes, (as she trusts you all do,) that for
England's sake, there were as many virtues in her, as would serve for the good
Government of this her Realm, committed to her Royal Charge, and desires you
all, with her, to give God daily thanks for those which she has, and to make
humble Petition to grant such increase of the rest, as to his divine Providence
shall be thought for his honor most Meet.

For the Second, her Majesty trusts, and verily believes, that those good
wishes and desires of yours are so deeply graven, and perfectly imprinted in
the hearts of the hearers, that the good success and sequel, that should come
thereof, will evidently declare, that you have not in vain spoken them, nor
they negligently heard them. For the third and last, you have divided into four
Petitions; The first, for your access to the Queen's Highness and her Nobles,
for your reports and conference. The Second, that you be born with in any
thing, if you should in any of your reports be mistaken, or overslipped, and
that without prejudice to the House it be better declared. The Third, Liberty
of Speech, for well debating of Matters propounded. The Fourth and last, that
all the Members of the House and their Servants may have the same freedom from
all manner of Suits, as before time they used to have.

To these Petitions, the Queen's Majesty has commanded me to say unto you,
that her Highness is right well contented to grant them unto you, as largely,
as amply and as liberally, as ever they were granted by any her Noble
Progenitors; and to confirm the same with as great an Authority. Marry, with
these Conditions and cautions; first, that your access be void of importunity,
and for matters Needful, and in time Convenient. For the Second, that your
Diligence and Carefulness be such, (Mr. Speaker,) that the defaults in that
part be as rare as may be; whereof her Majesty doubts little. For the Third,
which is for Liberty of Speech, therewith her Highness is right well contented;
but so, as they be neither unmindful, or uncareful of their Duties, Reverence
and Obedience to their Sovereign. For the last, great heed would be taken, that
no evil disposed person seek of purpose that privilege, for the only
defrauding of his Creditors, and for the maintenance of injuries and wrongs.
These Admonitions being well remembered, her Majesty thinks all the said
Liberties and Privileges well granted. To come to an end, only this I have to
put you in mind of, that in the sorting of your things, you observe such Order,
that matters of the greatest Moment, and most Material to the State, be
chiefly, and first set forth; so as they be not hindered by particular and
private Bills to this purpose. That when those great Matters be past, this
Assembly may sooner take end, and men be licensed to take their ease; I have
said.

The Speaker being thus allowed, he returned to the House of Commons, with the
Sergeant of the House bearing the Mace before him; and the Queen's Majesty, and
the Lords rose, and departed.

On Monday the 30th. day of January, were diverse Lords, Spiritual and Temporal
present, as is plainly set down in the entrance of the names in the Original
Journal Book of the Upper House.

Francis Spilman Esquire Clerk of the Upper House, standing at the Table near the
lower Woolsack, did there read a certain Bill, written in Paper, and Entitled,
An Act for the restitution of the first Fruits, and Tenths, and Rents reserved,
Nomine Decimae, and of Parsonages Impropriate to the Imperial Crown of this
Realm; and after he had so read it, (which was accounted the first reading
thereof,) then he delivered the same kneeling, unto Sir Nicholas Bacon, Knight,
Lord Keeper of the Great Seal, together with a Brief of the Bill.

The Lord Keeper read the Title of the Bill, and then reported the effect of
the same unto the House out of the Brief, And then concluded with these words,
viz. This is the first time of the reading of this Bill.

And there is no mention made in the Original Journal Book of the Upper House,
that this Bill was at all spoken unto upon this reading, neither is it indeed
usual, although there have not wanted Presidents thereof, prout A. 1. H. 8. 11.
Die Parliamenti Billa de actionibus, brought from the Commons Lecta prima vice,
and Domini disputando censuerunt reformandum quod Regia Majestas haberet. 3.
vel 4 Annos, pars vero contra partem nisi unum Annum. And a Bill has been
rejected upon the first reading, prout Anno 3. Edw. 6. 14. Nova Billa pro
jurisdictione Episcoporum Rejected, and a Committee appointed; to draw a new
Bill; of which also there want not diverse other Presidents in most of the other
Journals during her Majesty's Reign: but most true it is, that usually a Bill
is seldom rejected till the second reading, for then it is most proper to be
spoken unto; and when it has received either a longer or shorter disputation
in the House, then the proceedings eommonly are either to order it to be
engrossed, or refer it to Committees, or to reject it; which course holds
only in Bills that come newly into either House. For if a Bill, having passed
one of the two Houses, be sont unto the other, it is never ordered to be
engrossed, because it comes from thence ready engrossed in Parchment, and
seldom referred to Committees, or rejected; there want not also diverse
Presidents, when a Bill has been disputed after the third reading, and
sometimes recommitted, and sometimes rejected. Of all which, the Examples and
Presidents are so frequent in all the ensuing Journals of this Queen, as also
in those foregoing of H. 8. Ed. 6. and Queen Mary, as there is not need to make
any large Citation of them: Neither do there want, in their several places, fit
and due references, whereby to refer the several Presidents of this nature,
contained in one and the same Journal, from one to another. Which things being
thus premised and observed, now follow some Animadversions or Presidents,
touching the Commission of Bills, and further proceedings in them upon the
first reading.

Bills also have been Committed upon the first reading, prout An. 6. H. 8. 14.
Feb. recepta est Billa in papyro concernens apparatum, and lecta est prima vice
and deliberata Magistro Pigot reformanda.

Anno Primo Ed. 6. 21. Novembris allata est a Communi domo Billa for benefices,
Common Preachers and residence, quae prima vice lecta est, and commissa
Archiepis. Cantuarien', Episcopo Elien, Episcopo Dunolmen', Episcopo Roffen',
Episcopo Lincoln', Marchioni Northampton, Domino St. John, Comiti Arundel,
Domino Admirallo and Domino Wentworth, and in A. 5. Edw. 6. 16. Feb. Hodie
prima vice lecta est Billa to avoid regrating, forestalling, etc. and commissa
est Magistro Hales, Magistro Molineux, Magistro Saunders, and Solicitatori
Reginae. And there are very many Presidents that Bills have been committed upon
the first reading, in the times of Hen. 8. and Ed. 6. as may appear by the
Committees of those times.

The like Presidents are to be found in most of the Journals of her Majesty,
prout A. 8. Eliz. Oct. 3. The Bill for the better Executing of Statutes, etc.
codem An. 5. October. touching Fines and Recoveries, An. 13. Eliz. 20. Aprilis,
against fraudulent Conveyances, etc. An. 14. Eliz. 12. Maij, for preservation
of Woods, eodem An. and die, for the punishment of Vagabonds; and so in many
other Parliaments of this Queen's time, of which (because they are so
frequently obvious) it would be unnecessary to make further repetition.

And although there be no mention made in the Original Journal Book of the
Upper House, that the Lords and Members of the same were this day called, yet
there is no great doubt to be made thereof; and therefore I have caused it to
be inserted, and applied unto this time, in manner and form following.

Francis Spilman the Clerk, did on this third day of the Parliament call every
Lord in the House by his Name, that so it might be seen, who were present;
beginning with the lowest Baron, and ascending to the highest Peer, where also
the Proxies and other Excuses of the absent Lords, were Registered.

But it may be Collected by the Parliament Rolls Annis 37. 38. 40. 43. 45. 47.
and 50. Ed. 3. that the Lords names were called the first day, and the Commons
also in the Upper House before the King's coming, which Order, in respect of
the time, is held still with the Commons, whose Names are usually called at
this day in the Court of Requests, the first day of the Parliament.

Dominus Custos Magni Sigilli continuavit presens Parliamentum usque in diem
Crastinum, hora Octava.

On Tuesday, the 31th. day of Jan. the former Bill for the restitution and
annexation of the first Fruits and Tenths, to the Imperial Crown of the Queen's
Majesty, was read the Second time.

Francis Spilman Esquire Clerk of the House, (having read the said Bill for the
Restitution and Annexation of the First Fruits, etc.) standing at the Table,
near the nether Woolsack, did then deliver the same without any Brief, Kneeling
to the Lord Keeper, who thereupon read the Title thereof to the House, and
said, This is the second Reading; and so the Bill was Ordered to be Engrossed,
which is no more, than to Transcribe the Bill sairly out of the Paper, in which
it was written, into Parchment. More shall be said, touching the referring of a
Bill to Committees, on Friday the third day of March ensuing; where is the
first mention of Committing any Bill during this Parliament.

After the second Reading of the aforesaid Bill, there appears no other
matter in the Original Journal Book of the Upper House, save only the entrance
of the continuance of the Parliament by the Lord Keeper.

On Wednesday the first day of February, the Bill for the Recognition of the
Queen's Highnesse's Title to the Imperial Crown of this Realm, was read the
first time, (in such manner and form, as the Bill for the Restitution of the
Firstfruits and Tenths, etc. was read, on Monday the 30th. day of January
foregoing;) and was thereupon Committed to the Queen's Attorney, which cannot
properly be called a Committing of the Bill, because no Lords are named
Committees therein, but only a referring of the Bill to the said Attorney,
(who, as is most likely, with the residue of the Queen's Learned Council, did
at first draw it) that so upon further perusal thereof, he might again bring it
into the House, and Certify the Lords, if any thing were to be altered or
reformed in it.

On Saturday, the 4th. day of February, the Bill, for the Recognition of the
Queen's Highnesse's Title to the Imperial Crown of this Realm, was read the
second time, in such manner and form as the Bill, for the Restitution and
Annexation of the First Fruits, etc. was read, on Tuesday the 31th. day of
January foregoing, and was thereupon Ordered to be engrossed.

The Bill also for the Restitution and Annexation of the First Fruits and
Tenths and Rents reserved Nomine Decimae, and of Parsonages impropriate, to the
Imperial Crown of this Realm, was read the third time, The whole manner and
form of Proceedings wherein, as also of the sending thereof down unto the House
of Commons, I have caused to be Transcribed out of that beforementioned
written Discourse, touching the whole Order and Process of passing of Bills in
the Upper House, Penned by H. Elsing Esquire at this time Clerk of the same, this
present year 1630. and the form of the said sending down thereof, out of a like
Treatise, of passing Bills in the House of Commons, Penned by W. Hackwel of
Lincolns Inn Esquire For I conceive there is no question, but that the Form used at
this day, is one and the same with that which was observed this first year, and
the rest ensuing of her Majesty's Reign; And therefore I have applied all to
this time, although there be nothing thereof expressed, in the Original Journal
Book it self of the Upper House, save only the very Title of the Bill, the time
of the reading, the dissent of the Bishops, and the sending of it down to the
House of Commons. Francis Spilman Clerk of the House, standing by the Table at
the nether Woolsack, read the same Bill, and then indorsed upon it, being
fairly engrossed in Parchment, these words 3. vice lecta, and then delivered
the same, kneeling to the Lord Keeper, without any Brief of the Bill, who
thereupon, repeating the Title only of the Bill, said, This is the third
Reading of the Bill.

Then his Lordship demanded of the House, whether he should put it to the
question for passing, which being agreed on affirmatively, the question was
thus put.

Such of your Lordships as are of opinion, that this Bill is fit to Pass, (or
shall Pass,) say, content.

Then the lowest Baron first beginning said, content, without any more words,
and so did all the other Barons in their order, ascending to the Highest.

Then the Bishop of Carlisle, being the puisne Bishop present, said, not
content; and so also, in like manner, said the Bishop of Chester, the Bishop of
Exeter, the Bishop of Coventry and Lichfield, the Bishop of Landaffe, the
Bishop of Worcester, the Bishop of London, and the Archbishop of York; by which
it may be seen, how unwillingly these Popish Bishops did suffer their Dagon to
fall down.

And after the Bishops, all the other Temporal Lords present, beginning with
the lowest and ending with the highest, did all ( Nullo Contradicente) say,
content.

After which, all the Barons first stood up, and after them all the Earls and
other Lords who had voted the Affirmative. And then stood up the Archbishop of
York and all the other Bishops who had voted the Negative, and so upon the
great inequality of their Voices at the first view, the Bill. Passed, and its
likely, that the Voices for the Passing of the Bill exceeding so much the
number of those, who were against it, that the Proxies of the absent Lords were
not at all demanded, which might have been, if the House had moved or required
it; but, I conceive, that those are most frequently called for, when the
difference of the House stands upon some equality of Voices.

The Bill being thus Passed, was delivered to the Queen's Attorney and
Solicitor, to be carried to the House of Commons, which was not performed by
them, as appears by the Original Journal Book of the said House, until the
Monday following, being the 6th. day of this instant Feb. the manner of the
delivery thereof was as follows, viz.

The said Attorney and Solicitor, being admitted into the said House, came up
close to the Table, where the Clerk sat, and made three Congies, and then
acquainted Sir Thomas Gargrave the Speaker, that the Lords had sent unto the
House such a Bill, of which one of them Read the Title, and so again departed
the House, having made three other Congies.

There are also diverse Proxies entered at the beginning of the Original Journal
Book of the Upper House, to have been returned, and introducted this day, but
whether before or after the continuance of the Parliament, and rising of the
House, does not appear.

On Thursday, the 9th. day of February, the Bill wherein certain offenses be
declared Treason, was Read the first time.

The Bill also for the Recognition of the Queen's Highnesse's Title to the
Imperial Crown of this realm, was by general consent concluded, this being the
third Reading, and so the same was delivered to Mr. Solicitor and the Clerk of
the Crown, to be carried to the House of Commons: the whole form of which
Proceedings, touching the third reading, Passing and sending down of a Bill,
see in a like Case on Saturday, the fourth day of this Instant Feb. foregoing.

The Bill against Slanderous and Seditious words, was Read prima vice.

On Friday, the 10th. day of Feb. The Bill, whereby the Queen's Highness is
made inheritable to the late Queen Ann her Majesty's Mother, was read prima
vice, and after the reading of two other Bills, was read again the second time,
and Ordered to be engrossed, which speedy course the House took for the Passing
of this Bill to express their zeal and affection to her Majesty, whom it so
nearly concerned.

The Bill lastly, whereby diverse Offenses be made Treason, and the Bill against
Seditious words and rumors, were each of them read the second time, and
Ordered to be engrossed.

On Saturday, the 11th. day of February, two Bills of no great Moment, had each
of them their third reading, and were sent unto the House of Commons, by Mr.
Solicitor and Mr. Lewis, of which the first was the Bill for explanation of the
Statute of Seditious words and rumors.

Two Bills were brought up to the Lords from the House of Commons, by Mr.
Treasurer and others, viz. The Bill of a Subsidy granted to the Queen's Majesty
by the Temporalty, and the Bill of a Subsidy of Tonnage and Poundage.

The said Mr. Treasurer, being the Principal (...), accompanied with diverse
other Members of the House of Commons, came in the first rank of them to the
Rail, or Bar, at the lower end of the Upper House, and, after three Congies
made, declared unto their Lordships, That the Knights, Citizens and Burgesses
of the House of Commons had sent unto them two Bills, of which he read the
Titles, and then Sir Nicholas Bacon, Lord Keeper, rising srom his seat, came
down to the Bar to receive them, to whom the aforesaid Mr. Treasurer did in all
humble manner deliver them, and thereupon, with the residue of his Company,
having made other three Congies, departed.

On Monday the 13th. of February, the Bill for one Subsidy and two Fifteens and
Tenths granted by the Temporalty, was Read prima vice, and Committed, (or
rather reserr'd) to the Queen's Attorney and Solicitor, of which see a like
improper Commitment on Saturday the 10th. day of this Instant February
foregoing, in fine diei.

The Bill also of a Subsidy of Tonnage and Poundage was Read the second time,
but no mention is made that it was either referred to Committees, or Ordered to
be engrossed; and the Reason thereof was that this Bill had passed the House of
Commons, and was sent up unto the Lords on Saturday the 10th. day of this
instant February foregoing, fairly engrossed in Parchment, and therefore can be
no more engrossed: neither do the Lords ordinarily refer such Bills to
Committees, unless there be very great Cause, in respect that each House
holding Correspondency with other, they do not willingly submit that to the
Agitation of a private Committee, which has been allowed, and approved by the
Wisdom of the whole House. A second reason, that sometimes a Bill may neither
be reserred to Committees, nor Ordered to be engrossed upon second reading,
although it has not Passed the House of Commons, may be, because Bills of
Grace, viz. for the Restitution of Blood, of Naturalization, and such like, are
sent to the House from her Majesty fairly engrossed in Parchment, and Signed
with her hand, which for the most part do pass the House without any Stop or
Question. A third and last reason thereof may be, when the Lords defer the
Committing, or engrossing of any Bill, unto some other time, as sell out in the
Bill touching the Commission of Sewers, in A. 13. Regin. Eliz. which was Read
secunda vice on Friday the 20th. day of April, and referred to Committees on
the day following (although sometimes it may be omitted likewise through the
negligence of the Clerk of the Upper House.)

The Bill lastly, whereby the Queen's Majesty was restored in Blood to the Late
Queen Ann, her Highnesse's Mother, was read tertia vice and Communi omnium
procerum assensu conclus.

Custos magni Sigilli continuavit presens Parliamentum usque in diem Mercurij
prox' hora nona.

On Wednesday, the 15th. day of February, The Bill of a Subsidy, and two
Fifteens, and Tenths, granted by the Temporalty was read the second time, but
no mention is made, that it was either referred to Committees, or Ordered to be
engrossed, vid. Consimil. on Monday, the 13th. day of this instant February
foregoing.

The Inhabitants of the Shires of Wales, and County Palatine of Chester, who
are Charged as well with Mises as diverse Subsidies, now immediately due, made
Petition to the Lords to be respited, and to have longer day for the payment
thereof, whereupon it was thought good by the Lords, that the Queen's Majesty
should be moved therein by the Lord Keeper of the Great Seal, who having
knowledge of her Will and Pleasure in that behalf, signified the same unto the
Lords, according to which, and for more Corroboration thereof, it was in her
Highnesse's name commanded that an Entry thereof should be made, as follows.

It is Ordered and Decreed by the Queen's Highness, and assented unto by the
Lords, that in that year, in which our Sovereign Lady the Queen's Highness
shall award her Commission for the assessing and payment of any her Majesty's
Subsidies, now due, or by the Authority of this present Parliament to be due,
the Shires of Wales, and Counties Palatine of Chester, chargeable with the
payment of the same, and every of them, shall not be charged, or chargeable
with the payment of the Mises now due to her Majesty, nor in that year, in
which her Highness shall have payment of the said Mises, the said Subsidies, or
any of them, shall be paid by any the said Shires or County Palatine aforesaid.

Custos Magni Sigilli continuavit presens Parliamentum usque in diem Jovis
prox' bora nona.

On Thursday, the 16th. day of February the Bill of a Subsidy, and two
Fifteens, and Tenths, granted by the Temporalty, being read tertia vice, and by
common consent concluded, with certain Amendments to be inserted, was delivered
to Mr. Attorney and Mr. Vaughan, to be carried to the House of Commons.

In which Bills sending down, because both the manner of writing the said
Amendments, and the Subscription of the Lords under them, do differ from all
ordinary Proceedings, if the Bill had Passed the Upper House without such
Amendments; therefore I have thought good to add the whole manner and form
thereof, according to a like President in the Original Journal Book of the
House of Commons, An. 39. and 40. Regin. Eliz. December. 20th. Tuesday: although
there be not mention there made in the Original Journal Book of the Upper House
on this foresaid present Thursday the 16th. day of February.

But because it is difficult to conjecture the Express manner of the Lords
proceedings at this time, therefore I can only apply the imitation of that
President to this present occasion by probability.

The Lords having added certain Amendments to the Bill of Subsidy, which had
formerly Passed the House of Commons, and been sent up from thence to their
Lordships, engrossed in Parchment, and so remained still the Bill of the same
House; did cause the said Amendments to be written in Paper, and annexed them
to the Bill, showing the Line, and the place of the Line in the Bill, where
such words or Amendments should be put in, and where any other former words in
the Bill should be put out. And then their Lordships subscribed or indorsed
under the Superscription or indorsment of the House of Commons in the same
Bill, a Ceste Bille avecque les amendments a mesme le Bille annexe les
Seigneurs sont assentus; and so the Bill was delivered to Mr. Attorney and Mr.
Vaughan as aforesaid, to be carried to the House of Commons, together with the
Bill whereby the Queen's Majesty is made inheritable to the late Queen Ann her
Highnesse's Mother. But if the Lords had added any new Proviso to the foresaid
Subsidy-Bill, that ought to have been sent down to the House of Commons written
in Parchment. ut vid. March 23. Thursday, postea.

On Monday the 20th. day of February, The Bill of the Subsidy of Tonnage and
Poundage which by common consent was concluded upon the third reading, was
delivered to Mr. Solicitor and Mr. Martin Clerk of the Crown to be carried to
the House of Commons, with certain Amendments to be put thereunto.

On Tuesday the 21th. day of February, two Bills were sent up to the Lords from
the House of Commons, of which the first being the Bill for the Subsidy, and
the second to restore the Queen in blood to the late Queen Ann her Highnesse's
Mother, were each of them returned exped'.

The Bill also for the restitution of the Firstfruits and Tenths and Rents
reserved Nomine Decimae, and of Parsonages impropriate, to the Imperial Crown
of this Realm, was returned from the House of Commons, with five Provisoes
added thereunto by the said Commons, and certain Amendments to be reformed
therein; which said Provisoes were written in Parchment, and the Amendments in
Paper.

Whereas J. Broxham brought an Assize against the Lord Willoughby of Parham, to
be Tried at the Assizes and Sessions now next to be holden at Lincoln, at the
Complaint and Petition of the said Lord Willoughby, in respect of his necessary
attendance at the Parliament, whereby he cannot attend with his Learned Council
at the Assizes, the rather for that some of his Council are also Burgesses, and
attend the Parliament, it is Ordered and Decreed by the Lords, that an
Injunction presently be awarded out of the Chancery to the said John Broxham,
his Counselors and Solicitors commanding them and every of them, upon pain of
500 l. that none of them in any wise proceed in and to the Trial of the said
Assize, at this Assizes now next to be holden at Lincoln.

On Wednesday the 22th. day of Feb. the Bill for the Restitution in blood of
Sir James Crofte was read prima vice.

On Friday the 24th. day of February, the Bill for the restitution in Blood of
Sir Henry Gate was read three times, and the like Bill for Sir James Crofte was
read Secunda and tertia vice, and both sent down to the House of Commons by Mr.
Solicitor and the Clerk of the Crown. The manner whereof vide on Saturday the
4th. of this instant Feb. foregoing.

On Saturday the 25th. day of February, the Bill for the Restitution in blood
of the Lord John Gray was twice read, and after that, the Bill against
Conveyance of Horses into Scotland, was read the first time, the said Bill for
the Lord Gray was read the third time, and Passed, and sent to the House of
Commons by Mr. Attorney, and Mr. Solicitor, which was done in honor of him:

On Monday the 27th. of February, the Bill whereby certain Offenses be made
Treason, with a Request, that a Proviso therein contained, be put out, and
another devised by the House of Commons to be put in the stead thereof; The
Bill for the restoring the Supremacy to the Imperial Crown of this Realm, and
Repealing diverse Acts of Parliament made to the contrary, and the Bill for the
restitution of the Lord Cardinal Pool, were sent up to the Lords from the House
of Commons, the manner of which see on Saturday the 11th. day of this Instant
Feb. foregoing. And the said Bill, touching Cardinal Pool, was read prima vice
and committed to the Chief Justice, and the Queen's Attorney, vid. March 3.
postea.

The Bill lastly against Conveyance of Horses into Scotland, was read Secunda
vice, and Commissa ad ingrossandum.

On Tuesday the 28th. day of February, the Bill for the restoring of the
Supremacy to the Imperial Crown of this Realm, and the Bill for the explanation
of the attainder of the Lord Cardinal Pool, were each of them read secunda
vice, but there is no mention made, that they were either Ordered to be
engrossed, or referred to Committees, because they had been sent from the House
of Commons, on the day immediately foregoing.

On the first day of March, the Lord Keeper and diverse other Lords met, but
nothing was done save only the Parliament continued, the entrance whereof is
thus erroneously set down in the Original Journal Book of the Upper House
through the Clerks negligence, viz.

Dominus Cancellarius (mistaken for Custos magni Sigilli) continuavit presens
Parliamentum usque in diem Crastinum hora nona.

On Thursday the second day of March, the Bill of Recognition of the Queen's
Highnesse's Title to the Imperial Crown of this Realm, the Bill of Subsidy for
Tonnage and Poundage, the Bill touching Tanners and Sellers of Tanned Leather,
and the Bill touching Shoemakers and Curriers, were sent up to the Lords from
the House of Commons.

The Bill lastly touching the Duke of Norfolk, and the Bill for the restitution
of Robert Rudston, were each of them read the first time.

On Friday the third day of March, the Bill for Treasons (which had been Read
the second time on Friday the 10th. day, and the third time on Saturday, the
11th. day of February foregoing, and then sent down to the House of Commons,
although it be there omitted, as matter of no great moment; and from them sent
back again to their Lordships on Monday, the 27th. day of the same Month, with
a request that a Proviso therein contained, might be put out, and another by
them inserted) was Committed to the Earl of Sussex, the Bishop of Chichester,
the Bishop of Carlisle, the Lord Rich, and the Lord Hastings of Loughborrough,
to confer therein with certain of the House of Commons, touching a Proviso to
be put into the same; by which the Lords did express their great desire to keep
Correspondency with the House of Commons, who had commended the inserting of
the abovementioned Proviso unto them.

Nota also, that whereas the Judges are, in most of the Journals of her
Majesty's Reign, although they be but Attendants of the Upper House, named
joint Committees with the Lords in ordinary Bills, or else are named as
Attendants upon them in matters of greatConsequence, yet in the Original
Journal Book of the Upper House, A. isto primo Regin. Eliz. there is no mention
made of them as joint Committees, or as Attendants upon their said Lordships,
save only that on Monday, the 27th. day of February foregoing, a Bill upon the
first reading is said to have been Committed to the Lord Chief Justice of the
King's Bench, and the Queen's Attorney, which may rather be called a Reference,
than a Commitment, as see on Saturday the 4th. day of February preceding; and
therefore that they are not at all named with the Committees of the Lords (in
all the aforesaid Journal Books) may doubtless be conceived to have happened
through the Clerk's negligence: For in the very next ensuing Session of
Parliament in An. 5. Regin. Eliz. they are seldom omitted, prout on Tuesday the
26th. day of January, on Saturday, the 30th. day of the same Month, as also on
Saturday, the 20th. day of March then next following.

The Bill for Restitution of Robert Rudston, was read secunda vice, and again
tertia vice, and conclusa.

The Bill also to revive a Statute made A. 23. H. 8. against the Conveyance of
Horses, Geldings and Mares into Scotland, was read tertia vice, and conclusa,
and the Bill touching the Duke of Norfolk, was read secunda vice and Commiss'
ad ingrossandum.

Six Bills were brought up to the Lords from the House of Commons, of which the
first being for the restitution in blood of the Lord John Gray; the second for
restitution in blood of Sir J. Gates Knight, and the third for restitution in
blood of Sir James Croft Knight, were each of them returned conclus', the
fourth was touching the changing of Gavelkind Land of the Lands of Thomas
Brown, and George Brown, the fifth for the Incorporation of Trinity College n.
Cambridge, and the last for assurance of Lands to the Lord Wentworth, the Lord
Rich, and the Lord Darcy.

On Saturday the fourth day of March, the Bill to change the nature of
Gavelkind Land, of the Lands of Thomas Brown and George Brown, was read the
first time.

The Bill touching Tanners and Sellers of Tanned Leather, was read the first
time, and the Bill for Shoemakers and Curriers, was read the second time, and
both of them Committed to the Duke of Norfolk, the Earl of Shrewsbury, the
Bishop of London, the Bishop of Carlisle, the Lord Rich, and the Lord Willoughby.

Dominus Thesaurar' continuavit presens Parliamentum usque in diem Lunae prox'
hora nona.

Nota, That that there appears no Commission, or other Authority, in the
Original Journal Book of the Upper House, by which the Lord Treasurer supplied
the Lord Keeper's place: but most probable it is, that either the Commission it
self is negligently omitted by Francis Spilman Esquire at this time Clerk of the
said House, or else that the said Lord Treasurer did continue it only upon her
Majesty's Verbal Authority and Command, as did the Lord Treasurer in the like
Case, in the Session of Parliament, A. 18. Regin. Eliz. on Saturday, the third
day of March.

On Monday the 6th. of March, the Bill for the Ratification of the Marriage
between the Duke of Norfolk, and the Lady Margaret now his Wife, and for the
assurance of certain Lands for her Jointure, was read tertia vice and conclusa.

The Bill also for the restitution in blood of Harry Howard, etc. younger
Brother to the Duke of Norfolk, was read prima vice.

The Bill also for the Explanation of the restitution of the Lord Cardinal Pool
was committed to the Archbishop of York, the Duke of Norfolk, the Earl of
Rutland, the Bishop of Carlisle, the Lord Rich, the Lord Willoughby, and the
Lord Hastings of Loughborough: but no mention is made of the reading thereof,
which was doubtless omitted through the great Negligence of Francis Spilman Esquire
Clerk of the Upper House, for this Bill was read prima vice on Monday the 27th.
of February foregoing, and was Committed to the Lord Chief Justice of the
King's Bench and the Queen's Attorney, to consider of it, as is probable, and to
make report thereof, unto the Lords, which being done this day, and the Bill
thereupon, as may likewise be gathered, read the second time, it was Committed
to the Lords abovenamed, and on the morrow following it was read tertia vice,
and Passed the House, and on Wednesday the 8th. of this instant March following
was sent down to the House of Commons by Mr. Jews, and Mr. Vaughan.

On Tuesday the 7th. day of March, the Bill for the explanation of the Repeal
of the Attainder of the late Lord Cardinal Pool, was read tertia vice and
conclusa.

The Bill also for the assurance of Lands to the Lord Wentworth, the Lord Rich,
and the Lord Darcy, and the Bill for the Incorporation of Trinity-Hall in
Cambridge, were each of them read, prima vice.

The Bill lastly for explaining the Statute made against engrossing of Dead
Victuals, and the Bill that Gerson Wroth born in Germany, shall be reputed the
Queen's natural born Subject, were sent up to the Lords from the House of
Commons.

On Wednesday the 8th. day of March, the Bill for the explanation of the
Statute against engrossing of Dead Victuals, and the Bill for the true
Answering of the Queen's Majesty's Revenues, were each of them read prima vice.

Four other Bills also of no great moment, had each of them one reading; of
which one being the Bill for the changing of the nature of Gavelkind Lands of
Thomas Brown and George Brown, and another, for the assurance of Lands to the
Lord Wentworth, the Lord Rich, and the Lord Darcy, were each of them read
secunda vice; but no mention made, that they were either Ordered to be
engrossed, or referred to Committees, because they had been sent from the House
of Commons on the day next foregoing.

The Bill touching the Duke of Norfolk, and that concerning Cardinal Pool, were
sent to the House of Commons by Mr. Lewis, and Mr. Vaughan.

On Thursday the 9th. of March, the Bill for the assurance of certain Lands to
the Lord Wentworth, the Lord Rich, and the Lord Darcy de Chiche, was read
tertia vice and conclusa, dissentientibus Episcopo London, Meneven' and Abbat'
de Westm', the Bill for Gerson Wroth was read tertia vice and conclusa, and the
Bill for exchange of the nature of Gavelkind Lands of the two Browns, was read
also tertia vice, and conclusa, dissentient' Duce Norfolciae. Quatuor
Comitibus, and tribus Baronibus.

The Bill lastly for the true Answering of the Queen's Majesty's Revenues was
read secunda vice, and Commissa ad ingrossand.

On Friday the 10th. day of March, the Bill for the Incorporation of
Trinity-Hall in Cambridge, and the Bill for the true Answering of the Queen's
Majesty's Revenue, were, each of them read, tertia vice, and conclusa, and sent
down to the House of Commons.

The Bill lastly for the explanation of the Statute against engrossing of Dead
Victuals, was read secunda vice, but no mention is made, that it was either
referred to Committees, or Ordered to be engrossed, because it had been sent
from the House of Commons Tuesday the 7th. day of this instant March foregoing.
v. a like Commitment on Monday 13th. day of Feb. foregoing.

On Saturday the 11th. day of March a Proviso to be annexed to the Bill of
Treason, was read prima and secunda vice, and commissa ad ingrossand.

On Monday the 13th. day of March a Proviso to be annexed to the Bill of
Treasons, was read tertia vice and communi omnium procerum assensu conclusa.

A Bill containing certain Provisoes to be annexed to the Bill of First Fruits
and Tenths, was read secunda vice and commissa ad ingrossand.

The Bill lastly for the restoring of the Supremacy of the Imperial Crown of
this Realm, and repealing diverse Statutes made to the contrary, was read the
second time, and Committed unto the Marquess of Winchester, the Lord Treasurer
of England, the Duke of Norfolk, the Earl of Westmerland, the Earl of
Shewsbury, the Earl of Rutland, the Earl of Sussex, the Earl of Pembrook,
Viscount Mountague, the Bishop of Exeter, the Bishop of Carlisle, the Lord
Clinton Admiral, the Lord Morley, the Lord Rich, the Lord Willoughby, and the
Lord North.

On Wednesday the 15th. day of March, a Bill containing six Provisoes to be
annexed to the Bill of First Fruits and Tenths, was read tertia vice, and
conclusa, Dissentientibus Archiepiscopo Eboracen', Episcopo Winton', Episcopo
Wigorn', Episcop' Landaven', Episcop' Coven', Episcop' Exon', Episcopo
Cestren', Episcopo Carliolen', ac Abbat' de Westminster.

Nota, that the Bill having Passed the Upper House before, on the 4th. day of
January last past, was then opposed by all the Spiritual Lords there present,
as now also upon the passing of those Provisoes and Amendments which had been
added unto it, in the House of Commons: amongst which Spiritual Lords, the
Abbot of Westminster did yet sit in Parliament, and gave his free voice; by
which manner of alteration of the Form of Ecclesiastical Government, we may
observe, with what mildness and wisdom, this pious Princess Queen Elizabeth,
took it in hand, far differing from those furious and bloody Enterprises and
Confusions, practiced in the Reign of her Sister Mary: and it is to be noted,
that this Abbot of Westm', with five other Abbots, and Abbesses were all, who
were at this time lest in England, and were deprived of their Promotions at the
end of the Parliament, with fourteen Popish Bishops, amongst which were all
these here named, (except the Bishop of Landaffe in An. Dom. 1559.) and others
were Consecrated in the places of the said Bishops, where it is further to be
noted, that of 9400 Ecclesiastical persons, settled in their several
Promotions, but 177 left their Livings to continue in their Romish Idolatry.

A Bill being agreed upon by the Lords to be annexed to the Bill of Supremacy,
was read 1 a. vice.

On Thursday the 16th. day of March, to which day the Parliament had been first
continued, nothing was done, save only the continuance of Parliament by the
Lord Keeper, usque in diem Crastinum hora nona.

On Friday the 17th. day of March, the Bill for certain Provisoes and
Amendments to be put in the Bill of Supremacy, was read the second time, and
commissa ad ingrossand.

On Saturday the 18th. day of March, the Bill for the restoring of the
Supremacy to the Imperial Crown of this Realm, and repealing diverse Acts of
Parliament made to the contrary, with certain Provisoes added thereunto by the
Lords, and sundry other Amendments, was read the third time, and conclus'
dissentientibus Archiepiscopo Eboracen', Comite Salop, Vicecomite Monutacuto
Episcopo London', Episcopo Winton', Episcopo Wigorn', Episcopo Landaven',
Episcopo Coven', Episcopo Exon', Episcopo Cestren', Episcopo Carliol', and
Abbas de Westm', Et predicta Billa est Commissa Attornato and Solicitatori
Reginae in Domum Communem deferend.

Here also we may still note the great Lenity and mercy of this great Queen,
who suffered so many Heretical, and obstinately Popish Bishops to hold their
Sees, to have free voices in Parliament, besides the Abbot of Westm', who all
thus opposed the just power and Authority, which the Princes of this Realm
have, under God himself, within their Dominions; and which our Ancient Kings,
under the darkest times of Popery, did easily discern, and not improbably aim
at, as we may see frequently specified in the Ancient and most Authentic
Records of this Kingdom, viz.

Rotulorum Patentium a. 3. Regis Johannis numero 8. and 28. Rot. Pat. a. 5.
Reg. Joh. number. 15. Rot. Pat. a. 10. Reg. Joh. number. 3, ubi continetur salvus
conductus pro Simone de Langeton Romanae sedis Cardinale, ad tractand' cum
certis Episcopis modo cum applicuerit securitatem faciat quod in hoc adventu
suo malum Regi vel regno suo non quaerent.

Rot. Pat. a. 22. H. 3. number. 2. and number. 3. Rot. Pat. a. 25. H. 3. number. 2. and
number. 5. Rot. Pat. a. 28. H. 3. number. 6. Rot. Pat. a. 33. H. 3. number. 4. Rot. Pat.
a. 34. H. 3. indors. number. 1. Rot. Pat. a. 39. H. 3. indors. number. 14. Rot. Pat.
a. 42. H. 3. number. 35. Rot. Pat. a. 45. H. 3. number. 27. Rot. Pat. a. 48. H. 3.
number. 31. Rot. Pat. a. 51. H. 3. number. 27.

Rot. Pat. a. 8. E. primi 3 and Rot. Pat. a. 9. E. 1. 2 in quibus continentur
inhibitiones and aliae literae Regis missae Joh. Archiepiscopo Cantuariensi, ac
clero Angliae in consiliis apud London and Lambeth convocatis, ne quid in
eisdem attentarent in praejudicium Regis Coronae aut dignitatis suae Rot. Pat.
a. 31. E. 1. 7. Rot. Romae a. 34. and 35. E. 1. 4. 8. and 9, rot. pat. a. 35.
E. 1. 3. Rot. Scotiae a. 23. and 24. E. 1. 6.

Rot. Romae a. 1. 2. and 3. E. 2. 5. 20. 22, 24, 25. and 27. Rot. Romae a. 4.
5, 6, 7, 8, 9, and 10. E. 2. 14. 15. indors. ejusdem Rotuli 1. Rot. Romae a.
11. 12, 13, and 14. E. 2. 1. and indors' ejusdem Rotuli: 2. Rot. Romae a. 15,
16, 17, and 18. E. 2. 23. 24. and 30. Rot. Pat. a. 3. E. 2. in Scedula and 11.
and 17. ibid. Rot. Pat. a. 11. E. 2. part secunda, Rot. Pat. a. 15. E. 2.
part prima Rot. Pat. a. 16. E. 2. part prima sub initio Rotuli Rot. Pat. a.
19. E. 2. part prima.

Rot. Romae a. 1. E. 3. 5. 6. and 8. Rot. Romans a. 4. E. 3. 2. and 6. Rot. Romae
a. 7. and a. 8. E. 3. 6. and 9. Rot. Romae a. 9. and a. 10. E. 3. 3. 4. and 14.
Rot. Romae a. 19 E. 3. 3. Rot. Romae a. 17. E. 3. 1. 3. and 6. Rot. Romae a.
20. E. 3. 1. 3.

Rot. Franciae a. 17. E. 3. 6. and a. 28. E. 3. 2. Ubi memorabile hoc
continetur, quod Rex E. 3. Misit quam plures Nobiles ad tractandum de pace cum
Rege Franciae coram Papa non ut coram Judice, sed ut privata persona, and
tractatore and mediatore communi non in forma nec figura Ju dicij sed
extrajudicialiter and amicabiliter.

Rot. Pat. a. 2. E. 3. part secunda, Rot. Pat. a. 3. E. 3. part prima, Rot.
Pat. a. 3. E. 3. part secunda Rot. Pat. a. 4. E. 3. part prima, Rot. Pat. a.
7. E. 3. part prima, Rot. Pat. a. 8. E. 3. part prima, Rot. Pat. a. 11. E. 3.
part tertia, Rot. Pat. a. 12. E. 3. part prima, Rot. Pat. a. 10. E. 3. part
prima, Rot. Pat. a. 14. E. 3. part tertia, Rot. Pat. a. 15. E. 3. part prima
and secunda, Rot. Pat. a. 16. E. 3. part prima, Rot. Pat. a. 15. E. 3. part
tertia bis, Rot. Pat. a. 16. E. 3. part secunda bis, and part tertia, Rot.
Pat. a. 17. E. 3. part prima and tertia, Rot. Pat. a. 18. E. 3. part secunda
tertia and indors. Rot. Pat. a. 19. E. 3. part prima and indors. bis, Rot.
Pat. a. 19. E. 3. part secunda, Rot. Pat. a. 19. E. 3. part tertia and
indors', Rot. Pat. a. 20. E. 3. part prima sub initio Rotuli and indors', rot.
pat. 21. E. 3. part prima et secunda, rot. pat. a. 23. E. 3. part prima et
indors', rot. pat. a. 24. E. 3. part prima, secunda et tertia indors', rot.
pat. a. 25. E. 3. part prima, secunda et tertia, et indors', rot. pat. a. 26.
E. 3. part prima indors', part secunda et tertia indors', rot. pat. a. 27. E.
3. part tertia indors', rot. pat. a. 28. E. 3. part secunda indors', rot.
pat. a. 29. E. 3. part tertia indors' saepe, rot. pat. a. 3. E. 3. part prima
ibid. et part secunda indors', rot. pat. a. 31. E. 3. part secunda et tertia
indors', rot. pat. a. 32. E. 3. part prima indors. et ibid. part tertia
indors', rot. pat. a. 35. E. 3. part prima indors', rot. pat. a. 34. E. 3.
part prima indors', rot. pat. a. 36. E. 3. part prima et secunda indors',
rot. pat. a. 37. E. 3. part prima indors' et part secunda et tertia indors',
rot. pat. a. 38. E. 3. part prima indors', rot. pat. a. 39. E. 3. part
secunda indors', rot. pat. a. 40. E. 3. part prima indors', rot. pat. a. 41.
E. 3. part prima et part secunda indors', rot. pat. a. 42. E. 3. part
secunda, rot. pat. a. 43. E. 3. part secunda indors', rot. pat. a. 44. E. 3.
part prima et secunda indors', rot. pat. a. 45. E. 3. part secunda et part
prima tertia, rot. pat. a. 47. E. 3. part prima et secunda indors' bis, rot.
pat. a. 48. E. 3. part prima et secunda indors', rot. pat. a. 49. E. 3. part
prima et indors', rot. pat. a. 5. E. 3. part prima indors', et rot. pat. a.
51. E. 3. circa mediam partem Rotuli and indors.

Rot. Pat. a. 1. R. 2. part prima indors', rot. pat. a. 2. R. 2. part 1. et
2, rot. pat. a. 3. R. 2. part prima indors. in quo Rotulo apparet, quod Rex R.
2. in die Coronationis suae juratus fuit ad prosequendum omnes Provisores
Curiae Romanae contra leges et Statuta Edita. Rot. Pat. a. 3. R. 2. part
secunda indors', rot. pat. a. 4. R. 2. part prima indors', rot. pat. a. 6. R.
2. part prima indors', rot. pat. a. 7. R. 2. part prima indors', rot. pat. a.
8. R. 2. part prima indors', rot. pat. a. 9. R. 2. part prima indors', and
part secunda indors', rot. pat. a. de A. 10. R. 2. part prima and part
secunda indors', rot. pat. a. 11. R. 2. part prima indors.

Rot. Pat. A. 12. R. 2. part prima Indors. Rot. Pat. A. 13. R. 2. part prima
and tertia Indors. Rot. Pat. A. 14. R. 2. part prima and part secunda,
Indors. Rot. Pat. A. 16. R. 2. part tertia Indors. Rot. Pat. A 17. R. 2. part
prima.

Ubi apparet, quod collector Calverae Apostolicae in Hibernia Sacramentum
suscepit quod totaliter evertebat Primatum Papae infra Regnum Angliae
attribuendo prerogativam ac summam potestatem Regi Domino suo. Rot. Pat. A. 18.
R. 2. part secunda continentur haec verba, directa ad Provinciales Ordinis de
Monte Carmeli attendentes, quod vos ad executionem Bullarum praedictarum seu
aliquarum contentarum in eisdem aliqua vi vel authoritate earundem infra Regnum
nostrum praedictum absque licentia and authoritate nostra speciali procedere
non potestis, nec debetis. Rot. Pat. an. 19 R. 2. part. prima and secunda, in
dors. Rot. Pat. an. 20 R. 2. part. 3. In quo continetur, quod Universitas Oxon.
non patiatur Bullas Papales ibidem exerceri sub amissione libertatum suarum.
Rot. Pat. an. 21 R. 2. part. 1.

There is also in Rot. Pat. an. 3 R. 2. part. 1. this rare President of the
Kings denying the Pope certain profits he claimed in England, in quo patet,
quod cum Urbanus Papa exigebat primos fructus omnium Francorum Cardinalium
habentium dignitates infra Angliam ut ad se pertinentes, eo quod ipsi fuerunt
sui adversarii, Rex non cognoscens ca vera esse sed clamans ea ad se pertinere
jure regio, ex gratia sua tamen speciali in relevationem indigentiae Papae
concessit dicto Papae duas Parts dictorum primorum fructuum it a quod tertia
pars corundem per dispositionem Regis sit in reparationem Domorum hujusmodi
Cardinalium, etc. There are also three other excellent Presidents to this
purpose in the same Kings Reign, viz. Rot. Pat. an. 4 R. 2. part. 2. and Rot.
Pat. an. 6 R. 2. part. 2. bis.

These matters being thus faithfully and undeniably vouched out of the Records,
or other Authority, touching the ancient Rights and Prerogatives of the Crown
of England, against the unjust Usurpations and encroachments of the Bishop of
Rome, which said Rights, her Majesty did, by this foregoing Act that passed
this day, as aforesaid, seek to have restored and reunited to her Royal
Authority; Now follows the continuance of the Parliament, erroneously entered
through the neglect of the Clerk in these words, viz. Dominus Custos magni
Sigilli continuavit praesens Parliamentum usque ad diem crastinum (mistaken for
diem Lunae proximum) hora nona.

The same day were entered diverse Proxies.

On Monday the 20th day of March, 14. Bills were brought up to the Lords from
the House of Commons; viz. The Bill for the restitution in blood of Rudston
Esquire. The Bill for repeal of the Attainder of the late Cardinal Poole. The Bill
for the Incorporation of Trinity-Hall in Cambridge. A Bill for seditious words
and rumors. The Bill whereby certain offenses be made Treason. The Bill to take
away all pains and penalties made for Religion in Queen Mary's time. The Bill
for the assurance of Lands, late parcel of the Bishopric of Winchester, to
diverse Patentees of King Ed. 6. The Bill to revive a Fair at Lynn Regis in
Norfolk; which three last mentioned Bills were each of them read prima voce.
The Bill to make a Chapel in Caermarthenshire to be a Parish Church. The Bill
to restore in Blood the Sons and Daughters of Ed. Lewkenor Esquire. The Bill
touching the Marriage of the Duke of Norfolk. The Bill for making
Ecclesiastical Laws by 32. persons. The Bill for the Assizes and Sessions to be
kept at Stafford. And the Bill for the allowance of Sheriffs upon their
Accounts.

On Tuesday the 21th day of March, A Proviso and certain amendments annexe I by
the Commons to the Duke of Norfolks Bill were read.

Four Bills also of no great moment, had each of them one reading; of which the
sirst, being the Bill to revive a Fair at Lynn Regis, was read the second time,
but no mention is made that it was either Ordered to be engrossed, or referred
to Committees, because it had been sent from the Commons Yesterday.

Dominus Custos magni Sigilli continuavit praesens Parliamentum usque in horam
secundam post meridiem.

About which hour, the Lord Keeper and diverse other Lords being set, the Bill
for ratification of the marriage between the Duke of Norfolk and the Lady
Margaret now his Wise, and for the assurance of certain Lands for her Jointure,
with a new Proviso added by the Commons, conclusa est, being read tertia vice,
dissentientibus Archiepiscopo Eboracen. Episcopis Londin. Winton. Landaven,
Cestren. Carleol. and Abbate de Westminster.

The Bill for restitution in blood of the Sons and Daughters of Ed. Lewkenor
Esquire was read prima, secunda and tertia vice, and conclus. Quod nota, That this
Bill was read thrice at one time.

The Bill for the making of a Chapel in Caermarthenshire to be a Parish
Church; The Bill that the Queens Highness may make Ordinances and Rules in
Collegiate Churches, Corporations, and Schools; The Bill for Assizes and
Sessions to be kept in the Town of Stafford, And the Bill for the assurance of
Lands, parcel of the Bishopric of Winchester, to diverse Patentees of King Edm.
the Sixth, were each of them read the second time, but no mention is made that
they were either ordered to be engrossed, or referred to Committees; because
they had been sent from the House of Commons on the two days foregoing. Vide
consimilit. on Wednesday the 15th day of February foregoing.

On Wednesday the 22th day of March, six Bills of no great moment had each of
them one reading, and the Bill for the Assurance of Lands, late parcel of the
Bishopric of Winchester, to diverse Patentees of King Ed. VI. being the 6th,
was read tertia vice, and conclusa, dissentientibus Archiepiscopo Eboracen.
Marchion. Winton. Episcopis Londin. Winton. Wigorn. Landaven. Coven. Exon.
Cestren. Carleol. and Dominis Stafford, Dadley, and North, and Abbate de Westminster.

The Bill for restitution of the sirst-Fruits, and Tenths, and Rents reserved,
Nomine Decimae, and of Parsonages Impropriate to the Imperial Crown of this
Realm, was returned from the House of Commons conclus.

The Bill for restoring the Supremacy to the Imperial Crown of this Realm, and
for repeal of diverse Acts of Parliament made to the contrary, with a new
Proviso annexed by the Commons, was read prima, secunda and tertia vice, and
conclusa, dissentientibus Archiepiscopo Eboracen. Episcopis Londin. Winton.
Landaven. Coven. Exon. Cestren. Carleol. and Abbate de Westmonast.

Here also we may note the perverse obstinacy of these Popish Clergymen, who
having before opposed in vain the passing of the Bill on Saturday the 18th day
of this Instant March foregoing, do here likewise do their uttermost to stop
even the Proviso which was added unto it by the House of Commons: And yet how
just and equal this Bill was, see my Animadversion upon the said 18th day of
March, when the said Bill passed

The Bill to continue the Act last made against Rebellious Assemblies, was
committed to the Earl of Sussex, the Earl of Bedford, the Lord Rich, and the
Lord North.

The Bill lastly, for Admitting and Consecrating of Archbishops and Bishops,
and concerning Tanners and selling of Tanned Leather, were each of them read
prima vice.

Four Bills were brought up to the Lords from the House of Commons, of which
the first was the Bill for the reviving of a Statute made an. 23 Hen. 8.
touching the conveying of Horses, Geldings, and Mares, into Scotland. The
second, that carrying of Leather, Tallow, or Raw Hides, out of the Realm for
Merchandise, should be Felony, was read, prima and secunda vice. The third
touching Leases to be made by spiritual persons, was read prima vice. And the
last for revoking diverse Licenses granted for diverse things, prohibited by the
Law of the Realm.

The Bill for Admitting and Consecrating of Archbishops, was read secunda vice;
but no mention is made, that it was either Ordered to be engrossed or referred
to Committees, because it had been sent from the House of Commons.

The Bill lastly for the Assizes to be holden in the Town of Stafford, was
delivered to the Queen's Attorney, and Solicitor, to be carried into the House
of Commons.

On Thursday the Bill for the Assizes to be holden in the Town of Stafford, was
returned from the House of Commons, and concluja.

The Bill touching Tanners, and selling of Tanned Leather, was read tertia
vice, and conclusa, with certain amendments to be put to it; after which it was
deliverd to the Queen's Attorney and Solicitor, in Domum Communem deferenda.
Et postea introduct. a Domo Communi conclus.

The Bill for the Admitting and Consecrating of Archbishops and Bishops, was
read tertia vice, and conclus. And the Bill, that carrying Leather, Tallow, or
Raw Hides, out of the Realm shall be Felony, was read tertia vice, and conclus.
dissentiente Domino Lumley.

The Bill touching Leases to be made by Spiritual persons, was read secunda
vice.

The Bill lastly, for the Explanation of the Statute against the Engrossing of
dead Victuals, with a Proviso added thereunto by the Lords, was read tertia
vice, and conclusa, and sent by the Queen's Attorney and Solicitor to the
House of Commons.

In which Bills sending down, because both the manner of writing the said
Proviso, and the subscription of the Lords under it, do differ from all
ordinary proceedings if the Bill had passed the Upper House without a Proviso,
therefore I have caused the whole manner and form thereof to be added to a like
president in the Original Journal Book of the House of Commons, an. 39 and 40
Regin. Eliz. December. the 20th Tuesday, although there be no mention thereof
made in the Original Journal Book of the Upper House on this aforesaid present
Thursday, the 23th day of March; but because it is difficult to conjecture the
express manner of the Lord's Proceedings at this time, therefore I can only
apply the imitation of that president to this present occasion by probability.

The Lords having added a Proviso to the Bill for Explanation of the Statute
against the engrossing of Dead Victuals, which had formerly passed the House of
Commons, and been sent up from thence to their Lordships, engrossed in
Parchment, on Tuesday the 7th day of this Instant March foregoing, and so
remained still the Bill of the same House, did cause the said Proviso to be
written in Parchment, and annexed it to the Bill showing the line and the place
of the line where the Proviso should be put in, and then their Lordships
subscribed, or endorsed under the superscription or indorsement of the House of
Commons in the same Bill, a ceste Bille avecque une provision annexe les
Seigneurs sont assentus. And so the Bill was delivered to the Queens Attorney
and Solicitor as aforesaid, to be carried to the House of Commons. But if the
Lords had added any amendments to the foresaid Bill, those ought to have been
sent down to the House of Commons written in Paper. Ut vide, on Thursday the
16. day of February foregoing.

The Parliament continued and nothing done, till Tuesday the 4. day of April,
and then the Bill (that the Queens Majesty, upon the avoidance of any
Archbishopric, or Bishopric, may exchange the temporal possessions thereof
with Parsonages impropriate, etc.) was read the first time.

And then the Parliament continued till the next day at nine of the Clock, on
which day were several Proxies, both ordinary and extraordinary, entered.

On Wednesday the 5. day of April, the Bill for Leases to be made by spiritual
persons was committed to the Duke of Norfolk, the Earl of Rutland, the Bishop
of Carlisse, the Lord Rich, the Lord North, the Lord Hastings de Loughborrow,
and the Abbot of Westminster.

Nota, that this Bill had its second reading on Thursday, the 23. of March
foregoing, and was not committed until this day, of which there want not other
Presidents during her Majesty's Reign; as on Monday the 13. day of February
foregoing, and on Thursday the 6. day of this Instant April ensuing.

The Bill whereby the Queens Majesty, upon avoidance of any Archbishopric or
Bishopric, may resume the temporal possessions thereof into her hands,
recompensing the value thereof with Parsonages impropriate, etc. was read the
second time.

And then the Parliament continued till Thursday the 6. day of April, on which
day the Bill, whereby the Queens Majesty, upon the avoidance of any
Archbishopric, may resume the Temporalties thereof, recompencing the just
value thereof with Parsonages impropriate, etc. was Ordered to be engrossed.

Nota, This Bill was read the second time yesterday, and was not Ordered to be
engrossed until this day; of which nature there want not other Presidents
during her Majesty's Reign, where a Bill being read, secunda vice, on one day,
was referred to Committees on another ensuing; Prout vide, on April the 5.
immediately foregoing: But at this day, it is the constant rule and observation
of the Upper House, that no Bill be either Ordered to be engrossed, or referred
to Committees, but upon that very day on which it is read.

And then the Parliament continued till next day at nine of the Clock. The Bill
giving Authority to the Queens Highness, upon the avoidance of any
Archbishopric or Bishopric, to take into her hands the temporal possessions
thereof, recompensing the same with Parsonages impropriate, was read tertia
vice, and conclusa, dissentientibus Archiepiscopo Ehoracen. Episcopis Londin.
Wigorn. Coven. Exon. Cestren. Carleol. and Abbat. de Westminster. And it was
delivered to the Queens Solicitor and Mr. Vaughan, to be carried to the House
of Commons.

And then the Parliament by several continuances continued, and nothing done
till Friday the 14. day of April, on which day four Bills were brought up to
the Lords from the House of Commons; of which the first, being the Bill against
the deceitful using of Linen; the second that Craftsmen in Kent and Sussex
shall inhabit in Towns near the Seacoasts; and the third, being to revive the
Act of Parliament made Anno 5 Ed. 6. for keeping of Holydays and Fasting-days,
were each of them read prima vice. And the fourth and last, was the Bill for
restoring to the Crown the Ancient Jurisdiction over the State Ecclesiastical
and Spiritual, and abolishing all Foreign Power repugnant to the same; vid.
touching this Bill on Saturday the 29 day of this Instant April ensuing.

And then the Parliament continued till next day at nine of the Clock. And the
Bill against deceitful using of Linen Cloth, The Bill that Craftsmen in Kent
and Sussex shall inhabit near the Sea Coasts, And the Bill to revive the Act of
Parliament made An. 5 Ed. 6. for keeping of Holydays and Fasting-days, were
each of them read secunda vice: but no mention is made that they were Ordered
to be engrossed, or referred to Committees, because they had been sent from the
House of Commons on yesterday foregoing.

The Bill lastly restoring the Ancient Jurisdiction over the State
Ecclesiastical and Spiritual, to the Crown, and abolishing all Foreign Power
repugnant to the same, was read prima vice; vide touching this Bill on Saturday
the 29. day of this Instant April ensuing.

The Parliament continued till Monday the 17. of April: And then the Bill
against the deceitful using of Linen Cloth, was read tertia vice, and
conclusa, dissentiente Com. Arundel. And the Bill for the restitution in blood
of Henry Howard and Katherine Wise unto the Lord Berkeley, and communi omnium
Procerum assensu suit conclusa.

The Bill that Craftsmen in Kent and Sussex shall inhabit in Towns near the
Seacoasts, was read tertia vice, and rejecta.

The Bill lastly, for restoring to the Crown the Ancient Jurisdiction over the
State Ecclesiastical and Spiritual, and abolishing of Foreign Power repugnant
to the same, was read secunda vice; and commissa Duci Norfolc. Comiti Arundel,
Comiti Salop, Comiti Wigorn. Comiti Rutland, Comiti Sussex, Comiti Bedford,
Vicecomiti Mountacute, Episcopo Londin. Episcopo Elien. Episcopo Carleol. and
Domino Admirallo and Camerario, ac Domino Rich, Domino Hastings de Loughborrow,
ac Domino St. John de Blestoe; vide concerning this Bill on Saturday, the 29.
day of this Instant April ensuing.

The Parliament by several continuances continued till Tuesday the 25. day of
April at nine of the Clock in the Morning; and then nine Bills were brought up
to the Lords from the House of Commons; of which the second was the Bill for
Shipping in English Bottoms, and the third and fourth, touching Frizes, called
Pagaments, and concerning the buying and selling of Horses within a certain
time, were each of them read prima vice. The fifth was touching the Uniformity
of Common Prayer, and Service in the Church, and Administration of the
Sacraments: The sixth was, touching Hexam and Hexamshire in the County of
Northumberland. The seventh, to revive an Act made for killing of Rookes and
Crows. The eighth was to make good Leases, Grants of Offices, and Copyholds,
made by Nicholas Ridley, late Bishop of London. And the ninth and last being
for preservation of Spawn and Fry of Fish, was read the first time.

A Proviso to be annexed to the Bill for the Supremacy, was read prima and
secunda vice, and commissa ad ingrossandum; vide touching the said Bill, and
Proviso, on Saturday the 29. day of this Instant April ensuing.

The Bill for the restitution of Gregory Fynes, was read prima, secunda and
tertia vice, and communi omnium Procerum assensu conclusa; and it was then
presently delivered to Sir Richard Read and the Clerk of the Crown, to be
carried down to the House of Commons. Quod nota.

The Parliament continued till Wednesday the 26th Day of April. And then the
Bill for Shipping in English Bottoms, and the Bill to make good Leases, Grants
of Offices, and Copyhold Lands, made by Nicholas Ridley, late Bishop of London,
were each of them read Prima vice.

The Bill restoring to the Crown the Ancient Jurisdiction over the State
Ecclesiastical and Spiritual, and abolishing all Foreign Power repugnant to the
same, with a Proviso added thereunto by the Lords, were read tertia vice, and
conclus. dissentientibus Archiepiscopo Eboracen. Vicecomite Mountague, Episcopo
Londin. Episcopo Elien Episcopo Wigorn. Episcopo Landaven. Episcopo Coven.
Episcopo Oxon. Episcopo Cestren. Episcopo Carlcolen. ac Abbate de Westminster,
and commissae Magistro Weston servienti ad Legem, and Attornato Dominae Reginae
ad Communes deferend.

Nota, That all these Bishops, except the Bishop of Ely, did oppose the passing
of a former Bill, much to this effect and purpose, on Saturday the 18. day of
March foregoing; although with as little success to hinder the passing of the
Bill then, as now; and yet how little reason these Popish Bishops had, thus
stiffly and obstinately to resist the passing of this Bill, does fully appear by
my Animadversion, which I have caused to be entered at large, Quam vide in dicto
18. die Martii; vide also, how these two Bills happened to pass both the Houses,
to one and the same purpose, in another of my Animadversions, which I have
caused to be inserted on Saturday the 29. day of this Instant April ensuing.

The Bill lastly for the Uniformity of Common Prayer, and Service in the
Church, and Administration of the Sacraments, was read prima vice.

And then the Parliament continued till two of the Clock in the Afternoon of
the same day; about which hour in the Afternoon, the Lord Keeper, and diverse
other Lords meeting, six Bills of no great moment, had each of them one
reading, of which the second being the Bill for Shipping in English Bottoms,
The third touching buying and selling of Horses, within a certain time, The
fourth touching Frizes called Pagaments, And the last, to make Good Leases,
Grants of Offices, and Copyhold Lands by Nicholas Ridley, late Bishop of
London, were each of them read secunda vice; but no mention is made that they
were either to be referred to Committees, or Ordered to be engrossed, because
they had been sent from the House of Commons on Tuesday, the 25. day of this
instant April foregoing.

And then the Parliament continued till next day at nine of the Clock in the
Morning, at which time the Bill for buying and selling of Horses within a
certain time, and the Bill for Shipping in English Bottoms, were read tertia
vice, and conclusae.

The Bill touching Frizes called Pagaments, was read tertia vice, and reject a.

The Bill lastly, touching the reviving of the Act for killing of Rooks and
Crows, and the Bill for the Uniformity of Common Prayer, and Service in the
Church, and the Administration of Sacraments, were each of them read the second
time.

Three Bills were brought up to the Lords from the House of Commons, of which
the first was, For the searching of Woollen-Cloth; The second, whereby the use
and practice of Enchantments, Witchcraft and Sorcery is made Felony; And the
last, being the Bill to continue the Act made against Rebellious Assemblies,
was read the first time.

The Parliament continued till Friday the 28. day of April, at nine of the
Clock. And then three Bills of no great moment, had each of them one reading,
of which the third being the Bill to continue an Act against Rebellious
Assemblies, was read the second time.

The Bill for the Uniformity of Common Prayer, and Service in the Church, and
the Administration of Sacraments was read tertia vice and conclusa,
dissentientibus Archiepiscopo Eborac. Marchione Winton. Comite Salop.
Vicecomite Mountagne, Episcopis Londin. Elien. Wigorn. Landaven. Coven. Exon.
Cestren. Carleol. ac Dominis Morley, Stafford, Dudley, Wharton, Rich and North,
vide Apr. 29.

Two Bills were brought up to the Lords from the House of Commons, of which the
first was the Bill for restoring to the Crown the Ancient Jurisdiction over the
State Ecclesiastical and Spiritual, and abolishing all Foreign Power repugnant
to the same, with a new Proviso added thereunto by the Commons; which see in
principio diei sequentis. And the second of the said Bills was, limiting time
for laying on Land Merchandises from beyond the Seas, and touching Customs for
sweet Wines.

The Parliament continued till Saturday the 29. day of April at nine of the
Clock in the Forenoon; on which day a Proviso annexed by the Commons to the
Bill, for restoring to the Crown the Ancient Jurisdiction over the State
Ecclesiastical and Spiritual, and abolishing all Foreign Power repugnant to the
same, was read tertia vice and conclusa; but it rather seems, that this
Proviso had at this time three readings, and so passed; and it is very probable,
that either the Bishops, having had so ill success in opposing this Bill on
Wednesday the 26. of this Instant April foregoing, did now forbear to oppose
the passing of the new Proviso added unto it, or else that the Clerk was
mistaken in the entrance of it; for it seems here, by the Original Journal
Book, that this Proviso passed nullo dissentiente.

Nota, That this Proviso here named, to have passed the House this day, was
part of that Bill for the Supremacy, to which her Majesty gave her Royal
Assent; And is the first Statute Printed inter Statuta an. 1. Regin. Eliz. And
it is as true, that there was a former Bill touching the Supremacy, which the
two Houses labored long about, although it seems it came afterward to
nothing. And the Bill (to which this foregoing Proviso was annexed) was
received in its stead: Yet because the mature deliberation and long debatement
of the two Houses therein may appear, it will not be amiss to make some
observation upon it; for the said former Bill having first past the House of
Commons (as appears by the Original Journal Book thereof, fol. 193. b.) on
Saturday the 25. day, was sent up to the Lords on Monday the 27. day of
February foregoing; and had with them its first reading on Tuesday the 28. day
of the same Month; And on Monday the 13. day of March, the said Lords having
given it a second reading, did, notwithstanding that it had passed the House of
Commons, refer it to diverse Committees there named; who did, it seems, add
diverse Provisoes thereunto, containing the substance of a new Bill to be
annexed to the old Bill, and which with it made but one Act or Statute, and had
its first reading on Wednesday the 15. day, and its second reading on Thursday
the 16. day of the same Month, and on Saturday the 18. day thereof. Also both
the old Bill sent up from the House of Commons, and the Provisoes and
Amendments annexed unto it, in nature of a new Bill, were tertia vice lect. and
passed the Lords, notwithstanding the malicious opposition of diverse Popish
Bishops, although this Bill did, upon the matter, declare no more than the
Ancient Kings of this Realm had always aimed at; which said new Provisoes and
Amendments, being in the nature of a new Bill, were the same day sent down to
the House of Commons, with their old Bill; where the said Provisoes and
Alterations, added by the Lords, had their first reading on Monday the 20. day,
their second on Tuesday the 21. day, and their third on Wednesday the 22. day
of the aforesaid March preceding; and the said old Bill, touching the
Supremacy, with those new provisions and alterations annexed to it, and now
passed also by the House of Commons, were the same Forenoon returned up again
unto their Lordships, with a new Proviso added by the said Commons thereunto;
which said new Proviso was then read also, prima, secunda, and tertia vice, and
passed in the Upper House.

But whether the many new Additions and Alterations in this foregoing Bill, had
made some confusion in it, or that the House of Commons disliked that their
Bill formerly passed with them, had received so much reformation in the Upper
House, or for what other cause I know not; most certain it is, that they had no
desire the said former Bill should be made a perpetual Law by her Majesty's
Royal Assent; and thereupon, they framed a new Bill to the like purpose, (in
which I suppose they included also the substance of all the Additions,
Provisoes, and Amendments, which the Lords had annexed to their former Bill)
which had its first reading in the House of Commons, (as appears by the
Original Journal Book of the same House fol. 207. a.) on Monday the 19. day of
this Instant April, being thus entitled (much differing from the title thereof
here annexed, or after added, before the Printed Statute,) viz. The Bill to
avoid the usurped power claimed by any Foreign Potentate in this Realm, and for
the Oath to be taken by spiritual and temporal Officers. After which, it had
its second reading on Wednesday the 12. day, and its third reading on Thursday
the 13. day of the same Month, where also it is entered with this new title,
viz. The Bill for restoring the spiritual Jurisdiction to the Imperial Crown of
the Realm, and abolishing Foreign Power: And in the inner Margent of the said
Journal Book, fol. 203. a. over against the beginning of the said title, is
written Judicium Assent. which shows, that upon the said third reading, it
passed the House; after which, on the next day following, being Friday, it was,
with three other Bills, sent up to the Lords; And on Saturday the 15. day of
the said April, it was read prima vice in the Upper House. And on Monday the
17. day thereof next ensuing, it was read there secunda vice, and thereupon
committed to diverse Peers, (as the former Bill in this great and important
cause had been before referred to Committees on Monday the 13th day of March
preceding) although it had been sent up from the Commons, and had passed their
House in such manner and form as the present Bill had been passed by them. And
as to that said former Bill, so to this also, (as it is easy to be gathered)
did the Lords Committees make some addition, although but of one new Proviso,
which was read prima and secunda vice, on Tuesday the 25th day of this Instant
April; after which, both the Bill it self, and that new Proviso, had their
third reading, and passed the Upper House on Wednesday the 26th day of the same
Month; and the said Bill, with the said new Proviso, written in Parchment, were
at the same time sent down to the House of Commons by Sergeant Weston, and the
Queens Attorney, where the said new Proviso, added by the Lords, was passed,
and the Bill returned again from them unto their Lordships on Friday the 28th
day of this Instant April, with another new Proviso added by them, although,
through the great negligence of..... Scymour Esquire, now Clerk of the same House,
there be no mention at all of the sending down of the said Proviso, passing it,
or adding of the new Proviso, but only of the returning the same to the Lords
Apr. 27. in the Original Journal Book of the same House. To (...) new Proviso
also, it should seem, the (...) gave three readings this present day, and so
passed it. And it is probable, that it happened only through the error of
Francis Spilman Esquire, Clerk of the Upper House, that the said Proviso is set
down to have been read only tertia vice, this Instant Saturday, the 29th day of
April.

The Bill also limiting the times for laying on Land Merchandises from beyond
the Sea, and touching the Custom of Sweet Wines, and the Bill for the
continuance of certain Statutes, were each of them read prima vice.

The Bill touching Hexham and Hexhamshire in the County of Northumberland; and
the Bill, whereby the use or practice of Enchantments, Witchcrafts and
Sorceries is made Felony, were each of them read secunda vice.

Three Bills were brought up to the Lords from the House of Commons, of which
the first Bill set down in the Original Journal Book to have been brought up as
aforesaid, is thus entitled, viz. An Act for Uniformity of Common Prayer and
Service in the Church, and the Administration of the Sacraments, conclus. which
doubtless was so entered, through the negligence of Francis Spilman Esquire at this
time Clerk of the Upper House. For it is plain, that no such Bill was remaining
at this time in the House of Commons, and that only two other Bills, the one to
annex to the Crown certain Religious Houses, etc. and the other touching the
Garbling of Feathers, etc. were sent up by Mr. Vicechamberlain, as is there set
down, fol. 213. a. which two Bills are also set down in the Original Journal
Book of the Upper House.

For this Bill touching the Unity of Service in the Church, etc. was passed in
the House of Commons upon the third reading, on Thursday the 20th of this
Instant April foregoing, as appears by the Original Journal Book of the same,
fol. 210. a. and was from thence sent up to the Lords on Tuesday the 25th day,
and was read prima vice on Wednesday the 26th, and secunda vice on Thursday the
27th of this foresaid April preceding, and lastly it had its third reading, and
passed the House on Friday the 28th day of the same Month, although it were
opposed by the Archbishop of York, the Marquess of Winchester, the Earl of
Shrewsbury, Viscount Mountague, the Bishop of London, the Bishop of Ely, the
Bishop of Worcester, the Bishop of Landaff, the Bishop of Coventry and
Lichfield, the Bishop of Exeter, the Bishop of Chester, the Bishop of Carlisle;
the Lord Morley, the Lord Stafford, the Lord Dudly, the Lord Wharton, the Lord
Rich, and the Lord North.

In which may there still be observed the obstinacy and boldness of the Popish
Bishops, who opposed all things that tended but to the least reformation of
Idolatry and Superstition, or abolishing the usurped authority of the Bishop of
Rome (it seems that the Abbot of Westminster was now absent, because his
negative voice, which was never wanting, is not here mentioned.) Of the
temporal Lords, the most settled to Popery seem to have been the Viscount
Mountague and Earl of Shrewsbury; but as for the Marquess of Winchester, and
these other six Barons, they are seldom mentioned to have opposed, either the
Act for restoring the Supremacy, or any other touching Ecclesiastical matters,
except this only, concerning the Book of Common Prayer; the reformation of
which, being so little differing from the old form (as that it has given, and
yet does give occasion of offense and stumbling to many weak ones amongst us)
it is the more to be marvelled at, that so many should oppose it: and the
rather also, because most of the Papists of England did come to our Church, and
heard Divine Service ordinarily, till the eleventh Year of the Queen, when the
Bull of Pope Pius Quintus enforced not only their wilful and obstinate
separation, but drew on and necessitated many of those Laws which were
afterward made against them, an. 13. an. 23. and an. 27 Reg. Eliz.

The Bill lastly, to continue the Act last made against Rebellious Assemblies,
was read tertia vice and conclusa, and delivered to Mr Vaughan, and the Clerk
of the Crown, to be carried to the House of Commons.

The Parliament continued until Monday, the first of May at nine of the Clock
in the Forenoon. Then the Bill for the preservation of Spawn and Fry of Fish,
The Bill limiting the times of laying on Land Merchandises from beyond the
Seas, and touching Custom for Sweet Wines, And the Bill for the continuation of
certain Statutes, were each of them read the second time.

The Bill lastly to make good Leases, Grants of Offices, and Copyhold Lands,
made by Nicholas Ridley, late Bishop of London, was read tertia vice, and
rejecta.

Then the Parliament continued till two of the Clock in the Afternoon of the
same day, about which hour, the Lord Keeper, with diverse other Lords
Assembling, one Bill of no great moment was read primavice, which was, for the
Garbling of Feathers and Flocks to be sold in Beds and Cushions.

Then the Parliament continued till next day at nine of the Clock in the
Forenoon, at which time the Bill for Garbling of Feathers was read the second
time.

Two Bills also had each of them their third reading, and passed the House, of
which one being the Bill for laying on Land Merchandise from beyond the Seas,
and touching Custom for Sweet Wines, was sent down to the House of Commons, by
Weston, Sergeant at Law, and the Clerk of the Crown.

The Bill lastly, to annex to the Crown certain Religious Houses, etc. was read
prima vice.

Six Bills were brought up to the Lords from the House of Commons, of which the
third being the Bill that the Queens Majesty by Commission may examine the
Causes of deprivation of spiritual persons, and restore them again, And the
fifth for continuing the making of Woollen Clothes in diverse Towns in the
County of Essex, were each of them read prima vice; And the sixth and last was,
the Bill that Timber shall not be felled to make Coals for burning of Iron.

Then the Parliament continued till Wednesday the 3d of May at nine of the
Clock in the Forenoon, at which time, five Bills of no great moment, had each
of them one reading, of which the first was the Bill that Timber shall not be
felled to make Coals for burning of Iron; The second for continuing the making
of Woollen Cloths, in diverse Towns in the County of Essex; The third, that the
Queens Majesty by Commission may examine the deprivation of spiritual persons,
and restore them again; And the last, being the Bill to annex to the Crown
certain Religious Houses, and to reform certain abuses in Chantries, were each
of them read secunda vice.

The Parliament continued till Friday May the 5th at eight of the Clock in the
Morning. And then the Bill that Timber shall not be felled to make Coals for
the burning of Iron, The Bill for continuing the making of Woollen Cloth in
diverse Towns in the County of Essex, And the Bill that the Queens Majesty by
Commission may examine the Causes of deprivation of. spiritual persons, and
restore them again, were each of them read tertia vice and conclusae.

The Bill lastly to annex to the Crown certain Religious Houses, and to reform
certain abuses in Chantries, was read tertia vice una cum tribus provisionibus
eidem Billae annexis per Dominos, quae prima, secunda and tertia vice lectae
erant and conclus. dissentientibus Archiepiscopo Eboracen. Episcopis Londin.
Elien. Wigorn. Landaven. Coven. Exon. Cestren. Carleol. Abbate de Westminster. ac
Vicecomite Mountagne, and commiss. Magistro Weston Servienti ad Legem and
Attornato Reginae in Domum Communent deferend.

Two Bills were brought up to the Lords from the House of Commons, of which the
first was the Bill for the continuance of certain Statutes, with a Proviso
added thereunto by the Commons, to which the Lords would not agree, but sent it
down again to be passed by them, leaving out the Proviso. And the second being
the Bill for limiting the times for the laying on Land Merchandise from beyond
the Seas, and touching Customs for Sweet Wines, was returned conclus.

Then the Parliament continued till the next day at nine of the Clock, at which
time the Bill for the preservation of the Spawn and Fry of Fish, was read
tertia vice, and conclus. communi omnium Procerum assensu, dissentiente
Episcopo Elien.; and it was delivered to Sir Richard Read and the Clerk of the
Crown in Domum Communem deferend.

The Bill also, that Timber shall not be felled to make Coals for burning of
Iron, The Bill for the continuance of certain Statutes, And the Bill to annex
to the Crown certain Religious Houses, and to reform certain abuses in
Chantries, were returned from the House of Commons conclus.

On Monday the 8th day of May, the Lord Keeper and diverse other Lords, both
Spiritual and Temporal, met in the Upper House, but nothing was done, save only
the Parliament continued by the Lord Keeper, which is entered in the Original
Journal Book of the same House, in manner and form following.

Dominus Custos magni Sigilli continuavit praesens Parliamentum usque in horam
secundam post Meridiem.

About which hour in the Afternoon, the Queens Majesty came in person into the
Upper House of Parliament, where were then present to attend her, Sir Nicholas
Bacon Knight, Lord Keeper of the Great Seal of England, and diverse other Lords
both Spiritual and Temporal, who being all set in their Parliament Robes,
according to their several Ranks, in their due places, the House of Commons had
notice thereof, and repaired thither with Sir Thomas Gargrave Knight their
Speaker; whose Speech to her Majesty, and his very coming up, being wholly
omitted in the Original Journal Book of the Upper House, I have partly before
supplied it, according to the usual course, and added also the residue in like
manner touching the substance of what he spoke, being also partly furthered in
the setting down of it out of the Answer of Sir Nicholas Bacon Knight, Lord
Keeper of the Great Seal, unto him, whose said Answer I have also caused to be
inserted at large, out of a Copy thereof I had by me.

Sir Thomas Gargrave Knight, (before mentioned) with as many of the Knights,
Citizens, and Burgesses of the House of Commons as conveniently could, being
let into the Upper House, and he placed at the Rail, or Bar, at the nether end
of the same, made a Learned Speech to her Majesty (which is termed, in the
Original Journal Book of the House of Commons, fol. 214. b. A Learned Oration)
the effect whereof may very probably be gathered to have been as follows, viz.

He declared unto the Queens Majesty, and that present Assembly, with what care
and speed the House of Commons had this present Parliament enacted and passed
many good Laws, which remaining yet as a dead Letter and without force, he did
humbly desire that her Majesty would be pleased, by adding her Royal Assent
unto them, to make them living and active Laws. Then he desired in the name of
the House, that her Majesty would be pleased to accept of the good endeavors
and desires of the said House of Commons expressed this Parliament in all their
proceedings, and more especially, that her Majesty would be pleased to take in
good part the free gift of her said Subjects, who in token of their Love and
Zeal to her Majesty, did with one assent offer unto her, not only the Subsidy
of Tonnage and Poundage, but likewise one Subsidy, and two Fifteens and Tenths,
as an undoubted effect and Testimony of their Duty and thankfulness toward her
Majesty, for those many blessings and benefits which had accrued to the Church
and State by her Highnesses most lawful and just Succession.

Lastly, He concluded with an humble desire that her Majesty would be pleased
to accept of his hearty and zealous thanks, in allowing and admitting him,
though unworthy, to that place of trust and importance; and to pardon all those
weaknesses and imperfections, which he had unwillingly or casually discovered
in the Execution of it.

To which said Speech of the Prolocutors, Sir Nicholis Bacon, Lord Keeper of
the Great Seal, having first repaired to the Queen, to her Chair of Estate, to
know her Majesty's pleasure, as in her name and by her Command returned him
this wise and large Answer.

Mr Speaker, The Queens Majesty has heard how discreetly and wisely you have
declared the proceedings of this Session in the House of Commons, for Answer
whereunto, and for the better signification to be made to my Lords of the Upper
House, of the Judgment of the Parliament men, and these Parliament matters, her
Majesty's pleasure and Commandment is, that I should open and utter unto you
three things; The one is, what her Highness understands, by your doings this
Parliament, of your wisdom and diligence. The second, what of your liberality
and benevolence; and therewith, how comfortable the former is, and how thankful
the second. The third, what her Highness would you should do for the good
Execution of the Laws devised by you, and of the rest heretofore devised by
others. And here, my Lords and Masters all, albeit in laboring to bear this
burden I am much more like to fall, than but to faint under it, because
neither am I able to perform it as the Queens Majesty has commanded it, nor as
your deserts justly crave it, nor as my will wishes, and desires it.
Nevertheless my trust is, that you will pardon my weakness and want, so as no
note of arrogance or folly be ascribed to me for it; seeing as you know by duty
driven I do it. I had rather, and I know it much better for me to be silent,
and so to have no need of your pardon, than by Speech to all your pains in
hearing, and to mine also in speaking, to deserve to pray it; if mine Office
would suffer.

But now to the matter, For the first part wherein her Majesty considers, how
in the debating of the great and weighty Causes of this Parliament, we have
banished all sudden, rash, and swift proceedings (dangerous Enemies to all
good Counsel) and in place thereof have taken such convenient leisure, as the
weightiness of the matters of their better consideration has required. And
again, what freedom of Speech has been used and permitted, for the plain
Declaration of every man's knowledge and Conscience; yea, and how men in some
Cases and some places, have been rather by gentle persuasions provoked, than by
any sharp manner of Speech, by men of Council, dissuaded therefrom; and
therewith also, how learnedly and cunningly, the disputable matters, being of
moment, have been agreed and reasoned; how gravely and deeply weighed and
considered; how advisedly and considerately resolved and concluded; and lastly,
with what nigh and universal consent, they have been by you enacted and
established. Besides also, remembering your great Studies, and endeavors, and
diligences, for the opening and declaring what may be said Pro and contra, in
all causes of doubts, to the end (as it seems to her Highness) that when all
was said, and heard on both parts, that by any of your could be inferred, or
produced, That that which should thereupon for all respects appear to stand
most with the Honor and Glory of God, and the common Wealth of the Realm,
might be the better and more safely agreed upon and determined; When her
Majesty, I say, remembers and considers these things, she says, she cannot
but much commend, and allow your wisdom and diligence therein, greatly to her
comfort and consolation, and much to all your praises and commendations. For
now her Majesty verily trusts, that like as no manner of determination in
Parliament, neither can nor ought by any private Man, to be infringed or
undone; so these determinations of yours, in this form begun, proceeded and
concluded, cannot hereafter justly, no not by words, be impugned or gainsaid;
for seeing all men have thus at leisure, and with liberty upon the making of
these Laws frankly declared their opinions and knowledges likewise, as learned
men; so the Laws being made and past, her Majesty doubts nothing but that
they will, like good, humble, and obedient Subjects, willingly, and humbly
submit themselves to the Law as to Life. And the rather also, because that no
Man in the obeying of Laws made at this Sessions, being of the greatest moment,
should thereby be forced any otherways to do, than either himself has by Law
already done, or else others have before this time done, whom both for wisdom,
virtue, and learning, it shall not be unseeming to any man here (be it spoken
without offense) to follow and take Example of: And thus much for the first
part.

For the second part, which concerns your liberality and benevolence, her
Majesty has commanded me to say unto you, that your wise and grave
Consideration, had and used in the granting of a present aid and relief,
toward the relieving and discharging of the present charge wherewith the
Realm, at the time of her coming to the Crown, was and yet is charged, is by
her Highness taken in thankful part, and so is the restitution of the continual
Revenue, as some Supplement toward the maintenance of the continual charge of
late time grown to the Crown, as you have heard, and of necessity to be
continued, as well for the surety of you all, as for the Confirmation of the
whole Estate. And here, my Lords and Masters all, I take it to be my duty, to
do you to understand, of certain noble and princely observations, and
considerations had by her Highness of these your doings, much surely to all
your Comforts; whereof one is, in that she forgets not that these grants be
made, not by Subjects that have been a long time free from all manner of Taxes,
Loans and Subsidies, and so well able to bear this burden; but by Subjects,
(much to her grief when she thinks of it,) that have been well nigh
continually charged with these things, to the universal impoverishing of the
whole Realm, and no ways to the strengthening, amending or honoring of the
same; but rather to the weakening, decaying, and dishonouring of the same;
whereby it is evident, yea too evident (if it pleased God otherwise) that these
supplies are to be born, not of your superfluities, but rather of your
necessities; Marry of necessity also to withstand a greater necessity, which
otherwise might touch you and yours in surety.

The second Observation is, your readiness and willingness in granting, whereof
her Majesty makes a very great account, perceiving thereby, that neither warm
words, nor yet earnest nor long persuasions used amongst you, have drawn you to
this, but that the same has rather been by you willingly, readily, and frankly
offered, than by any of the means above remembered; and that these your grants
have altogether proceeded from the benevolent minds, and hearty affections,
that you bear to your Sovereign Lady and Country: which benevolence and
affection her Majesty accepts, and takes for the greatest benefit, and most
precious Jewel, that a Subject can present to his Sovereign; and, to be short
in this matter, if Bis dat qui cito dat be a true saying, you deserve great
Commendation for your small staying hereunto. Also her Highness adds a third,
that is, a generality and consent of their Grant, knowing with what difficulty
and diversity of Opinions in some times past, these things have been brought to
pass. It is a certain and infallible ground, that every good thing, the greater
it is, the better it is. Now this unanimity in consenting, being (as
undoubtedly it is) a good thing, has not her Majesty (trow you) good cause to
rejoice in the universality thereof? yes surely, and thanks you therefore
accordingly. To make an end of this part, her Highness has specially commanded
me to say unto you, that when she calls to remembrance what you have granted,
who has granted, and the form of granting; she finds her self earnestly
disposed, if your Sureties and the State would so suffer, as freely to remit
these Grants, as you did gladly grant them. And where in times past, long and
vehement Orations and persuasions have been in these Cases used, to such as
occupied your places, for the great diligence, and careful circumspection to be
had for the true levying of that which has been granted, for that the common
numbers respect altogether themselves as private men, and not themselves as
members of the whole body, whereby against all reason and right, the Realm has
been often defrauded of the greatest part of the benevolence granted: This
notwithstanding, her Highness has willed me herein to use few words, and only
for t his respect, lest else those which have showed such liberality and
benevolence in granting, might seem to be suspected by her, either of fidelity
or diligence in levying; whereof she thinks her self assured, and thereupon
reposing her trust, she doubts nothing, but by your good service, these
things shall be as truly answered as they have been freely granted; and that
this faithful trust, thus reposed by her Highness in your true service, shall
serve her to better purpose, than any words that could be spoken by me on her
Majesty's behalf. And besides, she thinks, (which is much to be noted
surely,) that it were better to adventure the loss of a great part of that she
takes her self assured of, than your benevolent minds, I mean, by speaking one
word too much.

Now to the third and last, which contains the Queen's Majesty's pleasure for
the well Executing of Laws. Here, my Lords and Masters all, remembering your
Wisdoms and Fidelities, albeit that it be not much needful to put you in mind,
to how small purpose good Laws serve, being not daily and diligently executed;
yet, because the ancient Order has been, that somewhat at this time should be
said for your remembrance in these matters; therefore it is thought meet, that
I should trouble you with a few words. I am sure you all judge, if a man would
be very diligent to provide Torches to guide him in his going by night, and yet
would be negligent in lighting any of them when he goes in the dark, he should
show a notable piece of folly, much like to a man that seeks to cleanse his
Garden and grounds from Weeds and Briers, he carefully provideth many sharp
Tools and Instruments for that purpose, and when he has so done, lays them
fair up in a House without occupying of them; and is it not great fondness
(trow you,) for men to use their endeavors to make good Laws, to govern men's
doings, and to weed out those that be evil in the Commonwealth, and thereupon
to bind them fair in Books, and to lay them up without seeing to the Execution
of those Laws? Yes, surely. Wherefore ye see, that as there has been used by
you great wisdom and discretion, in devising of some, so it is very necessary
that like diligence and pains be taken by you and others, to see the good
Execution of all; the effect of which charge consists principally in three
points; The first is, Conservation of the Queens Peace. The second, in
Administration of Justice between Subject and Subject. And the Third, in the
observation of one uniform Order in Religion, according to the Laws now
Established.

For the first, ye are to foresee all manner of Frays, Forces, Riots and Routs,
and the discovering and repealing in time of all manner of Conspiracies,
Confederacies and Conventicles; and in this part also you are to provide for
the swift and speedy appeasing of all manner of Tumults, stirs and uproars, (if
any happen) and for the diligent searching out, and severe punishment of all
manner of Felonies, Burglaries, and all other like Enormities; Matters (as you
know) against the Queen's Majesty's Peace, Crown and Dignity; for the well
doing whereof, two things are chiefly to be eschewed; The one is,
sloathfulness, the other is uncarefulness: for how can Justice banish these
Enormities, where her Ministers be so sloathful, that they will never creep out
of their Doors to any Courts, Sessions, or Assizes, for the due Administration
thereof, except they be drawn thereunto with some matters of their own; nor
cannot endure to have their Ears troubled with the hearing of Controversies of
their Neighbors, for the good appeasing of the same; or how can the uncareful
man, that makes no account of any of the common causes of his Country, but
respects only his private matters and Commodities, become a just and diligent
searcher out, follower and Corrector of Felonies, Murders, and such like common
Enemies to the Commonwealth? And yet true it is, that such careless and
sloathful men do daily color and cloak these their faults with the title of
Quietness; Coveting to be counted good and quiet men, where indeed they seek
only ease, profit, and pleasure to themselves, and that to be sustained and
born by other men's cares and labors, as Drones do amongst Bees; But if every
man should do so, who sees not but things would shortly come to ruin in
default of Order? for they may easily judge, that it is madness to seek the
conservation of any particular Member, and to suffer the whole body to decay;
but being well served by some men's opinions, as they care for none, so should
none care for them; or else that better were in mine opinion, they should be
used by men, as Drones be used by Bees. And thus much for the first part.

For the second, you are to provide, that all Embracers, Maintainers and
Champerties, which be utter Enemies to the due Execution of Justice between
Subject and Subject, be neither committed by any of you, nor (as near as you
can) be suffered to be committed by any other. A very behoveful matter to be
both carefully and earnestly looked unto, as the root and seed of all Justice,
and especially if any of these faults light upon any person that has Authority
or Rule in the Country, or has any office of Justice to execute among the
people. Is it not (trow you) a monstrous disguising to have a Justicer a
maintainer, to have him that should by his Oath and Duty set forth Justice and
right, against his Oath and Duty to offer injury and wrong; to have him that is
specially chosen amongst a number by the Prince, to appease all Brablings and
Controversies, to be a sower and maintainer of strife and Sedition, amongst
them seeking his reputation and opinion, by leading and swaying of Juries
according to his Will, acquitting some for Gain, Enditing others for Malice;
bearing with him as his Servant, over-throwing the other as his Enemy;
procuring all Questmongers to be of his Livery, or otherwise in his danger,
that his winks, frowning and countenance may direct all Inquests. Surely,
surely, it is true, that these be they, that be subverters and perverters of
all Laws and Orders; yea, that make daily the Laws, that of their own nature be
good, to become Instruments of mischief. These indeed be they, of whom such
Examples would be made, and the founders and maintainers of all enormities; and
these be those, whom if you cannot reform for their greatness, yet ought you to
complain of their villainies; and thus much for the due Administration of
Justice.

And as to the third, which is the Observation of the uniform Order in
Religion; you are to endeavor your selves, to the best of your powers and
understandings, drawing together in one line all points, to further, set forth
and maintain the same, which by great and deliberate advice here in Parliament
has been established. And here great Observations and watch should be had of
the withdrawers and hinderers thereof; and especially of those, that subtly,
by indirect means, seek to procure the contrary. Amongst these I mean to
comprehend, as well those that be too swift, as those that be too slow; those I
say, that go before the Laws, or beyond the Laws, as those that will not
follow; for good Government cannot be where Obedience fails, and both these
alike break the Rule of Obedience; And these be those, who in likelihood should
be beginners, and maintainers, and upholders of all Factions and Sects, the
very Mothers and Nurses to all Seditions and Tumults, which necessarily bring
forth destruction and depopulation; of these therefore great heed would be
taken, and upon these being found, sharp and severe Correction (according to
the Order of Laws) should be imposed; and that in the beginning, without
respect of persons, as upon the greatest adversaries that can be to Unity and
Concord, without which no Commonwealth can long endure and stand; whereupon
(you know) all our standing and falling wholly consists, and the surety of
our Sovereign. Also a matter most mavelous, that Laws whereby men possess all
that they have, and their lives also, should not be able to direct men's actions
so, as thereby all Factions and Sects, founded for the most part either upon
Will, or upon the Glory of men's Wits and Inventions, should not sufficiently be
repressed.

Now, for the handsome bridling of the factions of men, I see not that a better
way can be taken, than is used by the Horse-Master, who provideth for the good
Government of his Horse, Bit, or Brakes, according to the tenderness or
hardness of his Mouth, whereunto he adds a certain and well-taught hand. And
like as it is very well to be allowed, that none other Bit or Brake should be
provided for these Factious Folks, than by the Laws be forced; so were it meet
that any of that kind, be it never so sharp, should not be omitted, if the
cause so requires; and this would be executed by a certain and well-taught
hand; for it cannot be, but the winking or withdrawing from meddling in this
matter, or the remiss or loose handling thereof, must of necessity overthrow
in time the whole fruits of all your Labors, and put your selves, your
Country, and the Queens Majesty also, in peril, (whom O Lord preserve!) which
being warned, you may easily foresee and provide for. And this is all that at
this time I have to say. And therefore, here to make an end, her Majesty is
contented, according to your Petition, to grant her Royal Assent to such
Ordinances and Laws, as have been devised and agreed upon by you, in such order
and form, as by the Clerk of the Parliament, according to the ancient Order,
shall be read and declared. I have said.

After the Lord Keepers Speech was ended, the Queen's Majesty did doubtless
give her Royal Assent to such Acts as passed at this Session; but neither the
foresaid Speech, nor the passing of the said Acts, are at all mentioned in the
Original Journal Book of the Upper House, and therefore, as the said Speech was
transcribed out of a Copy thereof I had by me, so is the manner of her
Majesty's giving her Royal Assent to such Acts as now passed, supplied here,
according to a pattern or Platform thereof set down in the Original
Journal Book of the same House, in an. 39 Regin. Eliz. which may very well
serve in this place, in respect that matters of form and course do seldom or
never differ.

The Clerk of the Crown standing up, did first read the Titles of all the
public Acts, to every one of which, allowed by the Queen, the Clerk of the
Upper House read these French words following, viz.

La Roigne le veult, i. e. The Queen wills it.

Then were read the Titles of all the private Acts, to each of which that
passed, the said Clerk of the Upper House read the Queens Answer in these
French words following, viz.

Soit faite come il est desire, i. e. Be it done as it is desired.

These two last Answers to the public and private Acts that pass, are to be
written by the said Clerk, at the end of every Act.

To such Acts as her Majesty did forbear to allow, the Clerk of the Upper House
read in these French words following, viz.

La Roigne s'advisera, i. e. The Queen will advise upon it.

Then in the third place, after the Titles of all the public and private Acts
were read, and the Answers to them as aforesaid, then the said Clerk of the
Crown standing up, did read the title of the Bill of Subsidy, and then the
Clerk of the Upper House standing up likewise, did read the Queens Majesty's
Answer in manner and form following, viz.

La Roigne remercye ses loyaulx subjects, accept leur benevolence, and aussi le
veult, i. e. The Queen thanks her loyal Subjects, accepts their benevolence,
and also wills it.

The said Clerk having read the Queens acceptance, and thanks for the Subsidy
given, as aforesaid, did then upon the reading of the Title of her Majesty's
Pardon, by the Clerk of the Crown as aforesaid, pronounce in these words
following, the Thanks of the Lords and Commons for the same.

Les Prelates, Seigneurs, and Communes, en ce present Parliament assembles, an
nom de touts vous autres subjects, remercient tres humblement vostre Majesty,
and prient a Dieu, vous donner en sante bonne vie and longue, i. e. The
Prelates, Lords and Commons in this present Parliament Assembled, in the name
of all your other Subjects, most humbly thank your Majesty, and pray to God to
give you, in health, a long and happy Life.

The manner of her Majesty's Royal Assent being thus transcribed, according to
the Pattern of the said President, in the end of the Original Journal Book, an.
39 Regin. Eliz. now follows the Dissolution of this present Parliament, by
Sir Nicholas Bacon Knight, Lord Keeper, upon her Majesty's Commandment, which
is entered in the Original Journal Book of the Upper House in manner and form
following.

Nicolaus Bacon miles, Dominus Custos magni Sigilli ex Mandato Dominae Reginae
tune praesent is praesens hoc Parliamentum dissolvit.

The Acts being thus passed, her Majesty retired, and put off her Parliament
Robes, and so returned to her Court at Whitehall.

Nota: That Francis Spilman Esquire at this time Clerk of the Upper House, did
after the Parliament ended, transcribe out all such Acts as passed, and
certified them into the Rolls, and did, at the end of every public Act,
transcribe the French words ensuing:

La Roigne le veult. Being the same words which the Clerk of the Upper House
does usually, and now did pronounce, in the same House upon her Majesty's
allowance of each public Act, as aforesaid.

But as for the private Acts, there was some more and greater Ceremony observed
in the transcribing and Certifying of them into the Rolls, by the said Clerk of
the Upper House, which (although it be omitted in the end of the Original
Journal Book of this present Parliament, an. 1 Regin. Eliz. yet) I have caused
to be supplied, according to the form of a draught thereof set down in the end
of the Original Journal Book of the Upper House, an. 39 Reginae ejusdem, which
may very well serve to be supplied, and added unto the end of this present
Journal; in respect that matters of form do seldom or never differ, in which I
have only caused the direct times and persons to be sitted to this said
foregoing Journal. At the head therefore of every such private Act, so
certified into the Rolls as aforesaid, was doubtless written in Latin as
follows.

In Parliamento inchoat. and tent. apud Westminster. die Jan. An. Regni serenissimae
atque excellentissimae Dominae nostrae Elizabethae, Dei great. Angl-Franc. and
Hib. Regin. fidei defensor. etc. Primo, and ibidem continuat. usque ad and in
Octavam diem Maii tunc prox. sequent. communi omnium Dominorum tam spiritualium
quam temporalium and communitatis consensu and Regiae Majestatis tunc
praesentis assensu, inter alia sancitum, inactitatum, ordinat. and stabilitum
suit sequens hoc statutum ad verbum ut sequitur, viz.

And at the foot, or end of every such private Act, were these ensuing words in
Latin likewise added, as the said foregoing president does very certainly infer.

Ego Franciscus Spilman (who was Clerk of the Upper House in the first Year of
Queen Elizabeth) Armiger, Clericus Parliamenti, virtute brevis supradict.
dominae nostrae Reginae de Certiorand. ntihi direct. and hiis annex. certifico
superius hoc scriptum verum esse tenorem Actus Parliamenti supradicti in eo
breve express. In cujus rei Testimonium Sigillum nomenque meum apposui atque
subscripsi. Dat. die Anno Regni supradict. dominae nostrae Reginae, etc.

THE JOURNAL OF THE House of COMMONS.
A Journal of the Proceedings of the House of Commons in the Parliament holden
at Westminster, An. 1 Regin. Eliz. An. Dom. 1558. beginning there after one
Prorogation of the same, on Wednesday the 25th day of January, and then and
there continued until the Dissolution thereof, on Monday the 8th day of May An.
Dom. 1559.

THIS Journal of the first Parliament of her Majesty. is not only stored with
many good passages touching the ordinary reading, committing and expediting of
Bills, but also with much extraordinary matter concerning the private
privilege of the House, and public state of the Church, and Commonwealth;
which in this great Council of the Kingdom received much alteration and change,
to the yet lasting honor and welfare of them both. In which also (as in the
preceding Journal of the Upper House) I have enlarged and supplied many things
in matter of form, which are not found in the Original Journal Book of the same
House, touching the Writ of Summons, the preferring, reading, and passing of
Bills, with the committing and sending of them up to the Lords, and such like.
Neither does there want much enlargement out of Record, or otherwise,
concerning the Election, Presentiments, and Petitions of the Speaker, with all
other things that are materially worthy of any Animadversion, or Annotation;
which matters of Form or Explanation, I did the rather cause to be inserted in
this first Journal of the Parliament, during her Majesty's Reign, that so I
might the better omit it in the following Journal, and have ready recourse
hither unto it, being all framed into one structure or body in this present
Journal, prout sequitur.

Sir Nicholas Bacon Knight, Lord Keeper of the Great Seal, having received her
Majesty's Warrant for the making and Issuing forth of the Writs of Summons, did
speedily cause them to be directed to such Peers and others, as were to attend
in the Upper House, and to the several Sheriffs of England, for the Election
and Choosing of the Knights, Citizens, Burgesses and Barons, that were to be
present in the House of Commons. And although, neither any thing of this which
has preceeded, nor any Copy of the Writ sent to each Sheriff, be at all
inserted into the Original Journal Book of the House of Commons; yet as I have
supplied that matter, which preceedeth, according to the form thereof, which was
at this time used, and has been since continued, so I have thought it not
amiss, once for all, to add here also the Copy of the Writ at this time sent
forth, which has since received no alteration, and was as follows.

Elizabetha Dei gratia Angl. Franc. and Hib. Regina fidei defensor, Ambrosio
Jermyn Militi, Vicecomiti Norff. and Suff. salutem; Quia de avisamento and
assensu Concilii nostri pro quibusdam arduis and urgentibus negotiis Nos,
statum and defensionem regni nostri Angl. and Ecclesiae Anglicanae concernen.
quoddam Parliamentum nostrum apud Civitatem nostram Westminster. Vicesimo tertio die
Januarii prox. futur. teneri ordinavimus, and ibidem cum Praelatis, Magnatibus,
and Proceribus dicti Regni nostri Colloquium habere and tract. Tibi praecipimus
firmiter injungentes quod fact a Proclamat. in prox. Comitat. tuo post
receptionem hujus brevis nostri tenend. die and loco praedict. duos Milites
gladiis cinct. magis idoneos and discretos Commit. praedict. and de qualibet
Civitate Com. illius duos Cives, and de quolibet Burgo duos Burgenses de
discretior. and magis sufficientibus libere and indifferenter per illos qui
Proclam. hujusmodi interfuer. juxta formam statutarum inde edit. and provis.
legi, nomina corundum Milit. Civium, and Burgensium sic electorum in quibusdam
indentur. inter te and illos qui hujusmodi electioni interfuer. inde
conficiend. sive hujusmodi elect. praesentes fuerint vel absentes, inseri,
eosque ad dict. diem and locum venire fac. ita quod iidem Milites plenam, and
sufficientem potestatem pro se and Communitate Commit. praedicti, ac dict. Cives
and Burgenses, pro se and Communitat. Civitatum and Burgorum praedictorum
divisim ab ipsis habeant, ad faciendum and consentiendum his quae tunc ibidem
de Communi Concilio dicti regni nostri (favente Deo) contigerint ordinari super
Negotiis antedictis, it a quod pro defectu potestatis hujusmodi seu propter
improvidam electionem Milit. Civium, aut Burgensium praedictorum, dicta Negotia
infecta non remaneant quovismodo. Nolumus autem quod tu nec aliquis alius Vic.
dicti regni nostri aliqualiter sit electus, Et Electionem illam in pleno
Comitatu factam, distinct and aperte sub sigillo tuo and sigillis little qui
electioni illi interfuerint, Nobis in Cancellar. nostram ad dict. diem and
locum certifices indilate, remittens nobis alteram partem Indenturarum
praedictarum praesentibus consut una cum hoc breve. Test meipsa apud
Westmonasterium, Quinto die Decembris, Anno Regni nostri Primo.

Nota, That this is not the direct Copy of any Writ, that I saw sent at this
very time, but only applied to this time, according to the usual form of a like
Writ, which also does serve to discover all the Writs sent to the several
Sheriffs of England, differing only from this in the name of the Sheriff and
County.

And in the said Writ foregoing it is to be noted, that the words Supremum
Caput Ecclesiae Anglicanae, were wanting, which had been omitted also in the
foregoing Parliament of her Sister Mary, which notwithstanding it was
afterward agreed in the House, on Friday the third day of Feb. following, that
the Writs of Summons were well sent forth and returned, and that the Parliament
ought to hold accordingly.

In the Ancient Writ also of Summons the cause of the Assembling of the
Parliament was expressed, which at this day is not. Neither was there then any
such clause in the Writ, as in this foregoing does appear; viz. Nolumus autem,
quod tu nec aliquis alius Vicecomes dicti regni nostri aliqualiter sit Electus:
By reason of which words, some have conceived that the Sheriff of any County
ought not to be Elected, or admitted a Member of the House of Commons.

But to this it may first be truly answered, that these words were primarily
inserted into the said Writ, by virtue of an Ordinance only made to that end
upon some special Occasion in the Parliament held in an. 46 Regis Ed. 3. as
appears in the Parliament Roll of that Year, numero 13. remaining with diverse
others in the Tower of London; By which said Ordinance also Lawyers were as
well excluded as Sheriffs.

Secondly, the constant practice in most times since does sufficiently prove,
of how little validity the said Ordinance of Parliament was conceived to have
been, for the debarring of the said Sheriffs from being Members of the House of
Commons. For the proof whereof I have only vouched such as fell out during her
Majesty's Reign, viz. in an. 27 Regin. Eliz. December. 21. Tuesday, Ed. Leigh Esquire
being returned and admitted into the House of Commons, as one of the Knights
for the County of Stafford, was afterward Elected to be Sheriff of the same
Shire. In like manner Feb. the 23. Tuesday, Sir Edward Dimock Knight, was both
Sheriff of the County of Lincoln, and a Member of the House of Commons, as
appears in the Journal ensuing, in an. eodem 27 Regin. Eliz. So also in the
Parliament, de an. 31 Regin. Eliz. Feb. 21. Friday, Mr Saint Pole served as one
of the Knights for the County of Lincoln, being also Sheriff of the same Shire.
And lastly in the Parliament, de an. 43 and 44 Regin. Eliz. December. 2.
Wednesday, Peter Frechevile Esquire was returned one of the Knights for the County
of Darby, being afterward appointed Sheriff of the same County, as was also
Robert Lhuyde Esquire constituted Sheriff of the County of Merioneth in Wales,
having been formerly returned Knight for the said Shire, as appears in the
Journal of the same Parliament, on Tuesday the 8th of December. In and by all
which Presidents it does appear, and may probably be gathered, that neither her
Majesty, nor the House of Commons did conceive these two places to be
incompetible, but that they might well stand and be in one and the same man, at
one and the same time. For her Majesty did first make these foregoing persons
Sheriffs of the several Counties aforesaid, not only after they were chosen,
but returned also Members of the House of Commons, by which it is very plain
she could not be ignorant of it; and therefore her self, and the said House,
did both allow of their being made Sheriffs, as a thing well agreeing with the
Privilege of their former places, and the service of that House, and did not
therefore give them a final discharge, but only Liberty of recess about their
necessary affairs, into the several Counties beforementioned, as in the Case
of Sickness, or some other temporary cause of their absenting themselves from
the House, which being expedited, they might return again to that service; for
doubtless if the said House had conceived that they had been disabled from
their serving there by their new Offices, it would have been ordered, that a
Warrant should have been sent to the Clerk of the Crown, to have sent down a
new Writ into the foresaid Counties, for a new Election to have been made; as
in the Case of double Returns, Death, or the like, is used. And whereas in the
Parliament de an. 43 and 44 Regin. Eliz. on Wednesday the 4th day of November,
Sir Andrew Nowell being both Sheriff and Knight for the County of Rutland, was
wholly discharged, and a Writ sent out, de novo, for a new Election; That Case
differed from all the foregoing Presidents, and might well upon another reason,
be ordered by the House; For the said Sir Andrew, being Sheriff of the foresaid
County of Rutland, was afterward Elected one of the Knights for the same, and
so compelled to return himself, which could not be good in Law. But if the said
Sir Andrew had been chosen a Knight of some other Shire, during his
Sheriffalty, or had been constituted Sheriff by her Majesty of the said County,
after he had been Elected and returned a Member of the House of Commons, the
Case had doubtless differed, and the House would never have given Order for a
new Writ to have been sent forth; which course they observed in the two
before-cited Presidents of Mr Frechevile, and Mr Lhuyde in the same Parliament.

Thirdly, if these two places should not be competible, then had it now lain in
the Power of her Majesty (or may lie in the power of any Sovereign of this
Kingdom) to have disabled as many Members from serving in the House of Commons,
as she should or could have constituted Sheriff. She might have disfurnished
(or any Sovereign for the time being may disfurnish) the said. House at any
time, of all or the greater part of the ablest Members thereof.

Nota also, That those words, viz. Duos Milites Gladiis cinctos, were inserted
into the Writ of Summons after the Parliament, an. 13 E. 3. as may be gathered
by the Parliament Roll of the same Year.

And whereas some have objected in the foregoing Case, to prove that a Sheriff
ought always to be attendant upon the affairs of the County, and cannot
therefore be a Member of the House of Commons: the Objection is idle, for till
the tenth year of Queen Eliz. the Counties of Nottingham and Derby, and of
Warwick and Leicester, had but two several Sheriffs, as were also the Counties
of Norfolk and Suffolk, served with one Sheriff until the eighteenth Year of
her Majesty's Reign, and so are the Counties of Sussex and Surrey, served this
present Year 1630.

And anciently also (as is plain by that MS. Catalogue of all the Sheriffs of
England, or the most part, since the time of King H. 2. (which is in many men's
hands) diverse Counties were committed to one man, as in an. 1 H. 2. Richard
Bassett, and Awbrey de Vere, were jointly constituted for Sheriffs of the
several Counties of Norfolk, Suffolk, Northampton, Essex, Huntington,
Cambridge, and Hartford; and Robert Caran joined unto them for the Counties of
Bedford and Buckingham. From the Female Coheirs of the foresaid Richard
Bassett, being the Ancestor of the House of Weldon in Northamptonshire, are
lineally and undoubtedly descended the Families of Chaworth, Stafford, Knyvet,
Clinton Earl of Lincoln, the Howards of the House of Suffolk, and Clopton late
of Kentwell in the County aforesaid; and from the beforementioned Awbrey de
Vere is lineally descended (as I take it) Robert de Vere the nineteenth Earl of
Oxford, now living An. Dom. 1630.

Upon the receipt of the beforementioned Writ and Election made accordingly,
the Sheriffs of every Shire made their several Returns, of which the Form being
set down in the old Book of Entries, it shall be needless here to insert them.
But now, having supplied these matters of Form, according to the usual
Presidents, the next passages follow out of the Original Journal Book of the
House of Commons.

On Wednesday the 23th of Jan. Anno Regni Regin. Eliz. Primo, The Parliament
should have begun according to the Writs of Summons, but by the Queens
Commission, directed to Sir Nicholas Bacon Knight, Lord Keeper of the Great
Seal of England, the Lord Treasurer and others, to Prorogue the same, until
Wednesday the 25th day of the same Month; it was so done accordingly.

On Wednesday the 25th day of Jan. The Parliament held and began, according to
the last Prorogation thereof; but there is no mention made in the Original
Journal Book of the House of Commons, where or by whom, the Names of the
Knights, Citizens and Burgesses of the said House, were called; that so it
might be seen who were present: But most certain it is, that at this day they
took no Oath, before the beginning of this present Parliament, because that of
Supremacy, which was afterward taken, was not enjoined by Statute till this
first year of her Majesty. But most likely it is, that Hen. Fitz-Alan, Earl of
Arundell, at this time Lord Steward of her Majesty's Household, did both cause
their names to be called in some place near the Upper House, and their
Appearance to be Recorded, before her Majesty's coming to the Upper House.

The manner of calling the Names of the Knights, Citizens and Burgesses in
former times, did much differ from that which is used at this day, as appears
by the Parliament Rolls in the Tower: for in an. 7 R. 2. the Knights and
Burgesses were called by name, in presence of the King, which shows they staid
without till then; And in an. 2 H. 4. and an. 4 H. 4. they were called by name,
in the Chancery at Westminster Hall, before the Chancellor and the Steward of
the Kings House. And in an. 13 H. 4. the said Knights and Burgesses were called
at the Door of the Painted Chamber, in presence of the Steward of the Kings
House, as the manner is. Only one President differs from all the latter, which
is found in the Original Journal Book of the Upper House, de Anno 33 H. 8.
where the Duke of Suffolk, Lord Steward, commanded the Clerk of the Parliament,
to read the Names of the Commons, unto which every one answered, they being all
in the Upper House below the Bar; and then the King came.

But at this day they are called by their names by the Clerk of the Crown, in
presence of the Lord Steward, in the Court of Requests: and now since the first
Year of Queen Eliz. and from the fifth, the Knights, Citizens and Burgesses of
the House of Commons (as has been before observed) do take the Oath of
Supremacy, and since the seventh of King James they take the Oath of Allegiance
also, which the Lord Steward administers to some, and appoints certain of them
his Deputies, to give the same unto the rest. 7 Jac. cap. 6.

These passages touching the Ancient and Modern calling of the Knights,
Citizens and Burgesses of the House of Commons, being not at all touched in the
Original Journal Book of the same House, but supplied from other Authority; now
follows the residue of this days passages out of the foresaid Journal Book,
with some Additions.

Upon the already named 25th day of January, her Majesty came to the Parliament
Chamber, commonly called the Upper House, and being there set, and attended by
Sir Nicholas Bacon, Lord Keeper, and diverse Lords Spiritual and Temporal, in
their Parliament Robes, the House of Commons had notice thereof, and repaired
thither. And being (as many as conveniently could) let in, and silence made,
the Lord Keeper of the Great Seal, after an Excellent Oration by him made,
containing the urgent causes for the Calling of this Parliament, declared the
Queens pleasure to be, that the Commons should repair to their accustomed
place, and there to choose their Speaker.

Whereupon, the Knights, Citizens and Burgesses departing to their own House,
did there take their several places, and most remaining silent, or speaking
very submissively, Mr Treasurer of the Queens House, standing up uncovered, did
first put the House in remembrance of the Lord Keepers late Speech, and of his
Declaration of her Majesty's pleasure, that they should choose a Speaker, and
therefore in humble Obedience to her Majesty's said pleasure, seeing others
remain silent, he thought it his Duty to take that occasion to commend to their
Choice, Sir Thomas Gargrave Knight, one of the Honorable Council in the North
Parts, a worthy Member of the House, and Learned in the Laws of this Realm: By
which Commendations of his, of the aforesaid worthy Member of the House to
their Consideration, he said he did not intend to debar any other there
present, from uttering their free opinions, and nominating any other whom they
thought to be more fitting, and therefore desired them to make known their
opinions, who thereupon did with one consent and voice, allow and approve of Mr
Treasurers nomination, and Elected the said Sir Thomas Gargrave, to be the
Prolocutor, or Speaker of the said House.

The said Sir Thomas Gargrave being thus Elected Speaker, after a good pause
made, stood up uncovered, and having in all humility disabled himself, as being
unfurnisht with that Experience, and other qualities, which were required for
the undertaking and undergoing of so great a Charge, did conclude with an
humble Request to the House, to proceed to the New Election of some other more
able and worthy Member amongst them.

But the House still calling upon him to take his place of Mr Speaker, the
beforementioned Mr Treasurer, and Mr Comptroller of her Majesty's Household (as
may very well be gathered) did rise from their places, and going unto the said
Sir Thomas Gargrave, unto the place where he sat, did each of them take him,
one by the right Arm and the other by the left, and led him to the Chair at the
upper end of the House of Commons, and there placed him, where having sat a
while covered, he arose, and so standing bare-headed, he returned his humble
Thanks unto the whole House, for their good opinion of him, promising his best
and uttermost endeavor, for the faithful discharge of that weighty place, to
which they had Elected him. And soon after Mr Treasurer, and Mr Comptroller
repaired to the Queen, to know her Highnesses pleasure, when Mr Speaker should
be presented to her Majesty, for Confirmation of this Election; and soon after
they returned, showing her pleasure was that to be done on Saturday next, at
one of the Clock in the Afternoon.

Here it shall not be amiss to add somewhat touching the Election of the
Speaker, which, because I find it ready penned to my hand, in that elaborate
MS. Entitled, Modus tenendi Parliamentum apud Anglos, Written by my kind
Friend Henry Elsinge Esquire Clerk of the Upper House this present Year 1630. Libr.
1. cap. 7.. 1. and 2. Therefore I shall without any great alteration here, add
it in the next place; and first touching the Antiquity of the Speaker, it is
most likely that he began to be when the House of Commons first sat.

For it may clearly be gathered ex Lib. Sancti Albani fol. 207. in Bibliotheca
Cottoniana, that in the Parliament de an. 44 H. 3. The House of Commons had
then a Speaker. For there Pope Alexander laboring to have Adomar, the Elect
Bishop of Winchester, recalled from banishment; the Answer of the Parliament
was as follows: viz. Si Dominus Rex, and Regni majores hoc vellent,
communitas tamen, ipsius ingressum in Angliam, jam nullatenus sustineret. Which
is Signed and Sealed by all the Lords, and by Petrus de Mountefortivice
communitatis, which shows plainly that he was thire Speaker, for the very same
words did Sir John Tiptofte their Speaker Sign and Seal to the Entaile of the
Crown, Parl. an. 7 and 8 H. 4.

But it is true, that the first Speaker who is directly named in Record, was in
the Parliament Rolls in the Tower de an. 51 E. 3. N. 87. The last day of the
Parliament (says the Records) Sir Thomas Hungerford Knight, Speaker, declared
to the Lords, that he had moved the King to Pardon all such as were unjustly
Convicted in the Last Parliament. And that the King willed him to make special
Bills for them, which he had done for seven, etc. And therefore it can be no
Argument, that the House of Commons had no Speaker, before the 51th year of E.
3. because no former Records mention him. For this is to be noted, that the
Ancient Parliament Rolls did record only what Acts passed between both Houses,
and what Laws were made, and omitted matters of Form and Ceremony.

There are also diverse Parliament Rolls tempore R. 2. that do mention the
Presentment of the Speaker, prout in an. 1 Rich. 2. n. an. 2 R. 2. n. 18. 20,
22, and 23 an. 4 R. 2. n. 10, 12, and 13. an. 5 R. 2. n. 10, and 16. and an. 21
R. 2. n. 8, 9, 14, and 15. So also the Speaker is mentioned in the Parliament
Rolls, de annis 1, 2, 4, 5, 6, and 11 H. 4. and in the Parliament Rolls of H.
5. H. 6. and E. 4. remaining in the Tower, and in the Parliament Rolls of R. 3.
H. 7. remaining in the Chapel of the Rolls in Chancery Lane; and since H. 8.
time, the Original Journal-Books of the Upper House of diverse of his Years,
remain in the Parliament Office, situate and being in the Palace-Yard at
Westminster, at the South Corner thereof; as also the Original Journal-Books
downwards to this time; and from the first Year of Ed. 6. to this day, the
Original Journal-Books of the House of Commons, are in the Custody, or at the
disposing of my kind Friend John Wright Esquire Clerk of the same House this
present Year 1630.

And now here do, (...) the next place, follow certain Observations upon the
Election of the said Speaker, transcribed also, with very little alteration,
out of the beforementioned Treatise of Mr Elsinge, Lib. and Cap. eodem, and.
2. in which two Questions are moved.

First, Whether the Commons might choose their Speaker if the King Commands them
not?

Secondly, Whether the Election be in their own absolute choice?

For to clear these two we must view the Ancient Records; those of R. 2. are
the first, that frequently mention the Speaker.

It does not appear by any of them, that the Commons had ever any such
Commandment to choose their Speaker. Neither is there a word of it in any Record
of E. 3. which have the Speeches at large, touching the Cause of Summons; most
of them concluding with a Charge to the Commons, to consider and advise thereof
amongst themselves; but nothing touching the Election of their Speaker: yet out
of doubt they did first choose their Speaker, before they entered into any Debate
of their Charge.

The first Charge to choose their Speaker is in an. 2 H. 4. and yet it is
omitted again in the Parliament 7 and 8 H. 4. but (that only excepted) it is
continued from the 2 H. 4. until this day: and the long use has made it so
material, that, without the Kings Commandment or leave, they cannot choose their
Speaker, which appears by this, that in an. 31 H. 6. the Parliament being
Prorogued, and the Speaker arrested in Execution, in the interim, before the
access, the Commons prayed his Enlargement, which, after long Debates of the
Privileges of Parliament, was denied. And then certain of the Lords were sent
to the House of Commons, and Commanded them, in the Kings name, to choose a new
Speaker; and thereupon they did so. Vid. An Account of this President at the
end of this Session, out of Rot. Parl. 31 and 32 H. 6.

And of late Years, in the time of Queen Eliz. the Parliament being Prorogued
at two several times, and the several Speakers dead in the interim, before
their second access (as shall be more largely declared hereafter in these
Journals) the Commons, before they proceeded to any business, acquainted the
Lords therewith, and desired them to intimate the same to the Queen: and so
were commanded by her Majesty to choose new Speakers. Ut vide in an. 8 Regin.
Eliz. die 1 Oct. and in an. 23 Reginae ejusdem die 18 Jan.

But as touching the second Question, surely the Election of the Speaker was
anciently free to the Commons, to choose who they would of their own House,
which appears in this, that the King never rejected any, whom they made choice
of.

Vide 5 R. 2. The Parliament began 4 November. and the 18th of November. the
Commons came, and presented Sir Richard Walgrave, whom they had chosen for
their Speaker, who excused himself, desiring to be discharged. But the King,
Lui chargeast del fair sur sa ligeaunce, in as much as his Companions had
chosen him; whereby it appears plainly, that the choice was absolutely in their
own power.

These Animadversions touching the Antiquity and Election of the Speaker of the
House of Commons, being thus inserted from several Authorities; Now follows the
Presentment of the Speaker, and her Majesty's allowance of him, out of the
Original Journal Book of the House of Commons, in which many things of Form are
also added by my self, and diverse Animadversions out of that beforementioned
elaborate MS. Treatise of Mr Elsinge's penning, Lib. 1. cap. 7. with some small
Additions, or Alterations.

On Saturday, the 28th day of Jan. about one of the Clock in the Afternoon (to
which day and hour the Parliament had been last Adjourned, or continued on
Wednesday the 25th day of this instant Jan. foregoing) her Majesty, Sir
Nicholas Bacon, and diverse Lords Spiritual and Temporal were present in the
Upper House; which said Lords, as also her Majesty, had on their several
Parliament Robes, of which the Knights, Citizens and Burgesses and Barons of
the House of Commons having notice, they repaired thither. Sir Thomas Gargrave
was led up to the Rail or Bar, at the lower end of the said Upper House, who
submissively excusing himself, he humbly desired the Queens Majesty to free him
from that Employment, and to Command her Knights, Citizens and Burgesses of the
House of Commons, to Elect amongst themselves some other more able Member, for
the discharge of the said place; But notwithstanding these reasons her Majesty
signified his allowance by the Mouth of the Lord Keeper.

Nota, That the exeuse of the Speaker is at this day merely formal, and out of
modesty. For he first excuses himself unto the Commons when they Elect him,
and afterward to the Sovereign when he is presented: But anciently, it seems
they were both hearty and real, or else no excuse at all was made. And the
first President of this nature, that is found in Record, is in the Parliament
Rolls de an. 5 R. 2. n. 9. die 4 Novembris, where Sir Richard de Waldgrave
Knight (the Lineal Ancestor in the Male Line of the several Families of
Waldegrave in Suffolk) being chosen Speaker of the House of Commons, did excuse
himself unto the said King, but was charged upon his Allegiance to undertake
it, since he was Chosen by the Commons.

The next is in an. 1 H. 4. of Sir John Cheny, who made no excuse at his
Presentment. But the next day after, he and they came before the King, and
declared his disability to serve, by reason of a sudden sickness, and that the
Commons had chosen Sir John Dorewood in his place, beseeching his Majesty to
allow thereof; which the King did, and Commanded Sir John Dorewood to be their
Speaker. And then the said Sir John Dorewood made the common Protestation for
himself and the Commons, but no excuse, N. 63.

The next excuse is in an. 5 H. 4. n. 8. of Sir Arnold Savage, which the King
would not allow of. An. 6 H. 4. n. 8. Sir William Sturing made no excuse, and
an. 7, and 8 H. 4. n. 9. Sir John Tibtot desired to be excused by reason of his
Youth, but the King affirmed the Election; and all other Speakers in H. 4. his
time desired to be excused.

Some Speakers also under H. 5. desired to be excused, and some others did not,
for it was not constantly observed: but from the sixth year of H. 6. since
which time they have all (except two) desired to be excused; yet none were
excused, save only Sir John Popham Knight, an 28 H. 6. whom the King
discharged, and thereupon the Commons chose and presented William Tresham Esquire
who made no excuse, neither did Sir William Oldham an. 29 H. 6. desire to be
excused.

These Animadversions upon the Speakers Speech, which he first makes unto her
Majesty, containing his excuse, being thus inserted as aforesaid; now follows
the second Speech of the said Speaker, upon his allowance by her Majesty. The
substance of which, being not found in the Original Journal Book of the House
of Commons, I have supplied; according to the usual Form.

The said Sir Thomas Gargrave being allowed and confirmed Speaker of the House
of Commons by her Majesty, having tendered his humble thanks for her Highness
gracious Opinion of him, and added some Expressions in honor of her Majesty,
in the end of his Speech; He came according to the usual Form, to make certain
Petitions in the behalf of the House of Commons, and of himself: in which he
did first desire Liberty of access, for the Members of the said House to her
Majesty's presence, upon all urgent and necessary occasions. Secondly, that if
in any thing he should mistake, or misreport any thing, which should be
committed unto him to declare, that his unwilling miscarriage therein might be
pardoned. Thirdly, That they might have Liberty and Freedom of Speech, in
whatsoever they had occasion to propound, and debate in the House. And lastly,
that all the Members of the House, with their Servants, and necessary
Attendants, might be exempted from all manner of Arrests, and Suits, during the
continuance of the Parliament, and the usual space, both before the beginning,
and after the ending thereof, as in former times has always been accustomed.

To which Speech of the said Speaker the Lord Keeper, by her Majesty's
Commandment, made a large Answer (which is verbatim, set down in the
Journal Book of the Upper House upon this instant Saturday the 28th day of
Jan.) in which he intimated at large, among other things, that her Majesty did
graciously allow of those Liberties and Privileges, for which the said Speaker
had Petitioned, so as they were discreetly and modestly used.

In which Speech of the Speaker's in general, it may first be observed, that at
this day it is in the Speakers Power, to deliver in his Speech what shall best
please himself; whereas anciently he delivered nothing, but what the House gave
him in Charge to speak, as may be gathered by the Parliament Rolls de an. 1 R.
2. an. 2 R. 2. an. 3 R. 2. an. 6 R. 2. and an. 17 R. 2. in an. 4, and in an. 10
H. 4. and in diverse other Parliaments in the times of H. 5. H. 6. and Ed. 4.

And for those three Privileges before mentioned, which Sir Tho. Gargrave the
Speaker, did in his foregoing Speech desire of her Majesty, in the name and on
the behalf of the House of Commons, they were no other, than the said House did
doubtless enjoy in ancient time; although they were never desired by the then
Speakers of the same House, nor were any of them ever Petitioned by any
Speaker, until in the Parliament de an. 28 H. 8. as may very probably be
gathered by the Original Journal Book of the Upper House de an. eodem.

And as to the first Petition, which he made in the name of the House of
Commons, for free access to her Majesty, it is plain, that the said House
enjoyed it during the Reign of K. E. 3. prout patet ex Rot. Parl. de an. 51 Ed.
3. n. 87. when Sir Thomas Hungerford was Speaker, and in the time since under
R. 2. H. 4. and their Successors, the Presidents are so frequent, as they need
no vouching.

And as touching this foregoing Petition, it is first Recorded in the Original
Journal Book of the Upper House, to have been made de an. 28 H. 8. by Richard
Rich, the then Speaker; and in a like Journal Book de an. 31 H. 8. by Thomas
Moyle the Speaker in that Parliament, and the same course has been constantly
observed by all the Speakers since, of whose Speeches there is any good
memorial remaining.

And as touching the second Petition, which the said Sir Thomas Gargrave made
unto her Majesty in the name of the House of Commons for freedom of Speech;
there is no Record that it was ever Petitioned for, until in the Original
Journal Book of the Upper House, de an. 33 H. 8. it is entered to have been made
by Thomas Moyle the then Speaker, yet was it never denied them before; for the
said Commons would never suffer any uncomely Speeches to pass of private men in
their House, much less of the King, or any of the Lords; and in Ed. 3. his
time, who was an absolute Prince; and beloved of his People, the Commons
themselves did oftentimes discuss, and debate many things concerning the Kings
Prerogative, and agreed upon Petitions, for Laws to be made, directly against
his Prerogative; as may appear by diverse of the said Petitions: yet they were
never interrupted in their consultations, nor received any check for the same;
as may appear by the very Answers to their Petitions. The Presidents in the two
succeeding Kings times, are not of so good a stamp, as those of Ed. 3. because
R. 2. was much overruled in his young Years, and H. 4. was an Usurper, and so
was compelled to seek for the love of his Subjects: yet was there one passage
in his Reign, which proved him a most wise and just King, after he had attained
the Crown. For in Rot. Parl. de an. 2 H. 4. n. 11. the Commons Petitioned the
King, that he would not suffer any report to be made unto him, of any matters,
either moved, or debated amongst them, until they be concluded, nor give them
any credit; whereunto the King assented: and for the freedom of Speech, which
the Commons enjoyed in succeeding times, the Presidents are so frequent, as
they need no further vouching. And it is very well worthy the Observation, that
whereas in the Session of Parliament de an. 8 Regin. Eliz. when Richard Onslow
Esquire her Majesty's Solicitor, was Elected and allowed Speaker, by reason of the
Death of Thomas Williams Esquire:, who had been Speaker in the Session de an. 5.
Regin. Eliz. and did Decease in the interim of the several Prorogations between
the said two Sessions, the said Richard Onslow did, upon his Presentment to her
Majesty, and allowance by her, only desire in the name of the House of Commons,
free access to her Majesty; and did, either ignorantly, or wittingly, omit to
make those two other Petitions on their behalf, for freedom of Speech, and
freedom from Arrests and Suits; yet in the said Session, de an. 8 Regin. Eliz.
the House of Commons, falling upon that great business of her Majesty's
Declaration of a Successor, did use greater liberty of Speech, than they had
done, or did before or after in any other Parliament, during her Majesty's
Reign, when the said Speakers did most precisely desire the allowance of the
said privilege of freedom of Speech from her Majesty.

And now, thirdly and lastly, touching that Petition, which Sir Thomas Gargrave
the Speaker made unto her Majesty, for freedom from Arrests; It is plain, that
the Commons, and the Lords of the Upper House, have not only always enjoyed the
same for themselves and their necessary attendants, but also have been exempted
from Suits at Law, during the continuance of the Parliament; not only in legal
Courts, but in the very Court of Chancery, Star Chamber, and such like, unless
some Criminal matter be laid unto their Charge, which draws into question the
life it self; which I have caused to be inserted into the preceding abstract
of Sir Thomas Gargraves Speech, because he either did Petition for freedom from
Suits, as well as for freedom from Arrests, or he ought to have done it. For it
is plain, by the close Rolls of Ed. 2. remaining in the Tower, that the Barons,
and such others as were Summoned to Parliament in the seventh and eigth Years
of his Reign, were exempted from Answering to any Suits before tho Justices of
Assize, during the Parliaments continuance; where the Proclamations sent to the
said Justices, for that purpose, contain these words, viz. Quod supersedeant
ubi Barons and alii summoniti ad Parliamentum Regis sunt parts, and vide Rot.
Claus. de an. 7 Ed. 2. Membrana 24. and de an. 8 Ed. 2. m. 22, and 23.

And for the several Presidents, how frequently the Members of the House of
Commons were exempted, both from Arrests and Suits, during all the Parliaments
of her Majesty's Reign, they are so many, and fell out so often, as may be seen
by every ensuing Journal almost of the House of Commons, that they need no
vouching.

These Animadversions being thus added, touching the Speakers Speech, and the
Petitions on the behalf of the House of Commons contained therein, now follows
the departure of the said Speaker, being fully invested in his place by her
Majesty's allowance, down unto the House of Commons, out of the Original
Journal Book of the same, with some Additions in matter of Form.

Sir Thomas Gargrave aforesaid, being now settled in the place of Speaker, after
his humble reverence made unto her Majesty, departed with the other Members of
the House of Commons, unto their own House, the Sergeant of the same carrying
the Mace all the way before the said Speaker, which was in like sort born
before him, during this Parliament, both when he repaired unto, and when he
departed from the said House.

The Speaker being placed in the Chair,..... Seymore Esquire Clerk of the foresaid
House of Commons, who sat uncovered at a Table at the upper end of the House,
just before the Speaker, stood up and read a Bill, which had been treated of in
the last Parliament, being entitled, The Bill touching felling of Wood and
Timber Trees in Forests and Chases, which done, kissing his hand, he delivered
the said Bill to the Speaker, who standing up uncovered (whereas otherwise he
sits covered) and holding the Bill in his hand, said, The Bill is thus
Entitled; and then having read the Title of the Bill, as is before set down,
he opened to the House the substance thereof, which it is most probable he did
out of the Breviate which was filed to the Bill, and had been delivered unto
him, together with the Bill, by the Clerk of the House aforesaid; which being
done, he then said, This is the first reading of the Bill, and so delivered it
unto the Clerk again, which ended, the House arose; which has been the
constant use and custom ever since, as also diverse years before, that after the
presentment, and allowance of the Speaker, one Bill be once read after his
return from the Upper House unto the House of Commons.

On Monday the 30th day of January, the Bill for the avoiding of French Wares
and Wines, and the Bill touching any variance of Grants made by Corporations,
were each of them read the first time.

Mr Treasurer with 23. others of this House (whose names are wholly omitted in
the Original Journal Book of the House of Commons, through the negligence
of..... Seymour Esquire at this time Clerk of the same) were appointed to meet
together, and to treat for a convenient Subsidy, and also to consider touching
the validity of the Writ of Summons, both of the last Parliament and also of
this present Parliament; in which said Writ, the words Supremum caput Ecclesiae
Anglicanae were wanting, vide February 3. postea.

On Tuesday the 31th day of January, it was agreed in the House, that a Book
for the Subsidy be drawn by several of the Committees.

On Wednesday the first day of February, the Bill touching levying of Fines in
the County Palatine of Durham; and the Bill touching thicking of Hats or Caps
in Mills, were each of them read the first time. The Bill also touching the
grant of Tonnage and Poundage, was read the first time.

On Friday the 3d of Feb. the title of a Bill, which had this day its second
reading, is thus entered in the Original Journal Book of the foresaid House: The
Bill for felling of Wood and Timber in Forests or Chases. And under the
entrance of the title of it, in the Original Journal Book of the House of
Commons, was written Mr Sackvill, by which it should seem, that this Bill was
committed upon the first reading to him, and (as it is probable) to others
also. By which manner of entering the title of the said Bill, it may plainly be
collected, that the Bill it self had at this time its second reading, and was
thereupon committed to Mr Sackvill (to whom it seems the Bill was delivered)
and others whose names are omitted; the manner of which, being there also left
unmentioned, I thought good to supply, according to the usual Form, both then
doubtless used, and at this day also.

The Clerk of the said House, having read the title, and the Bill aforesaid,
standing, kissing his hand, delivered the same with a Breviate (containing the
substance of the Bill) annexed unto it, unto the Speaker; who thereupon,
standing up uncovered, and reading both the Title, and the Breviate said, This
is the second reading; and the, having paused a while, and (as it is likely)
none speaking against the Bill, he put the question for the committing thereof,
as follows; viz. As many as do think fit this Bill should be committed, say,
Yea. And after the affirmative voice given, as many as shall think the
contrary, say, No; and then (as it should seem) the Speaker judging that the
affirmative voice was the greatest, did put the House in mind to name
Committees. And thereupon every one of the House that listed, did name such
other Members of the same, to be of the Committee, as they thought fit; and the
Clerk either did, or ought to have written down as many of them, as he
conveniently could; and when a convenient number of the Committees named, were
set down by the Clerk, then did the Speaker move the House to name the time and
place, when and where they should meet, which the Clerk did also doubtless then
take a note of, and did also (Silence being made in the House) read out of that
Book or Paper (in which he entered them) the Committees names, with the time and
place of their meeting.

And it is most probable, that the Clerk of the House of Commons himself, or
his servant, in the. transcribing out of the foresaid notes into that Book,
which now remains the Original Journal of the said House, for this present
Parliament, did there wittingly and knowingly forbear to insert the names of
the other Committees, appointed in the foregoing Bill, with the time and place
of their meeting, as matters of Form and not essential to the said Journal.

The Bill for a Subsidy, and two Fifteens and Tenths, granted by the
Temporalty, was read the first time.

Mr Carrell, on the behalf of the Committees (who were appointed on Monday the
30th day of January foregoing) to consider of the validity of the Writs of
Summons of the Parliament foregoing, and this present now Assembled, (in
respect that these words Supremum caput were wanting in them) did make report,
that it was agreed by the said Committee, that the want of the said words did
not at all hinder, or impeach the validity of the said Writs of Summons, and so
consequently of those preceding Parliaments, or this present now Assembled.

On Saturday the 4th day of Feb. the Bill for Tonnage and Poundage to be
granted to the Queens Majesty, was read the second time, and Ordered to be
Engrossed.

There passed diverse Arguments in the House, touching a Request to be made to
the Queens Highness, for her Marriage; but by whom the said Arguments were
made, or what the substance of them was, or what was resolved by the House upon
them, is through the negligence of the Clerk of the House of Commons, omitted
in the Original Journal Book of the same; yet it may easily be gathered by that
which follows, on Monday the 6th day, and on Friday the 10th day of this
Instant February ensuing; that the House did this day Resolve that such a
Petition should speedily be drawn.

February the 5th Sunday.

On Monday the 6th day of Feb. the Bill for the Subsidy granted by the
Temporalty, was read the second time, and thereupon Ordered to be Engrossed.

The Bill for the restitution of Tenths, and First Fruits, was brought from the
Lords by Mr Attorney and Mr Solicitor, the manner of whose delivery thereof,
being not found in the Original Journal Book of the House of Commons, I have
caused to be supplied, according to the usual course thereof.

The said Mr Attorney and Solicitor, being admitted into the said House, came
up close to the Table, where the Clerk sat, and made three Congies, and then
acquainted Sir Thomas Gargrave the Speaker, that the Lords had sent unto the
House such a Bill; of which one of them read the Title, and so again departed
the House, having made three other Congies.

It was Ordered by the House, that Mr Speaker with all the Privy Council, and
thirty other Members of the same, should attend upon the Queen this Afternoon,
to petition her Majesty, touching her Marriage, in such manner and Form, as had
been on Saturday last agreed upon; but whether they were admitted to her
Majesty's presence, does not appear, nor can possibly be gathered out of the
Original Journal Book of the House of Commons; neither in what manner their
Petition was framed, although it is plain by her Majesty's Answer, inserted at
large, on Friday the 10th day of this instant February ensuing, that it was
only general, to persuade her Majesty, for the welfare of her State and
Kingdom, to be pleased to marry, without limiting the time, Person or place.
And howsoever, whether this aforesaid Petition were delivered this Afternoon or
no, most likely it is, that her Majesty deferred, and took time to give an
Answer in so weighty a business, until the said 10th day of February aforesaid,
which I do the rather gather, not only from the abovementioned Original
Journal Book it self, in which there is no report or mention of her Majesty's
Speech, made unto the House by the Speaker, until in the Forenoon of the said
day; but also from an ancient written Copy of her Majesty's said Answer, which
I had by me, in which it is referred unto the said 10th day of February, as
then uttered by her, which will also more fully appear in the passages of the
said day, where it is at large set down.

On Tuesday the 7th day of February, the Bill that the Citizens of York may
take Apprentices notwithstanding the Statute to the contrary, was read the
first time.

The Bill also for the Subsidy of Tonnage and Poundage, was read the third
time, and passed; which may be gathered by these words, viz. Judicium assent.
placed in the inner margent before the beginning of the entrance of the title
of the said Bill in the Original Journal Book of the House of Commons; by which
words I suppose the Clark intended, as much as if he had recorded it at large,
that upon the said third reading of the Bill, it passed the House by the
judgment and assent of the same. The manner and form of which third reading I
have thought good to cause to be applied to the present occasion, according to
the usual course therein accustomed.

The Clerk of the House standing up read the Title and the Bill aforesaid, and
kissing his hand, delivered the same unto the Speaker, who standing up
uncovered, read again the Title of the said Bill, and opened shortly the
effects thereof; and then said, This is the third reading of this Bill; and
told them further, that with their favor he would now put it to the Question,
for the passing; but paused a while to see, if any Member of the House would
speak unto it (which at this day is commonly most used upon the third reading
of a Bill) and whether any of the said House spoke unto the said Bill or no,
does not appear. But the Speaker holding the Bill in his hand, made the
Question for the passing of it in this sort, viz. As many as are of the mind,
that the Bill shall pass, say Yea; which being Answered accordingly by the
House, or the greatest part of them, the Bill passed; and so he delivered it
again unto the Clerk, who because the Bill was Originally begun, and first
passed in the House of Commons, wrote within the said Bill, on the top of it
toward the right hand, these words, viz. Soit baille aux Seigneurs.

The House was Adjourned until Thursday next, because the Morrow following,
being Ash Wednesday, there was a Sermon to be Preached at the Court, before the
Queen, at which (as it should seem) the greatest part of the House desired to
be present.

On Thursday February the 9th. the Bill for Melcomb Regis in the County of
Dorset, to be fortified, was read the first time; And the Bill also to restore
the Supremacy of the Church of England, to the Crown of the Realm, was read the
first time, and committed to Mr Cook, as he is there termed, and elsewhere Sir
Anthony Cook, and as is very probable, also to some others not named. For it
may be here noted, that in the first Journals of her Majesty's time, the title
of Mr only, is ordinarily given to Knights.

Mr Solicitor and Mr Martin, brought from the Lords the Bill for the Queens
Title to the Crown, which was delivered in such order and manner, as was the
Bill for the Restitution of Tenths and First Fruits, on Monday the sixth day of
this Instant February foregoing.

Friday 10 Feb. the Bill for one Subsidy, and two Fifteens and Tenths, was read
the third time and past.

Mr Speaker declared the Queens Majesty's Answer to the Message, which was read
to the House by Mr Mason, to the great honor of the Queen, and the
contentation of this House; which is all that is contained in the Original
Journal Book of the House of Commons, touching this great business of their
Petition, preferred to her Majesty, to induce her to marry; and therefore it
shall not be amiss to leave some larger memorial thereof; for this business,
having been first propounded and resolved on in the said House, on Saturday the
4th day of this instant February foregoing, and preferred to her Majesty (as it
should seem) on the Monday following in the Afternoon, was not answered by her
Majesty until this Morning, and was then also read in the said House; as
appears by the foregoing imperfect mentioning thereof. And I am the rather
induced to conceive, that her Majesty gave not her Answer until this Morning,
to the said Petition of the Commons, from a Copy of the said Answer, which I
have by me, written by Alexander Evesham, which said Answer out of the said
Copy (in which it is referred to this instant 10th day of February) with the
title and subscription thereof, do now in the next place follow, verbatim.

Friday 10th of Feb. 1558. etc. The Answer of the Queens Highness, to the
Petition propounded unto her, by the Lower House, concerning her Marriage.
AS I have good cause, so do I give you all my hearty thanks, for the good Zeal
and loving Care you seem to have, as well toward me, as to the whole Estate of
your Country. Your Petition I perceive consists of three parts, and my Answer
to the same shall depend of two.

And to the first part, I may say unto you, that from my Years of
Understanding, since I first had consideration of my self to be born a Servant
of Almighty God, I happily chose this kind of life, in the which I yet live:
which, I assure you, for mine own part, has hitherto best contented my self,
and I trust has been most acceptable unto God: from the which, if either
Ambition of high Estate, offered to me in Marriage, by the pleasure and
appointment of my Prince (whereof I have some Record in this presence (as you
our Treasurer well know) or if eschewing the danger of mine Enemies, or the
avoiding of the peril of Death, whose Messenger, or rather a continual
Watchman, the Princes indignation, was no little time daily before mine Eyes
(by whose means (although I know, or justly may suspect) yet I will not now
utter, or if the whole cause were in my Sister her self, I will not now burden
her therewith, because I will not charge the Dead) if any of these, I say,
could have drawn, or dissuaded me from this kind of life, I had not now
remained in this Estate, wherein you see me. But so constant have I always
continued in this determination, although my Youth and words may seem to some
hardly to agree together, yet is it most true, that at this day I stand free
from any other meaning, that either I have had in times past, or have at this
present; with which Trade of Life I am so thoroughly acquainted, that I trust,
God, who has hitherto therein preserved and led me by the hand, will not of
his goodness suffer me to go alone.

For the other part, the manner of your Petition I do well like, and take it in
good part, because it is simple, and contains no limitation of place or
person; if it had been otherwise, I must needs have misliked it very much, and
thought it in you a very great presumption, being unfitting and altogether
unmeet for you to require them, that may command; or those to appoint whose
parts are to desire, or such to bind and limit, whose Duties are to obey, or to
take upon you to draw my Love to your liking, or to frame my will to your
fantasy: For a Guerdon constrained, and gift freely given, can never agree
together. Nevertheless, if any of you be in suspect, whenever it may please
God to incline my heart to another kind of Life, you may very well assure your
selves, my meaning is not to determine any thing, wherewith the Realm may or
shall have just cause to be discontented. And therefore put that clean out of
your heads. For I assure you (what Credit my assurance may have with you, I
cannot tell, but what Credit it shall deserve to have, the sequel shall
declare) I will never in that matter conclude any thing that shall be
prejudicial to the Realm. For the well, good and safety whereof, I will never
shun to spend my Life, and whomsoever my chance shall be to light upon, I trust
he shall be such, as shall be as careful for the Realm, as you; I will not say
as my self, because I cannot so certainly determine of any other, but by my
desire he shall be such as shall be as careful for the preservation of the
Realm, and you, as my self. And albeit it might please Almighty God to continue
me still in this mind, to live out of the State of Marriage, yet is it not to
be feared but he will so work in my Heart, and in your Wisdom, as good
Provision by his help may be made, whereby the Realm shall not remain destitute
of an Heir that may be a fit Governor, and peradventure more beneficial to the
Realm than such Offspring as may come of me. For though I be never so careful
of your well doing, and mind ever so to be, yet may my Issue grow out of kind,
and become perhaps ungracious, and in the end, this shall be for me sufficient,
that a marble stone shall declare, that a Queen having Reigned such a time,
lived and died a Virgin. And here I end, and take your coming to me in good
part, and give unto you all my hearty thanks, more yet for your Zeal and good
meaning, than for your Petition. And under her Majesty's Answer aforesaid, was
subscribed in the same hand, as follows;

This was Copied out of a Printed Copy, garnisht with gilt Letters, given to
the Honorable the Lady Stafford, of her Majesty's Privy-Chamber, and written
out by Alex. Evesham, 1590. By which subscription the authentickness of this
Copy does sufficiently appear.


On Saturday the 11th of Feb. the Letany was said by the Clerk kneeling, and
answered by the whole House on their Knees with diverse Prayers.

The Bill touching Tanners, Curriers, and Shoemakers for Tanned Leather, And
the Bill for selling of Tanned Leather in Markets, were each of them read the
first time. As also the Bill for the Recognition of the Queens Majesty's title
to the Crown, was read the first time and committed.

The Bill also touching Liberties of Hexham and Hexamshire, and the Bill for
the Confirmation of diverse Grants and Leases, made by Bishops deprived, were
each of them read the first time.

Mr Solicitor and Mr Dr Lewis, brought from the Lords two Bills, one
concerning Treasons, and another for Explanation of the Statute of seditious
words and rumors.

The Bills for Tonnage and Poundage, and for the Subsidy of the Temporalty,
were sent up to the Lords, by Mr Treasurer and others not named in the Original
Journal Book of the House of Commons.

On Monday the 13th day of February, the Bill for Garbling of Feathers was read
the first time.

The Bill for thicking of Caps by men's Feet and Hands, And the Bill for
annexing the Supremacy to the Crown, were each of them read the second time;
both which Bills as it should seem were now dashed upon the second reading
aforesaid; the first of them (as probably may be gathered) without any great
dispute, but the latter being of great weight was long argued (as appears
plainly by the Original Journal Book of the House of Commons) before it was
dashed; and the new Bill framed to the same effect, was read the first time on
Tuesday the 21th day, the second time on the 22. day, and the third time on
Saturday the 25. day of this Instant February ensuing; when it passed the
House. Vide plus concerning this matter on Tuesday the 27. day of April ensuing.

On Tuesday the 14. day of February, the Bill to bring Artificers to dwell in
Market Towns, was read the first time.

Diverse Arguments passed in the House, touching the framing of a new Bill, for
annexing of the Supremacy to the Crown.

On Wednesday the 15th day of February, Committees were appointed, for the
drawing of a new Bill, for annexing of the Supremacy to the Crown.

The Bill to restore the Earl of Pembrook, Sir John Mason, Mr H. Nevill, Mr
Fitz Williams, Sir P. Folly, Sir Hen. Seymour, Sir Richard Sackvill, Patentees
by King Edw. the Sixth, of the late Bishop of Winchesters Lands; and the Bill
for Order of Service and Ministers in the Church, were each of them read the
first time.

Upon a Request made to the Lords, that thirty of this House might attend their
Lordships, for the Authority of his place, whom it shall please the Queen to
take to Husband; Mr Attorney declared from the Lords, that twelve of their
Lordships will be to morrow in the Afternoon, in the Star Chamber, to meet with
the thirty Members of this House.

The Bill for punishment of diverse Treasons, and the Bill for punishment of
false rumors or tales, were each of them read the first time.

On Thursday the 16. of Febr. the Bill for Common Prayer and Administering of
Sacraments, was read the first time.

Two Bills also had each of them one reading, the first being the Bill for the
payment of an imposition by French Men in Somerset and Dorset, to Melcombe
Regis, was read the second time, and as it should seem, committed to Mr South
and others not named.

The Bill for Recognition of the Queens Highness Title to the Crown, was read
the second time, but no mention is made, that it was either referred to
Committees, or Ordered to be engrossed; and the reason thereof was, that this
Bill had passed the Upper House, and was sent down to the House of Commons, on
Thursday the 9. day of this instant Feb. foregoing, fairly engrossed in
Parchment, and therefore can be no more engrossed, neither do the Lords
ordinarily refer such Bills to Committees, unless there be very great cause, in
respect that each House holding correspondency with others, they do not
willingly submit that to the Agitation of a private Committee, which has been
allowed and approved by the wisdom of the whole House.

The Bill for the deceitful using of Linen Cloth, was read the first time.

The Bill for the Recognition of the Queens Title to the Crown, was read the
second time; but no mention is made, that it was either Ordered to be
engrossed, or referred to Committees, because it had been formerly sent from
the Lords.

The Bill for punishment of diverse Treasons was read also the second time:
which Bill being of great moment, was, as it should seem, committed to Mr
Vice-Chamberlain (erroneously written Fitz Chamberlain, as may plainly be
gathered) and others; although it had been sent down from the Lords on Saturday
the 11th day of this instant Feb. foregoing: in which Case Bills usually pass
of course in the House of Commons, when they come ready expedited in Parchment
from the Lords.

The Bill for restitution in Blood of the Queens Highness, for the Attainder of
Queen Anne her Highness Mother, being brought from the Lords by Mr Attorney,
was read the first time.

On Friday the 17th day of February, two Bills of no great moment, had each of
them one reading, of which the second, being the Bill to restore the
First Fruits and Tenths, with a new Proviso, was read the second time, and, as
it should seem, committed to Mr Sackvill and others, although it had been
formerly sent down from the Lords.

On Saturday the 18th day of February, four Bills of no great moment had each
of them their first reading, of which the last was the Bill to reverse
Judgments, in praecip. quod red. for lack of Summons.

The Bill for Leases and Offices made by the deprived Bishops, was read the
second time, and as it should seem committed to Mr Gates and others.

The Bill also for the Patentees of the Bishop of Winchesters Lands, was read
the second time.

The Bill lastly, for restitution in Blood of the Queens Highness after Queen
Anne was read the second time, but no mention is made, that it was either
Ordered to be engrossed, or referred to Committees, because it had been sent
from the Lords on Thursday the 16th of this instant February foregoing.

On Monday the 20th day of February, the new Bill for Tanning and selling of
Tanned Leather, and the new Bill for regrating of Tanned Leather, were each of
them read the first time.

The Proviso from what time the Repeal of the Attainder of Cardinal Poole shall
have commencement, was read the first time.

The Bill touching common Recoveries, was read the first time.

The Bill for the Sessions to be holden in Pembrook Town, was read the second
time, and Ordered to be engrossed; and the Bill explaining the Act of
Regrators, Forestallers, etc. was read the second time.

The Proviso in the Bill for First Fruits, was read the first and second time.

The Bill lastly, of Tonnage and Poundage, was brought from the Lords by Mr
Solicitor.

On Tuesday the 21th day of February, three Bills of no great moment, had each
of them their first reading: of which the last was the new Bill for the payment
of an imposition by Frenchmen to Melcomb Regis in Dorsetshire.

The Bill for the First Fruits and Tenths, annexed to the Crown; and the Bill
for the restitution in Blood of the Queen, after her Highnesses Mother, did
each of them pass upon their third reading, and were sent up to the Lords by Mr
Comptroller and others, with the Bill of the Subsidy.

The new Bill for the Supremacy of the Church, etc. annexed to the Crown, was
read the first time.

On Wednesday the 22th day of February, two Bills of no great moment, had each
of them one reading, of which the second being the Bill for Supremacy of the
Church annexed to the Crown, was read the second time, and ordered to be
engrossed.

The Bill for restitution of Gerson Wroth to be naturally English Born, was
read the first time.

The Bill against regrating of Tanned Leather, and Carriers of Leather, The
Bill for Tanners and selling of Leather in open Market, And the Bill touching
the Repeal of the Attainder of Cardinal Poole, were each of them read the
second time, and Ordered to be engrossed.

Two Bills lastly, of no great moment, had each of them one reading, of which
the last, being the Bill for punishment of Treasons, with a Proviso from the
House of Commons, was read the third time, and passed the House.

On Friday the 24th day of February, the Bill touching carrying of
Woollen-Cloths over the Sea, The Bill for searching and sealing of
Woollen-Cloths, And the Bill for Heneden and Holdenshire, parcel of the
Bishopric of Durham, to be to Sir Francis Jobson Knight, were each of them
read the first time.

The Bill for the restitution of the Blood of Sir James Croft, and the like
Bill for Sir Hen. Gates, were brought from the Lords by Mr Comptroller and
others.

John Smith returned a Burgess for Cammelford in Cornub. upon a Declaration by
Mr Marsh, that he had come to this House being Outlawed, and also had deceived
diverse Merchants in London, taking Wares of them to the sum of three hundred
pounds, minding to defraud them of the same, under the color of the Privilege
of this House, the Examination whereof being committed to Sir John Mason and
others of this House, it was found and reported to be true, and a Writ of
Capias utlagatum against him, was directed to the Sheriff of London, return.
Quindena Paschae next, at the Suit of Will. Pinchbeck and Johan his Wife, in a
Plea of Detinue.

Upon which matters consultation being had in the House, the Question was asked
by Mr Speaker, if he should have privilege of this House or not. But by the
more number of Voices it seemed, that he should not have privilege. And upon
the division of the House, the number that would not have him to be
privileged, was a hundred and seven persons, and the number that would he
should be privileged, was a hundred and twelve, and therefore it was Ordered
that he should still continue a Member of the House. Vide concerning this
matter in a like President in an. 35 Regin. Eliz. in the Journal of the House
of Commons, on Thursday the first day, Friday the 2d day, on Saturday the 17th
day and on Monday the 19th day of March.

On Saturday the 25th day of February, the Bill for the Incorporation of
Trinity-Colledge in Cambridge, and the Bill for the preservation of the Fry of
Eels and Salmons, were each of them read the first time.

The Bill for the Supremacy of the Churches of England and Ireland, and
abolishing of the Bishop of Rome, with a Proviso for Richard Chettwood and
Agnes Woodhall, was read the third time, and passed upon the Question. And one
other Proviso touching Robert Harecourt Merchant of the Staple, was read the
first, second, and third time.

On Monday the 27th day of February, five Bills of no great moment, had each of
them one reading, of which the three last, being for the restitution in blood
of John Lord Gray, Sir James Croftes, and Sir Henry Gates, were each of them
read the first time.

The Bill touching the Declaration of the Repeal of the Attainder of Cardinal
Poole, was read the third time, and passed the House, and was sent up to the
Lords by Mr Treasurer, together with the Bill touching the Queens Supremacy,
and also the Bill of Treasons.

The new Bill for preservation of Woods was read the first time.

The Bill lastly, for repealing and reviving an Act for Shoomakers and
Curriers, And the Bill for Tanners and selling of Tanned Leather in Markets or
Fairs, were each of them read the third time, and passed upon the Question.

On Tuesday the 28th day of February, three Bills of no great moment had each
of them one reading, of which the last being the Bill for assurance of certain
Lands, late parcel of the Bishopric of Winchester, granted to King Edward the
Sixth, and by his Letters Patents granted to the Earl of Pembroke, Sir William
Fitz-Williams, Sir Philip Hobbie, Sir John Mason, Sir Henry Seymour, Sir Henry
Nevil, and Sir Richard Sackvill, was read the first time, and as it should seem
committed to Mr Kingsmell to be considered of.

John Owersall one of the Burgesses for Hull, Edmund Gascoigne Burgess for
Thetford in the County of Norfolk, and William Carvell one of the Burgesses for
Northampton, were each of them, in respect of their several occasions, Licensed
to depart.

On Wednesday the first day of March, the Bill for false using of Linen Cloth,
and the Bill for Gavelkind for Thomas Brown, and George Brown, were each of
them read the second time, and Ordered to be engrossed.

The Bill against Cancellations of Recoveries was read the first time. And the
Bill for allowances to be made to Sheriffs, being read the second time, was, as
it should seem, committed to Mr Comptroller and others.

The Bill also for Ecclesiastical Laws to be made by thirty two persons, And
the Bill for the assurance of certain Lands, late parcel of the Bishopric of
London, to the Lord Wentworth, the Lord Rich, and the Lord Darcy, were each of
them read the second time, and thereupon Ordered to be engrossed.

The Bill also for recognition of the Queens Highnesses Title to the Crown of
this Realm, was read the third time, and passed the House.

The Bill lastly, for restitution in Blood of the Lord Gray, and the Bill also
for restitution in Blood of Sir James Crofts, were each of them read the second
time.

The Bishop of Winchester in proper person, required the Copy of the Bill
exhibited here, touching his Lands, which was granted; And further, to bring in
his Answer and Counsel, on Saturday next at nine of the Clock.

On Thursday the 2d Day of March, the Bill for restitution in Blood of Sir
Henry Gates, was read the second time.

The Bill to revive a Fair at Linn-Regis, at Candlemas, was read the first
time, And the Bill for changing the Parish Church of Avernant in Wales, And the
Bill for Incorporation of Trinity-Hall in Cambridge, were each of them read the
second time, and Ordered to be engrossed.

The Bill touching Ingrossers and Forestallers of diverse Victuals, was read the
first time.

The Bill for searching and sealing Woollen Cloths, was read the second time.

Three Bills were sent up to the Lords by Mr Comptroller and others, of which
one was the Bill for recognition of the Queens Highnesses Title to the Crown of
this Realm.

The three Bills for restitution in Blood of John Lord Gray, Sir James Crofts,
and Sir Henry Gates, had each of them their third reading, and passed the House.

The Bill lastly, concerning the Confirmation of the Bishopric of London, to
the now Bishop of London, was read the first time.

On Friday March the 3d, the Bill for the restitution in Blood of Edward
Lewkenor, and three of his Brethren, and six of his Sisters; And the Bill
against often buying and selling of Horses and Mares, had each of them one
reading.

The Bill for the true Garbling of Feathers, The Bill that Leases of Benefices
shall not be charged with payment of Tenths, And the Bill against engrossing of
dead Victuals, called Monopoly, were each of them read the second time, and
Ordered to be engrossed.

The Bill for Assurance of Lands, late parcel of the Bishopric of London, to
the Lord Wentworth, the Lord Rich, and the Lord Darcy, The Bill for the
Gavelkind Lands of Thomas Brown and George Brown, And the Bill for the
Incorporation of Trinity-Hall in Cambridge.....

Mr Mason required that the Counsel of the Patentees for the Bishop of
Winchesters Lands, may be here to morrow, to hear what the Bishop and his
Counsel will say, which Request was granted by the House.

Mr Solicitor coming from the Lords, declared, that ten of this House shall
attend certain of the Lords to morrow, for the Proviso in the Bill of Treasons.

Six Bills were sent up to the Lords from the House of Commons, of which one
was the Bill for the Incorporation of Trinity-Hall in Cambridge, and another
for Gavelkind Lands.

On Saturday the 4th day of March, four Bills of no great moment, had each of
them their first reading, of which the last was the Bill for the Assurance of
Hartlebury and Wychenford, to Sir Francis Jobson, and Walter Blount severally.

The Bill for the reviving of the Act for the carrying of Horses into Scotland,
And that for the Restitution of Robert Rudston, were brought from the Lords by
Dr Vaughan. John Cheeseman, one of the Burgesses of Rumney in the five Ports,
for his business was Licensed to be absent.

The Bishop of Winchester, in proper person, opened his Title to the Manors,
saying, they had been parcel of the Bishopric by a thousand three hundred
Years, and required this House of Justice.

The Queens Attorney hearing the talk of the Bishop, required for the Queen,
that he might be heard for the Queen, touching certain Lands late parcel of the
said Bishopric; and Day was given as well to Mr Attorney, as to the Bishop, to
be here on Monday next, at half an hour before nine of the Clock.

Mr Chancellor of the Duchy complained, that Mr White had called him a Witness
not to like the Book of Service. Mr White answered that Mr Chancellor said, he
wished the Book to be well considered of. But for that the House does take that
Mr. White did mistake him, therefore Mr. White standing asked him forgiveness,
which Mr. Chancellor did take thankfully.

On Monday the 6th day of March, the new Bill for Artificers in the County of
Kent, to dwell in Towns, was read the first time.

Diverse Arguments were had touching Cancellation of the Records in the
Chancery, for the late Bishop of Winchesters Lands, and the Examination thereof
was committed to Mr. Comptroller, and others.

The Queens Attorney, for that the Bishop of Winchester had brought Learned
Counsel with him, desired they might say their minds, whereby Mr. Attorney
might fully Answer; and the Bishop said, that his Counsel was not yet
instructed; wherefore Mr. Attorney Answered, the effect whereof was that the
Appeal made by Gardener was not of effect. For that in the Commission, at his
Deputation, was contained cum appellatione remota. And so the Grant made to
King Edward the Sixth, by the Bishop, ne point d'effect.

Mr. Noell and Mr. Bell of Counsel with the Patentees, declared in effect for
the Patentees, as Mr. Attorney had showed for the Queen.

On Tuesday the 7th day of March, three Bills of no great moment, had each of
them their first reading; of which the last being the Bill that Executors shall
make the Supervisors privy to the performance of a Will, was committed to Mr.
Chamberlain, as it should seem, to be considered of.

The Bill touching the late Bishop of Worcesters Lands, to Sir Francis Jobson,
and Mr Blount, was read the second time, and Ordered to be engrossed.

The Bill for carrying of unwrought Cloths of 6l over the Seas, was read the
second time.

The Bill to revive a Fair at Linn Regis, the day after the Purification of our
Lady, was read the second time, and Ordered to be engrossed; And the Bill for
preservation of Woods being read also the second time, was committed.

The Bill touching the engrossing of dead Victuals for a Monopoly; And the Bill
for Gerson Wroth born in Stratsburgh, to be as being born in England, were each
of them read the third time, and passed the House; and were sent up to the
Lords by Mr. Vice-Chamberlain.

On Wednesday the 8th day of March, two Bills of no great moment, had each of
them one reading, of which the second, being the Bill against Leases to be made
by Spiritual persons, was read the second time, and Ordered to be engrossed.

The Bishop of Worcester in proper person, required the Copy of a Bill,
exhibited against his Bishopric, and a day to make Answer in writing or
otherwise.

The Bishop of Coventry and Litchfield, made the like Petition.

The Bishop of Winchester at this time, was Richard Pate, and the Bishop of
Coventry and Litchfield, was Ralph Banes, whose stiff opposition against the
Reformation of Religion perfected this Parliament; as also the free Liberty
they had to defend their own Causes, either in person, or by their Counsel, do
argue as in them, and diverse other Bishops, at this time, much boldness and
perverseness, so in her Majesty incomparable Lenity and Moderation, who so
impartially and patiently suffered their opposition, and gave way to their
Allegations, that so they might be fully convicted upon indifferent hearing.

It was Ordered, that the Bishop of Worcester shall have the Copy, and make his
Answer upon Saturday next, and the Bishop of Coventry and Litchfield on Monday
next after. And it is likewise granted, that the other parties shall then and
there have their Counsel, to hear the Bishops.

On Thursday the 9th day of March, four Bills of no great moment, had each of
them their first reading; of which the first was the Bill for the Assurance of
the Jointure of the Duchess of Norfolk.

The Bill to assure certain Lands, late of the Bishopric of Winchester, to the
Queen, and certain Patentees of King Edward the VI. was read the second time;
but no mention is made that it was either Ordered to be engrossed or referred
to Committees, because they had been formerly sent down from the Lords.

On Friday the 10th day of March, the Bill touching Colleges and Chantries,
surrendered to King Henry VIII. was read the first time.

The Bill for Restitution in Blood of Robert Rudston, And the Bill for the
Restitution in Blood of Edward Lewkenors Sons and Daughter, were each of them
read the second time, but no mention is made that they were either Ordered to
be engrossed, or referred to Committees, because they had been formerly sent
down from the Lords.

The Bill against destruction of Fry of Salmons, Eels and other Fish, And the
Bill for dwelling of Cloathiers in Barford, Dedding, Coxal, and Bocking in
Essex, were each of them read the first time. And the Proviso devised by the
Lords, in the Bill of Treasons, had its second reading.

The Bill for the Answering of the Revenues to the Queen, with the
Incorporation of Trinity-Hall, were brought from the Lords by Mr Solicitor.

Rowland Lakin Burgess for Wenlock, was Licensed to be absent for his business
at the Assizes.

On Saturday the 11th day of March, the Bill to confirm Leases and Grants, made
by Dr Ridley late Bishop of London, was read the second time, and Ordered to be
engrossed.

The Bishop of Worcester with his Counsel declared, that Hooper was not lawful
Bishop, by reason of the Appeal of Bishop Heath, And so the Grant not good, and
prayed the House to consider of it. Vide concerning this matter on Wednesday
the 8. day of this instant March foregoing.

On Monday the 13th day of March, three Bills of no great moment, had each of
them one reading; of which the last, being the Bill for the punishment of
seditious words and rumors, was read the second time; but no mention is made
that it was either Ordered to be engrossed or referred to Committees, because
it had been formerly sent from the Lords.

The Bishop of London in proper person, required a Copy of a Bill, put in for
Confirmation of Leases granted by Doctor Ridley, Usurper of the Bishopric, as
he says, which Copy was granted unto him, with addition, that the House does
intend to take his Title in the Bishopric as it is, And to make his Answer by
words, on Wednesday next peremptory, at nine of the Clock.

The Bishop of London at this time was Edmund Bonner, whose stiff opposition
against the Reformation of Religion, perfected this Parliament; as also the
free Liberty he had here to defend his own Cause, either in Person, or by his
Counsel, does argue as in him and diverse others Popish Bishops at this time
much boldness and perverseness, so in her Majesty incomparable lenity and
moderation, who so impartially and patiently suffered their oppositions, and
gave way to their Allegations; that so they might be fully convicted upon
indifferent hearing.

The Bishop of Coventry and Lichfield, with his Counsel, declared, that for the
Fine Levied, Mr Fisher has no cause to complain. To the which, Mr Fisher's
Counsel alleged, that the Fine was made by compulsion. Vide concerning this
matter on Wednesday the 8th day of this instant March foregoing.

Thomas Church, one of the Citizens for Hereford, for his Affairs was Licensed
to be absent.

On Tuesday the 14th day of March, the Bill for Liberties of Hexham and
Hexhamshire, and the Bill for Craftsmen to dwell near the Sea in Kent, were
each of them read the second time.

The Bill also for carrying of Leather and Tallow over the Sea to be made
Felony, was read the second time.

Articles being devised for the punishment of the Bishop of Winchester and
others, for Cancelling of Records: It was Ordered, that a Bill should be
thereof drawn by Mr Keilway.

On Wednesday the 15th day of March, three Bills of no great moment, had each
of them their first reading; of which the first was the Bill to restore
deprived Bishops.

The Bill for Cloathiers to dwell in Bocking, Coxal, etc. was read the second
time, and Ordered to be engrossed. Two other Bills also had each of them their
second reading; of which was one Bill for the Jointure and Marriage of the
Duchess of Norfolk.

The Bishop of London in his proper person showing the untruth of the Bill, as
he takes it, did conclude, that the Commissioners for his Deprivation, did not
according to their Commission. And yet by his Appeal, as also by his Letters
Patents from Queen Mary, he stands still Bishop, and the Grants made by
Doctor Ridley void. Vide touching this matter on Monday the 13th day of this
instant March foregoing.

The Bill lastly for Restitution in Blood of the Sons and Daughter of Edward
Lewkenor, was read the third time, and passed the House.

On Thursday the 16th day of March, two Bills of no great moment, had each of
them one reading: of which the second being the Bill to make lawful the
Deprivations of Bishops and Spiritual persons, was read the first time.

The Bill for the Assurance of the Lands, late parcel of the Bishopric of
Winchester, to the Patentees of King Edw. VI. was read the second time, and
thereupon Ordered to be engrossed.

The new Provisoes from the Lords, in the Bill for the First Fruits, were read
the first time, and the Proviso from the Lords in the Bill of Treasons, was
read the third time, and passed the House.

The Bill for allowance of Sheriffs for the Justices Diets, and the Bill for
the Restitution in Blood of Robert Rudston, were each of them read the third
time, and passed the House.

The Bill for thicking of Caps in Mills, was read the third time, and upon the
question was dashed.

The Bill lastly, for renewing one of the Fairs at Linn Regis, and the Bill for
the new Parish Church of Abernant in Wales, were each of them read the third
time, and passed the House.

Robert Buxton Burgess of Brembre in Sussex, was Licensed to be absent, for the
Duke of Norfolks Affairs.

On Friday the 17th day of March, the Bill for the Shipping of Woollen Clothes
of 5l 10s over the Sea; The Bill for Artificers in Kent and Sussex, And the
Bill against carrying over Sea of Leather, Hides or Tallow to be Felony, were
each of them read the second time, and Ordered to be engrossed.

The Bill, that no persons shall be punished for using the Religion used in
King Edwards last Year, was read the first and second time, and Ordered to be
engrossed. And the Bill that Licenses shall be good but during the Princes
Reign, was read the second time, and Ordered likewise to be engrossed.

The Bill for true Answering of Customs, and unlading of Goods in the day time,
was read the first time, and as it should seem, referred to Mr Chancellor to be
considered.

Three Bills lastly of no great moment, had each of them one reading; of which
one being the Bill for the Jointure of the Duchess of Norfolk, and another
against seditious words and rumors against the Queen, had each of them their
third reading, and passed the House.

On Saturday the 18th day of March, the Bill against buying of Horses to sell
shortly again, And the Bill for the Assizes to be kept in the Town of Stafford,
were each of them read the second time, and thereupon Ordered to be engrossed.

Two Bills of no great moment, had each of them one reading, of which one being
the Bill against unlawful Assemblies, was read the first time, and (as it
should seem) committed to Mr Smith to consider of it.

Three Bills lastly, had each of them their third reading, of which one being
the Bill for Assurance of diverse Manors, late parcel of the Bishopric of
Winchester, to King Edward the Sixths Patentees, was upon the Question passed
the House.

The Bill for the Supremacy was brought from the Lords, by Mr Attorney, to be
reformed. Vid. concerning this Bill on Thursday the 27th of April ensuing.

John Malock Burgess for Linne, and Robert Moon Burgess for Britport, for
their several Affairs have License to be absent.

On Monday the 20th day of March, two Bills of no great moment, had each of
them one reading, of which the second being the Bill touching the Assizes and
Jail-deliver, was read the third time, and passed the House: and was presently
sent up to the Lords, with diverse others, by Mr Vice-Chamberlain.

The Bill that the Queen shall make Rules for Colleges and Schools, was read
the second time and ordered to be engrossed. And the Bill for continuance of
the last Act for Rebellions, was read the first time.

The Proviso sent from the Lords, with the Bill of First Fruits, was read the
second time. And the Proviso and Reformation in the Bill of Supremacy, was read
the first time; de qua vide on Thursday the 27th of April ensuing.

On Tuesday the 21th day of March, two Bills of no great moment, had each of
them one reading; of which the second being the Bill for Tanning and selling of
Tanned Leather, was read the first time.

The Bill against unlawful Assemblies, was read the second time, and ordered to
be engrossed. And the Proviso and Reformation in the Bill touching Supremacy,
was read the second time.

Two Bills also had each of them one reading, of which one being the Bill that
the Queens Majesty shall make Orders in Collegiate Churches, was read the third
time, and passed the House, and was sent up to the Lords by Mr Vice-Chamberlain
and others.

The new Bill against Cancelling of Records by Warrant or otherwise, was read
the first time.

Two Bills also had each of them their second reading, of which one was the
Bill to make lawful the Deprivations of the Bishops of London, Winchester,
Worcester, and Chichester, in the time of King Edward the VI.

The Bill that the Queens Highness shall Collate or appoint Bishops in
Bishoprics being Vacant, was read the first and second time, and thereupon
Ordered to be engrossed.

On Wednesday the 22th day of March, the Bill to continue the Act for
Rebellious Assemblies, The Bill for Collating of Bishops by the Queens
Highness, and without Rites and Ceremonies, And the Bill for Tanners and
selling of Tanned Leather, were each of them read the third time, and passed
the House, and were sent up to the Lords by Mr Comptroller.

The Provisoes and Additions by the Lords in the Bill of Supremacy, and the
Provisoes from the Lords in the Bill of First Fruits, were read the third time,
and passed the House.

Four other Bills lastly, of no great moment, had each of them one reading, of
which the last was the Bill to revive the Act against Carriage of Horses into
Scotland, and was read the third time, and passed; and was with three others,
sent up to the Lords by Mr Chancellor of the Duchy.

On Thursday the 23th day of March, it was reported to this House by..... one
of the Burgesses, that Mr. Story had not well used himself, being a Member of
this House, to go before the Lords, and be of Counsel with the Bishop of
Winchester against the Patentees, which by the House was taken to be a fault.
Whereupon Mr Story excused himself by ignorance of any such Order. And
nevertheless had since considered of it, and does acknowledge it not to be well
done, and therefore required the House to remit it, which willingly by the
House was remitted. Vide touching this business on Wednesday the first day,
Friday the third, Saturday the fourth, and on Monday the Sixth day of this
instant March foregoing.

On Friday the 24 day of March, for weighty Affairs to be done in this
Parliament, according to the Example of the Upper House, this Court of the
House of Commons is according to former Presidents Adjourned until Monday the
third day of April next coming. But upon what occasion the House of Commons was
this day Adjourned, does not at all appear in the Original Journal Book of the
same House, but most probable it is, that it was by reason of a disputation had
and agitated this Forenoon in Westminster Church, between the Popish Bishops,
and some Learned men of the Protestant Religion, which is at large set down,
Acts and Monuments, a page 1919. usque ad page 1922. at which the Lords of the
Upper House, and the Knights, Citizens and Burgesses of the House of Commons,
desired (as it should seem) to be present. Vide also on Monday the third day of
April next ensuing.

On Monday the third day of April, Mr. Speaker with a few of this House was
present, and part of the Bill for sealing of Cloths was read; but for that this
day was appointed to have disputation before the Council and Lords in
Westminster Quire, between the Bishops and Mr. Horn, Mr. Cocks, and other
English Men that came from Geneva; And for that it was meet, that they of this
House should be there present, to hear; this Court was continued until the
Morrow following.

Her Majesty's godly desire to abolish superstition, and to preserve Unity and
Truth in the Church, does fully appear by the appointment and permission of
this disputation, which began in Westminster Church, on Friday the last day of
March immediately foregoing, not here mentioned, as is at large set down in
that Laborious and Voluminous Work of Mr. Fox his Acts and Monuments.

On Tuesday the 4. day of April, the Bill to revive the Act for Holy Days and
Fasting-dayes; and the Bill against Sorceries, Witchcrafts, and Prophecies, of
Badges and Arms, were each of them read the second time, and Ordered to be
engrossed.

On Wednesday the 5. day of April, the Bill for the true Answering of the
Queens Majesty's Revenues, was read the second time, but no mention is made
that it was Ordered to be engrossed, or referred to Committees, because it had
been formerly sent from the Lords.

On Thursday the 6. day of April, the Bill to restore spiritual persons
deprived in the time of Queen Mary, was read the second time, and as it should
seem, was committed to Mr. Goldsmith and others not named.

The Bill that all such Colleges and Chantries granted to King Edward the
Sixth, shall be also in the Queens Majesty, was read the first time. And
lastly, the Bill against buying and selling of Horses, was upon the third
reading Ordered to be engrossed. Quod nota.

On Friday April the 7. the Bill touching the Orders for Menservants, was read
the first time. And (as it should seem) committed unto Sir Anthony Coke, to
consider of it.

The Bill touching Shipping of Wares, and the Bill for the true Answering of
the Customs for Merchandises, were each of them read the first time.

The Bill for Bishops Temporalties, was brought from the Lords by Mr. Weston
and Doctor Vaughan; and the Bill lastly, that the Queen shall have the Bishops
Temporalties during the Vacation, for recompense of Tithes and Parsonages
impropriate, was read the first time.

On Saturday the 8. day of April, the Bill to revive the Act for sowing of Flax
and Hemp, and the Bill for increase of Woods, had each of them their first
reading.

The Bill touching Colleges and Chantries granted to King Edward the Sixth, to
be in the Queen by Explanation of this Bill, was read the second time, and (as
it should seem) committed to Mr. Mersh and others not named.

The Bill lastly, that the Queen and her Heirs shall have the Temporalties of
Bishops for recompense of Tenths and Parsonages impropriate, was also read the
second time; but no mention is made that it was either referred to Committees,
or Ordered to be engrossed, because it had been formerly sent from the Lords.

On Monday the 10. day of April, the Bill for sealing of Woollen Clothes, was
read the first time. It was this day Ordered that the names shall be called on
Wednesday next in the Afternoon.

Two Bills of no great moment, had each of them one reading, of which one being
the Bill, that the Inhabitants, being Craftsmen, in Kent, shall dwell near the
Seacoasts, was read the third time and passed the House.

The new Bill lastly, to avoid the usurped power claimed by any Foreigner in
this Realm, and for the Oath to be taken by spiritual and temporal Officers,
was read the first time.

On Tuesday the 11. day of April, the Bill to preserve the Spawn and Fry of
Fish, And the Bill to continue the Act made for sowing of Hemp and Flax; were
each of them read the second time, and Ordered to be engrossed.

On Wednesday the 12. day of April, the Bill to avoid all Foreign Power, used
by any Foreign Potentate in the Realm, and for the Oath to be taken, was upon
the second reading Ordered to be engrossed.

Two Bills lastly had each of them one reading, of which the last being the
Bill for punishment of such persons as misuse Linen Cloth with Chalk, was read
the third time and passed the House.

On Thursday the 13. day of April, the Bill for restoring the spiritual
Jurisdiction to the Imperial Crown of the Realm, and abolishing Foreign Power,
was read the third time; and upon the question passed the House.

The Bill to revive the Act for punishment of Rebellions, was read the first
time, and the Bill for entering the goods of Merchants, and unlading, and for
Customs of Sweet Wines, was read the second time.

Robert Whitney one of the Knights for Hereford, was Licensed to go home,
because his Wife was lately departed.

On Friday the 14th day of April, four Bills were sent up to the Lords by Mr
Vice-Chamberlain, of which one was the Bill for punishment of such persons as
misuse Linen Cloth with Chalk, and another for the abolishing of Foreign Power.

The Bill for searching and sealing of Woollen-Cloths, The Bill for making of
Frizes in Cardigan, Carmarthen, and Pembroke, And the Bill to explain the
Statute made against Ingrossers of Dead Victuals, were each of them read the
first time.

On Saturday the 15th day of April, the new Bill for the Assurance of Lands,
parcel of the Bishopric of Worcester, to Sir Francis Jobson, and Walter Blunt,
was read the first time.

It was Ordered that the Sergeant shall show unto the Master of the Rolls, that
his Servant..... Thrower shall be here, on Monday next, to Answer to certain
evil words spoken by him, against the House, opened by Mr Skinner, and Mr
Carnefewe. Vide plus concerning this business on Monday the 17th day of this
instant April ensuing.

Seven Bills of no great moment, had each of them one reading, of which one
being the Bill that Hexham and Hexhamshire shall be of the County of
Northumberland, and another for Confirmation of Leases, Grants of Offices, and
Copyholds by Nicholas Ridley late Bishop of London, and a third to avoid the
often buying and selling of Horses and Mares, had each of them their third
reading, and passed the House.

On Monday the 17th day of April, the Bill touching Knights and Burgesses, for
Attendance in the Parliament, was read the first time.

The Bill to revive the Act for destruction of Choughs and Crows, And the Bill
to revive the Act against Rebellions, were each of them read the second time,
and thereupon Ordered to be engrossed.

The Bill that the Queens Majesty shall have diverse temporal Lands of the
Archbishops and Bishops, in recompense of Tenths and Parsonages Impropriate,
was read the third time, and passed upon the Question and Division of the
House, viz. With the Bill a hundred thirty four, and against the Bill ninety.

The Bill for Restitution in Blood of Henry Howard, Jane Howard, and Katherine
Wife to the Lord Barkley, was brought from the Lords by Doctor Jews and others.

Mr Carnefewe declared to the House, that..... Thrower Servant to the Master of
the Rolls, did say against the State of the House, that if a Bill were brought
in for Women's Wyers in their Pastes, they would dispute it and go to the
Question; and that he heard the Lords say as much at his Masters Table; and
that these words were spoken on Wednesday last before Easter, at Lincoln's Inn.

Whereupon the said Thrower, being brought to the Bar by the Sergeant, denied
these words to be spoken by him, and Carnefewe affirmed them; whereupon Thrower
was Committed to the Sergeants keeping: Vide concerning this matter on Saturday
the 15th day of this instant April foregoing.

On Tuesday the 18. day of April, the Bill for taking and having of Apprentices
and Journeymen, was read the first time, and (as it should seem) committed to
Mr Arnold to consider of.

The Bill for making of Frizes in length and breadth in Wales, was read the
second time, and Ordered to be engrossed.

Two Bills had each of them one reading. Of which one being the Bill for the
Unity of the Service of the Church, and Ministration of the Sacraments, was
read the first time.

John Griffith Esquire Knight for Flintshire in Wales, has License to go home, for
the delivery of Records at the next County.

On Wednesday the 19. day of April, the Bill for Lading in long Bottoms, and
for Uniformity of Common Prayer, and Service in the Church, were read the
second time, and Ordered to be engrossed.

On Thursday the 20. day of April, the Bill for the Restitution in Blood of
Henry Howard, younger Son to the late Earl of Surrey, Lady Jane Howard, Lady
Katherine Howard, Wife to Sir Henry Lord Barkley, and Lady Margaret Howard, was
read the first time. And the Bill to revive the Act for killing of Rooks and
Crows, was read the third time and passed.

Two Bills had each of them one reading, of which the latter being the Bill for
the Unity of Service in the Church, and Administration of the Sacraments, was
read the third time, and passed the House.

The Bill lastly, for the Watermen of the Thames to have Harque-Buts, Shots,
etc. was read the second time, and as it should seem was committed to Mr
Cambden and others not named.

On Friday the 21. day of April, the Bill to carry Corn out of the Realm; The
Bill that Timber shall not be made for Cole to make Iron; The Bill that Hides
of four years old shall be made for sole Leather; And a Bill for the good Order
of Servants of Husbandry, and Artificers, and their Wages, were each of them
read the first time.

On Saturday the 22. day of April (for that this day Mr Speaker, with most of
the House, were all the Forenoon to hear the Arraignment in Westminster Hall of
the Lord Wentworth, for the loss of Calis) they sat not till the Afternoon; at
which time, the Bill that Tanners shall convert Hides of Beasts of four years
old and a half into soal Leather, was read the second time.

April the 23. Sunday.

On Monday the 24. day of April, the Bill for Restitution in Blood of Henry
Howard, etc. was read the second time, but no mention is made that it was
either Ordered to be engrossed, or referred to Committees, because it had been
formerly sent from the Lords.

Three Bills had each of them one reading; of which the first being the Bill
for the dissolution of Houses of Monasteries, Abbeys, Priories, etc. erected
since the Death of King Edward the VI. was read the first time.

The Bill lastly, for preservation of Spawn and Fry of Fish, was read the third
time, and passed the House; And the Bill to take Goods and Merchandise, was
read also the third time, and passed the House upon the Division thereof, viz.
with the Bill eighty four, and against the Bill sixty six.

Robert ap Hugh Knight of Carnarvonshire, had License to be absent for his
great business at the Assizes at Denbigh, on Monday next.

On Tuesday the 25th day of April, the Bill against burning of Timber into
Cole, to make Iron in certain places, was read the second time.

Nine Bills were sent up to the Lords by Sir Anthony Coke, and others, of which
one was the Bill for the preservation of Spawn of Fish, etc. And another was
for the Uniformity of Common Prayer, for Service in the Church, and
Administration of the Sacraments.

The Bill for Wages of Servants and Laborers; And the Bill for Dissolution of
certain Abbeys, Priories, Hospitals, etc. were each of them read the second
time.

The Bill for the Restitution in Blood of the Lord Dacres of the South, was
sent from the Lords by Mr Read and others.

Two Bills lastly, of no great moment, had each of them one reading (being the
third) and passed the House; Of which one was the Bill to revive an Act against
unlawful Assemblies, and the other for punishment of Sorcery, and Witchcraft,
and Buggery to be Felony.

On Wednesday the 26th day of April, Two Bills of no great moment, had each of
them one reading; Of which the first being the Bill for Restitution in Blood of
the Lord Dacres of the South, was read the first time.

Two Bills of no great moment, had each of them one reading, of which the first
being the Bill for making, searching, and sealing of Woollen Cloths, was read
the second time, and thereupon Ordered to be engrossed.

The Bill restoring to the Crown the Ancient Jurisdiction over the State
Ecclesiastical and Spiritual, and abolishing of Foreign Power repugnant to the
same; with a Proviso added thereunto by the Lords, was sent down from their
Lordships by Sergeant Weston and the Queens Attorney, which being omitted in
the Original Journal Book of the House of Commons, is therefore supplied out of
that of the Upper House.

On Thursday the 27th day of April, the Bill for searching and sealing of
Woollen-Cloths, was read the third time, and passed the House, and was sent up
unto the Lords by Mr Secretary.

The Bill for Answering of Customs, and laying Goods and Merchandises on Land,
was read the third time, and passed the House, and was sent up to the Lords by
Mr Secretary, with the Bill of Supremacy reformed; concerning which Bill of
Supremacy, Vide on Tuesday the 21th day, on Wednesday the 22th day, and on
Saturday the 25th day of February last past; as also on Saturday the 18th day,
Monday the 20th day, on Tuesday the 21th day, and on Wednesday the 22th day of
March preceding. Et vide etiam a Note touching this business in the Original
Journal Book of the Upper House, on Saturday the 29th day of April foregoing.

The Bill for Garbling of Feathers, Forsings and Flocks, was read the third
time, and passed the House; And lastly, the Bill that the Queen by Commission,
may restore spiritual persons deprived, was read the first time.

On Friday the 28th day of April, the Bill for the Restitution in Blood of the
Lord Dacres of the South, was read the second time.

Henry Clifford Gent. Burgess for Bedwyn, was Licensed for his Affairs to be
absent.

The Provisoes in the Bill for Suppression of Abbeys, Priories, etc. was read
the first and second time.

On Saturday the 29. day of April, the Bill for Watermen on the Thames to have
Harque-buts, etc. was read the second time, and Ordered to be engrossed.

The Bill for Uniting of Abbeys, Priories, Nunneries, Hospitals and Chauntries,
founded since the Reign of Queen Mary, to be annexed to the Crown, was read the
third time, and passed the House upon the Question, and was sent up to the
Lords by Mr Vice-Chamberlain.

The Bill lastly, to restore such persons to their Benefices, as were
unlawfully deprived, was read the second time, and was thereupon Ordered to be
engrossed.

April the 30. Sunday.

On Monday the first day of May, the Bill for the Restitution of the Brothers
and Sister of the Duke of Norfolks; The Bill for the Restitution in Blood of
the Lord Dacres of the South; The Bill that Timber Trees in diverse places shall
not be felled for Cole to make Iron; And the Bill that the Inhabitants of
Dorking, Coxall, and Dedham Westbarford, etc. may make Woollen Cloths there;
were each of them read the third time, and passed the House.

The Bill lastly, that Watermen of the Thames shall have and shoot in
Harque-buts, etc. was read, and upon the Question and Division of the House,
dashed by the difference of ten Voices, viz. with the Bill fifty two, and
against the Bill sixty two.

On Tuesday the second day of May, the Bill that the Queen by Commission may
restore such spiritual persons, as have been unlawfully deprived, was read the
third time, and passed the House, and was sent up to the Lords by Mr Sadler and
others, with the four other Bills which last passed.

The Bill lastly, for the continuance of diverse Acts, was brought from the
Lords.

On Wednesday the third day of May, three Bills of no great moment, had each of
them one reading; of which the second being the Bill for carriage of Corn over
Sea, when Wheat is 10s, Barley 3s 8d, Beans and Rye at 6s, and Oats at 3s 4d,
the Quarter, was read the third time, and passed the House.

On Friday the 5th day of May, the Bill for continuance of certain Acts, was
read the third time, and passed the House, and was sent up to the Lords by Mr.
Secretary.

On Saturday the 6th day of May, the Bill touching Abbeys, etc. was brought
from the Lords, to be reformed with three Provisoes of their Lordships; And the
Bill for preservation of Fry of Fish, was likewise brought down from the Lords
to be amended.

May the 7th Sunday.

On Monday the 8th of May, the Provisoes in the Bill for preservation of the
Fry and Spawn of Fish, were read the second and third time, and passed the
House.

In the Afternoon the Queens Majesty sitting in her Royal Seat, the Lords and
Commons attending, Mr Speaker made a Learned Oration, Exhibiting the Bill for
the Subsidy, and the Bill of Tonnage and Poundage, and required the Queens
Assent might be given to such Bills as had passed both the Houses; which
Oration being praised and Answered by the Lord Keeper of the Great Seal, the
Royal Assent was given to forty two Acts, and by the Queens Pleasure this
Parliament was Dissolved.

Rot. Parl. 31, and 32 H. 6. n. 1, 7, 8, 9, 10, 12, 20, 22, 23, 24.
Henry the VI. 6 Martii An. 31. called a Parliament at Reading; 8 Martii,
Thorpe was Chosen Speaker; from thence the Parliament was Adjourned to
Westminster till 25. Apr. where it continued till 2. July, and then Prorogued
till 12. Nov. to Reading, again Adjourned till 12. February, after till 14. at
Westminster. During these Adjournments and Prorogations, Richard Duke of York, having
got the Ascendant of the King, prepared Habiliments of War at the Palace of the
Bishop of Durham; Rot. Parl. 1 H. 7. n. 26. An Act for Roger Thorpe.
Thorpe being Speaker, by Command of the King took the Arms; whereupon in
Michaelmas Term the Duke brought his Action of Trespass in the Exchequer,
against Thorpe, and upon Trial that Term, recovered a thousand pound Damages,
and ten pound for Costs of Suit, and thereupon Thorpe was Committed to the
Prison of the Fleet, in Execution.

After all this the Parliament met 14. Feb. and the Duke of York having got a
Commission to hold and dissolve the Parliament, labored to keep Thorpe in
Prison, whom he mortally hated, as being faithful to King Henry; and having
gained his point in the Lords House, afterward the Commons gave up their
Speaker; which was no sooner done, and another Chosen, but the Duke, by the
Assent of the Lords and Commons, and after Confirmed by Commission from the
King, was made Protector of the Realm; Thorpe having paid the Debt, fled to the
Kings Party, and after was taken at Nottingham Field, from thence sent to
Newgate, then to the Marshalsey, and at last Beheaded at Haryingay Park in
Middlesex.

THE JOURNAL OF THE House of LORDS.
A Journal of the Passages of the House of Lords in the Session of Parliament
bolden at Westminster, An. 5 Regin. Eliz. An. D. 1562. which began there after
one Prorogation of the same on Tuesday the 12th of January, and then and there
continued until the Prorogation thereof upon Saturday the 10th day of April,
An. D. 1563.

THIS Session in An. 5 Regin. Eliz. making but one and the same Parliament with
that Session next ensuing, in an. 8 Reginae ejusdem, is replenished with some
extraordinary matter, besides the accustomed and usual passages of reading,
committing, and expediting of Bills. For not only the pompous and solemn manner
of her Majestics repairing to the Lords House, is set down; but the several
Speeches also of that Eloquent Orator, and wise Statist, Sir Nicholas Bacon
Lord Keeper, are supplied at large, together with such Interlocutory Speeches,
as passed in the House of Peers, from Thomas Williams Esquire the Speaker or
Prolocutor of the House of Commons; which said several Speeches, being not
found in the Original Journal Book of either House, are therefore supplied out
of several written Copies, or Anonymous Memorials of them I had by me;
especially the latter passages and Speeches, both when the Speaker was
presented on Friday the 15th day of January, and when this Session of
Parliament was Prorogued, on Saturday the 10th day of April, then next
following, together with the Solemn and Royal manner of her Majesty's passing
to the House of Lords, on either of the said Days, are for the most part
transcribed out of several Anonymous Memorials thereof, I had in my Custody,
being doubtless the very Original Draughts or Autographs, set down by some
observant Member of one of the Houses, or by some other person then present in
the Upper House, for it was written in a hand of that time, and much interlined.

The Parliament was Summoned to begin at Westminster, on Monday the 11th day of
Jan. An. 5 Regin. Eliz. An. D. 1562. upon which day Sir Nicholas Bacon Knight,
Lord Keeper of the Great Seal of England, with diverse other Lords, repaired to
the Parliament Chamber, commonly called the UpperHouse, and then and there in
presence of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and of the Knights, Citizens and
Burgesses, Summoned to the same Parliament, the Lord Keeper declared, that the
Queens Majesty, by reason of the evil disposition of her Health, could not be
present this 11th day of January, and that she has therefore been pleased to
Prorogue the same, until to Morrow, being the 12th day of the same.

And to this purpose, a Writ Patent under the Great Seal of England, whereby
the said Parliament was Prorogued unto the 12. day of this Instant Jan. was
read publicly, by the Clerk of the Upper House, in these words following:

Elizabeth Dei gratia Angliae, Franciae and Hiberniae Regina, fidei desensor,
etc. praedilectis and sidelibus nostris Praelatis, Magnatious and Proceribus
Regni nostri Angliae, and dilectis and sidelibus nostris Militibus, Civibus and
Burgen. dicti Regni nostri, ad Parliamentum nostrum apud Civitatem nostram
Westmonasterii, undecimo die instantis mensis Jan. inchoand. and tenend.
convocatis and electis, and vestrum cuilibet, salutem. Cum nos, pro quibusdam
arduis and urgentibus negotiis, nos, statum and defensionem dicti Regni nostri
Angliae and Ecclesiae Anglicanae concernent. dictum Parliamentum nostrum, ad
diem and locum praedict. teneri ordinaverimus, Ac vobis, per separalia Brevia
nostra, apud Civitatem and die praedict. interesse mandaverimus, ad tract and.
consentiend. and concludend. super hiis, quae in dicto Parliamento nostro tune
and ibidem proponcrentur, and tractarentur: Quibusdam tamen certis de causis,
and considerationibus, nos ad tempus specialiter movent. dictum Parliamentum
nostrum, usque duodecimum diem hujus instantis Mensis Jan. duximus prorogand.
it a quod nec vos, nec aliquis vestrum, ad dictum undecimum diem Jan. apud
Civitatem praedictam comparere teneamini, seu arctemini, volumus enim vos, and
quemlibet vestrum, inde erga nos penitus exonerari: Mandantes, and tenore
praesentium firmiter injungendo praecipientes vohis and cuilibet vestrum, ac
omnibus aliis, quibus in hac part intererit, quod ad dictum duodecimum dicm
Januarii, apud praedictam Civitatem Westmonasterii personaliter compareatis,
and intersitis, and quilibet vestrum compareat and intersit, ad tractand.
faciend. agend. and concludend. super hiis, quae in dicto Parliamento nostro,
de communi concilio dicti Regni nostri (favente Deo) contigerint ordinari.
Test me ipsa apud Westmonasterium nono die Januarii, anno Regni nostri quinto.

This day, although the Parliament began not, nor any Peers sat in the Upper
House, but the Lord Keeper, and some others of either House, met only in the
Parliament Chamber, to Prorogue the Parliament unto the 12. day of this Instant
Month, as aforesaid, were diverse Proxies returned, from many of the Lords, both
Spiritual and Temporal, who in their absence did constitute others to give
their Voices for them.

Nota, That the Duke of Norfolk was Constituted the sole or joint Proctor of
four several Peers, and Francis Earl of Bedford was nominated the sole or joint
Proctor of seven several Lords; whereof one was Thomas Archbishop of York, and
another of them was William Bishop of Exeter; By which it does appear, not only
that a Spiritual Lord did Constitute a Temporal (which at this day is
altogether forborne, as also for a Temporal Lord to Constitute a Spiritual,
which was but rarely used during this Queens Reign.) but likewise that any Peer
of the Upper House, by the ancient and undoubted usages and Custom of the same,
is capable of as many Proxies as shall be sent unto him.

On Tuesday the 12. day of January, the Parliament held according to the
Prorogation on yesterday foregoing, and about eleven of the Clock in the
Forenoon, the Queens Majesty took her Horse at the Hall Door, and proceeded in
manner as follows.

First, All Gentlemen two and two, then Esquires, Knights, and Bannerets, and
Lords, being no Barons, or under Age.

Then the Trumpeters sounding.

Then the Queens Sergeant, Mr Carus, in his Circot-Hood and Mantle unlined, of
Scarlet.

Then Mr Gerrard the Queens Attorney, and Mr Russell Solicitor.

Then Anthony Brown, Justice of the Common Pleas, and Mr Weston of the Kings
Bench.

Then the Barons of the Exchequer.

Then Mr Corbett, and Mr Whidon, two Justiees of the Kings Bench.

Then Sir Thomas Saunders, Chief Baron of the Exchequer, and Sir James Dyer,
Chief Justice of the Common Pleas.

Then Sir William Cordall, Master of the Rolls in his Gown, and Sir Robert
Catlin, Chief Justice of the Kings Bench; and these Justices and Barons of the
Exchequer, in their Scarlet Mantles, Hood and Circot edged with Miniver; the
Mantle shorter than the Circot by a foot.

Then Knights Counselors in their Gowns, as Sir Anthony Cook, Sir Richard
Sackvile, Sir William Peeters, and Sir Ambrose Cane.

Then Sir William Cecill Chief Secretary, and Sir Edward Rogers Comptroller.

Then William Howard bearing the Queens Cloak and Hat.

Then Barons, in all forty, but there in number 30. a. St. John of Bletso,
Hunsdon, Hastings of Loughborough, Chandois, North, Effingham, but now as the
Lord Chamberlain, Darcy of Chicke, Paget, Sheffield, Willoughby, Rich, Wharton,
Evers, Cromwell, St. John, Mordaunt, Borough, Wentworth, Windsor, Vaux, Sands,
Mountegle, Darcy of Menell, Ogle, Mountjoy, Lumley, Latimer, Scroope, Gray of
Wilton, Stafford, Cobham, Dacres of the North, Dacres of the South, Morley,
Barkley, Strange, Zouch, Audeley, Clinton, but now Lord Admiral, and Bargaveny:
their Mantles, Hoods, and Circot furred, and two Rows of Miniver on their right
Shoulder.

Then proceeded the Bishops, all that were there present were but twenty two,
as Gloucester and St. Asaph, Chester, Carlisle, and Peterborough, Norwich, and
Exeter, Lichfield and Coventry, Bath and Wells, Rochester, and St. David's,
Salisbury, and Lincoln, Bangor, and Worcester, Ely, and Hereford, Landaffe,
Chichester, and Winchester, Durham, and London; their Robes of Scarlet lined,
and a Hood down their back of Miniver.

Then the Viscounts, their Robes as the Barons, but that they had two Rows and
an half of Miniver, as the Viscount of Bindon absent, Viscount Mountague, and
Viscount Hereford present.

Then the Earls, but nineteen present, the Earl of Hertford, the Earl of
Pembroke, Bedford, Southampton, Warwick, Bath, Huntington, Sussex, Cumberland,
Rutland, Worcester, Darby, Shrewsbury, Westmoreland, Northumberland, Oxford,
and Arundel; their Robes of Scarlet, with their Rows of Miniver.

Then the Marquess of Winchester, but now as Lord Treasurer, and the Marquess
of Northampton; the Duke of Norfolk went as Earl Marshal. Then the Lord Keepers
Sergeant, and Seal, and after Sir Nicholas Bacon, Lord Keeper of the Great
Seal, in his Gown.

Here Clarenceux and Norroy.

Then the Queens Sergeant at Arms, and after Garter.

Then the Duke of Norfolk, with the gilt Rod as Marshal; the Lord Treasurer
with the Cap of Estate, and the Earl of Worcester with the Sword.

Then the Queens Majesty on Horseback, a little behind the Lord Chamberlain,
and Vice-Chamberlain; her Grace Apparelled in her Mantle, opened before, furred
with Ermines; and her Kirtle of Crimson Velvet, close before, and close
Sleeves, but the Hands turned up with Ermines, and a Hood hanging low, round
about her Neck, of Ermins. Over all a rich Collar, set with Stones and other
Jewels, and on her Head a rich Caul. And the next after Her, the Lord Robert
Dudley, Master of the Horse, leading the spare Horse. And after all, other
Ladies, two and two, in their Ordinary Apparel. By side the Queen went her
Footmen, and along on either side of her went the Pensioners, with their Axes;
after the Ladies followed the Captain of the Guard, Sir William St. Lo, and
after him the Guard.

In which Order Her Majesty proceeded to the North Door of the Church of
Westminster, where the Dean there, and the Dean of the Chapel met her, and the
whole Chapel in Copes; and St Edwards Staff, with the Inlet in the top, was
delivered unto her; her Arm, for the bearing thereof, assisted by the Baron of
Hunsdon; the Canopy born over her by Charles Howard Esquire Sir George Howard, Sir
Richard Blunt, Sir Ed. Warner, Sir John Perrott, and Sir William Fitz-Williams,
Knights; her Graces Train born up and assisted, for the weight thereof, from
her Arms by the Lord Robert Dudley, Master of the Horse, and Sir Francis
Knowles, Vice-Chamberlain; and so orderly proceeded to the Travers beside the
Table of Administration. Although other Princes have used to be placed in the
Quire till the Offering, but not now because there was neither Communion nor
Offering; and so, she being placed, all the Lords sat down on Forms, besides
the Travers; the Spiritualty on the North side, and the Temporalty on the South
side; the Sword and the Cap of Estate laid down on the Table. Then the Quire
sung the English Procession; which ended, Mr Noell Dean of Paul's began his
Sermon, and first made his Prayer orderly for the Queens Majesty, and the
Universal Church, and especially for that Honorable Assembly of three Estates
there present, that they might make such Laws, as should be to Gods Glory, and
the good of the Realm.

The Sermon being ended, and a Psalm sung, her Majesty and the rest orderly on
foot proceeded out of the South Door, where she delivered the Dean the Scepter,
and so proceeded into the Parliament Chamber, where the Queen stayed a while in
her Privy Chamber, till all the Lords and others were placed, and then her
Highness came forth, and went, and fate her down in her Royal Place, and Chair
of Estate (the Sword and Cap of Maintenance born before her) and when she stood
up, her Mantle was assisted and born up from her Arms, by the Lord Robert
Dudley, Master of the Horse, and Sir Francis Knowles Vice-Chamberlain.

The Lord Keeper sat alone upon the uppermost Sack, until the Queen was sat,
and then went and stood without the Rail, on the right hand the Cloth of
Estate; and the Lord Treasurer, holding the Cap of Estate, on the right hand
before the Queen, Garter standing by him, and on the left hand standing the
Earl of Worcester, with the Sword, and by him the Lord Chamberlain.

The Duke of Norfolk began the first Form, and the Viscount Mountague (for that
the Viscount Bindon was not there) ended it.

The Lord Clinton, the Lord Admiral, began the Form behind that of Barons, and
the Lord St. John of Bletsoe ended it.

The Archbishop of Canterbury began the Bishops Form, and the Bishop of
Gloucester ended the same.

On the Woolsack on the right hand, and Northside, sat Sir Robert Catlin and
Sir James Dyer Chief Justices, Sir William Peter, Anthony Brown, Corbett,
Weston, and Mr Gerrard the Queens Attorney.

On the Sack on the left hand and Southside, sat Sir William Cordall, Master
of the Rolls, Sir Edward Saunders Chief Baron, Justice Widdon, Sergeant Carus,
and Mr Russell the Queens Solicitor, and at their Backs sat Sir Richard Read,
Doctor Yale, and Doctor Vaughan.

On the other Sack sat Doctor Huicke, Spilman Clerk of the Parliament, and Mr
Martin Clerk of the Crown; and behind them kneeled Mr (...), Allen, Dyeter,
Nicasius, Cliffe and Permitter.

At the side hand of the Queen sat on the ground three or four Ladies, and no
more; and at the back of the Rail, behind the Cloth of Estate, kneeled the
Earls of Oxford and Rutland under Age, the Earl of Desmond, the Lord Roos, the
Lord Herbert of Cardiffe, and diverse other Noblemens Sons and Heirs.

Nota, That these foregoing passages, touching the solemn manner of her
Majesty's coming to the Upper House, are not at all found in the Original
Journal Book of the same, but are transcribed out of a written Copy or memorial
of them, I had by me, as does also the Lord Keepers Speech follow, out of the
same, in the next place.

The Queens Majesty (being set (as aforesaid) under the Cloth of Estate) the
House of Commons had notice thereof; and thereupon the Knights, Citizens and
Burgesses of the same, repaired to the Upper House, and being, as many as
conveniently could, let in, she Commanded Sir Nicholas Bacon the Lord Keeper,
to open the cause of Calling and Assembling this Parliament, who thereupon
spoke, as follows.

My Lords and others of this Honorable Assembly,

YOU shall understand, that my most Dread and Sovereign Lady the Queens
Majesty, here present, has Commanded me to declare the occasion of this
Assembly, which I am not able (but unmeet) to do, as it ought to be done, among
such a noble, wise and discreet Company. Howbeit, knowing the Experience of her
Majesty, bearing with such as do their good wills, and your Honors Patience,
in bearing with me in the like, before this time; it encourages me the better
herein, not doubting of the like at this present. Therefore my Lords, the
occasion is, that necessary matters be provided for, propounded and scanned,
and after agreed upon, and ended, which afterward shall remain and continue;
which matters in my Judgment, may well be divided into two parts, one touching
Religion for the setting forth of Gods Honor and Glory, and the other
concerning Policy, for the Commonwealth, as well for provision at home, as to
provide for the Foreign Enemy abroad: Which said matters of Religion, may again
be divided into two parts; for Gods cause being sincerely weighed, considered
and followed, brings forth good success in all Affairs, and being not
followed, but neglected, and made light of, how can any thing prosper, or take
good effect? And the greater the Personages be, which so abuse the same, the
greater the fault is, to the damage of the whole Commonwealth; for all men's
Eyes be fixed on those who be in Authority; for as the Head is, even so is the
Foot; and after the Superior follows the Inferior. For as Gods Law it self is
perfect, so there is no imperfection therein, but that which comes of our
selves, wherein I cannot excuse either the spiritualty or laiety. For as the
Preachers be not so diligent in their Vocation of Preaching, as they ought to
be, even so we of the Laiety be neither so diligent in hearing, nor yet in
doing as we should be. And thirdly, some of the Laiety in not giving credit
unto it, as it ought for to be For as all in Authority ought to be credited,
and their doings taken in the best part, yet I would wish the same should
continue no longer than they do well.

And where at this present there is great want of Ministers, and some of them
that be, be much insufficient; which, considering the time, are to be born
withal, not doubting the Circumspection of the Bishops, in well looking to the
placing of such, which shall be appointed hereafter; and those which be, and
will not be reformed, to have sharp punishment. For as heretofore the
Discipline of the Church has not been good, and again, that the Ministers
thereof have been slothful, even so for want of the same has sprung two
Enormities; the first is, that for lack thereof, every man lives as he will,
without fear; And secondly, many Ceremonies agreed upon, but the right
Ornaments thereof, are either left undone, or forgotten. As in one point, for
want of Discipline it is that so few come to Service, and the Church so
unreplenished, notwithstanding that at the last Parliament, a Law was made, for
good Order to be observed in the same; but yet as appears not Executed.
Therefore if it be too easy, let it be made sharper, and if already well, then
see it Executed. For the want of Discipline causes obstinacy, contempt and
growing of Heresy; therefore better to be winked at and unspoken, than bruted
abroad and unperformed: Therefore, in mine opinion, the device is good, that in
every Diocese there be Officers appointed and devised, as has been thought
good, to sit for redress of these and such like Errors, twice or thrice a Year,
till the faults be amended. In which well doing, the Head-Officers are to be
born withal, and maintained; and Laws to be made for the purpose: the chief
Care of which said former matters pertains to you, my Lords of the
Spiritualty, wherein you must take pains to travel, whereunto be Laws to be
joined, not only for the more perfecting of the same, but for the maintenance,
as well of the Heads, as the Ministers thereof.

Now to the second part, of Policy for the Commonwealth; for as there be
faults for want of Discipline, so are there faults in the imperfection, and
want of Execution, which imperfection must be looked unto; and want of Laws
which needs to be provided for and made; and to consider, if there be not too
many Laws for one thing, and those so large and busy, that neither the Commons
can understand the same, nor yet well the Lawyer, which would be brought into
some briefer and better Order, and there Executed. For which purpose, it is
necessary to take care, to have good Ministers thereof, and secondly, to banish
all fearfulness for prosecuting the same; and over and besides, that to appoint
proved men to inquire of these Ministers, whereby they may have the better
regard to their Duty: For, even as the Visitation of the Church is and was well
appointed for the Church, so now is he like to be appointed for the Temporalty.
For if the Laws be not well Executed, my part is not the least thereof, which
Yearly I would be glad to hear of. The third for the Enemy, as well here bred
amongst us, as abroad: for whereas the Queens Majesty at her entrance found
this Realm in War with Foreign Power, at which time lack of Treasure,
Artillery, Force and other things, caused her to agree to a Peace, although not
the best, howbeit for our surety she spared no cost to bring it to pass; which
notwithstanding, of later time, certain old cankered Enemies of this Realm,
attempted to put in Execution to bring the Scots to the Governance of France,
and so being a firm Land to ours, to have been our utter Enemies; which danger
the Queen foreseeing, sought by all means, as well by her Ambassadors as
others, to stay the Enterprise, but could not; and therefore helped her
Neighbors of Scotland, and so disappointed that attempt; or else before this
time I doubt the Scottish Territories would have been too little to have holden
them, but that they would have troubled us, not only at Barwick, but at the
Walls of York; which said attempt, being by the means of her Majesty stayed and
let, the said bent Enemies have attempted the same in France, to the whole
disturbance of all Christendom, and all done for the mischief of this Realm,
(joined with a devilish Conspiracy within our selves, tending to the aiding of
the Foreign Enemy, and by their own Confession, to have raised a Rebellion in
this Realm) And for that by none of her Graces Travels or means, she could
there stay their Enterprise, or make them agree, she was forced the rather to
stay the same, for the surety of this Realm, to the no little charge of her
Majesty: for in these proceedings, and in repairing of these, and other like
faults, I dare be bold to say (for that I am thereof assured) it has cost her
Majesty as much as two of the best Subsidies, which at any time has been
within this Realm; and all at her own proper Charges, without either straining
of her Subjects, or having aid of them, toward the same. Howbeit she yet
thinks it well spent, for often it chances, that money is better spent than
spared; as the common saying is, That a penny is well spent which afterward
saves a pound. And so in this, if that money had not been so spent in staying
in time their attempted Enterprises, it would afterward have turned to no
little prejudice, nor yet small Charge of this Realm. And where before this time
Princes commonly have had some vein or delight to spend Treasure upon for their
pleasure, which the Queen has none, but only for the Commonwealth and surety
thereof, so that we may most justly and fortunately say to her great Praise,
that the relieving of the Realms necessities is our Princes whole delight: And
notwithstanding all the disbursements of these her great Charges, yet she was
(as I right well know) very hardly brought to, and persuaded to call this
Parliament, in which she should be driven to require any aid, or by any means
to charge her Subjects, if by any other means it might have been helped: and so
her Majesty her self Commanded to be declared. And I for my part, and so do
others very well know; for the Commons little think or consider what a trouble
want is to her, whereby she is forced to ask of them (which surely is against
her nature) but that she is thereunto forced, for the surety of this Realm.

And for that the nether House cannot, being so many together, but of necessity
must have one to be a Mouth, Aider or Instructor unto them, for the opening of
matters, which is called the Speaker, Therefore go and Assemble your selves
together and Elect one, a discreet, wise, and learned Man, to be your Speaker,
and on Friday next the Queens Majesty appoints to repair hither again, for to
receive the Presentment of him accordingly.

The manner of her Majesty's coming to the Upper House, with the Lord Keepers
Speech, being supplied out of that written Copy or Anonymous Memorial, I had by
me, as aforesaid, now follow the Names of the Receivers and Tryors of
Petitions, out of the Original Journal Book it self of the Upper House.

Then the Clerk of the Parliament read in French the Names of such, as should
receive, hear, and try the Petitions for England, France, Scotland, Ireland,
Gascoigne and Guyen, etc. which were as follows.

Receivers of Petitions for England, Ireland Wales and Scotland, viz.

Sir Robert Catlin, Chief Justice of the Kings Bench; Sir William Cordall,
Master of the Rolls; Sir Anthony Brown, Knight; Sir Richard Read, Knight; and
Doctor Huicke; And such as will prefer any Petitions, are to deliver them in
six days next ensuing.

Receivers of Petitions for Gascoigne, and other parts beyond the Seas, and the
Isles, viz.

Sir James Dyer Knight, Chief Justice of the Common Pleas; Sir Edward Saunders
Knight, Chief Baron; Justice Weston, Mr John Vaughan, and Doctor Yale; And such
as will prefer any Petitions, are to deliver the same within six days next
ensuing.

Triors of Petitions for England, Ireland, Wales and Scotland, viz.

The Archbishop of Canterbury, Lord Marquess of Winchester, Treasurer of
England; the Duke of Norfolk, Earl Marshal of England; the Earl of Arundel, the
Earl of Rutland, the Earl of Bedford, the Earl of Pembroke, the Bishop of
London, the Bishop of Durham, the Bishop of Salisbury, the Lord Clinton,
Admiral of England, the Lord Rich; all these together or four of the Prelates,
and Lords, calling to them the Keeper of the Great Seal, and the Treasurer, and
the Queens Sergeant, when need shall require, shall hold their places in the
Chamberlains Chamber.

Triors of Petitions for Gascoigne, and other Countries and parts beyond the
Sea; viz.

The Archbishop of York, the Marquess of Northampton, the Earl of Shrewsbury,
the Earl of Huntingdon, the Bishop of Winchester, the Bishop of Worcester, the
Bishop of Oxon; the Lord Howard, the Lord Chamberlain, the Lord Abergaveny, the
Lord Wentworth, the Lord Willoughby, and the Lord North; all they together, or
four of the Prelates and Lords aforesaid, calling to them the Queens Sergeant,
Attorney, and Solicitor, when need shall require, shall hold their place in
the Treasurers Chamber.

These Names of the Receivers and Tryors of Petitions foregoing, being thus
transcribed out of the Original Journal Book of the Upper House there should
follow out of the same the Adjournment or Continuance of the Parliament, by the
Queens Majesty, or the Lord Keeper by her Commandment; but the same being
wholly omitted through the negligence of Francis Spilman, Clerk of the same, it
is in part supplied out of that beforementioned memorial Copy of this present
days passages following.

Then the Lord Keeper Adjourned the Parliament till Friday next, and then the
Queen returned to her Chamber, and shifted her, and so did all the Lords, and
then waited on her to the Water side, where she took her Boat, and departed to
Whiteball from whence she came, and they till Friday at their pleasures; upon
which ensuing Friday, her Majesty came again to the Upper House; but the manner
and form thereof being wholly omitted in the Original Journal Book of the Upper
House, and only found in the foresaid Anonymous Memorials I had by me, is
therefore inserted out of the same, in manner and form following.

On Friday the 15th day of Jan. 1562. the Queens Majesty at her Privy-Stairs
took Boat, and went by Water to the Parliament House, about two of the Clock,
the Lords and Heralds waiting on her to the Landing place, on the back side of
the Parliament; and so brought her to her Privy-Chamber, where she shifted her,
and put on her Robes, and the Lords theirs, as the first day; and then she
repaired to her Seat, and the Lords to theirs, with their Sergeants and
Gentlemen-Ushers; before her the Lord Marquess of Northampton, bearing the Cap
of Estate, the Duke of Norsolk the Rod of the Marshalsie, and the Earl of
Northumberland the Sword; the Lord Robert Dudley, Master of the Horse, and the
Baron of Hunsdon, sustained her Mantle, from her Arms: And her Train was born
by the Lord Chamberlain, Vice-Chamberlain, and Mr Ashley, Master of the
Jewel-House; and the Lord Keeper standing at the back of the Rail, on the
right, and the Lord Treasurer on the left. And because this is the first
Session of the Second Parliament of her Majesty, I thought it worth the labor
to cause the presence of her Majesty, and the Lords spiritual and Temporal, to
be inserted, directly according unto the Copy thereof in the Original
Journal Book of the Upper-House.

Die Veneris 15to Januar. Domini tam Spirituales, quam Temporales, quorum
nomina subsequuntur, praesentes fuerunt.
Pr. Regina. Pr. Archiepiscopus Cantuar. Pr. Archiepiscopus Eboracen. Pr.
Episcopus London. Pr. Episcopus Dunelmen. Pr. Episcopus Winton. Pr. Episcopus
Cicestren. Episcopus Landaph. Pr. Episcopus Hereford. Pr. Episcopus Elien. Pr.
Episcopus Wigorn. Pr. Episcopus Bangoren. Pr. Episcopus Lincoln. Pr. Episcopus
Sarum. Pr. Episcopus Meneven. Pr. Episcopus Rofsen. Pr. Episcopus Bathon: and
Wellen. Pr. Episcopus Coven. and Lichfeild. Pr. Episcopus Exon. Pr. Episcopus
Norwicen. Pr. Episcopus Petriburgen. Episcopus Carliolen. Pr. Episcopus
Cestren. Pr. Episcopus Assaven. Pr. Episcopus Gloucestren.

Nota, That this is the very express manner and form, by which the presence of
her Majesty, the Lord Keeper, and the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, is set down
and marked out, upon this present Friday, being the first day of this her
Highnesses Second Session of her Parliament; and at the beginning of every
Lords name that was present, are the Letters Pr. prefixed, by which it
appears, and may certainly be concluded, that all they, before whose names
those Letters are not set down, and entered, were then absent, which has been
the constant course of Recording such presence, in all the Original
Journal-Books of the Upper House, both of former and latter times, which is so
obvious to every man's curiosity, that will search, that it needs no further
dilating.

Pr. Nicolaus Bacon Miles, Dominus and Custos magni Sigilli. Pr. Marchio
Winton. Thesaurarius Angliae. Pr. Dux Norfolciae Comes Mareschallus Angliae.
Pr. Marchio Northampton. Pr. Comes Arundell. Seneschallus Hospitii Dominae
Reginae. Pr. Comes Northumbriae. Comes Westmoreland. Pr. Comes Salop. Pr. Comes
Darbiae. Pr. Comes Wigorn. Pr. Comes Rutland. Comes Cumberland. Comes Sussex.
Pr. Comes Huntington. Comes Bathon. Pr. Comes Bedford. Pr. Comes Pembrooke. Pr.
Vice-Comes Hereford. Pr. Vice-Comes Mountague. Vice-Comes Howard de Bindon.
In the next and second Rank after the Spiritual Lords, are the names of the
Lord Keepers, and of all other Temporal Lords, entered above the degree of
Barons, and the reason why the names of the Spiritual Lords are thus entered,
before the Lord Keepers, and all other Temporal Lords, although diverse of them
enjoy likewise the great Offices of the Kingdom; is not because they have all
precedence of them, but either in respect that the Archbishop of Canterbury
(when there is one) is the first Peer of the Realm, and so one of the rank with
whom they sit in the Upper House, and therefore ought to be ranked with him, or
else in respect of their Ecclesiastical Dignities, which are preferred before
the Temporal, as the Church is before the Commonwealth.

Pr. Dominus Clinton Admirallus Angliae. Pr. Dominus Howard de Effingham
Camerarius Dominae Reginae. Pr. Dominus Burgavenny. Dominus Audley. Pr. Dominus
Strange. Dominus Zouch. Pr. Dominus Barkeley. Pr. Dominus Morley. Pr. Dominus
Dacres. Pr. Dominus Dacres de Gillesland. Pr. Dominus Cobham. Dominus Stafford.
Dominus Gray de Wilton. Pr. Dominus Scroope. Dominus Dudley. Pr. Dominus
Lumley. Dominus Montery. Dominus Ogle. Pr. Dominus Darcie. Pr. Dominus
Mountegle. Dominus Sands. Pr. Dominus Vauxe. Pr. Dominus Windsor. Pr. Dominus
Wentworth. Pr. Dominus Mordant. Pr. Dominus St. John. Pr. Dominus Cromwell. Pr.
Dominus Evers. Dominus Wharton. Dominus Rich. Pr. Dominus Willoughbye. Pr.
Dominus Sheffield. Dominus Pagett. Pr. Dominus Darcie de Chiche. Dominus North.
Pr. Dominus Chandos. Pr. Dominus Haistings de Loughborough. Pr. Dominus Carry de
Hunsedon. Pr. Dominus St. John de Bletsoe.
In this third and last rank are placed the Barons names, of which the two
first precede, in respect of their Offices, the rest follow according to their
several rights.

The presence of the Lords being thus transcribed out of the Original
Journal Book of the Upper House, there is nothing worthy the further
observation therein, but only that the Abbot of Westminster, who sat all the
last Parliament, is not here at all mentioned, and the reason was, because
himself, with five other Abbots and Abbesses, and many other of the Popish
Clergy, were deprived of their Ecclesiastical Promotions, in An. Dom. 1559. at
the end of the last Parliament. And now in the next place follows the manner of
the Presentment of the Speaker, with his several Speeches, and the Lord Keepers
Answers at large, out of a Memorial thereof I had by me, which I conceive for
the most part to be the very Autography, or Original Copy thereof, taken by the
hand of some industrious Member of one of the Houses, or at least some other
Hearer, at this time present in the Upper House: It being set down in a hand at
that time, and full of interlinings and amendments.

The Queens Majesty being set under her Cloth of Estate, and the Lords having
placed themselves according to their several Ranks, in their Parliament Robes,
the Knights, Citizens and Burgesses of the House of Commons had notice thereof,
and thereupon repairing to the Upper House, with Thomas Williams Esquire their
Speaker Elect, were (as many of them as conveniently could) let in; and the
Speaker was led up unto the Bar or Rail, at the lower end of the said House,
between Sir Edward Rogers Knight, Comptroller of her Majesty's Household, and
Sir William Cecill Knight, her said Majesty's Principal Secretary; all of them
making, in their proceeding up thither, three Obeysances; and the said Speaker,
being placed there, after he had made three other like Obeysances, began as
follows.

RIght Excellent and most Virtuous Prince, our Renowned and Dread Sovereign
Lady, on Tuesday last it pleased your Highness by the Mouth of the Right
Honorable, the Lord Keeper of the Great Seal, for the more ease of the nether
House of this Parliament, to Command them to go and Assemble themselves, and to
Elect one, being wise, discreet and learned, to be their Speaker; who after a
Consultation had (with one Voice) did Elect me, being indeed insufficient, as
by, and for diverse Causes I did then to them declare; Howbeit, whether it were
that they, being so many wise men together, at the Electing of me, and
therefore would not seem to speak against their own Election, or for what other
cause I know not, but they refused my denial, and stood to their said Choice,
and now present me here, to be at your Graces Appointment: I therefore, knowing
my own imbecility, and yet not arrogantly refusing the same; as one amongst
the Romans chosen from the Plough to a place of Estimation, and after to the
Plough again; even so, I a Countryman, sit for the same, and not for this
place, most humbly desire your Majesty, to discharge me hereof, and to appoint
some other more able; and I, as I am bounden, will not only pray for your
Highness, but also serve your Highness, and my Country, to my power, in the
place of a Citizen, whereunto first I was Elect and appointed.

Then the Queen Called the Lord Keeper to her, declaring to him her Opinion,
for the Answering of him; whereupon he returned to his place, and Answered as
follows.

Mr Williams, The Queens Majesty has well heard and pondered your Speech, and
does well perceive your modest and humble manner, in the disabling your self to
that place, whereunto her well-beloved Subjects have Elected and Chosen you,
and now accordingly presented you, and has also heard your Suit for discharge
of the said Room; and for Answer, she has Commanded me to declare unto you,
that she commends well your modest and humble manner, in so disabling your
self, knowing that Judgment appertains to the Caller, and not to the party
Called; And, forasmuch as her Majesty is credibly informed, as well of your
knowledge and experience in other Parliaments, as in other great and weighty
matters, she thinks now therefore, she cannot disable you, without some peril
to the Realm; and the rather, for that the wise Knights, Citizens and Burgesses
have nominated and Chosen you, she cannot grant your Petition; And besides,
that your modest Order in disabling your self, does right well declare your
ability to furnish the place; for which cause the does allow this Election, and
Presentation made of you; not doubting your care to be such, but that the good
Opinion her Majesty and the Burgesses have of you, shall be augmented and
increased, and the Burgesses not to repent their Election. Therefore your
Office is to take it upon you.

Whereunto the Speaker Answered as follows.

Most Honorable,

ALthough before this time, the place has been furnished with Orators, and
therefore their matter entreated of worthily called an Oration; yet I now, void
of any such knowledge, require that name may be left, and that it might bear
the name of an Epistle with a Request. And for the better understanding
thereof, I will divide the matter into three parts; one for time past, and the
second, time present, and the third, time to come. But fearing to fall between
two Mountains, as to be counted either ungrate, or dissembling, I know not what
to say; but yet seeing Savage Beasts forget not them who do well unto them, as
appears by the story of a Lion, out of whose foot a certain Man took a Thorn,
which said person, being afterward cast to the same Lion to be devoured, the
Lion not forgetting, but remembering the former kindness showed unto him, would
not devour him, but ever after followed the same Man; even so, without too much
ingratitude, can I not let pass your Majesty's manifold benefits extended upon
us; which although worthily to be declared, they pass my Capacity now to
express, yet think it Blasphemy to suffer it clean to be untouched, and
therefore in some part will put in remembrance the same; which I will divide
into two parts; the one spiritual, the other temporal. For the first, When God
planted your Highness in this place, you found it not so furnished with
Treasure, as other your Predecessors have, although, if you had, yet occasions
enough to employ it; which notwithstanding, you did not take the extremity of
Penal Statutes, and other forfeitures, due unto you, but pardoned all such, as
in time convenient required it. Also your Majesty did vouchsafe to take upon
you the Charge of both the States, as well Spiritual as Temporal, and so purged
this Church of all ill Service, and placed therein Service to Gods Honor:
Further, what great Plague and Dearth happened by ill money this twenty Years
last past, which within one Year is brought to good again, with little loss of
your Subjects? Your Majesty prevented also, as well the Attempt in Scotland,
made by your Common Enemy there, as now of late again in France; which
otherwise, if it had not been foreseen, would have turned to the no little
peril, and loss of this your Realm, and Subjects thereof. Also your Highness
has been Author of good Laws, as appears by those made, both at the last
Parliament, and by your other Proclamations since. Further, finding this Realm
at your Entrance in Wars, you brought it in Peace: All which former Proceedings
have been a great Charge unto your Majesty, which although the Revenues of the
Crown be small, yet has it hitherto only been done of your own Charge, as the
last day by the Lord Keeper it was declared. And, for the last part and
principal point of all other, your Highness has brought and restored again
Gods Doctrine into this Realm; for which your humble Subjects most heartily
give thanks to God, and you, by the Mouth of me, their appointed Speaker.

For the second point, being time present; your Majesty is the Head, and the
Body the Spiritualty and the Temporalty, which Body is to be divided into three
Estates, The Lords Spiritual, and the Lords Temporal, and the Commons, whose
Mouth I am; which by no means can prosper, the one without the other: for as
any Estate divided cannot well continue, so in this; and therefore say, Nosce
teipsum, not minding to speak these words only to your Highness, but to the
whole Body; for although the Head may lack a Member of the Body, and yet
continue; yet so the Member cannot want the Head, nor yet the Head the whole
Body, but the want of the one of these last two shall be the ruin of the
other; and therefore of necessity, for the sure preservation of the whole, it
behooves them firmly to join together; for though your Highness be the Head,
and therefore the chief care pertains to you, yet your Majesty cannot
thoroughly redress the same, without knowledge of the faults, nor yet well
understand the whole State, except the other parts of the Body join with you,
and put to their helping hands. I find in diverse Histories great Commodities
grow to Princes, by searching out, not only the wants of their Subjects, but
knowledge of their talk; whereby they better both understand their own faults,
and the Flatterers they have about them; which Order the wise and prudent
Marcus Aurelius used, and long time Reigned Honorably. The noble Conqueror
Alexander, in the beginning of his Reign, used the same; but leaving that
Order, and having no regard to his living, was destroyed; which like Example
was seen by that notable and Valiant Warrier Julius Caesar. And being
encouraged by these like Examples, and others, to enter into some abuses used
in this Realm, I will only speak of three, being all three notable Monsters,
Necessity, Ignorance and Error. Necessity is grown amongst our selves, so that
no Man is contented with his Degree, though he has never so much; but where
she is (as the Proverb says) she has no Law; for how now be all Schools,
Benefices, and other like Rooms furnished, and yet those for Schools so few,
that I dare say a hundred Schools want in England, which before this time have
been. And if in every School there had been but an hundred Scholars, yet that
had been ten thousand; so that now I doubt whether there be so many learned men
in England, as the number wants of these Scholars.

The second Monster is her Daughter Ignorance; for want of ten thousand
Scholars, which these Schools were the bringers up of, and want of good
Schoolmasters, brings Ignorance; but the occasion of these two Monsters, is
for want of Livings and Preferments; for Covetousness has gotten the Livings,
as by Impropriations, which is a decay of Learning. For by it the Tree of
knowledge grows downwards, and not upwards, as it was first meant, and made
for; and grows thereby greatly to the dishonor both of God and this
Commonwealth. The Universities are decayed, and great Market Towns, and others
without either School or Preacher; for the poor Vicar has but only twenty
pound, and the rest, being no small sum, is Impropriate; and so thereby no
Preacher there, but the people being trained up and led in Blindness, for want
of instructions, become obstinate. And therefore to see to it, and that
Impropriations may be redressed, notwithstanding the Laws already made.

The third Monster is Error, a Serpent with many Heads, many evil opinions, and
much evil Life, as Pelagians, Libertines, Papists, and such others, leaving
Gods Commandments, to follow their own Traditions, affections and minds. But if
the Papist be, as indeed he is, in error, let us seek the redress thereof; for
that the poor and ignorant be thereby abused. Until which redress be had, you
nor your Realm, neither at home nor abroad, shall ever be well served of such
people, which be so divided; and therefore speedily look to it, and weed out
this wickedness and error within these our days, which is too much known now
adays; for if your Godly Proclamations were not so soon forgotten, they would
be amended. In the Country I heard tell, but since I came hither, walking in
the streets, I have heard oftentimes more Oaths than words, a pitiful hearing!
for if the Egyptians, by whose Laws the people lost their hands, and amongst
the Barbarians lost their Lives, for swearing, and especially if it were a lie;
if it were so punished amongst them, being Infidels, what, shall there be no
punishment amongst us being Christians? Is truth further from us professing the
name of Christ, and being Christians, than from them being Infidels? But even
as Tantalus was Plagued, so are we; for although he had Apples even hanging at
his Mouth, yet could he not eat any of them, and having a River of Water even
as it were running by his Lips, yet could he not drink, but died for hunger and
thirst: even so are we Plagued; for having Gods word, and his name even in our
Mouths, yet we live as Infidels, or as them that are furthest from the same,
and so having enough, there is scarcity. And that we may avoid this Blasphemy,
and the other Monsters, your humble Subjects desire your Highness to see to the
lamentable Estate of this Commonwealth, and the redress of the same.

Having perused times past, and times present, let us go to, and well remember
the time to come. For Cato says, A thing well begun shall be well ended; so
then follows of a good beginning a good ending. For that Noble Captain
Hannibal, environed with his Enemies, in a strange Country, sounded his Trumpet
to Council, and thereby prospered. So your Majesty has now called the
Prelates, Nobles and Commons to Council for surety of the Realm. We now so
therefore Assembled, as diligent in our Calling, have thought good to move your
Majesty with the assent of this Assembly, to build a strong Fort for the surety
of the Realm, to the repulsing of your Enemies abroad, which must be set upon
firm ground, and steadfast, having two Gates, one commonly open, the other as a
Postern, with two Watchmen at either of them, one Governor, one Lieutenant,
four Soldiers, and no good thing there wanting. The same to be named The fear
of God; the Governor thereof to be God, your Majesty the Lieutenant, the Stones
the Heart of faithful People, the two Watchmen at the open Gate, to be called
Knowledge and Virtue, the other two at the Postern to be called Mercy and
Truth; all being Spiritual Ministers.

This Fort is Invincible, if every man will fear God; for all Governors Reign
and Govern by the two Watchmen, Knowledge and Virtue; and if you, being the
Lieutenant, see Justice with Prudence her Sister executed, you shall then
rightly use the Office of a Lieutenant; and for such as depart out of this
Fort, let them be let out at the Postern by the two Watchmen, Mercy and Truth;
and then you shall be well at home and abroad. The Charge of this Fort is
yours, being Lieutenant. By Justice your place is settled, whereunto Obedience
ought to be taught and done; which your Majesty ought to look to. And so now
the fear of God to be a sure Fort, the Subjects Hearts the Stones, Knowledge,
Virtue, Mercy and Truth, the four Watchmen, God the Governor, and your Majesty
the Lieutenant, is well proved. Therefore to build upon this Fort, the fear of
God, is nothing lacking to a happy Life; for by God are all Princes appointed.
Who put down Saul? Who made David King, who sought only Gods Glory and so
prospered? as did Josaphat, Josias and Hezechias, and also Ahas, as long as
they sought Gods Glory, prospered; but forgetting God, were overthrown:
Therefore first of all, and continually vouchsafe to seek Gods Glory, and his
true Honor, and then you shall have this Fort well built, and by you well
Governed.

Further I am to be a Suitor to your Majesty, that when matters of importance
shall arise, whereupon it shall be necessary to have your Highness Opinion,
that then I may have free access unto you for the same; and the like to the
Lords of the Upper House.

Secondly, That in repairing from the nether House to your Majesty, or the
Lords of the Upper House, to declare their meanings, and I mistaking on
uttering the same contrary to their meaning, that then my fault or imbecility
in declaring thereof be not prejudicial to the House, but that I may again
repair to them, the better to understand their meanings, and so they to reform
the same.

Thirdly, That the Assembly of the Lower House, may have frank and free
Liberties to speak their Minds, without any Controulment, Blame, Grudge,
Menaces or Displeasure, according to the old ancient Order.

Finally, That the old Privilege of the House be observed, which is, that they
and theirs might be at Liberty, frank and free, without Arrest, molestation,
trouble or other damage to their Bodies, Lands, Goods or Servants, with all
other their Liberties, during the time of the said Parliament; whereby they may
the better attend, and do their Duty; all which Privileges I desire may be
Enrolled, as at other times it has been accustomed.

And thus having been tedious unto you with my Speech, void of Eloquence, I
crave your Pardon, and desire your Majesty to accept of my Heart, and good
Will, as well at this time as after, and I will pray as I am bounden, for your
Honor long to Reign over us.

Then the Queen called the Lord Keeper, declaring her Opinion for Answering
him, which he did as follows.

Mr Speaker, The Queens Majesty has heard and very well weighed your Eloquent
Oration, which you in the beginning required might not be so called, but that
it might bear the name of an Epistle, with a Request, full of good meaning, and
good matters, gathered, divided and set; which you divided, as I gather, into
four parts. Three by you applied unto three times, past, present, and to come;
and the fourth for your Petitions.

For times past, being the first, you opened the benefits received by us all
from the Queens Majesty, since her entrance to the Crown, which you divided
into two, the one Spiritual, and the other Temporal, and so in some part
related the same; and thus passed with times past.

The second part for time present; after you had therein declared many notable
Examples of Princes, which searched privily to understand the Commons talk and
Opinion, and the benefit thereof arising, you declared to be in this
Commonwealth three Notable Monsters, viz. Necessity, Ignorance and Error,
which to redress, you desired the Princes Aid.

And in the third part for time to come, you declared how the Queens Majesty
and this Parliament in your Opinion, by building a Fort, named the fear of God,
might take Order and live surely in time to come.

And in the fourth part, made four Petitions, the first for free access to her
Person, and Upper House, the second for well taking your meaning, and the third
and fourth for free Liberty of Speech and Persons.

Now for the Answering of them, her Majesty has Commanded me to say, That for
the first part she commends much those Godly Virtues that you opened to be in
her, and also those beautiful budding benefits which you declared to come from
her, and doubts not the rather by this your remembering of them, but they
shall be on her part hereafter performed, for which she thanketh you, thinking
all things well bestowed, when they are well remembered.

In the second part you declare certain Monsters, which trouble this Region,
and would be redressed; the Remedy whereof you declared in your third part,
wherein she desires you to travel for the bringing of it to pass.

And for the fourth part, being your Petitions, which be also four; for the
first being for free access to her Person, she grants it, not doubting of
your discretion to use it, as rath as may be, not out of time, nor yet without
they be matters of great importance.

For the second, that if you mistake their meanings, that they may
notwithstanding redress the same, without prejudice to them; this also she
grants, although unneedful, for that she trusts you will not offend
therein; And for the third, to have free Speech she grants also, so that it
be reverently used.

And to the last point, for them and theirs to be free, without disturbance,
she is pleased therewith; howbeit great regard would be therein had, not
thereby to avoid or delay their Creditors, but to be well used, according to
the meaning of the first grant thereof.

Now a word or two more, I would advise you, to make your Laws as few, and as
plain as may be, for many be burthenous, and doubtful to understand; and so
accordingly to make them as brief, as the matter will suffer; and thirdly, that
you proceed to the great and weighty matters first, and then to others of
smaller importance, and that so speedily as can be, whereby this Assembly may
be again at their Liberties, and so end.

Then the Speaker and nether House did their Reverence, and departed, and the
Queen returned into her Privy-Chamber, and shifted her, and the Lords likewise,
and then she repaired to her Barge, and so to Whitehall, unto which place the
Sword was born; the Officers of Arms waited to and fro.

On Monday the 18th day of January, three Bills of no great moment, had each of
them one reading, of which the last, being the Bill for the punishment of
Clipping, and washing of the Queens Majesty's Coin, and other Moneys Current
within the Realm, was read the first time.

Dominus Custos magni Sigilli continuavit praesens Parliamentum usque in diem
crastinum hora Nona.

On Tuesday the 19th day of January, four Bills had each of them one reading;
of which the first being for the good Order and Government of the Garrison of
Barwick, was read secunda vice, and commissa ad ingrossand. and the second,
being the Bill for punishment of Clipping and washing of the Queens Majesty's
Coin, was read tertia vice, and commissa Archiepiscopo Ebor., Duci Norfolciae,
Marchion. Northampton, Episcopo Hereford, Domino Wentworth, Domino Willoughby
and Domino Hastings de Loughborough.

On Wednesday the 20th day of January, the Bill touching the Government of the
Garrison of Barwick, was read tertia vice and conclns. and sent to the House of
Commons by Sergeant Carus, and the Queens Attorney.

On Thursday the 21th day of January, two Bills had each of them one reading;
of which one was the Bill to repeal a Branch of a Statute, made Anno primo
Edwardi 6ti, touching the Conveying of Horses out of the Realm, and being read
tertia vice, was concluded, and sent down to the House of Commons.

On Saturday the 23th day of January, the Lords Spiritual and Temporal
Assembled, but nothing was done, save only the Parliament continued by the Lord
Keeper, in usual Form, usque in diem Martis prox. hora nona.

On Tuesday the 26th day of January, the Bill for fulling and thicking of Caps,
was read prima vice, and commissa to the Earl of Shrewsbury, the Earl of
Rutland, the Earl of Bedford, the Bishop of Winchester, the Bishop of Exeter,
the Lord Wentworth, the Lord Willoughby, and the Lord Shandois; And the Bill
also against forging of Evidences and Writings, was upon the first reading,
Committed to the Archbishop of York, the Duke of Norfolk, the Marquess of
Northampton, the Earl of Rutland, the Earl of Huntington, the Bishop of London,
the Bishop of Durham, the Bishop of Winchester, the Lord Clinton, the Lord
Wentworth, the Lord Rich, the Lord Willoughby, the Lord Hastings of
Loughborough, the Lord Chief Justice of the Kings Bench, the Lord Chief Baron
of the Exchequer, and the Queens Solicitor.

Nota, That this last mentioned Bill, touching the forging of Evidences, etc.
was not only committed upon the first reading, which is not usual till after
the second, but committed also to the Judges, being but Assistants of the Upper
House, and to the Queens Solicitor, being but a mere Attendant upon the same,
jointly with the Lords, the only proper and undoubted Members of that great
Council; which is to be observed, because of latter days, neither the said
Assistants, nor Attendants, are ever appointed joint Committees with the Lords,
as here, but only Commanded by the House to attend upon the Committee, and
thereby to give such advice as shall be required of them; which is no greater
respect yielded them at a Committee, than in the House it self, sitting the
Parliament; and were they still admitted to be Committees, as they usually were
in all these first Parliaments of the Queen, yet could no inconvenience ensue
thereby, because at a Committee things are only prepared, and made ready for
the House, in which and no where else they ought to be concluded and expedited.

The Bill lastly for Repeal of a Statute made an. 1 Ed. 6. touching conveying
of Horses out of the Realm, was concluded, and sent down to the House of
Commons.

Here the House was doubtless continued until Thursday next, the 28th day of
this Instant January, because this being Hillary Term, the ensuing Wednesday
being the 27th day of the same Month, was Star Chamber day, on which the House
seldom sits; and this may be observed very usual, not only in this Journal, but
in the Original Journal-Books of the Upper-House of all her Majesty's time, in
whose Reign the Star-Chamber-Days were first certainly appointed to be on
Wednesdays and Fridays.

True it is, that in former times, when Star-Chamber-Days were uncertain, then
it is hard to guess when the House sat not by reason of them, and there seems
to be but one direct President of it, which is entered in the Original
Journal Book, de An. xxv. Henr. 8. die Mercurii, 4 die Februarii, in these
words, viz. Hodie Dominus Cancellarius, co quod die crastino Domini circa ardua
negotia in Camera Stellata consultaturi, and Domini spirituales die Veneris in
convocatione convers. fuerint, ex consensu totius Domus continuavit hoc
praesens Parliamentum in diem Sabbati hora consueta. By which President also it
may be plainly collected, that the House did sometimes forbear sitting on
Convocation Days, when the Lords Spiritual were absent; Of which also there is
another President in the Original Journal Book of the Upper-House, de an. 7
Hen. 8. die 30 Novembris, where it is thus entered; Dominus Cancellarius,
propterea quod Domini spirituales in Convocatione crastino die occupandi sunt,
continuavit praesens Parliamentum usque ad diem Lunae. But notwithstanding
these Presidents, it is plain, that the other Lords may sit, if they please, on
Convocation days, or Star-Chamber-Days; For as touching the first, it is plain
by the Original Journal Book, de an. 1 Hen. 8. that the Temporal Lords sat
every Convocation Day, though they did no other business than receive Bills
from the Commons; And for the second, there is an Excellent President, tempore
Jacobi Regis, to prove, that the Lords of the Upper-House are not bound to
observe Star-Chamber-Days (though usually they do) for it appears plainly by
the Original Journal Book, de an. 18 Regis ejusdem, die Martis, 24 die Aprilis,
that upon a motion made that day unto the House, that there was a great Cause
in the midst of hearing to be heard in the Star Chamber the day following being
Wednesday, the Lords were contented to forbear sitting that day, but withal it
was provided that it should not be drawn into a President, but that the House
(being the supreme Court) may sit upon any Star Chamber day, notwithstanding
the absence of such Lords, as do use to attend that Court: And accordingly the
House was Adjourned unto the next day, being Wednesday, in the Afternoon. And
the next Star Chamber Day, being Friday, the 26th day of April, the House did
sit both in the Forenoon, and in the Afternoon.

Dominus Custos magni Sigilli continuavit praesens Parliamentum usque in diem
Jovis prox. hora nona.

On Thursday the 28th day of January, the Lords Spiritual and Temporal
Assembled, but nothing was done, save only the Parliament continued in usual
Form, usque in diem Sabbati hora nona.

On Saturday the 30th day of January, the Bill for Assurance of certain Lands
assumed by the Queens Majesty, during the Vacation of Bishoprics, was read
secunda vice (although not mentioned through the negligence of the Clerk) and
commissa Archiepiscopo Eboracen. Duci Norfolciae, Marchion. Northampton, Comiti
Salop. Comiti Derby, Comiti Rutland, Comiti Huntington, Comiti Bedford, Comiti
Pembroke, Episcopis London, Dunelm. Winton. Hereford, Elien. Domino Clinton
Admirallo, Domino Howard de Effingham Camerario, Domino Dacres de Gillesland,
Domino Lumley, Domino Rich, Domino Willoughby, Domino Hastings de Loughborough,
and Domino Hunsden, ac dnobus primariis Justiciariis and Primario Baroni
Scaccarii.

Nota, That here the Judges, who are but Assistants unto the Upper House, are
made joint Committees with the Lords; see also a like President on Tuesday the
26th day of this Instant January foregoing.

Dominus Custos magni Sigilli continuavit praesens Parliamentum usque in diem
Lunae prox. hora nona.

On Monday the first day of February, the Lords Spiritual and Temporal
Assembled, but nothing was done, save only the Parliament continued in usual
Form, usque in diem Mercurii prox. hora nona.

On Wednesday the 3d of February, the Lords also Assembled, but nothing was
done, save only the Parliament continued by the Lord Keeper, usque ad diem
Sabbati prox. hora nona.

On Saturday the 6th day of February (to which day the Parliament had been on
Wednesday last continued) a Bill against forging of Evidences and Writings, was
read the first time.

On Monday the 8th day of February, the Bill against forging of false Deeds and
Writings, was read the second time, and commissa ad ingrossand.

On Tuesday the 9th of February, the Bill touching Pewterers, was read the
first time.

Dominus Custos magni Sigilli continuavit praesens Parliamentum usque in diem
Jovis prox. hora nona.

On Thursday the 11th day of February, the Bill against forging of false Deeds
and Writings, was read tertia vice, and conclusa, and sent down to the House of
Commons by the Queens Attorney and Solicitor.

On Monday the 15th day of February (to which day the Parliament had been on
Thursday last continued) The Bill touching Fines to be levied in the County
Palatine of Durham, The Bill against carrying over Sea of Sheep Skins and
Pelts, not being Staple Ware, And the Bill to revive certain Statutes Repealed
for Servants robbing their Masters, the punishment of the Vice of Buggery,
against fond and fantastical Prophecies, and for the punishment of Invocation
of evil Spirits, Enchantments, Witchcrafts and Sorceries, were brought from the
House of Commons, and each of them read prima vice.

Two Bills also had each of them their first and second reading, of which the
latter, being the Bill for the Restitution in Blood of Thomas Brook, William
Cromer, and Cutbert Vaughan, and others, commissa fuit Domino primario
Justiciario Com. Placitor.

On Tuesday the 16th day of February, the Bill for Restitution in Blood of Anne
Thomas; The Bill for Restitution in Blood of the Heirs of Thomas Isely; And the
Bill for Restitution in Blood of Thomas Diggs, were each of them read prima,
secunda and tertia vice, and conclus. and were, with two others, sent down to
the House of Commons, by Sergeant Carus and the Queens Attorney.

Dominus Custos magni Sigilli continuavit praesens Parliamentum usque in diem
Crastinum hora nona.

On Wednesday the 17th day of February, the Lords Spiritual and Temporal
Assembled, but nothing was done, save only the Parliament continued by the Lord
Keeper in usual Form, usque in diem crastinum hora nona.

On Thursday the 18th day of February, the Bill touching Fines to be levied
within the County Palatine of Durham, and the Bill against carrying of Sheep
Skins and Pelts over the Seas, not being Staple Wares, were each of them read
tertia vice and conclusae.

On Saturday the 20th day of February (to which day the Parliament had been on
Thursday last continued) Three Bills were brought up to the Lords from the
House of Commons, of which the first being the Bill of one Subsidy and two
Fifteens and Tenths, granted by the Temporalty, was read the first time.

The Bill for Assurance of certain Lands to Sir Francis Jobson, was read the
first time, whereupon the Lords took Order that the Learned Counsel, as well of
the said Francis, as of the Bishop of Durham, whom it concerned, should on
Saturday then next following be heard, what could on either side be said in
furtherance or disallowance of the same.

The Bill also for the Assurance of the Queens Majesty's Royal Power, over all
States and Subjects within her Dominions, was brought up to the Lords from the
House of Commons.

On Monday the 22th day of February, two Bills had each of them one reading; of
which the first being the Bill of one Subsidy and two Fifteens and Tenths,
granted by the Temporalty, was secunda vice lect. but no mention is made, that
it was either Ordered to be engrossed, or referred to Committees, because it
had been formerly sent up to the Lords from the House of Commons.

On Tuesday the 23th day of February, the Bill of one Subsidy and two Fifteens
and Tenths, granted by the Temporalty, was read tertia vice and communi omnium
Procerum assensu conclus. and sent to the House of Commons by Sergeant Carus,
and Doctor Huicke.

Nota, That this Bill of Subsidy, after it had passed the Upper House, was not
by them altered or amended in any thing, but only sent back again unto the
House of Commons, to whom it did most properly belong, and is on the last day
of the Parliament, or Session of Parliament, to be brought up by the Speaker of
the said House, as it was at this time on Saturday the 10th day of April
ensuing, and presented unto her Majesty by Thomas Williams Esquire Prolocutor of
the said House, at this present Session, before she gave her Royal Assent to
such Acts as passed.

On Thursday the 25th day of February, the Bill for the Assurance of the Queens
Majesty's Royal Power over all States and Subjects within her Dominions, was
read the first time.

On Saturday the 27th day of February, the Bill for Restitution in Blood of the
Children of Thomas Cranmer, late Archbishop of Canterbury, and the Bill
declaring the Authority of the Lord Keeper of the Great Seal of England, and
the Lord Chancellor, to be one, were each of them read prima vice.

Eight Bills were brought up to the Lords from the House of Commons, of which
the first, being the Bill of one Subsidy and two Fifteens and Tenths, granted
by the Temporalty, and the second against carrying over Sheep Skins and Pelts
over the Seas, not being Staple Ware, were each of them returned conclus.

This day, according to the Order formerly taken, Sir Francis Jobson, with his
Counsel, came before the Lords, and by them declared..... And no more is set
down in the Original Journal Book of the Upper House; and by the negligence of
the Clerk the matter is so left abruptly; but it does plainly appear, that it
was touching the Assurance of certain Lands, which concerned the Bishop of
Durham, ut videas, on Saturday the 20th of this Instant February foregoing.

On Monday the first day of March, two Bills of no great moment, had each of
them one reading; of which the second being the Bill for the Restitution in
Blood of the Sons and Daughters of the late Lord Hussy, was read prima vice.

A Proviso to be annexed to the Bill for the Assurance of the Queens Majesty's
Royal Power over all Estates and Subjects, within her Dominions, was read prima
and secunda vice, and commissa ad ingrossand.

On Tuesday the 2d day of March, Ten Bills of no great moment, had each of them
one reading; of which the first, being the Bill for the Confirmation of a
Subsidy, granted by the Province of Canterbury, and the second against such as
sell Wares for Apparel without ready money, to persons under two hundred pound
Lands or Fees, were each of them read prima vice.

The Bill also for Restitution in Blood of the Children of Thomas Cranmer late
Archbishop of Canterbury, was read secunda and tertia vice and conclus.; and
was (with the Bill for the Children of the Lord Hussy, which had likewise this
day passed the House upon the third reading) sent to the House of Commons by
Sir Richard Read and Sergeant Carus.

On Wednesday the 3d day of March, Three Bills had each of them one reading, of
which the last, being the Bill for the Assurance of the Queens Majesty's Royal
Power, over all States and Subjects, within her Dominions, was read tertia
vice, with certain Provisions thereunto annexed by the Lords, which were thrice
severally; read, and conclus.

A Proviso annexed by the House of Commons to the Bill against forging of false
Deeds, was read prima, secunda and tertia vice, and commissa Domino Rich,
Domino Willoughby, Primario Justiciario Banci Regii, and Justiciario Brown;
Quod Nota, Because no Bill or Proviso is usually committed after the third
reading.

On Thursday the 4th day of March, The Bill for the Restitution in Blood of Sir
Ralph Chamberlain Knight, and John Haleston Esquire; The Bill against such as sell
Wares for Apparel without ready money, to persons under two hundred pound Lands
or Fees; The Bill for the punishments of Vagabonds, calling themselves
Egyptians, And the Bill for uniting of Churches within the City of Winchester,
were each of them read secunda vice: but no mention is made, that they were
either Ordered to be engrossed, or referred to Committees, because they had
been formerly sent from the Lords.

The Bill also for Restitution in Blood of William West, and the Bill for the
Town of Southampton, were each of them read the first time, and thereupon
committed to Justice Southcote, Sergeant Carus and the Queens Attorney.

Nota, That these two Bills last mentioned were not only committed after the
first reading (which is not usual till the second) but also committed to mere
Assistants, which are not Members of the House, and therefore in both respects
the President is more rare and remarkable; vide consimile, on Tuesday the 26th
day of Jan. foregoing.

On Saturday the 6th day of March, The Bill for the Subsidy of the Clergy, And
the Bill for the Restitution in Blood of Edward Turner, were each of them read
tertia vice, and conclus. and commis. Servienti Carus, and Ricardo Read in
Domum Communem deferend.

Three Bills were brought up to the Lords from the House of Commons; of which
the first was the bill for avoiding of diverse Foreign Wares, made by
Handy-crafts-men beyond the Seas; and the second touching Badgers of Corn and
Drovers of Cattle to be Licensed.

Three Bills lastly of no great moment, had each of them one reading; of which
the first being the Bill for the further punishment of Vagabonds, calling
themselves Egyptians, was read tertia vice, and conclusa, dissentiente Comite
Arundel.

On Monday the 8th day of March, Six Bills of no great moment, had each of them
one reading; of which the third, being the Bill against such as shall sell any
Wares for Apparel without ready money, etc. The Bill declaring the Authority of
the Lord Keeper of the Great Seal of England, and the Lord Chancellor to be all
one, And the Bill touching the true fulling and thicking of Caps, were each of
them read the third time, and concluded: Et una cum alia Billa, For the making
Denizens of certain Children born beyond the Seas, commissae sunt Attorn. Dom.
Reginae, and Doctori Huick in Dom. Communem deferend.

Three Bills were brought up to the Lords from the House of Commons, of which
the first, being the Bill against such as shall sell any Wares for Apparel
without ready money, to persons under three thousand pound Lands or Fees, was
returned conclus. And the last was the Bill that the Hospital Church of St.
Katherine, near the Tower of London, shall be a Parish Church, and for the
erecting of a School.

Two Bills lastly of no great moment, had each of them one reading; of which
the second being the Bill against Enchantments, Sorceries and Witchcraft, was
read the first time.

On Tuesday the 9th day of March, Nine Bills had each of them one reading, of
which the first being the Bill for the Restitution in Blood of Sir PeterCarew
Knight, And the second against Enchantments, Sorceries, Witchcrafts, etc. were
each of them read the second time, but no mention is made that they were either
Ordered to be engrossed, or referred to Committees, because they had been
formerly sent to the Lords from the House of Commons.

The sixth being the Bill for the uniting and annexing of Churches, was read
prima vice, and commissa Justiciario Southcot, ut in duos libros redigatur.

On Wednesday the 10th day of March, the Bill for the Restitution in Blood of
William West, And the Bill for Restitution in Blood of Sir William Carew
Knight, were each of them read tertia vice, and conclus.

Eight other Bills had each of them one reading, of which the three last, the
one for Badgers of Corn, and Drovers of Cattle to be Licensed, Another touching
the Lord Viscount Bindon, And the third for the relief of the Poor; were each
of them read secunda vice.

On Thursday the 11th day of March, the Bill for avoiding of diverse Foreign
Wares, made by Handy-crafts-men beyond the Seas; The Bill against fond and
fantastical Prophecies; And the Bill for the punishment of the vice of
Buggery, were each of them read tertia vice, and conclusae, and commissae sunt
Attornato Dominae Reginae, and Doctori Yale in Domum Communem deferend.

Six other Bills also of no great moment, had each of them one reading; of
which the second being the Bill against Forgers of false Deeds and Writings;
and the third being the Bill for Badgers of Corn and Drovers of Cattle, to be
Licensed, were each of them read tertia vice, and conclus.

Four Bills were brought up to the Lords from the House of Commons, of which
the first, being the Bill for the Confirmation of the Subsidy granted by the
Clergy, and the second, declaring the Authority of the Lord Keeper of the Great
Seal, and the Lord Chancellor, to be one, were each of them returned conclus.

On Saturday the 13th day of March, the Bill touching the Town of Southampton,
was read secunda vice, and commissa ad ingrossand.

The Bill touching the Boyers of Westminster, was read prima and secunda vice,
and commissa ad ingrossandum. The Bill also for Confirmation of diverse
Liberties, granted by Letters Patents to the City of Exeter, was read tertia
vice; And a Proviso added thereunto by the Lords, being read prima, secunda and
tertia vice; the Bill was concluded, Commun. omnium procerum assensu.

On Monday the 15th day of March, Seven Bills had each of them one reading, of
which the second being the Bill that the Hospital of St. Katherines near the
Tower of London, shall be a Parish Church, and for the erecting of a School,
was read prima vice, and committed to the Bishop of London: Quod nota; For
Bills are not usually committed until the second reading, vide tamen consimile
on Tuesday the 26th day of January foregoing.

The fourth also being the Bill for the Enrolment of Bargains and Sales, in the
Queens Majesty's Courts of Record, in Lancaster, Chester and Durham, was read
tertia vice, and commissa Servienti Carus, and Attornato Dominae Reginae, una
cum Bill. Civitat. Exon. in Domum Communem deferend.

Five Bills were brought up to the Lords from the House of Commons, of which
the first, being the Bill for the Restitution in Blood of Sir Ralph
Chamberlain Knight, and John Harleston Esquire, And the Bill for Restitution in
Blood of Anne Thomas, Daughter and Heir of William Thomas Esquire were each of them
returned conclus.

On Tuesday 16. day of March, the Bill for the relief of the Poor; The Bill for
uniting of Churches in Cities and Towns Corporate; The Bill for the Boyers of
London, Westminster, and Southwark; And the Bill for the Confirmation of a
Grant made by Letters Patents to the Town of Southampton, touching the bringing
of Malmesies, and Sweet Wines by Merchant Strangers, were each of them read
tertia vice and conclusae.

The Bill for the Assurance of the Queens Majesty's Power over all States and
Subjects within her Dominions, which had been before here passed, and concluded
in the Upper House, and sent down by them to the House of Commons, and from the
Commons sent back again to the Lords, with certain Provisoes and Amendments
added thereunto; The said Bill needed no new reading; but the said Provisoes
and Amendments, which had been added, since it had passed the Upper House, were
now read prima, secunda and tertia vice, all at once and so passed.

The Bills for Southampton, and the Boyers of Westminster, were sent down to
the House of Commons, by Mr Solicitor, and Dr Yale; and from thence were
returned two other Bills which had passed the Upper House; the one for sundry
politic Constitutions for the increase of the Navy, and the other for the
Restitution in Blood of William West.

On Wednesday the 17th day of March, the Bill for Assignment for the Queens
Household, was read tertia vice; and with the Bill for uniting of Churches in
Towns Corporate, and for relief of the Poor, was sent from the Lords to the
House of Commons.

The Bill for allowance to be made to the Sheriffs, being called for, the Lord
Keeper of the Great Seal declared to the Lords, that the Queen would her self
take Order therein, which her pleasure and determination she willed him to
signify unto them on her behalf.

On Thursday the 18. day of March, Six Bills of no great moment, had each of
them one reading; of which the fourth, being the Bill against Filing, Washing,
and Clipping of Coins, was read the second time, and committed to be engrossed.

The Bill concerning Viscount Bindon, and the Bill for Tillage, were Ordered
this day to be engrossed.

On Saturday the 20. day of March, the Bill touching peculiar Jurisdictions,
was upon the second reading committed to the Earl of Shrewsbury, the Earl of
Huntington, the Earl of Bedford, the Bishop of London, the Bishop of Bangor,
the Bishop of Lincoln, the Lord Wentworth, the Lord Rich, the Lord Willoughby,
and the two Chief Justices.

Nota, That here the Judges, who are but Assistants unto the Upper House, are
made joint Committees with the Lords; vide a like President on Tuesday the 26.
of January foregoing.

Four other Bills had each of them their third reading, and passed, and were
sent to the House of Commons by Mr Sergeant Carus, and the Queens Solicitor;
of which one was for the preservation of the Woods in Sussex, and another for
the punishment of Clipping, filing, rounding or washing of the Coin of this
Realm, or any other Coin current within this Realm.

Seven Bills were brought up to the Lords from the House of Commons; of which
the first was against fond and fantastic Prophecies; The second against
Conjurations, Enchantments and Witchcrafts; And the third for the punishment of
the vice of Buggery.

On Monday the 22. day of March, Five Bills had each of them one reading; of
which the first being the Bill for the punishment of such persons as shall
procure and commit wilful Perjury; and the Bill touching Fines and Recoveries,
with Voucher, where the Original Writ is imbezilled, or lacking, were each of
them read the first time, and committed to the Queens Learned Counsel.

On Tuesday the 23. day of March, Three Bills of no great moment, had each of
them one reading; of which the first, being the Bill for the punishment of
unlawful taking of Fish, Deer, and Hawks, was read the second time.

On Wednesday the 24. day of March, the Bill for the maintenance of the Navy,
with certain Provisoes added thereunto by the Lords, was read tertia vice, and
conclusa, and committed to Sergeant Carus, and the Queens Attorney, to be
carried to the House of Commons.

The Bill also against unlawful Contracts and Bargains upon Usury, was read
tertia vice, and rejected.

On Thursday the 25. day of March, Four Bills had each of them one reading; of
which the first, being the Bill for punishment of such persons as shall commit
wilful Perjury, was read the second time.

A Proviso to be annexed to the Bill for Stealing of Hawks, Deer, or Conies,
was read prima, and secunda vice, and commissa ad ingrossandum.

On Friday the 26. day of March, the Bill for reviving of a Statute made An. 23
H. 8. touching the making of Goals, was read secunda vice, and commissa ad
ingrossand.

On Saturday the 27. day of March, Six Bills of no great moment, had each of
them one reading; of which the second, being the Bill for the punishment of
unlawful taking of Fish, Deer or Hawks, was read tertia vice, and communi
omnium Procerum assensu conclus.

On Monday the 29. day of March, Four Bills had each of them one reading; of
which the first, being the Bill for the punishment of such persons as shall
procure or commit any wilful Perjury; And the second for the due Execution of
the Writ, de Excommunicato capiendo; were each of them read the third time, and
communi omnium Procerum assensu conclus. and committed to the Queens Attorney
and Solicitor, to be carried to the House of Commons.

The Bill for Plumsted-Marsh was committed to the Lord Chief Justice; Quod nota.

On Tuesday the 30. of March, Eight Bills were brought up to the Lords from the
House of Commons; whereof six having been formerly ent down from the Lords,
were now returned expedited.

The seventh and eighth, being for the translating of the Bible, and other
Divine Service, into the Welsh Tongue; and that Chancellors, Commissaries, and
Officials in Ecclesiastical Courts, shall be Graduates of one University, were
each of them prima vice.

Two Bills were brought from the House of Commons; of which the second, being
the Bill touching an Annuity granted to the finding of a School in Guildford,
was prima vice lect.

The Bill lastly to fill up Juries, de Circumstantibus, lacking in Wales, was
tertia vice lect. and conclusa.

On Wednesday the 31. day of March, four Bills had each of them one reading; of
which the first being the Bill that Chancellors, Commissaries and Officials in
Ecclesiastical Courts, shall be Graduates of one University, And the second for
translating the Bible, and other Divine Service, into the Welsh Tongue, were
each of them read the second time; but no mention is made, that they were
either Ordered to be engrossed, or referred to Committees, because they had
been sent from the House of Commons on the day foregoing.

On Thursday the first day of April, the Lords Spiritual and Temporal Assembled
in the House; but nothing was done, save only the Parliament continued by the
Lord Keeper in Form following.

Dominus Custos magni Sigilli continuavit praesens Parliamentum usque in diem
Sabbati prox. hora nona.

On Saturday the 3d day of April, Three Bills were brought from the House of
Commons; of which the first was the Bill for relief of the Poor, with diverse
Amendments added by the House of Commons; and two Provisoes; And the second for
Confirmation of Letters Patents granted to the Town of Southampton, touching
the bringing in of Wines by Merchant Strangers, with a Proviso added by the
Commons. The Bill touching the Annuity granted for the finding of a School at
Guildford, was read tertia vice and conclus.

Hodie introduct. est a domo Communi Billa, touching an Assignment of the
Queens Majesty's Household; with certain Provisoes thereunto added by the
Commons, quae prima, secunda and tertia vice lect. and conclus. sunt.

The Bill lastly for the Annexing of the County of Dorset to the Jurisdiction
of the Bishopric of Salisbury, was read prima vice.

On Monday the 5. day of April, the Bill for the translating of the Bible, and
other Divine Service into the Welsh Tongue, was read the third time; and a
Proviso added thereunto by the Lords, was also thrice read, and conclus. and
commissa Servienti Carus in Domum Communem deferend.

The Bill for the relief of the Poor was read tertia vice and conclus.

On Tuesday the 6. day of April, Five Bills were brought up to the Lords from
the House of Commons; of which the first being the Bill for the translating of
the Bible into the Welsh Tongue, with three others, was returned, and conclus.
And the fifth, being the Bill touching Curriers, Shoo-makers, and other
Artificers, occupying the working of Leather, was read prima vice.

The Proviso added by the Lords to the Bill for the Town of Southampton, was
read prima, secunda and tertia vice and conclus. and commissa Attornato and
Sollicitatori Dominae Regin. in Domum Communem deferend.

Dominus Custos magni Sigilli continuavit praesens Parliamentum usque in horam
secundam a Meridie.

On the aforesaid Tuesday in the Afternoon, the Bill touching Tanners,
Curriers, Shoomakers, and other Artificers, occupying the working of Leather,
was read secunda vice; Et nota, that the same Bill was read the day following,
tertia vice and conclus.

On Wednesday the 7. day of April, Seven Bills were brought up to the Lords
from the House of Commons; of which the one was for Orders for Bankrupts, their
Goods and Chattels, Lands and Tenements, and another for Retailers of Worsted
Wools in Norwich, and the County of Norfolk, with a Proviso added by the
Commons.

Dominus Custos magni Sigilli continuavit praesens Parliamentum usque in horam
secundam a Meridie.

On the aforesaid Wednesday in the Afternoon, the Bill touching Orders for
Bankrupts, their Goods and Chattels, Lands and Tenements, was read prima vice.

On Thursday the 8. day of April, Three Bills were brought up to the Lords from
the House of Commons; of which the first being the Bill to take away the
Misdemeanors of Purveyors and Takers, was read prima vice.

The Bill for diverse Orders for Artificers, Laborers, Servants of Husbandry,
and Apprentices, was read tertia vice, and conclus. and sent down to the House
of Commons, by Sergeant Carus and Dr Yale.

Two Bills were sent up to the Lords from the House of Commons; the one that
Sanctuary shall not be allowed to defraud any due Debt, And the other was for
the Paving of Kentish Town near Southwark.

The Proviso annexed by the Commons, to the Bill for Retailers of
Worsted-Woolls in Norwich, and the County of Norfolk, was read tertia vice, and
communi omnium Procerum assensu conclus.

The Proviso annexed by the Commons to the Bill for the maintenance of Tillage;
And also one other Proviso annexed to the same Bill, by the Lords, were each of
them read prima, secunda and tertia vice.

On Friday the 9. day of April, the Bill for Tillage was given to Mr Attorney,
and Mr Martin, to be carried to the House of Commons.

The Bill touching Orders of Bankrupts, their Goods and Chattels, Lands and
Tenements, was read secunda vice.

Three Bills were brought up to the Lords, from the House of Commons conclus.;
of which one was touching diverse Orders for Artificers, Laborers, Servants of
Husbandry and Apprentices; And the second for the maintenance of Tillage; And
the third for the due Execution of the Writ de Excommunicato capiendo, with a
Proviso annexed by the Commons, and diverse Amendments; quae prima and secunda
vice lect. sunt; eadem Provis. tertia vice lect a est and conclus.

The Bill to take away the misdemeanors of Purveyors, and Takers, was read the
second time, and committed to Justice Southcot: Quod nota.

The Bill for the destruction of Rooks, Coughs and other Vermin, was brought
up to the Lords, from the House of Commons; which said Bill was on the day
following in the Afternoon read prima vice.

On Saturday the 10th day of April, the Bill for the reviving of a Statute made
Anno xxiiio Hen. 8. touching the making of Goals, with a Proviso thereunto
annexed by the Commons; which said Proviso was read prima, secunda and tertia
vice, and conclus.

The Bill for the Queens Majesty's most free and General Pardon, was read prima
vice, and communi omnium Procerum assensu conclusa.

Nota, That this Bill for the general Pardon, was concluded after the first
reading; whereas to all other Bills three readings are required, before they
can be passed.

The Bill also for Reformation of diverse misdemeanors in Purveyors, was read
tertia vice, with certain Amendments, and conclusa.

And then following the ordinary form, the Parliament was continued in manner
and order accustomed; viz.

Dominus Custos magni Sigilli continuavit praesens Parliamentum usque in horam
primam a Mcridie.

In the Afternoon, the Bill for destruction of Rooks and Coughs, and other
Vermin; And the Bill touching buying and selling of course Woolls, to make
Cottons, etc. were each of them read tertia vice and conclus.

Two Bills were returned from the House of Commons conclus. One to take away
the misdemeanors of Purveyors, and Takers, and the other touching Orders for
Bankrupts, their Goods and Chattels, Lands and Tenements.

Nota, That in the Original Journal Book of the Upper House, next after the
setting down or entering of the two Bills aforesaid to have been returned up to
the Lords, from the House of Commons, there follows immediately the entrance
of the Prorogation of this Session of Parliament; which doubtless happened
through the great negligence of Francis Spilman Esquire at this time Clerk of the
said Upper House: For the Queens Majesty her self, with the Lords both
Spiritual and Temporal was present in her Robes, and gave her Royal Assent to
such Acts as passed; Although no presence of any of the Lords or her Majesty,
be at all marked in the said Original Journal Book. And therefore I have caused
the solemn and stately manner of the Queens coming to the Upper House; with the
several Interlocutory Speeches of the Speaker of the House of Commons, and the
Lord Keeper, to be inserted at large out of a written Copy, or Anonymous
memorial thereof, I had by me, being doubtless the very Original Draught, set
down by some Member of one of the two Houses, or at least by some other
observant person, then present, while the said Speeches passed in the Upper
House; for it is written in a hand and language of that very time, and in many
places amended and interlined.

About three of the Clock (this present Saturday in the Afternoon) the Queens
Majesty came by Water from Whitehall, and landed on the backside of the
Parliament Chamber; and so the Earl of Northumberland, bearing the Sword before
her, the Duchess of Norfolk the Train, she proceeded up into her
Privy-Chamber, and there Apparelled her self in her Parliament Robes; during
which time the Lords likewise put on their Robes, and took their Places.

On the Upper Sack sat the Lord Keeper, till the Queen came, and then he went
to his place, at the Rail, on the right hand to the Cloth of Estate: On the
Wooll-sack on the North-side, sat Sir Robert Catlin, and Sir James Dyer, the
two Chief Justices, Sir John Mason, and Sergeant Carus, Mr Ruswell the Queens
Solicitor, and Doctor Yale.

On the Sack on the South Side, sat Sir William Cecill Secretary. Sir William
Cordall Master of the Rolls, Justice Weston, Sergeant Southcott, Mr Gerrard the
Queens Attorney, and Doctor Jews.

On the nether Sack sat Mr Spilman, Clerk of the Parliament, Mr Powle Deputy
and joint Patentee with Mr Martin, Clerk of the Crown, Mr Heming and some
Clerks of the Signet, Dister and Permiter, before which nether Sack stood a
little Table.

Then the Queens Majesty, being Apparelled in her Parliament Robes, with a Caul
on her Head, came forth, and proceeded up, and took the Seat; the Duke of
Norfolk, as Earl Marshal, with his gilt Rod, before her, with the Marquess of
Northampton bearing the Cap of Maintenance, and stood on her right hand, and
the Earl of Northumberland the Sword, on her left hand; the Queens Mantle born
over her Arms by the Lord Admiral, and Lord of Hunsdon; her Train born by the
Duchess of Norfolk, assisted by the Lord Chamberlain, and Mr Astley Master of
the Jewel-House; and so her Majesty being placed, the Duke of Norfolk, the Lord
Admiral, and the Lord Hunsdon, took their places, and from time to time, as her
Majesty stood up, her Mantle over her Arms, was assisted up with the Lord
Robert Dudley, Master of the Horse, and Sir Francis Knowles Vice-Chamberlain.

Then all being placed, Mr Williams the Speaker was brought in between Sir
Edward Rogers Comptroller, and Sir Ambrose Cave Chancellor of the Duchy; and
after one obeisance made proceeded down to the Wall, and from thence came up to
the Rail, in the way making three Obeysances; and after he was up at the Rail,
he made three Obeysances, and then began his Oration, as follows.

THis it is, most Excellent and Virtuous Princess, etc. As nature gives to
every reasonable Creature to speak, so it is a grace to be well learned; and I
presenting the Mouth of such a Body, as cannot speak for it self; and in the
presence of your Majesty's Person and Nobles, must most humbly desire and crave
of your Highness, to bear with my imperfections.

This Commonwealth has been by Gods Providence first instituted, and since by
Man's Policy continued, wherein Justice and good Counsel is most to be
preferred; for Ancient Lawmakers, and Authors of good Laws, be worthy to be
praised, and had in perpetual remembrance; and such are the Laws that we have
made in this Commonwealth, as (in mine Opinion) do excel and pass all other
humane Laws.

Amongst diverse Authors of good Laws, we have set forth unto us, to the end
they should not be forgotten, three Queens; the first Palestina the Queen,
Reigning before the Deluge, who made Laws as well concerning Peace as War.

The second was Ceres the Queen, which made Laws concerning evil doers; And the
third was Marc. Wife of Bathilacus, Mother to Stillicus the King, who enacted
Laws for the maintenance and preservation of the good and well-doers.

And since that time, Etheldred a King in this Realm, Established Laws, and set
in most beaten, high, and cross ways, a Cross, and therein a Hand, with a Ring
of Gold, pointing to the most usual way, which also stood untaken away or
diminished during his Life.

And so you are the fourth Queen, Establisher of good Laws, our most dread
Sovereign Lady, for your time as happy as any of the three, which happiness for
the present I let slip, and desire, as all our hearts do, that some happy
Marriage to your contentation might shortly be brought to pass; your Majesty
findings this Realm out of Order, and full of Abuses, have continually had a
special care to reform the said Abuses; and for the more expelling thereof,
have Congregated together this Assembly, whereby partly to your Contentation,
for Reformation of the same, to its old pristine Estate, and for Money and
Peace, is all that chiefly we have done; for which purposes we have agreed upon
and made certain Laws, which until your Majesty have granted your Royal Assent,
and so given Life thereunto, cannot be called Laws.

And herein requiring of your Majesty three Petitions, two for the Commons, and
one for my self; the first for such Laws as they have made, being as yet
without Life, and so no Laws, that it would please your Majesty to grant your
Royal Assent unto them; Secondly, that your Highness would accept their doings
in good part, that the imperfections of their Labors, by your acceptance may
be supplied; for, as appears in sundry Histories, the persons of those
Princes and Subjects have long continued, which have well used themselves one
toward the other; which without neglecting of my duty, I cannot in your presence
so let slip; for, as it appears in diverse Histories, the Noble Alexander
having presented unto him by one of his poor Soldiers the Head of one of his
Enemies, he, not forgetting the Service of his Soldier, although herein he had
done but his Duty, gave unto him a Cup of Gold, which first the Soldier
refused; but after that Alexander had Commanded it to be filled with Wine, and
delivered him, he received it, whereby appears the Noble and Liberal Heart of
the said Alexander.

Also Xenophon writing of the Life of Cyrus, who being liberal of Gifts, having
vanquished Craesus, and he marvelled at his liberality, said, it were better to
keep it by him, than so liberally to depart from it; unto whom Cyrus answered,
That his Treasure was innumerable; and appointed Craesus a day, to see the
same; and thereupon took Order, that his Subjects should before that time bring
in their Treasure; which being innumerable, and more than Cyrus by any other
means could have given, Craesus much wondered thereat; Cyrus said, thou causest
me to take of my Subjects, and retain the same; but what need I to take, when
they so frankly will bring it unto me? and so as occasion serves, ready
continually to supply my want? therefore how can I be but rich, having such
Subjects? but if they by my means or any other were poor, then were I poor also.

Which two worthy Examples of Alexander and Cyrus, your Majesty has not
forgotten to ensue; but with the like zeal have hitherto always used us, and
now especially at this present, by your most gracious and free Pardon; for the
which, and all other, they by me their Mouth, do most humbly thank you;
knowledging such, and so much love and zeal of their parts toward your
Majesty, as ever any Subjects did bear toward their Prince and Governor. And
in token thereof, with one Assent do offer to your Highness, one Subsidy and
two Fifteens, most humbly beseeching your Majesty to accept it, not in
recompense of your benefits, but as a Token of their Duty, as the poor Widows
Farthing was accepted, as appears in the Scripture.

Thirdly, That it may also like your Majesty, to accept my humble thanks in
allowing, and admitting me, being unworthy of this place, and bearing with my
unworthy service; and last of all, my unfitting words, uplandish and rude
Speech; beseeching God to incline your Majesty's Heart to Marriage, and that he
will so bless, and send such good success thereunto, that we may see the Fruits
and Children, that may come thereof, so that you, and they, may prosperously,
and as long time Reign over us, as ever did any Kings or Princes, which God for
his Mercies sake grant unto us. And so he ended, making his Obeisance.

Then the Queen called the Lord Keeper unto her, Commanding him, in her Name,
to Answer him, as she then declared unto him; which follows.

Mr Speaker, The Queens Majesty has heard how humbly and discreetly you have
declared the Proceedings, and for Answer has Commanded me, that I should utter
three or four things, the first for her Royal Assent to the Acts made at this
Parliament; Secondly, How comfortably, and also thankfully, her Majesty
accepts your Liberality; And thirdly, For the Executing of the Laws.

Here my Lords and Masters, although I cannot declare, or open it unto you, as
her Majesty has Commanded me; and therefore willingly would hold my Tongue, if
I might, which, for that I cannot be so excused, say unto you as follows; not
doubting of her Highness Clemency in bearing with me herein.

First, Her Majesty considers how wisely you have done, for the abolishing of
the Romish Power, the Common Enemy of this Realm; remembering your care for the
defense of the same Realm, your respects for the maintenance of Victual, the
banishment of Vagabonds, and relief of the Poor, with other: And therefore
allows your worthy Proceedings herein.

Secondly, Your Liberality and Benevolence, wherein your wise Considerations
toward her Charges, is by her Majesty taken in thankful part; and I take it to
be my Duty, to put you in remembrance, that although this Subsidy is made, and
to be born by Subjects, not daily accustomed thereunto; but that at her first
entrance she had the like; and that the grant thereof is more liberal than
before has been accustomed, and that it is of your necessity, yet it is to
withstand a greater necessity, that for fault thereof would else have ensued;
and therefore that penny is well spent that saves a groat; which also has
been granted, neither with persuasions, threats, nor sharp words, which before
this time has been accustomed, but by one general consent of you all; wherein
appears your good wills, and benevolent minds, you bear to her Majesty, which
zeal she most accepts; and as she has cause, thanketh you.

Again, by her Majesty's Commandment, she remembering by whom, why, and to whom
this was granted, does think as freely as you have granted the most part
whereof has been accepted, and lest those that have so freely offered should
not be so ready toward the gathering, thinks it much better to lose the sum
granted, than to lose your benevolent minds.

Thirdly, To the Execution of Laws, I have little to say, although the whole
substance consists therein; because I did in the beginning of this Parliament
declare my Opinion in that matter; and therefore, as now you have to your
Charges taken pains in making good Laws, so put to your helps, to see these and
all other Executed; for as it is infallible, that a thing done unconstrained,
is much better than when they be constrained thereunto, even so her Majesty
wills you to look well, without more words, to the Execution, lest her Grace
should be driven to do, as she does in her Ecclesiastical Laws, make
Commissions to inquire, whether they be done or no; whereby she shall know
those Justices and Officers, who have done their Duty, and are to be used in
service of Justice, whereof her Majesty desires to have many; and again she
shall understand who are to be barred from the like rooms, and the penal
Statutes to be on them Executed, after this gentle warning: which inquiry I
know is like to fall on me, as well as another. Howbeit, if Justice be not
Executed, I shall be glad to see this Order taken. Notwithstanding, her Majesty
hops that this her admonition shall not need, for that you see Laws without
Execution, be as a Torch unlighted, or Body without a Soul: therefore look well
to the Executing. Here ends the three things, which her Majesty commanded me
to say unto you.

Besides this, her Majesty has to Answer your Petitions, and as to the first,
in which you desire her Royal Assent to such matters as you have agreed upon;
to that she says, how at this present she is come for that purpose.

And for your other Petitions, to accept in good part, as well your service as
the travails and doings of the nether House, this Parliament; and to that she
Answers, how that she does not only accept them in good part, but also
thanketh both you, and them for the same.

And touching your request before this made unto her, for her Marriage and
Succession, because it is of such importance, whereby I doubted my own opening
thereof, and therefore desire her Majesty, that her meaning might be written,
which she has done and delivered to me, to be read as follows.

SInce there can be no duer Debt than Princes words, which I would observe,
therefore I Answer to the same; thus it is. The two Petitions, which you made
unto me, do contain two things; my Marriage, and Succession after me. For the
first, If I had let slip too much time, or if my strength had been decayed, you
might the better have spoke therein; or if any think I never meant to try that
Life, they be deceived; but if I may hereafter bend my mind thereunto, the
rather for fulfilling your request, I shall be therewith very well content.

For the second, the greatness thereof makes me to say and pray, that I may
linger here in this Vale of Misery for your Comfort, wherein I have witness of
my Study and Travail, for your Surety; And I cannot with Nunc dimittis, end my
Life, without I see some foundation of your Surety after my Grave Stone.

These foregoing Speeches being thus transcribed out of the very Autograph, or
Original Memorial of them, as aforesaid; now follows the form and manner of her
Majesty's Royal Assent to such Acts as passed.

Sir Nicholas Bacon, Lord Keeper, Commanded the Clerk of the Crown to read the
Acts; whereupon Mr Thomas Powle, as Joint-Patentee, and in the absence of Mr
Martin, Clerk of the Crown, stood up before the little Table, set before the
Wooll-sacks, and after Obeisance made, began to read the Titles of the same, as
follows.

An Act for the Assurance of the Queens Majesty's Royal Power over all States
and Subjects, within her Dominions.

Then Francis Spilman Esquire Clerk of the Upper House, standing up, after
Obeisance made, read her Majesty's Answer, in these words; viz.

La Roigne le veult.

And then both the Clerk of the Crown, and the Clerk of the Upper House, made
Obeisance together.

Thomas Powle Esquire Clerk of the Crown, standing up, did read the Title of the
Bill of Subsidy, and then Francis Spilman Esquire Clerk of the Upper House,
standing up likewise, did read the Queens Majesty's Answer, in manner and form
following; viz.

La Roigne remercye ses loyaulx subjects, accept leur benevolence, and ainsi le
veult.

The said Clerk, having read the Queens Acceptance and thanks for the Subsidy
given as aforesaid, did then, upon the reading of the Title of her Majesty's
Pardon, by the Clerk of the Crown as aforesaid, pronounce in these French words
following, the thanks of the Lords and Commons for the same.

Les Prelates, Seigneurs and Communes en ce present Parliament Assembles, au nom
de touts vous autres subjects, remercient tres humblement vostre Majestye, and
prient a Dieu que ils vous done en sante bonne vie, and longue.

The Bills of Subsidy and Pardon being passed, then were the Titles of the
public Acts read by the Clerk of the Crown; to every one of which allowed by
the Queen, the Clerk of the Upper House read these French words following; viz.

La Roigne le veult.

To every private Act that passed, the said Clerk of the Upper House read the
Queens Answer, in these French words following.

Soit fait come il est desire.

These two last Answers to the public and private Acts, that pass, are to be
written by the said Clerk at the end of every Act.

To such Acts as her Majesty did forbear to allow, the Clerk of the Upper-House
read in these French words following, viz.

La Roigne s'advisera.

Her Majesty having given her Royal Assent to such Acts as passed, in manner
and form as aforesaid, then Sir Nicholas Bacon, Lord Keeper of the Great Seal,
Prorogued this Session of Parliament by her Majesty's Commandment, to a further
day; which is thus entered in the Original Journal Book of the Upper House, viz.

Dominus Custos magni Sigilli ex Mandato Dominae Reginae Prorogavit praesens
Parliamentum usque in secundum diem Octobris proximum futurum.

After which (as is contained in the often beforementioned Anonymous
Autograph, or Original Memorial of this days passages) the Queen rose, and
proceeded into her Privy-Chamber, and shifted, and then proceeded to her Barge,
and so to the Court, which was about six of the Clock in the Afternoon.

That which follows, being the second Prorogation of this foregoing Session,
de an. 5 Regin. Eliz. is entered at large at the beginning of the Original
Journal Book of the Upper House, de an. 8, and 9 Reginae ejusdem; being the
second and last Session of this present Parliament; yet because it fell out
within this fifth Year, and may indifferently be referred to the Upper House
Journal of either Session, I thought good in the transcribing of it to cause it
to be annexed, and added to this present Journal in manner and form following.

Memorandum, quod secundo die Octobris, Anno Regni Elizabethae, Dei Gratia,
etc. Quinto, in quent diem 10o die Aprilis ultimo elapso Prorogatum fuit hoc
praesens Parliamentum, ex Mandato dictae Dominae Reginae, convenerunt Domini
tam spirituales quam temporales, quorum nomina subsequuntur, viz.

Marchio Wintoniae Thesaurarius Angliae, Episcopus London, Episcopus Wintoniae,
Dominus North, Dominus Mordaunt.

Qui cum convenissent, adstantibus tunc etiam Populi Burgensiumque ut vocant
satis magna frequentia, dictus Dominus Thesaurarius paucis verbis declaravit
conventum Procerum and Populi, quem Parliamentum vocant, in hunc diem
destinatum, a dict a Domina Regina, certis quibusdam de causis and
considerationibus illam ad id specialiter moventibus, maxim propter
infectionem Aeris pestiferi per Civitates London, and Westmonaster. ac suburbia
earundem, ad praesens grassantem, differri in quintum diem Octobris qui erit in
Anno Domini Millesimo quingentesimo sexagesimo quarto; Atque ut tam Proceribus
quam Populo palam fieret Regiam Majestatem it a constituisse, Literas
commissarias dictae Dominae Reginae, Francisco Spilman Armigero Clerico
Parliamenti public and clara voce legendas, in manus tradidit: earum autem
tenor hic erat.

Elizabeth Dei Gratia Angliae, Franciae, and Hiberniae Regina, fidei defensor,
etc. Charissimo Consanguineo, Willielmo Marchioni Winton. The saurario Angliae,
ac reverendis in Christo Patribus, Edmundo Episcopo London, Roberto Episcopo
Winton, Willielmo Episcopo Cicestrensi, nec non praedilectis and fidelibus
suis, Henrico Domino Morley, Arthuro Domino Gray de Wilton, Edwardo Domino
Windsor, and Johanni Domino Mordannt, salutem. Cum nos nuper pro quibusdam
arduis and urgentibus negotiis, nos, statum and defensionem Regni nostri
Angliae, ac Ecclesiae Anglicanae concernentibus, praesens hoc Parliamentum
nostrum, apud Civitatem nostram Westmonasterii, duo-decimo die Januarii, Anno
Regni nostri quinto, inchoari and teneri ordinaverimus, a quo die idem
Parliamentum tunc and ibidem tentum and continuatum fuerat usque decimum diem
Aprilis, tunc prox. sequentem, codemque decimo die Aprilis idem Parliamentum
nostrum usque ad and in instantem secundum diem Octobris prorogatum fuerat,
ibidemque tunc tenendum and continuandum: Sciatis quod nos, certis urgentibus
causis and considerationibus nos specialiter moventibus, and praecipue propter
infectionem Aeris pestiferi ubique per Civitates nostras London, and
Westminster and earundem Suburbia ad praesens invalescentem, de fidelitate,
prudentia and Circumspectione vestris plurinium confidentes, de avisamento and
assensu Concilii nostri assignavinius vos, and duos vestrum, dantes vobis, and
duobus vestrum tenore praesentium plenam potestatem, sucultatem, and
Authoritatem hoc instanti die Sabbathi, ad praesens Parliamentum nostrum,
nomine nostro, ad and in quintum diem Octobris qui erit in Anno Domini
Millesimo quingentesimo sexagesimo quarto, usque Civitatem nostram
Westmonasterii praedict. Prorogandum and continuandum, ibidemque tune tenend.
and presequend., and ideo vobis Mandamus, quod circa praemissa diligenter
intendatis, and ea in forma praedicta effectualiter explicetis. Damus autem
universis and singulis Archiepiscopis, Ducibus, Marchionibus, Comitibus,
Vice-Comitibus, Episcopis, Baronibus, Militibus, Civibus and Burgensibus, ac
omnibus aliis quorum interest, ad dictum Parliamentum nostrum conventuris,
tenore praesentium firmiter in Mandatis, quod vobis in praemissis faciend.
agend and exequend. pareant, obediant and intendant, prout decct. In cujus rei
Testimonium, has Literas nostras fieri fecimus Patentes. Test meipsa apud
Castrum nostrum de Windsor secundo die Octobris, Anno Regni nostri Quinto.

After which second time of Prorogation, in manner and form abovesaid, it was
again Prorogued three several times as aforesaid; all which Prorogations are at
large set down in the beginning of the Journal of the Upper House, in the
Session of Parliament in Anno 8 Regin. Eliz.

THE JOURNAL OF THE House of COMMONS.
A Journal of the Passages of the House of Commons in the Session of Parliament
bolden at Westminster, An. Dom. 1562. which began (after one Prorogation of the
same) on Tuesday the 12th of January, and then and there continued until the
Prorogation thereof upon Saturday the 10th day of April, An. D. 1563.

THE Journal of this present Session of Parliament, is not only furnished with
many good Ordinary passages, touching the reading, engrossing, and passing of
Bills; but also with some unusual and remarkable matter, concerning the
Privileges of the House it self, and with the return of diverse Burgesses from
certain Burrough-Towns, who had for some time before discontinued that their
Privilege. And although that..... Seymour Esquire continued still Clerk of the
House of Commons, by which means the agitations of the said House were, for the
most part, very imperfectly recorded by him in the Original Journal Book of the
same, so that the referring of a Bill to Committees is scarce discoverable, in
respect that the name only of one of them is for the most part mentioned; yet
the manner of the Burgesses taking the Oath of Supremacy (which was never in
use before this Session of Parliament, it having been enjoined by Statute in
the first year of her Majesty's Reign) together with the manner of the Election
and Presentment of the Speaker, is very Methodically and Orderly entered. And
lastly, whereas there is mention made in the Original Journal Book of the House
of Commons aforesaid, that the Speaker with the whole House did exhibit their
Petition to the Queens Majesty, on Thursday 23. day of January, in the
Afternoon, touching her Marriage, and the Limitation of the Succession of the
Crown, which said Petition is there omitted, I have therefore caused it to be
inserted at large, out of a Copy thereof I had by me, which I gather by all
concurring circumstances, to be the very same, which is only generally
remembered in the said Original Journal-Books, as aforesaid.

The second Parliament of the most Noble Princess Elizabeth, by the Grace of
God Queen of England, etc. begun at Westminster on Monday the 11. day of
January, in the fifth Year of her Gracious Reign; By her Highness Commission
directed to the Lord Keeper of the Great Seal, the Lord Steward, the Lord
Treasurer, the Duke of Norfolk, etc. to Prorogue the same Parliament until the
12. day of the same Month, viz. the Morrow following; And the Knights and
Burgesses, being sent for to come unto the Lords in the Upper House, without
any appearance of their names taken then by the Lord Steward, and Lord
Treasurer, the Lord Keeper showed in few words, that the Queens Majesty was
somewhat sick of a Stitch; wherefore she had sent her Writ for the Prorogation,
until the Morrow, which was done accordingly.

And on the Morrow, being the 12. day of January, about ten of the Clock, the
Queens Majesty, with the Lords and Bishops in Parliament Robes, did ride from
the Palace to Westminster-Church, and there heard a Sermon; during which the
Earl of Arundel, being Lord Steward, repaired unto Whitehall, and there
Recorded the Appearance of the Knights and Burgesses; at which time also (as
may very well be collected by comparing this instant days passages, with those
of Thursday the third day of October, in the Journal of the House of Commons,
de an. 8, and 9 Regin. Eliz. following) the said Lord Steward did doubtless,
either in his own person, or by his Deputies administer the Oath of Supremacy
(according to the Statute, de an. 1 Eliz. Cap. 1.) to such Knights, Citizens
and Burgesses, as were at this time present, and appeared.

And after, the Queen coming from the Church, and being set in her Royal Seat
in the Upper House, and the Commons standing at the lower end of the Chamber;
The Lord Keeper of the Great Seal, with great Eloquence, declared this
Parliament to be called for Religion, Discipline, and Aid to the State in
defense of Enemies with Excellent Dilation of those Causes; And in the end
willed the Commons to repair to their House, and there to choose a discreet,
grave, and wise man, to be their Speaker, and to present him to the Queens
Majesty, on Friday next in the Afternoon; immediately the Commons resorted to
their Common House, where after they were set, Mr Comptroller standing up,
rehearsed the Lord Keepers Oration, for the Election of a Speaker, and said,
that in his Opinion, Mr Thomas Williams Esquire, one of the Fellows of the
Inner Temple, being grave, learned and wise, was very meet to that Office;
whereupon the whole House with one entire Voice, cried Mr Williams, Mr
Williams; And then Mr Williams standing up, and reverently disabling himself,
required the House to proceed to a new Election; unto whom Mr Secretary Cecill
Answering that the House had gravely considered of him; and therefore required
him to take the place; and he approaching was led and set in the Chair by Mr
Comptroller; and it was agreed by the House to meet all there again on Friday
next, at one of the Clock in the Afternoon, to present Mr Speaker to the Queens
Majesty.

On Friday the 15th of January, in the Afternoon, Mr Speaker, with the rest of
the House of Commons, went before the Queen in her Royal Seat, where Mr Speaker
most humbly disabled himself, requiring that a new Election might be made, to
the which the Queens Majesty, confirming the same Election, by the Mouth of the
Lord Keeper, Mr Speaker made an Excellent Oration, and in the end made the
accustomed Petitions; which being granted, the Lord Keeper willed him with the
rest, to resort to the House of Commons, there to deliberate upon matters
necessary; which being done,

The Bill for increase of Woods in Champain Grounds, and saving of Bark of
Timber to be felled, was read the first time.

On Saturday the 16. day of January, Two Bills of no great moment, had each of
them one reading; of which one was touching Servants to serve their Masters;
And the other to put down an Iron-Mill near Guilford, and were each of them
read the first time.

A motion was this day made by a Burgess at length, for the Succession of the
Crown; of which see more, on Thursday the 28th day of this Instant January
ensuing.

January the 17th day Sunday.

On Monday the 18th day of January, Five Bills of no great moment, had each of
them one and the first reading; of which the second was the Bill for the
assurance of the Manors of Whiteacre, and Whiteacre Burgh, to Richard Bertie
and Katherine Duchess of Suffolk his Wife, from Walter Herenden, being a
Feoffee in Trust.

Certain Arguments were this day had in the House, by diverse wise Personages,
for motion to be made for the Queens Marriage, and Succession of the Crown.

On Tuesday the 19th day of January, the Bill for allowance to Sheriffs upon
their Accounts, for Justices Diets, was read the first time.

Mr Speaker with the Counsel, and twenty four more of the House, were appointed
to meet this Afternoon, to draw Articles of Petition for the Queens Marriage,
and Succession. Vide Concerning this business, on Thursday the 28. day of this
Instant January following; Mr Comptroller is nominated one of them.

For that it seemed to the House, being very full, that they were a greater
number than were returned; therefore the names were immediately called, and as
they were called, they departed out of the House, and in the end ten or eleven
remained, who said they were returned, and would bring Warrants thereof.

On Wednesday the 20. day of January, Two Bills of no great moment, had each of
them one reading; of which the second, being the Bill for allowance to
Sheriffs, upon their Accounts for Justices Diets, was read the second time; and
as it should seem Committed to Mr Sackvill, and others; see a like President on
the day following.

A motion was made by a Burgess for a Subsidy.

The Queens Sergeant and Attorney brought a Bill from the Lords, touching the
Garrison of Barwick.

An Excellent Declaration was this day made by Mr Secretary Cecill, of the
great Charges defrayed by the Queens Majesty, and of the Causes of the Wars in
France, for not keeping the Edict there made by the Parliament, and also
touching the Charges at Barwicke, and New Haven, the Provision of Armor, and
the Navy, the Cavillation of the French for Callice, concluding to consider for
the Aid.

The Bill lastly, for the Government of the Garrison, and Soldiers of Barwick,
was read the first time.

On Thursday the 21. day of January. For that it is said, that Mr Elrington
has interest in the Iron-Mill in the Town of Shere in Surrey, whereas the Bill
is to put down the same: It was resolved, that Mr Speaker should direct his
Letter to him, in the name of the House, to come and show, if he will, for
saving his Estate therein; Vide touching this business, on Saturday the 30. day
of this Instant January ensuing.

The Bill against breaking of Ponds, and Stealing of Fish and Conies, was read
the first time.

A like Letter was sent also to the Heir of Walter Herenden, for the Lands
claimed by Mr Barty, and the Duchess of Suffolk.

The Bill to revive diverse Acts to be Felony.

Mr Sidney.

By which manner of Entering the Title of the said Bill, it may plainly be
collected, that the Bill it self, had at this time its second reading, and was
thereupon committed to Mr Sidney aforesaid (to whom it seems the Bill was
delivered) and others, whose names are omitted.

The Queens Sergeant and others brought a Bill from the Lords, touching the
Repeal of a branch for conveying of Horses; which Bill was presently read the
first time.

On Friday the 22th day of January, Mr Elrington, Owner of the Iron-Mill in
Shere; for the suppressing of which, a Bill was put into this House; desired a
Copy of the Bill, and a day to Answer with his learned Counsel two in number;
and to bring his Answer on Friday next.

Three Bills of no great moment, had each of them one reading; of which the
second being the Bill against carrying of Horses out of the Realm, was secunda
vice lect.; but no mention is made, that it was either Ordered to be engrossed,
or referred to Committees, because it had been formerly sent down from the
Lords. And the last, being the Bill for the Government of the Garrison and
Soldiers of Barwick, was read the second time, and (as it should seem) was
committed to Mr Fitz-Chamberlain (mistaken for Mr Vice-Chamberlain and others;)
Vide a like President on Thursday the 21th day of this instant January
foregoing.

For that Burgesses be returned of diverse Boroughs, not lately returned in the
Chancery; viz. the Burgess of Tregony, St Jermynes, and Maws in Cornwall, the
Borough of Minked in Somersetshire, the Borough of Tamworth in Stafford, and
the Borough of Stankbridge in Southampton, Mr Speaker declared to the House,
that the Lord Steward agreed they should resort into the House, and with
convenient speed to show Letters Patents, why they be returned into this
Parliament.

Nota, That it was very common and ordinary in former times to avoid the
Charges of their Burgesses allowance, in time of Parliament (when the Town grew
into any poverty or decay) that the Boroughs did either get License of the
Sovereign for the time being, to be discharged from such Election and
Attendance, or did by degrees discontinue it themselves; but of later times,
the Knights, Citizens and Burgesses of the House of Commons, for the most part
bearing their own Charges, many of those Borough-Towns, who had discontinued
their former privilege, by not sending, did again recontinue it (as these
Towns here) both during her Majesty's Reign, and afterward in the Reign of
King James her Successor.

On Saturday the 23th day of January, Three Bills had each of them one reading;
of which the third being the Bill for levying of Fines in the County Palatine
of Durham, was read the second time, and Ordered to be engrossed.

The Bill to repeal the branch for carrying of Horses out of the Realm, was
read the third time and passed upon the Question.

Three other Bills had each of them one reading, of which the last being the
Bill to avoid Aliens, not being Denizens, nor being here for Religion nor
Conscience sake, was upon the second reading rejected, and the Bill torn.

On Monday the 25th day of January, Two Bills of no great moment, had each of
them one reading; of which the first being the Bill for Oak-Timber,
preservation of Bark, was read the second time, and thereupon rejected and torn.

Certain Articles in writing, were objected by the Burgesses of Barwick,
against the Bill of Barwick, which was sent down by the Lords.

For that Jews Mountgomery Esquire, is returned Burgess for Northampton, and also
for Dorchester, and does appear for Northampton, a new Writ de Burgens.
eligendo, was required for Dorchester.

The Queens Council with twenty four of the Shires, and fix of Wales were
appointed, on Wednesday next to meet in the Star Chamber, for Order to be
taken, concerning the Subsidy.

On Tuesday the 26th day of January, Two Bills had each of them one reading; of
which the second being the Bill that Apothecaries, and their Stuff, shall be
under the search of the College of Physicians, was read the first time.

A Petition devised by the Committees (who were appointed on Tuesday the 19th
day of this instant January foregoing, although their names be wholly omitted,
through the Clerks negligence) to be made to the Queens Majesty by Mr Speaker,
for limitation of Succession, was read by Mr Norton, one of the Committees. And
thereupon the Queens Privy Council were required to move her Majesty, that Mr
Speaker with the whole House, may exhibit to her Highness that Petition, and to
certify her Highness pleasure. Vide touching this business on Thursday the
28th day of this instant January ensuing in Pomeridiano.

The Bill touching carrying of Horses out of the Realm, was sent up to the
Lords, by Mr Comptroller, with a request to the Lords, to further the Petition
of this House to the Queens Majesty, touching Marriage and Succession; which
was well allowed of by the Lords. Vide on Thursday the 28th day of this instant
January following.

For that Francis Walsinghaw. returned Burgess for Linn in Dorsetshire, and for
Banbury in Oxfordshire, does appear for Linne, a new Writ de Burgens. eligend.
was required for Banbury.

On Wednesday the 27th day of January, the Bill touching Curriers to buy
Tann'd-Leather, to work and sell it, was read the second time, and (as it
should seem) was committed to Mr. Crosts, and others not named. Vide a like
President on Thursday the 21th day of this instant January foregoing.

Mr. Comptroller with the rest of the Council, declared, that the Queens
Majesty would receive the Petition to Morrow in the Afternoon, at the Palace,
by Mr. Speaker, with the whole House; of which see more on the day immediately
ensuing.

Mr. Comptroller with the Committees for the Bill of Subsidy, were appointed to
meet this Afternoon in the Star Chamber.

On Thursday the 28th day of January, the Bill for Badgers of Corn to be bound
by Recognizance, in the open Sessions, was read the first time.

Post Meridiem.

In the Afternoon Mr. Speaker, with the whole House (with a Notable Oration)
did exhibit their Petition to the Queens Majesty, in the Gallery at the Palace,
touching Marriage and Succession; which her Highness thankfully accepted (with
an Excellent Oration) deferring the Answer to further time, for the gravity of
the Cases. What further Answer her Majesty gave, may be seen on Thursday the
16th day of February ensuing, and on Saturday the 10th day of April postea.

But as touching the Petition delivered to her Majesty this Afternoon, by the
whole House, from the Mouth of Mr. Speaker, it is not at all contained in the
Original Journal Book of the House of Commons; and therefore having a Copy of
it by me (which I do gather by all concurring circumstances, to be the very
same here mentioned, both in respect of the time and matter) I have caused it
to be inserted at large. I am not ignorant, that in diverse Copies of this
Speech, another Petition also is joined with it, as preferred likewise by the
Lords to her Majesty, at this time, for the same Causes, which in truth
happened not until the second Session of this Parliament following, Anno 8, and
9 Regin. Elizabethae; neither shall it be needful to make any further
demonstration thereof in this place, having so fully cleared it in the Upper
House Journal, at that aforesaid second Session ensuing, upon Tuesday the 5th
day of November; and now follows the Copy of the abovementioned Petition, at
this time preferred as aforesaid.

Your Commons in this your Majesty's present Parliament Assembled, most High
and Mighty Princess, our most Dread Sovereign Lady, as they do daily, to their
Commodity and Comfort, feel and receive the inestimable benefits of your most
Gracious Government of this your Realm, in Peace and Surety, so do also most
thankfully acknowledge the same, beseeching Almighty God long to bless and
continue your most prosperous Reign over them; And among all these benefits
which they daily receive of your Highness, they have at this time willed me, in
their names to recognize unto your Highness, that they account it not the
least, but rather among the greatest of them all, That your Majesty has at
this time Assembled your Parliament, for supplying and redressing the greatest
wants and defaults in your Commonweal, and for the establishing the surety of
the same; which your Majesty's most gracious meaning, has been at your
Commandment, signified unto us, by the Right Honorable the Lord Keeper of your
Great Seal of England, namely in this, that he willed us first to have
consideration of the greatest matters that nearest touched the State of the
Realm, and the preservation thereof, seeming therein also to express unto us
the Conformity of your Majesty's mind, in having principal respect to the
matters of greatest weight; and for that respect Assembling this your
Parliament. And for as much as your said Subjects see nothing in this whole
Estate of so great importance to your Majesty, and the whole Realm, nor so
necessary at this time to be reduced to certainty, as the sure continuance of
the Government of the Imperial Crown thereof, and the most honorable Issue of
your Body (which Almighty God send us to your Highness Comfort) and for want
thereof, in some certain limitation to guide the Obedience of our Posterity;
And where Almighty God to our great Terror and dreadful Warning, lately touched
your Highness with some danger of your most Noble Person by Sickness, from
which so soon as your Grace was by Gods favor and mercy to us recovered, your
Highness sent out your Writs of Parliament, by force whereof your Subjects are
at this time Assembled; your said Subjects are both by the necessity and
importance of the matter, and by the convenience of the time of Calling them
immediately upon your recovery, enforced to gather, and confess, that your
Majesty of your most Gracious and Motherly Care for them, and their Posterity,
have Summoned this Parliament, principally for establishing of some certain
limitation of the Imperial Crown of your Realm, for preservation of your
Subjects, from certain and utter destruction; (if the same should not be
provided in your Life, which God long continue;) They cannot, I say, but
acknowledge your Majesty has most graciously considered the great dangers, the
unspeakable miseries of civil Wars, the perilous and intermingling of Foreign
Princes with seditious, ambitious, and factious Subjects at home, the waste of
noble Houses, the slaughter of People, subversions of Towns, intermission of
all things pertaining to the maintenance of the Realm, unsurety of all men's
Possessions, Lives and Estates, daily interchange of Attainders and Treasons;
All these mischiefs, and infinite others, most likely and evident, if your
Majesty should be taken from us, without known Heir, (which God forbid) to fall
upon your Subjects, to the utter subversion of the whole, whereof you have
Charge under God: If good provision should not be had in this behalf. Your
Majesty has weighed the Examples of Foreign Nations, as what ensued the Death
of Great Alexander, when for want of certain Heirs by him begotten, or
appointed, the variety of Titles, the diversity of Dispositions in them that
had Titles, the ambition of them that under color of doubtfulness of Titles,
forsook all obedience of Titles, destroyed his Dominions, and wasted Posterity
with mutual Wars and Slaughters: In what miserable Case also was this Realm it
self, when the Title of the Crown was tossed in question, between the two Royal
Houses of Lancaster and York, till your most Noble Progenitors Henry the
Seventh, and the Lady Elizabeth his Wife, restored it to a settled Unity, and
left the Crown in a certain course of Succession? These things, as your Majesty
has upon your own danger most graciously considered for our Comfort and
Safety; so we most humble Subjects, knowing the preservation of our selves, and
all our Posterity, to depend upon the safety of your Majesty's most Royal
Person, have most carefully and diligently considered, how the want of Heirs of
your Body, and certain limitation of Succession after you, is most perilous to
your Highness, whom God long preserve amongst us. We have been admonished of
the great malice of your Foreign Enemies, which even in your Lifetime have
sought to transfer the Dignity and Right of your Crown, to a Stranger; we have
noted their daily most dangerous practices against your Life and Reign; We have
heard of some Subjects of this Land, most unnaturally confederated with your
Enemies, to attempt the destruction of your Majesty, and us all that live by
you; We fear a Faction of Heretics in your Realm, Contentious and malicious
Papists, lest they most unnaturally against their Country, most madly against
their own Safety, and most treacherously against your Highness, not only hope
for the woeful day of your Death, but also lay in wait to advance some Title,
under which they may revive their late unspeakable Cruelty, to the destruction
of Goods, Possessions, and Bodies, and thraldom of the Souls and Consciences of
your faithful and Christian Subjects; We see nothing to withstand their desire,
but your only Life, their Unkindness and Cruelty we have tasted; we fear much
to what attempt the hope of such opportunity (nothing withstanding them but
your Life) will move them; We find how necessary it is for your preservation,
that there be more set and known between your Majesty's Life and their desire;
We see on the other side, how there can be no such danger to your Majesty, by
ambition of any Apparent Heir established by your benefit and advancement, for
want of Issue of your Majesty's Royal Body, as you are now subject unto, by
reason of their desire and hope; We know not how many pretend Titles and Trust
to succeed you, whose secret desire we so much more fear, because neither their
number, force nor likelihood of disposition, is known unto us; and so we can
the less beware of them for your preservation.

We find also by good proof, that the certain limitation of the Crown of
France, has in that Realm procured so great quiet, as neither the person of
the Prince in Possession has been endangered by secret or open practice, nor
the Commonweal molested by civil dissension, through any quarrel attempted,
for the Title of that Crown; And somewhat near home, we have remembered the
miserable estate of Scotland, after the Death of King Alexander, without any
certain Heir, or limitation to whom the Crown of Scotland should remain; by
reason whereof the whole estate of that Realm was left open, to the ambition of
many Competitors, and most grievous desolation and spoil, that grew upon such
division; which afterward gave occasion to King James the Fifth, to limit the
Crown of Scotland to certain Noble Families of that Realm; whereby they at this
present enjoy that quiet surety, which we want; And all your Majesty's most
Noble Progenitors, Kings of this Realm, have been in this behalf so careful,
that from the Conquest till this present day, the Realm was never left, as it
is now, without a certain Heir, living and known, to whom the Crown after the
Death of the Prince, should appertain; So, as your Majesty of your singular
Care for us, and our Posterity, has at this time Assembled us, for
establishing of this great and only stay of our Safeties. We again, Most
Gracious Sovereign Lady, acknowledge our selves, and all that we have, to
depend upon your Preservation, being according to our bounden Duty, most
careful of the same, are in most humble manner come to your Majesty's presence;
And I, the Mouth appointed for them, together with and in the name of all your
most loving, natural and obedient Subjects, do present unto you, our most lowly
Suit and Petition, That for as much as of your Majesty's Person would come the
most redoubted and best Heirs of your Crown, such as in time to come we would
most Comfortably see, and our Posterity most Joyfully Obey;

It may please your Most Excellent Majesty, for our sakes, for our preservation
and comforts, and at our most humble Suit, to take to your self some Honorable
Husband, whom it shall please you to join unto in Marriage; whom, whatsoever he
be that your Majesty shall choose, we protest and promise, with all humility
and reverence, to Honor, Love and Serve, as to our most bounden duty shall
appertain; And where by the Statute which your most noble Father Assented unto,
of his most Princely and Fatherly Zeal for his most loving Subjects, for the
limitation of the Succession of the Emperial Crown of this Realm, Your Majesty
is the last expressly named within the body of the same Act; and for that your
Subjects cannot judge, nor do know any thing of the form or validity of any
further limitations, set in certain for want of Heirs of your Body, whereby
some great dangerous doubt remains in their Hearts, to their great grief,
peril and unquietness; It may also please your Majesty, by Proclamation of
certainty already provided, if any such be, or else by limitations of
certainty, if none be, to provide a most gracious remedy in this great
necessity, which by your most Honorable, and Motherly Carefulness for them,
has occasioned this Assembly; That in this convenient time of Parliament, upon
your late danger most graciously called by you, for that cause, your Grace may
now extend to us that great benefit, which otherwise, or at other times perhaps
shall never be able to be done again; so not only we, but all ours hereafter,
and for ever, shall owe no less to your Majesty's propagation of Succession,
than we do already owe to your most Famous Grandfather, King Henry the Seventh,
his uniting of Division; And your Subjects on their behalfs, for your Majesty's
further Assurance, whereupon their own preservation wholly depends, shall
employ their whole endeavors, and Wits, and Power, to renew, devise and
establish the most strong and beneficial Acts and Laws of Preservation, and
Surety of your Majesty, and of your Issue in the Emperial Crown of this Realm,
and the most penal, sharp and terrible Statutes, to all that shall but once
practice, and attempt or conceive against your Safety, that by any possible
means they may invent or establish, with such limitations of conditions, and
restraints to all in Remainders, such grievous pains, and narrow Animadversions
to all that shall enterprise or imagine any thing in prejudice of your
Highness, and your Issue, as your Majesty shall not have any cause of
suspicion, but most assured ground of Confidence in all your faithful Subjects,
continually Watching and Warding for your Preservation, which God long
continue, that you may see your Childrens Children, to his Honor and our
Comfort, and incline your Gracious Ear to our most humble Petitions.

This Petition of the House of Commons, delivered by Thomas Williams Esquire their
Speaker, to her Majesty this Afternoon, as aforesaid (to which see her
Majesty's further Answer sent to the said House, on Tuesday the 16th day of
February ensuing) now follows the residue of the passages of this Journal, out
of the Original Journal Book of the same House.

On Friday the 29th day of January, Seven Bills of no great moment, had each of
them one reading; of which the sixth being the Bill for Fines to be levied in
the County Palatine of Durham, was read the third time, and passed the House.

For that John Hippesley Esquire, is returned a Burgess for Wotten-Basset in
Wiltshire, and also for Wells in Somersetshire, and does appear for Wells, a
new Writ was required for Wotten-Basset.

Mr Elrington appeared this day, with Mr. Sergeant Harper, and Mr. Plowden
being of his Learned Council, who showing great reasons, that the Bill might be
rejected, certain Articles were delivered in by the Mayor of Guildford, for
maintenance of the Bill, which being read, the Copy thereof was awarded to Mr.
Elrington; Vide de ista materia, on the Morrow following.

Giles Clinket, Servant to Sir John Parrot Knight, of Pembroke, Attached in London
in a Plea of Debt, at the Suit of Francis Park, had the Privilege of the
House granted.

On Saturday the 30th day of January, Thomas Heneage was returned Knight for
the County of Lincoln, and also Burgess for Boston in that County, and does
appear for Lincoln; whereupon a new Writ is required for Boston.

Three Bills had each of them one reading, of which the last being the Bill to
revive the Act touching Usury, an. 37 Hen. 8. was read the first time, and as
it should seem, committed to Mr. Vice-Chamberlain, to consider of it.

Mr. Elrington came in with the Sergeant, requiring the Order of this House, in
what sort he should Answer the Articles; whereupon the whole matter was
committed to twelve of the House, to hear the Parties and Proofs on both sides,
and thereupon to certify this House; of which number it should seem, Mr.
Sidney was one. Vide touching this business on Thursday the 21th day, on Friday
the 22th day, and on Friday the 29th day of this instant January foregoing.

It was Ordered, that every one of this House, that comes after the Prayer,
which shall begin at eight of the Clock, shall pay four pence to the poor Man's
Box.

On Monday the first day of February, Five Bills of no great moment, had each
of them one reading; of which the second being the Bill touching the Bowyers of
London, was read the second time, and (as it should seem) committed to Sir
William Chester, and others not named; And the third being the Bill against
carrying over the Sea of Pelts and Sheepskins, not Staple Ware, was read the
second time, and Ordered to be engrossed.

The Committees in the Bill touching Barwick, have had Conference with the
Lords, and have further day to meet again; viz. on Saturday next.

The Bill to have de circumstantilus to the Juries in Wales, and in the County
Palatine of Lancaster, was read the first time.

Mr. Comptroller with others, was appointed to confer of the Privilege of this
House, upon motions made for the Imprisonment of Sir Edward Warner.

On Wednesday the 3d day of February, the Bill to revive the Statute made for
putting down of Grigg Mills, was read the second time, and (as it should seem)
committed to Mr. Chichester, and others not named; Vide a like President on
Thursday the 21th day of January foregoing.

Thomas Dring Burgess of Petersfield in the County of Southampton, was Licensed
upon the Death of his Uncle, to be absent for ten days.

Five other Bills of no great moment, had each of them one reading; of which
one being the Bill against carrying over Sea of Pelts and Sheep Skins, not
Staple Ware, was read the third time and passed; And another being for Robbing
of Ponds, and Stealing of Fish and Conies to be Felony, was read the third
time, and (as it should seem) committed to Mr. Comptroller and others not
named; Vide consimile on Tuesday the 21th day of January foregoing.

On Thursday the 4th of February, Three Bills of no great moment, had each of
them one reading; of which the third being the Bill touching Badgers, and
Carryers of Corn, was read the second time; and (as it should seem) committed
to Mr. Recorder and others not named.

Christopher Hillyer, Burgess for Heydon in Yorkshire, upon the sickness of his
Wife, was Licensed to be absent.

On Friday the 5th day of February, Two Bills of no great moment, had each of
them one reading; of which the second being the Bill for repairing of Waltersey
Bank in the Isle of Ely, was read the second time, and (as it should seem)
committed to Mr. North and others not named; Vide consimile on Thursday the
21th day of January foregoing.

Sir Henry Jones complained, that all his Servants were Imprisoned, and prayed
Privilege; and after long Arguments for the Privilege, Commission was given
to Mr. Sackvill, and others, to examine and certify of the matter.

On Saturday the 6th day of February, the new Bill for setting up of Grigg
Mills, betwixt Plime and Dart, was read the first time.

A motion was made by Mr Winter, that the House would have regard by some Bill
to the Navy; And thereupon the matter, as it should seem, was referred to the
said Mr Winter, and others, whose names through the negligence of..... Seymour
Esquire, at this time Clerk of the House of Commons, are here, as in all other
places of this Journal, omitted.

The Bill for a Subsidy of Lands and Goods, and two Fifteens, was read the
first time.

On Monday the 8th day of February, the new Bill against Servants robbing their
Masters, and Buggery to be Felony, was read the first time.

Mr Sidney and Mr Mason declared, that upon Examination the Fray seemed to be
begun by Sir Henry Jones his Servants; Vide touching this business on Friday
the 12th day of this Instant February following.

On Tuesday the 9th day of February, the Bill for the Subsidy of Lands and
Goods, and two Fifteens and Tenths, was read the second time; but there is no
mention made of any thing spoken to it, or the referring of it to Committees,
or Ordering of it to be engrossed, because (as may be conjectured) the Subsidy
Bill, being commonly of a great length, the Forenoon was far spent by that time
it was read through; and therefore the Arguments upon it were deferred till to
Morrow; in which much dispute growing touching the Oath of the Assessors, it
was again agitated in the House on Friday the 12th day, and on Saturday the
13th of this instant February ensuing; when it was Ordered to be engrossed, and
was lastly, on Friday the 19th day of the same Month, read the third time, and
passed the House.

On Wednesday the 10th day of February, Two Bills had each of them one reading;
of which the first being the Bill for Servants robbing of their Masters, and
touching Buggery, was read the second time, and Ordered to be engrossed.

Thomas Walwin Gent., John Rice Yeoman, Owen Rice, Rice ap Richard, and
Griffith Jews, and John ap John, Servants to Sir Henry Jones Knight for
Carmarthen, being Attached in London in three Actions of Trespass, at the
several Suits of George Catchmeyde, William Prime and Henry Elmely Gent., move
to have a Writ of Privilege; Vide plus concerning this matter on Friday the
12th day of this Instant February ensuing.

Diverse Arguments were this day in the House upon the Bill of Subsidy, and the
Oath therein: Vide touching this Bill in fine diei praecedentis.

On Thursday the 11th day of February, Three Bills of no great moment, had each
of them one reading; of which the last being the Bill for Servants robbing
their Masters, Buggery, Invocation of evil Spirits, Enchantments, etc. to be
Felony, was read the third time, and passed the House.

Mr. Attorney and Mr. Solicitor brought from the Lords a Bill against Forgers
of Deeds, which was presently read the first time.

On Friday the 12th day of February, Three Bills had each of them one reading;
of which the third being the Bill for punishment of Forgers of false Deeds and
Wills, was read the second time; But no mention is made, that it was either
referred to Committees, or Ordered to be engrossed, because it had been
formerly sent from the Lords.

The House desired the Privy Council to (...) the Queens Majesty, to have in
(...) their Petition, looking for her most Gracious Answer. Vide touching this
matter on Thursday the 28th day of January foregoing, as also on Tuesday the
16. day of this instant February following.

The Committees do certify the House, that Sir Hen. Jones his men may be
committed to the Sergeant, and that he attend Mr. Recorder, and Mr. Gargrave,
with the persons before the Lord Chief Justice, to enter with Sureties in Bond
of five hundred pound, to appear personally in the Queens Bench, in Trinity
Term next, to Answer to such things as shall be then objected to them, on the
Queens behalf, and so set at Liberty: Vide concerning this matter on Friday the
5. day, on Monday the 8. day, and on Wednesday the 10. day of this instant
February foregoing.

On Saturday the 13. day of February, Arguments touching the Oath of Assessors
in the Subsidy being had, the Bill was Ordered to be engrossed: Vide plus on
Tuesday the 9. day of this instant February foregoing.

Two Bills had each of them one reading, of which the latter being the Bill
touching levying of Fines for respite of Homage, was read the second time, and
rejected.

For that John Harrington Esquire, returned Burgess of St Ives in Cornwall, and
also for Carnarvon in Wales, does appear for Carnarvon, a Writ was required for
a Burgess for St Ives.

On Monday the 15. day of February, the new Bill touching Usury, was read the
first time.

Three Bills were sent up to the Lords by Mr. Vice-Chamberlain, of which one
was the Bill touching Servants robbing their Masters, and Buggery to be Felony.

The Bill against those that extol the Bishop of Rome, and refuse the Oath of
Allegiance, was read the second time, and (as it should seem) committed to Mr.
Vice-Chamberlain, and others not named.

Diverse Arguments being had upon the Bill for respite of Homage, it was at the
last rejected.

On Tuesday the 16. day of February, Two Bills of no great moment, had each of
them one reading; of which the first being the Bill touching Usury, was upon
the second reading Ordered to be engrossed.

Robert Parker Servant to Sir William Woodhouse Knight for Norfolk, attached in
London at the Suit of Thomas Raber Baker in Transgr., had a Warrant for
Privilege, notwithstanding a judgment given against him.

Mr. Sergeant Carus and Mr. Attorney brought from the Lords five Bills for
Restitution in Blood of diverse persons.

Mr. Comptroller and Mr. Secretary declared from the Queens Highness, that she
doubted not, but the grave Heads of this House did right well consider, that
she forgot not the Suit of this House for the Succession, the matter being so
weighty; nor could forget it: but she willed the young Heads, to take Example
of the Ancients: Vide touching this business on Saturday the 16. day, Monday
the 18. day, Tuesday the 19. day, Tuesday the 26. day, Wednesday the 27. day,
and on Thursday the 28. day of January foregoing; as also on Friday the 12. day
of this instant February preceding. Vide April the 10. postea.

On Wednesday the 17. day of February, Three Bills of no great moment, had each
of them one reading; of which the first being the Bill to confirm the Liberties
of Exeter, was read the second time, and Ordered to be engrossed.

On Thursday the 18. day of February, Six Bills had each of them one reading;
of which the fifth being the Bill for Confirmation of the Liberties of Exeter,
was read the third time, and passed the House. And the last being the Bill for
punishment of Usury, and unlawful Bargains, was read also the third time, and
passed per Divisionem Domus, viz. with the Bill a hundred thirty four, and
against it ninety.

On Friday the 19. day of February, Two Bills had each of them one reading; of
which the first being the Bill for the Subsidy and two Fifteens, granted by the
Temporalty, was read the third time, and passed the House; Vide touching this
Bill on Tuesday the 9. day of this Instant February foregoing.

Thomas Andrews Esquire Burgess for Sudbury in Suffolk, and Thomas Eymis Burgess
for Thuske in the Country of York, for their weighty affairs have License to be
absent.

On Saturday the 20. day of February, Three Bills had each of them one reading;
of which the last being the Bill against engrossing of Wool, and that
Wooll-Winders may buy Wool, was read the second time, and thereupon rejected.

Three Bills were sent up to the Lords by Mr. Vice-Chamberlain, of which one
was for the punishment of Usury, and another for the Subsidy granted by the
Temporalty.

Four other Bills also had each of them one reading; of which the third being
the Bill against those that shall extol the Bishop of Rome, or shall refuse the
Oath of Allegiance, was read the third time, and passed the House.

Robert Wieth Gent. Burgess for Wiche in the County of Worcester, for his
necessary affairs is Licensed to be absent.

On Monday the 22. day of February, Four Bills of no great moment, had each of
them one reading; of which the second being the Bill for the Bowyers of London;
And the last to raise Grigg Mills between Plime and Dart in Devonshire, were
each of them read the second time, and Ordered to be engrossed.

The Bill against those that extol the Bishop of Rome, etc. was sent up to the
Lords by Mr. Secretary.

William Poughnyll Gent. Burgess of Ludlow in the County of Salop, for his
great affairs in the Marches, has License to be absent.

On Tuesday the 23. day of February, Seven Bills of no great moment, had each
of them one reading; of which the first being for the avoiding of diverse
Foreign Wares; The second touching Badgers of Corn; The third for punishment of
those that call themselves Egyptians; And the fourth for allowance to Sheriffs
for Justices Dyets at the Assizes, were each of them read the second time, and
Ordered to be engrossed.

Richard Bertie Esquire one of the Knights of the County of Lincoln, for his
weighty affairs, was Licensed to be absent.

On Wednesday the 24. day of February, Four Bills had each of them one reading;
of which the first being the new Bill against Clipping, Washing, and Filing of
Coins, was read the first time

On Thursday the 25. day of February, Six Bills had each of them one reading;
of which the third for punishment of Clipping and Washing of money; And the
fifth for such as lend their Goods for Apparel; were each of them upon the
second reading Ordered to be engrossed; And the last being the Bill against
forging of false Deeds, with Provisoes from this House, was read the third
time, and passed.

Post Meridiem.

In the Afternoon six Bills had each of them one reading; of which the first
being the Bill for Restitution in Blood of Anne Thomas, was read the second
time; but no mention is made, that it was either referred to Committees, or
Ordered to be engrossed, because it had been formerly sent from the Lords.

William Undale Esquire, Burgess for the Town of Southampton, was for his necessary
affairs Licensed to be absent.

On Friday the 26th day of February, the Bill for dressed Flax, and the Bill
touching Originals of Fines imbezelled, were each of them read the second time,
and Ordered to be engrossed.

Four other Bills also had each of them one reading; of which one was the Bill
that St Katherines Church shall be a Parish Church, and a School Erected.

The Bill for Clipping and Washing of money, and the Bill against Sale of Wares
for Apparel to persons under Land or Fees, etc. were each of them read the
third time, and passed the House; And the last, being for having Grigg Mills
between Plime and Dart in Devonshire, was upon the third reading dashed by the
division of the House; viz. with the Bill forty seven, and against the Bill
eighty four.

On Saturday the 27th day of February, Sir Robert Wingfeild, one of the Knights
for the County of Suffolk, for his affairs at the Assizes, was Licensed to be
absent.

The Bill for further punishment of Vagabonds, calling themselves Egyptians,
and the Bill for allowance to Sheriffs for Justices Dyets, were each of them
read the third time, and passed the House.

Six Bills were sent up to the Lords by Mr Secretary, with the Bill of the
Subsidy amended, of which one was touching the punishment of Vagabonds, and
another for Clipping and washing of money.

Three Bills lastly had each of them one reading; of which one being the Bill
to add de circumstantibus to the Juries in Wales, and Counties Palatine of
Lancaster and Chester, was read the third time, and passed the House.

On Monday the first day of March, Two Bills had each of them their first
reading; of which the second being against Purveyors, was (as it should seem)
referred to Mr Vice-Chamberlain, to consider of it.

Arguments being had in the House to the Proviso for Hunting of Conies, that
eat other men's Corn, was (as it seems) referred to Mr Vice-Chamberlain and
others not named.

Griffin Curtis Esquire Burgess for the Borough of Ludgersall in Wilts, for his
Affairs at the Assizes, was Licensed to depart.

John Cheney Esquire one of the Knights for the County of Berks, has also License
for his Affairs.

On Tuesday the 2d day of March, Two Bills had each of them one reading; of
which the second being the Bill touching Badgers of Corn, was read the third
time, and passed the House.

Mr Dr Read, and Mr Dr Huick, brought from the Lords the Bill for the
Restitution in Blood of the Children of the Lord Hussy; And the Bill for the
Restitution in Blood of the Children of Archbishop Cranmer.

Long Arguments being had to the Bill for the increase of the Navy, and
Fish-Days; and a Proviso brought in by Mr Secretary, the Bill was Ordered to be
engrossed.

On Wednesday the 3d day of March, the Bill for the Orders and Wages of
Servants of Husbandry, and Artificers, was read the first time; and (as it
should seem) committed to Mr Crofts to consider of it.

On Thursday the 4th day of March, Sir Thomas Gargrave Knight, one of the
Knights for the County of York, for great Affairs with the rest of the Council
in the North parts, was Licensed to depart.

Mr Richard Baker and..... Leonard Esquire with their Council learned, required
that a Proviso may be for them put to the Bill for the restitution in Blood of
the Sons of Henry Iseley Attainted of Treason.

William and Edward Iseley, with their learned Council, require, that
considering the Bill does restore them toward the Lands but to such Title as
they had before, that that State may continue unto them; Vide touching this
matter on the day following.

The Queens Sergeant and Mr Attorney, brought from the Lords two Bills, of
which one being the Bill touching the Oath with four Provisoes added by the
Lords, the same Provisoes were read the first and second time.

Post Meridiem.

In the Afternoon, Two Bills had each of them one reading; of which the second
being the Bill that St Katherines shall be a Parish Church, and a School there,
was read the second time, and Ordered to be ingrost.

Seven other Bills had each of them one reading; of which one being the Bill
that the Bible and Book of Service may be in the Welsh Tongue, And another that
Sanctuary shall not serve for Debt, were each of them read the second time, and
Ordered to be ingrost.

On Friday the 5th day of March, Six Bills had each of them one reading; of
which the second being the Bill for avoiding of diverse Foreign Wares, made by
Artificers beyond the Seas, was read the third time, and passed the House.

The Parties on both sides for Mr Isely's Bill, require that it might proceed
in form; for they be both agreed, that Mr Isely after this Bill pass, shall
release to Mr Richard Baker, and Mr Leonard, all their right, title, interest
and demand in such Lands, as the said Baker and Leonard severally have, late
Sir Henry Iseley's, Father to the said William and Edward Iseley; Vide touching
this business on the day foregoing. The Bill lastly, for restitution in Blood
of William and Edward Iseley; And the Bill for restitution in Blood of Thomas
Brook alias Cobham and others, were each of them read the second time; but no
mention is made, that they were Ordered to be engrossed, or referred to
Committees; because they had been formerly sent from the Lords.

On Saturday the 6th day of March, the Bill for the punishment of Perjury and
false Witnesses, was read the second time, and Ordered to be engrossed.

The three Bills last past, of which one was for avoiding of Foreign Wares,
were sent up to the Lords by Mr Secretary, with twelve more.

The Queens Sergeant brought from the Lords the Bill of Subsidy of the Clergy;
And the Bill for restitution in Blood of Ed. Turner.

The Bill also for continuance of Statutes for the mending of Highways, was
read the second time, and Ordered to be engrossed.

Post Meridiem.

In the Afternoon twelve Bills had each of them one reading, of which the first
being the Bill for restitution in Blood of Edward Turner; And the second for
restitution in Blood of Sir Ralph Chamberlain, and John Hurleston, had each of
them their second reading, but neither committed nor ordered to be engrossed,
because they had been formerly sent from the Lords.

John Eire Esquire, one of the Knights of the County of Wilts, for his Affairs
is Licensed to be absent.

On Monday the 8th day of March, Three Bills had each of them one reading; of
which the first being the Bill that St Katherines Church shall be a Parish
Church; And the Second for the repairing and mending of Highways, were read
the third time, and passed the House; and were sent up to the Lords by Mr
Comptroller.

Mr Attorney brought from the Lords three Bills, of which one was the Bill for
Denizens Children.

The Bill also against the unlawful taking of Fish, Deer, or Hawks, was read
the third time, and passed.

Post Meridiem.

In the Afternoon eight Bills had each of them one reading; of which one was
the Bill for the Subsidy of the Clergy.

Richard Parrott Gent. Burgess for Sandwich, for his Sickness was Licensed to
be absent.

On Tuesday the 9. day of March, Two Bills had each of them one reading; of
which the first being the Bill touching the Lord Keeper of the Great Seal, was
read the second time; but no mention is made, that it was either referred to
Committees, or Ordered to be engrossed; because it had been formerly sent from
the Lords.

Four other Bills also were each of them read the third time; of which one
being the Bill for restitution in Blood of Anne Thomas; Another for restitution
in Blood of Edward Turner; And a third for restitution in Blood of Thomas
Cranmer, and Margaret, Children of the Archbishop Cranmer, did each of them
pass the House.

Post Meridiem.

In the Afternoon eight Bills had each of them one reading; of which the fifth
being the Bill for the paving of Kentish-street, near Southwark, was read the
second time, and (as it should seem) committed to Mr Graston and others not
named; Vide consimile on Thursday the 21. day of January foregoing.

Long Arguments were this day had in the House, upon the Bill for having
Wednesday to be a Fish-Day; Vide touching this business on Thursday the 11. day
of this instant March following.

On Wednesday the 10. day of March, the Bill for restitution in Blood of
William and Edward Iseley; The Bill for restitution in Blood of Thomas Cobham;
The Bill to make Denizens the Children of John Fitz-Williams and others; And
the Bill for the restitution in Blood of the Heirs of the Lord Hussy, were
each of them read the third time, and passed the House.

The Bill that Merchants shall not marry Strangers beyond the Seas, was read
the first time.

The Bill that the Lord Keeper of the Great Seal has the like Power as the
Lord Chancellor; And the Bill for the restitution in Blood of the Daughters of
Thomas Iseley, were each of them read the third time, and passed.

Mr Solicitor brought from the Lords the Bill for the restitution in Blood of
Sir Peter Carew and William West. Long Arguments upon the Bill for having the
Wednesday to be a Fish-Day, were continued till the Morrow after.

On Thursday the 11. day of March, Three Bills had each of them one reading; of
which the third being the Bill for the Subsidy of the Clergy, was read the
third time and passed, and was sent up to the Lords by Mr Secretary, together
with the Lord Keepers Bill, and the Bill for Fish, Deer and Hawks.

Long Arguments were had upon the Bill for increase of the Navy, whether the
Wednesday shall be a Fish-Day, and upon the Question the House was divided; and
to have it a Fish-Day were a hundred fifty nine, and not to have it a Fish-Day
were ninety six; And immediately after, upon the qualification of that day, the
greater number agreed to the qualification: Vide touching this matter on
Tuesday the 9. day, and on Wednesday the 10. day of this instant March
foregoing.

George Cope Burgess of Ludgersall in Wilts, for his affairs at the Assizes,
has License to be absent.

On Friday the 12. day of March, the Bill touching Consecration of Bishops, was
read the second time, and Ordered to be engrossed.

Four other Bills also had each of them one reading; of which one being the
Bill for the Inning of Plumsted-Marsh, now surrounded, was read the third time,
and passed the House.

On Saturday the 13th day of March, the Bill for the restitution in Blood of
Leonard Diggs, and Thomas Diggs, and the Bill for restitution in Blood of Sir
Ralph Chamberlain Knight, and John Hurleston, were each of them read the third
time, and passed.

The Bill against Conjurations, was brought from the Lords by Mr Solicitor.

Post Meridiem.

In the Afternoon six Bills of no great moment, had each of them one reading;
of which the first being the Bill for increase of Woods and Champian Grounds,
was read the second time, and (as it should seem) committed to Mr Marsh, and
others not named.

On Monday the 15th day of March, the Bill against fulling of Caps in Mills was
read the second time; but no mention is made, that it was either committed or
Ordered to be engrossed, because it had been formerly sent from the Lords.

George Lee Esquire, one of the Burgesses for Rippon in Yorkshire, and Elice Price,
one of the Knights for Merionethshire in Wales, for their affairs were Licensed
to be absent.

Three Bills were sent up to the Lords by Mr Vice-Chamberlain; of which one was
the Bill for Inning of Plumsted-Marsh.

The Provisoes added to the Bill for increase of Navigation, were read the
third time, and passed.

Mr Sergeant Carus and Mr Attorney, brought from the Lords the Bill for
Enrolment of Bargains in Lancaster, with a Proviso in Exeter Bill.

On Tuesday the 16th day of March, the Bill for the Enrolment of Writings
Indented at Lancaster, Chester and Duresm, and a Proviso added to the Bill of
Exeter, were each of them read the first time.

The Bill for the Navy, and the Bill for restitution in Blood of Mr West, were
sent up to the Lords by Mr Secretary; and the Bill for Southampton, and the
Bill for Bowyers, were sent from the Lords by Mr Comptroller.

Post Meridiem.

In the Afternoon six Bills had each of them one reading; of which the first
being the Bill for unlading of Malmesies and Sweet Wines at Southhampton, was
read the first time.

On Wednesday the 17th day of March, the Proviso to the Bill of Exeter, was
read the third time, and passed.

Mr Sackvil declared from the Queens Majesty, that she would take Order to make
allowance for Justices Diets; and that Commissioners should be sent to enquire
of Vicountels that may be levied, and the rest, Order should be taken for the
discharge thereof.

Michael Poultney Esquire, Burgess for Lichfeild, Robert Buckstones, Burgess
for Horsam in Sussex, and Henry Green Citizen for the City of Hereford, were
for their several affairs Licensed to be absent.

On Thursday the 18th day of March, the Proviso to the Bill of Bowyers, was
read the third time, and passed the House.

The Bill against fantastical Prophecies, The Bill for punishment of
Witchcrafts, And the Bill against wilful Perjury, were each of them read the
third time, and passed.

Post Meridiem.

In the Afternoon, the Bill for the uniting of Churches by the Bishop, so that
the value be not above 24l of the Churches united, with two others, were each
of them read the first time.

On Friday the 19th day of March, Three Bills had each of them one reading; of
which the first being the Bill for punishment of Invocations of evil Spirits;
And the last, That Fines or Recoveries, with Voucher, though the Original be
imbezelled, shall be good, were each of them read the third time, and passed
the House.

On Saturday the 20th day of March, the Bill for continuance of Statutes to
endure for ever, was read the second time, and (as it should seem) committed to
Mr Clare, and others not named; And the Bill against Bankrupts being read also
the second time, was (as may be gathered) committed to Mr Mersh and others not
named. Vide consimile on Thursday the 21th day of January foregoing.

Mr Sergeant Carus, and Mr Solicitor, brought from the Lords the Bill against
Washing and Clipping of money; The Bill touching Leases made by Viscount Bindon
and his Wife, with two others.

Six Bills were sent up to the Lords by Mr Vice-Chamberlain, of which one was
for the punishment of Witchcraft, and another touching Fines and Recoveries,
with Voucher, etc. with two others of no great moment; and immediately the
Bill, that Clipping or Washing of money shall be Treason; The Bill for
preservation of Woods in Sussex, were each of them read the first time.

John Gardner Gent. Burgess for Dorchester in Dorset, was for his affairs
Licensed to be absent.

Post Meridiem.

In the Afternoon the Bill for the relief of the poor, And the Bill for the
uniting of Parish Churches in Cities and Corporate Towns, to the value of 24l,
were each of them read the second time.

John Darrington Esquire, one of the Knights for the County of Huntington, is for
his affairs, Licensed to be absent.

On Monday the 22th day of March, Two Bills had each of them one reading; of
which the first being the Bill that Clipping and Washing of Moneys shall be
Treason, was read the second time; but not committed nor engrossed, because it
had been formerly sent from the Lords.

It was Ordered, that William Gerrard, a necessary Witness for Mr Pledal, as he
says, may be served by the Sergeant, to attend Mr. Haddon at the rising of the
House; one of the Committees with the Master of the Rolls, Mr. Recorder and Sir
William Arnold and Mr. Norton, discharged of this Examination. Vide plus on
Saturday the 10th day of April ensuing.

Post Meridiem.

In the Afternoon four Bills of no great moment had each of them one reading;
of which the third being the Bill for the paving of Kentish-street, was upon
the second reading Ordered to be engrossed.

John Dorrington Esquire, Knight for Huntington, Humphrey Quarnby Burgess for
Nottingham, William Dawtrye Knight for Suffex, Simon Thellwall Knight for
Denbigh, for their several necessary affairs, were Licensed to be absent.

Three Bills lastly had each of them their first reading; of which the first
was the Bill touching Demurrers in Law.

On Tuesday the 23th day of March, Two Bills had each of them one reading; of
which the first being the Bill that Clipping and Washing of money, shall be
Felony, was read the third time, and passed the House.

The Bill for increase of Tillage, was brought from the Lords by Mr Sergeant
Carus.

Post Meridiem.

In the Afternoon Six Bills had each of them one reading; of which the first
being the Bill touching Leases to be made by the Lord Thomas Howard Viscount
Bindon, and his Wife; And the second, that Henry Howard Esquire shall not
discontinue Lands that shall descend, were each of them read the second time;
but no mention is made, that they were either Ordered to be engrossed, or
referred to Committees, because they had been formerly sent from the Lords.

On Wednesday the 24th day of March, Two Bills had each of them their second
reading; of which the latter, being the Bill for Assignment of forty thousand
twenty seven pound four shillings and two pence half penny, to the Expenses of
the Queens Household; which Bill, notwithstanding that it had passed the Upper
House, and been sent down from the Lords to the House of Commons, on Wednesday
the 17th day of this instant March foregoing, yet it was committed, or at least
referred to Mr Vice-Chamberlain, being an Officer of her Majesty's said
Household, to be further considered of; and was lastly passed in the House of
Commons, upon the third reading on Saturday the third day of April ensuing; and
was then immediately returned back to the Lords by Mr Comptroller.

Two Bills were each of them read the third time, of which one being the Bill
for Fulling of Caps, by foot and hand, was dashed upon the Question.

Morris William Knight for the County of Carnarvon, for his weighty affairs,
was Licensed to be absent.

On Thursday the 25th day of March, Three Bills had each of them one reading;
of which the first being the Bill that the Lord Abergavenny may make Leases for
twenty Years, or three Lives; And the second, that Henry Howard Esquire shall not
discontinue Lands descending to him, were each of them read the third time, and
passed.

And the third being the Bill for the Annuity of six pound thirteen shillings
and four pence, out of Wandlesworth in Surrey, being the Archbishop of Yorks
Lands, to the School of Guildford, was read the third time; but (it should
seem) the House did desire to consider further of this Bill; and thereupon
passed it not at this time, but gave it a fourth reading, on Tuesday the 30th
day of this instant March ensuing; and then it passed the House.

Post Meridiem.

In the Afternoon four Bills had each of them one reading; of which the second
being the Bill for payment of Alneagers Fees, for Sealing Clothes in
Lancashire, was read the second time, and Ordered to be engrossed.

On Friday the 26th day of March, Three Bills had each of them one reading; of
which the last being that the Lord Howard, and the Lady Elizabeth his Wife, may
make Leases, etc. was read the third time, and passed.

On Saturday the 27th day of March, Three Bills had each of them one reading;
of which the first being the Bill that the Bible and the Divine Service may be
translated into the Welsh Tongue, was read the third time, and passed the House.

The Bill touching Worsted Woolls, and the Bill against Servants imbezelling
their Masters Goods, were brought from the Lords by Mr Sergeant Carus.

Post Meridiem.

In the Afternoon the Bill that the Inhabitants of Norfolk and Suffolk, may
sell again course Woolls, was read the first time; And the Proviso also from
the Lords to the Bill for Deer and Hawks, was read the first time.

Five Bills also had each of them one reading; of which one being for Killing
of Crows was committed, as it should seem, to Mr. Ashley; Another to avoid Nets
for Fishing in the Thames, was read the second time, and committed to Mr. Cure;
And the last touching the Assize of Barrels, was upon the second reading,
committed to Mr. Grafton, and others not named.

On Monday the 29th day of March, the Proviso to the Bill for Stealing of Deer,
etc. was read the first time; and three other Bills being of no great moment,
were each of them read the second time; of which one was the Bill for increase
of Tillage.

The Bill de Excommunicato capiendo, and the Bill for the making of Goals, were
brought from the Lords by Mr. Attorney.

Post Meridiem.

In the Afternoon four Bills had each of them their first reading; of which the
last was the Bill touching Tanners, Shoomakers, and other Artificers occupying
Leather.

On Tuesday the 30th day of March, the Bill to continue the Act for making of
Goals, was read the second time; but no mention is made, that it was either
Ordered to be engrossed, or referred to Committees; because it had been
formerly sent from the Lords.

The Bill also for the School-House at Guildford, was read the fourth time, and
passed the House.

Nota, That here a Bill was read the fourth time, before it passed the House
(having had its third reading on Thursday the 25th day of this instant March
foregoing) of which, though there want not other Presidents, yet it is rare and
worth the observation.

Six Bills were sent up to the Lords by Mr. Secretary, and others, of which one
was the last mentioned Bill, touching the School-House at Guildford.

The Master of the Rolls with other Committees in the Cause of Forgery
suspected upon Pledal, declared great and vehement suspicion to be in Pledall;
and where Pledall by the Committees, was Commanded not to speak with the person
of Monkton Farley, he notwithstanding sent for him, and spoke with him in the
night, which person is likewise suspected; whereupon Pledall said, he did not
remember any such Commandment; and thereupon Order was taken, that the
Committees should put their doings in this Case in Writing, and send them to
the House this Afternoon, and that they should be read to Pledall; and he to
Answer them, either by word or writing. Vide touching this matter on Saturday
the 10th day of April ensuing.

Post Meridiem.

In the Afternoon two Bills had each of them one reading; of which the second
being that the Lord Chancellor may direct Commissions to the Bishop, for
increase of the Living of Ministers, etc. was read the first time.

On Wednesday the last day of March, the Proviso to the Bill against Stealing
of Fish, Deer and Hawks, was read the third time, and passed; And the Bill that
Sweet-Wines bought by Strangers, shall be brought to Southampton, was read the
third time, and passed.

On Thursday the first day of April, Four Bills had each of them one reading;
of which the second touching Enrollments of Deeds in Lancaster, And the last
for the relief of the Poor, were each of them read the third time, and passed.

Post Meridiem.

In the Afternoon the Bill for sale of course Woolls in Norfolk and Suffolk,
was read the second time; but neither Committed nor Ordered to be engrossed,
because it had been formerly sent from the Lords.

On Friday the 2d day of April, the Bill for Artificers, Laborers, etc. was
read the second time, and Ordered to be engrossed.

On Saturday the 3d day of April, Four Bills were sent up to the Lords, by Mr.
Vice-Chamberlain; of which one was the Bill for the relief of the Poor.

The Bill for the Assignment of forty thousand twenty seven pound four
shillings and two pence half penny, to the Queens Household, with three
Provisoes from this House, was read the third time and passed; and sent to the
Lords by Mr. Comptroller.

Post Meridiem.

In the Afternoon three Bills had each of them one reading; of which the second
being the Bill for taking and destroying of Crows, Rooks, etc. was read the
first time.

On Monday the 5th day of April, Mr. Sergeant Carus, and Mr. Solicitor,
brought from the Lords the Bill for Wales.

The Bill touching Tanners, Curriers and Shomakers, was read the third time and
passed, and sent to the Lords by Mr. Secretary; together with the Bill for
Restitution in Blood of William Iseley.

The Bill to avoid fraudulent Gifts, by any Convicted of Praemunire, was read
the third time, and dashed by the division of the House, viz. against the Bill
eighty nine, and with the Bill sixty three.

Post Meridiem.

A Proviso to the Bill for Wales, was read the first, second and third time,
and thereupon passed the House.

The Bill to revive the Statute against Servants imbezelling their Masters
Goods, was read the third time, and passed the House.

The Bill lastly, that Cloathiers for every Cloth of Woollen, or thirty
Kersies, shall make a piece of Linen Cloth, of twenty Yards long, was read the
second time, and (as it should seem) committed to Mr. Norton, and others not
named.

On Tuesday the 6th day of April, the Bill to avoid fraudulent Gifts, and the
Bill against Servants embezelling their Masters Goods, were sent up to the
Lords by Sir Anthony Coke.

Three Bills also had each of them their third reading, and passed the House;
of which the first being the Bill touching Artificers, Servants of Husbandry,
Laborers and Apprentices, was sent up to the Lords by Mr. Comptroller.

Post Meridiem.

In the Afternoon the Bill for the Order of Bankrupts and their Goods,
Chattels, Lands and Tenements, was read the third time, and passed the House.

On Wednesday the 7th day of April, Two Bills had each of them one reading; of
which the first being the Bill that the Alneager of Lancaster shall Seal the
Clothes there made, was read the third time, and passed the House; and was with
two others, sent up to the Lords by Mr. Secretary.

Post Meridiem.

In the Afternoon three Bills of no great moment, had each of them one reading;
of which the first being the Bill for increase of Tillage, and reedifying of
decayed Houses of Husbandry, was read the third time, and passed the House.

On Thursday the 8th day of April, the Bill touching Hat-makers, and
Felt-makers, to buy Spanish Wool; And the Bill to avoid the dressed Flax
brought out of Flanders, were each of them read the third time, and passed the
House; and were with two others, sent up to the Lords by Mr. Secretary.

The Bill for destruction of Crows, Rooks, etc. and other such Vermin, was
read the second time, and Ordered to be engrossed.

The Bill also for paving of Kentish-street near Southwark; And the Bill that
Sanctuary shall not be allowable for Debt, were each of them read the third
time, and passed the House; and were sent to the Lords by Mr. Vice-Chamberlain.

Post Meridiem.

In the Afternoon a Proviso to the Bill for repairing of Goals, and a Proviso
to the Bill de Excommunicato capiendo, were each of them read the first and
second time.

On Friday the 9th day of April, the Proviso added to the Bill de Excommunicat.
capiend. was read the third time, and passed the House.

The Bill also for destruction of Rooks, Crows and Coughs, and such other
Vermin, was read the third time, and passed the House; and immediately sent up
to the Lords by Mr Vice-Chamberlain.

The new Bill for uniting of Churches in Boroughs or Towns, being under the
value of twenty Marks, was read the first time; And the Proviso lastly of this
House to the Bill for repairing of Goals, was read the third time, and passed.

On Saturday the 10th day of April, It was Ordered that Mr Pleddall shall have
the Copies of such Examinations and Writings, as have been certified into this
House; by the Master of the Rolls and other Committees; and also that Mr
Francis Newdigate may have like Copies; And that such Evidence, as Mr Pleddall
has delivered to the Committees hands, may remain under their Seals, and Mr
Pleddall's Seal in the keeping of the Officer of the Rolls, that uses to keep
the Evidences there. Vide concerning this matter on Monday the 22th day, and on
Tuesday the 30th day of March foregoing.

The Bill for repairing of Goals was sent up to the Lords, by Mr
Vice-Chamberlain.

The Queens Majesty's free and general Pardon, Signed with her Graces Hand, was
brought from the Lords, by Mr Attorney, and Mr Solicitor, and immediately read
the third time, and passed.

Nota, That this Bill touching her Majesty's Pardon, passed upon the first
reading; whereas other Bills do never pass till after the third.

A Proviso sent down to the House of Commons from the Lords, touching the Bill
of Bankrupts; And the addition to the Bill concerning Purveyors, were read the
first, second and third time, and passed the House.

In the Afternoon about three of the Clock, the Queens Majesty sitting in her
Royal Seat, Mr Speaker made an Excellent Oration, rehearsing diverse Laws made
by diverse Queens of this Realm, and requiring the Queen to Assent to the Acts
past both Houses, and presented to her Majesty the Book of Subsidy, and the
Book of the general Pardon, with most humble thanks for the same. And the Lord
Keeper, by the Queens Commandment, gave great thanks unto the Nobility and
Commons, and earnestly required them severally in their Countries, to look that
the Laws might be Executed. And touching the Succession, the Queen Commanded
the Lord Keeper to declare her Highness device thereof; the effect and
conclusion whereof was, that for the great weight of the matter, her Majesty
minded to take further advice: Vide plus concerning this matter of Succession
on Thursday the 28. day of January, and on Tuesday the 16. day of February
foregoing.

Then were the several Titles of the Acts read, and thirty one public
Statutes, and seventeen private, were made Laws by her Majesty's Royal Assent.
And then this Parliament was Prorogued until the second day of October next.

At which second day of October, for that the Plague was great in London and
Westminster; The Queens Majesty's Letters Patents of Commission, were directed
to the Lord Treasurer of England, and other Bishops, and Lords of the Upper
House, to Prorogue this Parliament unto the fifth day of October, 1564. which
was done accordingly in the presence of the said Lords, and a few of the House
of Commons, Mr. Speaker not being there.

At which fifth day of October, this Parliament was further Prorogued by the
Queens Majesty's Commission Patent, unto the 30. day of April, the next
ensuing, Mr Speaker not being there.

At which 30. day of April, It was then further Prorogued unto the 4. day of
October then next following, Mr Speaker not being there.

At which fourth day of October, Anno Domini 1565. Anno Septimo Reginae
Elizabeth. It was then further Prorogued unto the 7. day of February then next
following, Mr Speaker not being there.

At which 7. day of Feb. 1565. and Anno Elizabethae Reginae Octavo, It was then
further Prorogued unto the 30. day of Sept. then next following.

THE JOURNAL OF THE House of LORDS.
A Journal of the Proceedings of the House of Lords in the Session of
Parliament bolden at Westminster, An. 8 Regin. Eliz. A. D. 1566. which began
there (after diverse Prorogations of the same) on Monday the 30th of September,
and then and there continued until the Dissolution thereof on Thursday the 2d
day of Jan. Ann. 9 Regin. ejusdem.

THIS Parliament de An. 8 Regin. Eliz. being in Law but one and the same with
that held in an. 5 Reginae ejusdem, An. Dom. 1563. although not Assembled till
about three Years after, was in the mean time never Dissolved, but only
Prorogued from time to time by six several Prorogations, whereof the two first
falling out in the said fifth Year of the Queen, are there mentioned as most
properly belonging to the first Session of this Parliament (although the latter
of them be entered at large in the Journal Book de an. 8 Regin. Eliz.) and the
four last of the said fix Prorogations do all here follow before the beginning
of this Journal of Parliament of the passages of the Upper House (being full of
excellent and rare matter) as necessary matter of preparation unto it, being in
Law (as has been observed) but the second Session of that former Parliament
Assembled in An. 5 Regin. Eliz. predictae, whereof those two former
Prorogations (as they do at large appear in the end of the Journal of the Upper
House of that fifth year of the Queen) were the first of them from Saturday the
10th day of April, on which day that said first Session of this Parliament
ended in that fifth year aforesaid, to the second day of October next ensuing,
de an. 5. Reginae ejusdem; and the second Prorogation of those foresaid two
former, was from the said second day of October in the said fifth Year of the
Queen, to the 5th day of October, which should be in an. 6 Regin. Eliz. An.
Dom. 1564. upon which foresaid 5th day of October in an. 6 Regin. supradictae,
Annoque Dom. 1564. Prorogatum fuit ulterius praedictum Parliamentum modo and
forma sequentibus.

Memorandum quod quinto die Octobris Anno Regni Elizabethae Dei gratia Angliae,
Franciae and Hiberniae Reginae, fidei defensor. etc. Sexto, in quem diem
praesens hoc Parliamentum Prorogatum fuerat, convenerunt Domini tam spirituales
quam Temporales, quorum nomina subsequuntur.

Archiepiscopus Cantuarien., Marchio Winton. Thesaurarius, Comes Suffex; Comes
Huntington, Episcopus London., Episcopus Roffen., Dominus Clinton Admirallus,
Dominus Howard Camerarius, Dominus Cobham, Dominus Hunsdon.

Qui cum convenissent una cum populi atque Burgensium, ut vocant, satis magna
frequentia, praedictus Archiepiscopus Cantuarien. paucis verbis declaravit
conventum Procerum and populi, quem Parliamentum vocant, in hunc diem
destinatum, a dicta domina Regina, ccrtis quibusdam de causis and
considerationibus illam ad id specialiter moven. differri in tricesimum diem
Aprilis prox. futurum; atque ut tam proceribus quam populo palam fieret Regiam
Majestatem ita constituisse, Literas Commissorias dict. Dominae Reginae
Francisco Spilman Armig. Clerico Parliamenti public and clara voce legendas in
manus tradidii, Earum autem Tenor sequitur in haec verba.

Elizabetha Dei gratia Angliae, Franciae and Hiberniae Regina, fidei defensor,
etc. Reverendissimo in Christo Patri, Matheo Cantuarien. Archiepiscopo totius
Angliae Primati and Metropolitano, ac Charissimo Consanguineo and Consiliario
suo Willielmo Marchioni Winton. Thesaurario Angliae, ncc non charissimis
consanguineis suis Thomae Comiti Sussex, Henrico Comiti Huntingdon, Reverendis
in Christo patribus Edmundo Episcopo London., Edmundo Episcopo Roffen., ac
etiam praedilectis and fidelibus consiliariis suis Edwardo Domino Clinton,
magno Admirallo suo Angliae, Willielmo Domino Howard de Essingham Domino
Camerario suo, ac praedilectis and sidelibus suis Willielmo Domino Cobham
Gardiano sive Custodi quinque portuum suorum, ac Henrico Domino Hunsdon,
salutem. Cum nuper pro quibusdam arduis and urgentibus negotiis, nos, statum
and defensionem Regni nostri Angliae ac Ecclesiae Anglicanae concernen.,
praesens hoc Parliamentum nostrum apud Civitat. nostram Westmonasterii
duodecimo die Januarii Anno regni nostri Quinto inchoari and teneri
ordinaverimus, a quo die idem Parliamentum nostrum tunc and ibidem tent. and
continuat. fuerat usque decimum diem Aprilis tunc prox. sequen. ac post
diversas Prorogationes idem Parliamentum nostrum usque ad and in instantem
Quintum diem Octobris Prorogatum, ibidemque tunc tenend. and prosequend.
Sciatis tamen quod certis urgentibus causis and considerationibus nos
specialiter moven., idem Parliamentum nostrum ulterius Prorogand, duximus; de
sidelitate igitur, prudentia and circumspectione vestris plurimum considentes,
de avisamento and assensu Concilii nostri, assignavimus vos and tres vestrum,
dantes vobis novem, octo, septem, sex, quinque, quatuor, and tribus vestrum
tenore praesentium, plenam potestatem, facultatem and authoritatem, hoc instan.
die Jovis ad praesens Parliamentum nostrum nomine nostro, ad and in tricesimum
Aprilis prox. futur. usque praedictam Civitatem nostram Westmonasterii
Prorogand, and continuand., ibidemque tunc tenend. and prosequend.: and ideo
vobis mandamus, quod circa praemissa diligenter intendatis, and ea in forma
praedicta effect ualiter expleatis. Damus autem universis and singulis
Archiepiscopis, Ducibus, Magnatibus, Comitibus, Vice-Comitibus, Episcopis,
Baronibus, Militibus, Civibus and Burgen. ac omnibus ahis quorum interest, ad
dictum Parliamentum conventur. tenore praesentium firmiter in mandatis, quod
vobis in praenissis faciend. pareant, obediant, and intendant, prout decet. In
cujus rei testimonium has Literas nostras fieri fecimus Patentes. Test me ipsa
apud Westmonasterium, Quinto die Octobris, Anno Regni nostri Sexto.

The like Commission, bearing date 30. die Aprilis An. 7 Eliz. was directed
unto the Archbishop of Canterbury, the Marquess of Winchester Lord Treasurer,
the Duke of Norsolk Earl Marshal of England, the Earl of Arundel, the Earl of
Shrewsbury, the Earl of Derby, Thomas Earl of Sussex, the Earl of Huntingdon,
the Earl of Pembroke, the Earl of Warwick, and the Earl of Leicester, the
Bishop of London, and the Bishop of Rochester, the Lord Cobham, Warden of the
Cinque Ports, the Lord Wentworth, and the Lord Hunsdon, Authorizing them 17,
16, 15, 14, 13, etc. or three of them to Prorogue and continue the Parliament,
ut supra in the other Commissions, mutatis mutandis, unto the 4th day of
October next coming. Test me ipsa apud Westmonasterium 30 die Aprilis Anno
Regni nostri Septimo.

On which 30th day of April, the Lord Treasurer, the Duke of Norfolk, the Earl
of Arundel, the Earl of Derby, the Earl of Sussex, the Earls of Huntingdon,
Pembroke, and Warwick, the Bishop of London, the Lord Admiral, the Lord
Chamberlain, the Lord Cobham, the Lord Wentworth, and the Lord Hunsdon, did
meet in the Parliament Chamber, and in due and accustomed Form did Adjourn the
Parliament unto the 4th day of October according to the said Commission last
specified; and caused the said Commission to be publicly read by Francis
Spilman Esquire, Clerk of the Parliament, in hearing of the Commons then also
present, according to ancient Custom in that behalf.

On the 4th day of October Anno Regni Reginae Eliz. Septimo, The like
Commission ut supra, bearing date the said 4th day of October, directed unto
the Archbishop of Canterbury, the Marquess of Winchester Lord Treasurer, the
Duke of Norfolk Earl Marshal of England, the Earl of Sussex Chief Justice of
all Forests, etc. on this side Trent, Ambrose Earl of Warwick Master of the
Ordnance, the Bishop of London, and the Bishop of Rochester, Edward Lord
Clinton great Admiral of England, William Lord Howard of Effingham Lord
Chamberlain, Thomas Lord Wentworth, and Henry Lord Hunsdon, authorizing them
10, 9, 8, 7, 6, 5, 4, and 3. ut antea, mutatis mutandis, to Prorogue and
continue the same Parliament, in Septimum diem Februarii prox. futurum. Test
me ipsa apud Westmonasterium 4 die Octobris, Anno Regni nostri Septimo. Which
Commission was read by the Clerk of the Parliament, in the Parliament Chamber,
in presence of ten of the Commissioners, and of the Commons.

Memorandum quod hodie septimo die Februarii, Anno Regni Eliz. Dei gratia
Angliae, Franciae and Hiberniae Reginae sidei defensor. etc. Octavo, in quem
diem praesens hoc Parliamentum Prorogatum suer at, convenerunt Domini tam
spirituales quam temporales quorum nomina subsequuntur, viz.

Archiepiscopus Cantuarien., Nicolaus Bacon Miles, Custos magni Sigilli,
Marchio Winton. Thesaurar, Dux Norfolc. Comes Marescallus, Marchio North, Comes
Sussex, Comes Warwick, Episcopus London., Episcopus Roffen., Dominus Clinton
Admirallus, Dominus Howard Camerarius, Dominus Wentworth, and Dominus de
Hunsdon.

Qui cum convenissent, una cum populi atque Burgen. ut vocant, satis magna
frequentia, praedictus Nicolaus Bacon Miles, Dominus Custos magni Sigilli,
paucis verbis declaravit conventum Procerum and populi, quem Parliamentum
vocant, in hunc diem destinatum, a dicta Domina Regina, certis quibusdam de
causis and considerationibus illam ad id specialiter moven., differri in 30
diem Septembris prox. futur.

These foregoing Prorogations of this present Session of Parliament, being thus
at large, or abstractedly transcribed, now follows in Order the Assembling and
Meeting of both Houses in their several places, on Monday the 30th day of
September, to which day it had been last Prorogued, so that either House going
on where they last left, there was no Meeting in the Upper House at all of both
Houses, nor the Queen came not in Person, as she used to do when a new
Parliament began, nor has it ever been used in latter times upon a mere
Prorogation; but yet on Wednesday the second day of October following, by
reason of the Choice of a new Speaker in the House of Commons, which was
occasioned by the Death of the former, the Queens Majesty came in her
accustomed Royalty, as at the beginning of a Parliament is usual, and there
admitted of their new Speaker, presented unto her, whom they had Chosen but the
day before, by virtue of her Majesty's Commission, all which in due Form and
Order follows.

On Monday the 30. day of September, to which day this present Session of
Parliament had been last Prorogued, there Assembled in the Upper House
according to the usual form and course (as also the Knights, Citizens and
Burgesses of the House of Commons did in their own proper place) Sir Nicholas
Bacon Knight, Lord Keeper of the great Seal of England, the Lord Archbishop of
York, the Lord Marquess of Winchester Lord Treasurer of England, the Duke of
Norfolk Earl Marshal of England, the Marquess of Northampton, with diverse
Earls, Viscounts, Bishops and Barons; the particular setting down of whose
names is purposely omitted here (although it were the first day of their
Assembling together) because they are at large set down on the second day of
October following being Wednesday; when by reason of her Majesty's coming in
Person to the Upper House, the presence of the Lords was somewhat greater than
upon this instant Monday.

Hodie retornatum fuit Breve, quo Edwardus Dominus Stafford ad praesens
Parliament. summonitus fuit, qui admissus est ad suum praeheminentiae locum
salvo semper jure superioris sedentis. Consimile pro Henrico Domino Paget.
Consimile pro Rogero Domino North. Consimile pro Roberto Comite Leicestriae.
Consimile pro Henrico Comite Westmorl.

This day Sir Edward Rogers Knight, Comptroller of her Highness Household, Sir
Francis Knolles Knight, her Highness Vice-Chamberlain, Sir William Cecill
Knight, her Highness Principal Secretary, and Sir Ambrose Cave Knight,
Chancellor of her Highness Duchy of Lancaster, four Chief Members of the House
of Commons, and diverse others of that Assembly to the number of twenty persons,
being sent up to the Lords from that House upon some urgent and weighty
occasions, desired to be admitted into the Upper House, there to make known to
their Lordships somewhat wherein they should require their advice, and need
their assistance; upon which, being admitted, the said Mr Comptroller, assisted
with the Personages and Company aforesaid, did in comely order and discreet
modesty, make manifest and known unto the said Lords, that Thomas Williams
Esquire, their late Speaker in the last Session of this Parliament, in the
fifth Year of the Queens Majesty that now is, was bereft from them by Death,
which had been openly and manifestly made known and testified unto them; for
remedy of which defection, they humbly prayed their Lordships advice; after
which the Lord Keeper, first requiring the said Personages a while to withdraw
themselves, and then commending the Order of the matter to the Lords sitting in
consultation for the same, it was by them all upon considerate advice therein
had, thought fit to signify unto the said Commons by the Personages aforesaid,
that they thought it expedient and good, the said Lord Keeper, the Lord
Treasurer of England, the Duke his Grace of Norfolk, and the Lord Marquess of
Northampton, with the four forecited Personages of the said House of Commons,
being also of her Highness most Honorable Privy Council, should in the name of
both of the Assemblies, with all humbleness and due celerity, make intimation
of their said Estate, and the Petition thereupon depending, unto her said
Highness, to which advice the said House of Commons, upon knowledge had of the
same, wholly assented.

Dominus Custos magni Sigilli continuavit praesens Parliamentum usque in diem
Martis primum Octobris.

On Tuesday the first day of October, the Bill for the making void of
fraudulent Gifts and Alienations, was read prima vice.

The Queen, having been moved as it seems the day past about the Death of the
former Speaker, and the Choice of a new one in the House of Commons, by those
eight Right Honorable Personages, who were then and there named to move her
Highness in it; did give Order, that this present Tuesday, both the Lords and
Commons should Assemble, and meet together in the Parliament Chamber, there to
receive her Majesty's Answer. Where being Assembled, the Lord Keeper showed
forth a Commission from her Highness, under the great Seal of England, which
was directed unto him only; the tenor whereof is set down at large in the
Journal of the House of Commons, de An. isto 8 Regin. Eliz. (to which House it
properly belonged) viz. That in respect Thomas Williams Esquire the former Speaker
was dead, therefore the Lord Keeper was for her Majesty, and in her Name, to
will and Command the Knights, Citizens and Burgesses of the said House of
Commons, to resort unto their accustomed place, and there to Elect and choose
amongst themselves, one able and sufficient person, to be their Speaker, for
the rest of this present Parliament, yet to come. And after they should have
made their Election, that then three or four of them, for, and in all their
names, should signify the same unto her Majesty, and thereupon her Highness
would further signify her pleasure unto them, what day and time they should
present him so Elected before her, as it had been used formerly in like Cases
to be done.

There was this day no other Bill, or other business agitated in the Upper
House; for immediately upon the reading of the last abovementioned Commission,
the Continuance of the Parliament is Entered in the Original Journal Book of the
said House, in manner and form following, viz.

Dominus Custos magni Sigilli continuavit praesens Parliamentum usque diem
Mercurii secundum diem Octobris.

On Wednesday the second day of October, it seems there was no meeting of the
Lords, nor any thing done in the Forenoon; neither is any mention made in the
foregoing continuance of this Parliament by the Lord Keeper, to what Hour of
this Wednesday it was continued; which is usual in other continuations of it.
But the reason why they met not till the Afternoon, seems to be, because then
the Queens Majesty her self came thither; to whom Richard Onslow Esquire her
Majesty's Solicitor, having been Chosen Speaker for the House of Commons the
day past, was presented, and admitted by her, in manner and form as follows.

About three of the Clock in the Afternoon this present Wednesday, the second
day of October, the Queens Majesty took her Barge, and Landed on the backside
of the Parliament-Chamber; and so the Earl of Northumberland bearing the Sword,
the Lady Strainge her Trayn, with the Lords in their daily Apparel, and the
Heralds attending on her, she proceeded up into the Privy-Chamber, to prepare
her self; during which time the Lords and Justices put on their Parliament
Robes, and took their places in manner and form following. In which it is to be
noted, that no part of this days passages already set down, is found in the
Original Journal Book of the Upper House; but is either transcribed out of a
certain Anonymous memorial I had by me, in which the presentment of the Speaker
this day, is somewhat exactly set down, or was supplied by my self, upon the
comparing of several things together. Now follow the Names of the Lords and
others as aforesaid.

First on the Form on the North-side, together with the Upper Form at the
nether end, sat the Bishops as follows.

Young Archbishop of York. Grindall Bishop of London. Pilkington Bishop of
Durham. Sands Bishop of Winchester. Birkley Bishop of Bath and Wells. Bett.
Bishop of Carlisle. Barlow Bishop of Chichester. Alleo Bishop of Exeter. Gest.
Bishop of Rochester. Skamler Bishop of Peterburgh. Horn Bishop of Worcester.
Bullingham Bishop of Lincoln. Bentam Bishop of Coventry and Lichfield. Denham
Bishop of Chester. Scorie Bishop of Hereford. Davies Bishop of St David's.
Parkhurst Bishop of Norwich. Cheyney Bishop of Gloucester.
Nota, That these names with those that follow, being transcribed in a
different manner from all others in the residue of the Journals of the Queens
time, were so found with the Names of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal added to
them, in that beforementioned Anonymous memorial of this present Wednesdays
passages, being the second day of October; and were therefore transcribed out
of it, as is aforesaid, rather than out of the Original Journal Book of the
Upper House; although the Series of them that were present set down there, did
serve well to rectify those foregoing, and these also that next ensue.

At the foremost Form on the South Side, sat these Peers, viz.

William Paulet Marquess of Winchester, Lord Treasurer. Thomas Howard Duke of
Norfolk, Earl Marshall of England. William Parre Marquess of Northampton.
Thomas Peircie Earl of Northumberland. Charles Nevill Earl of Westmorland.
George Talbot Earl of Shrewsbury. William Sommerset alias Plantagenet Earl of
Worcester. Thomas Ratcliff Earl of Sussex. Henry Haistings Earl of Huntingdon.
Edward Seymor Earl of Hartford. Robert Sutton alias Dudley, Earl of Leicester,
and Master of the Horse. Anthony Brown Viscount Mountague.
Nota, That Edward de Vere Earl of Oxford, Lord Great Chamberlain of England,
Edward Manors Earl of Rutland, William Bowrchier Earl of Bath, and Henry
Wriotheisly Earl of Southhampton; were at this time under Age, and in Ward to
the Queen; and therefore they were not admitted to take their places in the
Uppermost House, but (if they were present) did either stand besides the upper
part of the Rail, at the higher end of the said House, or were admitted to
kneel at the upper end of the same House, near the Chair of State, at this
time, and upon like solemn days; for no Peer is admitted to have his free
Voice, or sit as a Member of that Great Council, until he have accomplished
his full Age, unless by the special Grace of the Prince.

At the Form at their back, and the nether Form at the nether end, sat these
Peers.

Fynes Lord Clinton, as Lord Admiral, sat first amongst the Barons. Howard
Lord Effingham, as Lord Chamberlain of her Majesty's Household, sat second.
Nevill Lord of Burgaveny, sat in his due place of pre-eminence, and so the
rest that follow, unless such as were misplaced by the Clerks error, which is
too frequent. Zouch Lord Zouch. Standley Lord Strange. Birkley Lord Birkley.
Parker Lord Morley. Brook Lord Cobham. Stafford Lord Stafford. Gray Lord Gray
of Wilton. Sutton Lord Dudley. Lumley Lord Lumley. Blunt Lord Mountjoy. Darcy
Lord Darcy of Mevill. Standley Lord Mounteagle. Sands Lord Sands. Vaux Lord
Vaux. Windsor Lord Windsor. Wentworth Lord Wentworth. Borough Lord Borough.
Mordant Lord Mordant. Cromwell Lord Cromwell. Evers Lord Evers. Willoughby Lord
Willoughby. Sheffeild Lord Sheffeild. Paget Lord Paget. Darcy de Chiche Dominus
Darcy. North Lord North of Carthelige. Bridges Lord Shandois. Haistings Lord
Haistings of Loughborough. Carey Lord Carey of Hunsdon. St John Lord St John of
Bletsoe.
Nota, That Dutchet Lord Audley, and the Lord Dacres of the North, were under
Age.

All which Peers abovesaid had their Mantles, Hood and Circots furred with
Miniver, their Arms put on the right side, and the Duke of Norfolk had Bars of
Miniver; the Marquess of Winchester and Northampton had three Bars of Miniver,
the Earls likewise; the Viscounts two, and the Barons two.

Item, On the upper Sack of Wool sat the Lord Keeper, till the Queen came;
and then went to his place at the Rail. On the Woolsack on the Northside, sat
Sir Robert Catlin, and Sir James Dyer, the Queens two Chief Justices, Mr Corbet
Weston and Southcote Justices of both Benches; on the Woolsack on the
Southside, sat Sir William Cecill the Queens Principal Secretary, Sir William
Cordall Master of the Rolls, Sir Thomas Sanders Chief Baron, Baron Whiddon.....
Carus the Queens Sergeant,..... Gerrard the Queens Attorney; and on the nether
Sack sat Mr Vaughan, and Yale, Masters of the Chancery, Mr Spilman Clerk of
the Parliament, Mr Martin Clerk of the Crown, and Mr Peile his Joint Patentee.
And behind them kneeled Smith, Clerk of the Council, and Jones Clerk of the
Signet, Permiter and Dister.

Then the Queens Majesty being Apparelled in her Parliament Robes, with a Caul
on her Head, came forth, and took her Seat; the Marquess of Northampton
carrying the Cap of Maintenance; and after stood on her right hand the Duke of
Norfolk, carrying his Marshals Rod, and on her left hand the Earl of
Northumberland, with the Sword, the Heralds also and Sergeants at Arms being
before her; her Majesty's Mantle was born up on either side from her Shoulders,
by the Lord Chamberlain and the Lord of Hunsdon, who also stood still by her,
for the assisting thereof; when she stood up, her Train was born by the Lady
Strange, assisted by Sir Francis Knolles Vice-Chamberlain; at the left hand of
the Queen, and on the South Side, kneeled the Ladies, and at the Rail at the
Queens back, on the right hand, stood the Lord Keeper; and on the left hand the
Lord Treasurer.

Then the Queen (as aforesaid) being placed at the South Door, came in the
House of Commons, bringing in between Sir Edward Rogers Comptroller of the
Queens House and Sir Francis Knolles Vice-Chamberlain, Mr Richard Onslow Esquire
the Queens Solicitor, whom they had Chosen for their Speaker, and after a
Reverence done, proceeded after down to the Wall, and from thence came up to
the Rail, in the way doing three Reverences, and then began the said Speaker to
say, as follows.

IF it please your Royal Majesty, most Virtuous and most Excellent Princess, At
the humble Suit of the Knights, Citizens and Burgesses of your nether House of
Parliament, now Assembled, was signified from your Majesty, by the mouth of the
Lord Keeper, by force of your Highness Letters of Commission, your pleasure and
grant of free Election to the Knights, Citizens and Burgesses, to choose a fit,
and learned man, to be their Speaker, instead of Thomas Williams Esquire their late
Speaker, whom it has pleased God to call to his Mercy. For which they have
Commanded me, in their Names, to render unto your Majesty most humble thanks;
And have Commanded and forced me, to my great grief, to signify to your
Majesty, how accordingly they have proceeded to an Election, and chosen and
assigned me (as I may say) being most unworthy to speak in this place, for this
Parliament; and for that I would not be obstinate, I am forced to wound my self
with their Sword, which wound yet being green and new, your Majesty being the
perfect Physician, may Cure in disallowing that which they have allowed; for
that, without your consent it is nothing. And although I being very loath to
trouble your Highness, have made Suit and used all ways and means to avoid it,
yet could I find no remedy; and therefore am driven to seek remedy at your
hands; for though I have the experience of their uprightness, wisdom and
knowledge, which chose me, who if they would have found any fault in me, I
would lightly have believed them (notwithstanding that we are for the most part
given to think too much of our selves) but in this day, that they seem to
enable me to this calling, whereof I know my self unable, I cannot credit them,
no more than the simple Patient grievously tormented with sickness, will
believe the Physician, nay the whole College of them, if they say he has no
grief, pain or sickness. I therefore do not attempt this releasing of me for
any ease of my self, but would be glad to serve your Majesty, to the uttermost
of my Power, in the Office of Sollicitorship, whereunto I am appointed, and not
in this, being unfit for the same; and that for diverse Causes. For first, I
consider, I have to deal with many well Learned, the Flower and Choice of the
Realm, whose deep understanding my Wit cannot attain to reach unto. No, if they
for great carefulness would often inculcate. it into my dull Head, to signify
the same unto your Highness, yet my Memory is so slippery by Nature and
Sickness, that I should likely lose it by the way; yet if perhaps I kept part
thereof, I have no other knowledge to help my self withal, but a little in the
Law, far inferior to diverse in this House; and so should want Learning and
Utterance to declare their meanings, as it requires; specially when I consider
your Royal Majesty, a Princess endowed with so many Virtues, Learning and
flowing Eloquence, it will abash and astonish me; and therefore finding these
infirmities, and other in me, I think my self most unworthy of this place. I
trust therefore only in your Highness, that you will disallow this Election;
and the rather, for that by the true intent of your said Letters, it may not be
gathered that they should elect any of your Majesty's Officers; for although
the words be to have their free Election, yet the Law may restrain them in some
measure: As for Example, we find in the Law, that if it would please your
Majesty, to grant License to a Dean and Chapter, to purchase to them and their
Successors, a hundred pound yearly; which words be generally: yet if the
purchased Lands be holden in Capite, this grant is void. And again, if you
grant the Fines and Amerciaments of all your Tenants to one, who after chances
to be Sheriff of a Shire, yet being a Sheriff he cannot have them. So this (me
seems) if it please your Highness, serves my Case. Another Cause is for want
of substance to maintain this my Countenance; but yet your Majesty's goodness
in this point stops my Mouth, for that I have none other living, but in
manner by you. So for all these considerations, and diverse others, as it shall
please your Majesty to consider, I humbly desire your Highness to disallow this
Election, Commanding them to repair again together, and to choose another more
fit, to serve the same. And so he ended, and did his Reverence.

Then the Queen called the Keeper, declaring her opinion in Answering him, who
returning to his place, said as follows.

Mr Onslow, The Queens Majesty has heard and well understood this disabling
your self to this Office; and does well perceive your earnest Suit to be
discharged of the same; and for Answer, has Commanded me to say, that she
doubts not, but you very well understand, that when one is chosen to serve
the Commonwealth, it is not in him which is called, who has appointed him
thereunto. Also there is an old similitude, that like as it appertains to the
head, to dispose every inferior member in his place, so it pertains to the
Queens Majesty, being the Head, to appoint every one in the Commonwealth; This
being truth, and her Majesty withal remembering your Fidelity and long
Experience in Parliament matters, and again being chosen by so learned and
expert men, thinks therefore your fitness needs not to be disputed here,
and therefore they giving unto you such Faith and Credit, according to an
Ancient Custom, she cannot but do the like; and also you in disabling your self
have abled your self, and therefore she does allow and approve this their
Election, nothing doubting her opinion in your ability to serve this turn; and
so ended.

Mr Onslow's Answer.

SEeing that it has pleased your Majesty to ratify this Election, I to the
uttermost of my power shall serve your Highness, and this Commonwealth; but
first my humble suit is, that it would please your Majesty, to accept my good
will: and the better to discharge my Duty toward them which have Chosen me,
that in great matters sent from them, I may have access to your Majesty at
times convenient, as the weight shall require. Secondly, If by weakness I shall
mistake the effect and meaning of the matters committed to me, by the Knights,
Citizens and Burgesses, and thereby against my will misreport them; that then
thereby this Commonwealth may take no detriment; but that I may confer again
with them, the better to understand their meaning, and so with more words to
utter the same unto you; And I shall pray, as I am bound, to God, for your long
and prosperous Reign over us.

Then her Majesty called the Lord Keeper, and Commanded him to Answer him,
which he did as follows.

Mr Speaker, The Queens Majesty has heard your humble Petitions, and request
made unto her, the effect whereof she gathers to stand in two points; first,
for access to her person; and secondly, for good interpretation of your
meaning, and also larger Declaration thereof, if need be. For the former, her
Highness (as her Noble Progenitors have done) is well contented, that in
convenient time, and for convenient Causes, in -convenient place, and without
importunity (for that these parts now touched, have not been before this time so
well handled, as she trusts now it shall be) which considered, as free access
she grants you, as any other has had. For the second point, because no man
at all times may do so well, but sometimes things may be uttered, which may be
mispoken; for which cause, in that time also you shall have her intreatable;
but she thinks your circumspection to be such as she shall not therein need.
And so ended.

Now a word or two to remember you here present of both the Houses; first, this
it is that I would advise you in this your proceeding, to prefer the most
weighty matters first, and not trouble your selves with small matters, and of
no weight; and therein also, that all be done to understand the truth, and to
avoid all superfluous matters, and losing or driving away of time. Secondly, It
is profitable that you my Lords, and all others that be here, consider that
long time requires great expenses, and therefore wish you to make Expedition
the rather, to avoid the same. And yet not meaning such Expedition, that any
thing needful to be done, should be lightly passed over, and not substantially
done, and seen unto; but only I mean that you should settle your selves wholly
to mighty matters, and those which be necessary, and to spare superfluous
things, and which needs not; And this is the sum I have to say.

Then the Speaker, and the Knights, Citizens and Burgesses of the House of
Commons, having made their low Reverence toward her Majesty, departed to their
own House; and the Queen (after the Lord Keeper had by her Majesty's
Commandment, continued the Parliament unto the Morrow following) returned into
her Privy-Chamber, and there shifted her, and then repaired to her Barge; and
so to the Court. Hactenus ex Memoriali praefato.

On Thursday the third day of October, were three Bills read; of which the last
being the Bill for the better Execution of certain Statutes, and for the
reformation of certain disorders used in the Law, was read prima vice, and tunc
commissa Archiepiscopo Cantuarien., Duci Norfolciae, Comiti Mareschall.
Angliae, Comiti Salopiae, Comiti Wigorniae, and Comiti Leicester, Episcopo
Dunelmen., Episcopo Elien. and Episcopo Carliolen., Domino Cobham, Domino Gray
de Wilton, and Domino Haistings, Domino Primario Justiciario Banci Regis,
Domino Primario Baroni Scaccarii, and Scrvienti Carus.

Nota, That this days passages are wholly transcribed out of the Original
Journal Book of the Upper House, as are also the greatest part of the days
following; although the whole proceedings of Wednesday foregoing were inserted
out of the beforementioned Anonymous memorial, touching the Speakers
presentment and allowance, which I had by me.

Nota also, That the former Bill touching the better Execution of certain
Statutes, etc. was not only committed upon the first reading, which is not
usual till after the second, but committed also to the Judges, being but
Assistants of the Upper House, and to the Queens Sergeant, being but a mere
Attendant upon the same, jointly with the Lords, the only proper and undoubted
Members of that Great Council; which is a matter to be observed, because of
later days neither the said Assistants nor Attendant, are ever appointed joint
Committees with the Lords, as here; but only Commanded by the House to attend
upon the Committee, and there to give such advice, as shall be required from
them; which is no greater respect yielded them at a Committee than in the House
it self, sitting the Parliament, and were they still admitted to be Committees,
as they usually were in all these first Parliaments of the Queen, yet could no
inconvenience ensue thereby; because at a Committee things are only prepared,
and made ready for the House; in which and no where else they ought to be
concluded, and expedited.

And Nota lastly, That the Parliament was this day continued to Saturday the
5th day of October ensuing; but whether by the Lord Keeper, who (as it seems)
at this time fell sick of the Gout, or by the Lord Treasurer, who for a while
afterward was appointed by the Queens Commission to continue it, according to
the usual form and course in such case used, does not appear in the Original
Journal Book of the Upper House, but is omitted through the negligence of
Francis Spilman Esquire, now Clerk of the same House.

On Saturday the 5th day of October (to which day the Parliament had been last
continued) two Bills of no great moment, had each of them one reading; of which
the second, being the Bill for the taking away Clergy in certain Cases, was
read secunda vice, and commissa Archiepiscopo Eboracen., Duci Norf., Comiti
Huntington, Comiti Leicester, Vice-Comiti Mountague, Episcopo London, Episcopo
Dunelmen., Episcopo Lincoln., Domino Clinton, Domino Morley, Domino Wentworth,
Domino Willoughby, Domino North, Domino Hunsdon, the two Chief Justices, and
the Chief Baron.

Nota, That the Judges being mere Assistants, and no Members of the Upper
House, were here also made joint Committees with the Lords, which has never
been admitted of in later times.

These two Bills were read, the Lord Keeper by reason of his being sick of the
Gout abstaining this day, and a good while aster, from the Upper House; and
therefore William Lord Marquess of Winchester, Lord Treasurer of England, was
Authorized by verbal Commission from the Queen, to supply his place; and
accordingly continued the Parliament unto Monday next, being the 7th day of
October; the form and manner whereof (although the President be very rare, and
of great use) is only entered very briefly in the Original Journal Book of the
Upper House, in these words following.

Hodie dictus Thesaurarius, ex Mandato Dominae Reginae, eo quod Dominus Custos
Magni Sigilli Podagrae Morbo laboraret, continuavit praesens Parliamentum usque
in diem Lunae proxim. hora consueta.

Nota, That here the Marquess of Winchester Lord Treasurer of England, did
supply the Lord Keepers place in the Upper House, without any Authority given
him by Commission under the great Seal; which in like Cases is usual, and
therefore it is most probable that her Majesty did by word of Mouth, give him
this Commandment or Commission, either in private, or in the presence of some
other. Lords of the Upper House; which although it be not very usual, yet there
want not Presidents of the same nature, as I was assured by Henry Elsing Esquire,
at this time Clerk of the Upper House, upon Friday the 16th day of April 1630.;
and that especially in former times, as of King Edward the third, and others,
the Lord Keepers place was (during his absence) for the most part supplied by
virtue of the Kings verbal Command; and seldom by Commission.

October the 6th Sunday.

On Monday the 7th day of October, An Act to make void fraudulent Gifts,
Bargains and Alienations, made for the deceiving of Creditors, was read prima
vice, and committed to Justice Dyer: Quod nota.

The Lord Treasurer continued the Parliament until the next day at nine of the
Clock.

On Tuesday the 8th day of October, the Bill that no man killing any person by
misfortune, at twelve score or longer mark, shall therefore forfeit his Lands,
Tenements, or Goods, was read prima vice.

Dominus Thesaurarius continuavit praesens Parliament. usque in diem Jovis
prox. hora nona.

On Thursday the 10th day of October, Three Bills of no great moment, had each
of them one reading; of which the last being the Bill that no man killing any
person at twelvescore prick, or longer mark, shall forfeit his Goods or
Chattels (in which Bill for that it touches the Queens Prerogative, it was
thought not convenient to proceed further, without her Highness pleasure first
known in the same.)

Dominus Thesaurarius continuavit praesens Parliamentum usque in diem Sabbati
prox. hora nona; and so every sitting day until Friday the 25th day of October
exclusive, the Parliament was continued in this Form by the Lord Treasurer,
except Monday the 21th day, and Tuesday the 22th day of October; on both which
days the House did sit, and Bills were read; but in the Original Journal Book
is no mention of continuing the Court by any person; which seems to have
happened by negligence of the Clerk: and after the said 25th day of October (on
which Sir Robert Catlin Knight, Lord Chief Justice of the Kings Bench, was
appointed by her Majesty's Commission to supply the place of the Lord Keeper,
during his Sickness) it was continued until Saturday the 9th day of November
ensuing; when Sir Nicholas Bacon, Lord Keeper of the Great Seal, repaired again
to the Upper House, and there continued his place, till the Dissolution of this
present Session of Parliament.

On Saturday the 12th day of October, Two Bills of no great moment, had each of
them one reading; of which the first being the Bill against fraudulent Gifts of
Goods and Chattels, and also a remedy for Creditors against Bankrupts, was
Committed to the Lord Chief Justice Dyer, and Justice Southcote, to be by them
considered against the next meeting: Quod nota.

October the 13th Sunday.

On Monday the 14th day of October, to which day the Parliament had been last
continued by the Lord Treasurer, Two Bills had each of them one reading; of
which the first being the Bill for the taking away of Clergy from Pick-Purses,
and Cut-Purses, was read secunda vice, and commissa ad ingrossand.

On Tuesday the 15th day of October, to which day the Parliament had been last
continued by the Lord Treasurer, Three Bills had each of them one reading; of
which the two first, the one being the Bill to take away the benefit of the
Clergy from certain Offenders for some Felonies, for which by the Common Law
they could not be denied it, was read tertia vice and communi omnium Procerum
assensu conclusa. And the other being a Bill for the Confirmation of Fines and
Recoveries, notwithstanding the fault of the Original Writ, and majore Procerum
numero assentientium conclusa est. And the said two Bills so concluded, were
committed unto the Queens Attorney, and Mr Martin, to be carried down to the
House of Commons.

On Wednesday the 16. day of October, the Lords did meet in the Parliament
Chamber, and nothing done, but the Parliament continued by the Lord Treasurer
in usual Form, until Thursday the 17. day of October.

On Thursday the 17. day of October, Three Bills of no great moment, had each
of them one reading; of which the first being the Bill to Naturalize John
Stafford, born beyond the Seas, was prima vice lect. and the third being
against fraudulent Gifts of Goods and Chattels, and also a remedy against
Bankrupts, was by the consent of all the Lords concluded.

On Saturday the 19. day of October, to which day the Parliament had been last
continued, on Thursday foregoing, by the Lord Treasurer, the Bill for the
punishment of the negligence and false return of Writs, by under-Sheriffs and
Bailiffs; was by common consent of the Lords concluded, and with two other
Bills before concluded, was sent to the House of Commons by Sergeant Carus, and
the Attorney General.

On Monday the 21. day of October, the Bill for annexing of Hexhamshire to the
County of Northumberland, was read prima vice.

Two Bills were brought up to the Lords from the House of Commons, viz. One to
take the benefit of Clergy from certain Offenders, returned exped.; And another
to repeal a branch of a Statute made Anno 23 Hen. 8. touching prices of
Barrells and Kilderkins.

On Tuesday the 22. day of October, to which day the Parliament had been last
continued, two Bills of no great moment, had each of them one reading; of which
the second, being the Bill for the annexing of Hexhamshire to the County of
Northumberland, was read secunda vice; and committed to the Archbishop of York,
the Earl of Northumberland, the Earls of Westmoreland, and Bedford, the Bishop
of Durham, the Bishop of Carlisle, the Lord Evers, the Lord Rich, and the Lord
North, and to Justice Welsh and Sergeant Carus.

Nota, That here a Judge, being but an Assistant, and a Sergeant, being but an
Attendant upon the Upper House, are made Joint-Committees with the Lords; Ut
vide plus on Thursday the third day of this instant October foregoing.

Nota also, That an Extraordinary Proxy is Entered in the beginning of the
Original Journal Book of the Upper House, to have been introduced this day,
being as follows, viz.

22 die Octobris introductae sunt literae Procuratoriae Cuthberti Domini Ogle,
in quibus Procuratores constituit Franciscum Comitem Bedford, and Johannem
Dominum Lumley.

This I call an Extraordinary Proxy, in respect that a Temporal Lord did
Constitute two Proctors; whereas usually they nominate but one, and the
Spiritual Lords for the most part two; and this Proxy of the Lord Ogle's may
the rather seem unusual, in respect that of sixteen Temporal Lords, who were
absent by her Majesty's License from this Session of Parliament, there was but
one more, viz. Francis Earl of Bedford (ut vide on Saturday the 9. day of
November following) who Constituted above one Proxy.

It is also worth the noting, that Robert Earl of Leicester, being at this time
a Favorite, was Constituted the sole and joint Proxy of eight several Temporal
Lords, who with six others, as is aforesaid, were absent this Session of
Parliament: from which, as also from other Presidents of former and later
times, it may easily be gathered, that any Member of the Upper House, by the
ancient usage and custom of the same, is capable of as many Proxies, as shall
be directed unto him, although there was an Order made in the said House to the
contrary A. D. 1626. That no Lord or Member whatsoever of the Upper House,
should for the time to come, be capable of above two Proxies at the most; which
said Order was occasioned in respect that George Duke of Buckingham (Favorite
of the King Deceased, and of King Charles) being guilty of many Crimes, did, to
strengthen himself by Voices, not only procure diverse persons to be made
Members of that House, but also engrossed to himself near upon twenty several
Proxies.

Vide one other Extraordinary Proxy on Saturday the 9th day of November, and
another on Sunday December the first following.

This Forenoon also these twenty Lords under written, were appointed to repair
in the Afternoon to the Queens Majesty; viz.

The Archbishop of York. The Earl of Northumberland. The Earl of Westmoreland.
The Earl of Shrewsbury. The Earl of Worcester. The Earl of Sussex. The Earl of
Huntingdon. The Earl of Warwick. Viscount Bindon. Viscount Mountague. The
Bishop of London. The Bishop of Durham. The Bishop of Winchester. The Lord
Cobham. The Lord Rich. The Lord Wentworth. The Lord Pagett. The Lord Sheffeild.
The Lord Hastings of Loughborough. The Lord Hunsdon.
The business about which these Lords repaired to the Queen, is not in the
Original Journal Book it self of the Upper House, but it may be guested it was
concerning those two great businesses of the Queens Marriage, and the
Declaration of the next Heir, and Successor after the Queens Decease, to the
Crown; which business bred so much distaste afterward between her Majesty and
her Subjects in this Session; so that, as afterward the Lords did Petition the
Queen about it, so now (it should seem) these Lords repaired unto her, either
to desire leave to prefer that Petition, and that they might confer with the
House of Commons about it, or else to know of her Majesty a fitting time, when
they might repair unto her, with their said Petition, and so receive Answer
unto it. But what the Queen replied at this time, is hard to be conjectured;
only it follows at large, that on Tuesday the 5th day of November, the
Members of both Houses, for that end appointed, repaired to her Majesty in the
Afternoon; but whether they then offered up their Petitions unto her Majesty,
or whether the House of Commons did at this Session of Parliament, prefer any
Petition at all concerning those two great matters aforesaid, is hard to be
determined.

No mention is made in the Original Journal Book of continuing the Parliament;
which seems to have happened by the Clerks negligence.

On Wednesday the 23th day of October, the Bill to repeal a branch of a Statute
made Anno 23 Hen. 8. touching the prices of Barrels and Kilderkins, was read
prima vice.

An Act declaring the manner of making and Consecrating of the Archbishops and
Bishops of the Realm, to be good, lawful and perfect, was brought from the
House of Commons.

Dominus Thesaurarius continuavit praesens Parliamentum usque in diem Jovis
prox.

On Thursday the 24th day of October, the Archbishop of York, the Lord
Treasurer, the Duke of Norfolk, and diverse other Lords both Spiritual and
Temporal, did Assemble in the Parliament-Chamber, where nothing was done, but
only the continuance of the Parliament, until Friday next at ten of the Clock.

On Friday the 25th day of October, the Lord Treasurer signified to all the
Lords, that the Queens Highness, considering the decay of his Memory and
Hearing, being Griefs accompanying Hoary Hairs, and Old Age; and understanding
the Lord Keepers slow amendment, intended to supply both their said defects by
Sir Robert Catlin Knight, Chief Justice of the Kings Bench, and showed forth
her Majesty's Commission under the Great Seal of England, which the Clerk by
Commandment openly read, in haec verba.

ELizabeth, by the Grace of God, Queen of England, France and Ireland, Defender
of the Faith, etc.
To our Trusty and well Beloved, Sir Robert Catlin Knight, Chief Justice of the
Pleas to be holden before us, Greeting.
Where our right trusty and well-beloved Councellor, Sir Nicholas Bacon Knight,
Lord Keeper of our Great Seal of England, is at this present sore visited with
sickness, that he is not able to travel to the Upper House of this our present
Parliament, holden at Westminster, nor there to supply the room and place in
the said Upper House amongst the Lords Spiritual and Temporal there Assembled,
as to the Office of the Lord Chancellor, or Lord Keeper of the Great Seal of
England, has been accustomed, We, minding the same place and room to be
supplied in all things, as appertains, have named and appointed you, from day
to day, and time to time hereafter, during our pleasure, to use and occupy the
place and room of the said Lord Keeper, in our said Upper House of Parliament,
amongst the said Lords Spiritual and Temporal there Assembled; and there to do
and execute in all things from day to day, and time to time, as the said Lord
Keeper of the Great Seal of England, should and might do, if he were there
present, using and supplying the same place. Wherefore we will and Command you
the said Sir Robert Catlin, to attend unto and about the Executing of the
premises with effect. And these our Letters Patents shall be your sufficient
Warrant, and discharge for the same, in every behalf. In Witness whereof we
have caused these our Letters to be made Patents.

Witness our Self at Westminster the 25th day of October, in the Eighth Year of
Our Reign. Martin.


The Bill to repeal a branch of a Statute made in the 23th Year of Henry 8.
touching prices of Barrels and Kilderkins, was read tertia vice, and by common
consent of all the Lords concluded.

Dominus Capitalis Justiciarius continuavit praesens Parliamentum usque in diem
Sabbati proximum.

On Saturday the 26th day of October, the Bill declaring the manner of making
and Consecrating of the Archbishops and Bishops of this Realm, to be good,
lawful and perfect, was read prima vice.

Memorandum, The Lords after deliberate Consultation and advice taken, how to
proceed in the great matters of Succession and Marriage, before moved by the
House of Commons, did this present day send Sergeant Carus, and Mr Attorney
down unto them, to signify that they would a chosen number should be sent up
unto them, for their knowledge to be had of the same. Vide concerning this
business on Wednesday the 30th day of October, now next ensuing; as also on
Tuesday the 5th day of November following.

Dominus Capitalis Justiciarius continuavit praesens Parliamentum usque in diem
Lunae prox.

October the 27th Sunday.

On Monday the 28. day of October, Sir Robert Catlyn Knight, Lord Chief Justice
of the Kings Bench (supplying the place of the Lord Keeper, at this time sick
of the Gout, as is beforementioned) with diverse other Lords Spiritual and
Temporal, met in the Upper House; but nothing appears to have been done in
the Original Journal of the same House, only the continuance of the Parliament
unto Wednesday next following.

On Wednesday the 30. day of October, Two Bills of no great moment, had each of
them one reading; of which the second being the Bill declaring the manner of
making and Consecrating of Archbishops and Bishops of this Realm to be good,
lawful, and perfect, was read secunda vice.

The Lords whose names are here next after written, were appointed to have
Conference with a settled number of the House of Commons, touching Petition to
be made to the Queens Highness, as well for the Succession, as for her
Marriage, viz.

The Archbishop of York. The Lord Treasurer. The Duke of Norfolk. The Marquess
of Northampton. The Earl of Northumberland. The Earl of Westmorland. The Earl
of Shrewsbury. The Earl of Worcester. The Earl of Sussex. The Earl of
Huntingdon. The Earl of Warwick. The Earl of Bedford. The Earl of Pembroke. The
Earl of Leicester. Viscount Mountague. Viscount Bindon. The Bishop of London.
The Bishop of Durham. The Bishop of Winchester. The Bishop of Worcester. The
Bishop of Lincoln. The Bishop of Rochester. The Bishop of Coventry and
Lichfield. The Lord Admiral. The Lord Chamberlain. The Lord Morley. The Lord
Cobham. The Lord Gray. The Lord Wentworth. The Lord Windsor. The Lord Rich. The
Lord Sheffeild. The Lord Paget. The Lord North. The Lord Haistings of
Loughborough. The Lord Hunsdon.
It should seem that the Lords had intended at first to have appointed but
thirty of themselves, to have joined with the House of Commons, about the
foresaid Treaty or Conference, to be had between them, touching the said great
matters of Succession and Marriage, however it fell out afterward, as
appears by the names above set down, that they appointed more: for it
appears plainly by the Original Journal Book of the House of Commons,
(although there be no mention at all of it in that of the Upper House) that the
Lords did this day send down word unto the House of Commons, by Mr Sergeant
Carus, and Mr Attorney, that they had Chosen thirty of themselves, to consult
and confer with a Select Committee of the said House, touching the foresaid
great business: touching which see more on Tuesday the 5th day of November
following.

Dominus Capitalis Justiciarius continuavit praesens Parliamentum usque in diem
Jovis prox.

On Thursday the 31th day of October, the Bill for declaring the manner of
making and Consecrating of the Archbishops and Bishops of this Realm, to be
good, lawful and perfect, Commissa est to the Chief Justice of the
Common Pleas, Justice Southcote and Attorney General.

The Bill for annexing of Hexamshire to the County of Northumberland, was read
secunda vice.

The House of Commons appointed Sir Edward Rogers Knight, Comptroller of her
Highness Household, Sir Francis Knolles her Majesty's Vice-Chamberlian, Sir
William Cecill, her Highness Chief Secretary, Sir Ambrose Cave Knight,
Chancellor of her Duchy of Lancaster, Sir William Peeter, Sir Ralph Sadler,
Sir Walter Mildmay Knights, all of her Highness Privy Council, and diverse other
Members of the House of Commons, to have Conference with the Lords aforenamed
(whose names see on yesterday foregoing) touching those two great matters of
the Succession and Marriage, to be dealt in by Petition to her Majesty. As see
more at large upon to Morrow ensuing in the Afternoon.

Dominus Capitalis Justiciarius continuavit praesens Parliamentum usque in diem
Martis 5 die Novembris prox.

On Tuesday the 5th day of November, the Bill for the annexing of Hexamshire
unto the County of Northumberland, and the Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction of the
same unto the Sea of the Bishopric of Durham, was read tertia vice, and
communi omnium Procerum assensu conclusa.

The Nobles under-named were appointed to wait on the Queens Highness this
Afternoon, with thirty of the House of Commons, by her Highness special
Commandment.

The Archbishop of York. The Lord Treasurer. The Duke of Norsolk. The Marquess
of Northampton. The Earl of Northumberland. The Earl of Westmerland. The Earl
of Shrewsbury. The Earl of Worcester. The Earl of Huntingdon. The Earl of
Sussex. The Earl of Warwick. The Earl of Bedford. The Earl of Pembroke. The
Earl of Leicester. Viscount Mountague. Viscount Bindon. The Bishop of London.
The Bishop of Duresm. The Lord Clinton Lord Admiral. The Lord Howard of
Effingham, Lord Chamberlain. The Lord Morley. The Lord Lumley. The Lord Rich.
The Lord Sheffeild. The Lord Paget. The Lord North. The Lord Haistings of
Loughborough, and The Lord Hunsdon.
Dominus Capitalis Justiciarius continuavit praesens Parliament. usque in diem
Crastinum hora consueta.

But there is no mention at all in the Original Journal Book of the Upper
House, to what end or purpose the Lords abovementioned, with those thirty
Members of the House of Commons, repaired to her Majesty; which doubtless fell
out by the great negligence (in a matter of so great weight) of Francis Spilman
Esquire, Clerk of the Upper House, and therefore I have thought fitting and
necessary to supply it at large, partly out of the Original Journal Book of the
House of Commons, and partly out of other several Manuscript Memorials, I had
by me; all which in their proper place I have particularly vouched. It is
therefore in the first place to be noted, as fit matter of preparation to that
which follows, that these two great matters touching her Majesty's Marriage,
and the Declaration of a certain Successor, were agitated in the House of
Commons in the first Session of this present Parliament, in An. 5 Regin. Eliz.
and thereupon the greatest part of the said House, with Thomas Williams their
Speaker, did prefer a Petition to her Majesty, upon Thursday the 28th day of
January, in the said fifth Year of her Majesty's Reign, by her Allowance; in
which having humbly supplicated her Majesty to Marry, or in default of Issue of
her own Body, to declare a certain Successor, they received a gracious Answer.
But now the same Parliament reassembling again to this second Session thereof
in the eighth year of the Reign of the Queen, and finding nothing to have been
acted by her Majesty in either kind; but that she remained still a Virgin,
without all likelihood of Marriage, and that the Succession of the Crown
depended upon great uncertainties; some holding the Queen of Scots to have best
Right, others the Countess of Lenox, being the Daughter of Margaret of England,
by Archibald Douglass Earl of Anguisse, her Second Husband; and others also
argued very strongly for Catherine Countess of Hartford, being the Daughter and
Coheir of Henry Gray Marquess Dorset, and Frances his Wife, the Eldest Daughter
and Coheir of Charles Brandon Duke of Suffolk, by Mary the French Queen, being
the youngest Daughter of Henry the Seventh; and especially seeing that the
Queen of Scots, having Married the Lord Darley, (whom she had Created Duke of
Albany, and had by him Issue a Son born before the beginning of this Session of
Parliament, who afterward was Monarch of Great Britain) and duly considering
also, that the Scottish Queen had, during the Life of the French King her
Husband, by his means pretended a right to the Kingdom of England, before the
Queen her self, in respect of the Popes Authority; and that some also did not
stick to set a broach the Title of the Lady Elianor, being the younger Sister
and Coheir with the Countess of Hartford, Married to the Earl of Cumberland:
therefore I say all these said premises being duly weighed by both the said
Houses of Parliament, it made them to be more earnest in Petitioning her
Majesty at this time, to the same effect; although it seems that the Petition
delivered at this time, was chiefly preferred in the name of the Lords of the
Upper House, as that other Petition had formerly been preferred in the Name of
the Commons, in the first Session of this Parliament, in An. 5 Regin. Eliz.
whence it has come to pass, that neither of these Petitions being set down in
the Original Journal Book of the Upper House of Commons, in either of these two
Sessions of Parliament, the times of their delivery have been exceedingly
confounded together, in all such several Copies as I have perused of them; in
which, as also in Sir Robert Cotton's first Volume of the Journals of
Parliament of the Queens time (which are very imperfect and fragmentary) they
are erroneously Entered to have been both delivered in An. 1563. in which Year,
as also in part of the Year 1562. the Session in An. 5 Regin. Eliz. was
continued.

Post Meridiem.

The Archbishop of York, the Lord Treasurer, and the other Lords, whose names
are mentioned in the former part of this day, with Sir Edward Rogers Knight,
Comptroller of her Highness Household, and Sir William Cecill Knight, her
Majesty's Principal Secretary, and diverse other Members of the House of
Commons, repaired to her Majesty this Afternoon, being at her Palace of
Whitehall, to receive Answer from her Highness, touching those two great
businesses of her Marriage, and the Declaration of her Successor, as appears
plainly by the Original Journal Book of the House of Commons, fol. 266. a.
where the report of her Majesty's Answer is set down, which she gave this
Afternoon; although there be no mention at all thereof in the Original
Journal Book of the Upper House. And that this was the cause and ground of
their attending upon her Majesty at this time, appears also plainly by a
certain Manuscript Memorial, or Diary, kept and set down by Sir William Cecill,
her Highness Principal Secretary (and afterward Lord Treasurer of England) of
the passages of the greatest part of her Majesty's Reign: in which the words
are as follows.

Nov. 5. The Queen had before her thirty Lords and thirty of the Commons of the
Parliament, to receive her Answer concerning the Petition for the Succession,
and for Marriage.

But whether the Lords preferred their said Petition this Afternoon, or whether
they had supplicated her Majesty any time before, does not any where certainly
appear; neither can I possibly gather further than by conjecture: and so it is
most probable, that though her Majesty had notice before, what their Petition
was, yet it was not preferred till this Afternoon. For but on Saturday Morning
foregoing, which was the second day of this instant November, it is plain, that
the Committees of the House of Commons (as appears by the Original
Journal Book of the same House, on Thursday the 31th day of October, fol. 264.
b. on which day the said meeting of the Committees was appointed) did then meet
to consider and agree upon such reasons, as they should show to the Committees
of the Lords; whereby they might induce her Majesty, both to incline to
Marriage, and to declare a Successor.

And however Sir Nicholas Bacon Knight, Lord Keeper of the Great Seal, be not
nominated in either of the Original Journal-Books of the Upper House, and House
of Commons, to have been present with the beforementioned Lords and others;
yet it is plain, that if the said Petition was preferred this Afternoon, or
whenever else, it was delivered from his mouth; as may be gathered from the
very Petition it self ensuing; and is so also expressly set down by Mr Camden in
Annal Regin. Eliz. edit. Lugdun. Batav. A. D. 1625. page 99. and though he had
abstained a while about this time from the Upper House, by reason of his
infirmity of the Gout, yet he was now in the way of amendment and recovery,
repairing again to the said House on Saturday the 9. day of this instant
November ensuing; and therefore might very well meet the beforementioned
Lords, and other the selected Members of the House of Commons, at the Court
this Afternoon.

So then, it being most probable that the Lords did both prefer their Petition
this Afternoon to her Majesty, touching those two great matters of the Marriage
and Succession, and also received her Majesty's Answer; Therefore the said
Petition does here first ensue, which the Lord Keeper pronounced in these or
the like words following.

MOST humbly beseeches your Excellent Majesty, your Faithful Loving and
Obedient Subjects, all your Lords both Spiritual and Temporal Assembled in
Parliament in your Upper House, to be so much their good Lady and Sovereign, as
according to your accustomed benignity, to grant a Gracious and Favorable
Hearing to their Petitions and Suits, which with all Humbleness and Obedience,
they are come hither to present to your Majesty, by my Mouth, in matters very
nearly and dearly touching your most Royal Person, the Imperial Crown of this
your Realm, and Universal Weal of the same; which Suits, for that they tend to
the surety and preservation of these three things, your Person, Crown and
Realm, the Dearest Jewel that my Lords have in the Earth; therefore they think
themselves for diverse respects greatly bound to make these Petitions; as first
by their Duty to God, then by their Allegiance to your Highness, and lastly, by
the Faith they ought to bear to their natural Country.

And like as, most Gracious Sovereign, by these Bonds they should have been
bound to make the like Petition upon like occasion to any Prince, that it
should have pleased God to have appointed to Reign over them; so they think
themselves doubly bound to make the same to your Majesty, considering that
besides the Bond beforementioned, they stand also bound so to do, by the great
and manifold benefits they have and do receive daily at your Highness hands;
which, shortly to speak, be as great as the Fruits of Peace, common quiet and
Justice can give; and this with great care and charge to your Self. And thus,
my Lords diversely bound, as your Majesty has heard, are now to open to your
Highness their humble Petitions and Suits, consisting in two points chiefly;
which not sundrily, or the one without the other, but both jointly they desire
your Highness to assent to; The Former is, that it would please your Majesty to
dispose your self to Marry, where it shall please you, with whom it shall
please you, and as soon as it shall please you. The second, that some such
limitation might be made, how the Imperial Crown of this Realm should remain,
if God call your Highness without Heirs of your Body (which our Lord defend) so
as these Lords and Nobles, and other your Subjects then living might
sufficiently understand, to whom they should owe their Allegiance and Duty due
to be done by Subjects, and that they might by your Majesty's License, and with
your Favor treat and confer together this Parliament time, for the well-doing
of this. The former of these two, which is your Marriage, they do in their
hearts most earnestly wish, and pray, as a thing that must needs breed and
bring great and singular comfort to your Self, and unspeakable joy and gladness
to all true English Hearts. But the second carries with it such necessity,
that without it they cannot see how the safety of your Royal Person, the
preservation of your Imperial Crown and Realm, shall be, or can be sufficiently
and certainly provided for.

Most Gracious and Sovereign Lady, The Lamentable and pitiful Estate and
Condition, wherein all your Nobles and Counselors of late were, when it
pleased God to lay his heavy hand upon you, and the amazedness that most men of
understanding were by the Fruit of that Sickness brought into, is one cause of
this their Petition; The second the aptness and opportunity of the time, by
reason of this Parliament, whereby both such advice, consideration and consent,
as is requisite in so great and weighty a cause, may be better heard and used,
than at any other time, when no Parliament is. The third, for that the
assenting and performing of these Petitions, cannot as they think but breed
great terror to our Enemies, and therefore must of necessity bring great surety
to your Person, and especially by addition of such Laws, as may be joined with
this limitation for the certain and sure observing of it, and preserving of
your Majesty against all practices and chances. The fourth Cause, for that the
like (as it is supposed) has been done by diverse of your Noble Progenitors,
both of old time and of late days; and also by other Princes your Neighbors of
the greatest Estate in Europe, and for that Experience has taught, that good
has come of it. The fifth, for that it appears by Histories, how that in
times past, persons Inheritable to Crowns being Votaries and Religious, to
avoid such dangers as might have happened for want of Succession to Kingdoms,
have left their Vows and Monasteries, and taken themselves to Marriage, as
Constantia a Nun, Heir to the Kingdom of Sicily, Married after fifty Years of
Age, to Henry the Sixth Emperor of that name, and had Issue Frederick the
Second. And likewise Peter of Aragon, being a Monk, Married, the better to
establish and pacify that Kingdom. Again, Antonius Pius is as much commended,
for that not two days before his Death, he said to his Council, Laeto animo
morior, quoniam filium vobis relinquo. Pyrrhus is of all Godly men detested,
for saying he would leave his Realm to him that had the sharpest Sword. What
but want of a Successor known, made an end of so great an Empire as Alexander
the Great did leave at his Death? The sixth cause is, for that my Lords do
judge the performing of this will breed such an universal gladness in the
Hearts of all your true and loving Subjects, that likely and probably you shall
find them in all Commandments ready and glad to adventure their Goods, Lands
and Lives in your Service, according to their bounden Duties, which of
necessity must breed great surety also to your Majesty.

The seventh cause, because the not doing of this (if God should call your
Highness without Heir of your Body (which God grant never be seen, if it be his
Will) and yet your Majesty right well knows, that Princes and their
Offspring, be they never so great, never so strong, never so like to live, be
yet Mortal, and subject every day, yea every hour to Gods Call) my Lords think,
this happening, and no limitation made, cannot, by their Judgments, but be the
occasion of every evident and great danger and peril to all Estates and sorts
of men of this Realm, by the Factions, Seditions and Intestine War, that will
grow through want of understanding to whom they should yield Allegiance and
Duty; whereby much innocent blood is like to be shed, and many of those to lose
their Lives, that now would gladly bestow them for your sake, in your Majesty's
Service. The eighth, for that the not performing of this, the other happening,
does leave the Realm without Government, which is the greatest danger than can
happen to any Kingdom. For every Prince is anima Legis, and so reputed in Law;
and therefore upon the Death of Princes the Law dies; all the Offices of
Justice, whereby the Laws are to be Executed, do cease; all Writs and
Commandments to call parties to the Execution of Justice, do hang in suspense;
all Commissions for the Peace and for the punishment of Offenders do determine,
and lose their force; whereby it follows consequently, that Strength and Will
must Rule, and neither Law nor Reason, during such a Vacation and inter-Reign;
wherein such an incertainty ofSuccession is like to last so long, as it is to
be feared (if Gods mercy be not the greater) that thereby we may become a prey
to Strangers (which our Lord defend) or at least lose the great honor and
estimation that long time has pertained to us.

And like as, most Gracious Sovereign, my Lords have been moved for the Worldly
respect aforesaid, to make these their humble Petitions to your Majesty, so by
the Examples, Counsels, yea and Commandments, that they have heard out of the
sacred Scriptures, and for Conscience sake they feel themselves constrained,
and enforced to do the like. God, your Highness knows, by the course of the
Scriptures has declared Succession and having of Children to be one of the
principal Benedictions in this Life; and on the contrary he has pronounced
contrary wise; and therefore Abraham prayed to God for Issue, fearing that
Eliazar his Steward should have been his Heir; and had promise that Kings
should proceed of his Body. Hannah the Mother of Samuel, prayed to God with
tears for Issue. And Elizabeth (whose name your Majesty bears) Mother to John
the Baptist, was joyful when God had blessed her with Fruit, accounting her
self thereby to be delivered from reproach.

And as this is a blessing in private Houses, so is it much more in Kingdoms,
as it plainly appears by the two Kingdoms of Israel and Judah. Unto the
Kingdom of Judah, containing but two Tribes or thereabouts, God gave Lineal
Succession by Descent of Kings; and therefore it continued a long time. The
Kingdom of Israel, containing ten Tribes or thereabouts, often destitute of
lawful Heirs, the one half of the people following the one, and the other half
following the other, by Wars and Seditions being weakened, came soon to ruin,
as plainly appears by the third and fourth Book of Kings.

And again in the time of the Judges, because there was no ordinary Succession,
the people were oftentimes overcome, and carried into Captivity. Besides, it
is plain by the Scriptures, that Godly Governors and Princes (as Fathers of
their Countries) have always been careful to avoid the great evil that might
ensue, through want of limitation of Succession, therefore Moses did enjoin
Joshua to be his Successor, and David his Son Solomon, whereby a Sedition was
appeased, begotten by Adonijah; of this there be many Examples.

Further, seeing it may be easily gathered by Experience of all Ages past, that
Civil Wars, effusion of Christian Blood, and consequently ruins of Kingdoms,
do follow, where Realms be left without a certainty ofSuccession; and your
Majesty is also informed of the same, and sued unto for redress; if therefore
now no sufficient remedy should be by your Highness provided, that then it
should be a dangerous burden before God to your Majesty, and you were to yield
a strict account to God for the same; considering you are placed, as the
Prophet Ezechiel says, in Altissimo speculo of this Commonwealth, and see the
Sword coming, and provide no remedy for the defense of it. Lastly, The Spirit
of God pronounces by the Mouth of St Paul to Timothy, that whosoever makes no
due Provision for his Family, is in very great danger to Godward; and also by
the Mouth of St John, that whosoever sees but one Brother in necessity, and
does shut up the Bowels of Pity and Compassion from him, has not the Love of
God remaining in him; whereby it is plain and manifest, how fearful a thing it
were, if this whole Realm containing so many Families, were not in a perilous
Case upon their Suit provided for; or if the Bowels of Mercy should be shut up
from so many thousands, which every way were like to fall into most extreme
miseries, if God should call your Highness without certainty of Succession;
which we pray to God may never happen.

Most Excellent Princess, the places of Scriptures containing the said
threatenings be set forth with more sharp words, than be here expressed. Thus,
most Gracious Sovereign, your Lords and Nobles, both Spiritual and Temporal,
have as briefly as they can first showed to your Majesty, how diversely they
take themselves bound, to make these their humble Petitions unto you: And then,
what their Petitions be; And after that, what reasons for Worldly respects, and
what by the Scriptures and for Conscience sake, have moved them thus to do;
which here upon their Knees, according to their bounden Duty, they most humbly
and earnestly pray your Majesty to have consideration of in time; and to give
them such favorable and comfortable Answer to the same, that some good effect
and conclusion may grow before the end of the Session of this Parliament, the
uttermost day of their greatest hope, whereby this Commonwealth, which your
Highness found to be lateritia as Augustus did his, and by your great
Providence is now come to be marmorea, shall not for want of performing this,
if God shall call your Highness without Heir of your Body, be in more dangerous
Estate and Condition, than ever it was that any man can remember. True it is,
that this Suit is made by my Lords, not without great hope of good success, by
reason of the Experience that they have had of your bountiful goodness showed
to them, and the rest of your loving Subjects diverse and sundry ways since the
beginning of your Reign; which they pray to God long to continue, to his Honor,
with all Felicity.

The Petition of the Lords being thus set down, of which it cannot be
absolutely and undoubtedly determined, whether it were preferred this day or
no; Now in the next place must follow her Majesty's Answer, which was without
all doubt given this Afternoon to the beforementioned Lords, and those other
thirty Members of the House of Commons; yet there is no mention at all thereof,
either in the Original Journal Book of the Upper House, or in that before-cited
Memorial or Diary of the greatest part of the passages of her Majesty's Reign,
collected and set down by Sir William Cecill, at this time her Majesty's
Principal Secretary: and therefore the greatest light of it being gathered out
of the Original Journal Book of the House of Commons, containing the agitations
of this Session of Parliament, de An. 8 Regin. Eliz. fol. 266. A. (where on the
Forenoon of the next day ensuing this Afternoon being Wednesday, and the 6th
day of this instant November, report thereof was made to the said House, by Sir
Edward Rogers Knight, Comptroller of her Majesty's Household, and Sir William
Cecill, her Highness Principal Secretary abovementioned) it does plainly
appear, that touching her Marriage, her Majesty gave them some hope of it; but
excused her self, in not declaring a Successor, in respect of the great danger
thereof; and therefore comparing this with that which Mr Camden has set down,
touching this Answer, in Annal. Regin. Eliz. edit. Lugdun. Batav. A. D. 1625.
page 101, and 102. it may very well be gathered, and it is most likely, that
that Answer of her Majesty, of which I had a Copy by me, being erroniously
placed, as that also of Sir Robert Cottons is in the first Volume of his
Parliamentary Journals (being very imperfect and fragmentary) amidst the
passages of the Parliament of the fifth year of her Majesty's Reign, that that
Copy I say contains the Answer, which her Majesty gave at this time, to the
beforementioned Lords, and others, being as follows; save only, that through
often transcribing, without comparing, it should seem it is somewhat defective.

SInce there can be no duer Debt than a Princes word, to keep that unspotted,
for my part, as one that would be loath that the self same thing that keeps
Merchants Credit from craze, should be the cause that a Prince's Speech should
merit blame, and so their honor quail; Therefore I will an Answer give, and
this it is: The two Petitions that you presented me (which must doubtless
relate to the two several parts of one and the same Petition, viz. the Marriage
and the Succession, and might not improperly be so called, though couched in
one Body, and as the words also following do in manner explain it) expressed
many words, which contained in sum these two things, as of your cares the
greatest; My Marriage, and my Succession. Of which two I think the last best to
be touched, and of the other a silent thought may serve. For I thought it had
been so desired, as none other Tree's blossom should have been minded, or ever
any hope of any Fruit had been denied you. And yet by the way, if any here
doubt that I am by Vow or determination bent never to trade in that kind of
Life, put out that kind of Heresy; for your belief is there in a wry. For
though I can think it best for a private Woman, yet I do strive with my self to
think it not meet for a Prince; and if I can bend my liking to your need, I
will not resist such a mind.

But to the last, think not that you had needed this desire, if I had seen a
time so fit, and it so ripe to be denounced. The greatness of the cause
therefore, and need of your returns, does make me say that which I think the
wise may easily guess, that as a short time for so long continuance ought not
to pass by roat, as many tell their Tales, even so, as cause by Conference with
the Learned shall show me matter worth the utterance for your behoof, so shall
I more gladly pursue your good after my days, than with all my Prayers whilst
I live be means to linger my living thread. And thus much more than I thought
will I add, for your Comfort, I have good Record in this place, that other
means than you mention, have been thought of, perchance for your good as much
as for my surety no less; which if presently and conveniently could have been
Executed, it had not been now deferred or over-slipped. But I hope I shall die
in quiet with Nunc dimittis; which cannot be, without I see some glimpse of
your following surety after my graved bones.

Nota, That neither the foregoing Petition, nor this latter Answer of her
Majesty, are found in the Original Journal Book of the Upper-House; but now the
residue of the passages of the said Journal do for the most part follow out of
the same.

On Wednesday the 6th day of November, the Bill for declaring of the manner of
making and Consecrating of the Archbishops and Bishops of this Realm, to be
good, lawful and perfect, was read tertia vice, quae cum quadam provisione
annex. in loco alterius provisionis adempt. absciss. and disannex. communi
Procerum assensu conclusa est, dissentientibus Comite Northumberland, Comite
Westmoreland, Comite Worcester, and Comite Sussex, Vice-Comite Mountague,
Domino Morley, Domino Dudley, Domino Dacre, Domino Mounteagle, Domino Cromwell,
and Domino Mordant, and postea, cum Billa for the annexing of Hexhamshire unto
the County of Northumberland, and the Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction of the same,
unto the Sea or Bishopric of Duresm, deliberata fuit Magistro Vaugham and
Doctori Yale, in Domum Communem deferend.

Dominus Capitalis Justiciarius continuavit praesens Parliamentum usque in diem
Jovis prox.

On Thursday the 7th day of November, Three Bills of no great moment, had each
of them one reading; of which the first being the Bill for Confirmation of
Leases to be made by Morris Ridney and Joan his Wife, was read prima vice.

Dominus Capitalis Justiciarius continuavit praesens Parliamentum usque in diem
Sabbathi prox. ix. Novembris.

On Saturday the 9th day of November, the Bill for the graving of Alneagers
Seals, to be within the Tower of London, was read secunda vice, and commissa
est Domino Marchioni Winton, Thesaurar. Angliae, and Domino Capitali Baroni, ad
supervidend. considerand. and amendand.

Nota, That here the Lord Chief Baron, being but an Assistant of the Upper
House, and no Member thereof, is made a joint-Committee with the Lord Marquess
of Winchester, of which see more on Thursday the third day of October
foregoing.

The Bill also to restrain the Carriage of Woolls of the growth of Pembroke,
Carmarthen and Cardiganshires, out of the Counties where they grew, was read
secunda vice, and commissa ad ingrossand. And the Bill lastly for the repealing
of a branch of a Statute made An. 32 H. 8. for the Stature of Horses was read
secunda vice and commissa Episcopo Elien. Domino Clinton, Admiral. Domino
Willoughby, DominoSheffeild, Domino North, Domino St John de Bletsoe, and
Servienti Carus.

Nota, That a Sergeant being but an Attendant upon the Upper House, and no
Member thereof, is made a joint-Committee with the Lords. Vide touching this
matter, on Thursday the 3d day of October foregoing.

Then the Clerk read openly the Commission following.

ELizabeth, by the Grace of God, Queen of England, France and Ireland, Defender
of the Faith, etc. To our Trusty and well Beloved Councellor, Sir Nicholas
Bacon Knight, Lord Keeper of our Great Seal of England, and to our Right Trusty and
right well Beloved, Sir Robert Catlin Knight, Chief Justice of the Pleas before
us to be holden, Greeting. Whereas We, upon consideration that you the said
Lord Keeper of our Great Seal, were lately sore visited with Sickness, that you
were not able to travel to the Upper House of this our present Parliament,
holden at Westminster, nor there to supply the room and place in the said Upper
House, amongst the Lord, Spiritual and Temporal there Assembled, as to your
Office appertains; did therefore by our Letters Patents of Commission,
bearing date the 25th day of October, in this present eighth Year of our Reign,
nominate, appoint and authorize you the said Sir Robert Catlin, from day to
day, and time to time, from thenceforth, during our pleasure, to use and occupy
the place and room of the said Lord Keeper, in our said Upper House of
Parliament, amongst the said Lords Spiritual and Temporal there Assembled; and
there to do and execute in all things from day to day, and time to time, as the
said Lord Keeper of our Great Seal should, or might do, if he were there
present, using and supplying the same place; as in our said Letters Patents it
does and may at large appear. And forasmuch as we understand, that you the said
Lord Keeper of our Great Seal, are at this present in such state of health, as
ye are well able to travel to the said Upper House of our Parliament, and there
to supply the said room and place your self, as heretofore ye have done, We do
therefore by these presents fully and absolutely determine our pleasure,
touching any further Execution by you the said Sir Robert Catlin, of the said
Commission beforementioned; And therefore we do signify to you the said Sir
Robert Catlin, that our pleasure is, that ye do from the date of these
presents, surcease from the Execution of the said Commission, and every part
thereof. And we do also by these presents Command and authorize you, the said
Lord Keeper of our Great Seal, from henceforth, and from time to time hereafter
to resort to your accustomed room and place, in our said Higher House of
Parliament, and there to do and Execute from time to time, all things that
appertains to your office there to do, in such manner and form, as though no
such Commission had been directed and made, any clause, Sentence or matter in
our said Letters Patents of commission, or any other thing to the contrary in
any wise notwithstanding, and these presents shall be your Warrant and
discharge for the same. In Witness whereof we have caused these our Letters to
be made Patents. Witness our Self at Westminster the 8th day of November, in
the Eighth Year of Our Reign.

There are no other passages of this day set down in the Original Journal Book
of the Upper House, after the public reading of the foregoing Commission, by
which the Lord Keeper was resetled in his former place in the said House,
saving the Entrance of the Continuation of the Parliament in manner and form
following, viz.

Dominus Custos magni Sigilli continuavit praesens Parliamentum usque diem
Lunae prox. xi. die Novembris.

November the 10th Sunday.

On Monday the 11th day of November, Three Bills of no great moment, had each
of them one reading; of which the first being the Bill to restrain the Carriage
of the Woolls of the growth of Pembroke, Carmarthen and Cardigan-shires, out of
the Counties where they grow, was read tertia vice, and communi omnium Procerum
assensu conclusa.

Nota, That the daily continuance of the Parliament entered in these words,
Dominus Custos magni Sigilli continuavit praesens Parliamentum, etc. being now
hereafter performed in the residue of this Journal according to the ordinary
use by the Lord Keeper only, is for the most part omitted.

On Tuesday the 12th day of November, the Bill for the Lady Cobham's Jointure,
was read secunda vice.

On Wednesday the 13th day of November, the Bill for the Lady Cobham's
Jointure, was read tertia vice, quae communi omnium Procerum consensu conclusa
est, and postea cum Billa to restrain the Carriage of Woolls of the growth of
Pembroke, etc. was delivered to Sergeant Carus and Doctor Huick, to be carried
to the House of Commons.

Three Bills were brought up to the Lords from the House of Commons, of which
the last being the Bill for Confirmation of Letters Patents made for the
Hospital of St Bartholomew in Gloucester, was read prima vice.

On Thursday the 14th day of November, Three Bills of no great moment, had each
of them one reading; of which the first being the Bill for the avoiding of
penal Laws, was read prima vice.

On Saturday the 16th day of November, to which day the Parliament had been
last continued on Thursday foregoing, Four Bills of no great moment, had each
of them one reading; of which the third being the Bill for the better Execution
of penal Laws, was read secunda vice, and committed unto the Bishop of
Worcester, Viscount Mountague, the Bishop of London, the Bishop of Winchester,
the Lord Willoughby, the Lord Loughborough, the Lord Hunsdon; and to the Lord
Chief Baron, Justice Welsh, and the Attorney General.

Two Bills lastly, were brought up to the Lords from the House of Commons; of
which the second being the Bill that in diverse Counties there shall be but one
Sheriss in one County, was read prima vice.

On Monday the 18th day of November, to which day the Parliament had been last
continued on Saturday foregoing, the Bill to avoid excess in Apparel, was read
prima vice.

On Tuesday the 19th day of November, Three Bills of no great moment, had each
of them one reading; of which the first being the Bill to avoid excess in
Apparel, was read secunda vice, and committed unto the Marquess of Northampton,
the Earl of Sussex, the Earl of Huntington, the Earl of Leicester, Viscount
Mountague, the Bishop of London, the Bishop of Winton, the Bishop of Hereford,
the Bishop of Worcester, the Bishop of Lincoln, the Lord Lumley, the Lord
Sheffeild, the Lord Pagett, the Lord Hunsdon, Justice Welsh and Justice
Southcot.

And the third being the Bill to enable the Town of Woollmarsh in the County of
Surrey, to use Cloth-making, was read tertia vice, and communi omnium Procerum
assensu conclusa.

On Wednesday the 20th day of November, Three Bills of no great moment, had
each of them one reading; of which the last being the Bill for the avoiding of
worngful vexation upon the Writ of Latitat, was read secunda vice, and commissa
ad ingrossand.

Dominus Custos magni Sigilli continuavit praesens Parliamentum usque in diem
Jovis prox. hora nona. At which time the Lords Spiritual and Temporal did meet
and nothing done, but the Parliament continued by the Lord Keeper of the Great
Seal of England, until Saturday the 23th day of November.

On Saturday the 23th day of November, Three Bills had each of them one
reading; of which the second being the Bill for confirmation of Letters Patents
made for the Hospital of St Bartholomew in Gloucester, was read tertia vice,
and by common consent of the Lords concluded.

The Bill also for avoiding of worngful vexation upon the Writ of Latitat, was
read tertia vice, which by common consent of the Lords was concluded, and by
Sergeant Carus and R. R. sent down to the House of Commons.

On Monday the 25th day of November, to which day the Parliament had been last
continued on Saturday foregoing, three Bills had each of them one reading; of
which the second being the Bill for the more expedition of the Administration
of Justice in the Counties Palatine of Lancaster and Durham, communi omnium
Procerum assensu conclusa est.

On Tuesday the 26th day of November, the Bill for the Assurance of a Jointure
to the Lady Mary, Wife to Edward Lord Stafford, was read tertia vice, and
communi omnium Procerum consensa conclusa.

The said Bill for the Lady Staffords Jointure, and the Bill for the more
speedy expedition of the Administration of Justice in the Counties Palatine of
Lancaster and Durham, were delivered to Sergeant Carus, and Mr Vaughan, in
Domum Communem deferend.

On Wednesday the 27th day of November, and likewise on Thursday the 28th day
of the same Month, the Lords did meet and nothing done, save only the
continuance of the Parliament by the Lord Keeper in Ordinary Form, unto Monday
the second day of December following.

On Monday the 2d day of December, Two Bills had each of them one reading; of
which the second being the Bill for the erection of a Free School at Denbigh in
Wales, was read prima vice.

Six Bills were sent up to the Lords from the House of Commons; of which the
first being the Bill for the repeal of a Statute, made Anno 7 Edw. 6. for the
prices of Wines sold by retail, was read prima vice; And the third being the
Bill declaring the manner of making and Consecrating of the Archbishops and
Bishops of this Realm, to be good, lawful and perfect, returned cum provisione
annex. was read prima, secunda and tertia vice, and communi assensu conclusa.

On Tuesday the 3d day of December, Three Bills had each of them their second
reading; of which the two last were, one for avoiding tedious Suits in civil
and marine Causes, and another to alter the nature of Gavelkind in the Lands of
Thomas Brown Esquire.

On Wednesday the 4th day of December, Two Bills of no great moment, had each
of them one reading; of which the second being the Bill for Confirmation of
certain privileges granted by the Queens Majesty, for converting of Copper
into Latten, and for the viewing and searching all other kinds of Metals and
Treasures, was read prima vice.

The Bill that in diverse Counties there shall be but one Sheriff of one County,
was committed to the Earl of Huntington, Viscount Mountague, the Bishop of
Hereford, the Lord Mountjoy, the Lord Darcie, the Lord Willoughby, the Lord
North, Justice Brown, and the Attorney General.

On Thursday the 5th day of December, Two Bills had each of them one reading;
of which the second being the Bill for Confirmation of certain Privileges
granted by the Queens Majesty for the converting of Copper into Latten, and for
the mining and searching of all kind of Treasures and Metals, was read secunda
vice, and commissa.

The Bill also for the repeal of the Statute made Anno 7 Edw. 6. for the prices
of Wines sold by retail, was read tertia vice, and communi omnium Dominorum
Spiritualium and majore part Dominorum Tempor. consensu quassata est.

Four Bills were brought up to the Lords from the House of Commons, of which
the two last were, one for the Town-Clark of York, and another touching the
Patents made for making of Allom and Copperas, within the Realms or Dominions
of the Queens Majesty.

On Friday the 6th day of December, Three Bills had each of them one reading;
of which the second being the Bill touching Letters Patents made for the making
of Allom and Copperas, within the Realms or Dominions of the Queens Majesty,
was read prima vice.

On Saturday the 7th day of December, Six Bills had each of them one reading;
of which the fourth being the Bill to alter the nature of Gavelkind in the
Lands of Thomas Brown Esquire, was read tertia vice, and communi omnium Procerum
consensu conclusa, dissentiente Vicecomite Mountague.

The Bill also for Execution of penal Laws, was read secunda vice, and communi
omnium Procerum assensu conclusa est, cum quadam Schedula annex. and deliberat.
Servienti Carus, and Attornato General., in Domum Communem deferend.

On Monday the 9th of December, Three Bills had each of them one reading; of
which the first being for repeal of the Act made Anno 22 Hen. 8. for the
Stature of Horses, was read tertia vice and communi Procerum assensu conclusa.

On Tuesday the 10th day of December, Six Bills had each of them one reading;
of which the third being the Bill for the Bowyers of Westminster., etc. And the
fourth for the confirmation of Letters Patents made for the making of Allom and
Copperas, were each of them read tertia vice, and communi omnium Procerum
consensu conclusae.

After the reading of the three first Bills this day, three Bills were sent to
the House of Commons, by Sergeant Carus, and the Attorney General; viz. the
first for the Stature of Horses; The second for the Bowyers of Westminster., And the
third for Allom and Copperas.

Dominus Custos magni Sigilli continuavit praesens Parliamentum usque in diem
Mercurii, viz. undecim. Decembr.

On which eleventh day of December the Lords met, but nothing done, but the
Parliament continued in usual Form by the Lord Keeper, until Thursday the next
day following.

On Thursday the 12th day of December, Two Bills had each of them one reading;
of which the second being the Bill for the Office of Town-Clark of the City of
York, was read tertia vice, and communi omnium Procerum assensu conclusa, quae
deliberat. fuit Servienti Carus and Generali Attornato, in Domum Communem
deferend. pro certis causis emendand., and to them was delivered the Bill of
Subsidy.

Four Bills had each of them one reading; of which the second being the Bill
for Confirmation of the late new Erected Deaneries and Prebends, was read
secunda vice, and committed to the Archbishop of York, the Earl of Huntington,
Viscount Mountague, the Bishop of Durham, the Bishop of Chester, the Bishop of
Lincoln, the Bishop of Bath, the Lord Paget, the Lord Hastings of Loughborough,
the Lord St John of Bletsoe, Justice Welsh, Sergeant Carus, Dr Huick, and Dr
Yale.

Four Bills were sent up to the Lords from the House of Commons, and delivered
after the reading of the Bill last beforementioned; of which the two last
were, one touching Foreign Wares and Apparel, sold by Merchants in gross, which
had its first reading; And another to explain a branch of a Statute made Anno
27 Henr. 8. touching Colleges and Free-Chappels.

On Friday the 13th day of December, a Proviso added to the Bill that in diverse
Counties there shall be but one Sheriff in one County, was read prima vice and
commissa ad ingrossand.

The Proviso added to the Bill for the Assurance of the Jointure of the Lady
Mary, Wife to Edward Lord Stafford, was read secunda vice.

Three Bills had each of them one reading; of which the last being the Bill
touching Explanation of a branch of a Statute made 37 Henr. 8. concerning
Colleges and Free-Chappels, was read prima vice.

On Saturday the 14. day of December, Five Bills had each of them one reading;
of which the second being the Bill for the punishment of Riots and Routs, and
unlawful Assemblies, was read secunda vice, and commissa Archiepiscopo Ebor.,
Duci Norfolciae, Comiti Salop, Comiti Huntington, Comiti Leicester, Vice-Comiti
Mountague, Episcopis London, Dunelmen. and Winton, and Domino Morley, Domino
Cobham, Domino Paget, Domino North, Domino Hunsdon, and duobus Capital.
Justiciar. and Attornato General., ad considerand. and emendand.

After the reading of the first Bill, two Bills were brought from the House of
Commons, of which the second being the Bill for Uniformity in Doctrine, was
read prima vice.

On Monday the 16. day of December, to which day the Parliament had been last
continued on Saturday foregoing, Four Bills had each of them one reading; of
which the first being the Bill, that in diverse Counties there shall be but one
Sheriff, cum quadam Provisione conclusa est; And with the Bill for Alneagers
Seals, and the Bill for Trials in Merionethshire, was sent by Sergeant Carus,
and Mr Attorney General, to the House of Commons.

On Tuesday the 17. day of December, Three Bills had each of them one reading,
of which the first being the Bill for the repairing the Piere of Hartland in
Devon. was read secunda vice, but no mention is made either of the committing
of it to be engrossed, or referring of it to Committees. Vide de ista materia
in die sequente.

After the reading of which said Bill, Four other Bills were brought up to the
Lords from the House of Commons, of which the two last were, one touching
Jail-delivery in the twelve Shires in Wales, etc. And another for the Grant of
Fifteenths and Tenths, and of one Subsidy by the Temporalty.

Dominus Custos magni Sigilli continuavit praesens Parliamentum usque ad hor'am
secundam ejusdem diei in Pomeridiano.

About which hour the Lord Keeper, and diverse other Lords, both Spiritual and
Temporal, met, and the Bill of the Grant of one Fifteenth or Tenth, and one
Subsidy of the Temporalty, was read prima vice; Although there is no entrance
at all made (in the Original Journal Book of the Upper House, through the great
negligence of Francis Spilman, at this time Clerk of the same) of the names of
any of those Lords that were present this Afternoon.

On Wednesday the 18th day of December, Three Bills had each of them one
reading; of which the first being the Bill for the Grant of one Fifteenth or
Tenth, and of one Subsidy by the Temporalty, was read secunda vice.

Nota, That there is no mention made in the Original Journal Book of the Upper
House, of the referring of this Bill upon the second reading to Committees, or
of ordering it to be engrossed; of which there was a like President on the day
foregoing. And thus also in the Parliament in Anno 39 Reginae Elizabethae, upon
Saturday the 28th day of January, the Bill for Confirmation of Statutes
Merchants, acknowledged in the Town-Corporate of New Castle upon Tine, was
neither committed nor Ordered to be engrossed upon the second reading; To which
purpose finally there were many Presidents in the Parliament following, in An.
45 Regin. Eliz. viz. on Wednesday the 2d, on Friday the 4th day, on Monday the
7. day, and on Wednesday the 9. day of December. Vide Febr. 13. in An. 1 Eliz.

Dominus Custos magni Sigilli continuavit praesens Parliamentum usque ad. horam
primam ejusdem diei in Pomeridiano.

About which hour, the Lord Keeper, and diverse other Lords, both Spiritual and
Temporal, met, and their names are accordingly marked in the Original
Journal Book of the Upper House, the manner of which is thus; viz. The Clerk,
or some by his appointment, having written the names of the Lords Spiritual and
Temporal, in such Form as they are set down upon Friday the 15. day of January,
in the first Session of this Parliament, in Anno 5 Regin. Eliz. (Quod vide) he
signeth the name of every Lord that is present, with these Letters Pr. (on the
dexter Margent of the said name) and if the House sit again in the Afternoon,
and any of the same Lords be present, then also before those names that had
been marked in the first part of the day, are the same Letters added again to
the first mark; and then the signing and marking is thus, Pr. Pr. in the
Margent aforesaid, which shows he was present twice the said day; Vide plus
concerning this matter upon Tuesday the 21. day of March, in the first
Parliament of her Majesty's Reign, holden in Anno 1 Eliz.

The Lords Spiritual and Temporal being met in the Afternoon, as aforesaid, Two
Bills had each of them one reading; of which the first was the Bill for the
Grant of one Fifteenth, one Tenth, and of one Subsidy by the Temporalty; quae
communi omnium Procerum assensu conclus. And the second being the Bill for the
Alneagers Fees in Lancaster, and for length, breadth and weight of Cottons,
Frizes and Rugs, was read secunda vice.

Seven Bills were brought up to the Lords from the House of Commons, of which
the two first were, that two several Sheriffs may be in the Counties of
Buckingham and Bedford, and for uttering of Caps, and true making of Hats and
Caps.

On Thursday the 19. day of December, Six Bills had each of them one reading,
of which the third being the Bill for reformation of excess of Apparel, was
read tertia vice and conclusa, and missa ad Domum Communem, per Servientem
Carus, and Attornatum General.

The Parliament was continued by the Lord Keeper in accustomed Form, unto one
of the Clock in the Afternoon, about which time he and diverse other Lords, both
Spiritual and Temporal, meeting, Three Bills had each of them several readings,
of which the first being the Bill for the keeping the Records within the twelve
Shires of Wales, and diverse other Ordinances, was read prima vice. And the
third for the paving of Kentish-street, had its second and third reading; and
was thereupon concluded.

On Friday the 20. day of December, Five Bills had each of them several
readings, of which the second being the Bill for the Assurance of a Jointure
for the Lady Anne, Countess of Warwick, was read prima, secunda and tertia
vice, and conclus. and missa in Domum Communem per Servientem Carus, and
Attornat. General.; And the last touching Goal-Deliveries in the twelve Shires
of Wales, and for measures to be there, was read tertia vice and conclusa.

Before the reading of the fifth Bill beforementioned, Two Bills were brought
up to the Lords from the House of Commons; of which the first touching
Cloth-Workers, and Cloths ready wrought, to be Shipped over the Sea, was prima
vice lecta, and iterum aliis Billis mediantibus sive lect. in intermedio,
iterum secunda vice lect.

The Bill that two several Sheriffs may be in Bedford and Buckingham, was read
secunda vice, and quatuor aliis Billis mediantibus sive lect. in intermedio,
iterum tertia vice lect. and conclus.

Three Bills also had each of them one reading, of which the third being the
Bill for the Incorporation of Merchant-Adventurers, for discovery of new
Trades, was read tertia vice; And thereupon concluded.

The Bill for Keeping of Records in the twelve Shires of Wales, and diverse
other Ordinances there, was read secunda vice, and commissa Episcopis
Herefordens., Meneven. Cicestren., and Asaphen.

This Afternoon finally before the reading of the last Bill, for keeping
Records in Wales, etc. A Bill was brought from the House of Commons, for
Tonnage of Wares brought from beyond the Seas, which was prima vice lect., as
soon as it came; and now read secunda vice, and commissa Domino Norfolciae,
Comitibus Sussex and Leicester, Vice-Comiti Mountague, Domino Clinton, Domino
Camerario and Domino Cobham.

On Saturday the 21. day of December, Nine Bills were brought up to the Lords
from the House of Commons; of which the two first were, one for the Bowyers of
Westminster returned expedit. And another for Assurance of the Lady Warwick's
Jointure.

Four Bills also had each of them one reading; of which the first being the
Bill for uttering of Caps and Hats, and for the true making of Caps and Hats,
was read tertia vice and expedit.

The Bill concerning Tonnage of Wares brought from beyond the Seas; And the
Bill for Confirmation of Letters Patents, were each of them read secunda vice.

The Bill lastly touching Cloth-Workers, and Cloths ready wrought to be Shipped
over the Seas, was read tertia vice, and communi omnium Procerum assensu
conclusa.

In the Original Journal Book of the Upper House is no entrance or mention made
of the continuance of the Parliament. But it appears, that the House did sit
in the Afternoon, for without entrance of the presence of any Lord in
particular, it appears, that in the Afternoon two Bills were read; viz.

The Bill for the Almeshouse at Plymouth, And the Bill for the Provision of
Grain, were each of them read prima vice.

On Monday the 23th day of December, the Bill for the Confirmation of Fines and
Recoveries, notwithstanding the default of the Original Writs, was read prima
vice, cum additione and provisione annex. and cum quadam reformatione eidem
annex.

Two Bills were brought up to the Lords from the House of Commons, of which one
being the Bill for Sea-Marks, and Mariners; And another against carrying over
the Sea, Rams, Lambs, or Sheep, being alive, were read each of them prima vice.

The Bill lastly concerning Tonnage of Wares brought from beyond the Seas, was
read tertia vice, and communi omnium Procerum assensu conclusa.

Dominus Custos magni Sigilli continuavit praesens Parliamentum usque ad horam
secundam in Pomeridiano.

About which hour the Lord Keeper, and diverse other Lords, both Spiritual and
Temporal, meeting, the Bill concerning Sea-Marks, and Mariners; And the Bill
against the carrying over the Sea, Rams, Lambs, or Sheep alive, were each of
them read secunda and tertia vice, and thereupon concluded.

Two Bills also were sent from the Lords to the House of Commons; of which the
first was the Bill of her Majesty's Free and General Pardon.

The Bill for making of Salt within her Majesty's Dominions; and the Bill for
keeping a Market in the Manor of Battle in Sussex upon Thursday, were each of
them read prima and secunda vice.

Two Bills lastly had each of them their first reading; of which the second was
the Bill for the Inning of Plumstead-Marsh.

On Tuesday the 24th day of December, the Bill touching the transporting of
Tanned Leather made of Sheepskins, and the Bill for Inning of Plumstead-Marsh,
being surrounded, were each of them read secunda and tertia vice, and thereupon
concluded.

Three Bills also had each of them one reading, of which the first being the
Bill for keeping the Market in the Manor of Battle in Sussex upon Thursday,
was read tertia vice, and conclusa.

The Bill finally for continuance of certain Statutes, was read prima, secunda
and tertia vice. Quod nota, that it had three readings together.

Dominus Custos magni Sigilli continuavit praesens Parliamentum usque ad diem
Lunae tricesimum diem Decembris.

On Monday the 30th day of December, the Lord Keeper and diverse other Lords,
both Spiritual and Temporal, met, but nothing was done, save only the
continuance of the Parliament by the Lord Keeper unto Thursday the 2d day of
January following; upon which day in the Afternoon the Parliament was Dissolved.

On Thursday the 2d day of January, the Lord Keeper and diverse other Lords,
both Spiritual and Temporal, were present (although through the negligence of
Francis Spilman Esquire, at this time Clerk of the Upper House, it does not
certainly appear who they were in the Original Journal Book of the same House)
but no Bill (as it seems) was read, or any thing else done; but only the
Parliament continued by the Lord Keeper, which is there Entered in manner and
form following, viz.

Dominus Custos magni Sigilli continuavit praesens Parliamentum usque ad horam
primam in Pomeridiano.

Nota, That it appears in the Original Journal Book of the House of Commons,
that after the Parliament had been continued, as aforesaid, Doctor Huick was
sent down to the said House, from the Lord Keeper, to give them notice thereof.

Nota also, That in the Original Journal Book of the Upper House, there is no
mention made of any thing that was done, or of any Speech used, nor touching
the Dissolution of this present Session of Parliament, but only that her
Majesty was there present, with diverse Lords both Spiritual and Temporal; and
therefore I have supplied the whole Proceedings of this Afternoon at large, out
of a very Copious and Elaborate Anonymous Memorial thereof, I had by me; which
also I have in some places supplied out of the Original Journal Book of the
House of Commons, although it be so little and short, as it may rather be
called matter of Confirmation than Enlargement; in which also it shall lastly
suffice to touch briefly, that I have always observed, contrary to the ordinary
course, to insert all such Speeches and other passages (as largely as by any
good Authority I might) into the Journal of the Upper House, in which House
they were agitated and uttered, and to the Journal of which House they do most
properly belong, and do only for Order sake add some short expressions thereof
in the Journals of the House of Commons. The said Passages of this Afternoon do
now next ensue out of the abovementioned Manuscript Memorial.

The Queens Majesty between two or three of the Clock in the Afternoon (of this
present Thursday being the second day of January, in the ninth year of her
Reign) came by Water from Whitehall, and Landed on the backside of the
Parliament-Chamber. And so the Earl of Westmorland bearing the Sword before her,
the Lady Strange the Train, with the Lords in their daily Apparel, and Heralds
attending on her, she proceeded up into the Privy-Chamber, to prepare her self
in her Parliament-Robes, during which time the Lords and Justices put on their
Parliament-Robes, and took their places.

And upon the upper Woollsack sat the Lord Keeper, till the Queen came, and
then went to his place, at the Rail on the right hand of the Cloth of State.

On the Woollsack on the Northside, sat Sir Robert Catlin, and Sir James Dyer,
the two Chief Justices, and Richard Read under, and Mr Gerrard the Queens
Attorney.

On the Sack on the Southside, sat Sir William Cordall Master of the Rolls,
Justice Brown, Justice Welsh, and Sergeant Carus.

On the Westside sat Vaughan and Talc, Masters of the Chancery, Mr Spilman
Clerk of the Parliament, Mr Powle Deputy and Joint-Patentec with Mr Martin,
Clerk of the Crown; before which Sack stood a little Table.

Then the Queens Majesty being Apparelled in her Parliament-Robes, with a Caul
on her Head, came forth, and proceeded up and took her Seat; the Marquess of
Northampton carrying the Cap of Maintenance, and stood on her right hand, and
the Earl of Westmorland the Sword at her left hand, with the Heralds and
Sergeants at Arms before her; the Queens Mantle born up on either side from her
Arms, by the Earl of Leicester, and the Lord of Hunsdon, who always stood still
by her for the assisting thereof, when she stood up; her Train born by the Lady
Strange, assisted by the Lord Chamberlain, and Vice-Chamberlain. At the left
hand of the Queen, and Southside, kneeled the Ladies; and behind the Queen, at
the Rail, stood the Lord Keeper on the right hand, the Lord Treasurer on the
left hand, with diverse young Lords, and Peers Eldest Sons.

Then all being placed, Mr Onslow the Speaker was brought in, between Sir
Francis Knolles Vice-Chamberlain, and Sir Ambrose Cave Chancellor of the
Duchy; and after Reverence done, proceeded down to the Wall, and from thence
came up to the Rail, in the way making three Reverences; and standing there,
made other three like Reverences, and then began his Oration, as follows.

MOST Excellent and Virtuous Princess, etc. Where I have been Elected by the
Knights, Citizens and Burgesses of this your nether House to be their Mouth, or
Speaker, and thereunto appointed and allowed by your Majesty, to supply the
same room, to the bewraying of my wants, specially, that thereby I shall be
forced utterly to discover the barrenness of my learning before this Noble
Assembly, which not a little grieveth me, and would gladly be excused,
considering the true saying, How there is no difference between a wise Man and
a Fool, if they may keep silence; which I require. But again, considering your
Majesty's Clemency, taking in good part the good will of the party, for want of
ability, which puts me in remembrance, and good hope persuading me, that you
will not take your said Clemency from me, contrary to your Nature.

Again, when I consider my Office, as Speaker, it is no great matter, being but
a Mouth, to utter things appointed me to speak unto you, and not otherwise;
which consists only in Speaking, and not in any other Knowledge; whereby I
gather how it is necessary, I speak simply, and plainly, according to the truth
and trust reposed in me. And thus, considering whose Mouth I am, which chose me
to speak for them, being the Knights, Citizens and Burgesses, who were not also
by the Commons chosen for their Eloquence, but for their Wisdom and discretion,
by this means being fit men to whom the Commons have committed the care and
charge of themselves, Wives and Children, Lands and Goods, and so in their
behalf to foresee, and take order for all things necessary. Thus they being
Chosen by the plain Commons, it is necessary they Elect a plain Speaker, fit
for the plain matter, and therefore well provided at first to have such a one
as should use plain words, and not either so fine that they cannot be
understood, or else so Eloquent, that now and then they miss the Cushion.

But now upon occasion of beholding your Grace and this Noble Assembly, I
consider the manifold and great benefits, which God suddenly has sent unto
this Country; for although God has granted the benefit of Creation and
Conservation, with many other Commodities, to other Nations of the World, yet
this our Native Country he has blessed, not only with the like, but also with
much more fruitfulness than any other; of which great and inestimable benefit
of Gods preferment, which appears better by the want that others have of the
same, I am occasioned now to speak, the rather to move and stir up our hearts,
to give most hearty thanks to God for the same.

Now to speak of Government by Succession, Election, Religion, or Policy;
First, if the Body should want a Head, it were a great Monster; so it is
likewise, if it have many Heads, as if upon every several Member were a Head.
And to speak of one Head; although in the Body be diverse Members, which be made
of Flesh, Bones, Sinews and Joints, yet the one Head thereof governs wisely
the same; which if it should want, we should be worse than wild Beasts, without
a Shepherd, and so worthily be called a Monstrous Beast.

Again, If the Body should be Governed by many Heads, then the same would soon
come to destruction, by reason of the Controversy amongst them, who would never
agree, but be destroyed without any Foreign Invasion; therefore God sees it is
needful, that the people have a King, and therefore a King is granted them; and
so therefore the best Government is to be ruled by one King, and not many, who
may maintain and cherish the good and Godly, and punish the Ungodly and
Offenders.

As for Government by Election, in that is great variance, partiality, strifes
and part-takings. As for Examples, amongst the rest take out one, which is
called the most Holy, as that of the Pope; and weigh how holily and quietly it
is done, called indeed holy and quiet, but utterly unholy and unquiet, with
great part-takings and strifes.

Now touching Religion. To see the Divine Providence of God, how that many
Nations be Governed by one Prince, which were impossible, but that God Orders
it so, by whom the Order of Regiment is appointed, and that in his Scriptures;
wherefore the Subjects ought to obey the same, yea although they were evil, and
much more those that be good. So God has here appointed us, not a Heathen, or
unbelieving Prince, as he might, but a Faithful, and one of his own Children,
to govern us his Children: in which Government the Prince serves God two ways;
as a Man, and as a King. In that he is a Man, he ought to live and serve God,
as one of his good Creatures; And in that he is a King, and so Gods special
Creature, he ought to make Laws whereby God may be truly worshipped, and that
his Subjects might do no injury one to another, and specially to make quietness
amongst the Ministers of the Church; to extinguish and put away all hurtful and
unprofitable Ceremonies in any Case contrary to Gods word; in which point we
have in your Majesty's behalf great thanks to give unto God, in setting forth
unto us the Liberty of Gods word, whereof before we were bereaved, and that you
have reformed the State of the corrupt Church, now drawing Souls out of
dangerous errors, which before by that Corruption they were led and brought unto.

And concerning Policy, God has Committed to your Highness two Swords; the one
of which may be called the Sword of War, to punish outward Enemies withal, and
the other the Sword of Justice, to Correct offending Subjects: in which point
of Policy your Majesty is not behind your Progenitors; for although at your
Entrance you found this Realm in War, and ungarnished with Munition, and that
with such store as never was before; yet you have dislodged our ancient Enemies
which were planted and placed even upon the Walls of this Realm. And concerning
Policy in Laws, as Bones, Sinews and Joints be the force of a Natural Body, so
are good Laws the strength of a Commonwealth: And your Laws be consisting of
two points, the Common Laws, and the Statutes.

And for the Common Law, it is so grounded on Gods Laws and Natures, that three
several Nations governing here have all allowed the same; which is not
inferior, but rather superior, and more indifferent than any other Law. For by
our Common Law, although there be for the Prince provided many Princely
Prerogatives and Royalties; yet it is not such, as the Prince can take money,
or other things, or do as he will at his own pleasure without order: but
quietly to suffer his Subjects to enjoy their own, without wrongful oppression,
wherein other Princes by their Liberty do take as pleases them.

Aristotle says, That the Life of the Prince is the Maintenance of the Laws,
and that it is better to be governed by a good Prince, than by good Laws; and
so your Majesty, as a good Prince, is not given to Tyranny, contrary to your
Laws; but have and do pardon diverse of your Subjects offending against the
Laws. As now for Example, of your special Grace you have granted a general
Pardon, either without our seeking, or looking for; whereby it is the better
welcome. Again your Majesty has not attempted to make Laws contrary to Order,
but orderly have called this Parliament, who perceived certain wants, and
thereunto have put their helping hand, and for help of evil manners, good Laws
are brought forth; of the which we beseech your Excellent Majesty, so many as
you shall allow, to inspire with the breath of your Majesty's Power; whereby
they may be quickened, which now want Life, and so be made Laws.

Furthermore concerning Payments to be made to the Prince, it is as to deliver
the same to Gods Ministers, who are appointed always for our defense; wherefore
your humble Subjects do offer a Subsidy, to be put into your Majesty's
Treasure; which although it be but as a Mite, or a Farthing, yet is the good
will of them to be reputed as the poor Widows was in the Gospel; wherein I must
not omit to do that which never Speaker did before; viz. to desire your Majesty
not to regard this simple offer of ours, but therein to accept our good will,
wherein your Highness has prevented me in taking in the best part our good
will; and required us to retain in our hands part of our gift, and accounting
it to be in our Purses as in your own; and so is our Duty, besides the Policy
thereof, it being for our own Defense: and also honesty, for that we have
received many benefits by your Majesty; for he that does a good turn, deserves
the praise, and not he which afterward goes about to reward, or does reward
the same. Also giving most hearty thanks to God, for that your Highness has
signified your pleasure of your inclination to Marriage; which before you were
not given unto, which is done for our safeguard; that when God shall call you,
you shall leave of your own Body to succeed you, which was the greatest promise
that God made to David, and the greatest request that Abraham desired of God,
when God promised him exceeding great reward: Who said, Lord, what will thou
give me, when I go Childless, and he that is the Steward of mine House, is mine
Heir? Therefore God grant us, that, as your Majesty has defended the Faith of
Abraham, you may have the like desire of Issue with you. And for that purpose,
that you would shortly embrace the holy State of Matrimony, to have one, when
and with whom God shall appoint, and best like your Majesty; and so the Issue
of your own Body, by your Example, Rule over our Posterity; and that we may
obtain this, let us give our most humble thanks to God for his manifold
benefits bestowed upon us, and pray for the Reign of your Majesty's Issue,
after your long desired Government; and so ended and did his Obeisance.

Then the Lord Keeper (after the Queen had called him, and told him her mind)
Answered to Mr Speaker, and said.

Mr Speaker, The Queen has heard and understood your Wise and Eloquent
Oration, whereby principally I gather four things; First, Disabling your self.
Secondly, Concerning Governance. The third, touching the Subsidy. And lastly,
In giving thanks; which also was intermingled very wisely in all parts of your
Oration.

And for the first, In disabling your self, you have therein contrarily
bewrayed your own ableness.

For the second, Concerning Governance, as well by Succession as Election, of
Religion and Policy, in which Discourse you have dealt well, I therefore leave
it, and mean to speak only a few words, as to your last word Policy.

Politic Orders be Rules of all good Acts, and touching those that you have
made to the over-throwing of good Laws, they deserve reproof as well as the
others deserve praise; in which like case you err, in bringing her Majesty's
Prerogative in Question, and for that thing, wherein she meant not to hurt any
of your Liberties. And again, the grant of her Letters Patents in Question is
not a little marvail, for that therein you find fault; which is now no new
devised thing, but such as before this time has been used and put in practice,
howbeit her Majesty's nature is mild and full of Clemency; so that she is loath
herein to be austere; and therefore, though at this time she suffer you all to
depart quietly unto your Countries for your Amendment, yet as it is needful, so
she hops that the Offenders will hereafter use themselves well.

Again, touching the good Laws, which you have taken great pains in making; if
they be not Executed, they be not only as Rods without Hands to execute them,
or as Torches without Light, but also breed great contempt: therefore look well
to the Execution; for if it be not done, the fault is in some of us, which she
puts orderly in trust to see it done.

For the third point, concerning the presentment of the Subsidy, her Majesty
bids me say, that when the Lords Spiritual and Temporal granted it unto her,
so she trusts you will be as careful in gathering of it; which I, and others
be witness, how very unwilling and loath she was to take, but to avoid further
inconvenience.

And lastly, Concerning knowledge of benefits, and giving of thanks, which you
have well declared be many, yet one in comparison above all, yea a fruit above
all other, and whereby you may enjoy all the other, which is her Marriage;
whereof she has put you in good hope.

Further, I have to put you in remembrance of three things; the first is, that
where now you acknowledge benefits, and as you have cause to give thanks, so
secondly, that you be not unmindful hereafter to do the like; And thirdly, that
in all your doings hereafter, you show your selves, that all these benefits be
had in remembrance, and not forgotten; for that it should be a thing against
reason in humane Creatures; specially therefore now it behooves you all, as you
have acknowledged benefits, and for them given thanks in the first point, so
that you see the other two observed. And then her Majesty will not fail
likewise thankfully to accept the same; and so ended.

Thus far out of the beforementioned Memorial, touching the Passages and
Speeches of this present Afternoon. Now solloweth the manner of her Majesty's
giving her Royal Assent to such Acts as passed, out of one of the Original
Journal-Books of the Upper House, durante Regno Regin. Eliz. viz. in an. 30.
although it be not so expressly set down in that of this present Session of
Parliament.

Then were the Titles of all the Acts read in their due Order, and the Bill of
Subsidy; to which the Clerk of the Parliament standing up did read the Queens
Answer in manner and form following.

La Roigne remercie ses loyaulx subjects, accept leur henevolence, and auxi le
veult.

The Clerk of the Parliament, having read the Queens acceptance and thanks for
the Subsidy given, as aforesaid, did then upon the reading of the Pardon,
pronounce in these French words following, the thanks of the Lords and Commons
for the same.

Les Prelates, Seigneurs and Communes, en ce present Parliament assembles, au
nom de touts vous autres subjects, remercient tres-humblement vostre Majesty,
and prient a Dieu, que il vous done en sante bonne vie and longue.

Nota, That here to the Subsidy Bill, because it is the mere gift of the
Subject, the Queens Consent is not required for the passing of it; but as it is
joined with her thankful acceptance.

Nor to the Bill of Pardon, because it is originally her free gift, is any
other circumstance required, than that the thankful acceptance thereof by the
Lords and Commons be likewise expressed; it being but once read in either
House, before it come thus at last to be expedited. Now to all other Bills,
either private or public, the Queens express consent, though in different
words, is always requisite, as follows, viz.

The Bills of Subsidy and Pardon being passed in manner and form as aforesaid,
then were the public Acts read; to every one of which allowed by the Queen,
the Clerk of the Parliament read in French these words following, viz.

La Roigne le veult.

To every private Act that passed, the said Clerk of the Parliament read the
Queens Answer in these French words following, viz.

Soit fait come il est desire.

These two last Answers to the public and private Acts that pass, are to be
written by the Clerk of the Parliament, at the end of every Act.

To such Acts as her Majesty does forbear to allow, the Clerk of the Parliament
reads in these French words following; viz.

La Roigne s' advisera.

THen the Queen standing up, said (after she had given her Royal Assent unto
nineteen public Acts, and thirteen private) My Lords, and others the Commons
of this Assembly, although the Lord Keeper has, according to Order, very well
Answered in my Name, yet as a Periphrasis I have a few words further, to speak
unto you: Notwithstanding I have not been used, nor love to do it, in such open
Assemblies; yet now (not to the end to amend his talk) but remembering, that
commonly Princes own words be better printed in the hearers memory, than those
spoken by her Command, I mean to say thus much unto you. I have in this
Assembly found so much dissimulation, where I always professed plainness, that
I marvail thereat, yea two Faces under one Hood, and the Body rotten, being
covered with two Vizors, Succession and Liberty, which they determined must be
either presently granted, denied or deferred. In granting whereof, they had
their desires, and denying or deferring thereof (those things being so
plaudable, as indeed to all men they are) they thought to work me that
mischief, which never Foreign Enemy could bring to pass, which is the hatred of
my Commons. But alas they began to pierce the Vessel before the Wine was fined,
and began a thing not foreseeing the end, how by this means I have seen my
wellwillers from mine Enemies, and can, as me seems, very well divide the
House into four.

First the Broachers and workers thereof, who are in the greatest fault.
Secondly, The Speakers, who by Eloquent Tales persuaded others, are in the next
degree. Thirdly, The agreers, who being so light of Credit, that the Eloquence
of the Tales so overcame them, that they gave more Credit thereunto, than unto
their own Wits. And lastly, those that sat still Mute, and meddled not
therewith, but rather wondered disallowing the matter; who in my Opinion, are
most to be Excused.

But do you think, that either I am unmindful of your Surety by Succession,
wherein is all my Care, considering I know my self to be mortal? No, I warrant
you: Or that I went about to break your Liberberties? No, it was never in my
meaning, but to stay you before you sell into the Ditch. For all things have
their time. And although perhaps you may have after me one better Learned, or
Wiser; yet I assure you, none more careful over you: And therefore henceforth,
whether I live to see the like Assembly or no, or whoever it be, yet beware
however you prove your Princes Patience, as you have now done mine. And now to
conclude, all this nonwithstanding (not meaning to make a Lent of Christmas)
the most part of you may assure your selves, that you depart in your Princes
Grace.

Then she spoke openly to the Lord Keeper, saying, My Lord, You will do as I
bad. Who then said aloud, The Queens Majesty has agreed to Dissolve this
Parliament. Therefore every man may take his ease, and depart at his pleasure.
And the Queen rose, and went and shifted her, and took her Barge, and returned
to the Court, being past six of the Clock; and then after her rising, she made
Anthony Brown, one of the Justices of the Common Pleas, a Knight.

That the advice and consent of the Common Council, or Parliament, was often
required for the Marrying of the Kings of England.
1. WIlliam Duke of Normandy sending Ambassadors to King Harold, to deliver up
the Crown of England to him, and to Marry the Dukes Daughter; Herald returned
him this Answer. Eadmerus Histor. Normannorum lib. 1. fol. 5. l. 44.
Si de filia sua, quam debui in uxorem ut asserit ducere, agit, super Regnum
Angliae mulierem extraneam inconsultis Principibus (words of a large extension
used in those times by Historians) me nec debere nec sine grandi injuria posse
adducere noverit. Malmesbury Malmesbury (obiit mortem an. poll natum Sirvatorem
sesum MCxliio. 7 Regis Stephani, Balaeus Script. Britanniae fol. 186.) l. 3. p.
56. l. 24. in vita Willielmi.
that ancient and famous Historian, recites it thus. Quae dixi de puellae
nuptiis referens de Regno addebat praesumptuosum fuisse quod absque Generali
Senatus and Populi Conventu and Edicto alienam illi haereditatem juraverit.

2. William the Son of H. I. being dead, Eadmerus lih. 6. p. 135. l. 21.
Rex legalis Conjugii nexu olim solutus, ne quid ulterius inhonestum
committeret, Consilio Radulphi Cantuar. Pontificis and Principum Regni, quos
omnes in Epiphania Domini sub uno Londoniae congregavit, decrevit sibi in
uxorem Atheleidem filiam Godfredi Ducis Lotharingiae.

3. King John being Divorced, the new Queen was Crowned, Rut. Cart. 5 Johannis
m. 5. n. 33.
de communi assensu and concordi voluntate Archiepiscoporum, Episcoporum,
Comitum, Baronum, Cleri and Populi totius Regni.

4. H. 3. declares Rut. Claus. 19 H. 3. Pars 2. m. 5. dorso. Vide Stat. de an.
Bissextili 21 H. 3. Rex per Consilium fidelium subditorum, and vet resolved to
be a Parliament, Coke lib. 8. Case del Prince, fol. 20.
Ad omnem notitiam volumus pervenire, quod de assensu Magnatum and fidelium
nostrorum (words comprehensive of a Parliament, precedent and future
Authorities in the like Case considered) acceptabimus ducere in uxorem
legitimam Alianoram filiam nobilis viri P. Comitis Provinciae, etc. he having
had once a purpose to Marry the King of Scots younger Sister. Proposuit Rex
(says the A Mat. Weslm. An. 1231. 15 H. 3. p. 290. l. 13.
Historian) ducere in uxorem Regis Scotiae Sororem, indignantibus Comitibus and
A Barons suni majores and minores. Barons pro libere tenentibus in genere,
hoc est tam in Soccagio quam per Servitium militare, Spelm. Gloss. Diatriba de
Baronibus, fol. 64, 67.
Baronibus suis universis; non enim ut dixerunt decebat quod Rex duceret filiam
natu minorem cum Hubertus Justiciarius (meaning Hubert de Burgo) natu majorem
haberet sibi matrimonio copulatam.

5. Edward the Second, Rot. Claus. 1 E. 2. m. 19. dorso.
pro solempnitate sponsalium and Coronationis, Consulted with his Parliament in
his first Year.

6. And An. 5 E. 3. the Chancellor declaring the reasons of the Assembly of the
Parliament, amongst others tells them, that it was to Rot. Pars. 5 E. 3. n. 3.
consult and resolve, whether the King should proceed with France for recovery
of his Seignories, en voie de amiable trete per aliance de marriage, ou de
guerre.

7. In the 23d Year of H. 6. that great Favorite, William de la Pole, Marquess
of Suffolk, then Chancellor, by the Kings Command informs the Parliament, Rot.
Pars. 23 H. 6. n. 19.
that the Marriage with Margaret the Sicilian Kings Daughter, was Contracted
for inducing the Peace made with France; against which the Lords, as being made
without their advice, made Protestation, and caused it to be entered upon the
Parliament Roll; but it appears the Commons agreed to it, by the Petition which
they put up to the King, whereby they recommended by the Chancellors Interest,
his Services and Actions, praying his Grace to accept him to his gracious
favor and good acceptance, and that he was a great instrument of the intended
Peace and Marriage, which the Commons well liked of, though the Lords did not.

8. The Lords Spiritual, Temporal and Commons, tell the King, Rot. Parl. 1 R.
3. Cotton's Records, fol. 711.
that they had considered, how that the pretended Marriage between E. 4. and
Elizabetl. Gray, was made of great presumption without the knowledge and assent
of the Lords of this Land.

9. And in the Parliament 1 H. 7. the Commons by Thomas Lovell their Speaker,
did Rot. Parl. 1 H. 7. n. 18.
Petition the King to Marry Elizabeth, Edward the Fourths Daughter, which he at
their request (backed by the Lords) agreed to do: the Memorial of which is thus
recorded in the Parliament Roll.

Memorand. quod decimo die Decembris Anno praesenti Communes Regni Angliae in
pleno Parliamento coram Domino Rege comparentes, per Thomam Lovell Prolocutorem
suum Regiae Celsitudini bumillime supplicabant eandem Celsitudinem assectuose
requirentes, co considerato quod authoritate Parliamenti stabilitum est and
inactitatum quod baereditates Regnorum Angliae and Franciae cum praeeminentia
and potestate Regali sint, restent, remaneant and permaneant in persona ejusdem
Domini Regis and haeredum de corpore suo legitime exeuntium, eadem Regalis
sublimitas vellet sibi il lam praeclaram Dominam Elizabetham Regis Edwardi
Quarti siliam in Uxorem and Conthoralem assumere, unde per Dei gratiam sobolium
propagatio de stirpe Regum a multis speratarum in totius Regni consolationem
consequeretur. Quare Domini Spirituales and Temporales in eodem Parliamento
existentes a sedibus suis surgentes and ante Regem in Regali solio residentem
stantes capitibus suis inclinatis eandem requestam fecerunt voce divisa: quibus
idem Rex respondebat ore preprio, se juxta eorum desideria and requestas
procedere fuisse contentum.

10. Anno Domini 1530. Anno 21 H. 8. the Parliament sent a Declaration or
Letter to the Pope, touching the Marriage and Divorce of that King from Queen
Katherine, telling him, that Dominus Herbert de Cherbury, in vita H. 8. fol.
303, 305, 306, 307.
Causa Regiae Majestatis nostra cujusque propria est a Capite in membra
derivata, dolor ad omnes atque injuria ex aequo pertinet, and that if his
Holiness did not give his consent, nostri nobis curam esse relictam and aliunde
nobis remedia conquiramus, that is, in plain English, if the Pope would not do
it, they would, which indeed afterward they did.

To which Pope Clement the Seventh sent an Answer directed thus, Venerabilibus
fratribus Archiepiscopis and Episcopis ac dilectis filiis Abbatibus
Nobilibusque viris Ducibus, Marchionibus, Comitibus, Baronibus, Militibus, ac
Doctoribus Parliamenti Regni Angliae.

11. The Marriage of King Philip and Queen Mary, it is true, was treated on
before, yet nothing could absolutely be concluded till the whole Treaty and
Articles of Marriage were solemnly and solidly debated in Parliament, Parl.
sicundum 1 Mariae, Rast. Stat. p. 1085. c. 2. Rast. Stat. part 2. de An. 28
Eliz. fol. 121. c. 18.
which being agreed to, they confirm and establish them by a Law.

12. We your Majesty's most humble Subjects, cannot forbear, but with all
humbleness most thankfully to set before the same, our most lowly thanks for
three special matters proceeding from your Majesty to our benefit, joy and
comfort in this present Assembly.

First, For the more Princely consideration had of us in the forbearing at this
time some portion of that, which according to the greatness and necessity of
your Affairs, we of Duty meant and intended to have yielded unto your Majesty.

Secondly, For the most comfortable assurance and promise by your Majesty made
and declared unto us, that for our Weal and Surety, your Majesty would Marry as
soon as God should give you opportunity to accomplish the same, whereof we have
received infinite comfort, and shall pray to Almighty God to further and
prosper all your Majesty's Actions tending thereunto, that we your most natural
Subjects may speedily see some noble Issue of your Body, to continue
perpetually by Descent the Succession of this Imperial Crown.

Thirdly, For the great hope and comfort we have conceived by the means of your
Majesty's most Honorable Speech, uttered and declared unto us, of your most
Gracious and Princely Disposition and determination, when time thereunto shall
serve conveniently, with the Surety of your Majesty's Person, and the Weal and
Tranquillity of your Realm, to have due regard to the further establishing of
the Succession of your Imperial Crown.

Rot. Claus. 23 E. 1. m. 3. dorso.
Quod omnes tangit, ab omnibus approbetur.

THE JOURNAL OF THE House of COMMONS.
The Journal of the Proceedings of the House of Commons, in the Session of
Parliament bolden at Westminster, An. 8 Reg. Eliz. A. D. 1566. which began
there (after diverse Prorogations of the same) on Monday the 30th of September,
and then and there continued until the Dissolution thereof on Thursday the 2d
day of Jan. An. 9 Reg. ejusdem.

THIS Journal of the House of Commons in this present Session of Parliament de
An. 8 Regin. Eliz. is not only replenished with excellent matter, touching the
usual Orders and Liberties of the House, but also enriched with the unusual
Election of a new Speaker, and with the extraordinary agitation of those two
great businesses, touching her Majesty's Marriage, and Declaration of her next
Successor, in default of the Issue of her own Body. Which having been moved in
the first Session of this Parliament, in An. 5 Regin. Eliz. and been then well
accepted by her Majesty, gave her now much distaste, being again too earnestly
and plainly pressed by them, as her Highness did fully intimate upon the last
day of this present Session, before the Dissolution thereof; in which also it
is to be noted, that Seymour Eque, being still Clerk of the House of Commons,
although this were the last Parliament in which he served, the passages thereof
are recorded in the Original Journal Book of the said House, far more
imperfectly and briefly, than in the ensuing Parliaments of her Majesty's
Reign, when Fulk On slow Esquire succeeded him in the said place.

There were finally between that Session in An. 5 Regin. Eliz. and this now
following in An. 8 Regin. ejusdem, six several Prorogations; of which the first
was had on Saturday the 10th day of April in the Afternoon (when the said first
Session in the fifth Year of her Majesty ended) and by it the said Parliament
was Prorogued unto the second day of October next ensuing, and on the said
second day of October, in respect that the Plague and Pestilence was very rife
in London and Westminster, it was further Prorogued unto the fifth day of
October, which should happen to be in the Year of our Lord 1564. (which fell
out to be in An. 6 Regin. Eliz.) and on the said fifth day of October, in Anno
praedicto, it was further Prorogued unto the 30th day of April next ensuing,
which fell out to be in Anno 7 Regin. Eliz. An. Dom. 1565. And on the 30th day
of April in Anno praedicto, it was further Prorogued unto the 4th day of
October then next ensuing, which fell out to be in the same Year. And on the
said 4th day of October, in Anno praedicto, it was again Prorogued unto the 7th
day of Feb. next ensuing (which fell out to be in the eighth Year of her
Majesty's Reign.) And on the 7th day of February in Anno praedicto, it was
lastly Prorogued unto the 30th day of September being Monday in Anno supra
memorato Regin. Eliz. Annoque Dom. 1566. in which it is to be noted, that
Thomas Williams Esquire the Speaker of the said House of Commons, in the first
Session of this Parliament, in Anno 5 Regin. Eliz. was not present at any of
the said five Prorogations (except at the first only, as is specially set down
in the Original Journal Book of that House, de An. isto 5 Eliz. praesato)
although, it should seem, he were then living, and died not until after the
said fifth Prorogation, and before the said sixth and last; after which this
present Session in An. 8 Regin. Eliz. began on the foresaid 30th day of
September, in manner and form following.

On Monday the 30th and last day of September, this Session of Parliament in
An. 8 Reginae Eliz. held, according to the sixth Prorogation thereof on the 7th
day of February foregoing; whereupon both the Lords and Commons did each of
them assemble and meet in their several Houses, as at any other ordinary time,
without Pomp or Solemnity; this being, as has been observed, no new
Parliament, but only the last Session of that Parliament, which had been first
begun at Westminster, on Tuesday the 12th day of January, in An. 5 Regin. Eliz.
Anno Dom. 1563. and continued by many several Prorogations, unto this present
Monday, being the last day of September as aforesaid.

But as soon as the Knights, Citizens and Burgesses had Assembled themselves in
the House of Commons, and neither unmindful of the weighty Charge committed
unto them, nor letting slip the opportunity of the time offered, had begun to
make entry (as it were) to treat of that they had in hand, they immediately
found their defect, and want of their Mouth and Speaker, Thomas William Esquire,
lately from them by Death bereft, which was there openly and manifestly made
known unto them, by Sir Edward Rogers Knight, Comptroller of her Majesty's
Household. For remedy of which defect, they fell to Consultation, what was most
meet to be done, in that so needful, unexpected, and unexperimented Cause. In
which Deliberation, it was thought good, and wholly agreed upon, that the said
Sir Edward Rogers Knight, a chief Member of that Assembly and Fellowship,
accompanied with Sir Francis Knolles Knight, her Highness Vice-Chamberlain, Sir
William Cecill Knight, her Majesty's Chief Secretary, Sir Ambrose Cave Knight,
Chancellor of her Highness Duchy of Lancaster, four chief Members of that
Assembly and Fellowship, and diverse others, to the number of twelve persons,
should (as sent from and with the mind of the whole House) make their relation
of this so happened, unto the Lord Keeper of the Great Seal, and unto all the
foresaid Lords, at that time likewise being in their Court, in mindful
attendance to their Charge; And therewith also in humble wise should request
them, to have their Aid and Conjunction, both for the intimation of the matter
unto the Queens Highness, and also for knowledge of her Gracious good Pleasure
and Will therein; all which matter and Petition, the said Mr Comptroller,
assisted with the Personages and Company as aforesaid appointed, did in comely
order, and discreet modesty, make manifest and known unto the said Lords. After
which the Lord Keeper, first requiring the said Personages a while to withdraw
themselves, then commended the Order of the matter unto the said Lords, sitting
in Consultation for the same; by whom, upon considered advice therein had, it
was by them all thought seeming, to signify unto the said Commons, by the
Personages aforesaid sent, that they thought it expedient and good, the said
Lord Keeper, the Lord Treasurer of England, the Duke his Grace of Norsolk, and
the Lord Marquess of Northampton, Accompanied with the four before-recited
Personages of the said Commons House, being all of her Highness most Honorable
Privy Council, should in the name of both the Assemblies, with all humbleness
and due celerity, make intimation of their said Estate, and the Petition
thereupon depending, unto her said Highness. To which advice the said Commons,
upon knowledge had of the same, wholly assented. And then it was agreed, that
the House should meet again on the Morrow following at nine of the Clock.

On Tuesday the first day of October, the Knights, Citizens, Burgesses and
Barons of the House of Commons, being Assembled together in their own House,
about nine of the Clock in the Forenoon, report was made unto them (by Sir
Edward Rogers Knight, Comptroller of her Majesty's Household, as is most
probable, in respect that he was the Chief Privy-Councellor of the House) that
her Majesty had been moved according to the former Order, for her License to
choose a Speaker, and that they should receive Answer thereof this day in the
Upper House; and thereupon, as soon as they had notice, that diverse of the
Lords, Spiritual and Temporal, with Sir Nicholas Bacon Knight, Lord Keeper of
the Great Seal of England, were Assembled in the Upper House, and expected
their repair thither, they presently went up unto the Lords, where the Lord
Keeper showed forth a Commission from her Majesty under the Great Seal of
England, directed unto him, which he Commanded the Clerk openly to read.

Which said Commission, as also the greatest part of the foregoing days
passages, are transcribed out of the Original Journal Book of the Upper House,
and inserted here, as into the due and proper place. Which very things were in
part also mentioned in the Original Book of the House of Commons, with the
passages of this present Tuesday, although in both I have not omitted to supply
some things my self, which might easily be gathered by the comparing of several
things together. The Tenor of the said Commission ensues verbatim.

ELizabeth, by the Grace of God, Queen of England, France and Ireland, Defender
of the Faith, etc. To our right Trusty and right well Beloved Chancellor, Sir
Nicholas Bacon Knight, Lord Keeper of our Great Seal of England, Greeting.
Where in the beginning of this present Parliament holden at Westminster the
12th day of January, in the fifth Year of our Reign, the Knights, Citizens and
Burgesses being Assembled in the same Year, in the same Parliament, were
Commanded by us, to go to their accustomed place, and there to choose among
themselves one, to be their Speaker, according to their accustomed manner;
whereupon the same Knights, Citizens and Burgesses, did Elect and choose one
Thomas Williams Esquire to be their Speaker, and the same their Election did
afterward certify unto us, which we did allow and ratify; since which time
this our present Parliament has been continued by diverse Prorogations, until
the 30. of September, in this present eighth Year of our Reign, at which day
the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and also the said Knights, Citizens and
Burgesses being Assembled, for this present Parliament at Westminster, in their
accustomed places, the said Knights, Citizens and Burgesses have declared unto
us, that the said Thomas Williams since the last Session of this present
Parliament, is dead. And thereupon have made their humble Suit and Petition
unto us, that they might have License and Commandment from us, to proceed to
elect among themselves, one other to be their Speaker for the rest of this
present Parliament yet to come. Wherefore We, having certain and perfect
knowledge, that the said Thomas Williams is dead, as they have alleged, and
considering their humble Petition and Request, very meet and necessary to be
granted, have appointed and Constituted you, and by these Presents, We do Will,
Command, Constitute and Appoint you, for us and in our Name, to call the said
Knights, Citizens and Burgesses before you, and other the Lords Spiritual and
Temporal, Assembled in this our present Parliament, in the Higher House of our
Parliament at Westminster, and there for us, and in our Name, to Will and
Command the said Knights, Citizens and Burgesses, to resort to their accustomed
place, and there to Elect and choose amongst themselves, one sufficient and able
person, to be their Speaker for the rest of this present Parliament to come;
And after they have so made their Election, that then three or four of them,
for and in all their names, shall signify the same unto us. And thereupon we
will further signify our pleasure unto them, what day and time they shall
present the person Elected before us, as heretofore has been in like cases
accustomed to be done; wherefore our Will and Pleasure is, that you do
diligently attend about the doing of the premises, and execute the same with
effect. In Witness whereof we have caused these our Letters of Commission to be
Sealed with our Great Seal of England. Witness our Self at Westminster, the
first day of October, in the Eighth Year of our Reign. The residue of this Days
Passages follows out of the Journal of the House of Commons.

As soon as the said Commission had been read, the Knights, Citizens and
Burgesses, and Barons of the House of Commons, departed into their own House;
where Sir Edward Rogers Knight, Comptroller of her Majesty's Household, declared
unto them, that for as much as Richard Onslow Esquire, her Majesty's Solicitor
General, was a Member of their said House, being Elected a Burgess for the
Borough of..... in the County of Sussex, they would use some means to have him
restored unto them (who as yet attended in the Upper House) to join with them
in their Election of a Speaker. And thereupon, notice thereof being given to
the Lords of the Upper House, upon Consultation had amongst them, the said Mr
Onslow was sent down with the Queens Sergeant at Law, Mr Carus, and Mr Attorney
General, to show for himself, why he should not be a Member of this House, who
alleging many weighty reasons, as well for his Office of Solicitor, as for
his Writ of Attendance in the Upper House, was nevertheless adjudged to be a
Member of this House. And thereupon proceeding to the Election, Mr Comptroller
nominated Mr Onslow to be Speaker, who humbly disabled himself, as well for
non-ability of substance meet for that place, as also for his Oath made to the
Queens Majesty, and required them to proceed to a new Election; upon whose
Arguments the House was divided, and the number to have him Speaker was eighty
two, and the contrary was sixty. And immediately Mr Comptroller, and Mr
Vice-Chamberlain, brought him from his place, to the Chair, and there set him
down.

On Wednesday the second day of October, between three and four of the Clock in
the Afternoon, the Knights, Citizens and Burgesses of the House of Commons,
repaired to the Upper House (having notice that her Majesty with the Lords and
diverse others were already set in the said House, expecting their coming) where
Richard Onslow Esquire, their Speaker Elect, was led up to the Rail or Bar at the
lower end of the said House, between Sir Edward Rogers Knight, Comptroller of
her Majesty's Household, and Sir Francis Knolles Knight, her Highness
Vice-Chamberlain, and so presented unto her Majesty; where having disabled
himself in many respects, he was notwithstanding allowed by her Majesty, by the
Mouth of the Lord Keeper. After which having desired free access to her
Highness, and pardon for himself, if he should in any thing unwittingly fail or
mistake; the Lord Keeper, by her Majesty's Commandment, declared her full
Assent to the said particulars. And thereupon the said Speaker, being now
completely and perfectly invested in his place, departed back with the residue
of the House of Commons, unto their own House; where according to the usual
Form, one Bill had its first reading; viz. The Bill how Sanctuary-persons shall
be compellable for payment of their Debts.

Nota, That the Passages of this Afternoon, containing in them the manner of
the Presentment and Allowance of the Speaker, were in part transcribed out of
the Original Journal Book of the House of Commons, and in part out of a certain
Anonymous Memorial I had by me, containing the foresaid matters at large; in
both which, it does appear directly, that the said Richard Onslow Esquire, her
Majesty's Solicitor General, now Speaker of the said House, did contrary to
all former and latter Presidents, only Petition her Majesty in behalf of the
House, for free access; and did very ignorantly omit, or carelessly forget to
mention those two other ancient and undoubted Privileges of the same House;
viz. Liberty of Speech, and Freedom from Arrests for themselves and Followers;
or else perhaps he thought and conceived, that those said rights of the House
were so evident and unquestionable, as they needed no further Confirmation. And
doubtless, whatsoever the said Mr Onslow conceived, yet the Event at this
Session of Parliament, notwithstanding his omission, made it most clear, for
those two great businesses of her Majesty's Marriage, and declaring a
Succeslor, coming into agitation at this time, Mr Mounson, Mr Bell, Mr Paul
Wentworth, and others used so great Liberty of Speech, as (I conceive) was
never used in any Parliament, or Session of Parliament before, or since. Nor
were they any less zealous to maintain and preserve that their other privilege
of freedom from Arrests (omitted likewise by the said Mr Onslow) when occasion
was offered, than at any other time.

A motion sinally was made this day by Sir William Cecil, her Majesty's
Principal Secretary, that one Hen. Green, Burgess for Hereford, was come up to
attend; and that the Plague was in the said Town at his coming away: and
thereupon it was Ordered by the House, that he should not come thither but have
License to depart.

It was Ordered, that the House should be called upon Friday next.

This day Mr Speaker took the Oath, which I conceive was the Oath of Supremacy,
in such form and manner, as other Members of the House have it administered unto
them; saving only that he takes it in the presence of the House.

On Thursday the third day of October, were diverse Arguments made touching the
Oath, which the new Burgesses (Elected in such places as were void since the
last Session, in An. 5 Regin. Eliz.) should take; being, as I conceive, the
same Oath of Supremacy, which the other Burgesses had taken at the beginning of
the foresaid Session, in the fifth year of her Majesty. And at last it was
fully resolved by the said House, that they should take the said Oath
accordingly. And Mr Comptroller of her Majesty's Household, was appointed to
Minister the said Oath unto them; Ut vide in die Veneris jam proxime sequente:
vide Oct ob. 8. Tuesday postea.

This day the Clerk of the House, and Sergeant at Arms, took the Oath, which
was doubtless that of Supremacy; but how this should happen, that the Clerk of
the House should take the same, I cannot guess. For he, being an Officer for
Life, takes the same only at his first coming into the said place, and never
after. And at this Session of Parliament..... Seymor Esquire continued in that
place, which he had held many years before; and the first Parliament in which
Fulk Onslow Esquire his Successor did serve, was in the next following in Anno 13
Regin. Eliz.

Mr Thomas Broomly, being Elected both a Burgess for the Borough of Guildford
in the County of Surrey, and one of the Knights for London, upon his Election
to stand for Guildford, it was resolved by the House, that a new Writ should go
out for the Choice of another Knight, to be returned for London.

The long Bill touching Informations with costs for the Defendant, was read the
first time; and the Bill touching Sanctuaries, was read the second time, and
committed (as it seems) to Mr Recorder and others.

On Friday the 4th day of October, the Bill for Answering the Queens Majesty's
Revenues in the hands of Receivers, was read the first time.

Sir Francis Knolles, her Majesty's Vice-Chamberlain, declared unto the House,
that the Deputy to the Lord Steward, by the Constitution of the Queens
Majesty's Household, is taken to be Mr Treasurer, or Mr Comptroller, and the
Oath to be taken before one of them, and that the Queens Majesty has appointed
Sir Edward Rogers Knight, her said Comptroller, to take the Oath (at this time
usually accustomed to be administered) of the Knights and Burgesses, as Lord
Steward for that purpose.

Nota, That there being at this time no Lord Steward of her Majesty's Household,
it is here said (which is worthy much observation) that by the constitutions of
the Queens Household, when there is no Lord Steward, the Treasurer or
Comptroller of her said Household are taken to be of common usage and course his
Deputy, to all intents and purposes.

Nota also, That none of the Knights, or Burgesses, which had been present, at
the first Session of this Parliament, in an. 5 Regin. Eliz. and had then taken
the Oath of Supremacy, did now take it again; but only such of them, who had
been newly Elected, and returned for places void since the ending of the said
first Session, as see more at large on Tuesday the 8th day of this instant
October following.

The House was appointed to be called on Monday next at eight of the Clock.

The Bill touching informations upon penal Statutes, with costs for the
Defendants, was read the second time, and committed (as it seems) to Sir
Nicholas Throgmorton, and others.

On Saturday the 5th day of October, the Bill for Answering the Queens
Majesty's Revenues, in the hands of Receivers, was read the second time, and
committed (as it seems) to Mr Vice-Chamberlain, and others. The new Bill also
to avoid Sanctuaries for Debt, was read the first time. And lastly, The long
Bill of Apparel, as well for temporal men as spiritual, and also for Women, was
read the first time, and was thereupon (as it should seem) committed unto Mr
Comptroller and others, to consider of it.

On Monday the 7th day of October, the new Bill to avoid Sanctuaries for Debt,
was read the second time, and Ordered to be engrossed. After which, upon
Allegations made for the exemption of the Sanctuary of Westminster, by the Dean
thereof, a day was given unto him, on Friday next at nine of the Clock, to
attend in the House, with his Learned Council, to show cause, why the said
Sanctuary should be exempted. Vide also touching this matter on Wednesday the
16th day of this instant October.

Christopher Haies a Merchant of London, made suit to come into the House, to
put them in remembrance of some matters of weight, and being heard, thanks were
given him for his Motion; but what the said Motion was, through the Clerks
great negligence is wholly omitted, neither is it possible to gather by the
Journal Book it self to what end it tended, although it may not improbably be
conjectured, that it was touching matters of Merchandise, or Shipping.

The business (which had been disputed of in the House on Thursday foregoing)
was this day again debated, and (as it should seem) some moved to know, whether
the Ancient Knights and Burgesses still remaining, since the last Session, in
Anno 5 Regin. Eliz. ought not to take again the Oath of Supremacy, as well as
those that were newly Elected, and returned. Although it were the general
Opinion, and Vote of the House (as may be gathered) that the new Knights and
Burgesses only, should be sworn; yet it was committed to Mr Secretary Cecill,
Mr Vice-Chamberlain, Mr Kingsmill and others (not named) to consider thereof,
and to certify the House, which they did accordingly, on the Morrow following.

On Tuesday the 8th day of October, the Bill touching the engrossing of Tallow,
and Kitchinstuff, was read the first time.

Mr Kingsmill one of the Committee appointed yesterday to consider whether the
Ancient Members of the House, which had taken the Oath the last Session in An.
5 Regin. Eliz. should now have it administered unto them again, or whether those
only who were newly Elected, and returned at the beginning of this present
Session, (and to certify thereof accordingly) made Declaration this Forenoon,
by the Assent of the said Committee, that the former Knights and Burgesses
should not be sworn, but those only who were newly returned.

A Motion was made that..... Gardener, one of the Burgesses of the House,
remained now Prisoner in the Flect, and desired to be restored to the said
House; whereupon the Master of the Rolls, and the Master of the Requests, were
appointed by the House to repair unto the Lord Keeper (in the name of the same
House) to know the cause of his said Imprisonment, and to demand his
Restitution. To which Question and Request, the said Lord Keeper did send his
Answer by them, on the Morrow following.

On Wednesday the 9th day of October, Two Bills had each of them their first
reading; of which the second was the Bill for buying of course Woolls in the
North parts.

The Master of the Rolls (who had been sent yesterday with the Master of
Requests, unto the Lord Keeper, touching..... Gardener, a Member of this House)
declared from his Lordship, that he might be restored to this House again, with
condition that upon Prorogation, or Dissolution of this present session of
Parliament, he might be Prisoner again.

Two Bills had each of them one reading, of which the second being the Bill
touching engrossing of Tallow, and Kitchen stuff, was upon the second reading
rejected.

On Thursday the 10th day of October, Two Bills had each of them their first
reading; of which the second being the Bill for continuance of diverse Acts of
Parliament, to the end of the next Parliament, was read the first time.

The new Bill also touching Apparel of the Laity and Clergy, was this day
brought into the House; but whether it was read or no, cannot certainly be set
down.

The Dean of Westminster (who had been appointed on Monday the 7th day of this
instant October foregoing, to show the Privileges of the Sanctuary of the said
Church) had further day given him this instant Thursday, upon the Motion of Mr
Speaker, until Wednesday next, being the 16th day of this instant October
following.

On Friday the 11th day of October, the Bill that Sussex and Surrey, and other
Counties, never having but one Sheriff, may have several Sheriffs, was read the
first time, and under the Title of the said Bill, at the bottom of it, is
written Mr Vice-Chamberlain, which is all that is usually done also under the
Title of any Bill, which is committed upon the second reading, whether Mr
Vice-Chamberlain or any other be one of the Committees named; such is the
imperfect setting down of things in these former times: and therefore to what
end Mr Vice-Chamberlains name should be added in this place, I cannot guess,
unless this Bill were committed upon the first reading (as many others have
been) or else that he brought in the Bill, and commended it to the House.

The new Bill against Informers upon penal Statutes, was this day brought into
the House, and read the first time.

On Saturday the 12th day of October, the Bill touching prices of Barrells by
Coopers, as in the Statute Anno 24 Hen. 8. was read the first time.

Two Bills lastly against Informers upon penal Statutes, were each of them read
the second time; and (as it should seem) were thereupon committed to Mr
Vice-Chamberlain and others.

On Monday the 14th day of October, Three Bills had each of them one reading;
of which the third being the Bill touching prices of Barrels and Kilderkins,
sold by Coopers, was upon the second reading Ordered to be engrossed.

Upon Complaint made by Mr Graston against one Philpot, a Pursuivant in the
Court of Wards, touching two Promoters for Extortion, the said Pursuivant was
sent for.

On Tuesday the 15th day of October, the new Bill touching Apparel to be worn
by the Laity, and Clergy, was read the second time; and, as it should seem, was
thereupon committed to Mr Vice-Chamberlain and others.

Two Bills were brought from the Lords to the House of Commons, by Mr Sergeant
Carus, and Mr Attorney; of which the first was the Bill touching Fines and
Recoveries; and the second was the Bill to take away Clergy from Offenders in
certain Cases.

On Wednesday the 16th day of October, Two Bills of no great moment, had each
of them one reading; of which the second being the Bill for Assurance of Fines
and Recoveries to be good, from the beginning of the Reign of Queen Eliz.
although the Original be imbezelled, was read the first time.

This Morning finally the Dean of Westminster (according to the appointment of
the House on Thursday last, the 10th day of this instant October foregoing) was
present at the Bar, with his Council; viz. Mr. Edmond Plowden of the
Middle Temple, and Mr. Ford a Civilian. The Dean himself made an Oration in
defense of the Sanctuary, and alleged diverse Grants by King Lucius and other
Christian Kings, and Mr. Plowden alleged the Grant for Sanctuary there by King
Edward five hundred years ago; viz. Dat. in An. 1066. with great reasons in Law
and Chronicle; and Mr. Ford alleged diverse Stories and Laws for the same; and
thereupon the Bill was committed to the Master of the Rolls, and others (not
named) to peruse the Grants, and to certify the force of the Law now for
Sanctuaries.

On Thursday the 17th day of October, the Bill affirming the Consecration of
Archbishops and Bishops within this Realm, was read the second time, and
Ordered to be engrossed.

Sir Edward Rogers Knight, Comptroller of her Majesty's Household, moved the
House to have consideration of the Queens Majesty's late great and
extraordinary expenses, to proportion out some supply accordingly. And
thereupon Sir William Cecil Knight, her Highness Principal Secretary, made an
Excellent Declaration of the Queens great Charges in defending New Haven in
France, in repairing and increasing the Navy and Munition, her Charges also
against John Oneyle in Ireland; and immediately thereupon, all the
Privy Council being Members of this House, the Master of the Rolls, and forty
others of the House, whose names are omitted through the negligence of the
Clerk, were nominated and appointed to consider of the rate and payment of some
supply and aid to be given to her Majesty, and Ordered to meet to Morrow in the
Afternoon, in the Star Chamber.

On Friday the 18th day of October, Four Bills had each of them one reading, of
which the last being the Bill touching prices of Barrels and Kilderkins, was
read the third time.

A Motion was made by Mr. Molineux, for the reviving of the Suit touching the
Declaration of a Successor, in case her Majesty should die without Issue of her
own Body; which Suit had been first moved by the House, and their Petition
preferred therein, in the first Session of this Parliament, in Anno 5 Regin.
Eliz. and that the said business touching the Declaration of a Successor, and
the Subsidy Bill might proceed together, which Motion was very well approved by
the greater part of the said House.

And thereupon diverse Propositions and Reasonings ensued, this great business
being once moved, although it should seem in the conclusion thereof, that the
greater part of the House were resolved to recontinue the said Suit, and to
know her Highness Answer: Although Sir Ralph Sadler Knight Banneret, one of her
Privy Council, had declared and affirmed unto the House, that he had heard the
Queen say, in the presence of diverse of the Nobility, that for the Wealth of
the Realm, her Highness was minded to Marry. Vide plus concerning this matter
on Monday the 25th day of November following, whither all the days are
referred, on which this business was agitated.

On Saturday the 19th day of October, the Bill touching Fines and Recoveries to
be good from the beginning of the Reign of Queen Elizabeth, although the
Originals be lost, was read the second time, and, as it should seem, was
committed to Mr Seckford and others.

Three Bills finally were brought down to the House from the Lords, of which
one was the Bill for the Indenization of John Stafford, born beyond the Seas;
and another for prevention of fraudulent gifts in Bankrupts.

Mr. Secretary Cecill, and Sir Francis Knolles, her Majesty's Vice-Chamberlain,
declared unto the House, that the Queens Majesty was, by Gods special
Providence, moved to Marriage, and that she minds for the Wealth of her
Commons, to prosecute the same.

Sir Ambrose Cave Chancellor of the Duchy, and Sir Edward Rogers Comptroller
of her Majesty's Household, affirmed the same, and thereupon persuaded and
advised the House to see the sequel of that, before they made further Suit
touching the Declaration of a Successor.

But against this Opinion diverse Lawyers of the House (although their names are
negligently omitted, the chief of them being Mounson, Bell, and Kingsmill) did
argue very boldly and judiciously. And so prevailed with the greatest part of
the House, as that it was resolved, contrary to the foregoing Motion of those
of her Majesty's Privy Council, to recontinue their Suit touching the
Declaration of a Successor, and to get the Queens Answer. And to that end it
was Ordered, that all the Privy Council being Members of this House, with forty
four others (whose names are omitted in the Original Journal Book of the said
House) should meet to Morrow, to consult and advise in what manner they might
move the Lords of the Upper-House, to join with them in this matter.

This is the second day in which this great business was agitated in the House
of Commons, upon which doubtless those four Privy-Councellors, who first moved
to have a stop made of it, did it not without her Majesty's special Direction
(who, as it is very probable, foresaw even then the great inconveniences,
which the further prosecution thereof would produce) as see more at large, that
it did indeed so fall out, upon Monday the 25th day of November ensuing.

Mr Secretary Cecill (seeing his former Motion could not prevail to stop the
foregoing resolution of the House, partly, as may be conjectured, to divert it,
and partly that the matter of supply might preceed it) made a Declaration of
the Rates of one Subsidy, and one fifteenth and tenth, according to the
proportion of that Subsidy which had been given in the first Session of this
Parliament (in an. 5 Regin. Eliz.) but withal proposed further days of payment.

October the 20th Sunday.

On Monday the 21th day of October, some Addition, which had been annexed to
the Bill touching Coopers (as it should seem) after the third reading thereof
(which was on Friday the 18. day of this instant October foregoing) was read
the first, second and third time, and so passed with the Bill.

Three other Bills had each of them one reading; of which the first being the
Bill to take Clergy from Cut-Purses and Pick-Purses, was read the third time,
and passed upon the Question.

These two foregoing Bills, which passed this House this Morning, were sent up
to the Lords by Mr. Comptroller, with all the Committees (who were appointed on
Saturday the 19. day of this instant October foregoing, in the great business
touching her Majesty's Declaration of a Successor) with Order also from the
House to move the Lords to join with this House, in the said Suit to her
Majesty ( Vide plus concerning this business, on Monday the 25. day of November
ensuing.)

Three Bills had each of them one reading, of which the first being the Bill
for Sealing of Clothes by the Alneager of Lancaster, was read the second time,
and (as it should seem) committed to Mr. Southerly and others.

The Committees brought word from the Lords, upon their request, that they
coming again to the Lords on the Morrow following, should have Answer.

On Tuesday the 22. day of October, the Bill Confirming the Consecration of
Archbishops, and Bishops within this Realm, was read the third time, and passed
upon the Question.

Doctor Vaughan and Mr. Martin brought word from the Lords, that their
Lordships desired the Committees of this House, to defer their coming unto them
until to Morrow. But about what business the said meeting should then be, is
through the great negligence of Mr. Seymour, at this time Clerk of the House of
Commons, wholly omitted: although it were doubtless touching those two great
businesses; of her Majesty's Marriage, and the Declaration of her next
Successor. For the consideration of which, the House had appointed a select
Committee (being the same here mentioned) on Saturday the 19. day of this
instant October foregoing, and had yesterday sent them up to the Lords, to
(...) their Lordships to join with them in Petitioning her Majesty, touching
the same. And it should seem the reason why their Lordships deferred their
Answer this day, contrary to their appointment yesterday, was because the
Archbishop of York, the Earl of Northumberland, and eighteen other Lords
Spiritual and Temporal, were first appointed to repair in the Afternoon of this
present Tuesday, unto her Majesty, to know her pleasure therein, as may
directly be gathered out of the Original Journal Book of the Upper House. Vide
November. 25. postea.

On Wednesday the 23. day of October, Mr. Comptroller and the other Committees
(appointed on Saturday the 19. day of this instant October foregoing) were sent
up to the Lords, with the Bill for declaring the manner of making and
Consecrating of Archbishops and Bishops within this Realm to be good, lawful
and perfect; and, as it should seem, had Order likewise to desire of the Lords
their resolution touching those two great businesses of her Majesty's Marriage,
and Declaration of a Successor; and that Mr. Bell, Mr. Mounson, and Mr.
Kingsmill, three others of the said Committee, should make Declaration of the
said matters unto their Lordships. For upon the return of the same Committees
from the Lords, toward the end of this Forenoon, they made report to this
purpose, accordingly.

Ten Bills had each of them their first reading, of which the first was the
Bill to confirm by Parliament the Queens Letters Patents for an Hospital at
Gloucester; and the second touching Demurrers after Verdict, how exceptions
should be entered.

Mr. Comptroller with the rest of the Committees (which had been sent up to the
Lords this Morning) returning from them, showed that their Lordships having
heard the several Declarations of Mr. Bell, Mr. Mounson, and Mr. Kingsmill, and
others of the said Committee, touching those two great businesses of her
Majesty's Marriage, and Declaration of her next Successor, who had spoken very
amply and fully unto their Lordships, were resolved to deliberate further (as
the great weight of the matters in hand required) and to send word thereof to
this House accordingly. Vide at large concerning this business, on Monday the
25. day of November ensuing.

On Thursday the 24. day of October, the Bill for Corporation of Merchant
Adventurers, for discovery of new Trades, was read the first time.

It was Ordered, that a Warrant should be granted to require a Writ for the
Election of a new Burgess for Abingdon, in the County of Berks, in the place of
Oliver Hide Deceased.

Two Bills also had each of them one reading, of which the first being the Bill
touching Demurrers, how they shall be entered, was upon the second reading
Ordered to be engrossed.

On Friday the 25. day of October, Two Bills had each of them one reading; of
which the first was entitled, The Bill amended for Apparel of all States under
the Prince.

Mr. Sergeant Carus, and Mr. Attorney, brought word from the Lords, that the
Committees of this House (appointed on Saturday the 19. day of this instant
October foregoing) might be sent up to: their Lordships to receive their
Answer. Whereupon as many of the Committees as were then present, without
others in the places of those that were absent, went up to the Lords, and soon
after returned, and brought word down to the House, that their Lordships would
join with this said House in the Suit to her Majesty, touching her Majesty's
Marriage, and the Declaration of a Successor. Vide plus concerning this matter,
on Monday the 25. day of November ensuing.

The Bill touching Cutlers of London to have search of that Art in diverse
places in and about London, was read the first time.

On Saturday the 26. day of October, Two Bills had each of them their first
reading; of which the first was the Bill for the Inning of the residue of
Plumsted-Marsh; and the second the Bill touching Informers for Execution of
penal Statutes, and under it was written thus.

Wray.

A like President to which see on Friday the 11. of this instant October
foregoing, where the reason of it is conjecturally discussed.

On Monday the 28. day of October, Two Bills had each of them one reading; of
which the first being the Bill touching the making of Steel, and Iron-Wyer
within this Realm; and the second being the Bill for one Fifteenth and Tenth,
and also a Subsidy, as well of English Persons as Strangers, were each of them
read the first time.

On Tuesday the 29. day of October, Three Bills had each of them one reading;
of which the last being the Bill Confirming the Letters Patents for the
Hospital at Gloucester, was read the second time; and (as it should seem)
committed to Mr. Arnold, and others.

A Warrant was granted for a Writ to be made, and sent out for the Election of
a new Burgess for the Borough of Graunpound, in the County of Cornwall, in the
place of Christopher Perne, reported to be Lunatic.

A Warrant also was granted to William Jones, Servant to Sir Thomas Gerrard
Knight, one of the Knights for the County of Lancaster, to attain privilege
(that is to have his privilege allowed) who was Summoned to Answer at London
in a Plea of Debt of ten pound, at the Suit of John Allen and Emme his Wife.

On Wednesday the 30. day of October, the Bill touching Informers for Execution
of penal Laws, was read the second time, and Ordered to be engrossed.

The Lords sent word by Mr. Sergeant Carus, and Mr. Attorney, that they have
chosen of themselves thirty, and require a number of this House to be joined
with them, to consult of the Suit to the Queens Majesty (touching those two
great businesses of her Majesty's Marriage, and Declaration of a Successor) and
to send up word to Morrow of the number chosen. Vide concerning this matter on
Monday the 25. day of November following.

On Thursday the 31. day of October, upon the report of the Bill for
Sanctuaries, it was agreed to be engrossed: but what the effect of the said
report was, or by whom it was made, appears not in the Original Journal Book
of the House of Commons; but may easily be collected by comparing this
foregoing matter, with the former agitation of this business on Wednesday the
16. day of this present October foregoing. For this Bill of Sanctuaries having
had its first and second reading on Monday the 7. day of the same Month, was
then staid from engrossing, upon the motion of the Dean of Westminster, upon
his pretending that it was prejudicial to the Liberties and Privileges of the
said Church; and thereupon having been heard himself at large, and his Council
also on the foresaid 16. day of October, the whole business was referred to the
Master of the Rolls, to consider of further, and thereupon to make report unto
the House; which, as it seems, having done accordingly, this present Thursday
Morning, the House thereupon proceeded with the said Bill, and Ordered it to be
engrossed.

Two Bills of no great moment, had each of them their first reading; of which
the second was the Bill for Explanation of the Act for Chantry Lands.

The House this day (according to the request of the Lords sent down yesterday
by Mr. Sergeant Carus, and Mr. Attorney) appointed all the Privy Council, being
Members of this House, and diverse others, to repair unto the Lords this
Forenoon; which they performed immediately: But their names being very
negligently omitted, by Mr. Seymour, at this time Clerk of the House of
Commons, in this Original Journal Book of the said House; are therefore
supplied out of that of the Upper House, being as follows.

Sir Edward Rogers Knight, Comptroller of her Highness Household, Sir Francis
Knolles, her Highness Vice-Chamberlain, Sir William Cecill, her Majesty's Chief
Secretary, Sir Ambrose Cave Knight, Chancellor of her Highness Duchy of
Lancaster, Sir William Peeter, Sir Ralph Sadler, Sir Walter Mildmay, Knights,
all of her Highness Privy Council, Sir Thomas Wroth the Master of the Rolls,
Sir Nicholas Throckmorton, Sir Morris Berkely, Sir Peter Carew, Sir John
Chichester, Sir Thomas Gargrave, Sir Henry Nevill, Sir Nicholas Arnold, Sir
Henry Ashelie, Sir John Pollard, Sir John Perrott, Sir Gabriel Carew, Sir
Thomas Gerrard, Sir William Chester, Sir John White, Sir John Sellinger, Sir
John Constable, Sir..... Haistings, Sir John Moor, Sir John Southwrote, Sir
John Thinn, Sir G. Turpin, Sir Henry Gates, Sir Robert Wingfeild, Sir Henry
Cheyney, and Sir Arthur Champernown Knights, Mr. Seckford, Mr. Bell, Mr.
Mounson, Mr. Dalton, Mr. Colbie, Mr. Kingsmill, Mr. Mollineux, Mr. Mersh, Mr.
Prat, Mr. Norton, Mr. Robert Newdigate, Mr. Strickland, Mr. Wray, Mr. Sands,
Mr. Recorder, Mr. William Fleetwood, Mr. Mountgomery, Mr. Thomas Fleetwood, Mr.
Heneage, Mr. Bartue, Mr. Alford, Mr. Henry Knolles Sen., Mr. Hasset, Mr.
Hawtry, Mr. John Haistings, Mr. Ashbie of the Jewel-House, Mr. Colly, Mr.
William Moor, Mr. Hilliar, Mr. Knight Marshall, Mr. Robert Manners, Mr.
Barkham, Mr. Francis Newdigate, Mr. Warncomb, Mr. Francis Brown, Mr. Dunch, Mr.
Withers, Mr. Robert Bows, Mr. Awberry, Mr. Haddon, Mr. Edward Leighton, Mr.
Young, Mr. Charles Howard, and Mr. Wilson Esquires.

The Names of these Committees being thus transcribed out of the Original
Journal Book of the Upper House, now follows the Issue of their said meeting
and Conference with the Lords, out of the Original Journal Book of the House of
Commons; which was, that after they had returned thanks unto their Lordships
for their readiness to join with them in their Suit unto her Majesty touching
those two great businesses of her Marriage, and the Declaration of a Successor;
their said Lordships Answer was, that on Saturday next in the Afternoon they
would confer with them the said Committees of the House of Commons, in the
Utter (or Outward) Parliament Chamber.

The House Adjourned it self until Monday next ensuing, being the 4th day of
November, and the Committees before-named were appointed to meet in the mean
time, on Saturday Morning, to agree upon such reasons, as they might offer to
the Lords in the Afternoon of that day, to be presented unto her Majesty, to
persuade and induce her to Marriage, or at least to the Declaration of a
Successor.

But what the Issue of the Conference was. between the Committees of the Lords
and Commons, does no where appear in the Original Journal-Books of the Upper
and Commons House; but it may bevery probably conjectured, that upon their
meeting it was agreed, that the Commons should not at all at this time prefer
any Petition unto her Majesty, touching the said great businesses, because they
had already performed it in the first Session of this Parliament, in An. 5
Regin. Eliz. on Thursday. the 28th day of January in anno praedicto, and that
thereupon now the Lords only should sue unto her Majesty, in the foresaid great
matters, if the said Upper House should allow thereof. Which resolution (as it
should seem) was accordingly approved, and put in Execution, as is very
probable, upon Tuesday the 5th day of November following. Ut vide ibidem.

On Monday the 4th day of November (to which day the House of Commons had
Adjourned it self on Thursday the 31th day of October foregoing) Three Bills
had each of them one reading; of which the first being the new Bill for the
Alneagers Fees of Lancashire, and for the length, breadth and weight of
Cottons, Frizes and Rugs, was read the first time.

On Tuesday the 5th day of November, Five Bills of no great moment, had each of
them one reading; of which the second being the Bill for the having of one
Sheriff of one County in diverse Counties, was read the second time, and
thereupon Ordered to be engrossed.

The Lords sent down Mr Sergeant Carus, and Mr Attorney, to signisie unto the
House, that the Committees (touching those two great matters of her Majesty's
Marriage, and Declaration of a Successor, whose names see on Thursday the 31th
day of October foregoing) should come up unto their Lordships; who immediately
thereupon did so. And shortly after, returning from the Lords, they made
Declaration, that their Lordships required, that thirty of this House should be
before the Queen in the Afternoon, at the Palace (with thirty of the Lords)
which were thereupon appointed, and chosen accordingly by Mr Speaker, out of
the foresaid Committees (nominated on the 31th day of October foregoing) to
attend her Majesty, and to understand what her pleasure was.

Post Meridiem.

The Committees of the Lords and House of Commons attended her Majesty this
Afternoon touching those two great businesses of her Marriage, and Declaration
of a Successor; which I have supplied as a thing necessary for the
understanding, both of the former and future agitation (of which see more
largely on Monday the 25th day of this instant November following) and what her
Majesty's Answer was, shall be needless to insert here, in respect that it was
openly published by Mr Comptroller, and Mr Secretary Cecill, on this ensuing
Morning.

On Wednesday the 6th day of November, Two Bills had each of them one reading;
of which the second being the Bill for the Cloth-Workers of London to have
search, was read the second time, and (as it should seem) committed to Mr
Chancellor, and others.

The Bill touching Informers for better Execution of penal Laws, was read the
third time, and passed upon the Question.

Mr Dr Vaughan, and Mr Yale, brought from the Lords, the Bill for Hexamshire,
and a Proviso in the Bill for Bishops.

Sir Edward Rogers Knight, Comptroller of her Highness Household, and Sir
William Cecill Knight, her Majesty's Principal Secretary, read in writing notes
of the Queens Majesty's saying, before the Lords and Committees of this House;
tending that her Grace had signified to both Houses, by words of a Prince, that
she by Gods Grace would Marry, and would have it therefore believed; and
touching limitation for Succession, the perils be so great to her Person, and
whereof she has felt part in her Sisters time, that time will not yet suffer
to treat of it. Whereupon all the House was silent. Vide plus concerning this
matter on Monday the 25th day of this instant November following.

The Proviso added to the Bill for Archbishops and Bishops, was read the first
time.

On Thursday the 7th day of November, Three Bills had each of them one reading;
of which the last being the Bill for Confirmation of the Hospital of St
Bartholomews in Gloucester, was read the third time, and passed upon the
Question.

On Friday the 8th day of November, Two Bills had each of them one reading; of
which the first being the Bill for wearing of Caps on Holy Days, and not Hats,
was read the first time.

Mr Lambert began a Learned Oration, for iteration of the Suit to the Queens
Majesty for limitation of Succession; and thereupon strongly reasoned for both
parts: whence it appears plainly, that though her Majesty satisfied the Lords
by her former Answer on Tuesday the 5th of this instant November preceding (the
effect of which was, that she was desirous to incline her mind to Marriage; but
could not declare a Successor, in respect of the great danger thereof) yet
those of the House of Commons rested not contented therewith, but only resting
upon her Majesty's promise touching her Marriage, they still discoursed of, and
resolved to press further, that other part of their former Suit touching the
Declaration of a Successor; as appears by this foregoing Motion of Mr
Lambert, and by the sequel afterward; touching all which, see more fully on
Monday the 25th day of this instant November ensuing.

On Saturday the 9th day of November, Two Bills of no great moment, had each of
them one reading; of which the first being the new Bill for carrying of Rams,
or Sheep, over Sea, to be Felony, was read the first time; And the second being
the Bill to avoid delays upon Verdicts and Demurrers in Law, was read the third
time, and passed upon the Question.

Sir Francis Knolles Knight, her Majesty's Vice-Chamberlain, declared the
Queens Majesty's Express Commands to this House, that they should no further
proceed in their Suit, but to satisfy themselves with her Highness Promise of
Marriage. After whom Mr Secretary Cecill, and Mr Comptroller, severally
rehearsed the like matter. So that by this it may be gathered, that her Majesty
understanding of Mr Lambert's Motion made Yesterday, and fearing that the House
should fall a fresh upon the discussion of this business, did now send her
Express Inhibition to prevent it, by these forenamed honorable Personages; of
which matter see more at large on Monday the 25th day of this instant November
following.

The Bill for two Sheriffs to be several of Oxon and Berks, was read the first
time.

It is Ordered, That if after the reading of the first Bill, any of the House
depart before the rising of Mr Speaker, without License of Mr Speaker, that
then he shall pay to the poor Man's Box four pence.

Sunday November the 10th day.

On Monday the 11th day of November, Two Bills had each of them one reading; of
which the first being the Bill for Confirmation of Letters Patents, made to the
Cordwayners of London, was read the first time.

Paul Wentworth a Burgess of the House, by way of Motion, desired to know
whether the Queens Command and Inhibition, that they should no longer dispute
of the matter of Succession (sent Yesterday to the House) were not against the
Liberties and Privileges of the said House? And thereupon arose diverse
Arguments, which continued from nine of the Clock in the Morning till two of
the Clock in the Afternoon. But then, because the time was far spent, all
further debate and reasoning was deferred until the next Morning. And, as it
should seem, no certain resolution of the House given therein; neither does it
appear in the Original Journal Book of the House of Commons, either what the
effect of these Arguments were, or by whom uttered, which with many other
defects and imperfections, happened therein, through the great negligence of Mr
Seymour, at this time Clerk of the same House.

On Tuesday the 12th day of November, Mr Speaker being sent for to attend upon
the Queens Majesty, at the Court, about nine of the Clock, sent word to the
House, where he was, requiring the House to have Patience; and at his coming,
after ten of the Clock, began to show, that he had received a special Command
from her Highness to this House, notwithstanding her first Commandment, that
there should not be further talk of that matter in the House (touching the
Declaration of a Successor, in Case that her Majesty should die without Issue)
and if any person thought himself not satisfied, but had further reasons, let
him come before the Privy Council, and there show them. Vide plus concerning
this business, on Monday the 25th day of this instant November following.

On Wednesday the 13th day of November, Six Bills of no great moment, had each
of them one reading; of which the fourth being the Bill for Thomas Browns Lands
to be altered from Gavelkind, was read the second time, and Ordered to be
engrossed.

Three Bills were sent up to the Lords, from the House of Commons; of which one
was the Bill for the better Execution of penal Laws; And another to avoid
delays upon Verdicts and Demurrers in Law.

The Bill touching two Branches in the Statute made for Chauntry-Lands, was
read the second time, and committed to Mr Marsh.

Mr Sergeant Carus, and Mr Dr Huick, brought from the Lords two Bills; one for
the Jointure of the Lady Cobham, and the other for Carriage of Wool growing in
diverse Shires in Wales.

On Thursday the 14th day of November, Three Bills had each of them one
reading; of which the third being the Bill to avoid long delays in Civil and
Marine Causes, was read the second time, and Ordered to be engrossed.

The Bill for several Sheriffs to be in Surrey and Sussex, Essex and Hertford,
Oxon and Berks, Somerset and Dorset, Warwick and Leicester, Nottingham and
Darby from 1567. was read the third time, and passed upon the Question.

On Friday the 15th day of November, the Bill for buying of Ostrich Woolls, by
Hat-makers and Felt-makers, was read the first time.

Edward Jones Complained of John Gray Esquire, Knight for Stafford, that he had
misused and threatened him in Paul's, casting away his Cap, whereby he was in
great fear of his Life, and prayed Remedy of this House. To the which Mr Gray
Answered at the Bar, that he had diverse times claimed a Debt due by his Father,
to the which he had reasonably Answered. Whereupon the hearing of the matter,
for the Surety of Jones, was committed unto Sir Thomas Wroth, and four others
of this House. Vide plus touching this matter on Tuesday the 3d day of December
following.

The Bill to avoid excess in Apparel in diverse Degrees, was read the third
time, and passed upon the Question.

Leonard Darnet, Burgess for Marlborough in the County of Wilts, is for his
great Affairs Licensed by the House to be absent.

On Saturday the 16th day of November, Three Bills had each of them one
reading; of which the third and last, being the Bill touching Cutters of Tanned
Leather, was read the second time; but no mention is made, either of
committing, or engrossing of it.

The Bill for several Sherifss to be in several Counties; And the Bill to avoid
excess in Apparel in diverse degrees, were sent up to the Lords by Mr
Vice-Chamberlain.

Robert Ireland, Burgess for the Borough of Salop, Edward Leighton Esquire, one of
the Knights for the County of Salop, were each of them Licensed by the House
for their special Affairs to be absent, until..... and so this matter, without
expressing the certain time, breaks off abruptly in the Original Journal Book
of the House of Commons, through the great negligence of Mr Seymour, Clerk of
the said House; although it may very probably be conjectured, that this License
was not granted unto them absolutely, but upon condition to return again and
attend the service of the House, at some certain day prefixed. Vide consimile
December 7th postea.

Upon diverse Arguments made, that Edward Jones might be sent to the Tower for
so using Gray, in attaching his Goods, tending to the breach of the Privilege
of this House, the matter was eftsoons committed to Mr Wroth and others, as
well to provide Surety of Jones against the said Gray, until Saturday next, and
then further to report, as also touching an Informer sent to Ward by Mr
Grafton, and removed by Habeas Corpus into the King's Bench. Vide on Tuesday the
3d day of December following.

November the 17th Sunday.

On Monday the 18th day of November, William Epse, Burgess for Rumney, was
Licensed to be absent for eight days. Vide consimile in die praecedente.

Five Bills of no great moment, had each of them one reading; of which the
third being the Bill for making of Allom, and Copperas, by the Lord Mountjoy;
And the fourth being the Bill to repeal the Act made for prices, were each of
them read the second time, and Ordered to be engrossed.

On Tuesday the 19th day of November, Three Bills had each of them one reading;
of which the last being the Bill for the Alneagers Fees of Lancaster, and the
length, breadth and weight of Cottons, Frizes and Rugs, was read the second
time, and Ordered to be engrossed.

On Wednesday the 20th day of November, Two Bills had each of them one reading;
of which the first being the Bill for places for the keeping of Records in the
twelve Shires of Wales, was read the first time.

The Bill for Wollnersh in the County of Surrey, was brought from the Lords by
Mr Attorney.

Two Bills lastly had each of them one reading; of which the first being the
Bill for the Jointure of the Lady Frances Cobham in Cooling, was read the
second time.

On Thursday the 21th day of November, Five Bills had each of them one reading;
of which the first being the Bill to repeal a Branch in the Act for Watermen
upon the Thames; And the second touching the Act made for sale of stuff for
Apparel, not paid for, were each of them read the first time.

On Friday the 22th day of November, Six Bills of no great moment, had each of
them one reading; of which the third being the Bill for the Felt-makers and
Hat-makers, was upon the second reading rejected; and the fourth and sixth
being for wearing of Caps, upon the Sabbath, or Holy Days, and also that Trials
of Felonies done in Wales, shall be at the great Sessions there, were each of
them read the second time, and (as it should seem) committed to Mr Crofts and
others.

Richard Wheatley Clerk, Attendant upon Sir Henry Cromwell Knight, one of the
Knights for the County of Huntingdon, being Attached by several Bills of
Middlesex, in several Pleas of Trespass, at the Suit of William Marlyn, and
Michaell Welsh, required the Privilege of the House.

On Saturday the 23th day of November, A Proviso added to the Bill for Bishops,
in lieu of the Lords Proviso, was read the first time.

The Bill touching Latitats was brought from the Lords, by Mr Sergeant Carus,
and Mr Read.

Mr Thomas Wroth declared John Gray, and Edward Jones by Mediation to be
agreed, and that attachment to be void, upon condition, that Mr Gray should
openly in the House promise, that he, nor any by him should hurt the said
Jones, when he should come next to the House, being now sick of the small Pox,
and the Recognizance taken not to be certified: Vide concerning this matter on
Tuesday the 3d day of December following.

On Monday the 25th day of November, Two Bills had each of them one reading; of
which the first being the Bill for the Jointure of the Lady Cobham, was read
the second time.

The Proviso to the Bill for Bishops in lieu of the Lords Proviso, was read the
second time, and Ordered to be engrossed.

Mr Speaker coming from the Queens Majesty, declared her Highness Pleasure to
be, that for her good will to the House, she did revoke her two former
Commandments, requiring the House no further to proceed at this time in the
matter. Which Revocation was taken of all the House most joyfully, with most
hearty Prayer and thanks for the same.

HER Majesty having found by Experience, that the desire of the House of
Commons in that great business touching the Declaration of a Successor, in Case
she should die without Issue, was like other Passions, more easily calmed and
quieted by following than resisting, did now at length remit unto them (as
appears by this Message brought by the Speaker) that freedom of Speech, and
liberty of discussion, which they had formerly made use of, without any such
allowance, and by that means did sooner satisfy their discontent, and procure
their silence, than by any former secret diversions, or open inhibitions. And
though that business only touching the Declaration of a Successor, be mentioned
here, yet both in the first Session of this Parliament, in an. 5 Regin. Eliz.
and in the greatest part of this present Session, de an. 8, and 9 Reginae
ejusdem, it was joined with the other great matter of her Majesty's Marriage.
For the House of Commons, having in the said fifth Year of her Majesty,
Petitioned her in their own name only, on Thursday the 28th day of January in
the Afternoon, both to incline her Royal Person to Marriage, and to make
Declaration of her next and rightful Successor, in default of her own Issue,
they received from her a Gracious Answer; but finding now in this second
Session of that Parliament begun and continued above three Years after, that
there followed no Issue, or effect thereupon, in respect that her Majesty
remained still as far from any likelihood of Marriage, as then; and that the
State of the Kingdom, in Case she should die, grew every day more dangerous
than other, in respect of the several pretended Rights to the Crown, which now
began openly to be disputed and maintained, according to the several
inclinations and opinions of men; Therefore (I say) on Friday the 18th day of
October, in this present Session, de An. 8, and 9 Regin. Eliz. Mr Mollineux
first moved it in the House, that they might again revive their former Suit to
her Majesty, to declare a Successor, but mentioned not her Marriage; whereupon
Sir Ralph Sadler Knight Banneret, one of her Majesty's Privy Council, stayed
the House from further proceeding at that time, by making Declaration of her
Majesty's own Speeches, tending to the expression of her good Inclination unto
Marriage; and that therefore the House should expect the timely Issue of that a
while, and not intermeddle with the matter of Succession. Which report and
advice of Sir Ralph Sadlers, being seconded again the next day being Saturday
the 19th day of the same Month, by others of her Majesty's Council, was then
opposed by diverse of the House. And it was at last concluded, that they should
renew their said Suit to her Majesty, touching the Declaration of a Successor;
according to which resolution, they not only debated it themselves, on Monday
the 21th day, and on Tuesday the 22th day of October foregoing, but also
afterward with the Lords on Wednesday the 23th day, on Thursday the 24th day,
and on Wednesday the 30th day, and on Thursday the 31th day of the same Month;
joining also unto it that other great business of her Majesty's Marriage (which
I conceive was only colourably added, that the other Motion touching
Succession, might be the less distastful to her Majesty) who having appointed
thirty of either House to attend her on Tuesday the 5th day of this instant
November foregoing, in the Afternoon, did there Answer the Lords Petition (who
doubtless preferred it by themselves in this Session, de An. 8, and 9 Regin.
Eliz. as the Commons had Petitioned her in the same matters by themselves, in
the first Session of this Parliament in an. 5 Reginae ejusdem) but the Commons
resting not satisfied with the said Answer (wherein her Majesty did only in
general intimate her inclination to Marriage, but absolutely denied to make any
Declaration of her Successor, which they chiefly aimed at, in respect of the
danger) did notwithstanding several inhibitions and restrictions, further
prosecute the same matter, plainly and singly, without the least mention any
more of her Marriage, on Wednesday the 6th day, Friday the 8th day, Saturday
the 9th day, Monday the 11th day, and on Tuesday the 12th day of this instant
November foregoing, until this present Monday the 25th day of the same Month,
when upon her Majesty's Gracious Permission of freedom of Speech, they ceased
further to treat thereof, as appears by the following silence of the Original
Journal Book of the House of Commons therein, until the last day of this
Session, being Thursday the second day of January following, when her said
Majesty did mildly reprove the violent prosecution of the same, by the said
House.

On Tuesday the 26th day of November, Three Bills had each of them one reading;
of which the third being the Bill for the Corporation of Merchants, for
discovery of new Trades in Russia, was read the third time, and Ordered to be
engrossed.

Mr Sergeant Carus and Mr Vaughan, brought from the Lords two Bills, one for
the Expedition of Justice in Lancaster, and another for the Jointure of the
Lady Stafford.

It was Ordered this day, that the House should be called upon Tuesday next.

On Wednesday the 27th day of November, Three Bills had each of them one
reading; of which the second being the Bill for the Almeshouse at Plymouth in
the County of Devon, And the third to avoid vexations upon the Writ of Latitat,
etc. were each of them read the first time.

Mr Secretary declared from her Majesty, that for the good will she bears to
her Subjects, her Highness does remit the third payment of the said Subsidy,
before rated; for which her great Clemency, most hearty thanks was given by the
House; and immediately was read

The Bill for the grant of one Fifteenth, and a Subsidy at two payments the
second time, and committed (as it should seem) to Mr Seckford and others.

Nota, That here her Majesty (as is very probable) did remit this third and
extraordinary payment of the Subsidy, the more yet to withdraw them from the
further prosecution of that great business touching the Declaration of a
Successor, (mentioned at large on Monday the 25th day of this instant November
foregoing) in which those of the House of Commons had proceeded with great
violence: and that her Majesty had this intent in remitting the said third
payment, is the more apparent, because it had been formerly given by the said
Commons, thereby the rather to induce her Majesty to the said Declaration of a
Successor, as is plainly set down by Mr Cambden, in Annal. Regin. Eliz. Edit.
Lugdun. Batav. A. D. 1625. page 102.

On Thursday the 28th day of November, Four Bills of no great moment, had each
of them one reading; of which the last being the Bill for preservation of Corn
by destruction of Crows, and other Vermin, was read the first time.

Five other Bills were each of them read the first time, and passed upon the
Question; of which one was the Bill for the Jointure of the Lady Cobham, and
another to avoid long Suits in Civil and Marine Causes.

The Bill lastly for Confirmation of Letters Patents, was read the second time,
and (as it seems) was committed to Mr Gargrave, and others, whose name I
conceive should have been written, Sir Thomas Gargrave; for it is usual in this
Journal of the House of Commons, in this present Session de An. 8, and 9 Regin.
Eliz. according to the use of former times, to style Knights by the term of Mr
prefixed only to their Surnames.

On Friday the 29th day of November, Four Bills of no great moment, had each of
them one reading; of which the second being the Bill for John Stafford born
beyond the Sea, to be a free Denizen; and the third for the Watermen upon the
Thames, were each of them read the second time: but no mention made either of
referring them to Committees, or Ordering to be engrossed.

Diverse Arguments were had in the House, touching a Preamble to be made and set
down, before the Bill of Subsidy, whereupon the said Bill was Ordered to be
engrossed.

On Saturday the 30th day of November, Five Bills of no great moment, had each
of them one reading; of which the second being the Bill for the Frizers and
Cottoners of Shrewsbury; the third touching a Lease made by the Masters of the
Colleges in 37 Hen. 8. and the fourth to have several Sheriffs in Oxon and
Berks, were each of them read the second time, and Ordered to be engrossed.

The Bill to repeal the Statute made An. 7 Edw. 6. for prices of Wines, was
read the third time, and upon the Question and Division of the House, passed;
viz. with the Bill ninety five, and against it sixty five.

The Bill lastly requiring the Impost to be taken away, was read the first time.

On Monday the 2d day of December, Two Bills had each of them their second
reading; of which the first being the Bill for Confirmation of Letters Patents
of Merchant Adventurers at Bristol, was Ordered to be engrossed: And the second
for the pulling up of Wears and Piles, was (as it should seem) committed to Mr
Vice-Chamberlain, and others.

Six Bills were sent up to the Lords by Mr Vice-Chamberlain and others; of
which one was the Bill for the Free School of Southwark, and another for the
Jointure of the Lady Cobham.

The Bill touching Fines and Recoveries was read the second time, and (as it
should seem) was committed to the Master of the Rolls, and others.

The Bill for making of Allom and Copperas, by Letters Patents by Cornelius de
Vos, and by him assigned to the Lord Mountjoy, was read the third time, and a
Proviso thereunto annexed, was read the first, second and third time.

On Tuesday the 3d day of December, Three Bills of no great moment, had each of
them one reading; of which the third being the Bill for the Office of
Town Clerk of the City of York, was read the second time, and Ordered to be
engrossed.

Three Bills also had each of them their second reading; of which the first
being the Bill touching the Statute made for Apparel, was (as it should seem)
committed to Mr Vice-Chamberlain, and others; And the second for buying of
Woolls in the North parts, was committed unto Mr Gargrave; the like reference
see on Thursday the 28th day of November foregoing. And the third being the
Bill for carrying over Sea of Rams, Sheep or Lambs, to be Felony, was (as it
seems) committed to Mr Wilson, and others.

John Gray Esquire did this day promise before the whole House, that he and his
should keep the Peace against Edward Jones, and the said Jones promised
immediately to withdraw his Action. Vide concerning this matter on Friday the
15th day, Saturday the 16th day, and on Saturday the 23th day of November
foregoing.

Two Bills also had each of them one reading; of which the first being the Bill
for making of Steel and Plates for Armor, within the Realm, was read the
second time, and Ordered to be engrossed.

It was sinally this day Ordered, that the House should be called on Monday
next.

On Wednesday the 4th of December, Two Bills of no great moment, had each of
them one reading; of which the first being the Bill for punishment of Vagabonds
and Loyterers, was read the first time.

Three Bills also had each of them their third reading, and passed upon the
Question; of which the second was the Bill for Merchant Adventurers of
Bristoll; and the third for the Drapers, Cottoners and Frizers of Shrewsbury.

The Bill lastly to take away Sanctuary for Debt, was read the third time; and
upon the Question and division of the House, dashed with the difference of
seventeen Voices; viz. with the Bill sixty, and against it seventy seven.

On Thursday the 5th day of December, Two Bills of no great moment, had each of
them one reading; of which the second being the Bill for the Town Clerk of
York, was read the third time, and Ordered to be engrossed.

Four Bills were sent up to the Lords by Mr Vice-Chamberlain, of which one was
the Bill for the Drapers, Cottoners and Frizers of Shrewsbury; and another for
Merchant Adventurers of Bristoll.

The Bill with a little Book Printed in the Year 1562. (which was the fourth or
fifth Year of her Majesty's Reign) for the sound Christian Religion, was read
the first time. Vide May the 17th Thursday an. 13 Eliz. in the House of Commons
Journal.

On Friday the 6th day of December, Eight Bills of no great moment, had each of
them one reading; of which the third being the Bill for the punishment of
Offenders, in Swearing, Drunkenness, etc. was read the second time, and (as it
should seem) committed to Mr Vice-Chamberlain, and others; And diverse Bills
touching Religion, of which see fully on Thursday May the 17th in an. 13 Eliz.
in the Journal of the House of Commons.

On Saturday the 7th day of December, Three Bills of no great moment, had each
of them one reading; of which the third being the Bill for the finishing of the
Port of Hartlond in Devon was read the second time, and Ordered to be engrossed.

The Bill confirming the Corporation of the Kings Heralds at Arms, and the Bill
for the Embroiderers of London, were each of them read the second time, and
committed (as it should seem) to Mr Vice-Chamberlain, and others.

Walter Strickland Esquire, Knight for the County of Cumberland, being diseased
with the Gout, was Licensed to be absent.

On Monday the 9th day of December, Three Bills had each of them one reading;
of which the second being the Bill to avoid fraudulent Gifts, and also Order
for Bankrupts, was read the second time, and (as it should seem) committed unto
Mr Seckford; and the third for Explanation of the Act of 37 Hen. 8. touching
Colleges and Free-Chappels for Leases, with a Proviso for Judgments given, was
read the third time, and passed upon the question.

On Tuesday the 10th day of December, Two Bills had each of them one reading;
of which the Bill with a little Book Printed an. 1562. for the sound Christian
Religion, was read the second time, and Ordered to be engrossed. Vide May the
17th Thursday in An. 13 Regin. Eliz. sequen. in the Commons House Journal.

Mr Sergeant Carus, and Mr Attorney, brought from the Lords two Bills; one for
the Stature of Horses, and another for Allom and Copperas.

The Preamble of the Bill of Subsidy, after long Arguments, was read the first
and second time.

On Wednesday the 11th day of December, Four Bills of no great moment, had each
of them one reading; of which the first being the Bill for pulling up of Piles,
Wears and Fish-Gates; The second for Records to be kept in Wales, And the
third touching Jail-delivery in the Counties of Wales, and touching Sheriffs
and Justices of the Peace, were each of them read the second time, and Ordered
to be engrossed.

The Proviso and Amendments of the Bill for Informers, was sent from the Lords,
and read the first time, and (as it should seem) committed to Mr Seckford to
consider of it.

On Thursday the 12th day of December, Nine Bills had each of them one reading;
of which the seventh being the Bill that John Stafford, born beyond the Seas,
may be a free Denizen; and another for the making of Steel in England, were
each of them read the third time, and passed upon the Question, and were with
two others sent up to the Lords, by Mr Vice-Chamberlain.

Mr Sergeant Carus brought from the Lords, the Subsidy for the Clergy;
whereupon the Bill for one Fifteenth and Tenth, and also one Subsidy granted by
the Temporalty, was read the third time, and passed upon the Question.

On Friday the 13th day of December, Six Bills had each of them one reading; of
which the fourth being the Bill for bringing in of Tonnage-Wares landed in
other Countries, was read the second time, and Ordered to be engrossed. And the
Bill for the Articles of Religion, passed upon the third reading; Vide May the
17th Thursday in Anno 13 Eliz. sequent. in the Journals of the Commons.

On Saturday the 14th day of December, Five Bills had each of them one reading;
of which the third, that several Sheriffs may be in Buckingham and Bedford; and
the fourth for Confirmation of Letters Patents since the first Year of the
Reign of Queen Eliz. were each of them read the second time, and Ordered to be
engrossed.

The Bill for the Articles of Religion, and the Bill for the Port in Hartlond,
was sent to the Lords by Mr Vice-Chamberlain, etc.

The Bill for making and wearing of Hats and Caps within the Realm, with the
Proviso added thereunto, was read the second time, and Ordered to be engrossed.

The House was appointed to be called on Thursday next, in the Afternoon.

On Monday the 16th day of December, Three Bills of no great moment, had each
of them their third reading; and passed upon the Question: of which the first
was the Bill for keeping of the Records in twelve Shires of Wales, with diverse
Ordinances there.

Mr Sergeant Carus brought from the Lords two Bills, one for graving of Seals,
and the other for Merioneth.

The Bill touching the bringing in of Tonnage Wares landed by the way to be
forfeit, with a Proviso, was read the third time.

On Tuesday the 17th day of December, Four Bills of no great moment, had each
of them one reading; of which the fourth being the Bill for Adjournment of
Assizes at Lancaster and Durham, was read the second time; but no mention is
made whether it was Ordered to be engrossed, or referred to Committees. Vide
consimile December the 19th Thursday, postea.

The Bill for the Merchant Adventurers Corporation, for discovery of Russia,
and new Trades, with three Provisoes, were each of them read the third time,
and with the Bill passed upon the Question.

The Bill of Subsidv, with the three Bills last past, were sent up to the Lords
by Mr Chancellor of the Duchy.

Leonard Ireby Burgess for Boston, for his Affairs, is Licensed by Mr Speaker
to be absent.

On Wednesday the 18th day of December, Three Bills of no great moment, had
each of them their second reading; of which the first was the Bill for the
Bowyers of London, the second for Trials of Felony in the County of Merioneth,
and the third for the graving of Alneagers Seals by the Graver of the Mint.

Three Bill also were each of them read the third time; of which the first
being the Bill for Latitats for Execution out of the King's Bench, and the
second for paving of Kentish-street, passed upon the Question.

The Bill for Dyers of Woolls, Cloths, or Caps; The Bill for maintaining of
Sea-Marks, for the Trinity-House of Deptford, and for Watermen of the Thames;
And the Bill for the Cloth-Workers of London, was read each of them the second
time, and Ordered to be engrossed.

The new Bill to alter the Statute for the making and breadth of Cloths, was
read the first time.

The Bills which last passed in this House, were sent up to the Lords by Mr
Vice-Chamberlain, and others.

Two Bills finally had each of them one reading; of which the first being the
Proviso added to the Bill for making Steel in England, was read the third time,
and with the Bill Ordered to be engrossed.

On Thursday the 19th day of December, the Bill touching Plumstead-Marsh, for
the Inning of it, was read the second time, and Ordered to be engrossed.

Two Bills also had each of them their second reading; of which the first was
the Bill that no person shall hold above two Tenements; and the second to
repeal a Branch of a Statute for breed of Stone-Horses in diverse Shires.

The Addition to the Lords Bill for Fines with Proclamations, was read the
first and second time, and Ordered to be engrossed.

The Additions sent from the Lords, in the Bill touching Informers, were read,
and (as it should seem) referred to Mr Lovelace, to consider of them.

The new Bill for Apparel, was brought from the Lords by Sergeant Carus.

The Bill for Bankrupts and fraudulent Gifts, was dashed upon the question, and
division of the House, by the difference of sixteen Voices; viz. with the Bill
forty, and against the Bill fifty six.

Two Bills lastly had each of them their first reading; of which the first was
the Bill for Reformation of excess in Apparel.

On Friday the 20th day of December, the Bill for the Subsidy of the Clergy of
Cant. was read the second time.

Four Bills also had each of them one reading; of which the first for the
Almes-House of Plymouth, The second for the making of Bay Salt, and White-Salt
in England; And the third for preservation of Grain, by killing of Crows and
other Vermin, were each of them read the second time, and Ordered to be
engrossed.

The Bill for the Jointure of the Lady Warwick; and the Bill amended for
Shrewsbury, were brought from the Lords by Mr Attorney.

Two Bills were sent up to the Lords by Mr Attorney; of which one was the Bill
for making of Steel in England.

The Proviso in the Bill for Tonnage-Wares, was read the third time, and passed
upon the Question.

The Bill for the Inning of Plumstead-Marsh, and the Bill for Confirmation of
Letters Patents made since the first year of Queen Elizabeth, were each of them
read the third time, and passed upon the Question; and were sent up to the
Lords by Mr Chancellor of the Duchy.

The Bill for pulling up of Wears, Fish Gates, and Piles, was read the third
time, and upon the Question and Division of the House, dashed, with the
difference of three Voices only; viz. with the bill forty two, and against it
forty five.

The Bill for preservation of Grain by destruction of Vermin, was read the
third time, and passed upon the Question.

The Bill for the Jointure of the Lady Anne Countess of Warwick, was read the
first and second time.

The Proviso from the Lords for the Sessions to be kept at Hereford, added to
the Bill for Goal-Deliveries in Wales, was read the first, second and third
time, and passed upon the Question.

Francis Thinn came into the House personally, and agreed to such things,
concerning his Title to Tithes in Plumstead-Marsh, as Sir John Thynn should say
for him.

On Saturday the 21th day of December, Six Bills were read the third time, and
passed upon the question; of which the second was the Bill for Trial of
Felonies in Merionethshire in Wales; And another touching Fines with
Proclamations, though the Original be imbezelled, to which this House had made
an Addition; and a Proviso for the Heir of the Earl of Kent; and were sent up
to the Lords by Mr Chancellor of the Duchy.

The Bill also for repairing of Sea-Marks, Mariners and Watermen, was read the
third time, and passed upon the question.

The Bill for the Subsidy of the Clergy of Canterbury, was read the third time,
and passed upon the question.

The Bill for engraving of Alneagers Seals, by the Graver of the Mint in the
Tower of London, was read the third time; and two other Bills had each of them
their second and third reading; of which the first was the Bill for the
avoiding of excess in Apparel; but no mention is made that they passed the
House.

The Bill that Hexamshire shall be of the County of Northumberland, and parcel
of the Bishopric of Durham, was read the third time, and passed upon the
Question.

Three Bills also had each of them one reading; of which the first being the
Bill for buying of Woolls out of Caermarthen, Cardigan and Pembroke; and the
third for keeping the Assizes in Lancaster, were each of them read the second
time, and dashed upon the question.

The Bill against carrying over Sea of Rams, Lambs, or Sheep alive; The Bill
against carrying over of Pelts or Tann'd-Leather, And the Bill for the Market
of Battle to be kept at Battle, were each of them read the second time, and
Ordered to be engrossed.

The General Bill to avoid Fairs and Markets on Sunday, to the next work-day
following, was read the first and second time.

The House being moved with a Commission for Execution of penal Laws, Dated the
third day of December last, appointed diverse Committees (whose names through
the Clerks great negligence are wholly omitted in the Original Journal Book of
the House of Commons) to move the Lords to be a means for the revoking of the
said Commission; to which their Lordships agreed, conceiving with the Commons,
that Edmond Matthew, John Elliot, and Robert Reynold, the Commissioners
nominated and authorized in the said Commission, were not fit persons for the
Execution of the same.

On Monday the 23th day of December, Four Bills of no great moment, had each of
them one reading; of which the third being the Bill against carrying over Sea
of Rams, Lambs and Sheep alive, was read the third time, and passed upon the
question.

The Bill for the Clothing Town of Wonersh in Surrey, was read the third time,
but as yet passed not the House.

The Bill for helping of Havens and Ports of the Sea, was read the second time.

Seven Bills with three others, were sent up to the Lords by Mr
Vice-Chamberlain; of which one was the Bill for the making of White and Bay
Salt, and another for the Subsidy of the Clergy of Canterbury.

Report being made upon the Bill for Apparel, it was upon the question dashed.

The Bill for continuance of diverse Acts of Parliament, with Addition for
transporting of Grain, was read the second time.

A Report was made upon the Bill for Cloth-making in the Town of Wonersh in the
County of Surrey; and a Proviso being read the first, second and third time,
thereunto added by the House, the Bill was upon the question dashed.

The Bill for the Queens Majesty's Pardon, and the Bill for Tonnage-Wares, with
some words added unto them, were brought from the Lords by Mr Attorney; which
said Bill touching Tonnage-Wares to put out Wines, etc. was read the first
time, and dashed upon the Question.

On Tuesday the 24th day of December, the Bill for the Queens Majesty's general
and beneficial Pardon, unto the 26th day of December, in the eighth year of her
Highness Reign, was read the first time, and accepted by the Commons.

The Bill for continuance of diverse penal Statutes, was read the third time,
and passed upon the question, and was sent up to the Lords by Mr Chancellor of
the Duchy.

The Bill for the Alneagers Seals to be graved in the Tower, was read the
fourth time (or rather (as it should seem) some Additions or Amendments
thereunto annexed) and dashed upon the question.

The Bill touching Sheriffs, Under-Sheriffs and Bailiffs of Liberties to take
Oaths, was read the third time, and upon the Question dashed.

The Bill for continuance of Statutes, was brought from the Lords, to take away
all the Provisoes and Articles besides, only the continuance of the Acts, was
upon the question and division of the House, dashed; viz. with the Bill sixty
one, and against it ninety seven.

Mr Attorney, and Mr Dr Lewis, brought word from the Lords, that their
Lordships had Adjourned their House until Monday next. Whereupon Mr Speaker,
with the advice of this House, Adjourned the Parliament until Saturday next,
and then it was Ordered, that the House should then be called to see and
consider the defaults.

On Saturday the 28th of December, the House was called, and Adjourned until
Monday then next following.

On Monday the 30th day of December, the House was called again, and Adjourned
further till Thursday next following, because the Lords above had so Adjourned
their said House.

On Thursday the second day of January, the Defaulters were called, and twelve
allowed by the House to make default.

Dr Huicke sent in word from the Lord Keeper, that the Lords had Adjourned
their House, until one of the Clock in the Afternoon.

The Alms given this day by the House for relief of the Poor, amounted to the
sum of nineteen pound ten shillings, to be paid by Mr Henry Knolles Sen., and
Mr Grimston, two Members of the said House.

Post Meridiem.

In the Afternoon about three of the Clock, the Queens Majesty sitting in the
Upper House of Parliament, the Knights, Citizens and Burgesses of the House of
Commons, with Richard Onslow their Speaker (having had notice thereof) repaired
thither; where the said Speaker made an Excellent Oration, of above one hours
length, tending to the expression of the great goodness of Almighty God, showed
unto this Realm, by the quiet Government of the Queens Majesty; and showed also
the strength of Laws. And after thanks to the Queens Majesty for her Gracious
Pardon, offered the Subsidy, and the Pardon. And when the Lord Keeper had made
a short Answer to the special points of the Oration of the Speaker, and that
the Queens Majesty had given her Royal Assent to thirty four Acts, viz.
nineteen public Acts, and fifteen private; immediately it pleased her said
Majesty to declare in a most Excellent Phrase of Speech and Sentence, that she
seemed not pleased with the doings of the House of Commons, for busying
themselves in this Session, with matters which did not appertain at this time
unto them (intimating doubtless thereby their too violent, and eager
prosecution of those two great businesses touching her Marriage, and
Declaration of a Successor, in default of Issue of her own Body) but in the end
of her said Speech, she concluded with comfortable words, and commanded the
Parliament to be dissolved.

Nota, That this business had many and long Agitations in the House of Commons,
who were especially violent in that latter branch of it, touching the
Declaration of a Successor, as see more at large on Monday the 25th day of
November foregoing; and lastly, I have thought good to give a short touch, that
all the foregoing passages of this Afternoon, touching her Majesty's Presence,
Royal Assent, Speech and Dissolving the Parliament, were thus Orderly set down
in the Original Journal Book of the House of Commons, and have here received
little Alterations.

THE JOURNAL OF THE House of LORDS.
The Journal of the Proceedings of the House of Lords, in the Parliament holden
at Westminster, An. 13 Reg. Eliz. A. D. 1571, which began there on Monday the
2d day of April, and then and there continued until the Dissolution thereof on
Tuesday the 29th day of May ensuing.

THIS Journal of the Upper House continuing about the space of two Months, was
very carelessly entered in the Original Journal Book of the Upper House, by the
Clerk thereof, who (as it seems) was Anthony Mason Esquire, succeeding about this
time in the said Office of Clerk of the Upper House, unto Francis Spilman Esquire,
who had formerly supplied that place. But yet by means of a Copious Journal I
had by me, of the Passages of the House of Commons in this Parliament, taken by
some Anonymous Member thereof, and also of some Copies I had of the Speeches of
Sir Nicholas Bacon, Lord Keeper, at the beginning and conclusion of this said
Parliament, this ensuing Journal is much enlarged. And therefore to avoid
confusion, whatsoever is here inserted out of the said private Journal, is
particularly distinguished from that which is taken out of the abovementioned
Journal Book of the Upper House, by some Animadversions or Expression thereof,
both before and after the inserting of it. Neither does the Original
Journal Book it self of the Upper House, want some matter of variety, besides
the ordinary Reading, Committing and passing of Bills, in respect that Sir
Robert Catlyn Knight, Lord Chief Justice of the Kings Bench, was appointed by
her Majesty's Commission, under the Great Seal, to supply the Lord Keepers
place (upon occasion of his sickness during some part of this said Parliament)
in the first entry whereof is set down out of the foresaid Anonymous Journal of
the House of Commons, her Majesty's coming to the Upper House, with the Order
and manner of it, the substance also of which is found, though somewhat more
briefly set down, in the Original Journal Book of the same House.

On Monday the second day of April, the Parliament beginning (according to the
Writs of Summons sent forth) her Majesty about eleven of the Clock came toward
Westminster, in the ancient accustomed most honorable Passage, having first
riding before her the Gentlemen Sworn to attend her Person, the Batchellors
Knights, after them the Knights of the Bath, then the Barons of the Exchequer,
and Judges of either Bench, with the Master of the Rolls, her Majesty's
Attorney General, and Solicitor General; whom followed in Order, the Bishops,
and after them the Earls, then the Archbishop of Canterbury.

The Hat of Maintenance was Carried by the Marquess of Northampton, and the
Sword by the Earl of Sussex. The place of the Lord Steward for that day, was
supplied by the Lord Clinton, Lord Admiral of England; the Lord Great
Chamberlain was the Earl of Oxenford. And the Earl Marshal, by Deputation from
the Duke of Norfolk, was the Earl of Worcester.

Her Majesty sat in her Coach in her Imperial Robes, and a Wreath or Coronet
of Gold, set with rich Pearl and Stones, over her Head; her Coach drawn by two
Palfries, covered with Crimson Velvet, drawn out, imbossed and imbroidered very
richly. Next after her Chariot followed the Earl of Leicester, in respect of
his Office of the Master of the Horse, leading her Majesty's spare Horse. And
then forty seven Ladies and Women of Honor; The Guard in their rich Coats
going on every side of them. The Trumpeters before the first, sounding; and the
Heralds riding, and keeping their rooms and places Orderly. In Westminster
Church, the Bishop of Lincoln Preached before her Majesty, whose Sermon-being
done, her Majesty came from the Church, the Lords all on foot, in order as
before; and over her Head a rich Canopy was carried all the way. She being
entered into the Upper House of Parliament, and there sat in Princely and
seemly sort, under a high and rich Cloth of Estate; her Robe was supported by
the Earl of Oxenford, the Earl of Sussex kneeling, holding the Sword on the
left hand, and the Earl of Huntingdon holding the Hat of Estate, and the Lords
all in their Rooms on each side of the Chamber; that is to say, the Lords
Spiritual on the right hand, and the Lords Temporal on the left.

Nota, That whereas the presence of these Lords ought here, according to the
usual course, to have been inserted out of the Original Journal Book of the
Upper House, it must of necessity be omitted, in respect that through the great
negligence of Anthony Mason Esquire, at this time (as it should seem) Clerk of the
said House, there are none of the said Lords noted to have been present; yet it
may be probably guessed who they were, by those who attended on Wednesday of
this instant April ensuing. Quod vide.

The Judges and her Learned Council, being at the Woollsacks in the midst of
the Chamber, and at her Highness Feet, at each side of her kneeling one of the
Grooms, or Gentlemen of the Chamber, their Faces toward her, the Knights,
Citizens and Burgesses all standing below the Bar, her Majesty then stood up in
her Regal Seat, and with a Princely Grace, and singular good Countenance, after
a long stay, spoke a few words to this effect, or thus.

Mr right Loving Lords, and you our right faithful, and Obedient Subjects, we
in the name of God, for his Service, and for the safety of this State, are now
here Assembled, to his Glory I hope, and pray that it may be to your Comfort,
and the common quiet of our, yours, and all ours for ever. And then looking on
the right side of her, toward Sir Nicholas Bacon Knight, Lord Keeper of the
Great Seal of England, standing a little beside the Cloth of Estate, and
somewhat back and lower from the same, she willed him to show the cause of the
Parliament, who thereupon spoke, as follows.

THE Queens most Excellent Majesty, our most Dread and Gracious Sovereign, has
Commanded me to declare unto you, the Causes of your Calling and Assembly at
this time, which I mean to do as briefly as I can, led thereunto as one very
loath to be tedious to her Majesty, and also because to wise men, and
well-disposed (as I judge you be) a few words do suffice. The Causes be chiefly
two, The one to establish or dissolve Laws, as best shall serve for the
Governance of the Realm. The other, so to consider of the Crown and State, as
it may be best preserved in time of Peace, and best defended in the time of
War, according to the Honor due unto it. And because in all Councils and
Conferences first and chiefly there should be sought the Advancement of Gods
Honor and Glory, as the sure and infallible Foundation, whereupon the Policy of
every good Public Weal is to be Erected and built; and as the straight line,
whereby it is principally to be directed and governed, and as the chief Pillar
and Buttress, wherewith it is continually to be sustained and maintained;
Therefore, for the well-performing of the former touching Laws, you are to
consider; first, whether the Ecclesiastical Laws concerning the Discipline of
the Church, be sufficient or no? and if any want shall be found, to supply the
same; and thereof the greatest care ought to depend upon my Lords the Bishops,
to whom the Execution thereof especially pertains, and to whom the
imperfections of the same be best known.

And as to the Temporal Laws, you are to Examine whether any of them already
made, be too sharp or too sore, or over-burthenous to the Subject; or whether
any of them be too loose or too soft, and so over-perillous to the State. For
like as the former may put in danger many an Innocent, without cause,
particularly; so the second may put in peril both the Nocent and Innocent, and
the whole State universally. You are also to examine the want and superfluity
of Laws: you are to look whether there be too many Laws for any thing, which
breeds so many doubts, that the Subject sometimes is to seek how to observe
them, and the Councellor how to give advice concerning them.

Now the second, which concerns a sufficient provision for the Crown and State;
herein you are to call to remembrance, how the Crown of this Realm has been
many ways charged extraordinarily of late; not possibly to be born by the
ordinary Revenues of the same, and therefore of necessity to be relieved
otherwise; as heretofore it has commonly, and necessarily been. For like as
the ordinary charge has been always born by ordinary Revenues, so the
extraordinary charge has always been sustained by an extraordinary relief.
This to those that be of understanding is known, not only to be proper to
Kingdoms and Empires, but also is, has been, and ever will be a necessary
peculiar pertaining to all Commonwealths, and private States of men, from the
highest to the lowest; the rules of reason has ordained it so to be.

But here I rest greatly perplexed, whether I ought to open and remember unto
you, such reasons as may be easily produced, to move you thankfully and readily
to grant this extraordinary relief or no: I know the Queens Majesty conceives
so great hope of your prudent foreseeing what is to be done, and of your good
wills and readiness to perform that, which by Prudence you foresec, that few or
no persuasions at all are needful for the bringing this to pass. Nevertheless,
because by the ancient order heretofore used, it is my Office and Duty somewhat
to say in this Case, and likewise all men also that be present, neither
understand alike, nor remember alike; Therefore I mean, with your favor and
patience, to trouble you with a few words, touching this point. True it is,
that there be two things that ought vehemently to move us, frankly,
bountifully, and readily to deal in this matter. The former is the great
benefits, that we have received; the second is the necessity of the Cause. If
we should forget the former, we are to be charged as most ungrate and
unthankful; and the forgetfulness of the second does charge us, as uncareful of
our own Livings and Liberties, and of our Lives; the former moves by Reason,
and the second urges by Necessity. And here, to begin with the former, albeit
that the benefits that the Realm has received by Gods Grace, and the Queens
Majesty's Goodness, both for the number and greatness, are such as may be more
easily marvelled at, than worthily weighed and considered; Yet mean I to
remember briefly three of them, whereof the first and chief is restoring and
setting at Liberty Gods holy Word amongst us; the greatest and most precious
Treasure that can be in this World: for that either does, or should benefit us
in the best degree; to wit, our Minds and Souls; and look how much our Souls
excel our Bodies, so much must needs the benefits of our Souls excel the
benefits of our Bodies; whereby also, as by a necessary consequent, we are
delivered, and made free from the Bondage of the Roman Tyranny; therefore this
is to be thought of us the most principal benefit.

The second is the inestimable benefit of Peace during the time of ten whole
years together, and more; and what is Peace? is it not the richest and most
wished for Ornament that pertains to any public Weal? Is not Peace the mark
and end that all good Governments direct their actions unto? Nay, is there any
benefit, be it never so great, that a man may take the whole Commodity of,
without the benefit of Peace? Is there any so little Commodity, but through
Peace a man may have the full fruition of it? By this we generally and joyfully
possess all; and without this generally and joyfully we possess nothing. A man
that would sufficiently consider all the Commodities of Peace, ought to call to
remembrance all the miseries of War; for in reason it seems as great a benefit
in being delivered of the one, as in the possessing of the other. Yet if there
were nothing, the common and lamentable Calamities and Miseries of our
Neighbors round about us, for want of Peace, may give us to understand what
blessedness we be in that possess it. There be that never acknowledge benefits
to their value, whilst they possess them, but when they be taken from them, and
so find their want; marry such be not worthy of them. Now is it possible, trow
you, that this blessed benefit of Peace could have been from time to time thus
long conserved and conferred upon us, had not the mind, affection and love,
that our Sovereign bears toward us her Subjects, bred such care over us in her
Breast, as for the well bringing of this to pass, she has for born no care of
Mind, no travel of Body, nor expense of her Treasure, nor sale of her Lands; no
adventuring of her Credit, either at home or abroad? a plain and manifest
Argument, how dear and precious the safety and quiet of us her Subjects be to
her Majesty. And can there be a greater persuasion to move us to our power to
tender the like?

The third is the great benefit of Clemency and Mercy. I pray you, has it been
seen or read, that any Prince of this Realm, during whole ten years Reign, and
more, has had his hands so clean from Blood? If no offense were, her Majesty's
Wisdom in Governing was the more to be wondered at; and if offenses were, then
her Majesty's Clemency and Mercy the more to be commended. Misericordia ejus
super omnia opera ejus. Besides, like as it has pleased God ten years and
more, by the Ministry of our said Sovereign, to bless this Realm with those two
inestimable benefits of Peace and Clemency, so there is no cause but the same
might by Gods Grace have continued twenty Years longer, without intermission,
had not the Raging Romanist Rebels entertained the matter. And here it is to be
noted, that this Merciful and Peaceful Reign of ten Years and more, has happened
in the time of Christ's Religion now established. I cannot think that any man
can follow me in this, in the time of the Romish Religion since the Conquest.
Nay a man might affirm, that this is an Example for times to come, without any
like in times past; comparing Singula singulis, what should I say? these be the
true Fruits of true Religion. I could further remember you of the Fruits of
Justice, the benefit of restoring your Money to Finess; yea, I could put you in
mind, but I think it needs not, it happened so late, of a Subsidy granted,
whereof the Queens Majesty of her own bountifulness, remitted the one half; was
the like here in England ever seen or heard of? But being out of doubt, that
these benefits already remembered be sufficient of themselves to move you to be
thankful to your Power, I leave any longer to detain you in this point.

And albeit a Subject cannot yield any benefit to his Sovereign in the same
nature that he receives it; because every benefit is more than Duty, and more
than Duty a Subject cannot yield to his Sovereign: Yet can it not be denied,
but a Subjects acknowledging of benefits received, joined with good will to
yield as far as Liberty will reach, does sufficiently satisfy for the Subject,
for ultra posse non est esse. To your best actions therefore address ye. And
thus much concerning benefits.

Now to the second part, concerning urging by Necessity, true it is, that the
extraordinary matters of Charge, happened since the last Assembly here, urging
to have by necessity a relief granted, amongst many others be these. First, The
great Charge in suppressing the late Northern Rebellion, with Charges also in
reforming those the Queens Majesty's Enemies in Scotland, that assisted the
Rebels, and made Rodes into England. The continual growing Expenses, by reason
of Ireland, as in subduing the Rebels within that Realm, and withstanding the
Scots Northward, and other Foreign Forces, intending Invasion Southward. To
these three Charges by Land, you may add a fourth by Sea; as the preparation
and setting forth of Ships, partly for the defense against all Foreign Forces,
suspected and intended, partly for the safe conducting of the Wares and
Merchandises in greater strength and longer cut than heretofore has been used.
These and such like extraordinary Charges, whereof there be sundry, with the
remains of old Charges not possible to be born by the ordinary Revenue, and yet
of necessity to be expended, do greatly exceed any extraordinary aid therefore
commonly granted. Again, the great decay of the Queens Majesty's Customs, by
reason of stay and alteration of Traffic (albeit upon just occasion) has bred
no small want; for although in time it is not to be doubted, but that will grow
again to his old course, and continue with great Surety; Yet in the mean time,
this want must some way be supplied; for you know the Horse must be provided
for, whilst the Grass is in growing. At the least let us do so much for our
selves, as we do for our Horses. For our selves it is that are to be relieved
in this Case. This I must needs say, that if the Queens Majesty did use in
matters of Expense, to do as commonly Princes heretofore have used to do, then
with the more difficulty might such extraordinary aid be assented unto, and yet
of necessity to be had, to withstand a greater necessity. It has been used in
times past, that Princes pleasures and delights have been commonly followed in
matters of Charge, as things of necessity. And now, because, God be praised,
the relieving of the Realms necessity is become the Princes Pleasure and
Delight, a noble Conversion (God continue it, and make us as we ought to be,
earnestly thankful for it!) A Princely Example showed by a Sovereign for
Subjects to follow. To descend in some particulars: What need I to remember
unto you, how the gorgeous, sumptuous, superfluous Buildings of time past be
for the Realms good, by her Majesty in this time turned into necessary
Buildings, and upholdings? The chargeable, glittering, glorious Triumphs, into
delectable Pastimes and Shows? Ambassadors of Charge into such as be void of
excess, and yet honorable and comely? These and such like are dangerous dams,
able to dry up the flowing Fountains of any Treasure; and yet these
imperfections have been commonly Princes Peculiars, especially young. One free
from these was accounted Rara avis, etc. and yet (God be thanked) a Phoenix, a
Blessed Bird of this kind God has blessed us with. I think it may be affirmed,
and that truly, that there has not been any matter of great Charge taken in
hand by her Majesty in this happy Reign of twelve Years and more, that has not
been thought before convenient to be done for the Weal and profit of the Realm;
so far her Highness is from spending of Treasure in vain matters, and therefore
the rather how can a man make any difficulty to contribute according to his
Power? specially, in maintaining of his Sovereign, his Country, his Self, his
Wife and Children, and what not? having so long a proof by experience, of such
an employment? Here I would put you in mind of extraordinary Charges to come,
which in reason seems evident, but so I should be over tedious unto you, and
frustra sit per plura quod sieri potest per pauciora. And therefore here I make
an end, doubting that I have tarried you longer than I promised or meant, or
perchance needed, your wisdoms and good inclinations considered. But you know
things are to be done both in form and matter. And my trust is, that if I had
stayed, I may be warranted by either, or by both, that you will take it in good
part. Thus far out of the Copy of this foregoing Speech.

As soon as the Lord Keepers Speech was ended, then the Clerk of the Upper
House, read the names of Receivers and Tryers of Petitions in French (whose
names are transcribed out of the Original Journal Book of the Upper House) and
were as follows.

Sir Robert Catlin Knight, Chief Justice of the Kings Bench, Sir William
Cordell Knight, Master of the Rolls, Sir John Widden Knight, one of the
Justices of Sir Richard Read Knight, and Dr Huick, who were Receivers of
Petitions for England, Ireland, Wales and Scotland.

Receivers of Petitions for Gascoigne, and the parts beyond the Seas, and the
Isles:

Sir James Dyer Knight, Chief Justice of the Common Pleas, Sir Edward Saunders
Knight, Lord Chief Baron, Richard Weston one of the Justices of Welsh one of
the Justices of Dr Lewis, Dr Yale, and Dr Vaughan.

Triers of Petitions for England, Ireland, Wales and Scotland, The Archbishop
of Canterbury, the Earl of Arundel, the Earl of Sussex, the Earl of Huntington,
the Earl of Bedford, the Bishop of London, the Bishop of Durham, the Bishop of
Salisbury, the Lord Clinton, the Lord Admiral of England, the Lord Cobham, the
Lord Wentworth, and the Lord North.

Triers of Petitions for Gascoigne, and for other parts beyond the Seas, and
the Isles, The Archbishop of York, the Marquess of Northampton, the Earl of
Shrewsbury, the Earl of Leicester, the Bishop of Winchester, the Bishop of
Worcester, the Bishop of Lincoln, the Lord Howard of Esfingham, Chamberlain of
the Queen, the Lord Windsor, the Lord Hastings of Loughborough, and the Lord
Carry of Hunsdon.

Hodie retornatum breve quo Edwardus Comes Oxon. praesenti huic Parliamento
summonitus fuit, qui admissus fuit ad suum in sedendo praeheminentiae locum,
salvo cuique jure suo.

The like Writs returned for Henry Earl of Pembroke, and William Lord Sands.

Hodie retornatum fuit breve, quo Richardus Episcopus Carliolen. praesenti buic
Parliamento summonebatur, qui admissus fuit ad suum in sedendo praeheminentiae
locum, salvo jure alieno.

On Wednesday the 4th day of April in the Afternoon, but at or about what hour
appears not, although it may probably be guessed, that it was about three of
the Clock, her Majesty with diverse Lords Spiritual and Temporal, Assembled in
the Upper House, whose names are marked to have been present this day in the
Original Journal Book of the Upper House, being as follows.

Regina. Archiepiscopus Cantuarien. Episcopus London. Episcopus Dunelmen.
Episcopus Winton. Episcopus Hereforden. Episcopus Wigorn. Episcopus Lincolnien.
Episcopus Sarisburien. Episcopus Meneven. Episcopus Roffen. Episcopus Norwicen.
Episcopus Carliolen. Episcopus Cestren. Episcopus Assaven. Episcopus
Glocestren. Episcopus Bangoren. Episcopus Landaven. Nicolaus Bacon Miles,
Dominus Custos Magni Sigilli. Marchio Northampton. Comes Arundell. Comes Oxon.
Comes Wigorn. Comes Sussex. Comes Southampton. Comes Bedford. Comes Pembroke.
Comes Leicester. Vice-Comes Hereford. Vice-Comes Mountague.
Which are all the Lords Spiritual and Temporal sitting on the two Upper Forms,
noted to be present this day.

Nota, That the Spiritual Lords are always thus placed in the Original
Journal Book of the Upper House, on the dexter side, not in respect of their
precedence, but (as it should seem) because the Archbishop of Canterbury the
chief of them is the first Peer of England, and so the residue of the Clergy
are placed next after him, in respect of their Ecclesiastical Dignities. The
next that follow are the Barons, who are placed in the said Journal Book in
respect of their several places and precedencies, as follows.

Barons.
Dominus Clinton Admirallus Angliae. Dominus Howard Camerarius. Dominus
Burgavenny. Dominus Strainge. Dominus Dacres de Souch. Dominus Cobham. Dominus
Stafford. Dominus Gray de Wilton. Dominus Dudley. Dominus Lumley. Dominus
Darcie. Dominus Mountegle. Dominus Vauxes. Dominus Windesor. Dominus Wentworth.
Dominus Burgh. Dominus Crumwell. Dominus Evers. Dominus Wharton. Dominus Rich.
Dominus Willoughby. Dominus Paget. Dominus Darcie de Chich. Dominus North.
Dominus Shandois. Dominus Haistings de Loughborough. Dominus Hunsdon. Dominus
St John de Bletsoe. Dominus Buckhurst. Dominus De la Ware.
Her Majesty and the Lords being thus set, the Knights, Citizens and Burgesses
of the House of Commons, had notice thereof, and thereupon repaired to the
Upper House, with Christopher Wray Sergeant at Law, their lately Elected
Speaker, whose presentation to her Majesty, and allowance by her, being not
mentioned in the Original Journal Book of the said House, are therefore wholly
transcribed out of that before-cited Anonymous Journal, more particularly
mentioned at the beginning of this present Journal, the same also in effect
being contained in the Original Journal Book of the House of Commons, fol. 10.
a.

The said Speaker being led up to the Rail or Bar, at the lower end of the
Upper House, by two of the most Honorable Personages of the House of Commons,
did there, after three Reverences made, humbly beseech her Majesty, according
to the usual course, that albeit he could not obtain of the Commons (who had
Elected him to be their Speaker) for such causes, as he had alleged, to be
disbunthened of that place, that so some other more fit and able might be
chosen, that yet her Highness would vouchsafe to have consideration of the
greatness of the Service, and therefore to require them eftsoons to return to
the House, and to make a new Choice. To which his Petition, the Lord Keeper, by
her Majesty's Commandment, Answered and said.

That as well for that her Highness had understood of him, as for that the
Commons had chosen him, his Request could not be granted.

Whereupon the said Speaker being allowed, he desired to be heard to say
somewhat concerning the orderly Government of a Commonweal, which to be duly
done, he said, there were three things requisite, Religion, Authority, and
Laws. By Religion, he said, we do not only know God aright, but also how to
Obey the King or Queen, whom God shall assign to Reign over us; and that, not
in Temporal Causes, but in Spiritual or Ecclesiastical; in which wholly her
Majesty's Power is absolute. And leaving all proofs of Divinity to the Bishops,
and Fathers (as he said he would) he proved the same by the practice of Princes
within this Realm; and first, made remembrance of Lucius the first Christian
King, who having written to Elut herius the Pope, 1300. Years past for the
Roman Laws, he was Answered, that he had the Holy Scriptures, out of the which
he might draw to himself, and for his Subjects, Laws by his own good
discretion; for that he was the Vicar of Christ over the People of Britain.
The Conqueror (he said) in the Erection of Battell-Abby, granted that the
Church should be free from all Episcopal Jurisdiction.

Henry the Third gave to Ranulph Bishop of London, the Archbishopric of
Canterbury, by these words, Rex, etc. Sciatis quod dedimus Dilect. nostro
Ranulpho Archiepiscop. Cantuarien. quem instituimus Anulo and Baculo. The Ring,
he said, was the sign of perfection; The Staff the sign of Pastoral Rule, which
he could not do, if these Kings had not had and used the Ecclesiastical Powers.
In the Reports of the Law, we find that an Excommunication of a certain person
came from the Pope under his Leaden Bull; and was showed in abatement of an
Action brought at the Common Law; which, besides that it was of no force, the
King and Judges were of Mind, that he who brought it, had deserved Death, so to
presume on any Foreign Authority; which Authority being now by Gods Grace, and
her Highness means, abolished, and the freedom of Consciences, and the truth of
Gods word established; we therefore ought greatly to thank God and her.

For Authority, or the Sword, whereby the Commonwealth is stayed, three things
he said are requisite; Men, Armor and Money. For Men, their good wills he said
were most, being of it self a strong Fortress. For Armor, the necessity he
showed in part, and how requisite Treasure was, he a little declared. And
concluded, that all three must be conjoined, Men, Armor and Money.

Lastly for Laws, the third stay of the Commonwealth; he said there must be
consideration in making them, and care in Executing of them; in making such, as
by the providing for one part of the Commonwealth, the rest should not be
hindered, which were indeed a matter most pernicious; and this he vouched out of
Plato de legibus. For Execution, he said, that since the Law of it self is but
Mute, set in Paper, not able to do ought, the Magistrate (except he will be
also Mute) must be the Doer, and then is a good Law said to be well made, when
it is well Executed; for anima legis est executio.

Hereupon he said something in commendation of her Majesty, who had given free
course to her Laws, not sending or requiring the stay of Justice, by her
Letters or Privy-Seals, as heretofore sometime has been by her Progenitors
used. Neither has she pardoned any, without the advice of such, before whom
the Offenders have been Arraigned, and the Cause heard.

His Oration being ended, he then made four Petitions; the first, that the
Persons, Servants and Goods of all coming to that Assembly, might be free from
all Arrests. Secondly, That for Cause of Conference, they might have access to
her Majesty. Thirdly, If any sent should not truly report, or in part mistake
the meaning of the House, that the same should be by her Highness favorably
heard. And lastly, That in the House all men might have free Speech.

This Oration being ended, by direction from her Majesty, and instructions
given what should be said, The Lord Keeper Answered thus; dividing his Speech
into three parts, the first, where he had sometimes inserted commendations of
her Majesty, he said, her Highness would not acknowledge so great perfections
to be in her; but said, that they should be instructions for her better
proceedings in time to come. The second part of his Oration, he said,
concerning the Rule, for ordering of the Commonwealth, she well liked of, and
wished, that as he had well conceived of it, and well uttered the same, so he
and others would endeavor the Execution thereof.

For his Petitions, he said, her Majesty's Pleasure was, that the first should
be granted, with this caution, that no man should under their shadows, untruly
protect any others. For the second, he said, at time convenient, her Pleasure
was, they should come freely. Touching the third part, he said, she could not
imagine that among so many wise men it could happen; but if it should, her
Grace would be content to remit it. The fourth was such, that her Majesty
having Experience of late of some disorder, and certain Offenses, which though
they were not punished, yet were they Offenses still, and so must be accounted;
therefore said, they should do well to meddle with no matters of State, but
such as should be propounded unto them, and to occupy themselves in other
matters, concerning the Commonwealth.

The Presentment and Allowance of the Speaker being thus transcribed, out of
that often before vouched Anonymous Journal of the House of Commons in this
Parliament, Now follow the residue of this days passages, with those also of
other days ensuing, out of the Original Journal Book of the Upper House.

Hodie returnatum est breve, etc. by which the Bishop of Exeter was Summoned to
this Parliament, who was thereupon admitted to his accustomed place.

The like Writs were returned, whereby the Lord Paget, and the Lord De la Ware,
were Summoned to the said Parliament, who were thereupon admitted.

There is no entrance of the Adjournment, or continuance of this Parliament,
which happened doubtless through the great negligence of the Clerk of the Upper
House; although it is most casy to conjecture, that the Lord Keeper did
continue the same, by her Majesty's Commandment, unto some hour of the
Afternoon following, being Thursday the 5th day of this instant April.

This day finally (but whether before or after the rising of the Lords of the
Upper House, does not appear) were diverse Proxies returned, and delivered in
unto the Clerk of the said Upper House, or to some other belonging unto him; of
which the unusual or extraordinary Proxies, were only three, and those also all
from Spiritual Lords, which are entered in the Original Journal Book of the said
Upper House, in manner and form following.

4 die April. Introductae sunt Litterae Procuratoriae Hugonis Episcopi
Landaven. in quibus Procuratores suos constituit Nicolaum Wigorn. Richard.
Meneven. and Nicolaum Bangor. Episcopos, conjunctim and divisim.

Eodem die Introductae sunt Litterae Procuratoriae Thom. Episcopi Coventr. and
Litchf. in quibus Procuratores suos constituit Nicol. Wigorn. Johannem
Salisburien. and Richardum Meneven. Episcopos, conjunctim and divisim.

Eodem die Introductae sunt Literae Procuratoriae Richardi Episcopi Gloucestr.
in quibus Procuratores suos constituit Nicol. Wigorn. Johan. Norwicen. and
Willielmum Exonien. Episcopos.

Nota, That I call an extraordinary Proxy, when a Bishop Constitutes one
Proctor, or more than two, and when a Temporal Lord Constitutes more than one;
for of ten Temporal Lords, who sent Proxies this Parliament, none appointed
more than a single Proctor, and of seven Spiritual Lords, four Constituted but
two Proctors apiece.

Note also, That the Earl of Leicester had this Parliament seven Proxies sent
unto him, all Entered in the Original Journal Book of the Upper House, to have
been returned on the said 4th day of April; viz. from William Marquess of
Winchester, Edward Earl of Derby, Henry Lord Berkely, Henry Lord Scroope,
George Earl of Shrewsbury, Edward Lord Dudley, and Ambrose Earl of Warwick:
Vide a like President on Tuesday the 22th day of October, An. 8 Reg. Eliz.
antea.

On Thursday the 5th day of April, to which day the Parliament had been
doubtless continued or Adjourned Yesterday, although through the Clerks
negligence it be not at all mentioned in the Original Journal Book of the Upper
House,

Two Bills of no great moment, had each of them one reading; of which the
second being the Bill for the punishment of Collectors, Receivers, etc. for
their fraudulent and unjust deceiving of the Queens Majesty in their Offices,
was read prima vice.

The Bill for the reviving and continuance of certain Statutes, was read the
first time, and commissa Vice-Comiti Mountague, Episcopo London, Episcopo
Hereford, Episcopo Elien. Episcopo Wigorn. Domino Wentworth, Domino Shandois,
Domino St John de Bletsoe, Domino Primario Justiciario Banci Regis, Justiciario
Welsh, and Justic. Southcot.

Nota, That here a Bill was committed upon the first reading, of which although
it be not very usual, yet there want not diverse Presidents. Vide April the 20th
Friday postea.

Nota also, That here the Judges, being but Assistants unto the Upper House,
are made joint Committees with the Lords, which is usually found in all these
Parliaments of her Majesty's Reign, until the thirty ninth of the same.

Dominus Custos magni Sigilli adjournavit praesens Parliamentum, until to
Morrow at eight of the Clock.

On Friday the 6th day of April, Three Bills of no great moment, had each of
them one reading; of which the third touching Receivers, etc. deceiving the
Queen of her Treasure, was read secunda vice, and commissa to the Earl of Hunt.
the Earl of Bedford, the Earl of Leicester, the Bishop of Rochester, the Bishop
of Salisbury, the Bishop of Lincoln, the Lord Hastings of Loughborough, the
Lord North, the Lord Hunsdon, and to the Queens Attorney, and Mr Solicitor.

Nota, That here the Queens Attorney and Solicitor, who are but mere
Attendants upon the Upper House, are made joint Committees with the Lords.

Dominus Custos magni Sigilli adjournavit praesens Parliamentum in diem
Crastinum hora nona.

On Saturday the 7th day of April, the Lords Assembled according to the last
Adjournment, and the Lord Keeper being absent, Dominus Clinton vicem gerens
Senescalli, ex mandato Dominae Reginae, continuavit praesens Parliamentum usque
in diem Lunae proximum hora nona.

April the 8th Sunday.

On Monday the 9th day of April, Two Bills had each of them one reading; of
which the first being the Bill against such as shall bring in any Bulls, etc.
was read prima vice, and committed unto the Earl of Sussex, the Earl of
Huntington, the Earl of Pembroke and others; and to the Chief Justices of the
Common Pleas, Justice Southcot, and Justice Carus.

Nota, That the Judges, who were but mere Assistants unto the Upper House, are
here made joint Committees with the Lords. Vide consimise Apr. 5. Thursday.

And the second touching Receivers, Collectors, etc. was read the second time,
and eisdem Dominis quibus primo commissa fuit, denuo committitur.

Nota, That this Bill was read before, the second time, on Friday the 6th day
of this instant April foregoing, and committed, and therefore it should seem
that this Bill was not now read again the second time, but only some additions
or amendments thereunto annexed by the Committees, and thereupon the Bill was
again referred unto them, to be further considered of.

For that Sir Nicholas Bacon Knight, Lord Keeper of the Great Seal of England,
was sick, her Majesty's Letters Patents were read, Authorizing Sir Robert
Catlin, Chief Justice of England, to supply the place of the said Lord Keeper,
at all times, when the Lord Keeper, during this present Parliament, shall be
absent: The tenor of which here follows verbatim.

ELizabeth by the Grace of God, Queen of England, France and Ireland. Defender
of the Faith, etc.
To our Trusty and Right Well-beloved Sir Robert Catlin Knight, Chief Justice
of our Common Pleas, before us to be holden, Greeting.
Where our Right Trusty and Right Well-beloved Councellor, Sir Nicholas Bacon
Knight, Lord Keeper of our Great Seal of England, is at this time so visited
with Sickness, that he is not able to travel to the Upper House of this our
present Parliament, holden at Westminster, nor there to supply the room and
place in the said Upper House, amongst the Lord Spiritual and Temporal there
Assembled, as to the Office of the Lord Chancellor, or Lord Keeper of the Great
Seal of England has been accustomed; We therefore minding the same place and
room to be supplied, in all things as appertains, for and during every time
of his absence, have named and appointed you, and by these Presents, do
Constitute, name, appoint and authorize you, from day to day, and time to time,
when and so often as the said Lord Keeper shall happen at any time or times,
during this present Parliament to be absent from his accustomed place in the
Upper House, to occupy, use and supply the room and place of the said Lord
Keeper, in the said Upper House, amongst the said Lords Spiritual and Temporal
there Assembled, at every such day and time of his absence, and then and there
at every such time, to do and execute all such things, as the said Lord Keeper
of the Great Seal of England, should or might do, if he were there personally
present, using and supplying the same room. Wherefore we will and Command you
the said Sir Robert Catlin, to attend to the doing and Execution of the
Premises with effect. And these our Letters Patents shall be your sufficient
Warrant and discharge for the same, in every behalf. In witness whereof, we
have caused these our Letters to be made Patents.

Witness our selves at Westminster, the 9th day of April, in the Thirteenth
Year of our Reign. Powle.


Nota, That this Commission is in one respect very exotic, and unusual,
because it does not only give Authority to the Lord Chief Justice to supply the
Lord Keepers place, until his recovery and return to Parliament, as is ordinary
in other Commissions; but it does further authorize him to supply the said Lord
Keepers place, at any time during this Parliament, when he shall be absent, as
well as at this present; whence in this ensuing Journal it is frequent, that
sometimes the Lord Keeper, and sometimes the Lord Chief Justice, though
seldomer, without any new Commission, do in their several turns continue the
Parliament.

Robertus Catlin Miles, Dominus Capital. Justiciarius Banci Regis, continuavit
praesens Parliamentum usque in diem Crastinum hora nona.

On Tuesday the 10th day of April, Billa de novo reformata per Dominos, quibus
pridie committebatur, touching the bringing in of any Bulls, or other Writings
from the Bishop of Rome, was read the first time.

The new Bill touching Receivers, Treasurers, Collectors, etc. defrauding the
Queens Majesty of her Treasure, was read the first time.

The Bill touching the Confirmation of the Attainder of Charles Earl of
Westmerland, Thomas Earl of Northumberland, and others, was read the first time.

The Lords requested to have Conference with certain of the House of Commons,
touching a Bill brought to them, concerning matters of Religion, whereupon
Committees were appointed; viz. the Archbishop of Canterbury, the Marquess of
Northampton, and others.

The Lord Keeper continued the Parliament, usque in diem Crastinum hora Octava.

On Wednesday the 11th day of April, it was Ordered by the House, that the
Lords Committees for the Bill of Bankrupts, may call unto them such of the
House of Commons, and others, as they shall think good, which may best inform
touching any doubt, or other matter, that may rise upon the said Bill.

Two Bills also had each of them their second reading, of which the second
being the new Bill against the bringing in of Bulls, was read the second time,
and commissa Justiciario Southcot.

Dominus Capitalis Justiciarius, etc. continuavit praesens Parliamentum usque
in diem Crastinum hora nona.

On Thursday the 12th day of April, the Bill against Receivers, Treasurers,
etc. was read tertia vice, and conclusa, and sent to the House of Commons, by
Dr Lewis, and Dr Huick.

Two Bills also had each of them one reading, of which the first being the Bill
for the avoiding of frudulent Deeds, and Gifts, etc. was read prima vice.

Dominus Custos magni Sigilli continuavit praesens Parliamentum in diem
Sabbathi hora Octava.

On Saturday the 14th day of April, a Bill concerning the Commission of Sewers,
was brought from the House of Commons, and read prima vice.

Then the Parliament was continued by the Lord Chief Justice, etc. unto
Thursday next hora nona.

On Thursday the 19th day of April, to which day the Parliament had been last
continued on Saturday foregoing, Three Bills of no great moment, had each of
them one reading; of which the first being the Bill that the consent and
Exemplification of Letters Patents, shall be as good and available as the
Letters Patents themselves, was read prima vice, and commissa Domino Dier
Justiciario, and Justiciario Southcot.

Then the Parliament was continued in ordinary form by the Lord Keeper of the
Great Seal, unto to Morrow hora nona.

On Friday the 20th day of April, Five Bills had each of them one reading; of
which the first being the Bill against bringing in of Bulls from the Sea of
Rome, was read the second time, and commissa ad ingrossandum, it was read
secunda vice antea, and it seems now some Additions were only read.

The Bill against fraudulent Gifts, Alienations, etc. was read the first time,
and thereupon committed unto the Earl of Sussex, Viscount Hereford, and other
Lords, and to the Lord Chief Justice Dier, and Justice Southcot. Vide Apr. 5th
antea. Another Bill committed upon the first reading.

The Parliament was continued in ordinary form by the Lord Keeper of the Great
Seal, unto to Morrow hora nona.

On Saturday the 21th day of April, Two Bills of no great moment, had each of
them one reading; of which the first being the Bill against the bringing in and
putting in Execution of Bulls, Writings, or Instruments, and other
superstitious things, from the Sea of Rome, was read tertia vice, and Communi
omnium procerum assensu conclusa, and sent to the House of Commons by Sir
Richard Read Knight, and Dr Yale.

The Bill against fraudulent Gifts, Alienations, etc. was read prima vice, but
it should rather seem, That this Bill was read secunda vice, in respect that it
had its first reading before on Friday the 20th day of this instant April; and
being then committed, was either now upon the bringing in of it again by the
Committees, read the second time; or else some Additions or Amendments thereof
annexed unto it, by the said Committees, were now read the first time, and not
the Bill it self; but whether it were the one or the other, it may easily be
conjectured, that this Bill was dashed in the House, upon the said reading this
Forenoon; for on Wednesday the 25th day of this instant April ensuing, a new
Bill (as is very probable) with this very Title, had its first reading.

The Bill for Commissions of Sewers, was committed unto the Earl of Bedford,
the Bishop of Worcester, the Bishop of Ely, the Lord Admiral, the Lord
Burleigh, the Lord Rich, the Lord..... the Lord Darcie, de Dethick, and unto
Justice Southcot.

Nota, That the Bill here committed, is not mentioned to have had any reading
at this time, although it were most probable, that this commitment had
reference to the second reading of the Bill in the Morning Yesterday,
notwithstanding that the second reading thereof be there omitted, as a matter
of no great moment, which is a thing both likely and usual; neither do there
want Presidents of this nature in the very next Session of Parliament ensuing,
in An. 14 Reg. Eliz. where diverse Bills are referred to Committees, although
there be no mention made of any reading they had: Ut vide on Wednesday the 28th
day of May, on Wednesday the 4th day, on Tuesday the 9th day of June, in anno
Praedicto.

Dominus Custos magni Sigilli continuavit praesens Parliamentum usque in diem
Mercurii prox. hora Octava.

On Wednesday the 25th day of April, Three Bills of no great moment, had each
of them one reading; of which the first being the Bill for the Confirmation of
the Attainder of Charles Earl of Westmerland, Thomas Earl of Northumberland,
and others, was read secunda vice, and commissa ad ingrossandum.

Dominus Custos magni Sigilli continuavit praesens Parliamentum usque in diem
Crast. hora nona.

On Thursday the 26th day of April, Three Bills of no great moment, had each of
them one reading; of which the third being the Bill for avoiding of fraudulent
Gifts, was read secunda vice, and committed to the Earl of Sussex, Viscount
Hereford, and others, and to Sergeant Barham, and the Queens Solicitor.

Dominus Custos magni Sigilli continuavit praesens Parliamentium usque in diem
Sabbathi prox. hora nona.

On Saturday the 28th day of April, Five Bills of no great moment, had each of
them one reading; of which the fourth being the Bill for the Confirmation of
the Attainder of Charles Earl of Westmerland, Thomas Earl of Northumberland,
and others, was read tertia vice, and conclusa. And the fifth and last, being
the Bill for the reviving and continuance of certain Statutes, was read tertia
vice, and conclusa, and sent to the House of Commons by Sergeant Barham, and
the Queens Solicitor.

Dominus Custos magni Sigilli continuavit praesens Parliamentum usque in diem
Lunae prox. hora nona.

April the 29th Sunday.

On Monday the 30th day of April, Four Bills of no great moment, had each of
them one reading; of which the second being the Bill against Usury, was read
the second time, and committed unto the Archbishop of Canterbury, the Earl of
Sussex, the Earl of Huntington, the Earl of Leicester, the Bishop of
Winchester, the Bishop of Worcester, the Bishop of Chichester, the Bishop of
Lincoln, and others; and to Sergeant Barham, and the Solicitor General.

Dominus Custos magni Sigilli continuavit praesens Parliamentum usque in diem
Crastinum hora Octava.

On Tuesday the first day of May, the Bill to make a free Denizen Peregrine
Barty, Son of Richard Barty Esquire, and Katherine Duchess of Suffolk his Wife,
was read prima vice.

Four Bills were brought from the House of Commons, of which one was the Bill
against Fugitives over the Sea. Another was the Bill for the Town of Shrewsbury.

Three Bills also had each of them one reading, of which the second being the
Bill against fraudulent Deeds, Gifts, Alienations, etc. was read tertia vice
and conclusa, and commissa Sollicitatori Dominae Reginae, and Doctori Lewis, in
Domum Communem deferend.

Dominus Custos magni Sigilli continuavit praesens Parliamentum usque in diem
Crastinum hora Octava.

On Wednesday the second day of May, Five Bills of no great moment, had each of
them one reading; of which the second being the Bill touching William
Skeffington, was read prima vice, and the third against Fugitives over the
Seas, was read prima vice and commissa unto diverse Lords Spiritual and
Temporal, of which the Lord Hastings of Loughborough, a Grand Papist, was one.

Dominus Custos magni Sigilli continuavit praesens Parliamentum usque in diem
proximum hora nona.

On Thursday the 3d day of May, Five Bills of no great moment, had each of them
one reading; of which the fourth being the Bill touching Dilapidations by
Ecclesiastical persons, was read prima vice, and committed unto Viscount
Hereford, Viscount Mountague, the Bishop of Winchester, the Bishop of
Worcester, the Bishop of Ely, the Bishop of Rochester, the Bishop of Carlisle,
the Bishop of Lincoln, the Lord Gray, the Lord Cobham, Doctor Jews, and Doctor
Yale.

Nota, Though it be very usual in most of the Journals of her Majesty's Reign,
for the Judges and sometimes for the Queens Learned Council to be nominated
joint Committees with the Lords, this present commitment foregoing is a very
rare and unusual President, in respect that two Doctors only (as I conceive) of
the Civil Law, are made joint Committees as aforesaid. But the reasons of this
here may well be, in respect that this Bill concerned Dilapidations, properly
belonging to the Ecclesiastical Courts, in which they are for the most part
best Experienced. And this may be a cause also, that the Spiritual Lords in
this Committee are more than the Temporal, which is very seldom or rarely seen,
but in some such like Case.

Two Bills were brought from the House of Commons, of which the second was the
Bill for the Ministers of the Church to be of sound Religion.

Dominus Custos magni Sigilli continuavit praesens Parliamentum usque in diem
Sabbati proximum hora nona.

A Release at large, and ad verbum, by Henry Sacheverill of Risby, in the
County of Leicester, Gent., unto William Skeffington, and his Heirs, of all the
right, which the said Henry Sacheverill had by Feoffment of William Skessington
Esquire, and Ralph Sarheverill, and their Cofeoffees, Dated 30 die Januarii, anno
22 Regin. Eliz. in the Manors, Lands, etc. of and in Kersby, Trussington,
Thriamoston, Humberston, Silby, Burton super Molez, and in Queenborough in Com.
Leicester, which the said William Skeffington and Ralph Sacheverill had from
George clemand, and in all other Manors, Lands, etc. lying in the Towns and
Fields of Skevington in the County of Leicester, and Stock in the County of
Lincoln, or elsewhere in England, cognit. usitat. locat. reputat. seu accept.
ut possessiones and haereditamenta praedicti Willielmi Skeffington, Licet tamen
re vera iidem Willielmus and Rudolphus nec little alter eadem maneria, terras,
Tenementa and Haereditamenta in illo scripto ultimo nominato mihi praefato
Henrico tradere, dimittere, feoffare, concedere, deliberare seu confirmare
nimine intenderint, seu voluerint, sed tantummodo idem scriptum taliter
continens eadem Maneria, terras, tenementa and haereditamenta, per frandem and
deceptionem mei praefati Henrici indebite obtentum suit.

Then the same Deed of Release contains Warranty of all the Premises unto
William Skeffington, and his Heirs, against the said Henry Sacheverill his
Heirs and Assigns for ever: In cujus rei testimonium huic praesenti scripto meo
sigillum meum apposui. Dat. quinto die Martii, Anno Regni illustrissimae
Dominae nostrae Elizabethae, Dei Gratia Angliae, Franciae and Hiberniae
Reginae, Fidei Defensor. etc. Decimo tertio.

Nota, That Robert Bowyer Esquire, who succeeded Sir Thomas Smith Knight, in the
place of Clerk of the Upper House, in An. 6 Jacobi Regis, in his Abridgment of
the Journal of the Queens time, has at the end of this business touching Henry
Sacheverill, inserted this Note ensuing.

Upon what occasion or how this matter between Skeffington and Sacheverill came
in Question in the Parliament, or why other than that a Bill touching William
Skeffington was brought from the House of Commons on Tuesday the first day of
this instant May preceding, and had its first reading on Wednesday the 2d day,
and its second reading on Thursday the 3d day of the same Month foregoing, and
was also read the third time and concluded, on this present 5th day of May, on
which the said Release was Entered in the Parliament Book, appears not in the
Journal so much as by circumstance, which seems to have happened through the
negligence of the Clerk of the Parliament, who was either Mr Spilman, or Mr
Anthony Mason alias Weeks.

On Saturday the 5th day of May, to which, it should seem, the preceding
Release is to be referred, Four Bills of no great moment, had each of them one
reading; of which the third being the Bill whereby certain offenses be made
Treason, was read secunda vice, and committed unto the Archbishop of
Canterbury, and others.

Two Bills also were brought to the Lords from the House of Commons, of which
the first was the Bill for the coming to Church, and receiving the Communion.

Dominus Custos magni Sigilli continuavit praesens Parliamentum usque in diem
Lunae prox. hora Octava.

May the 6th Sunday.

On Monday the 7th day of May, Eight Bills of no great moment, had each of them
one reading; of which the last being the Bill touching Dilapidations by
Ecclesiastical Persons, was read prima vice, and committed unto the Lords, that
were before in that Bill appointed; whose names see on Thursday the third day
of this instant May foregoing; and the Earl of Leicester and the Lord of
Loughborough were added unto them.

Dominus Custos magni Sigilli continuavit praesens Parliamentum usque in diem
Crastinum hora nona.

On Tuesday the 8th day of May, Four Bills of no great moment, had each of them
one reading; of which the last being the Bill for respite of Homage, was read
secunda vice, and commissa Attornato and Sollicitatori Dominae Reginae.

The fourth lastly, being the Bill whereby certain offenses be made Treasons,
was read tertia vice, and conclusa, with a new Proviso added thereunto by the
Lords, and certain Amendments, and committed to Mr Attorney, and Mr Solicitor,
to be carried to the House of Commons.

Dominus Custos magni Sigilli continuavit praesens Parliamentum usque in diem
Crastinum hora Octava.

On Wednesday the 9th day of May, the Bill for coming to Church and receiving
the Communion, was read secunda vice, and committed to the Earl of Sussex, the
Earl of Huntingdon, the Earl of Bedford, Viscount Mountague, the Bishop of
Winchester, the Bishop of Hereford, the Bishop of Salisbury, the Bishop of
Lincoln, the Lord Burleigh, the Lord Cobham, the Lord Lumley, the Lord Hastings
of Loughborough, and Sergeant Barham.

Dominus Custos magni Sigilli continuavit praesens Parliamentum usque in diem
Crastinum hora Octava.

On Thursday the 10th day of May, Four Bills of no great moment, had each of
them one reading; of which the second being the Bill for the appointing of two
several Sheriffs for the Counties of Cambridge and Huntington, was read secunda
vice, and commissa ad ingrossandum.

And the last, that no Purveyors shall take any Corn, Grain or Victuals, within
five Miles of Cambridge and Oxford, was read prima vice.

Nota, That Cambridge is here ranked before Oxford in the title of this Bill.

Nine Bills were brought up to the Lords from the House of Commons; of which
the third being the Bill against the bringing in and putting in Execution of
Bulls, etc. from the Sea of Rome, was returned (as it seems) not expedited;
for the Journal Book does not set it down conclus., as in like Cases is usual.

The Earl of Sussex, the Earl of Bedford, the Earl of Winchester, the Bishop of
Ely, the Lord Burleigh, and the Lord Wentworth, were appointed to confer with
certain of the House of Commons about the Bill of Tellors, etc.

The Bill for increase of Tillage, and maintenance of the Navy, was referred to
Committees; of which two were Viscount Hereford, and Viscount Mountague, but no
mention is made of the reading of it; of which nature see a like President on
Saturday the 21th day of April foregoing.

Dominus Custos magni Sigilli continuavit praesens Parliamentum usque in diem
Sabbati hora Octava.

On Saturday the 12th day of May, the Bill for two Fifteenths and Tenths, and
one Subsidy granted by the Laity, was read prima vice.

Seven Bills were brought up to the Lords from the House of Commons; of which
one was the Bill to restrain the Oppression of Common Promoters; and another
for the maintenance of Navigation.

Four Bills also had each of them one reading, of which the third being the
Bill for Restitution in Blood of the Children of Sir Thomas Wyatt Knight, was
read tertia vice, and conclusa.

The Bill lastly, against the bringing in of Bulls, etc. was committed to the
Lords, that were in the Committee for the Bill of Treasons; who were appointed
on Saturday the 5th day of this instant May foregoing, to confer therein in
certain points, with certain of the House of Commons.

Dominus Custos magni Sigilli continuavit praesens Parliamentum usque in diem
Lunae prox. hora Octava.

May the 13th Sunday.

On Monday the 14th day of May, Nine Bills of no great moment, had each of them
one reading; of which the second being the Bill for one Subsidy and two
Fifteenths and Tenths, granted by the Laity, was read secunda vice. Vide May
16. postea, The reason why no Commitment. And the last for Orders for
Bankrupts, was read secunda vice and commissa ad ingrossandum.

Three Bills which passed this day with the Bill for Restitution in Blood of
the Children of Sir Thomas Wyatt Knight, were sent to the House of Commons by
Mr Solicitor, and Doctor Lewis.

The Bill for respite of Homage, was referred to Committees, but no mention
made of the reading of it; of which see a like President on Saturday the 21th
day of April foregoing.

Dominus Custos magni Sigilli continuavit praesens Parliamentum usque in diem
Crastinum hora Octava.

On Tuesday the 15th day of May, Five Bills had each of them one reading; of
which the first being the Bill for one Subsidy and two Fifteenths and Tenths,
granted by the Laity, was read secunda vice, and conclusa.

Five Bills were brought to the Lords from the House of Commons, of which one
was for the Confirmation of the Attainder of Charles Earl of Westmerland, and
Thomas Earl of Northumberland and others, with a Proviso and Amendments. And
another was the Bill for the Town of Lestwithiell in the County of Cornwall.

The Bill lastly against Simony was read secunda vice, and committed to the
Earl of Huntington, the Earl of Bedford, the Bishop of Winchester, the Bishop
of Ely, the Bishop of Salisbury, the Bishop of Lincoln, the Lord Burleigh, the
Lord Shandois, the Lord Hastings, and the Lord Hunsdon: And to the same
Committees was likewise committed the Bill against corrupt Presentations.

Dominus Custos magni Sigilli continuavit praesens Parliamentum usque in diem
Crastinum hora Octava.

On Wednesday the 16th day of May, Three Bills of no great moment, had each of
them one reading; of which the third being the Bill touching Orders for
Bankrupts, was read tertia vice, and conclusa, and sent to the House of
Commons, by Doctor Yale, and Doctor Huick.

The Proviso and Amendments required by the House of Commons, to be put in the
Bill for Confirmation of the Attainder of the Earls of Westmerland and
Northumberland, etc. were thrice read, and the Lords gave their Assent
thereunto.

The Amendments likewise in the Bill for Constats and Exemplifications of
Letters Patents, being thrice read, the Lords also gave their Assents.

Dominus Custos magni Sigilli continuavit praesens Parliamentum usque in horam
secundam post Meridiem.

About which hour the Lord Keeper and diverse other Lords, both Spiritual and
Temporal, meeting, thirteen Bills of no great moment, had each of them one
reading; of which the third touching Dilapidations, the fifth for Confirmation
of a Subsidy granted by the Clergy, and the twelfth that no Hay or Plate shall
cross the Seas, were each of them read the second time, and ordered to be
engrossed.

And of the said Bills the second being to License the Earl of Leicester to
Erect an Hospital, the fourth for the making of the River of Welland Navigable,
the eighth for the maintenance of Navigation, and the tenth for the continuance
of making of Caps, were each of them read secunda vice; but no mention is made,
that they were either ordered to be engrossed, or referred to Committees, of
which there can be but two Reasons; the first, that the Lords deferred the
committing or engrossing thereof until some other time, as fell out before in
the Bill touching the Commission of Sewers; which being read secunda vice, on
Friday the 2d day of April foregoing, was referred to a Committee the day
following (although sometimes it may be omitted likewise through the negligence
of the Clerk of the Upper House) or else another reason there may be, that such
Bills having passed the House of Commons, and being sent up to the Lords fairly
engrossed in Parchment, can be no more engrossed, neither do the Lords
ordinarily refer such Bills to Committees, unless there be very great Cause, in
respect that each House holding correspondency with other, they do not
willingly submit that to the agitation of a private Committee, which has been
allowed and approved by the wisdom of a whole House.

There may also lastly a third reason be assigned, in some extraordinary Cases,
as this; where Bills of Grace, viz. for the Restitution in Blood of any, and
such like, were sent to the House from her Majesty fairly engrossed in
Parchment, and Signed with her Hand, which for the most part do pass the House,
without any stop or question.

On Thursday the 17th day of May, to which day the Parliament had been last
continued by the Lord Keeper on the day foregoing, Six Bills of no great
moment, had each of them one reading; of which the first touching Morris
Rodney Esquire, the second for the Town of Lestwithiell in the County of Cornwall,
and the last to discharge Sheriffs of the Dyets of the Justices of Assize, were
each of them read the second time; but no mention was made, that they were
either Ordered to be engrossed, or referred to Committees; of which see the
reason at large discussed on the day foregoing, fitly suiting to this present
occasion.

Three Bills also of the aforesaid six, had each of them their third reading,
and passed the House; of which the first was the Bill for Restitution in Blood
of Henry Brercton Esquire, and the second to License the Earl of Leicester to
found an Hospital.

Seven Bills of no great moment, were brought from the House of Commons; of
which the first being the Bill whereby certain offenses are made Treason, was
returned conclusa, with requests that it might be fair written again, which the
Lords performed accordingly on Tuesday the 21th day of this instant May ensuing.

Three Bills also had each of them one reading; of which the last being the
Bill for coming to Church, and receiving the Communion, was read tertia vice,
and conclusa, dissentientibus Comitibus Wigorn. and Southampton., and Dominis
Windsor and Vaux.

Dominus Custos magni Sigilli continuavit praesens Parliamentum usque in horam
secundam post meridiem.

About which hour the Lord Keeper and diverse other Lords, both Spiritual and
Temporal, meeting, six Bills of no great moment, had each of them one reading;
of which the first being the Bill for the increase of Tillage, and maintenance
of the Navy, was read the second time, and referred to the Committees; of which
two were Viscount Hereford, and Viscount Mountague.

The Bill also for the Town of Bristol, was read the second time; but there is
no mention made, that it was referred to Committees, or ordered to be
engrossed, because it had been sent up to the Lords, from the House of Commons,
on Tuesday the first day of this instant May foregoing; of which see a like
President on Wednesday the 16th day of the same Month, immediately preceding.

Dominus Custos magni Sigilli continuavit praesens Parliamentum usque in diem
Sabbati hora nona.

On Saturday the 19th day of May, Eight Bills of no great moment, had each of
them one reading; of which the fourth being the Bill for avoiding of delays
upon Vouchers in real actions, was read prima vice, and was thereupon committed
to the Lord Dier, Chief Justice of the Common Pleas, and other the Justices, to
consider thereof; and the fifth being the Bill touching the Town of
Southampton, was read tertia vice, and conclusa, with certain Corrections and
Amendments thereunto added by the Lords.

Two Bills were brought up to the Lords from the House of Commons; of which the
first being the Bill for the preservation of Timber and Wood, was read prima
vice.

The Bill for Southampton, the Bill for the Subsidy of the Clergy, and
Fugitives over the Seas, were delivered to Doctor Lewis, and Doctor Yale, to be
carried to the House of Commons.

Dominus Custos magni Sigilli continuavit praesens Parliamentum usque in horam
secundam post Meridiem.

About which hour the Lord Keeper and diverse other Lords meeting, Six Bills of
no great moment, had each of them one reading; of which the third being the
Bill to restrain the oppression of common Promoters; and the last for the
avoiding of Perjury in Clerks Convict, were each of them read secunda vice; but
no mention is made, that they were ordered to be engrossed, or referred to the
Committees, because they had been formerly sent unto the Lords from the House
of Commons, on Saturday the 12th day, and on Tuesday the 15th day of this
instant May foregoing; of which see a like President on Wednesday the 16th day
of the said Month of May preceding.

Dominus Custos magni Sigilli continuavit praesens Parliamentum usque in diem
Lunae prox. hora nona.

May the 20th Sunday.

On Monday the 21th day of May, Eight Bills had each of them one reading; of
which the last being the Bill against Vagabonds, and for relief of the Poor,
was read secunda vice; but no mention is made, that it was either ordered to be
engrossed, or referred to Committees, because it had been sent up unto the
Lords from the House of Commons, on Saturday the 19th day of this instant Month
of May preceding; although it be there omitted.

The second of the said eight Bills, being for the preservation of Wood, was
read the second time, and committed unto diverse Lords, and unto the Queens
Solicitor.

The Bill for Confirmation of a Subsidy granted by the Clergy, was returned by
the Lords from the House of Commons conclusa.

Dominus Custos magni Sigilli continuavit praesens Parliamentum usque in horam
secundam post Meridiem.

About which hour the Lord Keeper and diverse other Lords, both Spiritual and
Temporal meeting; Three Bills of no great moment, had each of them one reading;
of which the second being the Bill for the Commutation of Penance in Clerks
Convict, was read secunda vice, and commissa unto the Earl of Hereford,
Viscount Hereford, the Bishop of Winchester, and the Bishop of Worcester.

Dominus Custos magni Sigilli continuavit praesens Parliamentum usque in diem
proximum hora Octava.

On Tuesday the 22th day of May, the Bill to make the Lands and Tenements of
Tellors, etc. liable to the payment of their Debts, was read tertia vice and
conclusa and missa in Domum Communem by Doctor Lewis and Doctor Yale, together
with the Bill of Treasons, newly written out and examined by six of the Lords,
according to the request of the House of Commons on Thursday the 17th day of
this instant May foregoing; viz. the Earl of Huntington, the Earl of Bedford,
Viscount Mountague, the Bishop of Worcester, the Bishop of Salisbury, and the
Bishop of St David's.

Two Bills also of no great moment, had each of them one reading; of which the
second being the Bill to restrain the oppression of common Promoters, was read
tertia vice, and conclusa, with certain Amendments added thereunto.

Five Bills were brought up to the Lords from the House of Commons; of which
the first was the Bill to make the River of Welland Navigable, the second
against Simony; the third for the severance of Sheriffs in the Counties of
Bedford and Buckingham; the fourth for the erection of a Grammar School and
writing-School in the Borough of Southwark; and the last for the making of
William Watson a free Denizen.

Dominus Custos magni Sigilli continuavit praesens Parliamentum usque in horam
secundam post Meridiem.

About which hour the Lord Keeper and diverse other Lords both Spiritual and
Temporal, meeting, Two Bills of no great moment, had each of them one reading;
of which the first being the Bill for the Erection of a Grammar School and
Writing-School in the Borough of Southwark, was read prima vice.

The Bill to restrain the Oppression of common Promoters, was sent to the House
of Commons, by Mr Attorney and Doctor Huick.

Dominus Custos magni Sigilli continuavit praesens Parliamentum usque in diem
proximum hora Octava.

On Wednesday the 23th day of May, Two Bills of no great moment, had each of
them one reading; of which the second being the Bill touching Priests
disguising themselves, was read the first time.

Ten Bills were brought from the House of Commons, the first to License the
Earl of Leicester to found an Hospital; the second whereby certain offenses be
made Treasons; the third against fraudulent gifts to the intent to defeat
Dilapidations; the fourth for the paving of the Town of Ipswich; the fifth
whereby the Queens Majesty's Servants in Ordinary of her Household and Chamber,
shall not be returned on Juries; the sixth against the bringing in of Foreign
Wares forbidden; the seventh for the continuance of Sheriffs of sundry
Counties; the eighth for the bringing in of Bow-staves into the Realm; the
ninth for Ministers of the Church to be sound in Religion; and the tenth for
paving of a street without Aldgate.

Dominus Capitalis Justiciarius continuavit praesens Parliamentum usque in
horam secundam post Meridiem.

Nota, That here the Lord Chief Justice did continue the Parliament unto the
Afternoon, by Virtue of that Authority which was given unto him by her
Majesty's Commission, under the Great Seal of England, and set down at large on
Monday the 9th day of April foregoing.

On the said 23th day of May, in the Afternoon, Seven Bills of no great moment,
had each of them one reading; of which the third being the Bill for the paving
of a Street without Aldgate; the fourth for the bringing in of Bowes-staves
into the Realm; and the sixth for the paving of the Town of Ipswich; were each
of them read the second time; but no mention is made, that they were either
referred to the Committees, or ordered to be engrossed, in respect that they
had been sent up to the Lords from the House of Commons, this present Wednesday
in the Forenoon; of which see a like President on Wednesday the 16th day of
this instant May foregoing.

The last also of the said seven Bills, touching Priests disguising themselves
in strange Apparel, was read the second time, and commissa ad ingrossandum.

Dominus Capitalis Justiciarius continuavit praesens Parliamentum usque in diem
proximum hora Octava.

On Thursday the 24th day of May, Five Bills of no great moment, had each of
them one reading; of which the first being the Bill for the maintenance of the
Navy, and for increase of Tillage; and the second for incorporating and uniting
of Weymouth, and Melcomb-Regis in Com. Dorset, were each of them read secunda
vice, and commissae ad ingrossand.

Eight Bills were brought up to the Lords from the House of Commons; the first
being the Bill for coming to Church, and receiving the Communion; the second
touching order for Bankrupts; the third for the Commission of Sewers; the
fourth for the appointing of two Sheriffs for the two Counties of Huntington
and Cambridge; the fifth for the restitution in Blood of Sir Thomas Wyat's
Children; the sixth, that no Hay or Plate shall cross the Seas; the seventh for
speedy Trial to be had upon Issues in the Counties of Salop. and Hereford; and
the last was the Bill for the Trial of Felons in the twelve Shires of Wales.

Dominus Custos magni Sigilli continuavit praesens Parliamentum usque in horam
secundam post Meridiem.

About which hour the Lord Keeper and diverse other Lords, both Spiritual and
Temporal, being Assembled, Two Bills of no great moment, had each of them one
reading; of which the first being the Bill for the Incorporation of both
Universities, and the second for the Trial of Felons in the twelve Counties of
Wales, were each of them read prima vice.

The Bill for coming to Church, and the Bill for severance of Sheriffs in the
Counties of Bucks and Bedford, were delivered to Doctor Yale and Doctor
Vaughan, to be carried to the House of Commons.

Two Bills also had each of them one reading; of which the first being the Bill
for the speedy Trial to be had upon Issues in the Counties of Salop and
Hereford, was read prima vice and commissa Justiciario Harper.

Three Bills were brought up to the Lords from the House of Commons; the first
to restrain the oppression of common Promoters; the second for the restitution
in Blood of Henry Brereton Esquire; and the third for John Tirrell Esquire.

The Bill for the paving of the Town of Ipswich, was read tertia vice, and
conclusa.

Dominus Custos magni Sigilli continuavit praesens Parliamentum usque in diem
Crastinum hora Octava.

On Friday the 25th day of May, Three Bills had each of them one reading; of
which the first was for the Incorporation of both Universities; the second for
the Incorporation and uniting of Weymouth and Melcomb-Regis, in Com. Dorset;
and the third for increase of Tillage, and maintenance of the Navy; they had
each of them their third reading; and passed upon the question. And were sent
to the Commons by Mr Attorney, and Doctor Vaughan.

Five Bills also of no great moment, had each of them one reading; of which the
last being the Bill whereby the Queens Majesty's Ordinary Servants of Household
and Chamber, shall not be returned on Juries, was read tertia vice and reject.

Two Bills were brought up to the Lords, from the House of Commons; of which
the first being the Bill for coming to Church, and receiving the Communion, was
returned conclusa.

Dominus Custos magni Sigilli continuavit praesens Parliamentum usque in horam
secundam post Meridiem.

About which hour the Lords met, but nothing was done save only the continuance
of the Parliament by the Lord Keeper, usque in diem proximum hora Octava.

On Saturday the 26th day of May, Three Bills were sent up to the Lords from
the House of Commons; of which the first being the Bill that no Purveyor shall
take Grain, Corn or Victual, within five Miles of Cambridge and Oxford, was
returned with certain Amendments, and so the Bill was concluded.

Two Bill also were brought from the House of Commons; of which the first was
the Bill for the Incorporation and uniting of Weymouth, and Melcomb-Regis in
Com. Dorset; and the second for the Town of Southampton.

The Bill touching Licenses and Dispensations, was committed to the Archbishop
of Canterbury, and others, and to Doctor Lewis, and Doctor Huick.

The Bill lastly for limitation of the Fees of Counselors, and others, toward
the Law, was read secunda vice, and commissa ad ingrossandum.

Dominus Custos magni Sigilli continuavit praesens Parliamentum usque in horam
secundam post Meridiem.

About which hour the Lord Keeper and diverse other Lords Assembling, Three
Bills had each of them one reading; of which the second touching the Limitation
of Fees of Counselors, and others toward the Law, was read tertia vice and
conclusa, and sent to the House of Commons, by Doctor Lewis, and Doctor Vaughan.

Four Bills were brought from the House of Commons, of which the first was the
Bill against Fugitives over the Seas; the second for Incorporation of both
Universities; with a new Proviso added by the House of Commons, and certain
Amendments, which were thrice read and assented unto; the third for reviving
and continuance of Statutes; and the last touching corrupt Presentations.

The Bill touching severance of Sheriffs of sundry Counties, was read the
second time; but no mention is made, that it was either referred to Committees,
or ordered to be engrossed, in regard it had been sent up to the Lords from the
House of Commons, on Wednesday the 23th day of this instant Month of May
preceding: of which see a like President on Wednesday the 16th day of the same
Month foregoing.

The Bill against Fugitives, was sent to the House of Commons by Doctor Lewis
and Doctor Yale, with the latter Proviso put out, and all other Amendments.

Three Bills were brought from the House of Commons, the first against
Fugitives over the Seas, and the second for the increase of Tillage, and
maintenance of the Navy.

Dominus Custos magni Sigilli continuavit praesens Parliamentum usque in diem
Lunae prox. hora nona.

May the 27th Sunday.

On Monday the 28th day of May, Four Bills of no great moment, had each of them
their third reading, and passed the House; of which the first was the Bill for
John Tirrell Esquire; and the second for the increase of Tillage, and maintenance
of the Navy.

Two Bills were sent at several times unto the Lords from the House of Commons,
of which the first being for the bringing in of the River of Lee to the
North-side of the City of London, was returned with a new Proviso, and certain
Amendments added by them of the House of Commons. And the second also for the
assurance of certain Lands to the Lord Berkeley, and the Lady Katherine his
Wife, was returned with certain Amendments and a Proviso added thereunto.

Dominus Custos magni Sigilli continuavit praesens Parliamentum usque in horam
secundam post Meridiem.

About which hour the Lord Keeper, and diverse Lords meeting, the Bill for the
bringing in of the River of Lee, to the North-side of the City of London, was
read tertia vice, with certain Provisoes and Amendments added thereunto by the
House of Commons, and Assented unto by the Lords.

Dominus Custos magni Sigilli continuavit praesens Parliamentum usque in diem
Crastinum hora Octava.

On Tuesday the 29th day of May, the Bill touching the Queens Majesty's most
Gracious, General and free Pardon, was read prima vice, and conclusa.

Dominus Custos magni Sigilli continuavit praesens Parliamentum usque in horam
secundam post Meridiem.

About which hour the Lord Keeper, and diverse other Lords Assembling, Six Bills
were brought from the House of Commons; of which the first being for the
continuance of the severance of Sheriffs in sundry Counties, and the second to
make the Lands, Goods and Chattels of Tellors, etc. liable to the payment of
their Debts, were each of them returned conclusae.

The Bill of the Queens Majesty's general and free Pardon, was returned
conclusa.

Note that Robert Bowyer Esquire, who succeeded Sir Thomas Smith in the place of
Clerk of the Upper House, in An. 6 Jacobi Regis, in his Abridgment of the
Journals of the said House, during the Queens Reign, has in this place upon
the sending up of the aforesaid Bill of Pardon, left this Animadversion
following; viz.

It seems the Clerks negligence that the sending of this Bill to the Lower
House, is not set down in the Journal Book: also by entrance of the returning
thereof, it seems that the same was sent single, alone by special Messengers,
and not with the other six Bills.

Nota also, That all the following passages of this Afternoon, excepting the
entrance only of the Dissolution of the Parliament, are all transcribed out of
the Original Journal Book of the House of Commons, and the Speech of Sir
Nicholas Bacon the Lord Keeper, was transcribed out of a Copy thereof which I
had by me; as was also the manner of her Majesty's passing the several Acts
supplied by my self, according to the ordinary use of a former President
thereof. None of all which passages (excepting that only touching the entrance
of the Dissolution of the said Parliament) are at all found in the Original
Journal Book of the Upper House: But do now come to be supplied out of those
other abovementioned Manuscript Monuments; and in the first place out of the
Original Journal Book of the House of Commons, in manner and form following.

About four of the Clock in the Afternoon, the Queens Majesty being sat in her
Royal Seat, in the Upper House, Mr Speaker made his Oration, presented unto her
Majesty the Book of the Subsidy, and in the name of the whole House, gave her
Majesty most humble thanks for her Highness general and free Pardon, and prayed
her Majesty's Royal Assent unto such Acts and Laws, as had passed both the
Houses in this Session.

This being thus transcribed out of the Original Journal Book of the House of
Commons, fol. 39. a. now follows the Answer of Sir Nicholas Bacon, Lord Keeper
of the Great Seal, at large, which he made unto the Speakers Speech, being
transcribed out of a Copy I had by me.

Mr Speaker, The Queens Majesty has heard, and does very well understand, how
discreetly and wisely you have declared the Proceedings of this Session in the
Nether House; for Answer whereof, and for the better signification of what her
Majesty's opinion is, both of Parliament men and Parliament matters; this is to
let you understand, her Majesty has Commanded me to say unto you, that, like
as the greatest number of them of the Lower House, have in the proceedings of
this Sessions showed themselves modest, discreet and dutiful, as becomes good
and loving Subjects, and meet for the places that they be called unto: So there
be certain of them, although not many in number, who in the proceeding of this
Session, have showed themselves audacious, arrogant and presumptuous, calling
her Majesty's Grants and Prerogatives also in question, contrary to their Duty
and place that they be called unto; And contrary to the express Admonition
given in her Majesty's name, in the beginning of this Parliament; which it
might very well have become them to have had more regard unto. But her Majesty
says, that seeing they will thus wilfully forget themselves, they are
otherwise to be remembered: and like as her Majesty allows and much commends the
former sort, for the respects aforesaid, so does her Highness utterly disallow,
and condemn the second sort, for their audacious, arrogant and presumptuous
folly, thus by superfluous Speech spending much time in meddling with matters
neither pertaining to them, nor within the capacity of their understanding.

And thus much concerning the Parliament of the Lower House.

And as to the Lords here of the Upper House, her Majesty has Commanded me to
let you know, that her Highness takes their diligence, discretion and orderly
Proceedings, to be such, as redoundeth much to their Honor and Commendations,
and much to her Comfort and Consolation. And here an end touching Parliament
men.

Now as to the Parliament matters, her Majesty has Commanded me to open and
declare unto you, her Opinion conceived therein, touching two things; the one
is concerning the Subsidy and benevolence, the other is concerning the
Execution of the Laws. As to the former, which concerns the Subsidy and
benevolence, her Pleasure is, that I shall say unto you, that in your dealings
in that matter, she has noted three things principally; every of them tending
much to the setting forth of your benevolences, and good wills; The first is,
who it was that granted, the second the manner of the granting, the third what
it was that was granted. As to the first, her Majesty forgets not, that it
is a grant made proceeding from the earnest affections, and hearty good wills
of her good, dutiful and obedient Subjects, for the greatest part. And
therefore has Commanded me to say unto you, that she makes a greater account
of the great good wills and benevolent minds of her good and loving Subjects,
than she does of ten Subsidies; which as it ought to bring and breed in us
great comfort and delight, so in reason it ought to move us (as I doubt not but
it does) to be and continue such as be worthy such an estimation and account.
Again, her Majesty forgets not, that besides this is not a Grant by good and
loving Subjects, that never made like Grant heretofore; but by such as have
contributed from time to time, as the necessary Charges of the Realm, and their
own Sureties have required; which does much commend and set forth this
benevolence of yours. And thus much concerning the persons that have granted.

And as to the second, which is the manner of granting, her Highness knows
very well, that before her time these manner of Grants have sundry times past,
not without difficulties, with long persuasions, and sometimes not without
sharp Speeches, but this contrariwise without any such Speeches or other
difficulty has been freely and frankly offered and presented; and like as the
former did much extenuate their benevolence, so is this of yours greatly
extended. It is written and very truly, concerning Benevolences, Qui diu
distulit diu noluit, and therefore justly concluded, Bis dat qui cito dat;
which sayings she cannot but apply to you, in the proceedings of your Grant.

Again, Universality in consent does greatly commend also your dealings in this
matter; for a more universal consent than was in this, will hardly be had in
any; and therefore much the more commendable. And thus much touching the manner
of the Gift.

And as to the third, which concerns the thing given, her Majesty says, that
she thinks it to be as great as any heretofore has been granted, and
therefore you are to receive condign thanks for it. And has further willed me
to say, that if the Service of the Realm and your Sureties would so permit and
suffer, her Majesty would as gladly, as readily, and as frankly remit this
Grant, as you have freely and liberally granted it. Thus I have remembered unto
you the three Princely Observations, that her Majesty has conceived of this
benevolence of yours, much to your Comfort, and greatly to her Majesty's
Honor; to your Commendation for granting, and to her Highness for this
honorable accepting; for her Majesty shall by this Grant receive no Commodity
or benefit, but rather a continual care in dispending and employing of it,
about the necessary Affairs and Service of the Realm, and your Sureties; and
yet it is a great Comfort to her Majesty, to see you thus frankly and freely
join with her Self, the Realm, and You.

Now to the second and last part, which concerns the Execution of Laws, which
I mean to divide into two parts; the first is the Execution of your Grant, the
second is the Execution of Laws, now made by you, and of the rest made before
of others. As to the former, I am to remember you, that like as it has pleased
the Queens Majesty thus Princely, Honorably and thankfully, to think of and
accept this free and liberal Grant of yours; so certainly, if the like
diligence and endeavor be not used, by such of you as Choice shall be made of
by her Majesty for the due putting in Execution of this Grant, then surely
those that shall be thus remiss, or negligent, as by that means her Majesty and
the Realm shall be defrauded of any part of that which has been thus freely
granted, shall thereby minister just occasion to her Highness to have their
fidelity and truth toward her Majesty, much to be suspected and charged; which
would touch them very near. Neither is it an offense that would be
pretermitted, but severely punished. Why, if the Case were between common
persons, can there be a greater untruth and unthankfulness, than for a man to
make a grant in appearance willingly and readily, and then to seek wilily and
craftily to defraud the same Grant? This amongst honest persons, is utterly
detested, and if so, how then might it be thought of between the Prince and his
Subjects? where for diverse respects this bond is thrice as great; for as the
Subject by the Duty of his Allegiance, is to serve the Prince truly, even so is
he by his Oath, and so is he by the great trust, that by the Princes Choice is
committed unto him, as a Commissioner in this matter, above others. Plainly to
speak, it may be affirmed, and that justly, that such as be in Commission for
the Execution of this Grant, and shall deal partially, either for favor, or
for fear, or for love to themselves, or their Friends, or negligently or
remisly, of purpose whereby her Majesty shall not be Answered of that that is
due unto her, such I say, may justly be charged as men forgetting their Duty
toward God, and their Sovereign, and to their Country. It cannot be denied,
that numbers respect only their private profit, and not the universal profit of
the Realm, which is their surety and defense; they respect themselves, as
private persons, and not as Members of the Universal Body; but their
imperfection would be supplied by the wisdom and persuasion of such, as the
Queens Majesty shall commit trust unto by her Commission, to see this Subsidy
well and truly levied.

And thus much for the Execution of the Grant; Now to the Execution of Laws,
made by you, and the rest made heretofore by others. I am to remember you, that
all these labors, travels and pains taken about the Laws now made, and before
time taken about the rest heretofore made, and all the Charge sustained by the
Realm about the making of them, is all in vain, and labor lost, without the
due Execution of them. For, as it has been said, a Law without Execution, is
but a Body without Life, a Cause without an Effect, a Countenance of a thing,
and indeed nothing; Pen, Ink, and Paper, are as much toward the Governance of
the Commonwealth, as the Rudder or Helm of a Ship serves to the Governance of
it without a Governor, and as Rods serve for Correction without hands. Were it
not a mere madness for a man to provide fair Torches to guide his going by
Night, and when he should use them in the dark, to carry them unlight? or for
one to provide fair and handsome Tools to prune or reform his Orchard, or
Garden, and to lay them up without use? And what thing else is it to make
wholesome and provident Laws in fair Books, and to lay them up safe, without
seeing them Executed? Surely in reason there is no difference between the
Examples, saving that the making of Laws, without Execution, is in much worse
Case, than those vain provisions before remembered; for those, albeit they do no
good, yet they do no hurt; but the making of Laws without Execution, does very
much harm; for that breeds and brings forth contempt of Laws, and Lawmakers,
and of all Magistrates; which is the very foundation of all misgovernance, and
therefore must needs be great and heinous in those, that are the Causers of
this; indeed they are the very occasions of all injuries and injustice, and of
all disorders and unquietness in the Commonwealth. For certain and evident it
is, that the Queens Majesty, that is Head of the Law does all meet for her
Majesty to do, for the due Execution of them. First, She gives her Royal
Assent to the making of them, the most material of them she Commands to be
Proclaimed, and published; and yet cease not there, but she grants out her
Commission into every of her Shires, to men which are or should be of greatest
consideration within the limits of their Charge, which for the better Executing
of them are Sworn to see the Execution of her Laws to them Committed, within
the Limits of their Commissions: and yet besides all this, by her Majesty's
Commandment, a number of these Justices are Yearly once at the least called
into her Highnesses Star Chamber, and there in her Majesty's Name, Exhorted,
Admonished and Commanded, to see the due Execution of their Charges.

And thus you see her Majesty Enacteth, Proclaims, Commits, Exhorts,
Admonishes and Commands from time to time; yea, what can be devised meet for
her Majesty to do, for help if this, that is left undone? Surely nothing, to
her Majesty's Honor and Renown. Whereupon it follows necessarily and
consequently, that the whole burden of the offense and enormity must light
upon us, that are put in trust by her Majesty, to see those Laws Executed; and
certainly this offense grows great or little, as the trust Committed for the
Execution of Laws, is great or little; and therefore it stands us greatly
upon, to use our whole Cares and Endeavors, for the help of this hereafter.
Were it possible, trow you, that if Justices being dispersed through the whole
Realm, as they be, did carefully and diligently endeavor themselves, according
to the Trust committed unto them, by their Sovereign, duly and truly to Execute
their Charge, as they be bound by their Oath to God, and by their Allegiance to
their Sovereign, and by Duty to their natural Country, and rightly considered,
by the love they should bear to themselves and their Posterity (for if their
Country do not well, they shall fare but illfavouredly) were it possible, I
say, if this were so done, that Laws should be thus remisly and negligently
Executed? No, doubtless. Is it not (trow you) a monstrous disguising, to have a
Justice a Maintainer; to have him that should by his Oath and Duty set forth
Justice and Right, against his Oath offer Injury and Wrong; to have him that is
specially Chosen amongst a number by a Prince to appease all Brawlings and
Controversies, to be a Sower and Maintainer of Strife and Sedition, by swaying
and leading of Juries according to his will; acquitting some for gain,
Indicting others for Malice, bearing with them, as his Servant or Friend,
over-throwing others as his Enemy; procuring the Questmonger to be of his
Livery, or otherwise in his danger; that his winks, frownings, and Countenances
may direct all Inquests? Surely, surely, these be they that be Subverters of
all good Laws and Orders; yea, that make daily the Laws, which of their nature
be good, to become Instruments of all Injuries and Mischief; these be they
indeed of whom such Examples would be made, as of the Founders and Maintainers
of all Enormities; and these be those whom, if you cannot reform for their
greatness, you ought to complain of them; and like as this is not said of those
that be Good, so is this and much more to be said and done against those that
be Evil.

But here it may be said, The mischief appears; what is the remedy? to make all
Laws presently Executed? I can hardly hope to make them in better Case, than
now they be, and although I had such hopes, I could find no more helps but
these.

The first is having great Care in the choice of the Officers. The second by
sharp Corrections imposed upon such Offenders. There should be throughout the
Realm a Triennial or Biennial Visitation in this nature, made of all Temporal
Officers, and Ministers, that by Virtue of their Office have in Charge to see
Execution of Laws. By this, I mean, that the Queens Majesty should make choice
every second or third year, of certain expert and approved persons, to whom
Commission should be granted, to try out and examine by all good means and ways
the offenses of all such as have not seen to the due Execution of the Laws, and
according to the offenses so found and certified, to be sharply punished
without Omission or Redemption.

Of effect like unto this, and to the like end, was the Visitation of the
Church first devised, whereof came in the beginning great good doubtless; and
reason I see none, but that a like good ought to follow upon a like Visitation
made amongst Temporal Officers. Now to find out the faults seems not hard,
for amongst many other ways, there is one plain, evident and easy; and that is
where offenses do abound in any Country, contrary to the Laws, which the
Justices should so reform, and there be nothing done by them for the
Reformation of those offenses; I do not see but this makes a full charge of
their uncarefulness and negligence, whereby they are well worthy, upon
Certificate made, as is aforesaid, to be removed of all Governance, to their
perpetual ignominy, and to the Commendation of all those that remain as good
Officers.

And besides, to set forth other pains upon them, as by Law may be justified;
if this were once or twice done, I doubt not but the Examples following of the
doing of it would cause greater diligence to be used in the Execution of Laws,
than now there is. And the better to understand which be those Justices that do
offend, why might there not be order taken, that the name of every Justice that
has not prosecuted any Offender, for any offense committed contrary to any
Law, which by the Commission that he is in, he is authorized to see punished,
might be entered into some Rolls; and also how often, and how many of those kind
of offenses he has also prosecuted for a declaration of his diligence, whereby
it might appear when such Visitation should come, who has been careful, and
who has been negligent, to the end that the slothful, drowzy Drones, might be
severed from the diligent and careful Bees. And like as I could wish this to be
done concerning Offices of mean degree; so do I desire that the same course
might be taken with the great and greatest; for so it should be Equable. But if
there be nothing done therein, but things left as they have been, then must you
look to have your Laws Executed as they have been, if not worse; for words will
not reform these matters, as I have seen by proof. And this is the sum of what
I have to say at this time, concerning the Execution of Laws.

This Speech of the Lord Keepers being thus transcribed out of the
beforementioned Copy thereof, now follows the manner of her Majesty's giving
her Royal Assent to such Acts as passed, as it is set down in the end of the
Original Journal Book of the Upper House, in an. 39 Reg. Eliz. although it be
omitted in that of this present Parliament.

The Title of the Bill of Subsidy being read after the public and private
Acts; the Clerk of the said House standing up, did read the Queens Answer in
manner and form following.

La Roigne remercie ses Loyaulx subjects, accept lour benevolence, and ainst
le veult.

The said Clerk having read the Queens acceptance, and thanks for the Subsidy
given as aforesaid, did then upon the reading of the Title of her Majesty's
Pardon, pronounce in these French words following, the thanks of the Lords and
Commons for the same.

Les Prelates, Seigneurs and Communes, en ce present Parliament Assembles, au
nom de touts vos autres subjects, remercient tres humblement vostre Majesty,
and prient a Dieu qu' il vous done and sante, bone vie and long.

To every one of the public Acts allowed by the Queen, the Clerk of the
Parliament read these French words following.

La Roigne le veult.

To every private Act that passed, the said Clerk read the Queens Answer, in
these French words following:

Soit fait come il est desire.

These two last Answers to the public and private Acts, that passed, are to be
written by the said Clerk, at the end of every Act.

To such Acts, as her Majesty does forbear to allow, the Clerk of the
Parliament reads these French words following; viz.

La Roigne s' advisera.

Her Majesty finally having given her Royal Assent to twenty eight public
Acts, and thirteen private, Dissolved the Parliament, which is Entered in the
Original Journal Book of the Upper-House, in manner and form following; viz.

Dominus Custos magni Sigilli ex mandato Dominae Reginae Dissolvit praesens
Parliamentum.

THE JOURNAL OF THE House of COMMONS.
A Journal of the Proceedings of the House of Commons, in the Parliament bolden
at Westminster, An. 13 Reg. Eliz. A. D. 1571, which began there on Monday the
2d day of April, and then and there continued until the Dissolution thereof on
Tuesday the 29th day of May ensuing.

THIS present Journal of the House of Commons de an. 13 Regin. Eliz. is not
only plentifully stored with all usual Passages touching the Orders and
Privileges of the House, but is most worthy to be had in Eternal Remembrance,
in respect of the long agitation and judicious debatement of matters of
Religion, and Ecclesiastical Government: for the Reformation of which, the said
House did express a great deal of earnest zeal and care, although all in the
issue came to nothing, out of that old Principle inculcated into her Majesty by
some politic Head, and misapplyed by her; viz. that nothing must be innovated
in matters of Religion. All which matters, with those also less extraordinary,
are more largely set down in the Original Journal Book of the House of Commons,
than was usual in the former Journals of her Majesty's Reign, by reason that
Fulk Onslow Esquire, did, as may be guessed, succeed in the place of Clerk of the
said House, unto..... Seymour. Esquire, somewhat before the beginning of this
Parliament. Which said Journal is also much perfected out of an imperfect
Journal of the same House I had by me, taken by some Anonymous Member of the
said House, at this Parliament; in which, to avoid confusion, whatsoever is
here inserted out of the said imperfect Journal, is distinguished by some
Animadversion.

The third Parliament of Queen Elizabeth held in the Thirteenth Year of her
Majesty's most happy and prosperous Reign, begun at the City of Westminster,
upon Monday the second day of April, and during the time that her Majesty was
at the Sermon at Westminster Church, whither she had repaired about ten of the
Clock in the Forenoon of the said Monday, the Lord Clinton High Admiral of
England, accompanied with diverse of her Majesty's most Honorable
Privy Council; that is to say, Sir Francis Knolles Knight, Treasurer of her
Highness most Honorable Household, Sir James Crofts Knight, Comptroller of the
same, Sir Ralph Sadler Knight, Chancellor of her Majesty's Duchy of Lancaster, Sir
Walter Mildmay Knight, Chancellor of her Highness Court of Exchequer, and Sir
Thomas Smith Knight, repaired into the Lower House of Parliament; And there in
the presence and hearing of a great number of the Knights, Citizens and
Burgesses of the same Parliament Assembled, the said Lord Clinton signified,
that the Queens Majesty had called and appointed him to be the Steward of her
Highness most Honorable Household, to continue during her Majesty's pleasure:
which being likewise affirmed and testified by the said other of her Highness
most Honorable Privy Council, the said Lord Steward then further declared,
that he did then and there name, Constitute and Authorize the said Sir Francis
Knolles, Sir James Crofts, Sir Ralph Sadler, Sir Walter Mildmay, and Sir Thomas
Smith Knights, to be his Deputies, for and in the ministering of the Oath, to
all and singular the Knights of the Shires, Citizens of Cities, Burgesses of
Boroughs, and Barons of the Ports, returned and to be returned for that present
Parliament, according to the form of the Statute in that behalf then lately
made and provided.

And immediately thereupon, the faid Lord Steward, and his Deputies, did then
and there Minister the said Oath, to all such of the said Knights, Citizens,
Burgesses and Barons, as were then present accordingly. Which done, the Sermon
ended, and the Queens Majesty sat in her Royal Seat, in the Upper House of
Parliament, the Commons standing at the lower end of the Chamber, the Lord
Keeper of the Great Seal of England, learnedly and briefly declared the Causes
of Calling the said Parliament; and so in the end willed them to repair into
their House, and there after their accustomed manner, to choose of themselves an
apt and fit man to be their Speaker, and to present him to the Queens Majesty
on the Wednesday next following in the Afternoon. Whereupon the said Commons
immediately resorted to their Common House, and being there Assembled, the
Right Worshipful Mr Christopher Wray Esquire, one of the Queens Majesty's Sergeants
at Law, was by the first motion and nomination of the said Mr Treasurer, with
one voice of the said whole House, Chosen to be Speaker, and placed in the
Chair, notwithstanding his Allegations of disabling himself, and humble request
for their proceeding to a new Election.

On Wednesday the 4th day of April in the Afternoon, Christopher Wray Esquire,
one of the Queens Majesty's Sergeants at Law, the Speaker Elect of the House of
Commons, was presented unto her Highness; who sitting in her Royal Seat, and
allowing and affirming the Election, after his Oration made, and ordinary
Petitions granted, the said Lord Keeper willed him with the residue to repair
to the House of Commons, there to deliberate and consult upon the making of
such good and wholesome Laws, as might tend to the advancement of Gods Glory,
and preservation and safety of the Queens Majesty, and the Commonwealth of
this Realm of England. And thereupon the said Mr Speaker, and the Knights,
Citizens and Burgesses of the House of Commons, returned back unto their own
House; and being there sat, one Bill (according to the usual Course) had its
first reading, which was

The Bill concerning coming to Church, and receiving the Communion.

It was this day finally agreed, upon the Motion of Mr Speaker, that the Letany
should be read every day in the House, during this Parliament, as in the last
was used; and also a Prayer by Mr Speaker, such as he should think fittest for
this time, to be begun every day at half an hour after eight of the Clock in
the Morning, and that each one of this House then making default should forfeit
every time four pence to the poor Man's Box.

On Thursday the 5th day of April, Thomas Clark and Anthony Bull of the
Inner Temple London Gentlemen, were by this House committed to the Sergeants
Ward, until further order should be taken with them, for that they presumed to
enter into this House, and were no Members of the same, as themselves at the
Bar confessed.

This day the House was called, and thereupon Edward Lewkenor, John Bullock,
Nicholas Plumtree, Edward Goodwyn, and John Garnons, were Commanded to attend
the order of this House to Morrow next, for that the House being this day
called, they had entered into the House, and had not as them been returned by
the Clerk of the Crown except Garnons, whose Case is, for that he is said to be
Excommunicate.

On Friday the 6th day of April, It was Ordered that the Burgesses for
Estringsted, shall remain according to the return.

This day Mr Treasurer, Mr Sergeant Manwood, Geffrie and Lovelace, Mr Feltman,
Mr Bell, and Mr Mounson, were appointed to confer with Mr Attorney, and Mr
Solicitor, about the return of the Burgesses following; for that the same
Towns returned no Burgesses the last Parliament, viz.

Cornwall the Boroughs of Estlow. Fowley.

Gloucestershire the Borough of Chichester. Nottinghamshire the Borough of
Easiretford. Kent the Borough of Queenborough. Oxfordshire the Borough of
Woodstock. Hampshire the Borough of Christ-Church. Suffolk the Boroughs of
Aldburgh. Eye.



And to meet to Morrow in the Afternoon, at three of the Clock in Mr Treasurers
Chamber at the Court.

Nota, That these ensuing Speeches are taken out of the beforementioned
Anonymous Journal.

Mr Strickland, a grave and ancient Man of Great Zeal, stood up, and made a
long Discourse, tending to the remembrance of Gods Goodness, giving unto us the
light of his Word, together with the gracious disposition of her Majesty, by
whom as by his Instrument, God has wrought so great, things, and blaming our
slackness and carelessness, in not esteeming and following the time and blessing
offered; but still as men not sufficiently instructed what is truth, or so that
we think it not convenient to publish and profess it openly, and that all
reproachful Speeches of the slanderous might be stopped, the draw-backs brought
forward, and the Over-runners, such as overrun, and exceed the rule of the
Law, reduced to a certainty, he thought it Operae pretium, to be occupied
therein; for which purpose he said, the Professors of the Gospel in other
Nations, had writ and published to the World the Confession of their Faith, as
did those of Strasburgh and Franckford, etc. for which purpose also great
Learned men in this Realm had traveled, as Peter Martyr, Paulus Fagius, and
others, whose works hereupon were Extant.

And before this time and offer thereof was made in Parliament, that it might
be approved; but either the slackness or somewhat else of some men in that
time, was the let thereof, or what else, he said, he would not say. This Book,
he said, rested in the Custody of Mr Norton, as he guessed, a man neither ill
disposed to Religion, nor a negligent Keeper of such matters of Charge, and
thereupon requested that Mr Norton might be required to produce the same; he
added also, that after so many Years, as now by Gods Providence we had been
learning the purity of Gods truth, we should not permit for any cause of
Policy, or other pretense, any errors in matters of Doctrine to continue
amongst us. And therefore, said he, although the Book of Common Prayer is (God
be praised) drawn very near to the sincerity of the truth, yet are there some
things inserted more superstitious, than in so high matters be tolerable; as
namely, in the Administration of the Sacrament of Baptism, the sign of the
Cross to be made with some Ceremonies, and such other Errors, all which, he
said, might well be changed, without note of chopping or changing of Religion,
whereby the Enemies might slander us; it being a Reformation not contrariant,
but directly pursuant to our Profession, that is, to have all things brought to
the purity of the Primitive Church, and institution of Christ. He spoke at
large of the abuses of the Church of England, and of the Churchmen; as first,
that known Papists are admitted to have Ecclesiastical Government, and great
Livings; that Godly, honest and Learned Protestants, have little or nothing;
That Boys are dispensed with to have spiritual Promotions; That by Friendship
with the Master of the Faculties, either unable men are qualified, or some one
man allowed to have too many several Livings; Finally, he concluded with
Petition, that by Authority of the House, some convenient number of them might
be assigned, to have Conference with the Lords of the Spiritualty, for
consideration and reformation of the matters by him remembered. Vide Apr. 26.
Tuesday postea.

Mr Norton, a man wise, bold and Eloquent, stood up next, and said, he was not
ignorant, but had long since learned what it was to speak on a sudden, or
first, before other men in Parliament. Yet being occasioned by Mr Strickland,
he said, that truth it was, he had a Book tending to the same effect; but
(quoth he) the Book was not drawn by those whom he named, but by virtue of the
Act of 32. at the assignation, or by the Advice of eight Bishops, eight
Divines, eight Civilians, and eight temporal Lawyers, who having in Charge, to
make Ecclesiastical Constitutions, took in hand the same; which was drawn by
that Learned man, Mr Doctor Haddon, and penned by that Learned Man Mr Cheek;
whereupon he said, that consideration had been, and some travel bestowed by Mr
Fox of late, and that there was a Book newly Printed, to be offered to that
House; which he did then and there, presently show forth. And for the rest of
Mr Stricklands Motions, he said he was of his mind, chiefly for the avoiding
and suppressing of Simoniacal Ingrossments.

Whereupon were appointed for that purpose for redress of sundry defections in
those matters, these following; viz. All the Privy Council being Members of
this House, Sir Henry Nevill, Sir Thomas Thin, Sir Thomas Lucy, Sir Henry
Gate, the Master of the Requests, Mr Heneage, Mr Recorder, Mr Bell, Mr Henry
Knolles Sen., Mr Mounson, Mr Norton, Mr Strickland, Mr Godier, Mr William More,
and Mr Doctor Berkley.

These names being thus transcribed out of the Original Journal Book of the
House of Commons, as were those two foregoing Speeches of Mr Strickland, and Mr
Norton, out of that beforecited Anonymous Journal of the same House, more
particularly mentioned at the beginning of this present Journal, now follow
other passages of this day out of the same.

The Bill concerning coming to the Church, and receiving the Communion, was
read the second time; and thereupon Sir Thomas Smith speaking for the
maintenance thereof, argued; and in part wished the Bishops to have
consideration thereof.

After whom Mr Fleetwood moved, that the penalty of that Statute should not go
to Promoters, and said it was a device but of late brought in, in the time of
King Henry the Eighth, the first year of his Reign, and showed the Evils and
inconveniences that did grow by these men's doings; wherein no reformation was
sought, but private gain to the most of men. He said also, that matter of going
to the Church, or for the service of God, did directly appertain to that Court;
and that we all have as well learned this Lesson, that there is a God, who is
to be served, as have the Bishops. And thereupon he undertook to prove by the
old Laws, vouched from King Edgar, that the Princes in their Parliaments have
made Ecclesiastical Constitutions: as these; That if any Servant shall work
upon the Sabbath day by the Commandment of his Master, he should be free; if of
himself, he should be whipped; if a Freeman should work, he should be bound, or
grievously amerced. Then he concluded upon request, that it might be committed
to some of the House, without the Bishops, who perhaps would be slow.

Sir Owen Hopton moved very orderly, that the Presentation of such defaults
should not only depend upon the relation of the Church Wardens, who being for
the most part simple, and mean men, and fearing to offend, would rather incur
danger of Perjury, than displease some of their Neighbors; he showed for
proof, Experience.

It may be gathered by these foregoing Speeches transcribed out of that
Anonymous Journal, more particularly mentioned at the beginning of this present
Journal, that Mr Fleetwood moved to have this Bill referred to Committees; but
their names being there omitted, are therefore wholly transcribed out of the
Original Journal Book of the House of Commons, in manner and form following;
viz.

Sir Thomas Smith, Sir Owen Hopton, Sir Thomas Scot, the Masters of the
Requests, Mr Sergeant Manwood, Mr Sergeant Geoffry, Mr Fleetwood and Mr Sands,
who were appointed to meet in the Star Chamber, at two of the Clock in the
Afternoon.

The Bill for preservation of Woods, was read the first time.

On Saturday the 7th day of April, the Bill concerning Religion was read, and
the first of the said Bills was delivered to the Commissioners, and the residue
read, and appointed to remain in the House, and this not to stand for any
reading. Vide what Bills these were, on Tuesday May the 17th ensuing.

It should seem that the first of these Bills here mentioned, is that which is
styled the Bill A, and the other Bills those which were then also offered to
the House, and thereupon referred to certain select Committees, to be
considered of, before they were suffered to be read in the House; which being
admitted of this day, was not allowed by the House for any reading, but only,
as may very well be gathered, for the said House it self to consider of them,
before they were further entertained.

But there can be no absolute certainty set down hereof, in respect that
through the negligence of Fulk Onslow Esquire at this time Clerk of the House of
Commons, it is so confusedly or briefly set down; although in the general it is
very probable, that this proceeding in Ecclesiastical matters with so much
caution and deliberation, was because they desired to give no occasion of
distaste to her Majesty: who ever, for the most part, showed her self very
averse to their intermedling with any thing concerning Church matters. Now
follow other of this days passages, out of the before-cited Anonymous Journal,
more particularly mentioned at the beginning of this present Journal; but it is
fully discovered what these Bills were, on May the 17th Thursday ensuing.

Mr Strickland first moved, that Mr Norton might be required to deliver such
Books, as he had. Mr Newdigate moved, that where one of the causes for the
Calling of the Parliament, and perhaps the chiefest, was for a Subsidy, he
thought it not amiss to make offer of a Subsidy, before it should be required,
which Speech was not liked of by the House.

Sir Francis Knolles made a long needless discourse concerning the Subsidy.

Mr Bell said, that a Subsidy was by every good Subject to be yielded unto; but
for that the People were galled by two means, it would hardly be levied;
namely, by Licenses and the abuse of Promoters; for which, if remedy were
provided, then would the Subsidy be paid willingly; which he proved, for that
by Licenses a few only were enriched, and the multitude impoverished; and
added, that if a burden should be laid on the back of the Commons, and no
redress of the common evils, then there might happily ensue, that they would
lay down the burden in the midst of the way, and turn to the contrary of their
Duty.

Mr Popham affirmed Mr Bells Speech, and added to the former abuses, that of
the Treasurers of the Crown; who having in their hands great Masses of Money,
with the which either they themselves, or some Friends of theirs, do purchase
Lands to their own use, and after become Bankrupts, and so cause or practice an
enstalment of their Debts, as of late some one has installed a Debt of thirty
thousand pounds: which occasioned the lack in the Princes Coffers.

Mr Sergeant Lovelace argued, that every Loyal Subject ought to yield to the
relief of the Prince, and that without any condition or limitation;
notwithstanding he did not dislike of the former motions; and thought it very
requisite, that these evils might be provided for, to the ends aforesaid; unto
the which he added three abuses more; first, the abuse of Purveyors, wherein he
had to desire the Council; and the Masters of the Household, to consider of it,
and to be willing to yield to Reformation; and, in his Opinion, it should not
be amiss to take away the Purveyors, and to limit every Country to a
proportionable rate; so should her Majesty be better served, and the Kingdom
eased. Secondly, The Reformation of the Exchequer, for the Charge which grows
by respite of Homage; which he wished might be paid on some other sort, in a
sum certain. Thirdly, Another Reformation which is upon a great abuse in the
Exchequer, by sending out upon every Fine levied, the Writ Quo titulo ingressus
est.

Mr Comptroller in few words said, that he being one of the Masters of the
Household, would do his endeavor for Reformation of all things arising by the
Purveyors.

Mr Sampoole sometimes of Lincoln's Inn, liked well of the Motion of the
Subsidy, and commended the Motions of the Gentlemen before; affirming, that
they were very necessary to be thought of; unto which he was to add one more;
viz. the abuse of Collectors. He showed, that they do retain their Charge
sometimes a Year, sometimes more in their own hands. And for that they are but
mean men, appointed to that Office, they often times convert it to their own
uses, and are perhaps never able to satisfy the same; whereby the people are
unwilling to pay; for if they should understand her Majesty should have it
presently, they would more willingly pay it; and therefore wished the better
sort of every Country should be assigned to that charge.

Mr Goodier said, that every man ought to yield to the Subsidy, and rather
offer it, than to stay till it should be demanded; desiring, that the Subsidy
might presently, and only go forward, without the hearing of any more
complaints: for that they might be Infinite, and already more were remembered,
than in one Parliament could be reformed. Wherein he showed a great desire he
had to win favor.

In the conclusion of these aforesaid Speeches, transcribed out of that often
before-cited Anonymous Journal, more particularly mentioned at the beginning of
this present Journal; it should seem that a Committee was appointed to consider
of the proportion, and time of yielding some relief unto her Majesty; whose
names being set down in the Original Journal Book of the House of Commons, are
thence transcribed at large in manner and form following.

All the Privy Council Members of this House, the Master of the Rolls, Sir John
White, Sir William Dormer, Sir Christopher Heydon, Mr Heneage, Sir Robert Lane,
Sir Henry Norrice, Sir George Blunt, Sir Henry Weston, Sir George Bows, Sir
William Pawlet, Mr Edgecomb, Mr Edward Stanhop, Mr John Mersh, Mr Robert
Newdigate, Mr Sergeant Lovelace, Mr Saintpool, Mr Thomas Snagge, Mr Hall, Mr
Hasset, Mr Grasior, Mr Sands, Mr Alford, Mr Basset, Mr Warncomb, Mr George
Forrors, Mr Amise Pawlet, Mr Hatfield, Mr Greithfield, Mr Bounton, Mr
Bellingham, to meet in the Star Chamber on Monday next, at two of the Clock in
the Afternoon.

At the same time also another Committee was nominated, to consider of those
griefs and Petitions, which had been touched and mentioned in the former
dispute; whose names being likewise found in the aforesaid Original
Journal Book of the House of Commons, are thence transcribed in manner and form
following.

For Motions of Griefs and Petitions were appointed Sir Owen Hopton, Sir Thomas
Scot, Sir William Buts, Mr Manwood, Mr Bell, Mr Popham, Mr Fleetwood, Mr
Mounson, Mr Mohun, Mr Grimston, Mr Mersh and Mr Winchcomb, to meet in the
Temple Church on Monday next, at two of the Clock in the Afternoon.

Upon a Motion by the Committees for matters of Religion (whose names see on
Friday the 6th day of this instant April foregoing) It was Ordered, that Mr
Grimston and Mr Strickland should move the Lords of the Clergy, to know their
pleasure concerning the motions, to be to them made to Morrow in the Afternoon,
in matters of Religion. Vide Apr. 26. postea and Maii 17.

Mr Mounson brought report, that Mr Attorney General prayed, that meeting may
be made to Morrow in the Afternoon, at Mr Treasures Chamber, for Conference
touching the validity of Burgesses.

April the 8th Sunday.

On Monday the 9th day of April, report was made of the validity of Burgesses,
and Ordered by Mr Attorneys Assent, that the Burgesses shall remain according
to the returns; for that the validity of the Charters of their Towns, is
elsewhere to be Examined, if cause be.

The Bill concerning coming to the Church, and receiving of the Communion, was
brought in again by Sir Thomas Smith, one of the said Committees.

The names of the Committees for the Subsidy, and for Motions and Petitions
(which see on Saturday immediately foregoing) were read again, and they
appointed to keep their former hour of meeting.

For that Sir Henry Perry Knight, being returned Knight for the Shire of
Cumberland, and likewise of Northumberland, has chosen to appear for
Northumberland; it was Ordered, that a new Writ shall go out to choose another
Knight for Cumberland.

The Bill touching certain Offenses to be made Treasons, was read the first
time.

Mr Norton Exhibited an Addition, which was received by the House; and after
sundry Arguments, and some Motions touching the severance or uniting of the
Bills, it was Ordered, that the Bill be read again upon Thursday next.

The Bill concerning coming to Church, and receiving of the Communion, was read
the first time.

Sir John St Ledger, moved the House for his Man's Privilege, and it was
committed to Mr Recorder, Mr Bedoll, and Mr Dalton, and they to meet this
Afternoon at Mr Recorders, and make report to Morrow.

On Tuesday the 10th day of April, Mr Speaker recited a Commandment from the
Queens Majesty, to spend little time in Motions, and to avoid long Speeches.
The reason whereof being omitted in the Original Journal Book of the House of
Commons, it is therefore supplied out of that often before-cited elaborate
Journal, more particularly mentioned at the beginning of this present Journal,
in manner and form following.

That this Advertisement grew of somewhat spoken by Mr Bell the 7th day of this
instant April, concerning Licenses granted by her Majesty, to do certain
matters contrary to the Statutes, wherein he seemed (as was said) to speak
against her Prerogative: but surely so orderly did he utter what he spoke, as
those who were touched might be angry; but justly to blame him might not be.

This Advertisement being thus transcribed out of the aforesaid Anonymous
Journal, now follows the residue of this days passages out of the Original
Journal Book of the House of Commons it self, in form following.

Sir Owen Hopton moved for the Commission of Motions and Petitions, to have the
Council added unto them, and also a greater number of others; and delivered a
Paper of Notes of the Motions made.

Upon a Motion made for Mr Garnons, who is reported to stand Excommunicate, it
is Ordered, that he shall Answer it in the House.

Six Bills of no great moment, had each of them one reading; of which the last
being the Bill touching Monasteries, was read the first time.

Mr Treasurer made report of the Committees doings for the Subsidy, whose names
see on Saturday the 7th day of this instant April foregoing, and brought in
Articles, which were well liked, and thereupon the same Commissioners were
appointed to proceed with the drawing of the Book.

Two Bills also had each of them their first reading, of which the first was
the Bill for the validity of Burgesses not resiant.

Touching matters of Religion, Mr Mounson brought report, that the Bishops pray
to have the Lords moved by this House, to assign a Committee to confer with
this House. And thereupon it was Ordered presently, that the same Commissioners
do immediately go to the Lords, with this Message, to know their pleasure for
appointing some to confer about the Book for Doctrine.

Mr Treasurer returned report, that the Lord Keeper has Answered, he will open
it to the Lords.

Four Bills of no great moment, had each of them one reading; of which the
second being the Bill for Cloth-workers, was read the first time: And the third
being the Bill B. had its first reading. Vide Maii 17. postea, what Bill B.
means.

Sir Richard Read and Mr Doctor Yale, did bring an Answer to the Message; viz.
that the Lords have appointed twenty of themselves, whereof ten of the Clergy,
and ten of the Temporalty, to meet at two of the Clock this Afternoon, in the
Star Chamber. And thereupon were added by the House to the former
Commissioners, the Master of the Rolls, Sir Henry Norrice, Sir William Buts, Mr
Austley, Mr Sergeant Manwood, Mr Stooks, Mr Fleetwood, Mr Carleton, Mr Eglenby,
Mr Yelverton, Mr Dalton, and Mr Robert Snagg, which meeting was about matters
of Religion. Vide abunde Maii 17. postea.

On Wednesday the 11th day of April, the Bill for Lestwithiell was read the
first time.

Mr Fleetwood brought in a Bill against Rogues.

The Bill against fraudulent Gifts and Conveyances, was read the second time,
and was delivered to certain of the House to amend presently, upon a Motion
made by Mr Dalton to have it to extend to the defrauding of Heriots.

Three Bills of no great moment, had each of them one reading; of which the
second being the Bill for Sewers, was read the second time, and Ordered to be
engrossed. And the Bill D. had its first reading. Vide Maii 17. post. what Bill
D. means.

Mr Seckford Master of the Requests, prayed longer time to consider of the Bill
of fraudulent Gifts and Conveyances; and that the Committees may be Sir John
White, Mr Seckford Master of the Requests, Mr Sergeant Manwood, Geoffry
Loveland, Mr Mounson, Mr Bell, Mr Fleetwood, Mr Thomas Snagg, Mr Barber, and Mr
Dalton, to meet to Morrow in the Afternoon in the Temple Church.

The Bill for not returning persons of the Queens Majesty's Household on Juries,
was read the first time.

The Bill for Bristol was read the second time, and Ordered to be engrossed.
Whereupon followed diverse longSpeeches and Arguments touching the same Bill;
which being omitted in the Original Journal Book of the House of Commons, are
here supplied out of that often before-cited Anonymous Journal of the same
House, more particularly mentioned at the beginning of this present Journal, in
manner and form following; viz.

Mr Comptroller first moved, that before some Committees were appointed, both
parties might be heard, and the Controversy appeased.

Mr Fleetwood argued, that there might appear rashness or indiscretion in them,
who should now reverse what of late they had done; but leaving to speak
thereof, he entered into a good Discourse of the Prerogative, which might
thereby be touched, if they should endeavor to overthrow her Majesty's Letters
Patents, to whom by Law there is power given to Incorporate any Town, and she
is Sworn to preserve her Prerogative; he vouched the Clerk of the Parliaments
Book to be, that no man might talk of the Statute of Wills, etc. but that the
King first gave License; for that his Prerogative in the Wards was hereby
touched. He showed likewise the Statute of Ed. 1. Ed. 3. and H. 4. with a
saving of the Prerogative. In King Edward the Sixths time License was sued for
to the Lord Protector, to talk of matters of Prerogative, he remembered the Book
of 2 Edw. 6. for the Parliament of Ireland, called by the Chief Judge, as is
for him lawful; where it was questioned, what by Parliament might be done;
whether they might depart with any of the Kings Towns, Forts or Piers; it was
agreed they might not, and so he concluded, that to talk thereof (for as much
as her Majesty's Letters Patents, and Prerogative were touched) Rege non
consulto, was perilous. He also made mention of the Statute, which authorizeth
all Merchants to Traffic by Sea, Nisi public prohibentur; he says, others
were prohibited.

Mr Young of Bristol, in the behalf of the Commons, reasoned to this effect;
First, Showed the loss to the Queen of her Custom, then the private Monopoly
wrought and occasioned by the Merchants, the Controversies which have ensued by
this means amongst them, and the subtle means whereby the Statute was
procured, without the consent of the Major or Commons, by such as were put in
Trust.

Mr Alford said, that he might not speak of the Prerogative aptly, for that he
was not Learned in the Law; but made some remembrance of what he had there
seen, concerning the Act of Parliament for Southampton; where it appears,
that without an Act of Parliament, her Majesty's Letters Patents were not
sufficient; and therefore he prayed convenient consideration might be, and that
the same (if it should so seem good to the House) might be conjoined to the
former and other Bill, etc.

Then spoke Mr Clear, Sir Francis Knolles, Sir Nicholas Arnold, Sir Henry
Norris, and Mr Christopher Yelverton of Gray's Inn, severally to the said Bill:
whose Speeches being somewhat imperfectly and uncertainly set down in the
beforementioned Anonymous Journal, are therefore omitted; although from them,
and the residue foregoing, the effect of this Bill may be Collected to have
been for the Dissolution of certain Companies of Merchants in Bristol, whom her
Majesty had Incorporated by her Letters Patents, and authorized them to Trade
to certain places, by which it was pretended that the public and free trading
of others was restrained; and at last upon the Motion of Mr Fleetwood, That the
Bill being of great weight, might be further considered of by the House, and
the Committees be appointed at some other time, it was thereupon Ordered, that
they should be appointed on the day following, which was done accordingly.

Then was read the Bill for coming to Service, but what reading it was
appears not by the aforesaid Anonymous Journal, nor by the Original Journal
Book it self, in which this said Bill is not at all mentioned: but it should
seem that it was the second reading, because diverse Speeches ensued thereupon;
which in respect that they concern a matter of so great moment, are therefore
transcribed out of the Anonymous Journal, in manner and form following.

Mr Snagg showed at large the inconveniences of the old Law, for coming to
Service: for, said he, by the former Law it was Enacted, that the Service shall
not be said, or Sacrament ministered, in other sort than in the Book of
Common Prayer is prescribed; he showed, how differently the same was used in
many places, from the prescribed Rule; as where no part of those Prayers were
observed, but a Sermon, and some such other Prayers only as the Minister shall
think good, in place thereof; whereupon have great divisions, discords and
dislikes grown amongst and between great numbers. And since it is Law, that in
this sort Service shall be used, and that whosoever shall be at any other form
of Service, shall incur the penalty prescribed, and that the Ministers neither
do, nor will do herein, as they should, and as is by the Law prescribed and
commanded; he thought the proceedings in this kind, should occasion a Dilemma
in mischief; for by this Law, if he come not, he shall lose twelve pence; and
if he come and be present, and the Service be not said according to the
prescribed Rule of the Book, he shall lose a hundred Marks.

Mr Aglionby Burgess of the Town of Warwick, moved the Law might be without
exception or privilege for any Gentlemen in their private Oratories; this did
he prove to be fit out of Plato his Laws, and Cicero, both prescribing for the
observation of the Law an equality between the Prince and the poor Man, not
giving scope to the one above the other. Also he remembered the Authority of
Lactantius Firmianus, making this only difference betwixt Man and Beast, that
all men do know and acknowledge that there is a God, and in this respect there
should be no difference between Man and Man. Withal, he said, the more noble
the Man, the more good his Example may do. He therefore concluded, that for so
much of the Law, so the same might be general, he was of good liking that it
should pass.

But for the other matter, concerning the receiving of the Communion, he
argued, that it was not convenient to enforce Consciences. And to that purpose,
he showed the Authority of Drs; which he vouched without quoting the place, or
sentence. He said also, that it was the Opinion of Fathers, and Learned Men of
this Land; and therefore wished they might be consulted with. Finally, he
concluded, that bonae Leges e malis moribus proveniunt: but no good Laws may
make a good man fit to receive that great Ministry of God above. This whole
Speech he tempered with such discretion as in such Case was seemly. And
whatsoever he spoke, he spoke the same under Correction.

Mr Strickland standing up, first prayed he might be excused, for that he was
to speak on a sudden and unprovided. For the first, He approved what Mr
Aglionby had said: For the second, he said, he could not be of that mind; and
he vouched out of Esdras, that the Church, yea the Consciences of men, were by
the Prophet restrained; withal he said, Conscience might be free, but not to
disturb the common quiet. He showed the practice and doings of the Pope, the
banishment of the Arrians, etc. That the word of the Prince, for lack of Law,
must not be tied. The Israelites, he said were constrained to eat the
Passover. And finally he concluded, that it was no straitning of their
Consciences, but a Charge or loss of their Goods, if they could not vouchsafe
to be, as they should be, good men and true Christians.

Mr Dalton reasoned to this effect, that there could ensue no inconvenience by
those two Laws, which were intended to be contrary; his reason was, except the
Service be according to the Law, no man is bound to stay there, no more, than
if he be bound to come and hear Service, if there be no Service, he is to
forfeit his Bond.

For Answer to Mr Aglionby he said, the matters of Conscience did not concern
the Lawmakers, neither were they to regard the error, curiosity, or
stiff-neckedness of the evil, ignorant or froward persons. For be it they did
proceed orderly to the discharge of their own Consciences, in making the Law,
let them care for the rest whom it behooves. He was of mind that Gentlemen
should not be excepted, for the causes aforesaid; but he wished provision might
be made for such as be imprisoned, or cannot come for fear of Arrests. He
wished also, that the Law might have continuance but till the end of the next
Parliament.

These foregoing Speeches being thus transcribed out of that often before-cited
Anonymous Journal, more particularly mentioned at the beginning of this present
Journal, and two other Speeches of Mr Fleetwood, and Mr Popham, of no great
moment, being omitted; now follows some part of the next days passages out of
the Original Journal Book of the House of Commons.

On Thursday the 12th day of April, Mr Comptroller, upon a Motion made by
himself, that the Bill touching Bristol might be proceeded in, was appointed a
Committee in the same, and with him were nominated Sir Nicholas Points, Sir
Nicholas Arnold, Sir John White, Mr Newton, Mr. John Young, Mr. Popham, Mr.
Fleetwood, Mr. Norton, Mr. Alford, Mr. Hall of York, and Mr. Hooker, to whom
the hearing of both parties touching the said Bill, was referred; and thereupon
to make report thereof to the House, and to meet in the Star Chamber, on Monday
next at three of the Clock in the Afternoon. Vide in die praecedente concerning
this business.

It is Ordered, that the House do sit to Morrow till ten of the Clock, and then
to go to the Court to hear the Sermon.

Two Bills of no great moment, had each of them one reading; of which the
second touching certain offenses to be made Treasons, was read the second time.

The Addition to the same Bill was read the first time.

After the reading of which said Bill, and Addition as aforesaid, sundry
Motions and Arguments ensued; which being omitted in the Original Journal Book
of the House of Commons, are therefore supplied out of that often beforecited
Anonymous Journal, in manner and form following.

Mr. Goodier with some show of former Care for that Cause, entered into the
utterance of a long Speech, and spoke to this effect: First, He made a solemn
Protestation of his sincerity, truth and Loyalty to her Majesty, to the State,
and to the House. Then he showed many singular and true blessings, which we
have by her Highness means, and religiously prayed for her preservation; but
his whole discourse stood upon these three points, what he thought of the
persons there Assembled, what he disliked in the matter of the Bill propounded,
and why he did so.

Of the persons, he said, he heartily believed the whole Company in truth and
true meaning to have a care and hearty well-wishing for her Majesty's safety,
acknowledging and reposing in her the very Anchor of our Safety; but whether
all were with a sincere meaning to the state of the Crown, he knew not; but
rather thought the clean contrary: but yet of the most and most honorable he
thought nothing amiss, but some surely, he said, were doubly disposed, and with
a favorable affection bent for some special body.

For the substance of the first Bill, he said he was of clear mind, well liking
and approving the whole course thereof; except, quoth he, that the same be not
already by former Laws provided for; and hereunto he further added, that if any
man should say, that the Papists do not err in saying or speaking so
slanderously of her Majesty, the same to be taken also as Treason. For the
Additions which concerned the first, which did clearly respect the time past,
as to make Treason of a fault already committed, which at the time of the
perpetrating of the same offense, was not in the same Degree; it was a
President most perilous, which might occasion such and so great Evils, as
easily might not be conceived. Of present time, man's wisdom might judge; Future
time man's Policy may reach to: but to call again the time past, or to raise
what is dead in any kind, Man may not; nor in reason is it to be presumed. The
like he said had not been seen; and where he has read thousands of Laws, yet
did he never find such a President. An extremity, rare, and never practiced, no
not in these the greatest matters of Faith and Religion, that we do now so
earnestly treat of.

The Enemy to God and our State (the Papists, I mean) is most hateful. Yet is
no man so hardly bent, as to have them punished, much less to suffer Death, for
what is past. Whether her Majesty has pardoned what is past, we do not know,
and whether her Highness pleasure be that it should be talked of, no man yet
has made a report. Withal, it may happily occasion dislike between her Majesty
and the House, which were odious and hateful; but doubtless, he prophesied, it
would occasion peril, such and so great, that the greatest Speakers therein,
yea those who should give them most or best words, could give no Warranties.
Neither is it that the sequel thereof may be warranted for the right of a
Crown, which words may not be strained or straightened.

Thus much considered, and the Prince being herein not as yet determined, he
therefore advised, and more than so by words of vehemence urged stay. He
farther said, that the penning of the first Article of the Additions was
clouded and involved with secret understandings, not to be understood but by
such as more curiously could, and more cunningly would, look thereinto than he.
For matters of Title of the Crown, he said, he neither knew any, nor durst to
intermeddle or take knowledge of any; and concluding, he said, that for
obscurity of the sense, he must needs condemn the same, since that Veritas est
nuda, simplex and plana.

Sir Thomas Smith her Majesty's Principal Secretary, neither condemning nor
approving of what had before been spoken by Mr Goodier, made motion, that the
Bill might be divided, left the one might be the hindrance of the other.

Mr Norton in his accustomed manner of natural Eloquence; first showed that
that Assembly should be free of Speech, so that the same did not exceed the
Bounds of Loyalty; and as in Speech free, so ought it also to be free of unjust
slanders, and undeserved reproaches. For so much as might concern him, he
protested that he neither thought, nor meant any other title than the sole
preservation of her Majesty, and to this end was he and the whole House (as he
supposed) settled and bent; she being of this Realm, not only in respect of our
goods and lives the singular stay, but for Truth and Religion, yea of all
Christendom not Magna, but in all the world Speciosa. And since that
Consultation is no other than Consultare in Commune, he was as well to remove
the surmise of Ambiguity, as the slander raised of any doubleness in him; the
words (quoth he) are plain, these and no other; that whatsoever person during
the life of her Majesty, has or shall imagine, intend or go about, the
deposing, etc. them and their Heirs to be barred of any title.

And, says he, where Ambition has once entered, such is the nature of the
same, that never it will be satisfied: and the thirst for a Kingdom is
unquenchable. Withal in common Experience we see, that between two, for a small
matter in Suit, when it shall pass against the one, though by perfect Trial,
yet will he who loses never acknowledge that he had either offered, or
defended an injury. He said, for working of great matters great time is
required; and such a mischief, as to overthrow a Crown is not in a day
compassed; and therefore what hereafter is thought, or meant to be Executed, is
already begun, compassed and devised. Time must therefore be taken, and
therefore in time, and at all times it is to be prevented.

Where it is said, the like has not been seen, and a Miracle made of it, as if
there were never former Presidents ever seen of the like, or ever heard of
before. It is no longer since than in Queen Mary's time, when to the Parliament
it was suggested, that the Congregations in the City of London Assembled, did
use this kind of Prayer to God, either to convert her, or confound her.
Whereupon it was Enacted, that every person who so, and in such sort, had
prayed, or who so after should pray, should be taken for a Traitor. The Case of
Bennet Smith is not so strange, nor so long since, but it may be remembered; his
transgression was not such, nor so to be adjudged at the time of the offense
perpetrated, as it was afterward; yet by Authority of Parliament the offense
precedent was from the old nature altered, and he, who before at the time of
the offense, until the making of the Law, was not to be privileged but by his
Clergy, was now by an Act made after, by Judgment Executed. And since in the
Case of a private man, as was this of Bennet Smith, such consideration, and
such good discretion was used, who can imagine it to be odious? Nay, who is it,
that would not the like or greater care to be had of a Prince, and especially
of so good and virtuous a Prince, as she, for whom our Conference is now? But
yet we are charged with partial affection, unsettled minds, and doubleness.
Whether this Speech now be an offense to the House, he earnestly craved the
Judgment of the House. For that it might seem by the Gentleman's earnestness who
spoke, that some one his Friend, whom he was bent to serve, would be touched.
Whereupon, for his own part he eft-soons protested, he had no certain
resolution with himself of any title, but was to be satisfied with the consent
of that Assembly; howsoever adding further, if his Motions might so sort, as
they were liked, he offered this Proviso to be added; That if any such person,
who had made any such claim, shall disclaim and renounce all Title during her
Highness Life, the same person, etc. to be then restored to the old Estate.

Mr Comptroller after some Declaration of grief, perceiving the matter grow to
heat, as verily the greatest number of the House were more than moved with the
vehemence of Mr Goodiers Speech, and that men were disposed to talk at large of
matters contrary or repugnant to the Bill, moved that it might be severed;
because the first part came in, and was exhibited to that House by her
Majesty's Learned Council; the other was but the advice of a private man, which
advice, though it justly deserved Commendation, yet was it not, in his fancy,
to be joined with that which came in other sort.

Mr Snagg argued to this effect, that in making of Laws, plainness of Speech
should be used, all intrapments to be shunned and avoided. And here he moved,
why the Statute of Edw. 3. whereby it is Enacted, that all such, who shall
endeavor, compass or imagine the Death of the King, etc. should be Traitors,
etc. should not be said sufficient, reaching as far, and comprehending as much,
as this latter advice. For the regard of the time past, he said, he could have
no good liking thereof, and what was practiced in Queen Mary's time (under
Correction) he took to be no Charitable President; concerning the Authority of
the Parliament, he did conclude nothing, but said it was a prevention.

Sir Francis Knolles showed, that he could not utterly dislike the conjoining
of the Additions, since that they rise all of one ground, and that they both are
good and charitable; whereof he acknowledged her Highness to have Intelligence,
and the cause already to have been in Conference by her Council. And for the
word ( has) he says it contained no such absurdity, but with good zeal it
might be maintained. And therefore such vehemence and sharpness of Speech, he
said was more than requisite, yea more than convenient. And as for the
obscurity, he said of men that would mean well, it could not be misconstrued;
and to stay or prevent devices past, he thought it but honest Policy, which
being otherwise used in a Princes case, is not to be disliked. He remembered her
Highness unwillingness to punish such offenses, and therefore though the Law be
sharp, yet such is her Mildness, that if any have offended for so much as may
concern her person, surely he thought it would not be Executed; and her
Clemency tempered with Authority, could never grow to Cruelty, wherein what his
Conscience was, he thought not fit to make further show thereof; but simply and
plainly he would deal herein, not meaning to treat in such sort, as if he
thought to deserve thanks, or any thing of her Majesty; for what he did, he did
it also as mindful of his own safety.

Another then spoke (whose name is not expressed in the aforesaid Anonymous
Journal) showing the weight of the matter, which was then in hand, to rest as
well on the general safety of the Subjects, as on the preservation of her
Majesty's Person, and therefore he could not but approve the effect of the
whole, both in Bill and Addition; albeit for the pains in the Bill he was
somewhat variant from that which was there offered, and in the understanding of
some words he was doubtful; as for the word compassing, he made some question;
of this ( bodily hurt) he had no perfect Intelligence, since the hurt of body
may grow by grief of mind, and grief of mind perhaps by small cause. He also
said, that saving in the Statute of 27 H. 8. he has not read it. But further,
he said, that he that would not allow her for lawful Queen, in his conceit
should also be called a Traitor; but for the speaking of those most slanderous
words of Heretic, Infidel, Schismatic, he would not any man to be for the
first offense taken as a Traitor; for that the not acknowledging of the
Supremacy, being a far greater offense, is but the pain of Praemunire. And
therefore, except the same offense also might be made Treason, he could not
like thereof. But if it should so seem to them good, that it should be as he
indeed wished, then was he well pleased to put them both to one Predicament.

And for the word Heretic, he said, that the Papists all, of force must be
forced to say, her Majesty is one; or that they themselves must be content to
carry the name, and to be noted Nomine, as they are' re and veritate Heretics,
which name they willingly will not bear. He further said, that with the rest of
those words of slander, he thought it might do well to insert the name Papist.
That if any man should say her Majesty to be an Infidel, Papist, or Heretic,
etc. to be a Traitor; for that some say, there are in these days that do not
spare to say, her Majesty is of another Religion, than is published; and that
it is the sole doing of the Counselors, whereby the Doctrine (in sort as it
is) is thus published, and not hers. He also added, that his wish was, that no
man might be attainted of these words, except the Speech or Publication might
be testified by two Witnesses. For the Additions, he said, assuredly they might
not be severed from the first Bill, not only as they are matters material
depending on the first, but stretching so far to the maintenance of the first,
that without them the first may seem to be nothing. For (said he) there can be
no remedy provided, except the cause of the grief be known, and the same cause
removed; wherein the Rebels of the North gave clear Experiment: for doubtless,
when they pretended Reformation of Religion, they thought to rend up the
ground, and to subvert the stay thereof, which was her Majesty's Person; and by
them he wished us to learn at last, and to wax wiser. He said, the Court of
Chancery will straightly Decree for saving and quiet keeping of a quiet
possession, often looking to ordering things before past, and shall not the
Court of Parliament do the like for the Title of the Crown? And the ancient
Laws of the Realm (he said) do (...) the same, as long before the 35 H. 8. the
Stat. 5 E. 3. in such like Cases has ordained, that the Heir for the Fathers
offense shall be punished: consule locum citatum.

Mr Mounson said, it were horrible to say, that the Parliament has not
Authority to determine of the Crown; for then would ensue, not only the
annihilating of the Statute 35 H. 8. but that the Statute made in the first
year of her Majesty's Reign, of Recognition, should also be laid void; a matter
containing a greater consequent, than is convenient to be uttered.

Mr Heneage moved the House to this effect, that either the Bill for Addition
should be severed, or both to be referred to the Queens Learned Council, to
consider of the convenience thereof; and then by them to be exhibited, etc. but
of his Opinion he yielded no further reason.

Mr Long a young Gentleman, would have proved the word ( have) and a regard of
the time past, not to be amiss, for that at the time of the offense the malice
of the Offender was as great, as it is at this present.

Mr Fleetwood endeavored to prove the overcharging of the Bill with larger
words than were convenient, and more Provisoes than were to the purpose, to
have been the overthrow of that which was truly meant; wherein the cunning
Adversary, when he knows not how to subvert directly, will by this means
easily and subtly insert more, pretending a face of more forwardness than the
rest, when indeed his heart is bent to the hindrance of the whole. For proof
and experience hereof, he remembered the cunning Prelates in Henry the Fourths
time, and afterward in Edward the Fourths time, when King Edward required the
suppressing of all such Abbeys, as King H. 6. had Erected; To hinder this,
contrary to the Kings meaning, some would needs add the Colleges in Cambridge,
which by him were also Founded; to which when by no means the House could be
induced, as well the intent of the first, as of the last, was subverted.

The like he remembered also of the second year of H. 7. in matter of Treason,
which all men would have yielded unto, the Counterfeit Friend heaped in, to
give the King free Liberty of Restitution to whom he would, of all both goods
and possessions, whereof the inconveniency being seen, stay was made of the
whole. So that, what men may not do directly, with face of further Friendship
they do covertly. He concluded therefore, it were well and most safe, to make
two Bills, and to be referred to the Queens Learned Council, as Mr Heneage had
well divided.

Mr Sergeant Manwood, first Answering the meaning of the words ( bodily hurt)
said, it must be intended when violence or force is done or offered to the
Body, and not otherwise, nor elsewhere. And whether the words of slander should
be Treason, he thought that there was great reason they should be; for (quoth
he) who so shall affirm her Highness to be an Heretic, does doubtless wish her
the pains of an Heretic, viz. to be burnt, etc. He further would have to be
added to these words of the Bill, That who so shall imagine, go about, claim,
etc. thus much more, that whosoever shall affirm himself to have Title, etc. to
be a Traitor. He was of further Opinion, that it should be no clogging to the
Bill, to have matter of the same nature added; being also provided for the same
purpose, as good, consequent and necessarily concurring with the effect of the
Bill. And for the Authority of the Parliament, he said it could not in
reasonable construction be otherwise, for who so should deny that Authority,
does deny the Queen to be Queen, and the Realm to be a Realm.

After which, Mr Alford and Mr Dalton spoke severally to the said Bill,
touching certain offenses to be made Treasons. Whose Speeches containing no new
matter at all in them, more than has been formerly spoken, are omitted in that
often before-cited Anonymous Journal, out of which all these foregoing Speeches
are transcribed. After all which, the business was at length drawn to this
Head, to be referred to a Committee, whose names being there likewise omitted,
are therefore all of them supplied out of the Original Journal Book of the
House of Commons it self, in manner and form following.

All the Privy Council being Members of this House, Sir Christopher Heyden, Sir
Henry Nevill, Sir Nicholas Arnold, Mr Sergeant Manwood, Mr Sergeant Jeoffry, Mr
Heneage, Mr Stoaks, Mr John Vaughan, Mr Bell, Mr Mounson, Mr Popham, Mr Norton,
Mr Dalton, Mr Fleetwood, Mr Telverton, Mr Goodier, Mr Alford, and Mr Long, were
appointed to meet to Morrow at two of the Clock in the Afternoon, in the
Star Chamber.

Mr Doctor Jews, and Mr Doctor Huick, brought from the Lords a Bill touching
the untrue demeanors of Tellors, Receivers, Treasurers and Collectors.

On Friday the 13th day of April, Five Bills had each of them one reading; of
which the last being the Bill for suppressing of Simony in Presentations to
Benefices, was read the first time; to which, because Mr Snagg spoke upon the
first reading, being a thing not altogether usual, his Speech is therefore
transcribed out of that often before-cited Anonymous Journal.

Mr Thomas Snagge treated hereupon, viz. after the reading of the said Bill of
Simony, saying that the cause of the slanders, which the Papists have against
the Church of England, in that they say Cobblers, Tailors Tinkers, Millers, etc.
are of the Ministry, grows thereby, that the Livings are detained by the
Patrons from the Spiritual, in their own hands, to their own private uses;
whereas the first original of the creation of Patronages, being considered, it
appears that nothing is left to the Patron of right. The manner of their
original he showed at large, and that the same was granted Deo and Ecclesiae,
and concluded that the Patron had nothing of worth or value, but a bare
nomination, if it be truly used; since that dealing sincerely, he is neither to
respect Commodity, Blood, Affection, Friendship, nor any thing else, but the
worth and sufficiency of the Man, etc.

The Bill against Vagabonds was read the first time; after which ensued diverse
Speeches, which is not commonly used, until after the second reading, and
therefore they are the rather transcribed out of the aforesaid Anonymous
Journal.

Mr St. John moved, that an old Bill before this time exhibited into the Lower
House concerning this matter, might be perused.

Mr Sands endeavored to prove this Law for Beggars, to be over sharp and
bloody, standing much on the care which is to be had for the Poor; saying, that
it might be possible with some travail had by the Justices, to relieve every
man at his own house and to stay them from wandering; this experience he showed,
and what was done in the Country of Worcester. Mr Treasurer talked to this
effect, that he would have a Bridcwel in every Town, and every Tipler in the
County to yield twelve pence yearly to the maintenance thereof.

Mr Wilson a Master of the requests, argued thus; that poor of necessity we
must have, for so Christ has said, until his latter coming: and as that is
true, so said he also, that Beggars by Gods word might not be amongst his
People: Ne sit mendicus inter vos. His Experience he showed through the
greatest part of Christendom, concluding that such looseness and lewdness was
no where, as here; he said it was no Charity, to give to such a one, as we know
not, being a stranger unto us. Thus, said he, did the Locrenses constitute by
their Laws. Even as of Thieves did the Grecians judge of them. To the pain of
the Constables for their remiss dealings, he wished might be conjoined
Imprisonment.

On Saturday the 14th day of April, the Bill for one William Skevington was
read; whereby was supposed a deceit practiced by one Sacheveril, for conveying
of Land, contrary to the true meaning, by subtle forging of a false deed, in
place of the true deed: which being read it showed the confession of
Sacheveril, and prayed restitution, with discharge of all mean encumbrances
during such time as it was in the possession of Sacheveril.

Mr Fleetwood endeavored to prove, that all such sinister, false, fraudulent
or convenous dealings being opened in that place, albeit that the party pray
not redress, yet being made apparent to that High Court, ought not to be
pretermitted without due consideration and convenient punishment to be by the
House assigned, and the party to be brought to the Bar of that House; for proof
thereof, he showed in the time of King Henry the Fourth, that the abusing of
one of that House, coming home into his Country, for what he had done or spoken
in the House, was afterward adjudged of in that place, and a Law presently
made for what before was not thought upon; the like he showed to be done in
Henry the Eighth his time, concerning an Excommunication had at Serjeants-Inn,
etc. He also remembered a President of one John Rue, who for that he meaning to
have deceived a Merchant of London in sale of certain sums of money due unto
him, to be paid out of the Exchequer, as he pretended, whereas in truth the
money was before received by him who sold the Debt; Judgment was given for the
subtilty of the loss of his goods, the profit of his Lands, and perpetual
Imprisonment: For every Conspiracy, the Judgment is by Law (said he) villainous,
even as in the Case of Attaint, to have the Houses turned up, the Meadows
Eared, etc. He showed also, that in the time of Edward the Third, one meaning
to cause the price of Wool to fall, gave out that there was likelihood of Wars
to be between the King of England, and the King of Denmark, by which means the
Traffic of the Staple was like to be stayed: Whereupon it was presently
ordained, that he should be banished, though for that purpose there were no Law
before.

After this Speech, as it should seem, Committees were appointed for this Bill;
whose names being not found in the aforesaid Anonymous Journal, out of which
the preceding Speeches are transcribed; they are therefore supplied out of the
Original Journal Book it self of the House of Commons, and were as follows;
viz. Sir John Thin, Mr Stokes, Mr Bell, Mr Fleetwood, Mr Bedell, and Mr
Smith, to meet in the Star Chamber, upon Wednesday next at three of the Clock
in the Afternoon.

The Bill for the Free Grammar School in Southwark, was read the first time.

For the Bill of Treasons and Additions, it was Ordered, that such of the
Committees, as are Learned in the Laws, shall have Authority to conser with the
Queens Majesty's Learned Council, touching the same Bill and Additions.

The Bill for Reformation of the Book of Common Prayer, was read the first
time, after which (the Bill being preferred by Mr Strickland) ensued diverse
long Arguments, which being omitted in the Original Journal Book of the House
of Commons, are therefore supplied, with some small alteration, where need
required, out of that often before-cited elaborate Anonymous Journal of the
same House, in manner and form following.

Mr Treasurer (of her Majesty's Household) reasoned to this effect, That if the
matters mentioned to be reformed were Heretical, then verily they were
presently to be condemned; but if they are but matters of Ceremony, then it
behooves us to refer the same to her Majesty, who has Authority, as Chief of
the Church, to deal herein. And for us to meddle with matters of her
Prerogative (quoth he) it were not expedient. Withal, he said, what Cause there
might be to make her Majesty not to run and join with those who seem to be most
earnest. We are not to search, whether it be, for that in time and order she
hops to bring them with her, or what other secret cause or scruple there may
be in the heart of Princes, it is not for all people to know.

Mr Comptroller argued to this effect as before, commending the Zeal, but that
the place and time were not fit. And since we knowledge her to be Supreme Head,
we are not in these petty matters to run before the Ball, which to do, and
therein to offend, were great folly; how forewarned we were herein, he did
refer to our consideration, insinuating in some sort, that our heady and hasty
proceedings, contrary to and before the Law, did rather hinder than help.

Hereupon one Pistor with a grave and seemly Countenance, and good natural
Eloquence, showed how Conscience enforced him to speak; and rather to hazard
his Credit than to the offense of his Conscience be silent. Albeit he would
acknowledge willingly, that many hundreds of that Honorable and Worshipful
Assembly, were well able to teach him, and he indeed willing to learn of them
all: the matter of his grief was, that matters of importance standing us upon
for our Souls, stretching higher and further to every one of us than the
Monarchy of the whole World, were either not treated of, or so slenderly, that
now after more than ten days continual consultation, nothing was thereon
concluded. This Cause he showed to be Gods, the rest are all but Terrene, yea
trifles in comparison; call you them never so great, or pretend you, that they
import never so much; Subsidies, Crowns, Kingdoms, he knew not, he said, what
they were in comparison of this; this he said, I know, whereof he most thanked
God, primum quaerite Regnum Dei, and caetera omnia adjicientur vobis. This Rule
is the direction, and this desire shall bring us to the light, whereupon we may
stay, and then proceed unto the rest; for in his word, and by him we learn, as
says St Paul, to correct, reform, etc. Our true home certainly is not here,
Non habemus hic permanentem Civitatem: and the Justice of God moved Terror unto
all, which he seemed to mean concerning the Bill beforementioned of
Strickland's Propositions. And so did set it forth with vehemence, that there
lacked no modesty, and with such Eloquence, that it neither seemed studied, nor
too much affected, but grave and learned throughout, and no whit too long, but
very well approved of.

And after him Mr Snagge, and far after him indeed, either for order, proof, or
matter, he entered into the discourse of Strickland's Articles, and seemed to
maintain them; this namely, not to kneel at the receiving of the Communion, but
rather, if a Law hereof should be made, to lie prostrate, to shun the-old
Superstition; or otherwise to set every man at liberty, and in this behalf to
do according to his Conscience and Devotion, he judged it to be nothing
derogatory or contrary to the Prerogative. And the directions he thought fit to
be left out of the Book, which should be a Law, etc.

After which Arguments it was upon the question agreed, That a Petition should
be made by this House unto the Queens Majesty, for her License and privity to
proceed in this Bill, before it be any further dealt in.

The Bill for the Commission of Sewers was read the third time, and after some
Arguments passed upon the Question, and was sent unto the Lords by Mr Treasurer
and others.

The Bill against Licenses and Dispensations, granted by the Archbishop of
Canterbury, was put to the question, Whether it should be read or no? It was
overruled in the affirmative, and had thereupon its first reading. After which
Mr Alford (although a Bill be not usually spoken unto until after the second
reading) spoke against the Bill, and endeavored to prove, that Licenses for
Marriages in some cases might be needful, and that Dispensations also for
non-residence might upon some occasion be of great necessity, as if a Minister
should be employed upon some Foreign Embassage, or other matter of great weight.

Mr Yelverton much disliked, as it should seem, Mr Alford's Speech, and spoke
very vehemently in maintenance of the Bill, alleging, that, as he thought, no
good Christian could be against it; in respect that by the very words of the
Bill it appears, that it was only framed for the suppression of such Licenses
and Dispensations, as were contrary to the Word of God.

Mr Dalton spoke next against the Bill, and grounded his opinion only upon this
vain supposition, That a Bishop can do nothing contrary to the Word of God.

Mr Beadle spoke next in maintenance of the Bill; but the substance of his
Speech is so briefly and imperfectly set down, as it cannot be gathered what
his Reasons were.

Mr Manwood spoke very judiciously and moderately, allowing well the scope and
meaning of the Law, but wished, that in respect it mentions the redress of
many Grievances, those same Grievances might first be particularly made known
to the House, before the Bill were any further proceeded in.

Mr Fleetwood approved the Bill, yet spoke not directly for it; but very
covertly guirded at the Ecclesiastical Judges, and the Office of Faculties;
showing also in the conclusion of his Speech, that Livings are given to
Ministers for the instructing the King and his People, and for the keeping of
House, and other deeds of Charity: all which, if they were absent by
dispensation, he inferred must of necessity be neglected.

Sergeant Lovelace lastly, as it should seem, concluded further Speech in this
business, showing the use and commodity of this Bill in question; but doubted
that there was not power enough given therein, nor sufficient remedy provided
for redress of the mischiefs thereby supposed to grow, by reason of the
Granting the aforesaid Licenses and Dispensations. Upon which (it should seem)
that some Members of the House were appointed to consider of the said Bill, but
their Names are not found in the Original Journal book of the House of Commons,
or in that before-cited Anonymous Journal, out of which both the preceding and
ensuing Speeches are transcribed.

Mr Norton made a Motion by Warrant of this Court, by the wisdom and godly care
which in matters of weight was to be employed, That to avoid the shameful and
most hateful usage amongst the Ecclesiastical Judges, for delivering of Clerks
convict upon their Oaths, and the manifest Perjury there by their Law against
the Law committed, some order might be taken. He proved it might not be said a
Liberty of the Church, except they will claim a liberty to sin; wherein indeed
their principal liberty has stood, and for the which they have not spared to
hazard, nay to give, both their bodies and Souls to become Traitors to God and
Man.

Thus did that Rebel Bishop Becket, whose principal quarrel and chief cause of
all his stir, was, that the King would have punished one of his Mark, a Priest,
for an abominable Incest committed by him; which trifling fault (forsooth) this
Holy Saint could not endure to be rebuked by a Temporal Judge. Et hinc illae
irae. He showed, it could not be termed a Privilege, and encouragement to
Learning, since it was no other but a Cloak for their Naughtiness, and for such
as might be of the Popes Sect: as well appeared, in that it was allowed to none
but to such as might enter their Holy Orders, and not to one that had two
Wives. He showed at large the Circumstance of their practiced Order upon the
purgation of such Clerks, declaring of truth so disordered and hateful doings,
that the whole House resolved to take care for redress.

There was then next after, by the Policy of Sir Humphrey Gilbert, a Motion
made by one to have in talk the griefs which before had been uttered in the
House, concerning the deceitful dealings of Treasurers and Receivers, the
Reformation of the Exchequer for Homage, etc. and for the granting of Licenses
by the Queen, contrary to the form of sundry Statutes.

Hereupon Sir Humphrey Gilbert standing up, and some Introduction made to crave
patience and toleration of the House, he endeavored to prove the Motion of Mr
Bell, made some days before, to be a vain device to be thought of, and
perilous to be treated of; since it tended to the derogation of the
Prerogative Imperial; which who should attempt in his fancy, could not
otherwise be accounted than an open Enemy. For what difference is to say, the
Queen is not to use the privilege of the Crown, and to say she is not Queen?
since they are so linked together, that the one without the other may not
possibly be, or subsist? We are (said he) to give to a common Constable the
right and regard of his Office; which if we should deny her, what is it other
than to make her meaner than the meanest? And albeit Experience has showed
such and so great Clemency in her Majesty, as might make us perhaps forfeit our
selves; yet it is not good to sport or venture too much with Princes; yea, let
be that our meaning be good, yet if it be not so thought of, how then? He
remembered the Fable of the Hare, which fled upon the Proclamation, that all
Horned Beasts should depart the Court, lest his Ears should be said Horns; this
did he further inculcate, with this further signification, that if we should in
any sort meddle with those matters, her Majesty might look to her own Power,
and thereby finding her validity to suppress the strength of the challenged
Liberty, and to challenge and use her Power any way, to do as did Jews of
France, who (as he termed it) delivered the Crown there out of Wardship, which
the said French King did upon like occasion. He also said, that other Kings had
absolute Power, as Denmark and Portugal; where as the Crown became more free,
so are all the Subjects thereby the rather made Slaves.

This Speech was disliked, as implying many occasions of mischief, but for the
present he was not answered further, than that it seemed he did mistake the
meaning of the House, and of the Gentleman that made the Motion; who would it
otherwise to be taken, nor otherwise for the House to deal in the matter, than
to show their common griefs in due and seemly sort unto her Majesty.

The Parliament was then by the consent of the House, for that it was Easter
Eve, Adjourned until Thursday next; and it was agreed, that they should from
thenceforth come to the House at seven of the Clock in the Morning; during
which said time of Easter, Mr Strickland so often beforementioned for the
Exhibiting the Bill for Reformation of Ceremonies, and his Speech thereupon,
was called before the Lords of the Privy Council, and required to attend upon
them, and to make stay from coming to the House in the mean season.

Thus far out of the aforesaid Anonymous Journal of the House of Commons. The
entrance into the next days Passages ensues out of the Original Journal Book
it self of the said House, in manner and form following.

On Thursday the 19th day of April, to which day the House of Commons had been
on Saturday the 14th day of this instant April foregoing, Adjourned, The Bill
for the restraining of Kentish and Sussex Cloths to be sold at the Fairs at
Maidston, was read the first time.

The Bill for the validity of Burgesses not resiant, was read the second time;
upon which ensued diverse Arguments, which being altogether omitted in the
Original Journal Book of the House of Commons, are therefore supplied out of
that often before-cited Anonymous Journal.

The first man that spoke effectually to this Bill, was Mr Warnecombe of
Hereford; who standing up, said to this effect, That it behooves all those
which were Burgesses, to see to that Bill; for (quoth he) this may touch and
overreach their whole Liberties, as not having whereunto to stay; but that
Lords Letters shall from henceforth bear all the sway: and to this effect was
all that he said.

Mr Norton first made Explanation of the meaning of the Bill, to be (he said)
to shame the imperfection of Choice, which is too often seen, by sending of
unfit men; and lest happily any thing might be objected to the imperfection of
the Parliament, which may seem to be scant sufficient by reason of the choice
made by Boroughs, for the most part of Strangers (whereas by the positive Law
no man ought to be Chosen Burgess for any Borough, but only Resiants and
Inhabitants) He said further, that the choice should be of such as were able,
and fit for so great a place and employment, without respect of privilege of
place or degree; for that, by reason of his being a Burgess, it might not be
intended or thought he was any thing the wiser; withal he argued, that the
whole Body of the Realm, and the good Service of the same, was rather to be
respected, than the private regard of Place, Privilege, or Degree of any
Person.

Then Mr Speaker moved the Opinion of the House, whether they could like the
Bill should be engrossed; and coming to the Question, some said No; but the
greatest number seemed to say Yea.

Whereupon one standing up, whose name is not expressed in the said Anonymous
Journal, said thus, I run wholly with the pretense of the Bill, that Boroughs
decayed may be eased or relieved, knowing assuredly the same Honorable for the
Realm, and in many respects profitable and commodious to those who do inhabit
the Countries adjacent to such decayed Towns; That it is so, I will not stand
to persuade. How far this Law may help them, I know not; if they be decayed,
then it is most fit for them, that of their own Company there may be some, who
feeling the smart, can best make relation of their estate; and knowing the
Country, may devise and advise of such helps, as without the hurts of other
places may restore the old ruins. All things are in change, and nothing so
suppressed, but by God's Grace the same may in time by Policy be raised up. But
to open my meaning shortly; the question is, What sort of men are to come to
this Court, and public Consultation in Parliament? Whether from every Quarter,
Country, and Town there should come (as I might say) home-dwellers, or
otherwise men chosen by directions, it forces not whom? I am surely of mind,
that neither for the good service of her Majesty, safety of our Country, or
standing with the liberty, which of right we may challenge (being born Subjects
within the Realm) this scope is to be given, or such looseness in choice to be
permitted. That the whole Land of this Realm, we know, is to be for three
purposes employed, and thereby three sorts of men are, as it were, created. The
one part given in Frank Almoigne, or for Divine Service to be used, to the
Glory of God and Ministry of his Word.

The second part to be holden for defense against our Enemies by the Sword.

The third for maintenance of our livelihood at home, and for necessary
employments here. Of these three grounds, in the first division there grows
to our knowledge three sorts of men, the Ministers and Teachers of the Gospel,
of whom we must have care, and with whom in making of Laws we must conferr if
we will be Christians. The second are the Nobility, Knights, and Soldiers, the
Defenders and Fortresses against our Enemies. The third sort be the Providers,
Devisors, and Executors of all things necessary, commodious or seemly for a
settled Estate (which has the happiness to live there where is Pax and
Justitia) for increase of our Wealths, sustenance of our Laws, the governing of
bodies, or what else soever is necessary for us: such are the Counselors, such
are the Judges and Ministers of the Laws, such be the Tillers of the Earth,
such be Merchants, such be Victuallers, and in this degree be those, who do use
Manual and Mechanical Arts. Of all these, in like sort, as of the others,
regard, care, and respect must be had; they thoroughly consulted with, the
general and particular States are by them to be known, if we mean to proceed
for the Public Weal, or endeavor in the same a true perfection. These last
sort making one kind are most ample, and thereto most effectual to be dealt
with, as yielding to the rest supplementum, consilium and auxilium.

The second sort is likewise most necessary to be thought of. The first are
best, and first to be followed; but those are all to be in one knot conjoined,
and as members of one body in one to be used. We may in regard of Religion lie
in the Dike (as the Proverb is) long enough without our own aid, if we do
nothing but pray for the help of Hercules. We may not trust only to the Sword,
lest the common known Saying of Cicero should turn to our shame: Parva sunt
soris arma, nisi Consilium Domi. Neither our Preaching, nor our praying to God
are only sufficient, but withal we must do our endeavors, and help each other;
since for the driving away of a Dog there is (as the Countryman says) some
virtue in a stone, if it be conjoined with St John's Gospel; I mean, that every
part of the body should do his own part to the aid of the other; the hand to
help the hand, the foot to help the foot, etc. This has moved our Forefathers,
and on this ground has it grown, that in this Court where we are to consider
of all, and (as occasion may serve) to alter, constitute, or reform all things,
as cause shall be, that we do know all sorts of men, so far as may be to help
all. How may her Majesty, or how may this Court know the estate of her
Frontiers, or who shall make Report of the Ports, or how every Quarter, Shire,
or Country is in state? We who never have seen Berwick or St Michael's Mount,
can but blindly guess of them, albeit we look on the Maps, that came from
thence, or see Letters of Instruction sent; some one whom Observation,
Experience, and due Consideration of that Country has taught, can more
perfectly open what shall in question thereof grow, and more effectually reason
thereupon, than the skilfullest otherwise whatsoever. And that they should be
the very Inhabiters of the several Countries of this Kingdom, who should be
here in times certain employed, doubtless it was the true meaning of ancient
Kings and our Forefathers, who first began and established this Court. But
leaving what I cannot reach unto, the first constitution and freedom of this
Court, the old President of Parliament-Writs do teach us, that of every Country
their own Burgesses should be Elected, the Writ to the Sheriff and Borough is
directly so; and the Writs to the Cities being Counties, are, Quod ex vobis
ipsis eligatis duos Cives, etc. which do prove it to be so; the Statute in the
1 H. 5. for the Confirmation of the old Laws was therefore made, and not to
create a new unknown Law; and that other in the.... H. 6. was made to redress
the mischief, which by breach of that old Law did grow. These do conclude it
without contradiction, that for that time it was thought fit to continue the
ancient Use, Liberty, and convenience of Service. We know that such as have
spent their whole time in Service, or have seen only the manner of Government
of other Nations, and can tell you how the Crown of France is delivered out of
Wardship, or otherwise tell a Tale of the King of Castile and Portugal; how
they in making of Laws do use their own discretion, the King of Denmark uses
the advice of his Nobles only, and nothing of his Commons; nor can paint you
out the monstrous Garments of the common People in some parts of Germany, or
the mangled Commonwealth of the Allies, or shadows of the great Cities, which
now are to be seen in Italy; surely all those men, except they know also our
own homes, are not to be trusted to conclude for our own Home-Affairs.
Doubtless the best learned for matters of Commodity to be raised, or to be
wrought in his own Country, may happily give place to his own Neighbors, even
as wisely and learnedly a Gentleman said of late, In every Commitment,
according to the matter, there must be a Declaration of men, as for Merchandise
the Merchant and so forth: Unicuique in sua art perito credendum, we hold for
a Maxim. And I mean this wholly to no other end, but since we deal universally
for all sorts and all places, that there be here of all sorts, and all
Countries, and not (seeing you list so to term it) thus to ease them of Towns
and Boroughs, that they may choose at liberty whom they list; yet can I hardly
call that a Liberty which is contrary to that which the King and the Queen
commonly grants as a free gift, and by these words, Et de majori gratia mea,
etc. dedimus potestatem, etc. quod de se ipsis eligant duos Burgenses, or duos
Cives; we take it more for a man to have of his own, than to have (by any man's
discretion) of another.

It has been of late often and well said, that to nominate another to a Benefice
is nothing worth in value, but if it be, that a man may take the benefit
himself, that is both valuable and estimable: that cannot hurt, that is ever
good for me, if it be ever tied in nearest sort unto me; and for this reason we
say in Law, that the Estate Tail, which must continue in our own Blood, is
better than the Estate in Fee simple, which may be got further from us, and is
to be given to Strangers at pleasure; mischiefs and inconveniences there may
grow by this Liberty; but a mischief it may be to me, and inconvenient also to
utter the same: I will not speak thereof but dutifully, neither do I see any
thing that is amiss at this present; what was done a hundred years since, I may
safely tell, and thus it was.

A Duke of this Realm wrote his Letters to a City, which I know, to this
effect; whereby he did signify, that a Parliament was to be Summoned in short
time, and that for great causes he was to crave aid of all his Friends, and
reckoning them amongst the rest, he wished them of four under-nominated to
choose two; the Letter under the Dukes Seal is still preserved, but hear you the
Answer; he was written to with due humbleness, that they were prohibited by
Law, they might choose none of them. I will venture a little nearer.

In Queen Mary's time a Council of this Realm (not the Queens Privy Council)
did write to a Town, to choose a Bishops Brother, (and a great Bishops Brother
it was indeed) whom they assured to be a good Catholic man; and willed them to
choose to the like of him some other fit man. The Council was Answered with Law.
And if all Towns in England had done the like in their Choice, the Crown had
not been so wronged, and the Realm so robbed with such ease at that Parliament,
and truth banished as it was; what has been, may be, there is no
impossibility. It will be said, I mistake, it is not meant, but that Towns
shall be at liberty to choose whom they list. I say, that Liberty is the loss of
Liberty; for when by Law they may do what they will, they may not well deny
what shall be required. It is too truly said, Rogando cogit qui rogat
potentior. And I have known one that to avoid a great man's displeasure that
dwelt near him, that was desirous (as he knew) to buy his Land, did upon small
occasion bind himself not to alienate his Land from his true Heirs: this being
known, I mean that he was bound as aforesaid; the great man was contented to
let him keep his own quietly, which otherwise he would not have done. Surely
Law is the only Fortress of the inferior sort of People, and contrary to the
Law, the greater sort will not desire or expect anything. Though now at this
present (God be praised) we need not to fear the greatness of any man, Justice
is so well administered: Yet hereafter, whatsoever has been we may fear, either
for maintenance of Faction, or maintenance of Mischief. Again, I say, it may
be, what heretofore was possibly again may be. We stand and have stood of late
upon the notorious manifestation of the Authority of Parliament: except withal
you keep the ancient usage of the same, and withal endeavor the freedom
thereof, in effect you do nothing, if I guess aright.

It is further said, that in some Towns there are not men of discretion fit;
they be not the wiser (said the Gentleman that spoke before,) for being
Burgesses. I can never be persuaded, but that either the Lord, whose the Town
is, be the Town never so little; or the Steward, if it be the Queens, or some
good Gentleman of the Country adjoinant, will either assign them who know the
Town and can be content to be free among them, and to serve by their
appointment, for their Country, and for them; or else for some reasonable Fee,
such as be of their Learned Council, and who know them, and the Country will
deal for them. I mean it not so strictly, that those who should be chosen,
should of necessity be dwellers in the Town; but to be either of the Town, or
toward the Town, Borderers and near Neighbors at the least: and to this
effect I would the Bill were framed. I stand too long hereon, and abundance of
matter occasioneth confusion; this is all. It was meant at the first, and first
Constitution of Parliament, that men of every quarter, and of all sorts, should
come to this Court, that they should be freely chosen. This in every Age
hitherto has seemed best; to alter without cause is not convenient; to give
every Town liberty may offer in time inconvenience. None so fit for every
Country as those who know the same. To choose of their own, it is a Liberty; to
lose their Liberty, I think it a bad Commodity, call it as you please; by such
kind of release in easing men of their. Wealths, or of some good part of their
Living, beshrow our Charity. And in like sort, and in like reason, it seems to
me this Law is inferred out of the Preface of the same. For thus it is penned:

Forasmuch as some Towns are decayed, and have not of their own, therefore let
every Town do what they list. Of a particular Proposition to make a general
conclusion, it is against our Rules, and nothing (as says the Philosopher) is
more absurd than non causam pro causa. Some Towns cannot send fit men, it
stands very strongly, if you seek to help, let the Plaster be fit for the
sore; let not the Salve be stretched too far, lest the whole and sound flesh by
the broad spreading of the Salve, do either smart, fret or fester. The Medicine
which heals the sick man may be poison for the whole and sound man. All
Citizens and Burgesses should not be thought alike, and yet all provided for,
as there is due cause; let there be therefore convenient consideration, how to
heal, how to hurt. And I could wish, according to the weight of the matter, it
might be rather staid on, than thus abruptly overruled; and while we fly
Scylla, we fall not into Charybdis; while we say that Boroughs cannot send to
this High Court so fit men as be convenient, that by altering the ancient
usage, which is the only Warrant and sole stay of freedom in Parliament, it may
happily be said we have no Parliament now within this Realm, nor Liberty at all
for any such here to be holden.

Mr Bell in Answer of this, did collect the substance of what had been said,
and in a long Discourse showed, that it was necessary all places should be
provided for, and not Boroughs only, being but one of the Members of the
Commonwealth, and that some of them have neither Wealth to provide fit men,
nor themselves any in any sort convenient. He thought not amiss, if in respect
of those manifest wants, convenient supply should be; but without the Warrant
of Parliament, such alteration might not be. He then thought it not amiss to be
advised. And for the objection of the danger which may ensue by reason of the
Letters of Noblemen; he could not (he said) but think it convenient to prevent
the same; and therefore wished, that there might be the penalty of forty pound
upon every Borough that should make such Election at the Nomination of any
Nobleman.

Mr Alford reasoned to this effect, That above all things, necessary care ought
to be for the choosing and having of fit men to supply the place, that there be
not imperfection. And therefore noted one great disorder, that many young men,
not experienced, for Learning sake, were often Chosen, through whose default he
knew not; whether Letters of Noblemen, Love or Affection in the Country, their
own Ambition, or the careless account of the Electors, or what else was the
Cause, he knew not; but it was to be seen: whereupon he would, none should be
of that House, not of thirty years of Age at the least. And for the Choice of
Townsmen (he said) he was of this mind, that Moses and Aaron should be
conjoined together, and that there should be one of their own, or some
Gentleman near them, who had knowledge of the State of the Country; and the
other a man Learned, and able to utter his mind and opinion, since that
knowledge locked up in the breast, not being orderly opened, is to no purpose;
and this part (he said) was as requisite for consultation as the other. So that
he seemed to conclude the Law should be in force for the one Burgess, and at
Liberty for th other.

After which Speeches the aforsaid Bill touching the validity of Burgesses,
etc. was Ordered to be committed, but the names of the Committees being not
found in the aforesaid Anonymous Journal, are therefore transcribed out of the
Original Journal Book of the House of Commons it self; viz. Sir Thomas Hilton
Knight, Mr Bell, Mr Robert Bows, Mr Fleetwood, Mr Warnecomb, Mr Bedle, Mr
Atkins, Mr Alford, and Mr Gynes; and appointed to meet in the Temple-Church
upon Saturday next at two of the Clock in the Afternoon.

It was Ordered that the Wardens of the Fleet should bring Mr Sacheveril into
this House to Morrow in the Morning, at nine of the Clock, touching Mr
Skeffington's Bill. Vide concerning this Bill on Saturday the 14th day of this
instant April foregoing.

The Bill against Usury was read the second time, whereupon ensued diverse
Arguments and Speeches, which being omitted in the Original Journal Book of the
House of Commons, are therefore transcribed out of that often already cited
Anonymous Journal of the same House, in manner and form following.

First one Mr Clarke spoke to this effect, That the referring of the punishment
in the Bill mentioned, being put to the Ecclesiastical Judges, for so much was
nothing; for that they are to punish by the Civil Law, by the Canon Law, or by
the Temporal Law. The Civil Law would not avoid them, because by that Law there
is allowance of Usury. The Canon Law is abolished; and in that respect the
Temporal Law says nothing; so that the pretense may seem to be somewhat, but
the effect thereby wrought is nothing; yet that it was ill, neither Christian
nor Pagan ever denied. Aristotle being asked what Usury was? he said, it was
praeter Naturam, and therefore could not be defined. And Plato being asked the
same Question, he said it was idem ac hominem occidere. St Augustine the same;
And in the very words of the Psalmist answers to the Question, Domine quis
habitabit in Tabernaculo tuo? He said, Qui curat proximo suo, non decipit eum,
and qui pecuniam suam non dabit ad usuram.

Mr Molley first Learnedly and Artificially making an Introduction to the
matter showed, what it might be thought on for any man to endeavor the defense
of that which every Preacher at all times, following the Letter of the Book,
did speak against; yet says he, it is convenient, and being in some sort used,
it is not repugnant to the word of God. Experience has proved the great
mischief which does grow by reason of excessive taking, to the destruction of
young Gentlemen, and otherwise infinitely; but the mischief is of the excess
not otherwise. Since to take reasonably, or so that both parties might do good,
was not hurtful; for to have any man lend his money without any Commodity,
hardly should you bring that to pass. And since every man is not an Occupier
who has money, and some which have not money may yet have skill to use money,
except you should take away or hinder good Trades, bargaining and contracting
cannot be; God did not so hate it, that he did utterly forbid it, but to the
Jews amongst themselves only, for that he willed they should lend as Brethren
together; for unto all others they were at large; and therefore to this day
they are the greatest Usurers in the World. But be it, as indeed it is, evil,
and that men are men, no Saints, to do all these things perfectly, uprightly
and Brotherly; yet ex duobus malis minus malum eligendum; and better may it be
born to permit a little, than utterly to take away and prohibit Traffic; which
hardly may be maintained generally without this.

But it may be said, it is contrary to the direct word of God, and therefore an
ill Law; if it were to appoint men to take Usury, it were to be disliked; but
the difference is great between that and permitting or allowing, or suffering a
matter to be unpunished. It may be said, that Nudum pactum non parit
obligationem, but there must be somewhat given in consideration. Let be that
there is nothing given of the Lenders, yet there is somewhat simile, and omne
bonum exemplum, and omnis lex in se aliquid habet mali; for that some body
shall suffer thereby. We are not, quoth he, so straightened to the word of God,
that every transgression should be surely punished here. Every vain word is
here forbidden by God, yet the temporal Law does not so utterly condemn it. As
for the words of the Scripture, he says, the Hebrew sounds thus in Answer of
this Question; Qui non dat pecuniam suam ad morsum: so it is the biting and
over-sharp dealing which is disliked and nothing else. And this, he said, was
the opinion and interpretation of the most Famous Learned Man Beza, and in
these days, of Bellarmine and diverse others; who say, that the true
interpretation of the Hebrew word is not Usura, but Morsus.

Doctor Wilson Master of the Requests, said, that in a matter of so great
weight he could not shortly speak, and acknowledging that he had thoroughly
studied the matter, desired the patience of the House. And first he endeavored
to prove, that the common State may be without Usury; then he showed, how even
men that have been ignorant of God or his Laws, finding the evils thereof by
their Laws, redressed it; and utterly prohibited the use thereof. As the
Athenians caused all the Writings taken for interest money to be burnt; and the
like did Lycurgus by a Law which he made, and seeing the Fire, he said, he
never saw so fair a Flame as those Books yielded. He then made a definition of
Usury, showing it was taking of any reward, or price or sum, over and above the
due Debt. To make any thing of that which is not mine, it is robbery. Forthwith
upon the delivery of the Loan money, it is not mine. And the Law is, that
Mutuum must ever be free. And here he showed the difference between Location
and Mutuum; the one implying a contract, the other none. He remembered out of
Ezechiel and other the Prophets, sundry places of Scripture, and vouched St
Augustines saying, that to take but a Cup of Wine, is Usury and Damnable. This
he seemed to say in Answer to that which had been before pronounced, that it
was not Usury except it were Morsus.

He showed, that loss may grow by Usury; First, to the Queen, then to the
Commonwealth. To the Queen in this, that men not using their own money, but
finding great gain in Usury, do employ the same that way; so that her Customs
must decrease: To the Commonwealth, for that, who so shall give hire for
money, is to raise the same in the sale of his Commodity. All Trades shall be
taken away, all occupations lost; for most men seeking most ease, and greatest
gain, without hazard or venture, will forthwith employ their money to such use.
He showed it to be so hateful in the Judgment of the Common Law, that an Usurer
was not admitted to be a Witness, nor after his Death to the common Sepulcher
of Christians. And for that his Discourse had been long, he inserted (as he
said) this Tale for recreation of the Hearers.

In Italy, Quoth he, a great known Usurer being Dead, the Curate denied him the
common place of Burial; his Friends made Suit, the Priest would not hear; in
fine, the Suitors bethought them of a Policy to bring it to pass, that he might
be Buried in the Church; which was this. The Parson of the Church did
accustomably use to carry his Books daily from his House to the Church on his
Ass; and the Ass by often going needed not to be driven, but knowing his
Journey, as soon as he was laden, would of himself go to the Church Door; they
desired the Parson, his Ass might carry the dead Body, and where it should
stay, the Body to be Buried. To so fond a request the Priest agreed, the Body
was laid on the Ass, who feeling a greater burden than he was used to bear,
did run toward the Town, never staying until he came to the common place of
Execution.

This Tale merrily told, he again entered to his matter, and proved the
Condemnation of Usury and Usurers, by the Authority of the Nicene and diverse
other Councils: He showed, that the Divines do call Usury a Spider, a Canker,
an Aspis, a Serpent and a Devil; he showed how in nature the offenses of
Homicide and Usury are to be compared, and by Examples proved the ruins of
diverse Commonwealths, when such practices for gain are suffered as that of the
Commonwealth of Rome, etc. The manner of Exchange now used in London, and how
much abuse he showed, a thing in old time not practiced, but by the King, as in
Ed. 3. time, when thereby the King obtained such Treasure, and such excessive
Wealth, that it was first wondered at, then guessed that it grew by the Science
of Alchymy. He here showed the practice of the Low Countries, of Germany, and
namely the doings of Fulchers to the very beggering of great and mighty
Princes; he vouched the authority of Sir John Cheek in that place, concerning
that matter; and the mind of the ancient English Law-Writers, who say that the
offense of Usury in Life the Bishop is to punish; but after his Death his
Executors shall not have his goods, but they appertain ad Fiscum. He concluded
that the offense in his Conscience should be judged Felony.

Mr Bell said, This matter being so ample had occasioned much Speech, and was
for cunning men a fit Theme to show their Wits and skills upon. Yet, says he,
it stands doubtful what Usury (...) we have no true definition of it. And in
our Laws we have little written thereon but this, Usura non currat super
Infantem. And not much more but to Answer the Objections, where it is
pretended, that the not punishing of it by the temporal Judge, may seem to be
an approbation of it, or to leave it to the Church may seem as if we had no
care concerning it; for that to put over an offense to another Judge, may not
be so said, if to the Church it may appertain, and they may well correct it. He
further showed, that the privilege of the Church is by Statute upon this point
to be expressed, namely in the Statute de Articulis Cleri. He said, we must not
curiously search Cicero's Paradoxes, and pronounce that Peccata sunt aequalia,
hoc est, quod omne peccatum est peccatum; and no further: but be every man
according to his transgressions, to make a reasonable pain; though he who
steals two pence, does as well steal as he who steals an hundred pounds;
yet there are degrees; we have Petit Larceny, and that which is greater; both
faults, both to be punished, both to be hated; but difference there is in
punishing, even according to the greatness and smallness of the offense; for
the one there is Death, for the other not so.

In the Statute for punishing of Perjury 5o of this Queen, there are sundry
degrees of Perjury: not for that there is less Perjury in the one than in the
other; but that there is greater hurt occasioned in the one than in the other.
In Answer of the Scripture, he said, the Law of God is, If thou be stricken on
the one Cheek, to turn the other; or if thy Cloak be taken away, to give also
thy Gown. The literal sense is not to be taken, and, as there is cause, a
reasonable construction must be. So he concluded, that though it were a sin,
yet it was to be punished here on Earth according to the good or bad, or rather
according to the greater or lesser hurt which grows thereby.

After which one (whose name is not expressed in the said Anonymous Journal)
endeavored the Answer of Mr Wilson, but with a Protestation of his
insufficiency, and then he showed, how the Divines have not agreed what is
Usury, but for his own part, he was to incline to the opinion of the Learned of
these days, whose interpretation of litteral sense and skill of the Tongues do
appear; which took that for no Usury which is without grievance. He made a
difference of the Law of God concerning the Divine Majesty contained in the
first Table, and what is concerning man in the second Table; saying, that
nothing is to be said in that degree sin in it self, but by the circumstances;
for so it is known whether it be good or bad. To kill is prohibited, yet
sometimes not to kill is evil. Phineas killed, and was therefore commended. And
Thefts at times have been in Scriptures approved. So likewise Usury is allowed
of in the Scriptures; but that it might be used to Strangers only: Albeit the
Chosen Children of God amongst themselves might not use it. But let be, whether
it be utterly unlawful, or in some sort to be tolerated, it is a question; and
until it be determined for the common Commodity and maintenance, let it be as
hitherto it has been used. And for the common sort of Bargains of Corn for
Cloth, Silk for Land, etc. what they be, whether Usury or no, we know not. That
all should be well, it is to be wished; that all may be done well among men, it
is beyond hope, for we are no Saints, we are not of perfection to follow the
Letter of the Gospel, Who so strikes the one Cheek, etc. and this Text date
nihil inde sperantes; These are no express Commandments. For the first, the Law
of nature does direct, and for the other also the same Law in effect makes
defense; surely there can be no sin where there can be no breach of Charity. To
do that therefore to another which we would to our selves (the state,
circumstance and case to our selves considered) is commendable, or not to be
reproved; if we our selves be to borrow, who is it that would not in extremity
give a little to save much money? It is said, the Usurer does or may grow rich:
Who has disliked in a Commonwealth, that there should be homines boni srugi?
they may be considered, and may be good, more than for one purpose. He further
stood on this, that God did not absolutely forbid Usury, which surely if it had
been utterly ill, he would have done. And he added, that the Common Laws were
Cruel in their censures, and wished that they should be no more remembered than
they are followed.

Sergeant Lovelace argued to this effect, that Usury was of money only,
protesting that he hated all kind of Usury, but yet the greater the ill was,
the more and more greatly did he hate the same. But to prohibit it with so
sharp and extreme a Law as to lose all, he thought it would be the ground of
greater Covetousness; withal he added, to prohibit the ill of Covetousness in
generality, were rash, void and frivolous; since that the Speech and the Act it
self is indefinite, comprehending all our actions and doings; and therefore, as
utterly vain to prohibit it, in vain words of generality. To prohibit
Drunkenness, Pride, Envy, Surfeiting, etc. were somewhat in some particular
sort; to do it in generality, albeit that we know that it is every way damnable
by the direct and written word of God, it were but folly. Of these great Evils
(to the which man of his nature is born and made prone, and too apt) when we
may not reach to the best, furthest and uttermost, we must do, as we may say,
by degrees. As to say there shall be no deceit, or slight in making of this or
that kind of Wares; that the Husbandman shall till his Arable Land, and that
he shall not keep above such a number of Sheep; that there shall be no
forestalling, regrating, etc. and this in particularity; whereas otherwise,
generally amongst sinful men to prohibit this sin or that sin utterly on a
pain, it may not be: but thus rather, he that shall so sin shall suffer or lose
so much; whereupon he concluded, that there should be degrees in punishing of
Usury; as he that should take so much, to lose, or be punished thus; he that
shall take more, more deeply.

Mr Flectwood showed, that all these Arguments long since, with great skill,
and very often have been opened in this place: He said, it was Ingenui pudoris
sateri per quem profeceris. Mr Check, he said, argued, and so far forth
explained this matter, as the Learner was thereby sufficiently informed, and
the Learned fully satisfied. His Papers of his Speech (he said) he had not
lost, and therefore could show as much cunning as the cunningest, which had
bent or endeavored himself thereunto. He said he had read the Civil Law, and
of the Common Law somewhat; but how well he did understand it, he would not
promise ought: What Usury was, he said, he was not to learn; call it if we
list, Proxima homicidio, or how else by a description, he forced not much; for
if there were not Civil Law, it were not much to be accounted of for any
certainty in this Case thereby to be had; and the most ancient Laws of this
Realm have taught us thereof somewhat; as the Laws of..... do make to us
mention of Usury. So do the Laws made in Lucius his time, and those of
Athelred; whereby it was ordained, that Witches and Usurers should be banished.
King Edward the Saint reserreth and appoints the Offenders herein to suffer
ordalium. Then was there a great kind of Usury known, which was called Torus,
and a lesser known by the name of..... Glanvile, in the Book de legibus
antiquis, makes mention of an inquiry of Christian Usurers. In the Tower (he
said) he had seen a Commission awarded to the Master of the Courts (he named
not what Courts) to enquire of Usurers, and the punishment of them (he said)
was whipping; he said further, by Scripture he knew it was damnable; and
therefore, whether it was good or not good, it was no good Question. For the
matter of Implication, whether by the pretense of the Law it might be intended
that it was in any sort allowed; he said it might be construed and compared
there with the Statute of Tiths: where it is said, that till for seven years
after Heath ground broken up, no Tith shall be paid; the Construction hereupon
is clear. He showed also, that Usury was malum in se, for that of some other
transgressions, her Majesty may dispense before with; but for Usury, or to grant
that Usury may be used, she possibly cannot. He further said, that the words of
an Act of Parliament are not ever to be followed; for that sometimes the
construction is more contrary to what is written, as in the Statute of Magna
Charta; nisi prius homagium fecerit. And some Statutes are winked at by
non-observation or otherwise, so that they seem to be no Laws, even in those
things which we practice most, as the Statute of Gloc. for the Oath to be taken
in Debt and Damages.

Mr Dalton endeavored to prove, that Mr Fleetwood mistook the Bill, but in
fancy he mistook his Arguments.

Mr Norton showed, that all Usury is biting; as in the word Steal is contained
all kind of injurious taking away of a man's goods: and as slanderizing is said
to be murdering or homicide; so is Usury justly ever to be said biting, they
being both so correlated or knit together, that the one may not be without the
other. He concluded, that since it is doubtful what is good, we should be
mindful of the old saying, Quod dubitas ne feceris, and for that Quod non ex
fide est peccatum est, therefore he wished that no allowance should be of it.

After these Arguments (being transcribed out of the often before-cited
Anonymous Journal) were ended, there is no other mention of any further
proceeding in this Bill, but it does plainly appear by the Original
Journal Book of the House of Commons, that this Bill having had its second
reading as aforesaid, was now at the last, after the preceding Arguments were
ended, Committed by Mr Treasurer and others, whose names are all omitted in the
Original Journal Book.

On Friday the 20th day of April, the Bill for the Assizes to be kept at
Worcester, was read the first time.

The Bill also for impannelling of Juries, was read the second time, and
rejected upon the Question.

These two Bills being thus transcribed out of the Original Journal Book of the
House of Commons, the greatest part of the residue of this days passages, do
here next follow, out of that often already cited Anonymous Journal, in which
there is one Bill touching Caps, which is not at all mentioned in the Original
Journal Book it self aforesaid, set down in manner and form following, viz.

A Bill for Caps was read the second time, and ruled, that the same should be
engrossed.

This Bill (as is aforesaid) is not at all found to be set down in the Original
Journal Book of the House of Commons; but that next ensuing is there mentioned,
and the Arguments also touching the Liberty of the House, are there generally
remembered, which with the said Bill do here at large follow, with some small
alteration only, out of the aforesaid Anonymous Journal, in manner and form
following.

The Bill for such as be fled beyond the Seas without License, or shall not
return within a certain number of Days, after their Licenses expired, to lose
their Lands and Goods, and to avoid Covenous Gifts, was read the second time,
and not then effectually spoken unto by any man.

Mr Wentworth very orderly in many words remembered the Speech of Sir Humphrey
Gilbert, delivered some days before: He proved his Speech (without naming him)
to be an injury to the House, he noted his disposition to flatter and fawn on
the Prince, comparing him to the Cameleon, which can change himself into all
colors, saving white; even so (said he) this reporter can change himself to
all fashions but honesty; he showed further the great wrong done to one of the
House, by a misreport made to the Queen (meaning Mr Bell;) he showed his Speech
to tend to no other end than to inculcate fear into those which should be sree;
he requested care for the credit of the House, and for the maintenance of free
Speech (the only means of ordinary proceedings) and to preserve the Liberties
of the House, to reprove Liars, inveighing greatly out of the Scriptures and
otherwise, against Liers. As this of David, Thou O Lord shall destroy Liars,
etc.

Mr Treasurer signified his desire to have all things well; saying, he could
not enter into Judgment of any; but he said, it was convenient ill Speeches
should be avoided, and the good meaning of all men to be taken, without
wresting or misreporting; and the meaning of all men to be showed in good sort
without unseemly words.

Mr Speaker endeavored an Agreement and unity in the House, making
signification that the Queens Majesty had in plain words declared unto him,
that she had good Intelligence of the orderly proceeding among us; whereof she
had as good liking as ever she had of any Parliament since she came unto the
Crown; and wished we should give her no other cause than to continue the same,
and added further her Majesty's pleasure to be, to take Order for Licenses;
wherein she had been careful, and more careful would be.

Mr Carleton with a very good Zeal, and orderly show of Obedience, made
signification how that a Member of the House was detained from them (meaning Mr
Strickland) by whose Commandment, or for what cause he knew not. But for as
much as he was not now a private man, but to supply the room, person and place
of a multitude specially chosen, and therefore sent, he thought that neither in
regard of the Country, which was not to be wronged, nor for the Liberty of the
House, which was not to be infringed, we should permit him to be detained from
us. But, whatsoever the intendment of this offense might be, that he should be
sent for to the Bar of that House, there to be heard, and there to Answer.

Mr Treasurer in some case gave Advertisement to be wary in our proceedings,
and neither to venture further than our assured Warrant might stretch, nor to
hazard our good opinion with her Majesty on any doubtful cause. Withal he
wished us not to think worse than there was cause. For the man (quoth he) that
is meant, is neither detained nor misused, but on considerations is required to
expect the Queens pleasure, upon certain special points: wherein (he said) he
durst to assure that the man should neither have cause to dislike or complain,
since so much favor was meant unto him as he reasonably could wish. He further
said, that he was in no sort stayed for any word or speech by him in that place
offered; but for the exhibiting of a Bill into the House against the
Prerogative of the Queen; which was not to be tolerated. Nevertheless the
construction of him was rather to have erred in his zeal and Bill offered, than
maliciously to have meant any thing contrary to the Dignity Royal. And lastly,
He concluded that often it had been seen, that Speeches have been examined and
considered of.

Sir Nicholas Arnold with some vehemence moved, that care might be had for the
liberty of the House; he was enforced, he said, rather to utter, and so to run
into danger of offense of others, than to be offended with himself.

Mr Comptroller replied to the effect Mr Treasurer had before spoken.

Mr Clear told, how the Prerogative is not disputable, and that the safety of
the Queen is the safety of the Subjects. He added, how that for matter of
Divinity, every man was for his instruction to repair to his Ordinary, being a
private man (where he utterly forgot the place he spoke in, and the person who
was meant; for that place required and permitted free speech with authority,
and the person was not himself a private man but a public; by whom even the
Ordinary himself was to be directed) He concluded, that for as much as the
cause was not known, he therefore would the House should stay.

Mr Yelverton said he was to be sent for, arguing in this sort. First, he said,
the President was perilous, and though in this happy time of lenity, among so
good and honorable Personages, under so gracious a Prince, nothing of
extremity or injury was to be feared; yet the times might be altered, and what
now is permitted, hereafter might be construed as of Duty, and enforced, even
on this ground of the present permission. He further said, that all matters not
Treason, or too much to the Derogation of the Imperial Crown, were tolerable
there, where all things came to be considered of, and where there was such
fullness of Power, as even the right of the Crown was to be determined, and by
Warrant whereof we had so resolved. That to say the Parliament had no Power to
determine of the Crown, was High Treason. He remembered how that men are not
there for themselves, but for their Countries. He showed, it was fit for
Princes to have their Prerogatives; but yet the same to be straightened within
reasonable limits. The Prince, he showed, could not of her self make Laws,
neither might she by the same reason break Laws. He further said, that the
Speech uttered in that place, and the offer made of the Bill, was not to be
condemned as evil; for that if there were any thing in the Book of
Common Prayer, either Jewish, Turkish or Popish, the same was to be reformed.
He also said, that amongst the Papists it was bruted, that by the Judgment of
the Council, Strickland was taken for an Heretic; it behoved therefore to
think thereof.

Mr Fleetwood first showed the order of Civil Arguments from the cause to this
effect, that time must be known and place observed. He said then, that of
Experience he could report of a man that was called to account of his Speech in
5to of this Queen; but he said, he could not meddle with so late matters, but
what he had learned in the Parliament Rolls, he thought convenient should be
known and considered of. In the time of H. 4. a Bishop of the Parliament was
Committed to Prison by Commandment of the King; the Parliament resolved to be
Suitors for him. And in King H. 5. the Speaker himself was Committed, etc. with
him another of the House; the House thereupon stayed, but remedy they had none,
other than to be Suitors to the King for them; whereupon he resolved, that the
only and whole help of the House for ease of their grief in this case, was to
be humble Suitors to her Majesty, and neither send for him, nor demand him of
right.

During which Speech the Council whispered together, and thereupon the Speaker
moved, that the House should make stay of any further Consultation thereupon.

Thus far of these Speeches out of the aforesaid Anonymous Journal, unto which
for the entire making up of this present days agitations, these passages
following are transcribed out of the Original Journal Book it self of the House
of Commons, in manner and form following.

Mr Comptroller moved touching the Bill for Bristol, that License might be
granted to amend it in form, not changing the matter; which was assented unto.

The Bill concerning coming to Church, and receiving of the Communion, was read
the second time.

A Proviso to the Bill concerning coming to Church, and receiving the
Communion, was read the first time.

The Bill for Shrewsbury was read the second time, and ordered to be engrossed.

On Saturday the 21th day of April, an Addition to the Bill for coming to
Church, and receiving of the Communion, was read the first time.

A Proviso to the Bill for coming to Church, and receiving of the Communion,
was read the first time.

The Bill for coming to Church, and receiving the Communion, with the Additions
and Provisoes, were Committed unto Mr Treasurer, Mr Chancellor of the Duchy,
Sir Thomas Smith, Mr Moore, Mr Henry Knolles Sen. Mr Sampoole, Mr Mounson, Mr
Bell, Mr Yelverton, Mr Agmonderon, Mr Boyer, Mr Thomas Snagg, and Mr
Strickland, who were appointed to meet in Mr Treasurers Chamber at the Court,
at two of the Clock in the Afternoon.

Thus far of this days Passages out of the Original Journal Book of the House
of Commons. Now follows an Observation upon Mr Stricklands coming to the House
this day; being nominated the last Committee in the Bill foregoing, out of that
often before-cited Anonymous Journal; because it does conduce very much to the
Declaration and maintenance of the Liberties of the House: for the said Mr
Strickland having on Saturday the 14th day of this instant April, pressed very
earnestly the reformation of the Book of Common Prayer, and some Ceremonies of
the Church, was, after the Adjournment of the House of Commons on that day,
being Easter Even, called before her Majesty's Council, about the beginning of
the Week following, and was commanded by them to forbear coming to the said
House, in the mean season, and to attend their further pleasure; whereupon, on
Friday immediately foregoing, being the 20th day of this said instant April,
diverse Speeches and Motions having passed in the House, touching the breach of
the Liberties thereof, by restraint of one of their Members from repairing
thither (although he were neither imprisoned nor confined) Mr Speaker did at
last desire them to forbear further Consultation in the said matter. And the
House having at his said request, passed over the residue of the said day in
the Morning, in the agitation of other business, the abovementioned Mr
Strickland did this Forenoon (upon an Advertisement (as it should seem) from
her Majesty's Council) repair again to the said House, soon after it was set.
And coming just upon the time, when the foregoing Bill for coming to Church,
and receiving the Communion, was in the referring to Committees; the said House
did in witness of their joy for the restitution of one of their said Members,
awhile from them restrained, presently nominate him one of the said Committees,
as appears plainly by their names immediately foregoing, being inserted out
of the Original Journal Book of the said House, out of which these next ensuing
passages do follow, in manner and form following.

The Bill for William Skeffington Esquire, was read the second time, and Henry
Sacheverel being present at the Bar, and in open Court confessing the fraud,
offered by way of excuse a Bill of causes moving him thereunto, which was read
also, and ordered to be engrossed.

The Proviso to the Bill for coming to Church, and receiving of the Communion,
was read the second time; upon which, as it should seem, diverse Arguments
ensued, although no mention thereof be made in the aforesaid Original Journal
Book it self; and are therefore supplied out of that often before-cited
Anonymous Journal, in manner and form following; viz.

Mr Aglionby argued, that there should be no human positive Law to enforce
Conscience, which is not discernable in this World. To come to the Church, for
that it is public, and tends but to prove a man a Christian, is tolerable
and convenient; and not to come to Church may make a man seem irreligious, and
so no man; for that by Religion only a man is known and discerned from Brute
Beasts; and this is to be judged by the outward show. But the Conscience of man
is Eternal, invisible, and not in the power of the greatest Monarchy in the
World, in any limits to be straightened, in any bounds to be contained, nor with
any policy of man, if once decayed, to be again raised. He showed, that neither
Jew nor Turk, do require more than the submission to the outward observance,
and a convenient silence, as not to dislike what is publicly professed, but to
enforce any to do the Act, which may tend to the discovery of his Conscience,
it is never found. He showed the difference betwixt coming to Church, and
receiving the Communion; the one he allowed to be incomprehensible in Law, the
other he could not allow. And in Answer of that which before had been said,
that the Conscience was not straightened, but a penalty of the loss of their goods
only adjudged; whereof no doubt the Law of God and the Law of Nations had given
to the Prince an absolute Power; he said to this out of Cicero de Legibus, that
man out of his own nature is to care for the safety of man, as being reasonable
Creatures, and not the one to seek to bereave the other of his necessary
livelihood, adding out of the same Book, this saying of Tully, Qui Deum non
curat hunc Deus ipse judicabit. He showed out of St Paul, that we must not do
ill that good may grow thereby; we must not take from him that is his, to the
end thereby to make him to do what is not in his power; to be fit for so great
a mystery God above of his free gift may make a man.

To come unworthily the penalty is appointed, St Paul has pronounced it to be
Death and Damnation, as guilty of the Blood and Death of Christ. Not to come
our Compulsory Law shall now condemn, so that this our favor herein to be
extended, is either to beg, or be exiled from our native Country. He said,
there was no Example in the Primitive Church to prove a Commandment for coming
to the Communion, but an Exhortation; he said, St Ambrose did Excommunicate
Theodosius, and forbid him to come to the Communion, because he was an evil
man. And for us to will and command men to come, because they are wicked men,
it is too strange an inforcement, and without President.

Mr Agmondesham without regard of any thing spoken before, made mention of a
Decree in the Star Chamber made by nine of the Privy Council, signed with their
hands, and the hands of the Chief Justices, concerning the receiving of the
Communion by Gentlemen of the Temple. This Decree made by so grave and learned
men, he thought for himself, and to his own Conscience, was a stay what to
judge, and a direction or president what to follow: the tenor of which Decree,
for so much as it did concern the reformation of the Houses of Courts, and
principal places to be thought and considered of, he wished might be inserted
into the Law. The motion was well liked, and he required to bring the same the
next day, which was done.

Mr Norton showed, that where many men be, there must be many minds, and in
consultations convenient it is, to have contrary opinions, contrary reasons and
contradictions; thereby the rather to wrest out the best: but this by the rule
of reasoning, and reason must be sine jurgiis: he then said, that not only the
external and outward show is to be sought, but the very secrets of the heart in
Gods cause, who is scrutator Cordium, must come to a reckoning. And the good
Seed so sifted from the Cockle, that the one may be known from the other. A man
Baptized is not to be permitted among us for a Jew. And here somewhat slipping
from the matter inSpeech, he moved, that all suspected for Papistry might make
this Oath, That they did acknowledge the Queen to be Queen, for any thing the
Pope in any respect might do, noting some imperfection in the former Oath. To
this end, quoth he, are the Bulls now sent to discharge men of their
Allegiance, and to give free pardon of sins; so that he, who thus should be
pardoned, should from henceforth in no sort Communicate with the Professors of
the Gospel; and now (quoth he) the very touchstone of trial, who be those
Rebellious Calves, whom the Bull has begotten, must be the receiving of the
Communion; which who so shall refuse, we may justly say, he savoureth, etc. And
men are not otherwise to be known but by the external sign. To Answer and
satisfy the Dilemma objected before in the first day, made concerning the
disorders of certain Ministers, in saying of the Service contrary to the
instruction of the Book; he wished, this Proviso might be added, that mistaking
of Chapters, misreading, etc. should be recovered as no offense, so that there
be no Mass-Song, or Popish Service used in Latin, etc. And thus the Bill rested
to be further considered of.

These preceding Speeches being thus transcribed out of the aforesaid
Anonymous imperfect Journal, a great part of the residue of this days passages,
do now next ensue, out of the Original Journal Book of the House of Commons, in
manner and form following.

The Committees for the Bill of Treasons, were appointed to meet in the
Star Chamber, upon Tuesday next, between two and three of the Clock in the
Afternoon.

The Bill for Bristol was brought in by Mr Comptroller, corrected in form, but
not in substance or matter.

Mr Sergeant Barham and Mr Attorney General, declared that the Lords desire
that some of this House be sent presently to them for Conference; whereupon it
was Ordered, that all the Privy Council, being of this House, Sir Christopher
Heydon, Mr Wilson, Sir John Thynne, Sir Nicholas Arnold, Sir Henry Gate, Sir
Henry Norrice, Mr Audrian Stocks, Mr Recorder of London, Mr Fleetwood, Mr
Sergeant Manwood, Mr Sergeant Lovelace, Mr Henry Knolles Sen., Mr Heneage, Mr
Bell, Mr Mounson, Mr Norton, and Mr Yelverton, shall presently repair unto
their Lordships: who so did, and thereupon brought report to this House from
the Lords, that as the Season of the Year waxed very hot, and dangerous for
sickness, so they desired, that this House would spend the time in proceeding
with necessary Bills for the Commonwealth, and lay aside all private Bills in
the mean time. Vide Apr. 26. Thursday postea.

Which report was made by Mr Treasurer, and a Note brought from the Lords by
him, of such Bills as they thought meetest to be treated of, was read by the
Clark; viz.

The Bill for Treasons.

The Bill for coming to Church and receiving the Communion.

The Bill against untrue demeanors of Tellors, Receivors and Collectors.

Against such as be fled beyond the Seas without License.

Against fraudulent gifts and conveyances of Lands and Goods.

For preservation of Wood.

For respite of Homage.

For corrupt returns by Sheriffs.

For the Subsidy.

For Suits by Promoters.

The Bill for Subsidy was read the first time, to which there is nothing
mentioned to have been spoken by any Member of the House of Commons, in the
Original Journal Book of the said House; and therefore, although that little
that is set down in the often already cited Anonymous Journal do there remain
imperfect, yet in respect it is the very last thing which is contained in it, I
have thought it worthy the transcribing; it being as follows,

Mr John Young (after that the said Bill of Subsidy had been read the first
time) offered the House some Speech; and silence being obtained, he spoke to
this effect; that the burden of the Subsidy and charge by Loans, imposed by the
Prince upon us, and the charge of the richest and most noblest Prince being
considered, it were not amiss if it -- -- --

But what should here follow is hard to be conjectured, in respect that here
the aforesaid Anonymous Journal breaks off abruptly.

Sir Robert Read, and Mr Doctor Yale, did bring from the Lords a Bill against
Bulls, etc. procured from the Sea of Rome, as a Bill amongst the residue of
necessary Bills meet to be considered of, and prayed Expedition for the reading
and passing thereof.

The Bill for the Erection of seven Banks or Stocks of money, was read the
first time.

On Monday the 23th day of April, the Bill for Bristol, which was committed on
Thursday the 12th day of this instant April preceding, and brought in by Mr
Comptroller on Saturday the 21th day of the same Month foregoing, was this day,
upon the Question, Ordered to be engrossed.

Mr Sergeant Manwood, Mr Sergeant Lovelace, Mr Bell, Mr Mounson, Mr Baber, Mr
Fenner, Mr Shute, and Mr Bedell, are added to the former Committees for
Vagabonds: but it should rather seem, that those were the first Committees
appointed in this Bill, and that this was the second reading thereof; for on
Friday the 13th day of this instant April foregoing, it had its first reading,
and in the mean time since, between the said day and this present committing of
it, there is no mention made in the Original Journal Book of the House of
Commons, that the said Bill was at all read the second time, or committed.

The Bill for reformation of Promoters, was read the first time, and after many
long Arguments rejected. And Mr Attorney of the Duchy, Mr Recorder of London,
Mr Sands, Mr Sampoole, Mr Bell, Mr Popham, and Mr Alford, were appointed to
make a new Bill, and to meet in the Temple Church, upon Wednesday next at two
of the Clock in the Afternoon.

Mr Norton, Mr Fenner and Mr Fleetwood, were appointed to draw a Bill for the
preservation of Wood, and to receive information of all such, as for that
purpose shall repair unto them.

The Bill against Bulls, etc. procured from the Sea of Rome, was read the first
time, and Mr Attorney of the Duchy, Mr Sergeant Jeffry, Mr Wilbraham, Mr
Yelverton, Mr Norton, and Mr Sands, were appointed to consider of the Bill, and
to meet at the Temple Church at three of the Clock this Afternoon.

The Bill against untrue Demeanors of Tellors, Receivors, Treasurers and
Collectors, was read the second time, and after many long Arguments was
committed unto Mr Chancellor of the Duchy, Mr Chancellor of the Exchequer, Mr
Heneage, Mr. Attorney of the Duchy, Mr. Seckford, Master of the Requests, Mr.
Bell, Mr. Alford, Mr. Iresby, Mr. Yelverton, Mr. Sampoole, Sir John Thynne, Sir
Nicholas Arnold, Mr. Norton, Mr. Knivet, Mr. Mounson, and Mr. Dalton, either to
alter, or add unto the Bill; or else to make new Provisoes at their
discretions, and to meet at the Savoy upon Thursday next at two of the Clock in
the Afternoon.

On Tuesday the 24th day of April, Three Bills had each of them one reading; of
which the third being the Bill against Fugitives, was read the second time, and
after many long Arguments, was upon the Question committed unto Sir Thomas
Smith, Mr. Bell, Mr. Mounson, Mr. Thomas Snagg, and Mr. Yelverton, who were
appointed to meet in the Star Chamber at two of the Clock in the Afternoon.

It was Ordered by the House, that a Note be made against to Morrow of the
Titles of all the Bills offered unto this House, and to be then read, to the
end the House may make their choice, with which of them they will first proceed.

On Wednesday the 25th day of April, Sir Robert Lane, Sir Henry Gate, Mr. Henry
Knolles Sen., Mr. Astley Master of the Jewel-House, Mr. Sands, and Mr.
Wentworth, were appointed to attend the Lord of Canterbury his Grace for Answer
touching matters of Religion. Vide Apr. 6. antea, and May 17. postea at large.

The Bill for respite of Homage was read the second time; and Mr Recorder of
London, Mr. Fleetwood, Mr Sands, and Mr Baber, were appointed to mend the Bill
presently.

The Bill lastly for the Subsidy was read the second time.

On Thursday the 26th day of April, Two Bills of no great moment, had each of
them one reading, and were Ordered to be engrossed; of which the second was the
Bill for Conservation of Order and Uniformity in the Church.

The note of the Titles of the Bills being read, it was Ordered, that Mr
Treasurer, Sir Arthur Mildmay, Sir Thomas Smith, Sir Christopher Heydon, Sir
Henry Gate, Sir John Thynne, Sir Nicholas Arnold, Mr Sergeant Manwood, Mr
Sergeant Lovelace, Mr Stocks, Mr Alford, Mr Yelverton, Mr Fleetwood, Mr Norton,
and Mr Dalton, shall be Committees for appointing such Bills for the
Commonweal as shall be first proceeded in, and preferred before the residue,
but not to reject any; and are appointed to meet at the Star Chamber to Morrow
at two of the Clock in the Afternoon.

Nota, That the appointing of the abovenamed Members of the House for the
purposes aforesaid, as it is in it self a very rare President, and may prove
worthy of often imitation; so it should seem that the House was induced unto it
upon a Message sent unto them from the Lords by Mr Treasurer and others on
Saturday the 21th day of this instant April foregoing; by which they advised
them to expedite the more public and necessary Bills, and pass by those of
less moment.

The two Bills concerning certain offenses to be made Treason, were twice read,
and upon the division of the House were Ordered to be joined together and made
one Bill, with the difference of thirty six Voices upon the said Division; and
after long arguing, it was upon the Question Ordered to be engrossed.

Mr Solicitor and Mr. Doctor Huick, came from the Lords to demand Bills with
speed, if any were ready; and were answered, that within few days their
Lordships shall receive some.

The Committees in the Bill against Fugitives, as also in the Bill of Bulls,
etc. procured from the Sea of Rome, which were committed on Monday the 23th day
of this instant April foregoing, were this day appointed to meet in the
Star Chamber at three of the Clock to Morrow in the Afternoon.

On Friday the 27th day of April the Bill against Usury was read the second
time, and Ordered to be engrossed.

Four Bills also had each of them their third reading, and passed the House; of
which the first was the Bill for preservation of Order and Uniformity in the
Church, and the second for William Skeffington Esquire.

The Proviso to the Bill of Subsidy, for Rumney-Marsh, was twice read.

The Bill for respite of Homage was read the third time.

The Proviso to the Bill for respite of Homage was twice read.

The Bill for respite of Homage was committed to Mr. Sergeant Manwood, Mr.
Sergeant Lovelace, Mr. Wilbraham, and Mr. Popham, who were appointed to meet
this Afternoon at three of the Clock, and to make report unto this Court to
Morrow next.

On Saturday the 28th day of April, a Supplication for the Merchants of
Dantzick touching Cony-Skins, was this day read unto the House, and delivered
unto Mr. Treasurer.

The Proviso to the Bill for Fugitives was twice read, and upon the question it
was Ordered that the Bill shall stand as it is, touching the relief of Wives
and Children. And the Bill was also Ordered to be engrossed; with the Proviso
for the Duchess of Feria, and the Lady Jane Dormer Widow.

The Bill against Usury was read the third time.

Five Bills were sent up to the Lords from the House of Commons, of which the
first was the Bill for Conservation of Orders and Uniformity in the Church, and
another against Popish Priests disguising themselves in Serving-mens Apparel.

The Bill for keeping Residence in Cathedral Churches was read the first time.

Mr. Henry Knolles Sen., Mr. Strickland, Mr. Mounson, and Mr. Yelverton, were
appointed to sort the Bills for Religion, in such order and course for
proceeding, one before another, as they shall think meetest. Vide May 17.
postea.

The Bill for Shrewsbury was read the third time.

The Committees in the Bill for coming to Church and receiving the Communion
(whose names see on Saturday the 21th day of this instant April preceding) and
the Committees in the Bill for respite of Homage (who were nominated on Friday
the 27th day of the same Month foregoing) were appointed to meet this Afternoon
at two of the Clock in the Temple Church.

The second Bill for Religion was read the second time, and committed unto the
Lord President of the Marches of Wales, Sir Thomas Smith, Sir Thomas Scott, Mr.
Attorney of the Wards, Mr. Norton, Mr. Greenfeild, Mr. Grimston, Mr. Smith, Mr.
Fenner, and Mr. Agmordsam, who were appointed to meet this Afternoon at three
of the Clock in the Star Chamber. Vide May 17. postea, what this Bill was.

The Bill for Bristol was read the third time, and after long Arguing passed
upon the Question.

Mr. Sergeant Barham and Mr. Solicitor, brought two Bills from the Lords, the
one for the Confirmation of the Attainder of the late Earls of Northumberland,
and Westmerland, and others, and the other for reviving and continuance of
certain Statutes.

April the 29th Sunday.

On Monday the 30th day of April, Two Bills had each of them their second
reading, and were Ordered to be engrossed; of which the first was the Bill for
allowance to be made unto Sheriffs for the Justices Diets.

Two Bills also had each of them their third reading, and were likewise Ordered
to be engrossed; of which the first was the Bill for coming to Church and
receiving of the Communion.

On Tuesday the first day of May, Two Bills of no great moment had each of them
one reading; of which the second being the Bill against Fugitives was read the
third time, and after many Arguments, passed upon the Question.

Mr. Attorney General and Mr. Doctor Huick, did desire from the Lords, that
some of this House may attend upon six of the Lords to Morrow Morning for
Conference touching the Bill against Priests disguising themselves in
Serving-mens Apparel, which was granted; and thereupon were appointed for that
purpose Mr. Treasurer, Sir Thomas Scott, Sir Owen Hopton, Sir Thomas Lucy, Sir
Henry Jones, Mr. Sergeant Manwood, Mr. Clear, Mr. Thomas Brown, Mr. Norton,
Mr. Yelverton, Mr. Strickland, Mr. Mounson, and Mr. Thomas Hussy.

Mr. Sergeant Barham and Mr. Attorney General did desire from the Lords, that a
convenient number be sent presently unto their Lordships from this House for
Answer touching Articles for Religion. Whereupon my Lord Deputy of Ireland, Mr.
Treasurer and diverse others were sent for that purpose, and had with them the
four Bills last passed, viz. The Bill against Fugitives, The Bill for Bristol,
The Bill for William Skeffington, and the Bill for Shrewsbury: And afterward
returned Answer from the Lords, that the Queens Majesty having been made privy
to the said Articles, likes very well of them, and minds to publish them,
and have them Executed by the Bishops, by direction of her Highness Regal
Authority of Supremacy of the Church of England, and not to have the same dealt
in by Parliament.

Nota, That there was in this Parliament much and long agitation touching the
reforming of several enormities and Ceremonies in matters of Religion, which
now at last the Queen took out of the hands of the House, and promised other
Amendment, as appears by the abovementioned Message sent from the Lords to
the said House; although the said matters and agitations were not thereupon
deserted, but continued in part, as is more at large observed upon Thursday the
17th day of this instant May ensuing, where the whole beginning, Progress and
Issue of this business is at large collected and digested into an orderly
relation.

The Bill for allowance to be made unto Sheriffs for the Justices Diets, was
read the third time.

Mr Solicitor and Mr Doctor Jews brought from the Lords two Bills, the one
against fraudulent Gifts and Conveyances, and the other for Constats and
Exemplifications of Letters Patents to be as good and available as Letters
Patents themselves.

The Bill of Attainder was read the first time.

Sir Henry Peircy Knight was appointed to be heard in this House, with his
Learned Council, upon Saturday next at two of the Clock in the Afternoon.

The Bill for Constats and Exemplifications of Letters Patents was read the
first time.

On Wednesday the second day of May, Five Bills of no great moment had each of
them their first reading.

The Bill for Leases of Benefices (being the fifth Bill of those seven Bills
preferred this Parliament, touching the reformation of matters of Religion, and
therefore called in the Original Journal Book of the House of Commons the Bill
E) was read the second time and Ordered to be engrossed. Touching which said
Bill and matters of Religion, see a more full and ample Animadversion or
Declaration on Thursday the 7th day of this instant May ensuing.

Mr Treasurer with the residue of the Commissioners having been with the Lords
about the Bill against Priests disguising themselves in Serving-mens Apparel,
showed, that upon Conference therein had with the Lords, their request is, that
some of the said Committees might confer with the Queens Majesty's Learned
Council touching the enlargement and better Explanation of some parts of the
same Bill. Whereupon the House liking well of that course of proceeding, it is
agreed that the Committees for the Bill against the untrue demeanors of
Tellors, Receivors, Treasurers and Collectors, and for the Bill against Bulls,
etc. procured from the Sea of Rome, and such like Bills as shall hereafter come
from their Lordships, needful to be considered or added unto or altered, shall
make request unto the Lords for Conference and privity in that behalf to be had
and made with them, as they in the said former Bill have used and done toward
this House.

The Bill for respite of Homage was committed unto Sir Walter Mildmay, Mr
Sergeant Lovelace, Mr Mounson, Mr Sampoole, Mr. Wilbraham, Mr. Popham, and Mr.
Fenner, to consider of this Afternoon at three of the Clock at the Rolls, and
to deliver it again to the House to Morrow Morning in such sort as now it is,
if in the mean time they shall not alter the same, or some part thereof.

On Thursday the third day of May, Three Bills of no great moment had each of
them one reading; of which the first being the Bill for increase of Tillage and
maintenance of Navigation, was read the first time.

The Bill for the Order of Ministers (being the second of those seven Bills
preferred this Parliament touching the matters of Religion, and therefore
called in the Original Journal Book of the House of Commons the Bill B) was
read the fourth time and passed. Touching all which said Bills of matters of
Religion see a more ample and full Animadversion or Declaration on Thursday the
17th day of this instant May ensuing.

The Bill for allowance to be made unto Sheriffs for the Justices Diets, was
sent up to the Lords by Mr. Comptroller and others.

The Bill for making Peregrine Barty free Denizen was read three times and
passed the House; as also the Bill against Usury; after they had been brought
from the Lords by Mr. Solicitor and Mr. Doctor Vaughan.

It was Ordered that Sir Nicholas Points Knight, one of the Knights from the
County of Gloucester, shall have a Writ of Privilege for his Servant Thomas
Wickham, being attached in the City of London upon two Actions of Trespass, the
one at the Suit of Christopher Temple Goldsmith, and the other at the Suit of
Fr. Acton Grocer.

On Friday the 4th day of May, Two Bills of no great moment had each of them
one reading; of which the second being the Bill against Licenses and
Dispensations granted by the Archbishop of Canterbury was read the second time,
and committed unto Mr. Treasurer, Sir Thomas Smith, Mr. Recorder of London, Mr.
Norton, Mr. Greenfeild, Mr. Eglenby, Mr. Strickland, and Mr. Yelverton.

The Bill for Fines and Recoveries was read the second time, and Ordered to be
engrossed.

The Bill for coming to Church, and receiving of the Communion, was read the
third time, and passed the House.

It was Ordered that the Officer which made the Arrest upon Sir Henry Clinton's
Servants, and also the party that procured the same, do appear here to Morrow
at ten of the Clock in the Forenoon.

Three Bills lastly had each of them their second reading, and were thereupon
Ordered to be engrossed; of which the first was the Bill for respite of Homage,
and the last was for Southhampton.

On Saturday the 5th day of May, Three Bills of no great moment had each of
them one reading; of which the first being the Bill for the River of Welland,
was read the second time, and Ordered to be engrossed.

The Bill for Confirmation of Attainders was read the second time; at which
time Sir Henry Peircy Knight, with Mr. Fetiplace, being of his Learned Council,
were present. And Wednesday next was given them to be further heard again.

The Bill for respite of Homage was read the third time and sent up to the
Lords, with the Bill for the coming to Church and receiving of the Communion,
by Mr. Treasurer, Mr. Comptroller, Mr. Chancellor of the Exchequer, Sir Thomas
Scott, Sir Francis Hastings, Sir William Pawlet, Sir John Thin, Sir Owen
Hopton, Sir Henry Gate, Sir William Buts, Sir Nicholas Arnold, Sir Thomas Lucy,
Sir Robert Lane, Mr. Austley, Mr. Stokes, Mr. Sergeant Lovelace, Mr. Recorder
of London, Mr. Sampoole, Mr. Mounson, Mr. Norton, Mr. Yelverton, Mr. More, Mr.
Henry Knolles, Mr. Carleton, Mr. Strickland, Mr. John Hastings, and Mr.
Halliard.

On Monday the 7th day of May, Three Bills of no great moment had each of them
one reading; of which the second being the Bill against Licenses and
Dispensations granted by the Archbishop of Canterbury, was read the second
time, and Ordered to be engrossed.

The Bill for Leases of Benefices, (being the fifth of those seven Bills
preferred this Parliament touching the Reformation of matters of Religion, and
therefore called in the Original Journal Book of the House of Commons the Bill
E) was read the third time and passed the House. Touching all which said Bills
and matters of Religion, see at large on Thursday the 17th day of this instant
May ensuing.

The Provisoes to the Bill against Vagabonds were twice read.

Three Bills lastly of no great moment had each of them one reading; of which
the first, being for the increase of Tillage, and maintenance of the Navy, was
read the third time, and passed upon the Question.

On Tuesday the 8th day of May, the Bill for the maintenance of Navigation, was
read the second time and committed unto Mr. Treasurer, Sir John St Ledger, Sir
Owen Hopton, Sir Richard Buckley, Mr. Holstock, Mr. Grimston, Mr. Mohun, Mr.
John Hastings, Mr. Grice, Mr. Crownier, Mr. Wilford, Mr. Humberston, Mr.
Pelham, Mr. Lieff, Mr. Gerby, Mr. Gaire, Mr. Downing, Mr. Norton, Mr. Popham,
Mr. Strickland, and Mr. Thornton, who were appointed to meet at the
Star Chamber to Morrow at two of the Clock in the Afternoon.

Three Bills lastly had each of them one reading; of which the last being the
Bill for Southhampton, was read the third time, and passed upon the Question.

On Wednesday the 9th day of May, the Bill for Maurice Radney Esquire was read the
second time, and Ordered to be engrossed.

It was Ordered upon a Motion made by Mr. Norton, that upon Friday next coming
the House do begin to sit at three of the Clock in the Afternoon, and to
continue till five; and so every Monday, Wednesday and Friday, until the end of
this Session of Parliament; which time to be employed only in the first reading
of private Bills.

The Bill against Promoters was read the second time, and Ordered to be
engrossed.

The Bill to avoid corrupt Presentations (being the fourth Bill of those seven
preferred this Parliament, touching the reformation of the matters of Religion,
and therefore called in the Original Journal Book of the House of Commons the
Bill D) was read the second time, and Ordered to be engrossed. Touching which
Bills and matters of Religion, see a more full Animadversion or Declaration on
Thursday the 17th day of this instant May following.

The Bill against Bulls, etc. procured from the Sea of Rome, was read the
second and third time, and passed upon the Question, with a note containing
some Additions and Alterations, referring to the Lines.

Mr. Attorney General and Mr. Solicitor, did bring from the Lords the former
Bill of Treasons, with a new Proviso, and certain other Alterations, contained
in a Paper affiled to the same Bill.

The new Bill against Licenses and Dispensations granted by the Archbishop of
Canterbury, was read the third time, and passed upon the Question.

Two Bills lastly of no great moment, had each of them one reading; of which
the second, being the Bill for Fines and Recoveries, with three Provisoes,
passed upon the Question.

On Thursday the 10th day of May, the Bill against Collusions and delays in
Vouchers was read the first time.

The Bill touching the Commutation of Penance by the Ecclesiastical Judge
(being the last Bill of those seven preferred this Parliament touching the
reformation of matters of Religion, and therefore called in the Original
Journal Book of the House of Commons the Bill G) was read the first time.
Touching which Bill see a more full Animadversion or Declaration on Thursday
the 17th day of this instant May following.

The Bill for the River of Welland, was read the third time, and passed upon
the Question.

The Bill for preservation of Woods was read the first time, and committed unto
Sir Nicholas Arnold, Sir George Bows, Sir Thomas Scot, Mr. Humberson, Mr.
Moore, Mr. Gayer, Mr. Wightman, Mr. Sampoole, Mr. Winchcomb, Mr. Robert Snagg,
Mr. Roper, Mr. Cowper and Mr. Fenner, who were appointed to meet at the Temple
Church at two of the Clock this Afternoon. Vide May 14. postea.

Nine Bills were sent up to the Lords from the House of Commons by Mr.
Treasurer and others; of which one was the Bill for Fines and Recoveries, and
another for the River of Welland.

The Provisoes to the Bill against Vagabonds were twice read and committed to
Mr. Atkins and others.

Two Bills also of no great moment had each of them one reading; of which the
second being the Bill for Lestwithiell, was read the second time and Ordered to
be engrossed.

Forasmuch as Thomas Long Gent., returned one of the Burgesses for the Borough
of Westbury in the County of Wilts for this present Parliament, being a very
simple man and of small capacity to serve in that place, did this day in open
Court confess, that he did give to Anthony Garland Mayor of the said Town of
Westbury, and unto one..... Wats of the same Town, the sum of four pound, for
that place and room of Burgesship; It was Ordered by this House, that the said
Anthony Garland and the said Wats shall forthwith repay unto the said Thomas
Long the same sum of four pound, and also that a fine of twenty pound be
assessed upon the said Corporation or Inhabitants of the said Town of Westbury
for the Queens Majesty's use, for their said lewd and slanderous attempt. And
that the said Thomas Long, his Executors and Administrators shall be discharged
against the said Anthony Garland and..... Wats, their Heirs, Executors and
Administrators, of and from all Bonds made by the said Thomas Long to any
person or persons touching the discharge of the exercise of the said room or
place of Burgesship in any wise.

Mr. Solicitor and Mr. Doctor Vaughan pray from the Lords, that some Members
of this House may be presently sent to confer with their Lordships, touching
the Bill of Attainders, and the Bill against Bulls, etc. Whereupon were sent
unto them Mr. Heneage, Sir Thomas Smith, Sir John Thynne, Sir Nicholas Arnold,
Sir Christopher Haydon, Mr. Recorder of London, Mr. Sampoole, Mr. Popham, and
Mr. Alford.

On Friday the 11th day of May, it was Ordered that a Pursuivant be sent with
Letters from this House unto Anthony Garland Mayor of the Town of Westbury in
the County of Wilts, and..... Wats of the same Town, for their personal
appearance forthwith to be made in this House; and also to bring with them all
such Bonds, as Thomas Long Gentleman, lately returned one of the Burgesses for
the same Town, stands bound in unto them, or either of them, or unto any
other to their use. And also to Answer unto such matters as at their coming
shall be objected against them by this House.

The Bill against Exactions of Collectors of the Tenths of the Clergy was read
the first time.

The Bill against Perjury in Clarks Convict, and the Bill for the continuance
of the severance of Sheriffs in sundry Shires, were each of them twice read,
and Ordered to be engrossed.

Two Bills also of no great moment had each of them one reading; of which the
first, being the Bill for severance of the Sheriffs in the Counties of Norfolk
and Suffolk, was read the second time, and Ordered to be engrossed.

All the Privy Council being Members of this House. Sir Henry Morris, Sir
Thomas Scot, Sir John Thynne, Mr. Attorney of the Duchy, Mr. Attorney of the
Wards, Mr. Sergeant Manwood, Mr. Stokes, Mr. Bell, Mr. Mounson, Mr. Thomas
Snagg, Mr. Telverton, Mr. Norton, Mr. Dalton, and Mr. Rugby, were appointed to
consider amongst themselves this Afternoon, at the Star Chamber, touching the
Bill of Treasons, and then afterward with the Lords upon further appointment.
Vide plus de ista materia on Thursday the 12th day of April foregoing.

Two Bills lastly had each of them one reading; of which the second being the
Bill for Morris Rodney Esquire was read the first time and passed upon the
Question.

Post Meridiem.

In the Afternoon ten Bills had each of them one reading; of which the fourth,
being the Bill for the maintenance of the Havens of Plymouth and Dartmouth,
etc. and the fifth against the Usurpation of Tinners in the County of Devon,
were each of them read the first time, and thereupon committed to Sir John St.
Ledger, and others.

Nota, That these two Bills were committed upon the first reading, which is not
usual until the second. Vide May 14.

On Saturday the 12th day of May, the Bill for the Haberdashers was read the
second time, and rejected upon the Question.

The Bill for residence of Pastors (being the third Bill of those seven
preferred this Parliament touching the Reformation of matters of Religion, and
therefore called in the Original Journal Book of the House of Commons the Bill
C) was read the first time. Touching all which said Bills and matters of
Religion, see on Thursday the 17th day of this instant May following.

The Bill for maintenance of Navigation, was read the third time, and passed
the House.

Seven Bills were sent up to the Lords from the House of Commons; of which one
was the Bill against Usury, and another touching Morris Rodney Esquire.

The Bill of Jeofails was read the second time, and committed unto Mr. Sergeant
Manwood, Mr. Thomas Snagg, Mr. Sampoole, and Mr. Cromwell.

The Bill against Exactions of Collectors of the Tenths of the Clergy was read
the second time, and Ordered to be engrossed.

The Bill for the payment of Tithes, was read the first time and rejected upon
the Question.

May the 13th Sunday.

On Monday the 14th day of May, the Bill for not returning in Juries persons of
the Queens Majesty's Household, was read the second time, and committed unto Mr.
Treasurer, Sir John Thin, Mr. Cofferer, Mr. Brown, Mr. More, and Mr. Ferrers.

The Bill for Residence of Pastors (being the third of those seven Bills
preferred this Parliament touching the reformation of matters in Religion, and
therefore called in the Original Journal Book of the House of Commons the Bill
C) was read the second time and Ordered to be engrossed. Touching which Bill
and matters of Religion see a more full Animadversion or Declaration on
Thursday the 17th day of this instant May following.

The Bill against Vagabonds, and the first Bill for preservation of Wood, were
Ordered to be engrossed.

The Bill for Conveyances and Assurances of Lands to be made without Covin, was
read the second time, and committed unto Mr. Recorder of London, Mr. Marsh, Mr.
Stanhop, Mr. Grice, Mr. Sampoole, Mr. Norton, Mr. Alford, and Mr. Dalton, who
were appointed to meet in the Temple Church at two of the Clock this Afternoon.

Mr. Solicitor and Mr. Attorney brought from the Lords four Bills; of which
the two last were, one for the Restitution in Blood of the Children of Sir
Thomas Wyat, and the other for the Assurance of the Jointure of the Lady
Barkley.

Three Bills had each of them their third reading, and passed upon the
question; of which the last was the Bill against the Exaction of Collectors of
the Tenths of the Clergy.

The Bill lastly, for severance of the Sheriffs in the Counties of Bedford and
Buckingham, were read the second time, and thereupon Ordered to be engrossed.

Post Meridiem.

Four Bills of no great moment had each of them one reading; of which the first
being the Bill concerning Hospitals, and the third for Planting of Hops, were
each of them read the first time; and the second, being the Bill against great
Hosen, was read the first time, and committed unto Sir Christopher Heydon, Sir
William Buts, Mr. Stokes, Mr. Moore, Mr. Warncomb, Mr. St. John, Mr. Gare, Mr.
Humberston, Mr. Layton, and Mr. Sackerston. Which is the rather to be observed,
in respect, that this Bill was committed upon the first reading, which is not
usual until the second; of which there were three like Presidents, viz. one on
Thursday the 10th day, and two on Friday the 11th day of this instant May
foregoing.

The Bill for making of William Watson a free Denizen was twice read; and the
Bill lastly for Leverpool was read the first time.

On Tuesday the 15th day of May, the Bill against Wednesdays was read the first
time.

The Bill touching the Commutation of Penance by the Ecclesiastical Judge
(being the last of those seven Bills preferred this Parliament touching the
Reformation of matters of Religion, and therefore called in the Original
Journal Book of the House of Commons the Bill G) was read the second time, and
Ordered to be engrossed. Touching which Bill and matters of Religion see more
at large on Thursday the 17th day of this instant May following.

Three Bills also of no great moment had each of them one reading; of which the
last being the Bill for Confirmation of Attainders was read the third time, and
passed the House.

The Proviso for the Countess of Cumberland and others to the Bill for
Confirmation of Attainders, was thrice read: And further Ordered by the House,
that the Saving for Sir Henry Peircy Knight, shall be placed in the Book before
the general saving, without any alteration or change of any word or words at
all.

The Bill for Confirmation of Attainders, with the other last passed, were sent
up to the Lords from the House of Commons by Mr Treasurer and others.

The Bill for the Restitution in Blood of the Children of Sir Thomas Wyat
Knight, was read the third time.

The Bill lastly for the continuance of the severance of Sheriffs in sundry
Shires, was read the third time, and passed upon the Question.

On Wednesday the 16th day of May, the Bill against Wednesdays, was read the
second time and Ordered to be engrossed.

The new Bill against great Hosen, and a new Bill of Jeofails, were each of
them read the first time.

Mr Attorney General and Mr Doctor Vaughan brought from the Lords the Bill for
Confirmation of Attainders, for mending of an Indorsement.

Three Bills of no great moment had each of them one reading; of which the
third being the Bill against Collusions and Delays in Vouchers, was read the
second time, and Ordered to be engrossed.

Mr Attorney General and Mr Doctor Huick did require from the Lords to have the
Committees in the Bill for Treasons presently sent to them for Conference.

The Bill for Residence of Pastors (being the third of those seven Bills
preferred this Parliament touching matters of Religion, and therefore called in
the Original Journal Book of the House of Commons the Bill C) was read the
third time, and upon the Division of the House dashed.

Mr Doctor Huick and Mr. Doctor Yale, did bring from the Lords a Bill against
Bankrupts, with Commendations for the expediting thereof.

Post Meridiem.

In the Afternoon the Bill for search of Fairs of Maidston in Kent, was read
the first time.

Mr. Solicitor and Mr. Doctor Huick brought from the Lords the Bill against
Bulls, etc. and the Bill for Treasons, both reformed, as appears in several
Papers annexed, containing the places and words of Amendments.

Seven Bills of no great moment had each of them one reading; of which the
fourth being a new Bill for the maintenance of the Havens of Plymouth and
Dartmouth, etc. was read the second time.

On Thursday the 17th day of May, Two Bills of no great moment had each of them
their second reading, and Ordered to be engrossed; of which the second was the
Bill against Clothworkers.

The Bill against Cloth-workers was read the second time, and Ordered to be
stayed.

Sir Walter Mildmay, Sir Thomas Smith, Mr. Sergeant Lovelace, Mr. Bell, Mr.
Mounson, Mr. Popham, Mr. Sampool, Mr. Sands, and Mr. Yelverton, were appointed
to have Conference with the Lords touching the Bill for respite of Homage, in
the outer Chamber of the Upper House at two of the Clock this Afternoon.

The Bill for Sewers was read the first time.

The Bill against Bulls, and the Bill for Treasons were upon the Question
absolutely passed with all the Additions and Amendments.

The Bill also against Wednesdays, and the Bill against Collusion and delays in
Vouchers, were each of them read the third time, and passed the House.

The Bill touching the Commutation of Penance by the Ecclesiastical Judge
(being last of those seven Bills preferred this Parliament touching Reformation
of matters of Religion, and therefore called in the Original Journal Book of
the House of Commons the Bill G) was read the third time and passed.

Because the great matter touching Religion and Church Government (of which the
passing of the aforesaid Bill is the last passage mentioned in the Original
Journal Book of the House of Commons) was so Religiously begun by the said
House in the former Sessions of Parliament, in An. 8 Regin. Eliz. and so
zealously prosecuted in this present Parliament de an. 13 Regin. Eliz.
therefore it shall not be amiss here to set down at large, once for all, the
whole proceeding of the same, although all in the Issue was dashed by her
Majesty, persuaded unto it (as it should seem) by some sinister Counsel. The
first step therefore unto this business, was upon Thursday the 5th day of
December in the said former Session of Parliament in the said eighth year of
her Majesty, when the Bill with the Articles Printed 1562. for sound Christian
Religion had its first reading; which in the Original Journal Book of the House
of Commons in this present Parliament is always called the Bill A, and in the
margent of the said Journal in an. 8. the said Letter A is expressed over
against the title of the said Bill. A second step then followed in this their
intended Reformation upon Friday the 6th day of December in the said Session de
an. 8 Regin. Eliz. when all these Bills following had each of them their first
reading, being there inserted in manner and form following, the words only [the
first reading] being added instead of the Figure or Number [1.] set down in the
margent.

B. The Bill for the Order of Ministers, the first reading.

C. The Bill for residence of Pastors, the first reading.

D. The Bill to avoid corrupt Presentations, the first reading.

E. The Bill for Leases of Benefices, the first reading.

F. The Bill for Pensions out of Benefices and Leases of Benefices, the first
reading.

All which several Bills are no otherwise styled in the Original Journal Book
of the House of Commons in this present Parliament, than the Bill B, the Bill
C, etc. and therefore without recourse to the aforesaid Journal of the same
House in an. isto praedicto 8 Regin. Eliz. it could not have been possibly
herein understood what had been intended thereby. Which last mentioned five
Bills had no further progress in the said Session of Parliament, by reason that
it was Dissolved soon after on Thursday the second day of January, but only the
first before-cited Bill, called the Bill A, had its second reading on Thursday
the 10th day, and its third and last reading on Friday the 13th day of December
in the same Session. After which the said Bills so rested until the beginning
of this present Parliament in an. 13 Regin. Eliz. when upon Friday the 6th day
of April foregoing these six Bills foregoing were again presented to the House;
and a seventh Bill also, as is very probable, which was not at all read in the
aforesaid last Session in An. 8 Regin. Eliz. which was the Bill read the third
time this present day, touching the Commutations of Penance by the
Ecclesiastical Judge, and is always styled in the Original Journal Book of the
House of Commons the Bill G. And thereupon all the said seven Bills touching
Religion were referred to Committees to consider of them. And on the day
following, being Saturday, and the seventh day of the same Month, the said
Bills were read. The first Bill of them styled the Bill A, was delivered to the
foresaid Committees, or Commissioners, and the residue appointed to remain in
the House, and that to stand for no reading of any of them. Which great Caution
doubtless the House of Commons did the rather observe in their proceeding with
these Bills touching the Reformation of matters of Religion and Church
Government, because they desired her Majesty might the more graciously
interpret their endeavors, and give way to the passing of the said Bills. To
which purpose also the House appointed two of their Members before their rising
that very day, to have their furtherance also for the same; who returned their
Answer on Thursday the 10th day of the same Month, and advised the House of
Commons to pray a Conference with the Lords for that purpose; which was
accordingly had in the Afternoon of the same day. And that day also the second
of the said seven Bills, styled the Bill B, had its first reading, and was read
the second time on Saturday the 28th day of April, and the third time on Monday
the 30th day of the same Month. On the Morrow after the foresaid 10th day of
April, being the 11th day of the same Month, and Wednesday, the Bill D had its
first reading, being the fourth of the aforesaid seven Bills touching Religion:
And on Wednesday the 9th day of May its second reading. And on Saturday the
12th day of May the Bill C, being the third of the said seven Bills, had its
first reading, and its second reading on Monday the 14th day, and its third
reading on Wednesday the 16th day of the same Month. The Bill E also, being the
5th of the said seven Bills, had its first reading on Friday the 13th day of
April, its second on Wednesday the second day, and its third on Monday the 7th
day of May. For the Bill F it appears not by the Original Journal Book of the
House of Commons, that it was at all read, although it concerned Pensions out
of Benefices, and Leases of Benefices. For the Bill G lastly, which was the
seventh of the aforesaid Bills touching Religion, it had its first reading on
Thursday the 10th day of May; its second on Tuesday the 15th, and the third on
this instant Thursday, being the 17th day of the same Month, as is before set
down. Although it is to be observed, that some of the readings of the aforesaid
Bills are omitted upon some of the said days as matters of no great moment. Of
which Bills also there was some treating on Wednesday the 25th day, and on
Saturday the 28th day of April foregoing. But her Majesty on Thursday the first
day of May, by the Lords of the Upper House, declared unto the Committees of
the House of Commons, who afterward declared it to the House it self, that she
approved their good endeavors, but would not suffer these things to be Ordered
by Parliament. Notwithstanding which Message, as appears by the reading of
some of the said seven Bills afterward, the House of Commons still proceeded,
and having passed two of the said Bills, viz. the Bills B and C, on Wednesday
the 16th day of May foregoing, and the Bill G this present Thursday, as is
aforesaid, they sent them up to the Lords by Mr Comptroller and others, as soon
as the said Bill G had passed the House.

All the Bills last passed except that for severance of Sheriffs of sundry
Shires, were sent to the Lords by Mr Comptroller and others.

Three Bills lastly of no great moment had each of them one reading; of which
the second being the Bill against great Hosen, was read the second time and
committed.

On Friday the 18th day of May, Two Bills of no great moment had each of them
one reading; of which the first being the Bill for the Free Grammar School in
Southwark, was read the second time, and Ordered to be engrossed.

The Bill against great Hosen was read the third time, and upon the division of
the House, with the advantage of one man, it was Ordered that the Clause for
disabling the wearer to prosecute or commence any Suit, shall be allowed to be
in the Bill in manner and form as in the Bill is contained.

The Bill for the preservation of Woods, etc. was read the third time, and upon
the division of the House passed.

Post Meridiem.

This day in the Afternoon eleven Bills of no great moment had each of them
their first reading; of which the first was the Bill for the Free School of
Bletchingly, and the second for John Tirrell.

On Saturday the 19th day of May, the Bill against the bringing into this Realm
of Foreign Wares forbidden, was twice read, and Ordered to be engrossed.

Two Bills also of no great moment had each of them one reading; of which the
first, being the Bill for the twelve Shires of Wales, was read the second time;
but no mention is made that it was either referred to Committees or Ordered to
be engrossed, which is usual upon the second reading.

Mr Doctor Jews and Mr Doctor Yale, did bring from the Lords seven Bills,
whereof one was to License the Earl of Leicester to found an Hospital; another
for the Restitution in Blood of Henry Brereton Esquire; another against fraudulent
gifts to defeat Dilapidations; another against corrupt Presentations to
Benefices; another against Simony; another for the River of Welland, and
another for the coming to Church, and receiving the Communion. All which Bills
are particularly transcribed, in respect that the sending down of them to the
House of Commons is wholly omitted in the Original Journal Book of the Upper
House.

The Bill for preservation of Wood, and the Bill against Vagabonds were sent up
to the Lords by Mr Treasurer, and others.

Mr. Doctor Jews and Mr. Doctor Yale brought from the Lords three Bills; one
against Fugitives, another for Southampton, and another for Confirmation of a
Subsidy of the Clergy.

All the Privy Council being of this House, my Lord President, Sir Nicholas
Arnold, Sir Owen Hopton, Mr. Stokes, Mr. Mounson, Mr. Bell, Mr. Yelverton, Sir
Francis Hastings, Sir Henry Knolles Sen., Mr. Edward Hastings, Mr. Strickland,
Mr. Carleton, Mr. More, Mr. Norton, and Mr. Dalton, were appointed to confer
with the Lords touching the Lords Bill, for coming to Church and receiving of
the Communion.

May the 20th Sunday.

On Monday the 21th day of May the Bill for Confirmation of the Subsidy granted
by the Clergy was read three times.

The Bill also for reviving and continuance of certain Statutes, was read the
second time; but no mention is made that it was either Ordered to be engrossed
or referred to Committees, as was only this day a Bill against Bankrupts.

It was this day Ordered, that the Court do from henceforth every day during
this Sessions sit in the Afternoon, and proceed as well to the second reading
of Bills as to the first.

The Proviso to the Bill for reviving and continuance of Statutes, and the
Proviso to the Bill against buying of the Wares for Apparel without ready
money, were each of them twice read.

The Bill for the twelve Shires of Wales, was Ordered to be engrossed.

The Bill for limitation of the Subsidy of the Clergy was sent to the Lords by
Mr. Comptroller and others.

The Bill against Bankrupts was read the second time.

Nota, That this Bill having formerly passed the Upper House, was sent down
from them to the House of Commons on Wednesday the 16th day of this instant May
foregoing; And therefore now upon the second reading, is neither Ordered to be
engrossed, nor referred to the Committees: for it being sent down fairly
engrossed in Parchment from the said House after it is passed, unless the Bill
be wholly dashed, or much altered, it shall need no other engrossing. And for
referring a Bill to Committees, it is chiefly for amendment or alteration
thereof, after it has been penned, and put into the House by some one or more
private men. But when a Bill has once passed the Upper House, in which besides
the Lords the greater part of the Judges of the Realm are commonly Assistants,
there shall need no consideration thereof either for Addition or mutation; for
either House does ever, for the most part, show it self so careful to keep firm
correspondency with the other, as that when a Bill has passed either of the
said Houses and is sent to the other, it does for the most part pass, and is
neither dashed, nor altered, without very great cause upon mature deliberation,
and usually also not without Conference desired, and had thereupon; that so,
full satisfaction may be given to that House from which the Bill so rejected,
or altered was sent. Of which the Presidents are so frequent in every Journal
of her Majesty's Reign, as there shall need no further reference or Citation.

Mr. Doctor Jews and Mr. Doctor Vaughan, brought from the Lords three Bills;
one for Pastors to be of sound Religion; another that no Hoyes or Plate shall
cross the Seas, and another that no Purveyor shall take any Victuals within
five Miles compass of the Universities of Oxford and Cambridge.

Mr. Treasurer, Sir Christopher Heydon, Sir Henry Gate, Sir Valentine Brown,
Mr. Hawkins, Mr. Grice, Mr. Holstock, Mr. Langley, Mr. Humberston, Mr.
Holliard, Mr. Sampoole, Mr. Boynton, Mr. Palmer, Mr. Grimston, Mr. Hassett, and
Mr. Vaughan, were appointed to confer this Afternoon with the Lords touching
the Bill for increase of Tillage and maintenance of the Navy.

Three Bills of no great moment had each of them their third reading, and
passed the House; of which the first was the Bill for the Free Grammar School
of Southwark.

The Bill that no Hoy or Plate shall cross the Seas, was read the first time.

Post Meridiem.

In the Afternoon five Bills of no great moment had each of them their second
reading, and were Ordered to be engrossed; of which the first was the Bill for
the removing of the Grammar School from Laughton to Gainsborough.

The Bill to License the Earl of Leicester to found an Hospital; and the Bill
for Restitution in Blood of Henry Brereton Esquire, were each of them read twice,
being the first and second time.

The Bill against fraudulent gifts to defeat Dilapidations, was read the first
time.

The Bill lastly, for the Restitution in Blood of the Children of Sir Thomas
Wyat Knight, and the Bill for the severance of the Counties of Huntington and
Cambridge, were each of them read the second time: But neither Ordered to be
engrossed, nor referred to Committees, because they had been sent from the
Lords.

On Tuesday the 22th day of May, Two Bills of no great moment had each of them
one reading; of which the first, being the Bill for John Tirrell Esquire, was read
the second time, and Ordered to be engrossed.

Mr. Doctor Jews and Mr. Doctor Yale brought from the Lords two Bills; one
against the untrue Demeanours of Tellors, Receivors, Treasurers, and
Collectors; and another for Treasons newly written, and truly examined by the
former Book thereof lately passed this House, to the end the same may likewise
be Examined by this House, and so then pass accordingly.

Mr Doctor Vaughan and Mr Doctor Yale, did pray from the Lords that this House
would send unto them such Bills as are already passed this House, for that
their Lordships do tarry for them: and thereupon five Bills were sent unto
them, by Mr Chancellor of the Duchy and others; of which one was the Bill for
the River of Welland.

The Bill for coming to Church and receiving the Communion, was Ordered upon
the Question to be general as to the body thereof.

Post Meridiem.

In the Afternoon the Bill against taking of any Grain or Victual within five
Miles compass of the Universities of Oxford and Cambridge, was read the first
time.

Mr Attorney General and Mr Doctor Haick, brought from the Lords a Bill against
the Oppression of common Promoters.

Four Bills lastly of no great moment had each of them one reading; of which
the first, being the Bill against fraudulent gifts and Conveyances for
defeating of Dilapidations, and the third for Sewers, were each of them read
the second time: but no mention is made that they were either Ordered to be
engrossed or referred to Committees, because they had been sent from the Lords.

On Wednesday the 23th day of May, Five Bills of no great moment had each of
them their third reading, and passed the House; of which the first was the Bill
for the paving of the street without Aldgate.

The Bill that no Hoy or Plate shall cross the Seas, was read the second time,
but neither engrossed nor committed, because it had been sent from the Lords.

Two Bills also had each of them their third reading; of which the second was
the Bill for the removing of the Grammar School from Laughton to Gainsborough.

All these Bills which passed this Day, were sent up to the Lords by Mr
Treasurer and others.

Mr Attorney General and Mr Richard Read, did bring word from the Lords, that
their Lordships prayed Conference with some of this House, touching the Bill
for preservation of Timber and Woods, the Bill against Vagabonds, and the Bill
for continuance of Statutes: Whereupon were sent unto them the former
Committees in the Bill for coming to the Church, and receiving the Communion,
whose names see on Saturday the 21th day of April foregoing.

Three Bills lastly had each of them their third reading, and passed the House;
of which the second was the Bill for Restitution in Blood of the Children of
Sir Thomas Wyat Knight.

Post Meridiem.

In the Afternoon six Bills of no great moment had each of them one reading; of
which the first being the Bill for the Jointure of the Lady Berkley, and the
fifth against taking of any Grain or Victual within five Miles compass of the
Universities of Oxford or Cambridge, were each of them read the second time;
but neither Ordered to be engrossed, nor referred to Committees, because they
had been formerly sent from the Lords.

On Thursday the 24th day of May, the Bill against the untrue Demeanors of
Tellors, Receivors, Treasurers and Collectors, was read the second time; but
neither Ordered to be engrossed nor referred to Committees. Vide consimile May
the 22th Tuesday foregoing.

The Bill for Sewers was read the third time, and a Proviso added to the said
Bill was thrice read; whereupon the Bill passed the House.

The Bill also against Bankrupts, and the Bill that no Hoyes nor Plate shall
cross the Seas, were each of them read the third time, and passed the House.

All the Bills which last passed the House were sent to the Lords by Mr
Treasurer and others.

The Bill for the reviving and continuance of Statutes was read the third time.

Mr Serjeam Barham and Mr Doctor Huick, did bring from the Lords a Bill for
bringing the River of Lee to the North-side of the City of London.

Mr Doctor Jews and Mr Doctor Yale, did bring word that the Lords pray present
Conference with three or four of this House, touching the amendments of the
Bill for coming to Church and receiving the Communion; and thereupon were sent
Mr Treasurer and others.

The Bill for not paying for Wares sold for Apparel without ready money, was
upon the Question Ordered to be rejected, and not to be revived or any longer
continued.

The Bill for carrying out of Leather beyond the Seas, was likewise upon the
Question Ordered to be rejected or discontinued.

Post Meridiem.

In the Afternoon two Bills of no great moment had each of them their third
reading, and passed the House; of which the first was the Bill for Restitution
in Blood of Henry Brereton Esquire.

The Bill for maintenance of Tillage was upon the Question Ordered to be
revived and continued in such sort as in the Bill for the reviving and
continuance of Statutes is contained.

The Proviso to the Bill against Regrators, Forestallers and Ingrossers
mentioned in the said Bill of Reviver, was read the third time, and passed the
House.

An Addition to the old former Statute for preservation of Woods, was read the
second time.

Mr. Doctor Yale and Mr. Doctor Vaughan, brought from the Lords two Bills; the
one for coming to Church and receiving the Communion, and the other for the
severance of the Sheriffs in the Counties of Bedford and Buckingham, with some
amendments: and did also require, that six of this House may presently confer
with the Lords touching the Bill against Bankrupts.

The Bill for reviving and continuance of certain Statutes was passed upon the
Question with some Additions and some Substractions.

On Friday the 25th day of May, Mr. Treasurer, Mr. Chancellor of the Exchequer,
Sir Thomas Scott, Sir Henry Morris, Mr. Sergeant Manwood, Mr. Mounson, Mr.
Norton, Mr. Alford, Mr. Cromwell, Mr. Thomas Snagg, Mr. Bedle, Mr. Nicholas St
Ledger, and Mr. Sands, were appointed to have Conference with the Lords touching
the Bill against Fugitives.

The Bill against taking of any Grain or Victuals within five Miles of the City
of London, was read the third time and passed the House.

Mr. Attorney General and Mr. Doctor Vaughan brought from the Lords three
Bills; one for the Incorporation of both the Universities; another for the
Incorporation of Weymouth and Melcomb Regis in the County of Dorset; and
another for the increase of Tillage, and maintenance of the Navy; with
recommendations from the Lords of the Bill against taking of any Grain or
Victual within five Miles compass of the Universities of Oxford or Cambridge,
like as their Lordships had done on their parts upon like request of this House
in the said Bill concerning Tillage and the Navy.

Mr. Attorney General and Mr. Doctor Huick brought word, that the Lords pray
Conference with some of this House at two of the Clock this Afternoon, touching
the Bill for the twelve Shires of Wales, and also present report of the
Committees of this House, touching the Bill against Bankrupts.

My Lord Deputy of Ireland, Mr. Comptroller, Sir Nicholas Arnold, Mr. Attorney
of the Duchy, Sir Henry Jones, Sir George Blunt, Mr. William Gerrard, and Mr.
Bassett, were appointed to attend upon the Lords touching the Bill of the
twelve Shires of Wales.

The Bill against the taking of any Grain or Victual within five Miles compass
of the Universities of Oxford and Cambridge, being a Bill sent from the Lords,
and specially recommended from them, having at the third reading thereof an
Addition or amendment in paper upon the Question affiled unto it, the said
Addition or amendment then having been but once read, the Bill was put to the
Question, and the House thereupon divided; and afterward the error aforesaid
being found, it was after sundry motions Ordered upon another Question, that
the said Addition or amendment being three times read, the Bill should go to
the Question again; which being so done, the Bill afterward passed upon the
division of the House accordingly.

Post Meridiem.

In the Afternoon the Bill for the maintenance of the Havens of Plymouth and
Dartmouth, etc. was read the third time, and passed the House.

Sir Thomas Smith, Sir William Pawlet, Sir Francis Hastings, Mr. Heneage, Mr.
Recorder of London, Mr. Stokes, Mr. Thomas Brown, Mr. Hussy, Mr. John
Hastings, Mr. Thomas Snagg, Mr. Strickland, and Mr. St John, were appointed to
have Conference with the Lords touching the Bill against corrupt Presentations.

The Bill for the Incorporation of the Towns of Weymouth and Melcomb-Regis, and
the Bill for the increase of Tillage and maintenance of the Navy were each of
them twice read.

Mr. Comptroller, Sir Christopher Haydon, Sir Thomas Russell, Sir William
Pawlet, Sir Nicholas Arnold, Sir Henry Gate, Mr. Baynton, Mr. Grice, Mr.
Strickland, Mr. Seckerson, Mr. Clear, Mr. John Horsey, Mr. Stanhop, Mr.
Hasset, Mr. Edgcomb, and Mr. Laton, were appointed to..... And here the whole
matter breaks off abruptly in the Original Journal Book of the House of
Commons, through the negligence of Fulk Onslow Esquire Clerk of the same: but it is
most probable, that these Committees were nominated in the Bill last
beforementioned, upon the first and second reading thereof.

On Saturday the 26th day of May, the Bill for the River of Lee was read the
first time and referred to be considered of by Mr Comptroller of the Duchy, Mr
Wilson, the Master of Requests, Sir Henry Gate, Sir John White, Mr Moore, Mr
Holstock, Mr Grimston, Mr Baghe, Mr Robert North, Mr Henry Cock, Mr Dacre, Mr
Norton, Mr Humberston, and Mr Bowyer.

The Bill against the untrue Demeanors of Tellors, Receivors, Treasurers and
Collectors, was read the third time and referred to be considered of by Mr
Treasurer, Mr Chancellor of the Exchequer, Sir Nicholas Arnold, Sir Humphrey
Gilbert, Mr Heneage, Mr Recorder of London, Mr. Sampoole, Mr. Humberston, Mr.
Bedle, Mr. Norton, Mr. Ireby and Mr. Thomas Brown.

The Bill for Incorporating of both the Universities of Oxford and Cambridge,
was twice read.

Mr. Doctor Jews and Mr. Doctor Huick, brought from the Lords one Bill
touching the limitation, reviving and continuing of Statutes.

The Bills which lastly passed in this House, were sent to the Lords by Mr.
Comptroller and others.

The Bill for the Incorporating of the Towns of Weymouth and Melcomb-Regis, was
read the third time and passed the House.

Post Meridiem.

In the Afternoon Mr. Doctor Jews and Mr. Doctor Vaughan, brought from the
Lords one Bill touching the limitation of Fees for Counselors and others
toward the Law, which was specially recommended from the Queens Majesty.

Mr. Doctor Yale and Mr. Doctor Vaughan, brought from the Lords the said former
Bill Indorsed, for that the same was delivered without Indorsement.

Mr. Solicitor and Mr. Doctor Yale did desire from the Lords, that six of this
House be presently sent unto them of those which did yesterday confer with
their Lordships touching the Bill against Fugitives.

Four Bills lastly of no great moment had each of them one reading; of which
the second being the Bill for increase of Tillage, and maintenance of the Navy,
was read the third time and passed upon the Question.

May the 27th Sunday.

On Monday the 28th day of May, the Bill for the Jointure of the Lady Berkley,
was read the third time, and passed the House.

The Provisoes to the Bill for the River of Lee, were thrice read and passed
with the Bill upon the Question, and sent up to the Lords by Mr. Chancellor of
the Duchy and others.

The Proviso to the Bill for the Jointure of the Lady Berkley was thrice read
and passed with the Bill upon the Question, and sent up to the Lords by Mr.
Treasurer and others.

Sir Richard Read and Mr. Doctor Vaughan, brought from the Lords the Bill for
John Tirrell Esquire, with certain amendments.

Mr. Doctor Jews and Mr. Doctor Huick brought word, that the Lords desire to
have six of this House to confer with them presently touching the severance of
the Sheriffs in the Counties of Surrey and Sussex. Whereupon Mr. Thomas Brown,
Mr Moor, Mr Palmer, Mr Comper, Mr Morley, and Mr Bowyer, were appointed and
sent to them accordingly.

Mr Doctor Jews and Mr Doctor Yale, did desire from the Lords to know the mind
of this House, whether this House can be contented to leave Surrey and Sussex
out of the Bill for severance of Sheriffs, if there Lordships shall so think
meet: which being opened to the House, it was upon the Question Ordered, that
they shall be left out, if the Lords so will.

All the Privy Council being Members of this House, Sir Nicholas Arnold, Sir
Thomas Scott, Sir Thomas Lucy, Sir Humphrey Gilbert, Mr Recorder of London, Mr
Mounson, Mr Yelverton, and Mr Robert North were, upon some Speeches uttered to
this House, that some of the Members of this House should take money for their
Voices, appointed to meet this Afternoon in the Star Chamber, and to Examine
what persons, being Members of this House, have taken any Fees or Rewards for
their Voices, in the furtherance or hinderance of any Bills offered in this
House, and then afterward to make report of the particularities thereof unto
this House accordingly. Vide the residue of this business on the next day
following.

Post Meridiem.

In the Afternoon the Bill for shooting in Hand-Guns and Harquebuses, was read
the second time and Ordered to be engrossed.

Mr Doctor Jews and Mr Doctor Huick, brought from the Lords the Bill against
untrue Demeanors of Tellors, Receivors, Treasurers and Collectors, with a new
Proviso; and the Bill for severance of Sheriffs in sundry Counties, Surrey and
Sussex being left out.

The Bill for Counselors Fees was read the third time.

Mr Doctor Huick and Mr Doctor Vaughan, brought from the Lords the Bill for the
River of Lee, with some Additions and Amendments.

Sir Walter Mildmay, Sir Thomas Smith, Sir John Thynne, Mr Wilson, Master of
the Requests, Mr Heneage, Mr Recorder, Mr Mounson, Mr Yelverton, and Mr
Bembrick, were appointed to meet here in the Chamber to Morrow in the Morning
at seven of the Clock, to consider of the Bill for Counselors Fees.

On Tuesday the 29th day of May, Mr Sergeant Barham and Mr Doctor Huick,
brought from the Lords the Bill of the Queens Majesty's General and free Pardon.

The Committees for Examination of Fees or Rewards taken for Voices in the
House reported, That they cannot learn of any that has sold his Voice in this
House, or any way dealt unlawfully or indirectly in that behalf, and thereupon
Mr Norton declaring, that he heard that some had him in suspicion, justified
himself, and was upon the question purged by the Voice of the whole House, and
their good opinion of him, and of his honest and dutiful dealing and great
pains taking in the service of this House, were in very good and acceptable
part declared and affirmed by the like Voice of the whole House.

The Bill for shooting in Hand-Guns and Harquebuses, was read the third time
and passed the House. And the Bill also for the Queens Majesty's most gracious
and free Pardon was read.

Post Meridiem.

In the Afternoon the Bill for Counselors Fees (the third reading being
yesterday accomplished) was now passed upon the Question.

All the Bills passed were sent up to the Lords by Mr Treasurer and others.
After which the manner of the Conclusion of the Parliament is Entered in the
Original Journal Book of the House of Commons Verbatim as follows:

About four of the Clock this Afternoon the Queens Majesty being set in her
Royal Seat in the Upper House, Mr Speaker made his Oration, presented unto her
Highness the Book of the Subsidy, and in the name of the whole House gave her
Majesty most humble thanks for her Highness General and free Pardon; And prayed
her Majesty's Royal Assent unto such Acts and Laws as had passed both the
Houses in this Sessions. Whereupon her Highness gave her Royal Assent unto
forty one Acts, and so Dissolved this present Parliament.

THE JOURNAL OF THE House of LORDS.
The Journal of the Passages of the House of Lords, in the Parliament bolden at
Westminster, An. 14 Reginae Eliz. A. D. 1572, which began there on Thursday the
8th Day of May, and then and there continued until the Adjournment thereof on
Monday the 30th and last Day of June next ensuing.

THIS Session of Parliament held in An. 14 Reginae Eliz. although it lasted no
long time, yet it contains in it a great deal of extraordinary matter
touching the Proceeding of the House in the business of the Scottish Queen; and
toward the Conclusion thereof touching the Privilege of the Members of the
same: and that which does yet somewhat the more enlarge and beautify it, is
the Addition of Sir Nicholas Bacon's Speech, being the Lord Keeper of the Great
Seal, on the first day of this Session. But howsoever this said Session were in
it self short in Continuance, yet considering the two other following Sessions,
which with it made but one and the same Parliament, and that the longest of any
in this Queens time, it will not prove unworthy (although the aforesaid
extraordinary passages wanted) of a careful and methodical setting down. For
the second Session being held in An. 18 Regin. Eliz. and the third and last
Session in An. 23 Regin. ejusdem, it was continued by many Adjournments and
Prorogations (although the House sat but a part of the time) until the final
Dissolution thereof upon the 19th day of April in An. 25 Reginae praedictae,
after it had lasted about the space of eleven years.

On Thursday the 8th day of May, according to the Writ of Summons that had been
sent forth dated at Greenwich the 5th day of May, in the fourteenth year of the
Queen, the Parliament held.

Nota, That the Writ of Summons is set down in the Original Journal Book of the
Upper House to have born date the 5th day of May in this fourteenth year, and
the Parliament to have begun on the 8th day of May in the same year of the
Queen, but three days after the Writ of Summons it self, which is impossible;
and it is plain, that the day of the beginning of the Parliament cannot be
mistaken, because according to that all the other days through the whole
Journal Book do follow in due form and order: and therefore it is very
probable, that the date of the Writ is set down contrary to the Originals
themselves, which were dated the 5th day of March, and that the Clerk might
mistake. This is likewise very conjecturable in respect that the name of the
Month being set down and perhaps abbreviated, it was easily written May for
March, and so this incongruity is only the slip and error of the Clerk.

The Queens Majesty was doubtless present her self this day in the Upper House,
and was attended by Sir Nicholas Bacon Lord Keeper of the Great Seal, and
diverse Lords Spiritual and Temporal; but in the Journal Book of the Upper House
there is no mention made who were present this day, only it may be guessed by
the names of such as the said Original Journal Book sets down to have been
present on Monday the 12th day of this instant May following, which is the
first day on which the presence of any Lords is marked, according to the usual
form by the Clerk of the Parliament.

Neither can it possibly be collected or gathered by the Original Journal Book
of the Upper House, or House of Commons, whether her Majesty was present or no.
For as concerning the Journal of the House of Commons it appears only, that
diverse of the Knights, Citizens and Burgesses of the said House of Commons did
this day take the Oath in that Case accustomed. And therefore the chief ground
I had to conclude that her Majesty was this day personally in the Upper House,
was a Copy I had by me of the Lord Keepers Speech made there this day in the
public Assembly of both Houses, in the end of which he gives direction to the
House of Commons to Elect their Speaker; which shows also that the said Speech
in diverse Copies thereof is falsely attributed to the eighteenth Year of her
Majesty, which was but the second Session of this Parliament, and no Speaker
Elected in it; and therefore this Error seems only to have grown through the
fault of Transcribers and the ignorance of such as suffered so groundless an
Error to stand.

The said Speech therefore of the Lord Keeper, pronounced by her Majesty's
Commandment, was as follows, viz.

THE Queens Majesty, our most Dread and Gracious Sovereign Lady, has given me
Commandment to declare unto you the Causes of the Summons of this Assembly for
a Parliament to be holden here at this time; wherein albeit I mean to employ my
whole endeavor to the uttermost of my power and understanding, yet I must
needs confess, that neither shall you have it done as the Majesty of this
presence, neither as the gravity of the Cause requires it to be done. And yet
the often Experience that I have diverse and sundry times had of the Queens
Majesty's great benignity and gentleness in bearing with and well accepting the
doings of those that to her Service put their good wills and diligences; And
besides all, the proof of your Patience in the like matter has so much
encouraged me, that (as I trust) it shall be done although not cunningly nor
eloquently, yet plainly and truly, so as it may be well understood and easily
born away, and therewith also as briefly as the greatness of such a matter will
suffer. True it is, the original and principal cause is, that things there
propounded may be orderly and diligently debated, deeply considered, and
thereupon wisely concluded. And to the end also that those Conclusions so made,
the rather for such an universal Consent as in Parliament is used, remain firm
and stable.

Now the matters that are in this Parliament to be proved, do consist
altogether in two parts. The former is in matters of Religion, for the better
maintenance of Gods Honor and Glory. The second in matters of Policy, for the
more perfect upholding and establishing of the Queens Majesty's Royal Estate,
and the preservation of the Commonweal committed to her Charge. The Causes of
Religion are again to be divided into two, that is into matters of Doctrine and
Discipline. The thing of Policy I mean also to part into other two, that is,
into matter concerning the good Government of the Subjects at home, and into
causes of defense against the Enemy abroad.

And thus by this Process you see you are, as indeed you ought,

First, To consider in this your Assembly of Gods cause, which faithfully,
sincerely and diligently done, like as it cannot but bring success to all the
rest, so likewise lukewarm, deceitful and double-dealing therein cannot but
breed, nourish and bring forth Factions, Divisions, Seditions, etc. to the
great peril and danger of all the rest. And the greater that the personages be
in Authority and Dignity that thus deal, the greater of necessity must be the
danger of the Commonweal. And because Gods Law and Doctrine being the first
Law and branch must light upon our selves that ought to take the benefit of it,
as first and chiefly upon Ministers of this Doctrine, either for not preaching
and teaching by word and example of life so purely and reverently as they
might, or else not so diligently as they were bound.

And secondly upon us for not hearing it so desirously, or else hearing it and
forgetting it, or not following it so effectually as we should.

Thirdly, For that many of us of the Laity do not yield and give that
estimation, countenance and credit to the Ministers of his Doctrine which of
right they ought to have, and that many greatly hurt the setting forth of it:
For this one thing may be holden firm by the Rules of good Government, that all
Officers both Spiritual and Temporal that have Governance, during the time of
their Offices, ought to be preserved in Credit and Estimation. For how can any
thing be well set forth by them that want Credit? Marry for my part let the
time of their Offices last as their doings do deserve.

Fourthly, Because the want of the number of Ministers that ought to be and be
not, and for the insufficiency of those that be for diverse respects. But
therein the Queens Highness doubts nothing but all that which the difficulty
of time in so great a scarcity of men meet to be Ministers will suffer to be
done, shall by my Lords the Bishops be done in this behalf, and that as
speedily, diligently and carefully as can be. And if any person admitted or to
be admitted to this Ministry shall hereafter either of Arrogance or Ignorance,
show any strange Doctrine contrary, or varying from that which by common
consent of the Realm is published, to the breach of Unity, that he by those to
whom it appertains, sharply and speedily be reformed, all favor and fear set
apart.

Thus much for Doctrine. You are most earnestly also to think and consider of
the Discipline of the Church as one of the strong Pillars of Religion, which
doubtless at this time has two great lacks. The first the imperfection of Laws
for the countenance of it; which has grown either by reason that sundry of the
Ordinances made for that purpose, be disused or otherwise have not their force;
or else for that most of the Laws that remain be such as for their softness few
men make account of.

The second imperfection is the slothfulness, corruption and fearfulness of the
Ecclesiastical Ministers and Officers in the due Execution of those Laws that
be good and yet continue. True and too true it is, that hereby at this present
two great Enormities daily grow: The former that men of wealth and power given
to be evil may in their Countries live what dissolute and licentious life they
list, and both Temporally and Spiritually offend daily in all the branches of
Simony, the very Canker of the Church without feeling of this Discipline.

The second, That many of the laudable Rites and Ceremonies of the Church, or
pertaining to the Ministers of the same agreed upon by common consent, the very
Ornaments of our Religion are very ill kept, or at least have lost a great part
of their Estimation. And here (through the many faults for want of Discipline)
to remember you of one particular matter of great moment. How comes it to pass
that the common people in the Country universally come so seldom to
Common Prayer and Divine Service, and when they do come, be many times so
vainly occupied there, or at least do not there as they should do, but for want
of this Discipline?

And yet to the help of this there was at the last Parliament a Law made, but
hitherto no man, no, no man or very few has seen it Executed; as plainly to
speak, Laws for the furtherance of this Discipline unexecuted be Rods for
Correction without Hands. It cannot be denied but as Superstition is every way
to be abhorred for fear of Idolatry; so certainly the loss of this Discipline
is always to be avoided, lest else contempt (that necessarily must follow) may
cause Irreligion to creep faster in than a man would think. For of all other it
is the most pestilent and pernicious thing, never suffered nor allowed in
anyCommon-Weal, nay not amongst the Heathens that were most barbarous. But here
it may be said the mischief appears, where is the remedy? and that it were
better not opened in such a presence, than opened without the remedy both
devised and declared.

In mine opinion the remedies may easily be devised: all the difficulty is in
the well Executing of them. As first, if the chief Parsonages of this Realm,
both in Town and Country, would give good Example, it cannot be but it would be
much to the remedying of a great part of this mischief.

Secondly, The dividing every one of the Dioceses according to their greatness
into Deaneries, as I know commonly they be; and the committing of the Deaneries
to men well chosen, as I think commonly they be not: and then the keeping of
certain ordinary Courts at their prescript times for the well Executing of
those Laws of Discipline, as they ought to be, with a sure controulment of
those inferior Ministers by the Bishop or his Chancellor, not biennially or
triennially, but every year twice or thrice: which use of necessity without
very great difficulty may do much in very short time to the reformation of
this, the chief Officers Ecclesiastical all being very well, and the Laws
themselves being first made sufficient and perfect, which in this Parliament
may very well be brought to pass.

And because the proceedings of matters in Discipline and Doctrine do chiefly
concern my Lords the Bishops, both for their understanding and Ecclesiastical
Function, therefore the Queens Highness looks that they being called together
here in Parliament, should take the chiefest care to confer and consult of
these matters. And if in their Conference they found it behooful to have any
Temporal Acts made for the amending and reforming of any of these lacks, that
then they will exhibit it here in Parliament to be considered upon, and so
Gladius Gladium, juvabit, as before time has been used; foreseeing always that
all Laws and Ordinances for this matter of Doctrine and Discipline be uniform,
and so one sort throughout the whole Realm. And thus much concerning Religion,
being the first part.

Now to the second, that is, matters of Policy. And herein first for the good
Government of the Subjects at home, the lacks and defaults whereof as in
Discipline so in this stand altogether in the imperfection of Laws, or else the
fearfulness, slothfulness and corruption of Temporal Officers, that ought to
see the due Execution of them. For the help of the former, you are to Examine
whether any Laws already made are too sharp or too sore, and so over-burthensom
for the Subject, or whether any of them are too loose or too soft, and so
over-dangerous to the State; for like as the former may put in danger many an
Innocent particularly, so the second may put in danger both the nocent and
innocent, and the whole State universally. You are also further to Examine the
want and superfluity of Laws, and whether crafty Covetousness and Malice have
devised any means to defraud Laws already made, or how to do any injuries for
which there is no Law that has his being to reform it: or whether the
Commonweal and State of this Realm, by reason of any imperfection or cause, is
like to fall to any danger or peril; for the greater the danger is, the greater
would the care and consideration be for the remedy of it. You are also to
Examine whether there are too many Laws for any one thing, which breeds so
many doubts, that the Subject is sometimes to seek how to observe them, and the
Chancellor how to give advice concerning them.

As to the second imperfection, which is the want of the due Execution of Laws;
because I cannot perceive but all the rest and all Laws made and to be made is
but a vain matter, therefore I have thought often with my self what might be the
best remedy, if not to make all Laws perfectly Executed (for that I can hardly
hope of) yet to make them in much better Case than now they be. And when I had
considered all things, I could find no help but this: The first by having great
care in the choice of those Officers that have the Execution of Laws. The
second, to do as much as may be for the banishing of sloth, corruption and
fears from them. A third way there is which I leave to your judgments, this it
is: there should be a triennial or biennial Visitation in this nature, made of
all the Temporal Officers and Ministers that by virtue of their Office have in
charge to see the Execution of Laws. By this I mean that the Queens Majesty
should make choice every second or third year of certain expert and approved
persons, to whom Commission should be granted to try out and examine by all
ways and means the offenses of all such as have not seen to the due Execution
of the Laws according to the offices and charges committed to them by the
Prince. And the offenses so found and certified to be sharply punished without
remission or redemption. Of effect much like this, and to the like end was the
Visitation of the Church first devised; whereof, in the beginning of it, came
great good doubtless; and reason I see none but the like good ought to follow
upon like Visitation made amongst Temporal Officers. And the old Commission of
Oyer tended somewhat to this end. I doubt certainly if the Laws and Statutes of
this Realm should not indifferently, uprightly and diligently be put in
Execution (as my trust is they shall) especially in the great and open Courts
of this Realm, then my burden, I confess, is equal with the greatest, and yet
for my part, I would gladly every year hear of, and yield to such a Comptroller.

Now to the last and greatest, which is the defense against the Foreign Enemy
abroad and his Confederates brought up and bred amongst us our selves, because
these matters be by reason now chiefly in hand, and that the dealings of the
outward Enemy be matters that go to the whole, and that this presence you know
represents the whole; Therefore in all congruity it seems reason that all
we for and in the name of the whole consider carefully of this cause, and give
present assistance for the help of it. And to the end you may be more able to
give good Counsel and advice therein, it has been thought meet I should
summarily and shortly make you privy of these proceedings, which shall be the
better understood if I begin at the root as I intend:

This it is: The Queens Majesty at her coming to the Crown finding this her
Realm in a ragged and torn State, and yet in Wars with a mighty Enemy, the
Chief Fortress of the same lost, to the Realms great dishonor and weakening;
her Frontier Towns not sufficiently fortified, the Revenue of the Crown greatly
spoiled, the Treasure of the Realm not only wasted, but the Realm also greatly
indebted; The Land of Ireland much out of order; The Staple and Store of all
kind of Munition for the Realms defense marvellously consumed; The Navy and Sea
matters nothing in the State they now be, was forced to give Ear to a Peace
with some other Conditions than else it is like her Highness would have come
to, to the end that these dangerous defaults might be in the time of Peace
sufficiently for the security of the Realm provided for. Whereupon indeed her
Highness (Peace being concluded) entered into the reforming and supplying of
most of all those great lacks, and for the well-doing of them has not forborne
to take any care or pains, neither has she sticked for the compassing of this
both to spend her own Treasure, to sell her own Lands, to prove her own Credit
at home and abroad to the uttermost, and all this for our Sureties and quiet.
(Here want the Causes why the Queens Highness sent her Forces to lie in
assisting the Admiral and others against the Guises, and a Declaration of the
great charges that grew thereby.)

Thus have you heard the sum of those Proceedings; whereby it is plain and
evident, that as our most Dear and Gracious Sovereign Lady, has for the
preservation of common quiet, and for our own Surety against the common Enemy,
for born no care or travel in the devising, no more has she charge or expense
in the performing. I may safely affirm it, because I am well able to prove it,
that the Charges of the managing of these Affairs, and that that has been done
since the Queens Majesty came to the Crown in supplying the dangers
aforementioned, amount to as much as two of the greatest Subsidies that I can
remember; a matter not possibly to be born for that which is past, nor to be
continued for that which is to come by the ordinary Revenue of the Crown, and
yet of necessity to be done, except all (which God forbid) should run to ruin:
If when any part of the natural body happens to be in danger, the head and
every part hastes to the relief; what would then be done trow ye, when peril
is offered, that the Head should take the whole care and bear the whole
burden, and all the Members remain uncareful and uncharged therewith? How
light a burden it is when it is born of many, is understood of us all. But
hereof I make a stay, because there is no doubt your good wills and towardness
upon these Considerations be such, as this last Speech of mine needs not, and
so doubtless the Queens Highness takes it. And yet your Wisdoms well know,
that the Office of this place which I occupy, craveth thus much to be said at
my hands, and for that purpose chiefly could I trust you take it, and not for
any necessity to draw them by persuasion that otherwise of their own
disposition be forward enough. The Declarations of the Proceedings being
uttered, I do assure my self to suffice to men of your understanding and
inclination. For how can a man think that any is so void of reason, that he
would not gladly offer any aid against a Foreign Enemy, that he were able to
make for the safety of his own Country, his Sovereign, himself, his Wife and
Children; especially when by reason it is plain, that the Queens Majesty has
already, and daily does employ her own Treasure, yea, and her Lands and Credit,
not in any Glorious Triumphs, superfluous and sumptuous Buildings of delight,
vain and chargable Embassages, neither in any other matters of will and
pleasure; I mean, no Expense to be noted in a Prince of thirteen Years Reign,
but as far as man can judge in the Service of her Realm and necessary defense
for her people, and for the annoyance of the Enemy. Yet has it been seen ere
this, that Princes Wills, Pleasures and Delights, have been followed in
Expenses as necessities. And now God be thanked the doings have been such since
the Queens Highness Reign, that to the indifferent man it will be probable and
plain, that the relieving of the Realms necessity is become the Princes
Delight; a good Change, God continue it, a mavelous good Example for us to
follow, and yet it is scant credible how long it was, and in the end with what
difficulty the Queens Majesty came to agree that this Example should be
followed by us, in being content that this Parliament should be Summoned, that
it might be moved that the Realm might contribute to the Realms defense, with
such difficulty indeed, that if any other way could have been devised (her
Honor and Realms Surety saved) this had never been attempted: So loath she is
to any offensive matter by burden or charge, that if any other way could have
been devised, this had not been: and so from her own Mouth she Commanded me to
say unto you.

Oh what a grief it is to a Prince (trow you) when he finds such want that he
is not able so to consider of the Service of his Servants and Subjects; this
dangerous and necessary Service, as their deserts do crave! knowing that most
commonly the very life and heart of the Servant, and Soldier which so often
offers himself to the Cannon, the Pike, the Fire, is either over-thrown or
set up as regard is had of his perils. Except there be some odd men (as they
call them) of that perfection, that virtue and well-doing is their mark, and
not reward, who hold for firm, that Recti facti merces est fecisse tantum, but
Rara avis in terris, etc. Yea, those are so rare as counsel cannot be given
that Princes Service should hang on the help of such hope, and yet these be the
perfectest and best, but the World is not served by such. To give good words is
a good thing, but often used, albeit never so cunningly, without Deeds or
Service, is reputed but as Wind, and is indeed dare verba. Marry, power serving
not, then it deserves great Commendations; for it is as much as can be done:
for ultra posse non est esse. But hereof thinks little the greatest number.
But to a Prince who thinks thus much, and daily thinks and feels of it,
what a tormenting trouble is such a want think ye? These wants when they
happen, would be, ought to be most helped. But here I have troubled you further
than I meant, or perchance needed. If I have so done, I pray you apply it to
the best as I meant it, and so there must needs come good of it.

And thus no further to trouble you but to make an end. You have heard First,
the causes of this Assembly. Secondly, What I think meet to be remembered.
Thirdly, What for the Governance of the Subject at home, and what has been
done for the defense of the Enemy abroad; your Offices and Duties, to be
careful to consider of these matters, which I have the rather summarily
remembered than effectually discoursed upon. The former pertains to my Office
as a Remembrancer. The second to you as Executors of these remembrances. And
because you of the Nether House cannot without a Head thus do, therefore it
rests, that you according to your ancient Order, of your selves choose some
wise and discreet man, who after he has been by you chosen and presented, and
that presentation by the Queens Majesty allowed, shall then be your Speaker,
and Day is given, etc.

This Speech being thus transcribed out of the Copy I had of it, as is
aforesaid; now follow the names of the Receivors and Tryors of Petitions out of
the Original Journal Book of the Upper House, which the Clerk of the same
reads in French as soon as the Lord Keepers Speech is ended, and which were
as follows.

Receivors of Petitions for England, Ireland, Wales and Scotland.

Sir Robert Catlin Knight, Chief Justice of the King's Bench, Sir William
Cordell Knight, Master of the Rolls, Sir John Widdon Knight, one of the
Justices of the -- -- - Sir Richard Read Knight, one of the Justices of the -- -- -
and Dr Huick; and they that will deliver Petitions, are to deliver the same
within six days next ensuing.

Receivors of Petitions for Gascoigne and other Lands beyond the Seas and the
Isles.

Sir James Dyer Knight, Chief Justice of the Common Pleas, Sir Edward Sanders
Knight, Lord Chief Baron, Richard Weston, one of the Justices of the -- -- -
John Southcott, one of the Justices of the -- -- - Doctor Lewis, Doctor Yale
and Doctor Vaughan: and they that will deliver Petitions, are to deliver the
same within six days next ensuing.

Triors of Petitions for England, Ireland, Wales and Scotland.

The Archbishop of Canterbury, the Earl of Oxford, the Earl of Sussex, the Earl
of Huntington, the Earl of Bedford, the Bishop of London, the Bishop of
Winchester, the Bishop of Ely, the Lord Howard of Effingham, Lord Chamberlain
of the Queens House, the Lord Windsor, and the Lord North. All these or four of
them calling unto them the Lord Keeper of the Great Seal, and the Treasurer,
and the Queens Sergeants when need shall require, shall hold their place in the
Chamberlains Chamber.

Triors of Petitions for Gascoigne and other Islands beyond the Seas.

The Archbishop of York, the Earl of Lincoln, Lord Admiral of England, the Earl
of Leicester, the Earl of Essex, the Bishop of Worcester, the Bishop of
Lincoln, the Bishop of Rochester, the Lord Burleigh Principal Secretary, the
Lord Wentworth, the Lord Buckhurst. All they or four of them calling to them
the Queens Sergeants, Attorney and Solicitor when need shall require, shall
hold their place in the Treasurer's Chamber.

Hodie retornatum est breve Dom. Reginae quo Henricus Compton de Compton
Chevalier praesenti Parliamento interesse summonitus est, qui praesens admissus
est ad suum praeheminentiae sedendi in Parliamento locum, salvo cuique jure suo.

And two other Writs were returned in like manner, by which Henry Cheyney of
Toddington, and Henry Lord Norris of Ricott, were Summoned to be present this
Parliament, who were accordingly admitted to their due places, saving to all
others their right.

Nota, That there is no entrance in the Original Journal Book of the Upper
House, of any Continuance or Adjournment of the Parliament by the Lord Keeper,
which doubtless happened through the great negligence of Anthony Mason Esquire at
this time Clerk of the said House.

There were also diverse Proxies returned on this present Thursday, being the
8th day of May, but whether before or after the Continuance of the Parliament
appears not; in which two Spiritual Lords Constituted each of them two
Proctors apiece, according to the usual and frequent manner, and are therefore
omitted; but four other Bishops nominating either three Proctors apiece or but
one, which is somewhat extraordinary, therefore they are here inserted.

Die 8o Maij, introductae sunt literae Procuratoriae Hugonis Episcopi Landaven.
in quibus Procuratores suos constituit Nicolaum Wigorn., Richardum Meneven, and
Nicolaum Bangoren. Episcopos.

Eodem die introductae sunt literae Procuratoriae Jacobi Dunelmensis Episcopi,
in quibus Procuratorem suum constituit Edmundum Archiepiscopum Ebor.

Eodem die introductae sunt literae Procuratoriae Johannis Herefordensis
Episcopi, in quibus Procuratores suos constituit Matthaeum Cantuariensem
Archiepiscopum and Edwin. London. and Nicolaum Wigorn. Episcopos.

Eodem die introductae sunt literae Procuratoriae Thomae Assavensis Episcopi,
in quibus Procuratores suos constituit Robertum Wintonien, Nicolaum Wigorn., ac
Nicolaum Bangoren. Episcopos.

Now although it be most usual for the Spiritual Lords to name two Proctors,
yet here four of six varied from it, three of them exceeding that number, and
the other nominating but one. It is likewise as usual for the Temporal Lords to
Constitute but one Proctor, and it is an Action worthy observation where they
nominate more; for in this very Parliament of fifteen Temporal Lords that sent
Proxies, but one nominated two Proctors: which see afterward, on Monday the
12th day of this instant May following, and all the rest Constituted but one
Proctor apiece, which being trivial and ordinary are omitted.

Nota, Also that the Earl of Leicester had this Parliament eight Proxies sent
unto him, viz. from George Earl of Shrewsbury, Edward Earl of Darby, Henry Lord
Scroop, Edward Lord Dudley, Anthony Viscount Mountacute, Gregory Lord Dacres,
William Lord Sands, and Edward Earl of Lincoln; all which seem to have been
returned on Monday the 12th day of this instant May, in such order as they are
here set down.

Nota, That the Lord Burleigh also Principal Secretary to her Majesty, had six
Proxies sent unto him this Parliament, viz. from John Marquess of Winchester,
Henry Lord Hunsdon, Thomas Lord Buckhurst, John Lord Latimer, Edward Earl of
Lincoln (who made also the Earl of Leicester his joint Proctor with him) and
Robert Lord Rich. These also are set down in the Journal Book to have been
returned the 12th day of May in such order as they are here set down; but now
by a late Order made in the Upper House an. 2do Caroli Regis, no Lord is
capable of above two Proxies.

Nota, That in the Original Journal Book of the Upper House it does not appear
at all whether her Majesty or any of the Lords were present on Saturday
following being the tenth day of this instant May, (it appearing plainly, that
neither House sat on Friday the 9th day of the same) nor what was done
thereon, and therefore the Passages of the same are supplied out of the
Original Journal Book of the House of Commons.

On Saturday the 10th day of May (in the Afternoon) her Majesty being come to
the Upper House, with diverse of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, being there
also set, and the Knights, Citizens, Burgesses and Barons of the House of
Commons having notice repaired thither with Robert Bell of the Middle Temple
London Esquire their Speaker Elect, who was led up unto the Rail or Bar, at the
lower end of the said Upper House, by two of the most Eminent Personages of the
Commons, and presented to her Majesty, whom she allowed and Confirmed in the
said place of Prolocutor or Speaker, notwithstanding his Excuse made, and
disabling himself according to the usual form.

After which the said Speaker being now fully and absolutely invested in his
said place, did after his humble thanks rendered to her Majesty, in the
Conclusion of his Speech make certain Petitions of course in the behalf of
himself and the House of Commons, viz. for the free access to her Majesty,
freedom of Speech, and freedom from Arrests and Suits during the Continuance of
the Parliament, and for Pardon for himself if he should in any thing
unwittingly mistake or offend. All which being graciously allowed by her
Majesty, she arose and departed.

Nota, That there is no entrance in the Original Journal Book of the Upper
House of the Continuance or Adjournment of the Parliament, which doubtless
happened through the great negligence of Anthony Mason Esquire, now Clerk of the
same. For it is plain, the Lords did sit again on Monday following in the
Forenoon, to some hour of which it is most likely it was continued, and the
passages whereof, as also of all the other days on which the said House sat,
do now in order follow out of the aforesaid Original Journal Book of the same.

May the 11th Sunday.

On Monday the 12th of May, to which day the Parliament had been last continued
(as is most likely) the presence of the Lords is first noted in the Original
Journal Book of the Upper House, which were as follows (their Names only
being altered into English.)

The Archbishop of Canterbury. The Archbishop of York. Sir Nicholas Bacon
Knight, Lord Keeper of the Great Seal of England. The Marquess of Winchester.
Comites.
The Earl of Oxford Great Chamberlain of England. The Earl of Kent. The Earl of
Worcester. The Earl of Rutland. The Earl of Sussex. The Earl of Warwick. The
Earl of Pembroke. The Earl of Hartford. The Earl of Leicester. The Earl of
Essex. Viscount Bindon.
Episcopi.
The Bishop of London. The Bishop of Winchester. The Bishop of Ely. The Bishop
of Worcester. The Bishop of St David's. The Bishop of Salisbury. The Bishop of
Bath and Wells. The Bishop of Coventry and Litchfield. The Bishop of
Peterborough. The Bishop of Norwich. The Bishop of Chester. The Bishop of
Bangor. The Bishop of Lincoln. The Bishop of Exeter. The Bishop of Rochester.
Barons.
The Lord Howard of Effingham, Chamberlain to the Queen. The Lord Burleigh,
Secretary to the Queen. The Lord Abergaveny. The Lord Strange. The Lord Dacres.
The Lord Stafford. The Lord Gray of Wilton. The Lord Mountjoy. The Lord Darcy.
The Lord Mounteagle. The Lord Sands. The Lord Windsor. The Lord Wentworth. The
Lord Borough. The Lord St John of Basing. The Lord Cromwell. The Lord Evers.
The Lord Wharton. The Lord Willoughby of Parham. The Lord Pagett. The Lord
Darcy of Chich. The Lord North. The Lord Chandois. The Lord St John of Bletsoe.
The Lord Buckhurst. The Lord De la Ware. The Lord Compton. The Lord Cheyney.
The Lord Norris.
This day also by Order and Consent of the whole House, were appointed to
confer with such number of the House of Commons as should please the said House
to appoint, for the more speedy and better direction of them in the great
matter touching the Queen of Scots, these Lords undernamed, viz.

The Archbishop of Canterbury. The Archbishop of York. The Earl of Oxford. The
Earl of Kent. The Earl of Worcester. The Earl of Sussex. The Earl of Warwick.
The Earl of Bedford. The Earl of Leicester. The Earl of Essex. The Bishop of
London. The Bishop of Winchester. The Bishop of Ely. The Bishop of Lincoln. The
Bishop of Rochester. The Lord Chamberlain. The Lord Burleigh. The Lord Gray.
The Lord Windsor. The Lord Wentworth.
The Lord North, and the Lord Chandois. Who were appointed to meet in the
Star Chamber, at eight of the Clock in the Morning the next day. Vide on
Wednesday May the 28th ensuing.

The Bill for preservation of Wood and Timber was read prima vice and Commissa
Archiepiscopo Cantuar., Comiti Lincoln., Comiti Sussex, Comiti Leicester,
Episcopo Elien., Episcopo Wigorn., Episcopo Meneven., Domino Howard, Domino
Camerario, Domino Burleigh, Domino Windsor, Domino Wentworth, Domino Pagett,
Domino Chandois, Domino Buckhurst, and Justiciario Southcott and Justic. Weston.

The Bill for punishment of Vagabonds, and for relief of the poor was read
prima vice and Commissa Archiepiscopo Cantuar., Comiti Huntington, Comiti
Rutland, Comiti Pembroke, Comiti Hertford. Episcopo London. Episcopo Wigorn.,
Episcopo Meneven, Episcopo Bangor., Domino Gray, Domino St John, Domino Evers,
and Domino St John de Bletsoe, and Justiciario Harper, and Christophero Wray
Servienti ad Legem.

Nota, That here a Bill is not only committed upon the first reading, but a
Judge who is but a mere Assistant unto the Upper House, and a Sergeant who is
but a mien Attendant thereon, are made joint Committees with the Lords as in
the Bill foregoing.

Dominus Custos magni Sigilli continuavit praesens Parliamentum usque in diem
Crastinum hura Octava.

This day also was brought in the Proxy of Edward Earl of Lincoln into the
Upper House, and as it seems the Proxies of fourteen other Temporal Lords,
viz.

One Marquess, two Earls, one Viscount, and ten Barons.

But there is no mention made in the Original Journal Book whether they were
returned before or after the Continuance of the Parliament, according to the
usual form as aforesaid, which was in the Afternoon of this present Monday,
where each Temporal Lord nominateth one Proctor, and therefore were admitted;
but the Earl of Lincoln nominating two Proctors, which is somewhat
extraordinary, is transcribed out of the Original Journal Book as follows.

12th Maij introductae sunt literae Procuratoriae Edwardi Comitis Lincoln. in
quibus Procuratores suos constituit Robertum Comitem Leicester, and Willielmum
Dominum Burleigh.

On Tuesday the 13th day of May, to which day the Parliament had been last
continued, the Bill against corrupt Presentations was read Prima vice.

Nota, Because the daily continuing of the Parliament in these words, Dominus
Custos magni Sigilli, etc. is but matter of course, it is afterward through
the whole Journal Book omitted, unless something extraordinary fall out either
in respect of the person, time, or manner of continuing of it.

On Wednesday the 14th day of May, to which day the Parliament had been last
continued on the day next foregoing, diverse Lords Spiritual and Temporal
Assembled, but nothing was done save only the Continuance of the Parliament by
the Lord Keeper to the day next following, at eight of the Clock.

On Thursday the 15th day of May, to which day the Parliament had been
yesterday continued, the Bill for the punishment of Vagabonds and relief of the
Poor was read secunda vice: but there is no mention made that it was either
Ordered to be engrossed or referred to Committees, of which doubtless there can
be no other reason, (seeing it was not sent up from the House of Commons) than
the negligence of the Clerk of the Upper House, in respect that it is easy to
be conjectured, that this foregoing Bill was either Ordered to be engrossed or
recommitted to the former Committees, whose names see on Monday the 12th day of
this instant May foregoing.

On Friday the 16th day of May, the Bill against Forging and Counterfeiting of
Foreign Coin being not current within the Realm, was read prima vice.

On Saturday the 17th day of May, the Bill against Forging and Counterfeiting
of Foreign Coin being not current within the Realm, was read secunda vice, and
commissa ad ingrossand.

The Bill against corrupt Presentations was read secunda vice and commissa
Comiti Huntington, Com. Bedford, Episcopo Wigorn. Episcopo Wintonien. Domino
Gray, and Domino St John de Bletsoe. Vide concerning this Bill on Saturday the
31th of this instant May following.

The Bill also for the annexing of the Jurisdiction of Dorset to the Sea of
Sarum, was read prima vice and commissa Archiepiscopo Cantuar. Archiepiscopo
Ebor. Comiti Bedford, Comiti Pembroke, Vice-Com. Bindon, Episcopo Wigorn.
Episcopo Exon. Episcopo Lincoln. Episcopo Roffen. Domino Mountjoy, Domino St
John, Domino Chandois.

The Bill lastly for punishment of Vagabonds and relief of the Poor, was read
tertia vice and conclusa.

May the 18th Sunday.

On Monday the 19th day of May, to which day the Parliament had been last
continued. The Bill for the punishment of Vagabonds and relief of the Poor, was
delivered to Doctor Jews and Doctor Vaughan, to be carried to the House of
Commons.

The Bill also against Forging and Counterfeiting of Foreign Coin being not
current within the Realm, was read tertia vice, and sent to the House of
Commons by Doctor Yale and Doctor Huick.

The Bill lastly for punishment of such as shall rebelliously take or detain
from the Queens Majesty any Castle, Tower, Fortress, Ship or other Munition of
War, was read prima vice.

On Wednesday the 21th day of May, to which day the Parliament had been on
Monday last continued, three Bills were brought up to the Lords from the House
of Commons, of which the first being the Bill that the Tenant and Defendant may
have a Tales de circumstantibus, and the second against the deceit of
Under-Collectors of the Tenths and Subsidies of the Clergy, were each of them
read prima vice.

On Thursday the 22th day of May, introducta fuit Billa nova touching corrupt
Presentations, and prima vice lecta.

Six other Bills of no great moment had each of them one reading; of which the
third being the Bill touching corrupt Presentations; another that the Tenant
and Defendant may have a Tales de Circumstantibus, as well as the Demandant or
Plaintiff; and the last being the Bill against deceits of Under-Collectors of
the Tenths and Subsidies of the Clergy, were each of them read secunda vice:
but no mention is made that they were either Ordered to be engrossed or
referred to Committees, because they had been sent to their Lordships from the
House of Commons the day foregoing.

On Friday the 23th day of May, Two Bills of no great moment had each of them
one reading; of which the first being the Bill against deceits of
Under-Collectors of the Tenths and Subsidies of the Clergy, was read tertia
vice and conclusa.

Three other Bills also were each of them read secunda vice and commissae ad
ingrossand.; of which the third was the Bill against such as shall conspire or
practice the enlargement of any Prisoner committed for High Treason, etc.

On Saturday the 24th day of May, Two Bills of no great moment had each of them
their third reading and passed the House; of which the second was the Bill
against such as shall conspire or practice the enlargement of any Prisoner
committed for High Treason.

The Bill that the Tenant or Defendant may have a Tales de Circumstantibus, as
well as the Demandant or Plaintiff, was sent to the House of Commons by
Sergeant Barham and Doctor Huick.

Five Bills also were brought up to the Lords from the House of Commons; of
which the last was the Bill for the inserting of the Manor of Havering at
Bower in a blank and void place in certain Letters Patents of the late King
Edward the Sixth, made unto certain persons of certain Lands and Tenements in
the County of Essex.

On Wednesday the 28th day of May, Six Bills of no great moment had each of
them one reading; of which the fourth being the Bill touching Fine and
Recoveries, was read secunda vice and commissa Comiti Rutland, Comiti Suff.,
Comiti Huntington, Domino Wentworth, Domino North, Domino primario Justiciario
Com. Placitorum, primario Baroni Scaccarii, and Justiciario Wray.

Nota, That here the Judges who are but Assistants unto the Upper House, are
made joint Committees with the Lords.

The Bill of Wood (which had been read prima vice on Monday the 12th day of
this instant May foregoing, and then committed to those whose names are there
set down, was now recommitted to the Archbishop of Canterbury, the Earl of
Sussex, the Earl of Huntington, the Earl of Bedford, the Earl of Leicester, the
Bishop of Worcester, the Bishop of Chichester, the Lord Chamberlain, the Lord
Burleigh, the Lord Wentworth, the Lord Chandois, the Lord Norris, the Master of
the Rolls, Justice Weston, Justice Southcott, and Mr Sergeant Barham.

But whether this Bill had its second reading at this present or upon some
other day foregoing, does not certainly appear, but seems to have been
omitted through the negligence of Anthony Mason Esquire at this time Clerk of the
Upper House: Neither do there want Presidents that Bills after the first
reading have been referred to Committees, when there has been no mention made
of any second reading; nay sometimes when the Bill has had its second reading
on a former day, as it was in the Bill for the Commission of Sewers referred to
Committees on Saturday the 21th day of April in the Parliament de an. 13 Regin.
Eliz. in the Journal of the Upper House, it is afterward committed: and
sometimes it is committed when it has its second reading at an after-day, as
it was at this present Journal in the Bill touching Tunbridge-School, on Monday
the 9th day of June ensuing.

For the great matters touching the Scottish Queen (which had been referred to
Committees on Monday the 12th day of this instant May foregoing) were appointed
these Lords; viz.

The Archbishop of Canterbury, the Earl of Sussex, the Earl of Leicester, the
Bishop of Lincoln, the Lord Burleigh, and the Lord Gray; Vide touching this
matter on Tuesday the 10th day of June next ensuing.

On Thursday the 29th day of May, the Bill for the annexing of Hexham and
Hexamshire, etc. was sent up to the Lords from the House of Commons.

The Bill for the inserting of the name of the Manor of Havcring at Bower in a
blank or void place, was read the second time; but no mention is made that it
was either Ordered to be engrossed or referred to Committees, because it had
been sent from the Lords on Saturday the 14th day of this instant May foregoing.

The Bill for the preservation of Timber and Fuel within twelve Miles of London
and Subburbs of the same, was read secunda vice and committed to the Earl of
Worcester, the Earl of Rutland, the Earl of Essex, the Lord Abergavenny, the
Lord St John of Bletsoe, and the Lord Compton.

The Bill for the assurance of certain Lands, according to the meaning of Sir
Thomas Woodhouse for the benefit of certain Infants, was read secunda vice.

The Bill for repeal of a Statute made for the Town of Shrewsbury an. 8 Reginae
Eliz. was read secunda vice, and committed to the Earl of Bedford, the Earl of
Essex and others.

The Bill also touching Presentations to Benefices by lapse was read the second
time and committed unto the Archbishop of York, the Earl of Rutland, the Earl
of Hartford, the Bishop of Worcester, the Lord Cromwell, the Lord Ewers,
Justice Southcott, and Justice Wray.

The Bill for keeping of the Assizes and Sessions in the Town of Stafford, and
the Bill for annexing the Sheriffwicks of Huntingtonshire and Cambridgshire,
were each of them read secunda vice and Commisse ad ingrossand.

The Bill lastly touching Sea-Marks, and that no Hoy or Plate shall cross the
Seas, was read prima vice and committed to the Earl of Suffolk, the Earl of
Leicester, the Lord Burlcigh, the Lord Darey de Chich. the Lord Cheyney, the
Lord Norris, Sergeant Barham, and Doctor Jews.

Nota, That this is not committed only upon the first reading, but also a
Sergeant and a Doctor who are but Attendants upon the Upper House, are here
made joint Committees with the Lords.

On Friday the 30th day of May, Two Bills of no great moment had each of them
one reading; of which the first being the Bill for inserting of the name of the
Manor of Havering at Bower in a blank and void place of certain Letters
Patents of the late King Edward the Sixth, made unto certain persons of certain
Lands and Tenements in West-ham in the County of Essex, was read the third time
and passed the House.

On Saturday the 31th of May, Four Bills of no great moment had each of them
one reading; of which the third being the Bill for renewing of a Statute made
for the keeping of the Assizes and Sessions within the Town of Stafford, was
read tertia vice and conclusa. And the fourth and last being the Bill against
corrupt Presentations was read secunda vice and commissa to the Earl of
Rutland, the Earl of Sussex, the Lord Chandois, and the former Lords nominated
on Saturday the 17th day of this instant May foregoing, where this Bill was
then read the second time, and then committed.

On Monday the second day of June, Two Bills had each of them one reading; of
which the second being the Bill for the assurance of certain Lands and
Tenements according to the meaning of Sir Thomas Woodhouse, for the benefit of
certain Infants, was read tertia vice and conclusa.

On Tuesday the third day of June, Two Bills of no great moment had each of
them one reading; of which the first being the Bill to renew a Statute made an.
1o of the Queens Reign, inhibiting the transporting of Leather, or Raw-Hides
out of the Realm, was read secunda vice and commissa ad ingrossand.

On Wednesday the 4th day of June, the Bill touching a Statute made an. 1mo of
the Queens Reign, inhibiting the transporting of Leather or Raw-Hides, was read
tertia vice and conclusa, and sent down to the House of Commons by Sergeant
Barham and Doctor Huick.

Four Provisoes annexed by the Commons to the Bill for Vagabonds, with certain
other Amendments in the said Bill, were read secunda and tertia vice and
conclusa communi Procerum assensu.

Three Bills were brought up to the Lords from the House of Commons; of which
the first being the Bill for avoiding of Recoveries suffered by Collusion of
Tenants for term of life and such others, was read prima vice.

The Bill touching Mary the late Scottish Queen, was Ordered to be engrossed.

The Bill for avoiding of Recoveries suffered by Collusion of Tenants was
committed to the Earl of Rutland, the Earl of Sussex, and others; but there is
no mention made whether this Bill was at all read: of which see a like
President on Wednesday the 28th day of May foregoing.

On Thursday the 5th day of June, the Bill touching Mary the Daughter and Heir
of James the Fifth late King of Scots, was read tertia vice and conclusa, and
sent to the House of Commons by Sergeant Barham and the Queens Attorney.

Five Bills were brought up to the Lords from the House of Commons, of which
the second being the Bill against such as shall conspire or practice the
enlargement of any Prisoner committed for High Treason, and the third for
annexing of Hexham and Hexhamshire to the County of Northumberland, were each
of them returned conclusae.

The Bill for the better and further assurance of certain Lands and Tenements
to the maintenance of the Free Grammar School at Tunbridge in the County of
Kent, was read prima vice, and committed to the Archbishop of York, the Earl of
Bedford, the Earl of Hartford, the Bishop of Chichester, the Bishop of
Rochester, the Lord de la Ware, the Lord Norris, the Master of the Rolls and
Justice Southcott. Vide concerning this Bill on Monday the 9th day, Tuesday the
10th day, and on Wednesday the 11th day of this instant June following.

The Bill that no Hoy or Plate shall cross the Seas, and touching Sea-Marks,
was read secunda vice and commissa ad ingrossandum.

Dominus primarius Justiciarius Banci Regis continuavit praesens Parliamentum
usque in horam secundam post meridiem.

Nota, That this continuance of the Parliament, with some others that follow by
the Lord Chief Justice of the Kings Bench, was not without some express
Authority given him by her Majesty; but through the great negligence of Anthony
Mason Esquire at this time Clerk of the Upper House, it does not appear in the
Original Journal Book of the same, whether the said Authority were given by
Commission or otherwise.

About which hour in the Afternoon four Bills of no great moment had each of
them one reading; of which the third being the Bill for the true making of
Hand-Guns, Callivers, etc. and the last for Partition of certain Lands between
the Lord Latimer and Sir Robert Wingfeild Knight, and their Heirs, were each of
them read prima vice.

Dominus Primarius Justiciarius Banci Regis continuavit praesens Parliamentum
usque in diem Crastinum hora nona.

On Friday the 6th day of June, Four Bills of no great moment had each of them
one reading; of which the last being the Bill against flying with long-winged
Hawks under certain degrees, was read prima vice.

Dominus Primarius Justiciarius Banci Regii continuavit praesens Parliamentum
usque in diem Crast. hora nona.

On Saturday the 7th day of June, Four Bills of no great moment had each of
them one reading; of which the third being the Bill for the true making,
proving and marking of Callivers, Muskets, Hand-Guns, Dags and other small
Ordnance, was read secunda vice, and committed to the Earl of Bedford, the Earl
of Hartford, the Earl of Leicester, the Earl of Essex, the Lord Gray, the Lord
Evers, the Lord North, the Lord Chandois, and the Lord Norris, and to Justice
Harper.

And the fourth and last being the Bill touching Hawks and preservation of
Game, was read secunda vice, and committed to the Earl of Bedford, the Earl of
Hartford, the Lord Darcy, the Lord Chandois, the Lord St John de Bletsoe, the
Lord Compton, the Lord Cheyney, and Justice Wray.

Dominus Primarius Justiciarius Banci Regii continuavit praesens Parliamentum
usque in diem Lunae proxim. hora nona.

On Monday the 9th day of June, Four Bills were brought up to the Lords from
the House of Commons; of which the first being the Bill that the inhabitants of
the City of Winchester, and of the Liberty of Soke adjoining to the same, may
use the Trade of Cloth-making and take Apprentices, was read prima vice.

Three Bills also of no great moment had each of them their second reading; of
which the second being the Bill for the Partition of certain Lands between the
Lord Latimer and Sir Robert Wingfeild Knight and their Heirs, was read secunda
vice: but no mention is made that it was either Ordered to be engrossed or
referred to Committees, because it had been formerly sent from the House of
Commons.

The Bill lastly being for the School of Tunbridge was committed unto the Earl
of Huntington, the Earl of Hartford, the Bishop of Worcester, the Bishop of
Lincoln, the Lord Wentworth, the Lord Norris (being doubtless brought in this
day by the Committees nominated on Wednesday the 4th of this instant June
foregoing) but it was not at all now read, but had its second reading with a
new Proviso added unto it on the Morrow following, and on Wednesday the 11th
day of this instant June, and was committed the third time upon the third
reading. Vide a like President on Wednesday the 28th day of May foregoing.

Dominus Primarius Justiciarius Banci Regii continuavit praesens Parliamentum
usque in diem Crastinum hora nona.

On Tuesday the 10th day of June, Eight Bills were brought up to the Lords from
the House of Commons; of which the first being the Bill for the severance of
the Sheriffwick of Cambridgeshire and Huntingtonshire, and the second for the
punishment of such as shall rebelliously take or detain from the Queens Majesty
any Castles, Fortresses, etc. were each of them returned conclus.

The Bill for the better and further assurance of certain Lands and Tenements
to the maintenance of a Free Grammar School at Tunbridge in the County of Kent,
was read secunda vice, with a new Proviso added thereunto by the Lords, which
was twice read and Ordered to be engrossed.

Upon request made by the House of Commons to have Conference with some of the
Lords to be appointed by the House touching the great Bill of the Queen of
Scots, were appointed these Lords following, viz.

The Archbishop of York. The Earl of Worcester. The Earl of Sussex. The Earl of
Bedford. The Earl of Leicester. The Earl of Essex. The Bishop of London. The
Bishop of Winchester. The Lord Burleigh. The Lord Gray. The Lord Wentworth. The
Lord Chandois, and The Lord North.
But no Judges were nominated because they were to confer with the House of
Commons. Vide concerning this matter on Monday the 12th day, and on Wednesday
the 28th day of May foregoing.

Dominus Custos magni Sigilli continuavit praesens Parliamentum usque in diem
prox. hora nona.

Nota, That as it did not appear before on Thursday the 5th day of this instant
June, so neither is it expressed here by what Authority the Lord Keeper is
re-authorised to exercise the same again, which happened through the great
negligence of Anthony Mason Esquire at this time Clerk of the Upper House. The
Presidents are familiar in other Journals of this Queens Reign, where this
Authority has been given to the Lord Chief Justice or some other (to supply
the Lord Keeper's place) by Commission under the Great Seal, and that the
readmittance of the Lord Keeper to the Executing of his said place again was by
like Commission; but here it is possible that either were at this time here
Executed by some other Authority.

On Wednesday the 11th day of June, Four Bills of no great moment had each of
them one reading; of which the last being the Bill touching Sea-Marks, and the
reviving of a Statute that no Hoy or Plate shall cross the Seas, was read
tertia vice and conclusa.

Three Bills were sent from the Lords to the House of Commons, by Doctor
Vaughan and Doctor Huick; of which one was the Bill for continuance of Statutes.

The Bill to revive a Statute made an. 1. of the Queens Majesty's Reign,
inhibiting the transporting out of the Realm of Leather, Tallow and Raw-Hides,
was returned from the House of Commons conclusa.

Dominus Custos magni Sigilli ex Mandato Dominae Reginae adjournavit praesens
Parliamentum usque in vicesimum quartum diem Junii prox. hora nona mane.

On Tuesday the 24th day of June, Three Bills of no great moment had each of
them one reading; of which the first being the Bill that Wool and Yarn may be
bought and sold in the Markets and Fairs to be kept in the Borough of New
Woodstock in the County of Oxon, was read prima vice.

Three Bills also were sent to the Lords from the House of Commons; of which
the first was the Bill for Partition to be made between the Lord Latimer and
Sir Robert Wingfield Knight, and their Heirs.

On Wednesday the 25th day of June, Three Bills of no great moment had each of
them one reading; of which the second being the Bill for the avoiding of
Recoveries suffered by Collusions of Tenants for Term of life and such others,
was read secunda vice, but no mention is made that it was either referred to
Committees or Ordered to be engrossed, because it had been sent formerly from
the House of Commons.

The Bill for the Inning of Plumsted-Marsh in the County of Kent, being
surrounded, was returned from the House of Commons conclusa.

On Thursday the 26th day of June, The Bill for the assurance of certain Lands
and Tenements, to the maintenance of a Sermon to be had in the Church of St
Paul in London every Holyday in the Afternoon for ever, was read secunda vice;
but no mention that it was committed or Ordered to be engrossed, because it had
been formerly sent from the House of Commons.

Five Bills were brought up to the Lords from the House of Commons; of which
one was the Bill touching Mary Daughter and Heir of James the Fifth late King
of Scots, commonly called the Queen of Scots, and another for the Reformation
of the inordinate length of Kersies.

Nine Bills also of no great moment had each of them one reading; of which the
first being the Bill for the better assurance of Gifts, Grants, etc. made and
to be made, to and for the relief of the Poor in the Hospitals within and near
unto the City of London, of Christ, Bridewell, and St Thomas the Apostle, with
a Proviso and certain amendments added by the Lords, was Ordered to be
engrossed.

And the second being for avoiding of Recoveries suffered by Collusion of
Tenants for term of life and such others, was read tertia vice and conclusa,
and commissa Sollicitatori Reginae and Doctori Jews in Domum Communem deferend.

On Friday the 27th day of June, Three Bills were brought up to the Lords from
the House of Commons; of which the last being the Bill for the continuance of
certain Statutes with certain amendments, and a Schedule thereunto annexed
being thrice read, was concluded.

The Bill for the Explanation of the Statute for Fugitives over the Seas, with
a new Proviso added by the Lords, and the Bill touching the Free School of
Tunbridge with a new Proviso, were each of them read tertia vice and conclus.,
and Commis. Sollicitatori Reginae in Domum Communem deferend.

Memorand. Quod hoc praesenti 27 die Junij, Anno Regni Elizabethae Reginae 14.
Andreas Fisher de Graies-Inne in Com. Midd. Genesis and Henricus Fisher de
Greves-Norton in Com. Northampton Genesis coram Domina Regina in Cancellaria sua
personaliter constituti recognoverunt se debere Johanni Ryvers Civi and
Aldermanno de London, tres mill libras legalis Monetae Angl. solvend. eidem
Johanni, etc. nisi fecerint, etc.

The Condition of this Recognizance is such, That if they above-bound Andrew
Fisher and Henry Fisher, and either of them, and the Heirs and Assigns of them
or either of them do well and truly stand to, perform and accomplish, and cause
to be performed and accomplished all such award, order and direction, as shall
be made and Ordained by the Right Honorable Thomas Earl of Sussex, Francis
Earl of Bedford, Robert Earl of Leicester, and William Lord Burleigh, or any
three of them, for and concerning all and singular those Messuages, Lands,
Tenements and Hereditaments, which heretofore were bargained and sold by Henry
Fisher Father of the said Andrew and Henry to one Richard Smith Citizen of
London, and now or late in the Tenure or Occupation of John Rivers Citizen and
Alderman of London, or of any his Tenants or Farmors, and for the right Title,
Inheritance and Possession of the same, so that the said award, order or
direction be had and made in writing, under the hands and Seals of them or
three of them, on this side and before the Nativity of our Lord next coming;
That this Recognizance to be void, otherwise to remain and abide in his full
force, strength and effect.

Memorand. That the two Brethren Recognitors in consideration that Alderman
Ryvers his Cause touching the purchasing of certain Lands bona side mentioned
in the said Bill Exhibited in this Parliament for the said School may remain
unholpen and be excepted out of the said Bill, were contented, and by way of
Petition have submitted themselves to abide the Order and Determination of the
Earl of Sussex, the Earl of Bedford, the Earl of Leicester, and the Lord
Burleigh, or three of them, so as the same be made on this side the Feast of
the Birth of our Lord God next: For the more sure performance whereof, not only
they acknowledged this Recognizance of three thousand pound, but also of their
own offer they yielded their Bodies to be Prisoners in the Queens-Bench, where
the Elder Brother then remained by force of an Execution at a Strangers Suit,
there to remain until they did bring before the Lord Keeper of the Great Seal
sufficient Sureties with them to be bound by Recognizance in the said sum of
three thousand pound for the same.

Nota, That it should seem this business concerned the Free Grammar School of
Tunbridge, mentioned on Monday the 9th day, Tuesday the 10th day, and on
Wednesday the 11th day of this instant June foregoing, in respect that certain
Lands were to be purchased for it by the beforementioned John Rivers Alderman
of London, and thereupon this Recognizance, with the Condition thereof, came to
be entered in the Original Journal Book of the Upper House de an. isto 14
Reginae Eliz.

Dominus Custos magni Sigilli continuavit praesens Parliamentum usque in horam
secundam post meridiem.

About which hour the Lord Archbishop of Canterbury, and diverse other Lords
meeting in the absence of the Lord Keeper, it does not appear in the Original
Journal Book of the Upper House that any thing was done, but only the
Parliament continued in manner and form following, viz.

Dominus Primarius Justiciarius Banci Regis continuavit praesens Parliamentum
usque in diem Crastinum hora octava.

On Saturday the 28th day of June, Dominus Custos magni Sigilli continuavit
praesens Parliamentum usque in horam secundam post Meridiem. About which hour
the Lord Keeper and diverse other Lords both Spiritual and Temporal meeting. The
Bill for the assurance of certain Lands and Tenements to the maintenance of a
Sermon to be had in the Church of St Paul in London for ever, was read tertia
vice and conclusa.

Two Bills were brought up to the Lords from the House of Commons; of which the
first being the Bill for the assurance of certain Lands and Tenements to the
maintenance of a Sermon to be had in the Church of St Paul in London for ever,
was read tertia vice and conclusa.

The Bill for the assurance of certain Lands for the maintenance of the Poor in
the Hospitals, was read tertia vice and conclusa, with a new Proviso added
thereunto by the Lords, and commissa Doctori Lewis and Doctori Huick in Domum
Communem deferend.

The Bill against the excessive length of Kersies was read secunda and tertia
vice and conclusa.

Two Bills were brought up to the Lords from the House of Commons; of which the
first being the Bill for the assurance of Gifts, Grants, etc. made for the
relief of the Poor in Hospitals, etc. was returned conclusa.

The Bill for the repeal of a Statute made an. 8 Reginae Eliz. for the Town of
Shrewsbury was read tertia vice, with a Proviso added thereunto by the Lords,
quae conclusa est, and sent to the House of Commons by Dr Lewis and Dr Huick.

On Monday the 30th day of June, to which day the Parliament had been on
Saturday last continued, The Bill for the reviving of a Statute made an. 8
Eliz. for the Town of Shrewsbury was returned from the House of Commons
conclusa.

The Bill against delays in Judgment in the Common Law was read secunda vice,
but there is no mention made that it was either Ordered to be engrossed or
referred to Committees, because it had been sent from the House of Commons on
Saturday the 28th day of this instant June immediately foregoing.

In the Parliament Chamber where the Lords Spiritual and Temporal Assembled the
day abovesaid in an. 14 Regin. Eliz. etc.

Whereas, upon Complaint and Declaration made to the said Lords Spiritual and
Temporal by Henry Lord Cromwell, a Lord of the Parliament, that in a Case
between one James Tavernor against the said Lord Cromwell, depending in the
Court of Chancery, for not obeying to an Injunction given in the said Court of
Chancery, in the absence of the Lord Keeper of the Great Seal, at the Suit of
the said Tavernor, the person of the said Lord Cromwell was by the Sheriff of
the County of Norfolk attached by virtue of a Writ of Attachment proceeding out
of the said Court of Chancery, contrary to the ancient privilege and immunity
time out of memory unto the Lords of Parliament and Peers of this Realm in such
case used and allowed, as on the behalf of the said Lord Cromwell was declared
and affirmed, wherein the said Lord Cromwell as a Lord of Parliament prayed
remedy.

Forasmuch as upon deliberate Examination of this Case in the said Parliament
Chamber, in the presence of the Judges and other of the Queens Majesty's
Learned Council there attendant in Parliament, and upon Declaration of the
opinions of the said Judges and Learned Council, there has been no matter
directly produced or declared whereby it did appear or seem to the said Lords
of Parliament there Assembled, that by the Common Law or Custom of the Realm,
or by any Statute Law, or by any President of the said Court of Chancery it is
warranted, that the person of any Lord having place and voice in Parliament in
the like case in the said Court of Chancery before this time has been
Attached, so as the awarding of the said Attachment at the Suit of the said
Tavernor against the said Lord Cromwell for any thing as yet declared to the
said Lords, appears to be derogatory and prejudicial to the ancient
privilege claimed to belong to the Lords of this Realm.

Therefore it is the day and year aforesaid Ordered by consent of all the said
Lords in Parliament there Assembled, that the person of the said Lord Cromwell
be from henceforth discharged of and from the said Attachment. Provided
nevertheless, and so is the mind of the said Lords in Parliament plainly by
them with one assent declared, That if at any time during this Parliament or
hereafter in any other Parliament there shall be showed sufficient matter that
by the Queens Prerogative, or by the Common Law or Custom of this Realm, or by
any Statute. Law or sufficient Presidents, the person of any of the Lords of
Parliament in such Case, as this Case of the Lord Cromwell is, ought to be
attached or attachable, then and from thenceforth it is by this order intended,
that to take place, which so shall be showed and warranted as above is said,
This Order or any thing therein to the contrary notwithstanding.

In the Original Journal Book of the Upper House is no entrance of any
continuance of the Parliament which seems to have been omitted through the
negligence of Anthony Mason Esquire at this time Clerk of the same House; although
it may very easily be gathered that the Parliament was continued unto some hour
in the Afternoon of this present day: and most probable it is, that it was
continued by the Lord Keeper, because it appears without all question that he
was present in the Afternoon.

Post Meridiem.

In the Afternoon the Queens Majesty, as may easily be gathered, was present
with the Lord Keeper and diverse Lords Spiritual and Temporal, but their names
through the great negligence of the abovenamed Anthony Mason. Esquire are not at
all noted with the mark of being present, neither are any of the passages of
this Afternoon there entered, saving only the Adjournment of the Parliament;
although it be most certain, that her Majesty being present this Afternoon did
put an end to this Session of Parliament, by giving her Royal Assent to
thirteen public Acts, and four private. But yet there passed no Bill of her
Majesty's free and general pardon to the Subject, nor of any Subsidies from
them to her Majesty; and the reason of it is plain, because this Session of
Parliament (although some Statutes did of course pass in it) was doubtless
convocated chiefly for that great business touching the Scottish Queen, of
which there are diverse passages in this proceeding Journal, which see on Monday
the 12th day, and on Wednesday the 28th day of May, on Tuesday the 10th day,
and on Thursday the 26th day of this instant June foregoing.

And therefore now lastly, as touching the manner of her Majesty's giving her
Royal Assent to such Acts as passed, in respect that it is matter of form and
seldom differs, it is therefore supplied (omitting that only which concerns
the Bills of Subsidy and Pardon) out of a draught thereof set down in the end
of the Original Journal Book of the Upper House in the Parliament de an. 39
Regin. Eliz. although it be omitted in that of this present Session of
Parliament.

To every public Act that passed, after that it had been read, the Clerk of
the Upper House standing up did openly pronounce her Majesty's Allowance in
these French words following.

La Roigne le veult.

To every private Act that passed, the said Clerk read the Queens Answer in
these French words following.

Soit fait come il est desire.

These two last Answers to the public and private Acts that pass are to be
written by the said Clerk at the end of every Act.

To such Acts as her Majesty does forbear to allow, the Clerk of the Parliament
read in these French words following.

La Roigne s'advisera.

The several Acts being thus passed, the next matter that followed was the
Adjournment of the Parliament, which is Entered in the Original Journal Book of
the Upper House in the manner and form following.

Dominus Custos magni Sigilli ex Mandato Dominae Reginae adjournavit praesens
Parliamentum usque in festum omnium Sanctorum proximum futurum.

By the Entrance of which Adjournment it does plainly appear that her Majesty
was present, in respect that it is said, that the Lord Keeper Adjourned the
Parliament, ex mandato Dominae Reginae.

And it is also worthy the observation, that as the greatest part of the
passages of this foregoing Monday (on which this Session of Parliament ended)
are through the great negligence of Anthony Mason Esquire at this time Clerk of the
Upper House, wholly omitted in the Original Journal Book of the same; so also
by a like negligence are all those many and several Prorogations buried in
Silence, by which this Parliament was continued without Dissolution until the
next meeting thereof on Wednesday the 8th day of February in the eighteenth
year of her Majesty's Reign, which was the second Session of this present
Parliament, and held about four years after the determination of this first
Session by Adjournment as aforesaid: so that it is very probable, that there
are not less than twenty several Prorogations. For between that foresaid second
Session in an. 18 Reginae Eliz. and the third Session of this present
Parliament in an. 23 Reginae ejusdem, which contained not above one years space
more than had intervened between the two former Sessions, there passed at least
twenty five Prorogations, as does plainly appear in the end of the Original
Journal Book of the Upper House in the said Session of Parliament, de an. 18
Reginae praedict. where they are for the most part set down either abstractedly
or at large.

And lastly, As touching the great business of the Scottish Queen so much and
so long agitated in both Houses, it did at this time receive no period or
conclusion, but in this Session of Parliament in an. 14 Reginae Eliz. an Act
passed both Houses against her; and lastly, in the Parliament de an. 28, and 29
Reginae ejusdem, she was (a little before her Execution at Fortheringhay-Castle
in Northamptonshire) Condemned to be Worthy of Death by the Vote of both the
said Houses of Parliament.

THE JOURNAL OF THE House of COMMONS.
A Journal of the Passages of the House of Commons in the Session of Parliament
bolden at Westminster, An. 14 Reginae Eliz. A. D. 1572, which began there on
Thursday the 8th Day of May, and then and there continued until the Adjournment
thereof on Monday the 30th and last Day of June next ensuing.

THIS Journal of the House of Commons contains in it not only many good
passages touching the ordinary reading, committing and expediting of Bills, but
is plentifully stored also with the frequent agitation and discussion of that
great business touching the Scottish Queen, whose practices not only with
Thomas Howard Duke of Norfolk, but also with the Foreign Enemies of her Majesty
for the destruction and Invasion of the Realm are notably described; which also
is much enlarged out of a written Copy I had by me of such reasons as were
conceived in the House of Commons for her speedy Execution, and of the Petition
also preferred to her Majesty to the same purpose: which said Reasons and
Petition being not found in the Original Journal Book of the House of Commons,
I have therefore, to avoid confusion, distinguished by an Annotation or
Animadversion from that of the Journal it self, where it has in its due place
been inserted. There passed also in this said Session a Bill against the said
Queen of Scots, which is falsely referred in diverse Copies thereof to the 23th
year of her Majesty.

On Thursday the 8th day of May, this first Session of the fourth Parliament of
her Majesty's Reign beginning at Westminster, The Right Honorable the Earl of
Lincoln, High Admiral of England, and by her Highness appointed Lord Steward
for this present time, came to the Lower House of Parliament accompanied with
diverse others of her Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council, viz. Sir Francis
Knolles Knight, Treasurer of her Highness most Honorable Household, Sir James
Crofts Knight, Comptroller of the same, Sir Ralph Sadler Knight, Chancellor of
her Majesty's Duchy of Lancaster, and Sir Walter Mildmay Knight, Chancellor of
her Highness Court of Exchequer: And did then and there minister the Oath unto
all the Knights, Citizens, Burgesses and Barons then and there Assembled; The
said Earl of Lincoln Constituting and Authorizing the said Sir Francis Knolles,
Sir James Crofts, Sir Ralph Sadler and Sir Walter Mildmay to be his Deputies in
and for the more speedy ministration of the said Oath, according to the Statute
in that behalf lately made and provided, unto all such others of the said
Knights, Citizens, Burgesses and Barons as should happen afterward to appear
upon any return during this present Parliament.

This day Robert Bell of the Middle Temple London Esquire was Chosen Speaker for
this present Parliament. But whether her Majesty were this day in Person in the
Upper House, or by what Authority from her said Highness the said Speaker was
Elected, cannot possibly be gathered out of the Original Journal of the said
Upper House, or that of the House of Commons, but elsewhere it appears the Lord
Keeper gave them Authority in the end of his Speech on Thursday foregoing.

On Saturday the 10th day of May, Mr Speaker was by the House presented to the
Queens Majesty, and of her Highness well accepted and allowed; who after his
Oration made and the Ordinary Petitions granted, repaired to the House of
Commons; and being set in the Chair received the Oath. After which according to
the usual form was read,

The Bill concerning Bayles to be taken in the Court of Common Pleas, was read
the first time.

On Monday the 12th day of May, Four Bills of no great moment had each of them
their first reading; of which the third being the Bill for Proclamations to be
made in Parish Churches and Chapels before Outlawries, was committed unto Mr
Gent, Mr Robert Snagg, Mr Fenner, Mr Humberston, Mr Flowerdue, Mr French and Mr
Boys: who were appointed to meet this Afternoon at two of the Clock in the
Temple Church.

The Lords did send Sir Richard Read and Mr Dr Huick, to require Mr Speaker and
this whole House forthwith to make their repair unto their Lordships in the
Upper House; and upon their repair thither the Lord Keeper signified unto them,
that the Queens Majesty's Pleasure is, that twenty one of the said Upper House
and forty four of this House should meet to Morrow in the Morning at eight of
the Clock in the Star Chamber, then and there to consult and deliberate upon
matters concerning the Queen of Scots. Whereunto were appointed of this House,

Mr Treasurer. Mr Comptroller. Mr Chancellor of the Duchy. Mr Chancellor of
the Exchequer. My Lord Deputy of Ireland. Sir Maurice Berkeley. Sir Hugh
Pawlet. Sir Thomas Scott. Sir Owen Hopton. Sir Nicholas Arnold. Sir John
Thin. Sir Hen. Gate. Sir Rowland Hayward. Mr Doctor Wilson. Mr Attorney of
the Duchy. Mr Recorder of London. Mr Sergeant Manwood. Mr Sergeant Geffry. Mr
Mounson. Mr Sands. Mr Popham. Mr Yelverton. Mr Coleby. Mr Heneage. Mr Charles
Howard. Mr Hatton. Mr Asteley. Mr Shute. Mr Hen. Knolles Sen. Mr Hen. Knolles
Jun. Mr Peter Wentworth. Mr Sampole. Mr Norton. Mr William Moor. Mr John
Vaughan. Mr Tho. Randall. Mr John Vaughan of Caermarthen. Mr Greenfield Sen. Mr
Charles Somerset. Mr Hen. Killegrew. Mr William Gerrard. Mr Dalton and Mr
Peacock.
Vide concerning this matter on Thursday the 26th day of June following.

On Tuesday the 13th day of May, the Bill for the Almeshouse of Plymouth in the
County of Devon. was read the second time, and committed unto Mr Edward
Stanhope and Mr Robert Snagg, and by them in certain points amended and
returned again.

Five Bills also of no great moment had each of them their first reading; of
which the first was against fraudulent Conveyances and secret Estates of Lands;
and the second for Christ's Hospital.

On Wednesday the 14th day of May, Two Bills of no great moment had each of
them one reading; of which the second being the Bill that Tenants and
Defendants in Actions may pray a Tales de circumstantibus as well as Plaintiffs
and Defendants, was read the first time and delivered to Mr Fleetwood to be
augmented for the Counties Palatine.

The Bill lastly for Explanation of a Statute made, that the Lands and Goods of
Tellors and Receivors should be liable to the payment of their Debts, was read
the second time, and committed unto Sir Walter Mildmay, Mr Wilbraham, Mr
Fanshawe, Mr Norton, Mr Sampoole and Mr Robert Snagg: who were appointed to
meet at three of the Clock at Sir Walter Mildmay's House.

On Thursday the 15th day of May, Mr Attorney General and Mr Solicitor, were
sent from the Lords to require Mr Speaker that a convenient number of this
House should attend upon their Honors in the Council Chamger for Conference;
and signified that they had good liking of the first Committees for that
purpose on Monday last. Whereunto the House being moved by Mr Speaker fully
assented.

And upon the repair of the said Committees to the Lords and their return to
this House again, it was declared by Mr Treasurer, that the said Lords had
appointed to meet in the Afternoon at two of the Clock in the Star Chamber,
willing them to attend them there for further direction, and a Plot to be
devised for their manner of proceeding in the matter concerning the Queen of
Scots. Vide de ista materia on Thursday the 26th day of June ensuing.

The Bill for the due Execution of the Statute for Weights and Measures, and
reformation of the abuses of the Clerk of the Market, was read the first time.

On Friday the 16th day of May, A Motion being made whether it were convenient
that this House and the Lords should join in Petition to move the Queens
Majesty for the Execution of the Duke of Norfolk (who was afterward Beheaded
on the Tower Hill on the 10th day of June following) or that the common opinion
of this House touching necessary Execution to be done upon him were meet to be
signified unto her Highness, as their general Resolution. And upon the Question
all the House thought that the general resolution was meetest to be signified
unto her Majesty, but not by way of Petition or direction of this House.

Two Bills also of no great moment had each of them one reading; of which the
second being the Bill against fraudulent Conveyances and secret Estates of
Lands, was read the second time and committed unto Sir Hen. Gates, Sir Nichol.
Arnold, Mr Recorder, Mr Mounson, Mr Fenner, Mr Edward Stanhoppe, Mr Snagg, who
were appointed to meet in Lincolns-Inn-Hall this Afternoon at two of the Clock,
and to return the Bill to Morrow.

On Saturday the 17th day of May, Five Bills of no great moment had each of
them their first reading; of which the last being the Bill that Patrons shall
not lose their Presentations by lapse without notice when the Incumbents take
another Benefice, was read the first time.

Upon sundry Motions made by diverse of this House, it was Ordered, that Arthur
Hall Esquire for sundry lewd Speeches used as well in this House as also abroad
elsewhere, shall have warning by the Sergeant to be here upon Monday next, and
at the Bar to answer to such things as he shall then and there be charged with.

And it was further Ordered, that all such persons as have noted his words in
writing, either in this House or abroad, do forthwith assemble in the Chamber
above, and put the same words in writing, and afterward deliver them to Mr
Speaker, to the end he may charge the said Hall on Monday next. On which said
day see more concerning this matter.

On Monday the 19th day of May, Four Bills of no great moment had each of them
one reading; of which the last being a Bill for the Repeal of a former Statute
made for the Town of Shrewsbury, was read the second time, and Ordered to be
engrossed.

The Bill for Explanation of 32 H. 8. for Recoveries, was read the second time,
and committed unto the Master of the Wardrobe, Sir Nicholas Arnold, Mr Attorney
of the Court of Wards, Mr French, Mr Bowreman, and Mr Snagg.

Wednesday next was appointed unto Lodwicke Grevill Esquire to make his appearance
in this Court at the same hour he should have appeared this present day.

The Bill concerning Presentations by Law was read the second time and Ordered
to be considered of by Mr Tho. Brown, Mr Doctor Yale, Mr Wolley, Mr French, Mr
Baber, Mr Jeoffrey, Mr Gates and Mr Bowreman: who were appointed to meet this
Afternoon in the Middle Temple Church.

Mr Doctor Jews and Mr Doctor Vaughan, brought from the Lords a Bill touching
Vagabonds, and for relief of the Poor.

The Bill concerning Rites and Ceremonies was read the second time, and Ordered
to be engrossed.

Mr Doctor Yale and Mr Doctor Huick brought from the Lords a Bill against the
Forging of Foreign Coin not current within this Realm.

Four Bills also of no great moment had each of them one reading; of which the
second being the Bill against the deceits of Under-Collectors of the Tenths and
Subsidies of the Clergy, was read the second time and Ordered to be engrossed.

Mr Attorney of the Court of Wards in the name of all the Committees in the
great cause (whose names see on Monday the 12th day of this instant May
foregoing) made report unto the House of their Conference therein had with the
Lords; which being done, after sundry Speeches it was upon the Question
resolved by the House, for the better safety and preservation of the Queens
Majesty's Person, and the present State, to make choice of proceeding against
the Scottish Queen in the highest degree of Treason, and therein to touch her
as well in Life as in Title and Dignity, and that of necessity with all
possible speed by the whole Voice of the House.

But upon what occasions or motives the House grounded this their advice and
resolution, does not appear in the Original Journal Book of the same: But most
probable it is, that they were the same which remain in written Copies in many
hands, though falsely attributed to have been presented unto her Majesty in the
Thirteenth Year of her Reign: whereas it appears plainly by both the Original
Journal-Books of the Upper House and House of Commons, and by all other
Monuments of the Parliament de an. 13 Regin. Eliz. that there was not so much
as any mention made of the Queen of Scots or her dangerous practices, which
were so much and so often agitated in this present Session de an. 14. And
therefore it being so plain that they were tendered unto her Majesty in this
said present Session, and being also most likely that they were at this time
framed in the House of Commons, and were the cause of this days above-recited
Resolution, although it does not certainly appear that they ought to be
referred to this very place; yet I thought good to have them inserted here in
manner and form following. Which said reasons (as is very probable) were
presented unto her Majesty the 28th day of May ensuing.

Reasons to prove the Queens Majesty bound in Conscience to proceed with
Severity in this Case of the late Queen of Scots.
THE Word of God which is the only Director of Consciences, and a certain Rule
for all Estates and Offices, does often and most earnestly teach, that Godly
Princes or Magistrates not only in Conscience safely may, but also in Duty
toward God ought severely and uprightly to administer Justice.

For this is one of the Principal Causes for the which the Providence and
Wisdom of God has ordained Magistrates in Commonwealths, that they might by
Justice and punishment according to the greatness of the offenses repress the
wickedness of Mankind, whereunto by corruption of nature they are inclined.

The Magistrate (as St Paul says, Romans 13.) is the Minister of God and the
Revenger of wrath toward him that has done evil, etc. And St Peter, 1 Pet. 2.
Be subject to the King as to the Chief, or to the Under-Rulers as sent of him
ad vindictam nocentium, to the punishment or revengement of Ossendors, and to
the praise of them that do well.

If the Magistrate does not this, God threatens heavy punishment. When you
were (says Wisdom to Princes, Sap. 6.) the Ministers of his Kingdom, you have
not Executed Judgment rightly, nor kept the Law, nor walked according to his
Will. Horrible therefore and right soon shall he appear unto you: for an hard
Judgment shall they have that hear rule. Potentes potenter tormenta patientur.

Now then if the Magistrate be the Minister of God, in his name and authority
to punish the wicked according to the Measure of their offenses, and are
threatened grievous punishment if they do not; and on the other Party, the late
Scottish Queen has offended in two highest degrees both concerning Gods
Religion and the disinheriting and destruction of our Prince: we see not but
her Majesty must needs offend in Conscience before God, if she do not punish
her according to the measure of her offense in the highest degree.

Small punishment for great offenses in respect of any person is partiality and
slack Justice, which God above all things in Judgment forbids. Consider not
(says God) the person of the poor, nor honor the Countenance of the rich,
Levit. 19.

It is not good (says Solomon, Prove. 18.) to consider the person of the wicked
thereby to decline from the truth of Judgment.

And Jesus Sirach, Make no labor to be a Judge, except thou have that
stoutness that thou mightily may put down wickedness: for if thou stand in
awe of the mighty, thou can not but fail in giving Sentence. Ecclus. 7.

Wherefore whether the late Queen of Scots be Queen or Subject, be Stranger or
Citizen, be Kin or not Kin, by Gods word for so great offenses she should have
the just deserved punishment, and that in the highest degree.

The second Reason. When God by his just Providence does commit any grievous
Offender into the hands of a Prince or Magistrate as to his Minister to be
punished, he ought to fear the heavy displeasure of God if by any color he do
omit the same. Non enim hominis Judicium est, sed Dei; and maledictus est qui
facit opus Domini fraudulenter vel negligenter: For God often times brings
Sinners to punishment for other offenses than those that are known and appear
to the World. And therefore has he showed himself grievously displeased when
such by color of Mercy and Pity in Princes have escaped just Judgment.

Because Saul spared Agag, (1 Reg. 15.) although he were a King, God took from
the same Saul his good Spirit, and transferred the Kingdom of Israel from him
and from his Heirs for ever.

When Achab spared Benhadad the King of Syria by his unreasonable Clemency
though he were a great Prince, God willed the Prophet to say unto him, Because
thou have (...) escape out of thy hands the man that I would have to die, thy
life shall be for his life, and thy people (...) his people.

In these Examples great pretense might be made for Mercy for sparing of them,
and great reproach of bloodiness and Cruelty in the contrary; but we see how
God judged them.

The late Queen of Scots being a grievous Offender diverse ways both before she
came into this Land and afterward also, has been by Gods special and
remarkable Providence put into the Queens Majesty's hands to be punished, and
that far more notably than Agag and Benhadad were put into the hands of Saul
and Achab.

Therefore it is greatly to be feared if she escape as Benhadad did under
pretense of mercy and favorable dealing, that Gods heavy displeasure will for
the same, light both upon the Prince and the Realm, as it did upon Achab and
the Israelites shortly after.

This Sentence of the Prophet (as it is for certain reported) was spoken to the
Lord James now Regent in Scotland, when with too much lenity he proceeded
therein; it has followed too true in him, the Lord turn it from our Gracious
Sovereign.

The third Reason. Every good Prince ought by Gods Commandment to punish even
with Death all such as do seek to seduce the People of God from his true
worship unto Superstition and Idolatry. For that offense God has always most
grievously punished, as committed against the first Table, Deuteronomy. 13. His words
are these: If thy Brother the Son of thy Mother, or thine own Son, or thy
Daughter, or thy Wife that lies within thy Bosom, or thy Friend which is as
thine own Soul unto thee, shall entice thee saying, Let us go and serve strange
Gods, etc. Thou shall not consent unto him nor hearken unto him; thine Eye
shall not pity him, neither shall thou have compassion upon him, nor keep him
secret, but cause him to be slain; thine own hand shall be first upon him to
kill him, etc. And afterward adds, and all Israel shall fear to do any more
any such wickedness.

The Residue of that Chapter afterward contains more grievous matter, which
we would wish all them to read that in great offenses under the color of pity
are loath to have sharp punishment used.

Here you may perceive that God wills his Magistrate not to spare either
Brother or Sister, Son or Daughter, Wife or Friend, be he never so high, if he
seek to seduce the People of God from his true Worship; much less is an Enemy
and Traitor to be spared. Yea, and he adds the cause why he would have such
sharp punishment used in such Cases, That Israel may fear to do the like.

But the late Queen of Scots has not only sought and wrought by all means she
can, to seduce the people of God in this Realm from true Religion; but is the
only hope of all the Adversaries of God throughout all Europe, and the
Instrument whereby they trust to overthrow the Gospel of Christ in all
Countries. And therefore if she have not that punishment which God in this
place aforementioned appoints; It is of all Christian hearts to be feared,
that Gods just Plague will light both upon the Magistrates and Subjects: but
that by our slackness and remiss Justice we give occasion of the overthrow of
God's Glory and truth in his Church mercifully restored unto us in those latter
days.

Constantinus Magnus caused Licinius to be put to Death, being not his Subject
but Eusebius. li. 2. de vita Constantini.
his Fellow-Emperor, for that the said Licinius labored to subvert Christian
Religion. And the same Constantinus is for the same in all Histories highly
commended. Much more shall it be lawful for the Queens Majesty to Execute this
Woman, who besides the Subversion of Religion has sought the Life of the same
our Gracious Sovereign.

The Fourth Reason. It is dangerous for any Person being a Prince, both for his
own State as also for that punishment which may come from God's hand, by
slackness of Justice in great offenses to give occasion by hope of impunity of
the increase of like wickedness.

Joab being spared of David for Murdering Abner, killed Amasa also.

Because Amnon was winked at by his Father for committing Rape and Incest with
his own Sister, Absalom under hope of like Impunity was emboldened to murder
his Brother Amnon.

But look, I pray you, how grievously God punished that slack Justice of David
colored with a tender heart toward his Children. Did he not suffer, yea and
by his just Judgment raise one of his own Sons toward whom he used that
excessive tenderness and pity to rebel against him and drive him out of his own
Kingdom?

The late Scottish Queen has heaped up together all the Sins of the Licentious
Sons of David, Adulteries, Murders, Conspiracies, Treasons, and Blaspemies
against God also; and if she escape with small punishment, her Majesty in
Conscience ought, as also good and faithful Subjects to fear that God will
reserve her as an Instrument to put her from the Royal Seat of this Kingdom,
and to plague the unthankful and naughty Subjects. Quod omen ut Deus avertat
precamur. Shall we think that God will not plague it? Surely our hearts do fear
he will do it grievously.

The fifth Reason. A Prince ought in Conscience before God by all the means he
can to see to the Quietness, Safety and good Estate of that People over which
God has appointed him Governor.

For in the Prophets oftentimes under the names of Pastors and Watchmen he
threatens great punishment to Princes and Governors for the contrary;
especially in Ezechiel 33, and 34. And signifies, that if his People perish
either in Soul or Body, by slackness in administering justice or by any other
mis-government, God will require their Blood at the Princes hands; which places
as they may be applied to Prophets and Teachers, so do they not exclude but
principally comprehend Kings and Magistrates, as Hieronymus notes in Ezechiel
33. the words of the Prophet are these, viz.

If the Watchmen see the Sword and blow not the Trumpet, so that the people is
not warned; If the Sword come then and take any man from among them, the same
shall be taken away in his own sin from among them, but his Blood will I
require at the Watchmans hand. Ezechiel 33.

And again, Woe unto the Shepherds that destroy and scatter my Flock, says the
Lord, etc. You scatter and thrust out of my Flock and do not look upon them:
Therefore will I visit the wickedness of your imaginations, etc. Jer. 23. By
these and such other words in many places God signifies, if his People perish
either in Soul or Body by the slack or remiss Government of them that are
appointed Rulers over them, and as it were Shepherds and Herdsmen to keep them
from danger, that he will require the Blood of his people at their hands.

But the late Scottish Queen with her Allies by the pretensed Title, and other
wicked, devilish and Traitorous devices and workings, is like to bring
confusion to this Realm of England and the People thereof, as evidently
appears to all good and faithful Subjects. Therefore the Prince offends
grievously before God, and is in danger of the Blood of Gods People, if for the
safety of the same she does not cut her off.

3 Reg. 2. Solomon a Wise and godly Prince spared not his own natural, yea and
his Elder Brother Adonijah, for suspicion and likelihood of Treason, and for a
Marriage purposed only, but put him to Death for the same, and that speedily
without course of Judgment, lest by delay trouble and danger might have ensued,
not only to his own Person being Prince and Chief Minister of God in that Land,
but also to that People over which he had charge, and for safety whereof in
Conscience he was bound to deal. He would have thought it a great burden to
his Conscience if by the sparing of one man's Life, were he never so nigh of
Blood unto him, he would have hazarded the Seat in which God had placed him,
and the Blood of many thousands of his People which by a Rebellion might have
been spent.

But this Woman and her greatly desired Husband, as she pretends, have put
far more heinous matters in Execution: wherefore her Case standing as it does,
there is no scruple in Conscience to proceed with Severity, but great danger in
Conscience for dealing too mildly and contrary to Order of Justice, making the
punishment less than the offense, with the danger of her Majesty's own person,
the hazard of the Realm, and the Subversion of Gods Truth.

The sixth Reason. It is dangerous for any Christian Prince and contrary to the
word of God, with color of Mercy and Pity, to do that whereby he shall
discourage and kill the hearts not only of his own good Subjects and faithful
Counselors, but also of all other Nations faithfully professing Gods Religion
and his true worship, as may well appear in the Example of David.

David having this infirmity of too much Pity and Indulgency toward Offenders,
which is not of any Prince to be followed, did forbid that his Traitorous Son
Absalom should be slain; and when he was killed, effeminately he bewailed the
same to the discouraging of his People: but he was sharply rebuked by Ioab his
Councellor saying, Thou have shamed this day the faces of thy Servants which
have saved thy life and the life of thy Sons, etc. Thou love those that hate
thee, and thou show this day that thou passest not for thy Captains and thy
Servants; And now I perceive if Absalom had lived and all we had been slain, it
would have pleased thee well.

What inconvenience was like to follow unto David by this doing, and what other
good direction may be taken out of this History well considered, for brevities
sake we leave to the Consideration of wise Princes and Governors.

When David was so much moved with these words that he was contented to take
another course, which turned both to the Comfort of his Subjects and his own
benefit, the application needs not.

If David were moved thus to do to the Comfort of his own Subjects only and the
abashing of his own private Rebels; how much more have we to desire God to move
the Queens Majesty, by the Execution of this Lady, to glad the hearts of all
true Christians in Europe, and to abash and damp the minds of all the Enemies
of God, and Friends of Antichrist?

Obj. It may be objected that thus to proceed is not Honorable for the Queens
Majesty.

Respons. The shadow of Honor (as may evidently appear) deceived upon like
occasion both King Saul in sparing Agag King of Amaleck, and King Achab in
receiving to his Mercy King Benhadad, as it is in the Example in the second
Reason mentioned, who did pretend great honor in saving a King, and thought
dishonor in the contrary, that one King should kill another; but man's Judgment
and Gods in such cases are far diverse: for indeed Execution of Justice upon
any person whatsoever, is and ever has been accounted honorable.

Joshua a worthy Prince and Governor put to Death at one time five Kings, and
that as might appear rudely, causing his Soldiers to set their Feet on their
Necks and slay them, and willed them to be stout and not to fear to do it.
Joshua 10.

We find also in the Scriptures that in this Zeal of Justice two wicked Queens,
Iesabel and Athaliah, both inferior in mischief to this late Queen, have been
by Gods Magistrates Executed, and the same Execution commended in Scripture.

Obj. It may be further objected that the Queens Majesty in so doing should
exceed the limits and bounds of Mercy and Clemency.

Resp. Indeed a Prince should be merciful, but he should be just also. It is
said Misericordia and veritas custodiunt Regem; but in the next Chapter it
follows, Qui sequitur justitiam and misericordiam, inveniet vit am. Pro. 20.

The Prince in Government must be like unto him who is not only amiable by
Mercy, but terrible also by Justice; and therefore is called Misericors and
Justus Dominus. Mercy oftentimes shows it self in the Image of Justice; Yea
and Justice in Scriptures is by God called Mercy, Psalm. 136. Who smote Egypt
with their firstborn, for his mercy endures for ever. In that Psalm the
smiting of Egypt with terrible Plagues, the destruction of Pharaoh, the killing
of great and mighty Kings are called the merciful works of God, as indeed they
were, but mercy toward the People of God, and not toward the Enemies of God
and of his People.

Therefore as the Queens Majesty indeed is merciful, so we most humbly desire
her that she will open her Mercy toward Gods People and her good Subjects, in
dispatching those Enemies that seek the confusion of Gods cause amongst us, and
of this noble Realm.

It may also be said that to spare one Person being an Enemy, a Stranger, a
professed Member of Antichrist, and Convicted of so many heinous Crimes, with
the evident peril of so many thousands of Bodies and Souls of good and faithful
Subjects, may justly be termed Crudelis misericordia.

Petiliano objiciente Deum non delectari humano Sanguine: Respondet, Legimus
multos a famulo Dei Moise Misericorditer interfectos. Nunquid crudelis effect
us est, cum de monte descendens tot Millia juberet occidi? August. contra
literas Petiliani. li. 2. c. 86.

Saul and Jehosaphat Reges fuerunt populi Dei, and dum misericordiam iis quos
Deus oderat praestiterunt, Dei offensam in opere pietatis incurrerunt. E
contrario Phinehas filiique Levi gratiam Dei humana caede and suorum parricidio
meruerunt. Hierom.

The same Hierom de Origin animae, says the like, Sparing of evil persons is
misericors inobedientia.

St Augustine also says, Sicuti est misericordia puniens, est etiam crudelitas
parcens.

Object. But happily it may be that some do discredit these reasons by the
persons, when they cannot by the matter; and will put in her Majesty's mind,
that we in persuading her, respect our own danger and fear of peril coming to
us, and not right and true judgment: Yea, and that it may appear very unseemly
and worthy sharp reproof in a Bishop to excite a Prince to Cruelty and Blood,
contrary to her merciful inclination.

Resp. As touching the first branch, Surely we see not any great continuance of
danger likely to come unto us, more than to all good Subjects while this State
stands; and the State cannot lightly alter without the certain peril both of
our Prince and Country. Now if our danger be joined with the danger of our
Gracious Sovereign and natural Country, we see not how we can be accounted
godly Bishops or faithful Subjects, if in common peril we should not cry and
give warning: Or on the other side how they can be thought to have true hearts
toward God and toward their Prince and Country, that will mislike with us for
so doing, and seek thereby to discredit us.

As touching the second branch, God forbid that we should be instruments to
incense a merciful Prince to Cruelty and Bloodiness; neither can we think well
of them or judge that they have true meaning hearts, that in the Minister of
God and Officer do term justice and right punishment by the name ofBloodiness
and Cruelty. God I trust in time shall open her Majesty's Eyes to see and espy
their cruel purposes under the Cloak of extolling mercy.

When the Prince or Magistrate is slack in punishing the sinful and wicked, the
Bishop and Preacher is bound in Conscience before God to exhort him to more
diligent and severe dealing therein, lest the Blood both of Prince and People
be required at his hands.

3. Reg. 20. May the Prophet be accounted cruel to incite Achab to Bloodiness,
which so sharply rebuked him for his Clemency showed toward Benhadad? May
Samuel be justly named cruel, because in like case he reproved Saul for sparing
the life of King Agag, and killed the said Agag with his own hands in the sight
of the Prince?

What shall we say of the Prophet Elias, shall we call him Cruel because in the
Zeal of Justice he killed all the false Prophets of Baal? Did not God approve
his fact with the miraculous sending of abundance of rain after three years
continual drought? But to those men I think God himself and his Angels will
seem Cruel, and his Justice Cruelty; that they under the color of mercy might
be spared until time will serve to satisfy their own cruel hearts.

An Argument persuading that the Queens Majesty ought to have in Conscience a
great care of the safety of her own person.
EVery Prince being the Minister of God and a public Person ought by Gods word
to have an especial care of his own safety more than a private Person; and
chiefly when the case so stands, that the safety of his Realm and Country,
and the true worshipping of God by Gods disposition may seem to depend on him.

But now so it is in the Queens Majesty, therefore in Conscience ought she to
have a singular care of her safety, if not for her self sake, yet at the least
for the furtherance of Gods cause and stay of her Country to the maintenance
whereof she is bound before God.

Moses wished to be put out of the Book of Life for the safeguard of his
People. Exodus 32.

Paul wished to be Anathema for his Brethren. Romans 10.

Codrus and diverse other Heathens gave away their Lives for the safety of their
Countries. Contrariwise we wish and are humble Suitors, that it may please her
Majesty to preserve her own Life, and to cut away the dangers thereof, if not
for her own cause which happily her noble Courage does smally regard, yet at
the leastwise for Gods cause, and for her faithful and loving Subjects, whose
Life and good Estate depends on her.

Obj. It may be objected, That her Majesty reposeth her trust and confidence in
the Providence of God, and therefore makes light of all attempts that her
Enemies can work against her.

Respons. Surely it must needs be confessed, that the same proceeds both of
noble Courage and of a strong Faith and trust in God, and ought indeed to be
the Bulwark of help and comfort to all good and godly Princes; yet so far as
they seem not withal to tempt God by leaving that diligence and those ordinary
means whereby he uses to save, and deliver.

David knew himself to be Anointed and appointed Israel by God himself, yet he
did not rashly cast himself into the hands of Saul his Enemy.

Jehosophat and Hezechias in their great distresses undoubtedly had their chief
trust and confidence in the Providence of God, but they ceased not both to shun
and cut off all those things whereby danger might grow, and to use all means
whereby their safety might be helped.

It is alleged by Christ. Thou shall not tempt thy Lord God; but surely it
might have been as fafe for Christ. without tempting God to have cast himself
down from the Pinnacle of the Temple, as for the Queens Majesty to suffer in her
Bosom this poisonous Serpent, that cease not continually to thrust the sting
of her venomous workings into her Majesty's safety and possession of her Crown.

It is well said, Principum securitas paucorum vita redimenda est.

There are diverse Histories yea and Examples of late time whereby it has been
declared, that the tempting confidence of Gods Providence not shunning evident
occasions of danger, has fallen out to the extreme hurt of the Parties, and on
such as have depended on them; which we think not meet to recite, lest they
might seem in this Case Ominosa, as God for his great Mercies sake forbid that
they should be.

Many Reasons, Authorities and Examples more besides this may be taken out of
the Holy Scriptures for Confirmation of this purpose; but for tediousness we
thought good to omit them, and to leave the residue to God.

In the 20th Chapter of Levit. there is much like matter, and that in as
earnest manner set forth; neither can any in Conscience think that this
punishment was here by God appointed so grievous, only for those that then
seduced the people of God to Gentilish and heathenish Idolatry; for Idolatry
and false worship by whomsoever it be begun, though they bear the name of the
Church or of the People of God never so much; It is a direct offense against
the first Table; and therefore in Gods Judgment worthy no less punishment. Yea
their offense must needs be more heinous in the sight of God, for that they
have had greater opportunity to understand Gods true worship.

Shall any Christian man think, that the worship of God appointed in his Law
being but the figure, was more acceptable and pleasant to God than this his
true worship in the Faith of Jesus, according to the Gospel of our Redemption?
or that the violating of the same, or seducing of his people from it, is in his
Judgment less displeasant or not so grievously to be punished as was the
breaking of his Law or the seducing from it? Shall we think that the gathering
of a few sticks on the Sabbath Day is to be punished by Death in a poor simple
person, and the seeking to subvert the Gospel of Christ and to draw the people
of God to that Idolatrous Doctrine that teaches to impute the merit of Christ's
Blood and Passion to wicked men's devices, yea to Stocks, to Stones, to Sticks,
to Water, to Bells, etc. shall not be worthy the punishment of Death in a noble
Person? God direct our Judgments otherways.

By these words of God before recited Deuteronomy. 13; if it be evident that God
willed his Magistrates to spare neither Brother, nor Sister, nor Son, nor
Daughter, nor Wife, nor Friend, though he were never so nigh, if he sought to
seduce the people of God from his true worship, how much less is an Enemy, a
Traitor, and an Adulterer to be spared?

These Reasons for the speedy Executing of the Scottish Queen (being part of
those contained in the written Copy of the said Reasons I had by me, and of
which the latter part contains the Petition of the House to her Majesty,
which see Entered at large in their proper places on Thursday the 28th day of
this instant May ensuing, are transcribed out of the said written Copy, and are
added to this days passages, because it is very probable the House did ground
their beforementioned resolution upon them; although not only the day on which
they were first digested in the House be there omitted, but also the very year
is through the Error (as it should seem) of some transcriber falsely set down to
have been the Thirteenth of her Majesty, in which Parliament the matter of the
Scottish Queen was not at all mentioned, nor at all dealt in by the House of
Commons until this present Session of Parliament in an. 14 Reginae Eliz. as
does appear plainly by the Original Journal Book of the same House. And now
follows the residue of this days Passages, as also the greatest part of the
business of this ensuing Parliament out of the said Original Journal Book of
the same.

This day Arthur Hall Esquire being brought by the Sergeant to the Bar and Charged
by the House with seven several Articles, humbly submitted himself to the
House, and confessed his folly as well touching the said Articles, as also his
other fond and unadvised Speech at the Bar, and was upon the question remitted
with a good Exhortation given him by Mr Speaker at large. Vide concerning this
matter on Saturday the 17th day of this instant May foregoing.

The Bill for the Jurors of Middlesex was committed unto Mr Robert Wroth, Mr
Newdigate, Mr Dalton, Mr Cromwell, and Mr Gent.

On Tuesday the 20th day of May, the Bill for the Assurance of Lands late of
Sir William and Sir Thomas Woodhouse Knights deceased, was read the first time
and referred unto Sir John Thynne, Sir Robert Wingfield, Mr Moore, Mr Grimston,
Mr Norton, and Mr Snagg, to confer with the Parties and their Friends touching
their Assents to the proceeding of the Bill.

Three Bills also of no great moment had each of them one reading; of which the
last being the Bill for the Town of Shrewsbury, was read the third time, and
passed the House.

The Proviso to the Bill of December tales was twice read, and the Bill and
Proviso were Ordered to be engrossed.

The Bill for Rites and Ceremonies was read the third time and referred to be
considered by Mr Treasurer, Sir Thomas Scott, Mr Attorney of the Duchy and
others, who were appointed to meet this Afternoon in the Star Chamber.

On Wednesday the 21th day of May, the Bill between Chatterton and Chatterton
was read, and committed unto Sir Nicholas Arnold, Sir Hen. Gates, Sir George
Penruddocke, Sir Hen. Wallop and Mr Cromwell, who were appointed to meet here
to Morrow Morning at six of the Clock.

The Bill for the Earl of Kent was read the first time.

Francis Harrington Esquire being one of this House was appointed by the Queens
Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council to repair forthwith to the Town of
Stamford or thereabouts for her Majesty's Service, as by his Commission for
taking of Posthorses bearing date the 20th day of this Month does and may
appear; which Mr Speaker Commanded to be set down and noted accordingly.

The Bill for the Earl of Kent was committed unto Mr Attorney of the Duchy,
Mr. Popham, Mr. Bedell, Mr. Sands, Mr. Fenner, Mr. Dalton, Mr. Shute and Mr.
Matthew Dale; and the opinion of the House was to leave out the general clause
contained in the said Bill.

The Bill for Tales de Circumstantibus was read the third time and passed the
House, and was sent up unto the Lords with two other Bills of no great moment
by Mr. Treasurer and others; with further Order from this House to make
Declaration unto the Lords of the Choice made by this House upon Monday last in
the great Cause. And also to desire to understand their Lordships liking of the
same Choice, and further to pray their good advice and pleasure for further
proceeding therein.

Two Bills also of no great moment had each of them one reading; of which the
first being the Bill touching Presentations by lapse was read the second time
and Ordered to be engrossed.

Mr. Treasurer and the residue returning from the Lords, Mr. Treasurer made
report of their Message done to the Lords; and declared, that the Lords had
resolved in the great cause amongst themselves much to the like effect with the
former Choice made by this House. And that their Lordships for the better and
more speedy proceeding therein do pray present Conference with the former
Committees of this House, who are by the House appointed to attend their
Lordships presently for that purpose. And further Commission also was granted
to the said Committees to impart unto the Lords Committees the Opinion of this
House to be, that for her Majesty's better safety, present Execution be done
upon the Duke. And the rather by reason of the tract of time which of necessity
must arise by occasion of proceeding against the Queen of Scots, by way of
Charging her in proper Person and hearing of her Personal Answer. And further,
that this Opinion of this House shall be delivered to the Lords of the Upper
House in the name of all this House, either by the said Lords Committees, or
else by some of this House, if the said Lords Committees shall so advise and
think good. Vide concerning this matter on Thursday the 26th day of June
ensuing.

Three Bills lastly had each of them one reading; of which the last being the
Bill against Hunting and Killing of Conies was upon the first reading rejected.

On Thursday the 22th day of May, Three Bills of no great moment had each of
them one reading; of which the third being the Bill for the true making of
Callivers, Daggs, etc. was upon the first reading committed unto Mr. Treasurer,
Sir Maurice Berkeley, Sir Nicholas Arnold, Sir Henry Wallop and others, who
were appointed to meet to Morrow in the Star Chamber, at two of the Clock in
the Afternoon.

The Bill for Weeks against Dennis, etc. was committed unto Sir John Thin,
Sir Henry Gates, Sir Hen. Wallopp, Sir Geo. Turpin and Mr. Moore, and others,
who were appointed to meet upon Wednesday next at two of the Clock in the
Afternoon in the Star Chamber.

The Bill against Vagabonds and for relief of the Poor was read the second
time, and referred to be considered by Sir Henry Gates, Mr. Sergeant Lovelace,
Mr. Yelverton and others, who were appointed to meet in this House to Morrow at
six of the Clock in the Morning.

Upon Declaration made unto this House by Mr. Speaker from the Queens Majesty,
that her Highness Pleasure is, that from henceforth no Bills concerning
Religion shall be preferred or received into this House, unless the same should
be first considered and liked by the Clergy. And further, that her Majesty's
Pleasure is to see the two last Bills read in this House touching Rites and
Ceremonies: It is Ordered by the House, that the same Bills shall be delivered
unto her Majesty by all the Privy Council that are of this House, Mr. Heneage,
and Mr. Doctor Wilson Master of the Requests, or by any four of them.

The Bill to avoid the multitude of Rogues and Vagabonds, was read the first
time.

Upon the reading of the Bill Exhibited by Weeks against Dennis, it was
Commanded by the House to be set down and Entered, that in all matters preferred
and offered to this Court between any private persons, and wherein the Bill
shall by Order of this House be thought good to be committed, those Committees
shall make their Reports thereof unto this House, in the presence of both the
Parties and of their Learned Council.

Three Bills lastly of no great moment had each of them one reading; of which
the third being the Bill for the Jurors of Middlesex, was upon the second
reading committed unto Mr. Robert Wroth, Mr. Newdigate, Mr. Dalton, Mr.
Cromwell and Mr. Gent.

On Friday the 23th day of May, Two Bills of no great moment had each of them
one reading; of which the first being the Bill for the City of Worcester, was
read the second time and Ordered to be engrossed.

Mr. Comptroller in the name of all the Committees in the great cause declared
from her Majesty her very good and thankful acceptance of the great care of
this House for her Majesty's Safety; and that moved partly in Conscience and
partly in Honor, minding to defer, not to reject the determination of this
House to proceed in the Choice of a Bill against the Scottish Queen in the
highest degree of Treason both in Life and Title, likes better with all
convenient speed to proceed in a second Bill to the other part of the said
former Choice, which her Majesty's pleasure was should be signified unto this
House by those of her Privy Council being of this House, and so likewise to the
Lords by some others of her Privy Council, being also of that House. Vide
concerning this business on Thursday the 26th day of June following.

Upon a Motion made by Mr. Speaker it was agreed by the House, that the former
Committees shall signify unto the Lords of the Upper House, that after
Declaration made unto this House from her Majesty of her disposition to have
the second part of the former choice proceeded in with Expedition, and to defer
and not to reject the first part of the same; This House nevertheless with one
whole voice and consent, do still rely upon the said first part as most
necessary, without any liking or allowance of the second. And further to make
request unto the Lords to understand whether upon the like report of her
Majesty's like pleasure declared unto their Lordships, that they of that House
do think good nevertheless to continue the proceeding with the former Choice
like as this House does; and if yea, then to confer further with their
Lordships for their good advices and joining therein accordingly. And also to
signify unto their Lordships that the whole opinion of this House is, that her
Majesty's safety cannot stand without Execution of the Duke this present
Session. And that it might please their Lordships in Petition thereof unto her
Highness to join with this House. Vide concerning this matter on Saturday the
31th day of this instant May ensuing.

Four Bills also of no great moment had each of them one reading; of which the
last being the Bill for Weights and Measures, was upon the second reading
committed unto Sir Nicholas Arnold, Sir Owen Hopton, Sir Rowland Hayward, Mr.
Recorder of London, Mr. Thomas Brown, Mr. Stanhope and others, who were
appointed to meet to Morrow in the Afternoon in the Temple Church.

Mr. Treasurer reported to the House the delivery of the two Bills of Rites and
Ceremonies to her Majesty, together with the humble request of this House, most
humbly to beseech her Highness not to conceive ill opinion of this House, if it
so were that her Majesty should not like well of the said Bills, or of the
Parties that preferred them. And declared further, that her Majesty seemed
utterly to mislike of the first Bill, and of him that brought the same into the
House: and that her Highness express will and pleasure was, that no Preacher or
Minister should be impeached or indicted, or otherwise molested or troubled, as
the preamble of the said Bill did purport: adding these comfortable words
farther, that her Majesty as Defender of the Faith, will aid and maintain all
good Protestants to the discouraging of all Papists.

Two Bills also of no great moment had each of them one reading; of which the
first being the Bill for the Free Grammar School of Tunbridge, was read the
first time and committed unto Mr Recorder of London, Mr Coleby, Mr Norton, Mr
Matthew Dale, who were appointed to meet upon Monday next in the Afternoon in
Guildhall.

Mr Attorney and Mr Solicitor brought word from the Lords, that touching the
Petitions lastly made unto them this present day by this House, their Lordships
will to Morrow at eight of the Clock in the Forenoon have Conference together
therein, and so then make Answer of them unto this House.

On Saturday the 24th day of May, Four Bills of no great moment had each of
them one reading; of which the last being the Bill against injuries offered by
Corporations in the City of London to diverse Foreign Artificers, was read the
first time, and committed unto Mr Seckford, Sir Owen Hopton, Sir Rowland
Hayward, Mr Moor and Mr Cure, who were appointed to meet upon Monday next at
three of the Clock in the Afternoon in the Guildhall.

Mr Sergeant Barham and Doctor Huick brought from the Lords three Bills, viz.
The Bill of Tales de circumstantibus, heretofore passed this House to have
certain words therein inserted. An Act against such as shall conspire or
practice the Enlargement of any Prisoner committed for High Treason; And an Act
for the punishment of such as shall rebelliously take or detain from the Queens
Majesty any Castles, Fortresses, etc.

The Bill for preservation of Timber and Fuel was read the time and passed, and
was (with four other Bills of no great moment) sent to the Lords by Mr
Treasurer and others, with further Commission to have Conference with their
Lordships touching some Amendments to be had in the Bill of Vagabonds, and also
touching the opinion of this House for the necessity of the speedy Execution of
the Duke; and also to pray their Lordships Answer to the Petition of this House
made yesterday unto them as for their liking to proceed with the first part of
the former Choice, and for their advices and conjoining with this House in the
Order of the same proceeding.

The Bill for Planting and setting of Hops was read the first time.

Mr Treasurer and the residue returning from the Lords, Mr Treasurer made
report of the delivery of the said Bills to the Lords, and of the residue of
their said Commission from this House to their Lordships, with Answer from
them, that they like well and allow of the opinion of this House to proceed in
the first degree of Choice in the great Cause, and that their Lordships will
therein join with this House, and have appointed to have Conference with the
Committees of this House this Afternoon in the Star Chamber, for the order and
manner of the same proceeding; and then also with the same Committees to have
Conference touching the Bill of Vagabonds; and that as touching Petition to be
made to the Queens Majesty for the present Execution of the Duke, their
Lordships not misliking the opinion of the House in that matter, neither
discouraging this House in that Enterprise, do refuse to join with this House
in that Petition to her Majesty; for the Duke having had his Trial by them of
that House, their consent and liking in the matter is thereby sufficiently
manifested already.

Mr Attorney and Mr Solicitor declared unto this House from the Lords, that
their Lordships do desire that those Committees which were appointed to meet
with them this Afternoon, may have Authority from this House to make Choice of
a number of themselves to Accompany the Lords unto the Queens Majesty, for the
reporting and maintaining of such reasons as upon their said Conference shall
be first propounded and yielded amongst them touching the great cause.

This Court was Adjourned until Wednesday next; and upon sundry Motions it was
resolved, that all such of this House as shall think good to exhibit or prefer
any reasons or causes to enforce the matter of the Dukes Execution, may in the
mean time of the next Session deliver them in writing to Mr Speaker at their
Choices and pleasures, to the end that this Court may further proceed to the
manner and order of sig nifying the same Petition to her Majesty accordingly.

On Wednesday the 28th day of May, It was signified unto this House by Mr
Speaker, that the Queens Majesty's pleasure was, that all they of this House
being of the Committees in the great Cause, and appointed by them out of
themselves to come to her Highness Presence, shall all attend at the Court this
present day at eight of the Clock in the Forenoon for the same purpose
accordingly: which Message was so delivered unto Mr Speaker now in the House,
by one of this House sent unto him from Mr Treasurer. But to what end or
purpose the said Mr Treasurer with other Members of the House were appointed to
attend upon her Majesty, does not appear or can at all be gathered by the
Original Journal Book of the House of Commons; but it was doubtless to agitate
and treat of the great business touching the Scottish Queen: and it is very
probable that the Members of the said House did at this time offer up their
Petition and Reasons to her Majesty for the speedy Execution of the said Queen;
all which I have thought good to insert in this place out of a written Copy
thereof I had by me, although they are there falsely referred to the Parliament
foregoing which was in An. 13 Regin. Eliz. as were also other reasons there
contained, which are referred unto Monday the 19th day of this instant May
foregoing.

An humble Pe^tition to her Majesty and the Reasons gathered out of the Civil
Law by certain appointed by Authority in Parliament, to prove that it stands
not only with Justice but also with the Queens Majesty's Honor and Safety to
proceed Criminally against the pretended Scottish Queen.
WE your Majesty's most humble and faithful Subjects Assembled in Parliament
for preservation of your Royal Person and Estate, do highly acknowledge the
great goodness of God that has Chosen and appointed such a Sovereign to Reign
over us as never Subjects by any Record ever had a better; and therefore our
hearty Prayers are daily and ever shall be to Almighty God, long to preserve
your most Excellent Majesty in all and most perfect Felicity that ever Creature
had or might have upon Earth. And whereas the highest and chiefest States are
ever more envied of all such as be the worst and greatest disturbers of Gods
Monarchy and his Anointed Jurisdiction, we cannot but with a care of mind and
force of our Bodies seek to redress what soever shall be thought hurtful to
your Majesty's safe quietness and most blessed Government.

A Queen of late time, and yet through her own Acts now justly no Queen, a nigh
Kinswoman of your Majesty's and yet a very unnatural Sister, Lady Mary Steward,
late Queen of Scots, being driven through violence and force of others to take
Harbor in your Majesty's Realm for the Safeguard of her Life, has not only
had your Majesty's most Gracious Protection, but also was saved within her own
Realm by your Majesty's Authority from Execution of Death for her most horrible
and unnatural doings there, known throughout Europe to her perpetual infamy and
shame for ever. And albeit upon her first coming your Highness might both by
Law and Justice have dealt with her judicially for her attempts made by writing
and otherwise against the Crown and Dignity, and to the Disherison of your most
Royal Person for ever; Yet your Majesty in Consideration of her long dangerous
troubles in her own Realm, and in hope that such great Adversities would have
been good Lessons for her Amendment hereafter, has not used her in any such
manner as she has deserved: But rather forgetting or forgiving after a sort
her former doings, has dealt with her like a good and natural Sister. All
which notwithstanding this unnatural Lady (being born out of kind as it should
seem) has altogether forgotten God and all goodness, abusing her self, as it
appears, most Treasonably against your Majesty's Person and State, and
seeking and devising by all means possible not only to deprive your Majesty of
all Earthly Dignities and Livings, but also of your natural Life; which thing
is found by evident Proofs, and by the Judges of your Realm declared to be most
horrible and most wicked Treason that ever was wrought against any Prince. For
which her doings her Majesty minding to touch her in Honor, esteems her a
Person unworthy of any hope or Title, Pre-eminence or Dignity within this your
Land; and therefore not seeking to deal with her according to her desert is
only contented to have her disabled as a person not capable of Princely Honor.
And thus your Majesty using this course thinks it the meetest way to
establish your self and to quiet your Dominions hereafter, taking away hereby
the hope of such as do depend upon the pretended Title, and weakening the whole
strength of that Faction.

And for further assurance of your Majesty's quietness your Highness does not
mislike to have grievous pains of High Treason laid upon all such as shall
attempt and maintain her pretended Title by any manner of way.

Thus as evil men shall be kept back from intermedling in the maintenance of a
Title, so may your Majesty's true and faithful Subjects be much emboldened to
deal against this pretended Queen and her Adherents, when your Subjects shall
see a Law set down for your avail, and your Enemies shall want Forces and wax
weak thereby, and your true Subjects greatly hardened for all offenses.

Moreover if the said pretended Queen shall hereafter make any attempt of
Treason, the Law so to run, that she shall suffer pains of Death without
further trouble of Parliament.

And if any shall enterprise to deliver her out of Prison after her
disablement, either in your Majesty's Life, or after the same, to be Convicted
immediately of High Treason, and her self assenting thereunto to be likewise
adjudged as a Traitor in Law.

In all which proceedings your Majesty thinks to deal both safely and
honorably, as well for your Self as for your State. For thereby it seems
that neither shall she nor any for her hereafter dare deal to do harm; but also
all Foreign Princes and Nations will think much Honor of such your merciful
proceedings.

And lastly, whereas she has fallen into your hands from the violence of
others, and so as a Bird followed by a Hawk seeks succor at your Majesty's
Feet; your Highness thinks your Self bound in Honor, for that she is your
Sister, and a Queen Born, not to proceed further, only to her disablement,
counting it a strong work for your Safety.

These be the Reasons which in part may move your Majesty to take this Course,
as we do conceive. All which notwithstanding, if it it might please your most
Excellent Majesty to suffer your poor and faithful Subjects to enter deeply
upon good search of this Cause, and by way of reply to make Answer with
proceeding by just proofs for your Majesty's Safety, we doubt not but with your
Highness favorable acceptance, all that which hitherto has been uttered is
rather a Declaration of that most Mild and Gracious Nature of Yours, than any
assurance for your Person and State at all.

Reasons Answering the former Arguments.
May it therefore please your Majesty,

WHereas it is said, that it stands to very good purpose to proceed only in
disabling the Scottish Queen for any Claim or Title to the Crown; we take it,
by your Majesty's Favor, that such and especially disabling of the Scottish
Queen is in effect a special Confirmation of a Right that she should have had.
Quia privatio praesupponit habitum. And further we do take it for a known
truth, that by the Laws and Statutes in this Land now in Force, she is already
disabled, and therefore it is to small purpose, rem actam agere. And for Answer
unto the premises we say further, that neither shall this weaken others that
are evil minded, but rather strengthen them in their mischief, and make them
desperate where there is no other remedy. And a Firebrand once kindled and
finding apt matter to work upon, will hardly be quenched without a great
hazard. Touching the grievous pains laid upon those that shall deal, those will
be little feared, by the wicked, whom hope of gain makes more bold than such
pains do appall. Besides, Nature given to this Nation and all others that are
under the Moon, makes men oftentimes stir without cause, and as Plato says,
Naturales sunt conversiones rerum pub. Yet they that heretofore have born
Armor as Traitors, not fearing the Law then in force, which did as much
restrain them as this or any Law to be made can be able being desperate will
fear no Laws, especially such an instrument living by whom all attempts are to
be wrought. Force overthrows Justice, till the Cause of all mischief, which
is the hoped help, be clean taken away.

And where it is said that the making of a Law for her disabling emboldneth
much your Subjects to deal against her: We Answer that no new Law needs to
encourage good and Loyal Subjects against such a Person, who has broken all
the Laws of God and nature, and is worthy to be out of your Majesty's
Protection, because she seeks still the disturbance of this noble State, and
using often her own phrase threatens that she will stir Coals.

Touching a new Law to be made against her, if she should attempt any evil
hereafter; the experience of her former life is such that no Law has any force
with her, that is fully minded to take her advantage upon any apt occasion
offered. And to threaten her with Death if she should seem to make an escape
hereafter, is such advice that she nothing fears; for besides that she was
told at Lough-Leaven, there was no way but Death with her if she would not take
her Imprisonment quietly and live without seeking Liberty, she notwithstanding
adventured her self with a young Fellow very dishonourably to get away in a
Boat. And now since her coming into England she has wrought diverse ways to
make an Escape, and employed the heads of the chiefest Estates of your own
disloyal Subjects for that purpose. Therefore menacing and but threatening words
of Law shall not keep her back from her malicious intent to subvert your
Majesty, and to give a push for the Crown, come of her what will. And likely it
is that she may escape as well as be taken, for she neither wants Wit nor
Cunning to make her way. And we have learned in matters of great hazard to be
well advised and to take always that Order which may be the best. Now there
will want no Traitors to be always ready to bring this her device about, and to
do what they can for her Liberty. And such as will not deal in small matters
will adventure deep for a Kingdom, because the reward is great when the service
is done.

But your Majesty has regard unto your Honor as much as to your Safety; and
thinks that in taking this Course all Princes will speak well of your
Highness.

May it please your Majesty, We your good Subjects do well like of so
honorable a meaning; but we would be loath to see that when you have such
regard of Honor, you do thereby lose your State, and so your Life, Honor and
all. For if it should fall out that the Scottish Queen escaped your hands
(which Christ for his Mercies sake forbid) all good Princes would think great
want of Judgment and foresight, First in your Majesty, next in your Council,
last of all in all the whole Nation; and such a grief it would be to your
Majesty and Subjects, and to all other good Christian Princes throughout
Europe, as none could be greater. Again, such a matter of Comfort and Triumph
it would be to the Adversaries, that they would account her escape a miraculous
work of God, and that your Majesty had no power though will to keep her safe.
And when that day should come, Woe be to all true Christians universally; for
upon her do depend the chiefest Enemies of Religion, and to this Kingdom.

May it please you therefore most Gracious Queen to be well advised and to take
sound Counsel when it is given; knowing this for a certain truth, that evil
foreseen and advisedly looked unto, does ever the less harm.

But still your Majesty considering the great troubles that she has had, and
forgetting or not greatly esteeming what troubles she has brought unto your
Realm, does by a merciful respect of your most Gracious Nature, rather bend to
do good to her than to seek Safeguard for your Self. And seeing here your
Sister though unnatural, and also a Queen by Birth, although not worthy of
Life, cannot but rather hazard your own self than deal with her according to
her deserts.

This your Majesty's nature being thus known, it behooves all your good
Subjects, most Gracious Sovereign, to call and cry to God for his Heavenly
Assistance, that his Power may be given to you, next after the advancement of
his Glory, to seek assuredly your own Safety; which your Majesty cannot fully
do by this means that has hitherto been taken, or hereafter to be used.

Therefore it would please your most Excellent Majesty to give ear to the sound
Reasons of your most Faithful Subjects, and rather deal certainly than by
Chance; and there is no doubt but your Majesty shall avoid all apparent
dangers, and live in all Safety and Honor, to Gods Glory and to the Comsort of
all good Christian Princes universally.

Thus much against the opinion of disabling the Scottish Queen; whereby it
appears that it will be rather for her benefit, than to her hurt. And most
certain it is, that it will be dangerous for the State diverse ways; whereas
dealing with her in the first degree according to her deserts, the same is
lawful, safe, necessary and honorable for your Majesty and all Christendom
besides.

And because it may appear that this Speech is grounded upon Law and Reason,
there shall be Arguments in Law alleged sufficiently for this matter, as the
shortness of time may serve.

Civil Reasons for doubt of Answer.
A Confederate being in the Country of his Confederate is to be punished as
though he were a Subject.

Every person offending is to be tried in the place where he commits the
Crime, without Exception of privilege.

A King passing through another King's Realm, or there Resident, is but a
private person.

The Dignity of the Person offending increases the offense.

Reat us omnem honorem excludit.

A King deposed is not to be taken for a King; and therefore Frederick King of
Naples being deprived by the King of Spain, was afterward judged to be no King
by Sentence.

A King though not deposed may commit Treason.

Diotorus a King Consederated with the Romans was Criminally judged by Caius
Julius Caesar, for that he Conspired to have slain the said Julius Caesar at a
Banquet.

Joan Queen of Naples was put to Death for that she gave her Consent to the
Murder of her Husband, and caused him to be hanged out at a Window.

Henry the Seventh Emperor did give a Solemn Judgment of Death at Pisa 1311.
against Robert King of Sicil, for that the same King had entered into Conspiracy
with the Subjects of the Emperor: and yet was not King Robert within the
Jurisdiction of the Emperor at the time of the Conspiracy, neither at the time
of the Judgment.

It stands with the Law of nature which is immutable, for any Person to
proceed for the safety of himself and his Charge.

Great offenses in the highest degree ought not to be punished for any
affection of Kindred.

Justice, Equity and Commonwealth, are to be preferred before the affection of
Kindred. Quia arctiora sunt vincula virtutis quam sanguinis.

An offense of the highest degree against the Prince being the Head of the
Political Body, is an offense to every Member of the same, and requires sharp
punishment for preservation of the whole.

The intent of offenses in the highest degree is punished with death, although
the Execution of the intent does not follow.

The benefit and privilege of safe Conduct is lost by any Crime committed
after the Grant made thereof.

Administration of Justice cannot but be honorable.

All just and honorable dealings are pleasing to God and profitable to the
Prince and State.

Execution of Justice is void of all Injury.

It is dangerous for the State to swerve from the Ministration of Justice and
the due Execution of Law.

To spare Offenders in the highest degree, is an injury to the Prince and State
of the Realm.

Poena unius salus multorum.

The loss of life is the penalty appointed for Treason; and the loss of Lands
and Goods with the possibility of Title, comes but in consequence and
unnecessarily.

Punishment ought to be equal with the fault, and he that ministers less
punishment than the fault deserves, does not execute the Law according to the
Rules of Justice.

Reasons to prove that it stands not only with Justice, but with the Queens
Majesty's Honor and Safety, to proceed Criminally against Mary Steward late
Queen of Scots, for her Treasons committed against her Majesty and this Realm.
A Confederate being in the Country of his Confederate, for a Crime committed,
is there to be punished. Cod. and de captivis and post termino reversis, verba
legis, At si sunt apud nos rei ex Civitatibus foederatis, in eos damnatos
animadvertimus. Therefore although the Scottish Queen were a Confederate, yet
she is to be used in like fort as a Subject.

Item, there is no Person of what degree soever he be, but is there to be Tried
where the Crime is committed without exception of privilege. Cod. ubi de
Criminibus agi oporteat, verba legis, Qua in Provincia quis deliquit, aut in
qua pecuniarum aut criminum reus sit, ibi judicari debet, and hoc jus perpetuum
sit.

But the Scottish Queen here has offended. Ergo.

Item, every Person is to be Condemned and adjudged equally. In Crimine laesae
Majestatis verba legis. In crimine laesae Majestatis aequa est omnium conditio.
Ad legem Juliam laesae Majestatis.

But she has fallen in crimen laesae Majestatis. Ergo.

Item a King in another Kings Territory may commit Treasons as another private
Person, Corectus de potestate regia no 90. verba, Quaero utrum Rex non habens
justum titulum regni incidat in crimen laesae Majestatis. Respondeo, quod sic,
secundum Bartol. in legem duodecim tabularum, and in legem prim. ff. de crimine
laesae Majestatis.

But the Scottish Queen has offended here in England. Ergo.

A King passing through another King's Realm or there resiant, is but a private
person. Bartolus duodecim. libro de Dignitatibus, verba, Sed tamen dubitatur si
Rex vel Baro transit per alias parts extra Regnum suum, utrum possit creare
Milites: Et videtur quod non, quia ibi privatus est homo. ff. de Praefecto
Urbis. ff. de officio praesidis. Praeses in homines suae Provinciae imperium
habet, and hoc dum est in Provincia.

91. Coll. penult. verba, Quilibet Rex extra suum territorium privatus est.
Lapus in allegatione, Censetur ad instar Privati.

But the Scottish Queen being here in England is out of her Territory. Ergo to
be punished as a private Person.

Every Person of what condition soever he be, either superior or equal,
submitting himself to the Jurisdiction of another, is to be judged by him to
whom he submits himself. L. est receptivum ff. de judiciis, verba, Est
receptivum eoque jure utimur, ut siquis major vel equalis subjiciat se
jurisdictioni alterius, potest ei and adversus eum jus dici.

But the Queen of Scots, although she were a Queen and thereby equal, by
committing heinous Treason, has submitted her self to the Queens Jurisdiction.

Paulus de Castro in dictam legem est receptivum ff. eo, verba ejus enim, Major
vel aequalis potest se subjicere Jurisdictioni ordinaliter alterius Judicis
minoris vel paris tacit, si Judex unius Territorii delinquat vel contrahat in
territorium alterius Judicis vel minoris vel paris, quia ratione delicti vel
contractus sortitur ibi forum. Rota de definitionibus de Judiciis, Ille qui
delinquit, per delictum amisit mercem imprim. and sic factus est alius
privatus; and sic compar potest eum punire. Quilibet in suo Territorio est
major Alexandro.

But the Scottish Queen having committed High Treason within this Realm, has
by contraction of Law submitted her self to this Jurisdiction, and therefore to
be punished as another private Person.

And although it be said that one that is not subditus, non potest committere
crimen laesae Majestatis; yet that saying is to be taken, whereas the crime is
committed out of the Jurisdiction: but if it be committed within the
Jurisdiction, then there to be punished. Papa in Clementinam de sententia and
re judicata.

And albeit the Pope did reverse the same Sentence; yet he says, that if the
party had been within the Jurisdiction of the superior at the time of the Crime
committed, and judgment to the party offended, he had been justly condemned,
etc. Verba Papae, Quod si Rex infra districtum imperiale suisset invenitus
delinquens, potuisset contra eum scntentia dici.

Lo here the Pope declares plainly that she here offending may justy here be
punished in poena Capitis.

Item, a King deposed is not afterward to be taken for a King. Thomas de
Turrecremeta definitione 65. Rex Regno privatus non est amplius Rex.

But the Queen of Scots is deprived. Ergo.

The benefit or privilege of Safe Conduct is lost when any crime is committed
after the Safe Conduct granted. Angelus de maleficiis, in verbo publica fama.

But the Queen of Scots has committed against the Safe Conduct since her
coming into the Realm. Ergo.

The will and mind in Treasons is punished equally as the Act. Cod. ad legem
Juliam laesae Majestatis, verba legis. In crimine laesae Majestatis voluntatem
sceleris aeque ac effectum puniri jura voluerunt.

But the Scottish Queen has not only had the affections, but has notoriously
proceeded to the actions. Ergo.

Neither is it any new or rare thing for Kings and Queens to be adjudged and
Condemned for Treason; for Henry the Seventh Emperor did give a solemn
judgment of death at Pisa, A. D. 1311. against Robert King of Sicily. Diotorus
was likewise Condemned by Julius Caesar; and Joan Queen of Naples for
murdering her Husband, and Hanging him out of a Window.

Punishment ought to be equal to the offenses committed. ss. de poenis; but
Death is the penalty appointed for Treason. Ergo.

The foregoing Petition and Reasons for the speedy Execution of the Scottish
Queen being thus transcribed out of the beforementioned written Copy of them I
had by me,

Now follows the residue of this days passages and of this ensuing Journal out
of the Original Journal Book of the House of Commons it self in manner and form
following.

Two Bills of no great moment had each of them one reading; of which the second
being the Bill for Cogshall and Bocking, was read the first time.

The Proviso to the Bill for Worcester was twice read and Ordered to be
engrossed.

The Bill for the Free Grammar School in Tunbridge was committed unto Sir Tho.
Scot and others to meet to Morrow in the Afternoon at three of the Clock.

The Bill for the Explanation of the Statute of 32 H. 8. for Recoveries, was
read the third time, and committed to the former Committees; unto whom also
were added Mr Sergeant Lovelace, Mr Attorney of the Duchy, Mr Popham and Mr
Townesend, who were to meet this Afternoon in the Temple Church.

Mr Treasurer declared, that he and certain others of the Committees chosen by
themselves out of themselves do presently come from her Majesty; and that her
Majesty does very thankfully accept the good will and zeal of this House in
their carefulness for her Majesty's safety and preservation; and that as her
Majesty thinks the course chosen by this House, and wherein the Lords have
joined with this House, to be the best and surest way for her Majesty's
preservation and safety indeed; yet her Highness for certain respects by her
self conceived thinks good for this time to defer, but not to reject that
course of proceeding as yet; and in the mean time with all convenient speed to
go forward in the great matter against the Scottish Queen with a second Bill,
being the other part of the said Choice heretofore offered to this House. And
that her Majesty minding in that Bill by any implication or drawing of words
not to have the Scottish Queen either enabled or disabled to or from any manner
of Title to the Crown of this Realm, or any other Title to the same whatsoever
touched at all, wills that the Bill be first drawn by her Learned Council,
and by them penned before the same be treated of or dealt in, in this House.
And that in the mean time of bringing in of the said Bill, this House enter not
into any Speeches or Arguments of that matter. And that her Majesty has
likewise signified the same her like pleasure unto the Lords of the Upper House
by some of the said Committees of the same House. Vide concerning this matter
on Thursday the 26th day of June following.

Mr Attorney and Mr Solicitor declared from the Lords that their Lordships
have appointed six of themselves which were with the Queens Majesty this
Forenoon at the Exchequer, and that they have appointed the Judges there to
attend them; and pray that a convenient number of such of this House as were
also with her Highness, might with some others of this House meet there with
their Lordships for further Conference, and thereupon were for that purpose
appointed by this House,

Mr Treasurer. Mr Comptroller. Mr Chancellor of the Duchy. Mr Chancellor of
the Exchequer. Sir Maurice Berkeley. Sir Tho. Scott. Sir Hugh Pawlett. Sir John
Thynne. Sir Hen. Gate. Mr Dr Wilson Master of the Requests. Mr Sergeant
Lovelace. Mr Attorney of the Court of Wards. Mr Recorder of London. Mr Moor. Mr
Mounson. Mr Popham. Mr Attorney of the Duchy. Mr Sands. Mr Norton. Mr Atkins
and Mr Dalton.
Nota, That it is not certainly set down why these forenamed Committees were
nominated; but as is most probable, they were appointed either for the great
business touching the Scottish Queen, or the Execution of the Duke, or both.

The Resolution of this House upon the Question was, that Petition should be
made by this House unto her Majesty for the present Execution of the Duke, and
that the same Petition shall be digested and put in writing against to Morrow
Morning, and be then delivered to Mr Speaker, to the end he may move her
Majesty in the behalf of this whole House in such sort as this House shall
further appoint him. Vide concerning this matter on Saturday the 31th day of
this instant May ensuing.

On Thursday the 29th day of May, Two Bills of no great moment had each of them
one reading; of which the second being the Bill for Partition of the Lands to
be made between the Lord Latimer and Sir Robert Wingfeild Knight, was read the
second time and Ordered to be engrossed.

Mr Chancellor of the Exchequer, Mr Attorney of the Duchy, Mr Attorney of the
Court of Wards, and Mr Boyer, were added to the former Committees for the
School of Tunbridge (who were appointed on Friday the 23d day of this instant
May foregoing.)

Three Bills also had each of them one reading; of which the second being the
Bill against the multitude of Rogues and Vagabonds, was upon the second reading
rejected.

Mr Doctor Jews and Mr Doctor Huick did bring from the Lords a Bill touching
the annexing of Hexham and Hexamshire to the County of Northumberland.

The Bill lastly for Vagabonds was committed unto Mr Treasurer, Mr Comptroller,
Mr Attorney of the Court of Wards, Mr Sands, Mr Mounson, Mr Marsh, Mr Sampole,
Mr Cromwell, and Mr Boyer, who were appointed to meet to Morrow between five
and six of the Clock in the Morning; and such of them as can, to meet in the
mean time in the Temple Church at three of the Clock.

On Friday the 30th day of May, the Bill for Sir William Harper was upon the
first reading committed unto Sir Hugh Pawlett, Sir John Thynne, Sir Maurice
Berkley, Mr Dr Wilson Master of the Requests, Mr Atkins, Mr Nicholas Hare, and
Mr Matthew Dale, who were appointed to meet upon Monday next in Southwark in
the Courthouse there at two of the Clock in the Afternoon, and the Parties to
be warned by the Sergeant.

Five Bills of no great moment had each of them one reading; of which the last
being the Bill touching Grants by Corporations, were read the second time, and
committed unto Mr Seckford Master of the Requests, Mr Sergeant Manwood, Mr
Popham, Mr Bedell, Mr Thimbleby, Mr Snagg, Mr Fenner, and Mr Grimsditch, who
were appointed to meet at three of the Clock this Afternoon in the Temple
Church.

The Committees for the Free Grammar School of Tunbridge were appointed to meet
at three of the Clock this Afternoon in the Guild Hall.

Upon the Question it was resolved by this House touching the Bill of
Vagabonds, That the words Minstrells, Bearwards, Pedlers, etc. shall not be put
out of the Bill, but stand still in the same, qualified by Licenses of the
Justices of the Peace in such sort, as upon the Committee has been considered
and agreed upon, with this condition also, That if the Lords shall not agree to
that qualification, then this House will not be so bound by the said
resolution, but that they may alter and change the same at their Liberty and
pleasure, if they shall so think good.

Martin Cole one of the Burgesles for the Borough of Sudbury in the County of
Suffolk, was for his great business and affairs licensed to be absent for eight
days.

On Saturday the 31th day of May, Three Bills of no great moment had each of
them one reading; of which the third being the Bill against Recoveries suffered
by Tenants for term of life, was read the second time, and committed unto Mr
Attorney of the Court of Wards, Mr Recorder of London, Mr Mounson, Mr Popham
and others, who were appointed to consider of the said Bill sitting the Court.

The Bill for the Earl of Kent was read the first time, and committed to the
former Committees, and to meet at the Temple Church to Morrow at two of the
Clock in the Afternoon.

Upon the Question moved whether upon a former motion now made by Mr Treasurer
for respiting of the Petition to her Majesty touching the Execution of the
Duke, for that it may be her Majesty will cause the same to be done rather of
her own disposition than being thereunto pressed by Petition of this House; It
is resolved, That neither this present day nor in the mean time of the next
Session of this House any Consultation be had touching any proceeding in the
said Petition. Vide concerning this business on Friday the 16th day, Friday the
23th, and on Wednesday the 28th day of this instant May foregoing.

Four Bills lastly of no great moment had each of them one reading; of which
the first being the Bill against such as shall practice to enlarge any person
committed to Prison for High Treason, was read the first time.

On Monday the second day of June, Four Bills of no great moment had each of
them one reading; of which the last being the Bill against Recoveries by
Collusion suffered by Tenants for term of life, was read the second time, and
Ordered to be engrossed.

Sir Tho. Scott and Sir George Turpin Knights, were added to the former
Committees in the Bill for the Earl of Kent, (whose names see on Wednesday the
21th day of May foregoing) with Authority given by this House to the said
Committees or any six of them, to proceed and to meet at the Temple Church to
Morrow at three of the Clock in the Afternoon.

The Committees in the Bill for Sir William Harper, were appointed by this
House to meet this Afternoon at the Marshalsea, and not at the Courthouse in
Southwark.

The Proviso for the Prisoners in the Marshalsea unto the Bill of Vagabonds,
was rejected upon the Question. And the Proviso for Mr Dutton allowed and
passed the House.

The Bill against Vagabonds and for relief of the Poor, with the Amendments and
Provisoes passed upon the Question.

On Tuesday the third day of June, Seven Bills of no great moment had each of
them one reading; of which the last being the Bill against transporting of
Leather and Tallow out of the Realm by way of Merchandise, was read the third
time.

The Bill of Vagabonds and the Bill of Tales de Circumstantibus, were sent up
to the Lords by Mr Comptroller and others.

The Bill also against Recoveries suffered by Collusion by Tenants for term of
life and such others, was read the third time and passed upon the Question.

Mr Sergeant Barham and Mr Doctor Jews did bring from the Lords three Bills;
of which one was for the Assizes to be kept at Stafford, and the third for the
Severance of the Sheriffwicks of Huntington and Cambridge. Mr Chancellor of the
Duchy, Mr Chancellor of the Exchequer, Sir Hugh Pawlett, Sir Tho. Scott, Mr
Seckford, Mr Sergeant Lovelace, Mr Sergeant Gefferies, Mr Attorney of the
Duchy, Mr Popham, Mr Mounson, Mr Yelverton, Mr Cooper, Mr Beamond, Mr Sampole,
and Mr Knyvet, were appointed to meet at the Savoy at three of the Clock this
Afternoon, at Mr Chancellors of the Duchy, for Conference in the Bill of
fraudulent Conveyances of Lands.

On Wednesday June the 4th, Five Bills of no great moment had each of them one
reading; of which the last being the new Bill for assurances by Corporations,
was read the first time.

The Bill also for the City and Soke of Winchester was read the second time,
and Ordered to be engrossed.

Upon the Question it was Ordered by this House, that the Lord Compton do,
before the Committees, make his Answer to Morrow in the Afternoon in the
Star Chamber at three of the Clock.

Unto the Bill Exhibited by the Earl of Kent, which was in open Court signified
unto the Lord Compton, and upon another Question day was given unto both the
said Parties with their Council to be here present at the report of the
Committees upon Friday next in the Morning, unless the same Committees shall
upon further motion of this House, for that purpose, in the mean time pray
Saturday.

Mr Sergeant Barham and Mr Doctor Huick did bring from the Lords the Bill to
revive an Act against the transporting of Leather, Tallow, and Raw-Hides.

Mr Treasurer, Mr Comptroller, and Mr Chancellor of the Duchy, were added to
the former Committees for the Earl of Kent his Bill.

The Bill for the true making, proving and marking of Calivers, and the Bill
for the School of Tunbridge, were each of them read the third time and passed
the House, and were with two others sent up to the Lords by Mr Chancellor of
the Duchy and others.

The Bill against such as shall keep or detain from the Queens Majesty any
Castles, Fortresses, etc. The Bill against such as go about to enlarge any
Person Imprisoned for Treason, and the Bill for annexing of Hexam and
Hexamshire to the County of Northumberland, were each of them read the second
time; but no mention is made that they were either referred to Committees or
Ordered to be engrossed, because they had been formerly sent from the Lords.

On Thursday the 5th day of June, Three Bills of no great moment had each of
them one reading; of which the first being the Bill for the Severance of the
Sheriffs in the Counties of Surrey and Sussex, was read the first time.

The Bill for the City of Worcester was read the third time, and was rejected
upon the Division of the House, with the difference of six persons.

Five Bills of no great moment had each of them their third reading, and passed
the House, and were sent up unto the Lords by Mr Treasurer and others; of which
one was for Partition of Lands between the Lord Latimer and Sir Robert
Wingfeild Knight, and another for Plumstead Marsh.

Mr Sergeant Barham and Mr Attorney General, did bring from the Lords the Bill
against Mary the Daughter and Heir of James the Fifth late King of Scots,
commonly called the Queen of Scots, with Recommendation of the said Bill from
their Lordships, and pray a present reading thereof this day. And did further
signify, the time of the Year considered, the Queens Majesty's pleasure is,
that this House do proceed in that and other weighty Causes, laying apart all
private matters. Vide Thursday 26th of June postea.

The Bill against Mary commonly called the Queen of Scots, was read the first
time.

On Friday the 6th day of June the Bill for Coggshall Clothes was read the
second time, and Ordered to be engrossed.

The Sergeant was commanded by the House to warn Andrew Fisher, that he make
his personal appearance here presently this Forenoon immediately, after that
the Lords now dealing in the Committee of his Cause, shall have left off their
present Conference. And Sir Thomas Scott, Mr St Ledger, Mr Norton, and others of
the Committees of this House in the matter before the Bill passed, were
presently sent from this House to the said Lords Committees, to inform them of
the former proceedings of the said Committees of this House in the matter.

Four Bills had each of them one reading; of which the last being the new Bill
against fraudulent Gifts and Conveyances of Lands, was read the first time.

The Bill against the bringing in of Foreign Wares forbidden was stayed the
third reading till another time.

The Bill against Mary commonly called the Queen of Scots, was read the second
time.

Mr Chancellor of the Duchy, Mr Chancellor of the Exchequer, Mr Sergeant
Manwood, Mr. Attorney of the Duchy, Mr. Attorney of the Court of Wards, Mr.
Popham, Mr. Mounson, Mr. Yelverton, and Mr. Norton, to have Conference for the
understanding of the Bill against Mary commonly called the Queen of Scots, to
meet this Afternoon, and all Arguments to be received as upon the second
reading of the Bill, until it shall be read the third time.

It is Ordered by the House to sit at Afternoons from three of the Clock till
six, and to proceed but only in private Bills, and not to go to the Question of
any such Bill if it concern any Town or Shire, unless the Knights of such Shire
or Shires, or the Burgesses of such Town or Towns shall then be present.

Andrew Fisher being called this day to the Bar and charged with certain
Objections, was further Adjourned to make his appearance here in this Court to
Morrow next coming.

Post Meridiem.

In the Afternoon two Bills of no great moment had each of them their first
reading; of which the second was the new Bill for Weights and Measures.

Mr. Weeks and Mr. Dennis with their Council were appointed to be heard to
Morrow at three of the Clock in the Afternoon, and Dennis at his peril for the
other to be heard in his absence.

Day was given to the Earl of Kent and the Lord Compton, with their Council on
both sides, to be heard to Morrow at four of the Clock in the Afternoon.

On Saturday the 7th day of June, Eight Bills of no great moment had each of
them one reading; of which the last being the Bill against covenous Vouchers,
and another for Woodstock, were each of them read the second time, and Ordered
to be engrossed.

The Bill for Sir William Harper Knight, was read the first time, being a new
Bill.

Mr. Attorney and Mr. Doctor Huick brought from the Lords the Bill against such
as do withhold from the Queens Majesty any Forts, etc. with certain Amendments
by their Lordships added unto the former Amendments of this House.

Mr. Coleby and Mr. Flowerdew, were added to the former Committees in the Bill
against Mary commonly called the Queen of Scots.

Post Meridiem.

In the Afternoon, the Bill that none serving any Subject shall be a Justice of
Peace or High Constable, was read the first time.

The Bill for repairing the Ways and Bridges near Oxford was read the second
time; but no mention is made that it was either referred to Committees or
Ordered to be engrossed, because it had been sent from the Lords.

Upon the Argument in the matter between the Earl of Kent and the Lord Compton,
by their Learned Council of both sides, this House thinks good to be further
advised upon the matter, and so it was signified unto their Lordships and their
Council.

On Monday the 9th day of June, the Bill for Mr. Smith was read the first and
second time, and Ordered to be engrossed.

The Bill that no Servant of any Subjects shall be a Justice of Peace or High
Constable, was read the second time and Ordered to be engrossed.

Mr. Sands, Mr. Fenner and Mr. Shute, were appointed presently to consider and
correct the Bill of my Lord of Kent, exhibited against the Lord Compton.

Three Bills also of no great moment had each of them one reading; of which the
second being the Bill for Explanation of the Statute of Fugitives was read the
third time, and with the Bill for Presentations by Lapse, and two others of no
great moment sent up to the Lords by Mr. Treasurer and others.

Upon the Question it was resolved by this House that some Committees of this
House be appointed to have Conference with the Lords touching the Proviso to
the Bill against Mary commonly called the Queen of Scots.

Mr. Comptroller, Mr. Treasurer, Sir Thomas Scott, Mr. Doctor Wilson, Master of
the Requests, Mr. Recorder of London, Mr. Cromwell, Mr. Langhorne, Mr. Fenner,
Mr. Snagg, Mr. Dalton, Mr. St Ledger, and Mr. Cowper, were for that purpose
added to the former Committees. Vide touching this matter on Thursday the 26th
day of this instant June following, and Monday the 19th of May foregoing.

Post Meridiem.

In the Afternoon three Bills of no great moment had each of them one reading;
of which the first being the Bill for the Severance of Sheriffs in the Counties
of Surrey and Sussex, was read the third time, and passed upon the Question.

Upon the Question it was Ordered, that the matter be presently proceeded in to
the hearing between the Earl of Kent and my Lord Compton, notwithstanding my
Lord Compton his Allegations of the want of his Council, and the hearing to be
dealt in only touching the matter of the release and the procuring of the same.

Geo. Goscoigne and Tho. Cole being produced, Vide de ista materia in die
praecedente.

On Tuesday the 10th day of June, Six Bills of no great moment had each of them
one reading; of which the second being the Bill that no Household Servant or
Retainer to any Subject shall be a Justice of Peace or High Constable; And the
third for Cogshall, were each of them read the third time, and passed the
House, and were sent up to the Lords by Mr. Seckford Master of the Requests and
others.

Mr. Solicitor and Mr. Doctor Huick did signify from the Lords that their
Lordships have appointed a Committee to have Conference with the Committees of
this House in the Bill against Mary commonly called the Queen of Scots; and
that their Lordships do require the same to be done presently. Vide concerning
this matter on Thursday the 26th of this instant June following.

The Bill for the transporting of Corn was read the second and third time, and
passed upon the Question.

Two Bills also of no great moment had each of them one reading; of which the
first being the Bill for the Town of Stafford, was read the first time.

Post Meridiem.

In the Afternoon two Bills of no great moment had each of them one reading; of
which the first being the Bill for the marking of tanned Leather was read the
first time.

Six Bills also had each of them their second reading; of which the first was
the Bill for Corporations, and the last for the Earl of Kent was upon the
Question Ordered to be engrossed, and both the Parties to be in this House with
their Learned Council at the next Session of this Court to be holden next after
this present day.

On Wednesday the 11th day of June Mr. Doctor Huick and Mr. Doctor Vaughan did
bring word from the Lords, that having understood the Queens Majesty's Pleasure
to be, that they should adjourn their Sessions until Tuesday come Se'nnight,
they did signify the same unto this House, to the end this House may likewise
Adjourn until the same time, and nevertheless to continue the Session this
Forenoon and send unto them such Bills as are already passed this House or
shall pass this Forenoon.

Upon the Question Mr. Snagg was by the whole Voice of the House purged of the
words and meaning which it was pretended he should have heretofore uttered in
this House to the dishonor and discontentation of the Lords of the Upper House.

The Bill touching the transporting of Leather and Tallow was sent up to the
Lords by all the Privy Council being of this House, and others.

The Bill against fraudulent Gifts and Conveyances of Lands was read the third
time, and passed the House.

Mr. Doctor Huick and Mr. Doctor Vaughan did bring from the Lords three Bills;
of which the first was touching Sea-Marks and the second for Partition of Lands
to be had between the Lord Latimer and Sir Robert Wingfeild Knight, and their
Heirs.

The Bill against fraudulent Gifts and Conveyances of Lands, and the Bill for
Partition of Lands between the Lord Latimer and Sir Robert Wingfeild, were sent
up to the Lords by Mr. Chancellor of the Exchequer and others, and by them
brought back again, for that the Lords were risen and gone.

The Bill for Grants by Corporations was read the third time, and passed the
House.

The Court was this day Adjourned until Tuesday come S'ennight next coming.

On Tuesday the 24th day of June, Four Bills of no great moment had each of
them one reading; of which the first being the Bill touching Lands and
Tenements within the County and City of Exeter, was read the second time, and
Ordered to be engrossed.

The Bill for Grants by Corporations with two others of no great moment, was
sent up to the Lords by Mr. Treasurer and others, with request to be by them
made unto their Lordships for their Answer touching Conference in the Bill
against Mary commonly called the Queen of Scots.

The Bill against delays in Judgment at the Common Law was read the second
time, but no mention is made that it was either Ordered to be engrossed or
referred to Committees, because it had been formerly sent from the Lords.

The Bill against Mary commonly called the Queen of Scots, was sent to the
Lords to see and consider, by Sir Rowland Hayward, Mr. Dr. Wilson, Mr. Sergeant
Manwood, and Mr. Attorney of the Court of Wards.

The Bill against delays in Judgment was upon the Question committed unto Mr.
Sergeant Manwood, Mr. Sergeant Jefferies, Mr. Popham and Mr. Sands, who were
appointed to meet at the Temple Church at two of the Clock this Afternoon, and
to make report and to return the Bill to Morrow Morning.

Further day was given for the Earl of Kent and the Lord Compton, with their
Learned Council to Morrow at eight of the Clock in the Forenoon.

On Wednesday the 25th day of June, my Lord of Kent appearing in the House, it
was signified that the Queens Majesty's Pleasure is, that for this time the
matter between him and the Lord Compton be deferred; for that the said Lord
Compton is presently appointed to attend upon the Duke Memorancy to Dover, as
by Letters from the Lord Burleigh directed unto Mr Speaker, and containing her
Highness said Pleasure in that behalf, amongst other things appears.

The Bill for Continuation of certain Statutes was read the first time and
committed unto Mr. Atkins, Mr Dale, Mr Beamond, Mr Greenfeild, Mr March, Mr
Cardinal, Mr Layton, and Mr. Honywood, who were appointed to meet here to
Morrow Morning at six of the Clock.

The Bill against Mary commonly called the Queen of Scots, was read the third
time and passed the House; and the Proviso to the same Bill had also its third
reading.

Post Meridiem.

In the Afternoon the Bill for the Severance of the Sheriffs of the Counties of
Bed. and Bucks. was read the second time, and Ordered to be engrossed.

Three Bills also had each of them their third reading, and passed the House;
of which one was touching the inordinate length of Kersies, and another for the
Town of Stafford.

On Thursday the 26th day of June, the Bill for marking of Tanned Leather was
twice read.

Six Bills were sent up to the Lords by Mr. Treasurer and others; of which one
was the Bill touching Lands within the County of the City of Exeter, and
another against Mary commonly called the Queen of Scots. Touching which Bill
and business of the said Queen see on Monday the 12th day, Thursday the 15th
day, Monday the 19th day, Wednesday the 21th day, Friday the 23th, and on
Wednesday the 28th day of May preceding; as also on Thursday the 5th day,
Friday the 6th day, Tuesday the 10th day, Tuesday the 24th day, and on
Wednesday the 25th day of this instant June.

The Bill for Hemp and Cordage was twice read.

Mr. Sergeant Manwood, Mr. Marsh, Mr. Grice, Mr. Hastings, Mr. Grimston, Mr.
Norton, Mr. Barrey, Mr. Atkins, Mr. Thomas Brown, Mr. Honywood, Mr. Shute, Mr.
Bury and Mr. Greenfeild, were appointed to have Conference with the Lords
touching the Bill of Continuation of Statutes. And the Bill touching Sea-Marks
and the Bill for the Severance of the Sheriffs of Bedf. and Bucks were sent up
to the Lords by Mr. Doctor Wilson and the said other Committees.

Mr. Solicitor and Mr. Doctor Jews did bring from the Lords the Bill touching
Recoveries passed in this House before, with a Branch of Repeal of the Statute
of 32 H. 8. added by the Lords.

The Bill against delays in Judgment was read the third time, and the Proviso
twice read, and thereupon Ordered to be engrossed.

Mr. Sergeant Barham brought from the Lords the former Bill touching Sea-Marks,
with allowance of the Amendments.

Mr. Sergeant Barham and Mr. Attorney General, did bring from the Lords the
Bill for Continuation of Statutes with allowance of the Amendments.

On Friday the 27th day of June, the Bill touching Sea-Marks was read the third
time; The Bill for Continuation of certain Statutes was twice read, with all
the Additions; and the Provisoes were each of them thrice read.

The Bill for Recoveries by Collusion suffered by Tenants for term of life, and
the Bill for the Continuation of Statutes, with another Bill also of no great
moment, were each of them sent up to the Lords, by Mr. Treasurer, Mr. Doctor
Wilson, and others.

Mr. Solicitor and Mr. Doctor Huick, did bring from the Lords the Bill for the
Explanation of the Statute against Fugitives, with Additions by them made, and
request for Expedition and reading thereof.

Post Meridiem.

In the Afternoon, the Addition to the Bill for Explanation of the Statute
against Fugitives, was thrice read and passed.

The Proviso for the Duchy of Lancaster made by this House unto the Bill for
Explanation of the Statute against Fugitives, was thrice read, and passed upon
the Question.

On Saturday the 28th day of June, The Proviso touching the Duchy of Lancaster
in the Bill for the Explanation of the Statute against Fugitives, was by Order
of this House withdrawn, and a new one added, and thrice read and passed; for
that the former wanted sufficient penning, to carry the meaning of this House.

Post Meridiem.

The Bill for the Explanation of the Statute against Fugitives, with the
Provisoes and Amendments, and also the Bill concerning the Free Grammar School
at Tunbridge in the County of Kent, were sent up to the Lords by Mr. Chancellor
of the Duchy, and others.

Mr. Doctor Jews and Mr. Doctor Huick, did bring from the Lords the Bill
touching Grants made unto Hospitals.

Mr. Doctor Jews brought word from the Lords, that their Lordships did desire
present Conference with some of this House in the Bill concerning the length of
Kersies; for which purpose were sent Sir Rowland Hayward, Mr. Grimston, Mr.
Gresham, Mr. Norton, Mr. Langley, Mr. Brownell, Mr. Fleet, Mr. Appleby, Mr.
Chester and Mr. Sekerson.

The Bill for Hospitals was sent up to the Lords by Mr. Hugh Pawlett, Sir
Maurice Berkley, Sir Owen Hopton, and Sir Henry Gate.

The Bill against delays in Judgment at the Common Law passed after many
Arguments, and was sent up to the Lords by Mr. Chancellor of the Duchy and
others, with special Commendations from this House.

Mr. Doctor Jews and Mr. Doctor Huick brought from the Lords the Bill for the
Statute made for the Town of Shrewsbury, with a Proviso.

The Proviso to the Bill for Shrewsbury was read three times.

On Monday the 30th day of June, the Bill for Shrewsbury was sent up to the
Lords by Mr. Comptroller and others.

It was this day Ordered by this House upon the Question, that touching the
Bill passed in this House for the School of Tunbridge, and Andrew Fisher, these
words following shall be set down, viz.

Memorandum, That the Bill concerning Tunbridge-School and Andrew Fisher, in
which Bill one Deed made in the name of Henry Fisher is supposed to be forged,
was committed to the Right Honorable Sir Walter Mildmay Knight, Chancellor of
the Exchequer, Sir Thomas Scott, etc. who have certified to this House, that
they found great untruth and impudency in the said Andrew Fisher; And that for
very vehement presumptions they think very Evil of the Deed. Nevertheless upon
Fishers Submission they have been contented to withdraw out of the Bill all
words that touched him in infamy. And so the Bill penned passed this House with
assent on both sides, as well to help Tunbridge-School, as others that had
bought Land of the said Andrews Father bona fide. And the said Committees have
further reported that the same matter coming also in Question in the UpperHouse
before Committees there at the Suit of Henry Brother to the said Andrew, the
Committees of the higher House have for great Causes agreed in opinion with the
Committees of this House concerning the Deed. Vide concerning this matter on
Wednesday the 28th day of May preceding, as also on Tuesday the third day,
Wednesday the fourth day, and on Friday the sixth day of this instant June
foregoing.

The Bill lastly for relief of Sir William Harper Knight, was read the third
time.

But what further passed this day in the House of Commons does not at all
appear in the Original Journal Book of the same House; but is negligently
omitted by Fulk Onslow Esquire at this time Clerk thereof. Yet it is most probable,
that here ended the whole, or at least the greatest part of this Forenoons
Passages. And then this Sessions of Parliament being Adjourned in the Afternoon
by Sir Nicholas Bacon Lord Keeper of the Great Seal, Ex mandato Dominae
Reginae, as the words of the Original Journal Book of the Upper House are; it
should seem the said Mr. Onslow did omit to make any remembrance or mention
thereof, although this Adjournment did add an end to this present Session, her
Majesty giving her Royal Assent to thirteen public Acts, and four private. And
the reason why so few Statutes received Life, as also that neither the Bill for
her Majesty's general Pardon, nor any Bill of Subsidy passed the Houses at this
Sessions, was in respect that it was chiefly called for Consultation and
deliberation touching the dangers of her Majesty and the Realm by reason of the
Scottish Queen, against whom the House of Commons did proceed with great
earnestness; advising her Majesty to proceed to her final Execution, although
the said advice took not effect, nor was pursued by her Majesty until the
twenty eighth Year of her Reign.

THE JOURNAL OF THE House of LORDS.
An Exact and perfect Journal of the Passages of the House of Lords, in the
Parliament holden at Westminster, An. 18 Reginae Eliz. A. D. 1575, which began
there on Wednesday the 8th Day of February (after diverse Prorogations of the
same) and there continued until the Prorogation thereof on Thursday the 15th
Day of March next ensuing.

THE Journal of this present Session (although there were no Solemnity at the
beginning thereof as of a new Parliament) yet wanted there not the Return and
Entrance of diverse Proxies as well extraordinary as ordinary: and although
through the great negligence of Anthony Mason Esquire, at this time Clerk of
the Upper House, there appears little other matter to have been agitated
therein than the reading, committing and expediting of Bills; yet it is plain
by the Original Journal Book of the House of Commons, that there was some
Entrance by both Houses upon the reformation of diverse Abuses in the
Ecclesiastical Government, and some difference between the said Houses about
the Bill for the Restitution in Blood of the Heirs of the Lord Stourton sent
down from the Lords to the Commons. Besides, this foresaid Journal is not a
little enlarged and beautified by the inserting of the Speech at large of Sir
Nicholas Bacon Lord Keeper of the Great Seal, out of a Copy thereof I had by
me; which is the rather worth the noting in respect that it was doubtless the
last Speech he ever made in Parliament: for before the third Session of this
present Parliament, which was held five Years after the Adjournment of this
present Session he died, viz. in the two and twentieth Year of her Majesty,
Anno Domini 1579. and so Sir Thomas Bromley Knight, succeeded Lord Chancellor
before the said Session in Anno 23 Reginae ejusdem, which was the third and
last Session of this instant Parliament; The first Session whereof was held in
Anno 14 Reginae praedictae, by which means this was the longest Parliament
(continuing about eleven Years) of any during her Majesty's Reign, and was not
Dissolved until the five and twentieth Year of her said Reign; containing also
in it three several Sessions, whereas no other consisted of above two at the
most.

Memorand. quod die Mercurii, octavo die Februarii, Anno Regni excellentissimae
ac metuendissimae Dominae nostrae, Dom. Eliz. Dei gratia Angliae, Franciae and
Hiberniae Reginae, Fidei Defensatricis, etc. Decimo octavo, quo die post varias
ac diversas Prorogationes praesens haec Sessio Parliamenti tenta and habita
fuit apud Westmonasterium, Domini tam Temporales quam Spirituales, quorum
nomina subsequuntur, praesentes fuerunt.

The Queen was not present because as it has been observed this was no new
Parliament, but the Lords met of Course.

Nicolaus Bacon Miles, Dominus Custos magni Sigilli. Dominus Burleigh
Thesaurarius Angliae.
Comites.
Comes Lincoln. Admirallus. Comes Sussex. Dominus Camerarius Hospitii Reginae.
Comes Northumbr. Comes Kanc. Comes Darb. Comes Wigorn. Comes Rutland. Comes
Huntingdon. Comes Warwick. Comes Southampton. Comes Bedford. Comes Pembroke.
Comes Hartford. Comes Leicester. Comes Essex. Vice-Comes Mountague. Vice-Comes
Bindon.
Episcopi.
Episcopus London. Episcopus Winton. Episcopus Hereford. Episcopus Elien.
Episcopus Meneven. Episcopus Sarisburien. Episcopus Covent. and Litchf.
Episcopus Cestren. Episcopus Bangoren. Episcopus Cicestren. Episcopus Oxon.
Episcopus Roffen. Episcopus Assaven.
Barons.
Dominus Abergavenny. Dominus Audley. Dominus Dacres. Dominus Stafford. Dominus
Gray de Wilton. Dominus Dudley. Dominus Lumley. Dominus Darcy. Dominus
Wentworth. Dominus Mordant. Dominus Cramwell. Dominus Evers. Dominus Rich.
Dominus Pagett. Dominus Howard. Dominus North. Dominus Shandois. Dominus
Hunsdon. Dominus St John de Beltso. Dominus Buckhurst. Dominus de la Ware.
Dominus Compton. Dominus Cheyney. Dominus Norris.
Which are all the Names noted in the Original Journal Book of this eighteenth
Year of the Queen to have been present this Wednesday the 8th of February.

These Lords being thus set, they fell to their ordinary business without any
manner of solemnity, this being (as has been said) no new Parliament, but only
the second Session of that Parliament which began in Anno 14 Reginae
Elizabethae.

Two Bills of no great moment had each of them their first reading; of which
the first was the Bill for the reformation of the excess in Apparel.

Hodie returnatum fuit breve, quo Henricus Comes Northumbriae praesenti
Parliamento interesse summonebatur, qui admissus est ad suum praeheminentiae
sedendi in Parliamento locum, salvo jure alteno.

The like several Writs returned the Earl of Kent, and Charles Lord Howard,
Lord Audley, William Bishop of St Asaph, and Henry Earl of Darby.

Dominus Custos magni Sigilli continuavit praesens Parliamentum usque in diem
Crastinum hord octava.

Although this were but a second session of a former Parliament (as has been
said) yet were diverse Proxies sent and returned; of which (there being no
mention upon what day they were introduced) I have caused two only to be
inserted being extraordinary and less usual, viz. where two spiritual Lords
Constituted three Proctors apiece, whereas they usually nominate but two, as
the Temporal Lords do but one: And in respect that through the negligence of
Anthony Mason Esquire, at this time Clerk of the Upper House, there is no day
set down on which the said Proxies were introduced; therefore I have thought it
most fit to insert them here at the end of the first days Passages of this
present Session. Although they be Entered in the Original Journal Book of the
said House before the beginning thereof in manner and form following

Episcopus Wigorn. absens ex licentia Dominae Reginae constituit Procuratores
suos, Johannem Episcopum Herefordens. Thomam Episcopum Coventr. and Litchf. and
Thomam Episcopum Lincoln.

Episcopus Landaven. absens ex licentia Dominae Reginae constituit Procuratores
suos Edwinum Episcopum London, Thomam Episcopum Coventr. and Litchf. and
Willielmum Episcopum Assaven.

Nota, That the Lord Burleigh had this Parliament four Proxies Entered in the
Original Journal Book in the same Order as they follow, but no day is set down
on which they were returned, viz. from the Lord Vaux, from the Marquess of
Winchester, from Viscount Mountacute, and from the Lord Latimer.

On Thursday the 9th day of February, the Bill for Reformation of Apparel was
read secunda vice, and committed unto the Earl of Sussex, the Earl of
Leicester, the Bishop of London, the Lord Wentworth, the Lord North, the Lord
Hunsdon, the Queens Attorney and Solicitor.

Two Bill also had each of them one reading; of which one was the Bill against
diminishing the Queens Majesty's Coin, and was read the second time.

Nota, That this foregoing Bill had now its second reading; but there is no
mention made that it was either Ordered to be engrossed, or referred to
Committees, as in the like Case is always usual, unless it be in such Bills as
are sent up to the Lords from the House of Commons ready engrossed in Parchment
upon their passing of them, or else when they are fairly engrossed in Parchment
and sent from her Majesty to the House, when they immediately concern her own
Person, State or Prerogative, or some Subject whom out of Grace she intends
to have restored in Blood, Naturalized or the like; and of this latter sort
this present Bill seems to be, because it concerns her Majesty's Coin,
unless perhaps the mentioning of the engrossing or the referring thereof were
omitted by the Clerks negligence, which may sometimes happen.

A Writ in common form was returned summoning the Lord Chandois to come to
Parliament.

On Friday the 11th day of February, to which day the Parliament had been on
Thursday last continaed, the Bill for Confirmation of Letters Patents and other
Assurances made by the Queens Majesty, was read the second time, and committed
unto the Lord Burleigh, Lord Treasurer, the Earl of Essex, the Earl of Bedford,
the Bishop of London, the Bishop of Winchester, the Bishop of Hereford, the
Lord Gray, the Lord Lumley, and the Lord Howard.

A Writ was directed and this day returned in common form, summoning the Lord
Stourton to come to Parliament.

The Parliament was continued in common form by the Lord Keeper until Monday
next at nine of the Clock.

On Monday the 13th day of February, to which day the Parliament had been on
Saturday last continued, two Bills had each of them one reading; of which the
second being the Bill for Confirmation of Letters Patents and other Assurances
made by the Queens Majesty, was read secunda vice.

But it should rather seem, that this was the first reading of this new Bill
brought in by the Committees, to whom the same was referred on Saturday the
11th day of this instant February foregoing, because it had its second reading
on Wednesday the 15th day, and its third reading on Thursday the 16th day of
this instant Month foregoing.

The Bill for Reformation of Excess in Apparel was read prima vice.

Nota, That the former Bill to this effect which had been referred to
Committees on Thursday the 9th day of this instant February foregoing, was (as
it seems) dashed by them, and a new Bill brought in which had its first
reading on this day, its second reading on Wednesday, and its third and last
reading on Thursday the 16th day of this instant February following.

On Wednesday the 15th day of February, to which day the Parliament had been on
Monday last continued, The Bill for coming to Church and receiving of the
Communion, was read the second time, and committed unto the Lord Burleigh, Lord
Treasurer, the Earl of Sussex, the Earl of Bedford, the Earl of Leicester, the
Bishop of London, the Bishop of Ely, the Bishop of Chichester, the Bishop of
Lincoln, the Lord Cobham, the Lord Gray, the Lord Wentworth, the Lord North,
Justice Mounson, and Justice Manwood, and the Queens Solicitor.

Two Bills also of no great moment had each of them their second reading, and
thereupon Ordered to be engrossed; of which the first was the Bill for
reformation of excess in Apparel.

On Thursday the 16th day of February, the Bill for reformation of excess in
Apparel, and the Bill for Confirmation of Letters Patents were each of them
read tertia vice and conclusae, and sent to the House of Commons by Dr. Barkley
and Mr. Powle Clerk of the Crown.

Two Bills also had each of them one reading; of which the last being the Bill
for the Repeal of a Statute made in the eighteenth year of Henry the Sixth, was
read prima vice and committed to the Queens Attorney and Solicitor to consider
of.

On Saturday the 18th day of February, to which day the Parliament had been on
Thursday last continued, two Bills of no great moment had each of them one
reading; of which the second being the Bill for the Repeal of a Statute made
an. 18 H. 6. was read secunda vice. and committed to the Queens Attorney and
Solicitor.

Nota, That this Bill was committed upon the first reading on Thursday the 16th
day of this instant February foregoing to Sergeant Barham, the Queens Attorney,
and Solicitor; by whom it should seem the Bill being brought in again without
any great alteration, was now recommitted upon the second reading to the two
latter of them to consider further of the same, according to the Order of the
House. Vide Febr. 22. postea.

The Bill for the maintenance of Rochester-Bridge (which was read the first
time in the beginning of this present day) was now committed unto the
Archbishop of Canterbury, the Lord Treasurer of England, the Earl of Lincoln,
Lord Admiral, Viscount Mountague, the Bishop of Salisbury, the Bishop of
Chichester, the Lord Abergavenny, the Lord Cobham, the Lord Buckhurst, Justice
Manwood, and Sergeant Barham.

On Monday the 20th day of February, to which day the Parliament had been on
Saturday last continued, the Bill for the assurance of certain Lands sold by
Henry Fisher to Richard Smith, was read secunda vice, and committed to the
Queens Solicitor, etc.

The Bill also for excluding of Clergy and Purgations Ecclesiastical, was read
prima vice and commissa Justiciario Mounson. Vide touching this Bill on
Wednesday the 22th day of this instant February following.

On the Tuesday the 21th day of February the Bill for the repairing of
Chepstow-Bridge was read the first time.

Four Bills were brought up to the Lords from the House of Commons; of which
the first being the Bill for the explanation of the Statute of 31 H. 8.
touching Monasteries, Abbeys, Priories, etc. And the last being for the relief
and reedifying of the Borough of New-Woodstock in the County of Oxford, were
each of them read prima vice.

The Bill for the avoiding of fraudulent Gifts of Lands made by the late Rebels
in the North, was read prima vice.

The Bill lastly for reformation of Errors in Fines and common Recoveries, was
sent up to the Lords from the House of Commons.

On Wednesday the 22th day of February, Nine Bills of no great moment had each
of them one reading; of which the first being the Bill for Reformation of
Errors in Fines and common Recoveries, another for the assurance of certain
Lands unto Christopher Hatton Esquire of the Privy-Chamber and Captain of her
Majesty's Guard, and another for the Explanation of the Statute of 31 H. 8.
touching Monasteries, etc. were each of them read the second time: but no
mention is made that they were either Ordered to be engrossed or referred to
Committees, because they had been sent from the House of Commons on Tuesday
immediately foregoing, where the Bill only touching Sir Christopher Hatton is
omitted as matter of no great moment.

The Bill lastly for excluding of Clergy and Purgations Ecclesiastical, was
read prima vice and commissa Comiti Northumbriae, Comiti Huntington, Episcopo
London. Episcopo Lincoln. Domino Hunsdon, Domino Buckhurst, and Justiciario
Manwood and Justiciario Mounson.

On Thursday the 23th day of February, the Bill for avoiding of fraudulent
Gifts, etc. made by the late Rebels in the North, the Bill for
Rochester-Bridge, and the Bill for repairing of Chepstow-Bridge, were each of
them read the third time and concluded, and sent to the House of Commons, with
another Bill of no great moment, by Sir Richard Read and Dr Barkley.

Two Bills also were sent up to the Lords from the House of Commons; of which
the first being the Bill for the true payment of the Debts of William Isley
Esquire, was read the first time.

The Bill lastly for the assurance of certain Lands and Tenements unto
Christopher Hatton Esquire, was read tertia vice and conclusa.

On Saturday the 15th day day of February, to which day the Parliament had been
on Thursday last continued, Five Bills of no great moment had each of them one
reading; of which the fourth being the Bill for Reformation of Errors in Fines
and common Recoveries, was read secunda vice and commissa to Justice Mounson
and the Queens Attorney and Solicitor to consider of it.

On Monday the 27th day of February, the Bill for the assurance of New-Hall in
the County of Essex to Thomas Earl of Sussex, was read prima vice.

Four Bills were sent up to the Lords from the House of Commons; of which the
two last were, one against diminishing and impairing the Queens Coin, and the
other for repairing the Goal in St Edmonds-Bury, and of Brandon-Bridge in the
County of Suff.

The Bill for the assurance of certain Lands to Sir John Rivers Knight, Citizen
and Alderman of London, was read tertia vice.

On Tuesday the 28th day of February, Four Bills of no great moment had each of
them one reading; of which the two last being one for the assurance of the
Manor of New-Hall in Com. Essex to Thomas Earl of Sussex, and the other for
the appointing of Justices within Wales, were each of them read secunda vice
and commissae ad ingrossand.

On Wednesday the 29th day of February, Seven Bills of no great moment had each
of them one reading; of which the two last being one concerning Offices found
within the Counties Palatines, and the other for the appointing of Justices in
the Shires of Wales, were read tertia vice and conclusae, and sent to the House
of Commons with two others by the Queens Solicitor and Dr Barkley.

The Bill also for a Subsidy and two Fifteenths and Tenths granted by the
Temporalty, was read the second time.

Three Bills lastly of no great moment had each of them one reading; of which
the first being the Bill for the assurance of the Manor of New-Hall to Thomas
Earl of Sussex, was read tertia vice and conclusa.

On Thursday the first day of March the Bill for a Subsidy and two Fifteenths
and Tenths granted by the Temporalty, was read tertia vice and conclusa communi
omnium Procerum assensu.

The Bill also for the Confirmation of a Subsidy granted by the Clergy, was
read the second time and commissa ad ingrossandum.

Nota, That the Subsidy it self granted by the Clergy is always engrossed in
Latin, and sent up in Parchment from the Convocation House; but the
Confirmation thereof by the Parliament is added unto it in English, and passed
in the House as other Bills are; and this only it was that was Ordered to be
engrossed upon the second reading.

Four Bills also of no great moment had each of them one reading; of which the
last being the Bill concerning Tithes within the Parish of Hallifax was read
tertia vice and conclusa.

The Bill for Hallifax, and that for taking away of Clergy, were sent from the
Lords to the House of Commons by Sir Richard Read Knight, and Dr Barkeley.

The Bill for the Confirmation and establishment of the Hospital of Leicester,
was read secunda vice and commissa ad ingrossand.

On Friday the second day of March, Four Bills of no great moment had each of
them one reading; of which the second being the Bill for the Confirmation of a
Subsidy granted by the Clergy, was read tertia vice and conclusa, and sent to
the House of Commons by Doctor Jews and Doctor Barkley.

Five Bills were brought up to the House of Lords from the House of Commons; of
which one was for avoiding of fraudulent Gifts and Conveyances made by the late
Rebels in the North, and another for Confirmation of Letters Patents.

Two Bills also of no great moment had each of them one reading; of which the
first being a Bill concerning an Hospital at Leicester was read tertia vice and
conclusa, and sent to the House of Commons by Doctor Vaughan and Doctor Barkley.

On Saturday the third day of March, the Bill that notice may be given to
Patrons of Benefices upon the Vacation of the same in certain Cases, was read
tertia vice and conclusa, with certain amendments added thereunto by the Lords.

Five Bills also of no great moment had each of them one reading; of which the
last being the Bill for the County Palatine of Durham and the Isle of Ely, was
upon the second reading committed to the Archbishop of Canterbury, the Lord
Burleigh, Lord Treasurer, the Earl of Northumberland, the Bishop of London and
others.

Dominus Thesaurarius in absentia Domini Custodis magni Sigilli continuavit
praesens Parliamentum usque in diem Lunae prox. hora nona.

Nota, That there appears no Commission or other Authority in the Original
Journal Book of the Upper House, by which the Lord Treasurer supplied the Lord
Keepers place; but most probable it is, that either the Commission it self is
negligently omitted by Anthony Mason Esquire, at this time Clerk of the same
House, or that the Lord Treasurer did continue it only upon her Majesty's
verbal Authority and Command, as it is very likely the Lord Chief Justice did
supply the Lord Keeper's place on Thursday the 5th day of June in the first
Session of this very Parliament in Anno 14 Reginae Eliz. And it is certain that
Sir Nicholas Bacon Lord Keeper of the Great Seal growing at this time (after
which he did not long live) both Aged and Sickly, gave occasion to her Majesty,
by reason of his weakness, to Authorize others more frequently to supply his
place, than it is otherwise likely she would have done. Vide Consimil. Mar. 4.
in An. 1 Eliz.

On Monday the 5th day of March, to which day the Parliament had been on
Saturday last continued, seven Bills of no great moment had each of them one
reading; of which the last being the Bill touching the Lord Viscount Bindou and
Henry Howard his Son, was read secunda vice and commissa ad ingrossandum.

Seven Bills were brought up to the Lords from the House of Commons; of which
one was for the assurance of certain Lands to Sir John Rivers Knight, and
another for the perpetual maintenance of Rochester-Bridge.

Dominus Thesaurarius continuavit praesens Parliamentum usque in diem Crastinum
hora nona.

On Tuesday the 6th day of March, Four Bills of no great moment had each of
them one reading; of which the first being the Bill for setting the poor on
work, and for avoiding of Idleness, was read the second time; but no mention
made that it was either Ordered to be engrossed or referred to Committees,
because it had been formerly sent from the House of Commons.

The Bill for the true Tanning and Currying of Leather, was sent up to the
Lords from the House of Commons.

Two Bills also of no great moment had each of them one reading; of which the
first being the Bill touching Viscount Bindon and Henry Howard his Son, was
read tertia vice.

Three Bills were brought up to the Lords from the House of Commons; of which
the first was for the repairing of Chepstow-Bridge, and the third was the Bill
for Reformation of the Jeofails.

Two Bills finally had each of them one reading; of which the second being the
Bill whereby certain Authority was given to the Justices of the Queens
Majesty's Parks, Forests and Chases, was read secunda vice and commissa ad
ingrossandum.

Dominus Thesaurarius continuavit praesens Parliamentum usque in diem prox.
hora nona.

On Wednesday the 7th day of March, Three Bills of no great moment had each of
them one reading; of which the third being the Bill for the restitution in
Blood of John Lord Stourton, his Brother and Sisters, was read tertia vice and
conclusa, and sent to the House of Commons by Dr Yale, and Dr Barkley.

Four other Bills also had each of them one reading; of which the third being
the Bill whereby certain Authority was given to the Justices of the Queens
Parks, Forests and Chases, was read tertia vice and conclusa, and sent to the
House of Commons by Doctor Yale and Mr Powle Clerk of the Crown.

Five Bills were sent up to the Lords from the House of Commons; of the which
one was for the Confirmation of Letters Patents with certain Amendments; and
another for avoiding of sraudulent Gifts by the late Rebels in the North.

The Bill lastly for the Trial of Nisi prius in the County of Middlesex was
read secunda vice; but no mention is made that it was either Ordered to be
engrossed, or referred to Committees, because it had been formerly sent from
the House of Commons.

Dominus Thesaurarius continuavit praesens Parliamentum usque in diem Crastinum
hora nona.

On Thursday the 8th day of March, Four Bills were brought up to the Lords from
the House of Commons; of which the first being the Bill for maintenance of the
Colleges in the Universities of Winchester and Eaton, and the second against
buying and selling of Rooms and Places in Colleges and Schools, were each of
them read prima vice.

Three Bills also of no great moment had each of them one reading; of which the
first being the Bill for setting the poor on work and for the avoiding of
Idleness, was read tertia vice and conclusa; with a Proviso added by the Lords,
and certain Amendments, and sent to the House of Commons by Dr Vaughan and Dr
Yale.

Dominus Thesaurarius continuavit praesens Parliamentum usque in horam secundam
post meridiem.

About which hour the Lords Spiritual and Temporal Assembling, Ten Bills of no
great moment had each of them one reading; of which the third being the Bill
for the Toleration of certain Cloths in Com. Wilts. Summers. and Dors.; the
fifth for Reformation of Disorders in common Informers; the sixth for the
payment of Tithes in the Town of Reading in like sort as it is in the City of
London; the seventh touching Benefices Impropriate; the eighth for reformation
of Abuses in Goldsmiths; and the last being the Bill for the reformation of
Jeofailes, were each of them read the second time: but no mention is made that
they were either referred to Committees or Ordered to be engrossed, because
they had been formerly sent from the House of Commons.

Four Bills were sent up to the Lords from the House of Commons; of which one
was for the making of certain Denizens, and another for avoiding fraudulent
Gifts and Conveyances made by the late Rebels in the North.

On Friday the 9th of March, Six Bills of no great moment had each of them one
reading; of which the fifth being the Bill for the repairing and amending of
Highways and Bridges near unto Oxford, and the sixth and last being the Bill
that the Plaintiff shall be sworn upon his Bill as the Defendant is sworn upon
his Answer, was read secunda vice; but no mention is made that they were either
Ordered to be engrossed or referred to Committees, because they had been sent
from the House of Commons.

Two Bills were brought up to the Lords from the House of Commons; of which the
first being the Bill for the Hospital at Leicester, was returned conclusa.

Four Bills of no great moment lastly, had each of them one reading; of which
the first being the Bill for the payment of Tithes in the Town of Reading, as
in the City of London; and the last for repairing of the Gaol of St
Edmonds-Bury, and of Brandon-Bride in Com. Suff. were each of them read tertia
vice and conclusa.

On Saturday the 10th day of March, Six Bills were brought up to the Lords from
the House of Commons; of which the first was the Bill for setting the Poor on
work, and for avoiding of Idleness, and another was for a Confirmation of a
Subsidy granted by the Clergy.

Nine Bills also of no great moment had each of them one reading; of which the
first being the Bill touching the Hospital of Sr Cross near Winchester, was
read tertia vice and conclusa, and sent to the House of Commons by Doctor
Barkley and Mr Powle Clerk of the Crown; and another being a Bill for the
Restitution in Blood of Sir Henry Norris Knight, Lord Norris of Ricot, was read
secunda vice; but no mention is made that it was either Ordered to be engrossed
or referred to Committees, because it had been formerly sent from the House of
Commons.

About which hour the Lords Spiritual and Temporal Assembling, Six Bills of no
great moment had each of them one reading; of which the first being the Bill
for Explanation of the Statute against the defeating of Dilapidations, and
against Leases to be made of Spiritual Promotions; and the second for remedy
against the Plaintiff for false Complaint, were each of them read secunda vice,
but no mention is made whether they were Ordered to be engrossed or referred to
Committees, because they had been sent from the House of Commons.

Three Bills were brought up to the Lords from the House of Commons, of which
the second being the Bill for Confirmation of an Arbitrament to be made by
certain Persons, between Richard Hudleston Esquire, and Dame Elizabeth Weynman
his Wife on the one part, and Francis Weynman Gent. on the other part, was read
prima vice.

Three Bills also of no great moment had each of them one reading; of which the
first being the Bill for reformation of abuses in Goldsmiths, was read secunda
vice and commissa ad ingrossand.; and the second being the Bill for
preservation of Feasants and Partridges, was read tertia vice and conclusa, and
sent to the House of Commons by Doctor Jews and Mr Vaughan.

On Monday the 12th day of March, Four Bills of no great moment had each of
them one reading; of which the first being the Bill for Confirmation of an
Arbitrament to be made by certain Persons, between Richard Hudleston Esquire
and Dame Elizabeth Weynman on the one part, and Francis Weynman Gent. on the
other part, was read secunda vice; but no mention is made that it was Ordered
to be engrossed or referred to Committees, because it had been sent from the
House of Commons on Saturday the 10th of this instant March foregoing.

The Bill also for restitution in Blood of Anthony Mayney was read prima and
secunda vice, which as it should seem was in honor of the said Anthony Mayney.

Six Bills were brought up to the Lords from the House of Commons; of which one
was for the maintenance of Colleges in the Universities of Winchester and
Eaton, and another for the repairing and amending of Bridges and Highways near
unto the City of Oxford.

Dominus Custos magni Sigilli continuavit praesens Parliamentum usque in horam
secundam post meridiem.

Nota, That here the Lord Keeper continues again the Parliament, which had
been performed by the Lord Treasurer from Saturday the third day of this
instant March foregoing, until this present Monday the 12th day of the same;
but whether the one or the other were by her Majesty's Commission under the
Great Seal, or by any other Authority, appears not in the Original
Journal Book of the Upper House; but seems to have been omitted through the
negligence of Anthony Mason Esquire, at this time Clerk of the same.

About which foresaid hour in the Afternoon the Lords Spiritual and Temporal
Assembling, Six Bills of no great moment had each of them one reading; of which
the second being the Bill to take away Clergy from Offenders in Rape or
Burglary, and an Order for the delivery of Clerks Convict without Purgation,
with certain amendments and a Proviso, was read tertia vice and conclusa: As
also the Bill for restitution in Blood of Anthony Mayncy Esquire.

An Act to redress Disorders in common Informers was sent to the Lords from the
House of Commons.

The Bill lastly for Toleration of certain Clothiers in the Counties of Wilts,
Somerset and Gloucester, was read tertia vice and conclusa.

Dominus Thesaurarius continuavit praesens Parliamentum usque in diem Crastinum
hora octava. Vide touching the continuance of the Parliament by the Lord
Treasurer on Saturday the third day of this instant March foregoing.

On Tuesday the 13th day of March, Eight Bills of no great moment had each of
them one reading; of which the second being the Bill for annexing of Gate-side
to the Town of New Castle, and the seventh being for the Confirmation of an
Arbitrament to be made by certain Persons between Richard Hudleston Esquire and
Dame Elizabeth his Wife on the one part, and Francis Weynman Gentleman on the
other part, with a Proviso and certain Amendments, were each of them read
tertia vice and conclusae, and sent to the House of Commons by her Majesty's
Attorney General, Mr Barkley and Mr Powle.

The Bill for Restitution in Blood of Anthony Mayney Esquire, with a Proviso
added by the House of Commons, was sent from thence to the Lords.

The Bill lastly for reformation of Jeofailes was read tertia vice and
conclusa, and commissa Magistro Vaughan and Magistro Powle in Domum Communem
deferend.

Dominus Custos magni Sigilli continuavit praesens Parliamentum usque in horam
secundam post meridiem. Vide concerning this continuance of the Parliament by
the Lord Keeper on Monday the 12th day of this instant March foregoing.

About which hour in the Afternoon the Lords Spiritual and Temporal Assembling,
two Bills were brought up to the Lords from the House of Commons; of which the
first was the Bill for the restitution in Blood of John Lord Stourton, with a
new Proviso added by the said House.

After which three other Bills also were brought up to the Lords from the House
of Commons: of which the first was concerning Offices found in Counties
Palatines, and the last for reformation of Jeofailes.

On Wednesday the 14th day of March, the Bill for reformation of excess in
Apparel was read secunda vice, but no mention of committing or engrossing
because it had been sent from the Lords.

About which hour the Lords Spiritual and Temporal Assembling, two Bills were
sent up to the Lords from the House of Commons; of which the second being the
Bill for the Queens Majesty's most gracious general and free Pardon, was
returned conclus.

This day also in the Afternoon the Queens Majesty with diverse Lords Spiritual
and Temporal were present in the Upper House; of which the Knights, Citizens,
Burgesses and Barons of the House of Commons having notice, repaired thither
with Robert Bell their Speaker, who carried up with him the Bill of one
Subsidy, and two Fifteenths and Tenths, and was placed at the Rail or Bar at
the lower end of the said Upper House.

But both this manner of his coming up, or what was else spoken or done this
Afternoon in the said House, is wholly omitted in the Journal Book of the same
(through the great negligence of Anthony Mason Esquire, at this time Clerk
thereof) and therefore the repairing up of the said Speaker, with the residue
of the Members of the House of Commons, is Collected out of the Original
Journal Book of the same House, and the substance of the said Speakers Speech,
with the Lord Keepers Answer at large, are both supplied out of a Copy of the
said Lord Keepers Speech which I had by me.

The Speaker standing close to the Rail or Bar in the-lower end of the Upper
House, as is aforesaid, and after his humble Reverence made, delivered his
Oration to her Majesty to the effect following.

First, He spoke touching sundry kinds of Government which had been in this
Kingdom, and so drew his Discourse to the present time. Then he made a large
enumeration of her Majesty's many Virtues, and of the many benefits which the
Kingdom received by her Gracious Government. After which he proceeded humbly to
Petition her Majesty to make the Kingdom further happy in her Marriage, that so
they might hope for a continuing Succession of those benefits in her Posterity.
To which having added a compendious relation of such Acts as had passed the
House of Commons, he concluded with the Presentation of the Bill of Subsidy in
their names unto her Majesty. After which the Lord Keeper by her Majesty's
Commandment Answered as solloweth, viz.

Mr Speaker, The Queens Majesty our most Dread and Gracious Sovereign Lady,
has heard and does very well understand your Oration, full of good will and
matter. The sum thereof may be reduced into five parts, whereof the first
contains a Discourse of sundry kinds of Government from the beginning until
this time. The second the Commendations of her Majesty's Virtues, and of her
great and gracious Government from the beginning with a remembrance of her
Highness bountiful benefits. The third concerns the humble and earnest
Petition moving her Majesty to Marry. The fourth is a Declaration of Laws past
in the Lower House, with an humble Suit for her Highness Royal Assent to be
given unto the same. The fifth and last concerning a Presentation of a Subsidy
granted in this Session.

As concerning the first, which contains the Discourse of sundry kinds of
Government, I see not that this time and place does require any Answer to be
given unto it other than this, that you, Mr Speaker, are much to be Commended
for your diligent Collecting, and also for the apt comparing of the last part
of the same.

And as to the second which concerns the Commendations of her Majesty's great
Virtue and good Government, with the remembrance of the manifold benefits that
you have received at her Majesty's Hand, her Highness has Commanded me to say
unto you, that she wishes of God with all her Heart, that all those Royal
Virtues and principal parts, together with the great gifts of gracious
Government that you make mention of, were so perfectly planted in her as best
might serve to the maintenance of Gods Glory, from whom her Majesty confesses
all goodness to proceed, and best also might serve for the good Governance of
you her good, loving and obedient Subjects; and withal prays you with her and
for her to give God hearty thanks for those Virtues and Graces that it has
pleased him to bless her withal, and also to pray for the continuance of them
with such increase, as shall best like his Divine Majesty. And besides this I
may and dare certainly affirm unto you by her Majesty's own Mouth, that if the
Virtues of all the Princes in Europe were united within her Highness Breast,
she should gladly employ the same to the best of her Power about the good
Governance of you, that be so good and loving unto her; so great is her
Highness good will and inward affection toward you. Again true it is, that
these your loving and reverend conceivings of the Virtuous and Gracious
Government of your Sovereign, is taking by her Majesty in very thankful part,
as a special and peculiar property pertaining to faithful and loving Subjects;
neither will her Highness admit of any occasion that may move you to conceive
otherwise than you have: neither do I think that any man can devise any more
ready or any more strong persuasion to move a Princely nature to be such
toward her Subjects as they can wish, than by such good, reverend and loving
conception and conceiving remembered by you. To conclude, as touching this
point, I am to affirm unto you from her Majesty, that she takes your
Proceedings in the Parliament both in the midst and also in the ending so
graciously and in so thankful part, that if both parts and nature did concur in
me abundantly to make me Eloquent (as neither of them do) yet I am sure I were
not able to set forth this point according to her Highness desire, or to the
worthiness of it. And for the more manifest Declaration of this and of the
great good liking her Majesty has conceived of you that be of this Parliament,
her Highness means not to determine the same, but to Prorogue it until the
next Winter. And as both Cognizance and Recognizance of benefits her Majesty's
Pleasure is, that I should declare unto you, that there is none of these
benefits received by you, but she wishes them trebble in number, and quadruple
in greatness and goodness. And further, her Highness thinks that the faithful
recognizing of benefits received is one of the greatest satisfactions that a
Subject can make to his Sovereign for them. And as to the third, which
concerns your humble earnest Petition, it proceeds from your inward
affections and benevolent minds founded and grounded upon the great good
opinion that you have conceived of your Majesty's most gracious Government over
you, according to the Declaration made by you, a matter greatly moving her
Majesty the rather to allow of your Petition.

The second note imports yet more than this; for therein she conceives that
this great good opinion of this blessed Government is not conceived by you, as
it appears by your own Declarations, upon any sudden ground or cause, but
has grown upon the consideration of her Highness Governance during the Reign
of seventeen Years now past: whereby it is evident that this is a settled and
constant opinion of yours, and therefore much the more moving her Majesty to
give a Gracious Ear unto this your Petition.

And yet the third note exceeds the other two former; for in this note she
conceives the abundance of your inward affection grounded upon her good
Governance of you to be so great, that it does not only content you to have her
Majesty Reign and govern over you, but also you do desire that some proceeding
from her Majesty's Body might by a perpetual Succession Reign over your
Posterity also: a matter greatly to move her Majesty (she says) to incline to
this your Suit. Besides her Highness is not unmindful of all the benefits that
will grow to the Realm by such Marriage; neither does she forget any perils
that are like to grow for want thereof. All which matters considered, her
Majesty willed me to say, that albeit of her own natural disposition she is not
disposed or inclined to Marriage, neither could she ever Marry were she a
private Person; yet for your sakes and the benefit of the Realm, she is
contented to dispose and incline her self to the satisfaction of your humble
Petition, so that all things convenient may concur that be meet for such a
Marriage; whereof there be very many, some touching the state of her most Royal
Person, some touching the Person of him whom God shall join, some touching the
state of the whole Realm: these things concurring and considered, her Majesty
has Assented (as is before remembered.) And thus much touching this matter.

As to the fourth part which concerns a Declaration of the Laws passed in the
Session whereunto you do pray that her Majesty would give her Royal Assent, her
Majesty has Commended your travel and pains taken in devising of these Laws,
your Considerations and Carefulness in debating and consulting, and your
Judgments and Determinations in concluding and passing of the same, and means
to give her Royal Assent to so many of them as her Majesty shall think meet and
convenient to pass at this time. But here I am to remember you, that this is
not all that her Highness requires in this point; for she is desirous that the
great travels, pains and great charges employed about the making of these Laws
should not be lost, neither her Majesty's Royal Assent granted in vain, which
must needs come to pass except you look better to the Execution of Laws than
heretofore you have done; for as I have before this time seen, Laws without
Execution, be nothing else but Pen, Ink and Parchment, a Countenance of things,
and nothing in Deed, a cause without an effect, and serve as much to the good
Governance of the Commonweal, as the Rudder of a Ship does serve to the good
Governance of it without a Governor; and so serve to as good purpose to direct
men's actions, as Torches do to direct men's goings in the dark, when their
Lights be put out. Were it not great folly, trow ye, yea, and mere madness for
a man to provide apt and handsome tools and instruments to reform and prune his
Trees withal, and then to lay them up in fair Boxes and Bags without use of
them? and is it not as strange trow ye to make Laws to reform men's manners, and
to prune away the ill branches and members of the Commonweal, and then to lay
up those Laws in fair Books and Boxes without Execution of them? Surely there
is a small difference betwixt these Causes; may it were much better to have no
new Laws made at all, than to have Laws not Executed: for the former does but
leave us in the state we were in before the making of the new Laws; but not to
execute them is to breed a contempt of Laws and Lawmakers and of all
Magistrates, which is the Mother and Nurse of Disobedience; and what she
breeds and brings forth, I leave to you to judge.

Now this offense of not executing of Laws growing so great, it rests to see
in whose default this is, and who ought to have the burden of it. First,
certain it is, that her Majesty leaves nothing undone meet for her to do for
the Execution of Laws; for first she makes choice of Persons of most Credit
and best understanding throughout the whole Realm, to whom for the great Trust
and Fidelity that she reposeth in them, she gives Authority by Commission to
execute a great part of those Laws, who also by Oath be bound to perform the
same. Besides, the most special and needful Laws her Highness causes to be
Proclaimed and published unto her People; as over this also (lest men should be
forgetful of their Duties) she causes a number of her Justices to be called
into public place, and there to be exhorted and admonished in her Majesty's
name to see the Execution of her Laws; and what can here be more devised for
her Majesty to do? Surely in my opinion nothing.

Then falls it out necessarily and consequently, that the burden of all
these Enormities, Absurdities and mischefs that do grow in the Commonwealth
for not Executing of Laws, must light upon those persons that have Authority
from her Majesty to Execute them and do it not: which is a burden over-heavy
for any to bear, being justly charged. For the avoiding of this therefore
methinks men being thus remembered ought to seek with all diligence and
endeavor to satisfy for their negligence, and uncarefulness past; which if
they shall forget to do, her Majesty shall be then driven, clean contrary to
her most Gracious Nature and Inclination, to appoint and assign private men,
for profit and gain sake, to see her penal Laws to be Executed. The course
which hitherto her Majesty has taken has been, to have her Laws Executed by
men of Credit and Estimation for the love of Justice, uprightly and
indifferently; but if they shall refuse so to do, forgetting their duty to God,
Sovereign and Country, then of necessity rather than the Laws should be
unexecuted, her Majesty shall be driven I say to commit the Execution of them
to those who in respect of profit and gain, will see them Executed with all
extremity. And what a burden that will bring to the Commonweal I leave it to
your consideration. But it is to be hoped, that if the respects before
remembered will not move you to see better to your Charge, yet the fear of this
great inconveniency should constrain men that be in Commission to look to the
better Execution of Laws. And thus much touching the fourth part.

Now as to the fifth and last which concerns the grant of a Subsidy, her
Majesty has Commanded me to say unto you, that that grant is a manifest
Declaration by Deeds of that which before was declared by words: for how could
such a Grant be made, and in such manner granted, and by such persons, but that
of necessity it must proceed from the benevolent minds and hearty affections of
such loving Subjects as are before remembered? True it is, that her Majesty in
these your doings has noted three things especially and principally, every of
them tending much to the setting forth of your benevolence. The first, who it
is that granted; the second, the manner of granting; the third, what it was
that is granted. As to the first, her Majesty cannot forget, how this Grant
proceeded from the earnest affections and hearty good wills of her loving and
obedient Subjects. Wherefore her Majesty makes greater account thereof than
Ten Subsidies, and so she Commanded me to say unto you. Again, her Majesty
remembers very well, that this Grant was made not by Subjects that never did
the like before, but by Subjects that have been and continued to be ready from
time to time to contribute toward the necessary charges and defense of the
Realm; which does greatly commend and set forth she says this great
benevolence of yours. And as to the second, which is the manner of granting,
her Highness notes two things especially; the one is universality of consent;
and can there be a more universal consent than when all agreeing and none
denying as this was? Nay her Highness knows that before her time these manner
of Grants passed not but with a great persuasion and many difficulties; whereas
this was frankly offered without any persuasion or difficulty at all. The other
is the readiness of granting. It is written of Benevolence, Bis dat qui cito
dat, which her Majesty says may be justly applied to these your Proceedings.
And to the third, which is the thing granted, she takes it to be as liberal as
any heretofore has been granted; and therefore has Commanded me to yield unto
you her most hearty condign thanks, and withal to let you understand, that her
Majesty is as willing and desirous to give you this whole Subsidy again as you
have been willing to grant it, if the necessity of the Realm and your Surety
would suffer it. And thus much touching the granting of the Subsidy.

Now as to the due and true Execution of the same I am to exhort and also to
admonish you, and yet it may be probably said, that Persons that have thus
bountifully and readily made this Grant, wherein and whereby the benevolent
minds and hearty affections that have been so manifestly declared in granting,
that to these persons neither admonishments nor exhortations are due for the
true executing of that Grant, no more than a Spur is to a Horse, that runs
as swiftly as he can. Albeit this Argument in reason carries probability and
likelihood with it; yet former experience has taught that these Grants have
not been so duly and truly executed as they have been benevolently granted.

After the Lord Keepers Speech was ended, the Queens Majesty did doubtless give
her Royal Assent to such Acts as passed at this Session; but neither the
foresaid Speech, nor the passing of the said Acts, is at all mentioned in the
Original Journal Book of the Upper House.

Her Majesty's Royal Assent being given to the said Bills. Now follows the
Adjournment of this present Session, together with the several Prorogations
thereupon, out of the Original Journal Book of the same.

Dominus Custos magni Sigilli ex mandato Dominae Reginae Adjournavit praesens
Parliamentum usque in diem prox. hora secunda post meridiem.

On Thursday the 15th day of March in the Afternoon, the Queens Majesty came
her self into the Upper House, where were also present the Lord Archbishop of
Canterbury, Sir Nicholas Bacon Lord Keeper of the Great Seal, the Lord
Burleigh, Lord Treasurer and diverse other Lords both Spiritual and Temporal;
but the only occasion of her Majesty's coming seems to have been for the
Prorogation of the Parliament, which otherwise must have been done by virtue of
her Majesty's Commission, or Letters Patents under the Great Seal. And it is
the more remarkable because I conceive it is the only President during all the
said Queens Reign, in which she came to the Upper House in Person to Prorogue a
Session; the Entrance whereof in the Original Journal Book of the same House is
as follows.

Dominus Custos magni Sigilli ex mandato Dominae Reginae Prorogavit praesens
Parliamentum usque in diem quintum Novembris prox. futurum.

After which followed diverse other Prorogations, until the Assembling of the
last Session of this present Parliament in Anno 23 Reginae Eliz. All which are
inserted in the Original Journal Book it self de Anno 18 Reginae ejusdem in the
end thereof.

THE JOURNAL OF THE House of COMMONS.
A Journal of the Passages of the House of Commons, in the Session of
Parliament holden at Westminster, Anno 18 Reginae Eliz. A. D. 1575, which began
there after diverse Prorogations of the same, on Wednesday the 8th Day of
February, and then and there continued until the Prorogation thereof on
Thursday the 15th Day of March.

THIS present Journal of the House of Commons, contains in it, not only many
good Passages touching the ordinary usages and privileges of the House, but is
plentifully stored also with diverse extraordinary and rare Occurrences touching
the maintenance of the Liberties of the House, not only from the indignity of
private Persons, but also against the pressures of the Lords of the Upper
House; in which also there wanted not the zealous endeavor of the House for
reformation of diverse Ecclesiastical matters, and the remarkable Imprisonment
of a Member of the same by themselves: in which I have supplied many Passages
and Speeches which were wanting in the Original Journal Book it self, in the
due places, out of several Copies of them I had by me. Yet to avoid confusion,
whatsoever is transcribed out of the said Copies, is distinguished by some
Annotation or Animadversion, both before and after it. And lastly it may here
fitly be observed, that this being but the second Session of the fourth
Parliament of her Majesty's Reign, the House of Commons, as did also the Lords
of the Upper House, sell to their ordinary business upon their first meeting in
manner and form following, viz.

On Wednesday the 8th day of February, the Bill that upon Actions upon the Case
brought for slanderous words or writings, the Country may be traversed, was
read the first time.

Peter Wentworth Esquire, one of the Burgesses for the Borough of Tregony in
the County of Cornwall, was for unreverent and undutiful words uttered by him
in this House of our Sovereign Lady the Queens Majesty sequestered, that the
House might proceed to Conference and consideration of his said Speech. Which
Speech I have transcribed out of a Copy I had by me, and added it to this
Journal: viz.

Mr Speaker, I find written in a little Volume these words in effect: Sweet is
the name of Liberty, but the thing it self a value beyond all inestimable
Treasure. So much the more it behooves us to take care lest we contenting our
selves with the sweetness of the name, lose and forgo the thing, being of the
greatest value that can come unto this noble Realm. The inestimable Treasure is
the use of it in this House. And therefore I do think it needful to put you in
remembrance, that this Honorable Assembly are Assembled and come together here
in this place for three special Causes of most weighty and great importance.

The first and principal is to make and abrogate such Laws as may be most for
the preservation of our noble Sovereign.

The second.....

The third is to make or abrogate such Laws as may be to the chiefest surety,
safe-keeping, and enrichment of this noble Realm of England. So that I do think
that the part of a faithful-hearted Subject is to do his endeavor to remove
all Stumbling Blocks out of the way that may impair or any manner of way hinder
these good and Godly Causes of this our coming together. I was never of
Parliament but the last and the last Session, at both which times I saw the
Liberty of free Speech, the which is the only Salve to heal all the Sores of
this Commonwealth, so much and so many ways infringed, and so many abuses
offered to this Honorable Council, as has much grieved me even of very
Conscience and love to my Prince and State. Wherefore to avoid the like I do
think it expedient to open the Commodities that grow to the Prince and whole
State by free Speech used in this place, at the least so much as my simple Wit
can gather of it, the which is very little in respect of that that wise Heads
can say therein, and so it is of the more force.

First, All matters that concern Gods Honor through free Speech, shall be
propagated here and set forward, and all things that do hinder it removed,
repulsed and taken away.

Next, there is nothing commodious, profitable, or any way beneficial for the
Prince or State, but faithful and loving Subjects will offer it in this place.

Thirdly, All things discommodious, perilous or hurtful to the Prince or State
shall be prevented, even so much as seems good to our merciful God to put
into our minds, the which no doubt shall be sufficient if we do earnestly call
upon him and fear him, for Solomon says, The fear of God is the beginning of
Wisdom, Wisdom, says he, breaths Life into her Children, receives them that
seek her, and will go beside them in the way of Righteousness: so that our
minds shall be directed to all good, needful and necessary things, if we call
upon God with faithful hearts.

Fourthly, If the Envious do offer any thing hurtful or perilous to the Prince
or State in this place, what incommodity does grow thereby? Verily I think
none, nay will you have me to say my simple opinion therein, much good comes
thereof; how forsooth, for by the darkness of the Night the brightness of the
Sun shows more excellent and clear, and how can truth appear and conquer
until falsehood and all subtilties that should shadow and darken it be found
out? for it is offered in this place a piece of fine Needle Work unto them that
are most skilful therein, for there cannot be a false stitch (God aiding us)
but will be found out.

Fifthly, This good comes thereof, a wicked purpose may the easier be
prevented when it is known.

Sixthly, An evil man can do the less harm when it is known.

Seventhly, Sometime it happens that a good man will in this place (for
Argument sake) prefer an evil cause, both for that he would have a doubtful
truth to be opened and manifested, and also the evil prevented; so that to this
point I conclude, that in this House which is termed a place of free Speech,
there is nothing so necessary for the preservation of the Prince and State as
free Speech, and without it is a scorn and mockery to call it a Parliament
House, for in truth it is none, but a very School of Flattery and
Dissimulation, and so a fit place to serve the Devil and his Angels in, and not
to glorify God and benefit the Commonwealth.

Now to the impediments thereof which by Gods Grace and my little Experience I
will utter plainly and faithfully, I will use the words of Elcha, Behold, I am
as the new Wine which has no vent and bursteth the new Vessels in funder,
therefore I will speak that I may have a vent, I will open my Lips and make
Answer, I will regard no manner of Person, no man will I spare, for if I should
go about to please men, I know not how soon my Maker will take me away: my Text
is vehement the which by Gods sufferance I mean to observe, hoping therewith to
offend none; for that of very Justice none ought to be offended for seeking to
do good and saying of the truth.

Amongst other, Mr Speaker, Two things do great hurt in this place, of the
which I do mean to speak: the one is a rumor which runs about the House and
this it is, take heed what you do, the Queens Majesty likes not such a matter,
whosoever prefereth it, she will be offended with him; or the contrary, her
Majesty likes of such a matter, whosoever speaks against it she will be much
offended with him.

The other: sometimes a Message is brought into the House either of Commanding
or Inhibiting, very injurious to the freedom of Speech and Consultation, I
would to God, Mr Speaker, that these two were Buried in Hell, I mean rumors
and Messages; for wicked undoubtedly they are, the reason is, the Devil was the
first Author of them, from whom proceeds nothing but wickedness: now I will
set down reasons to prove them wicked.

First, If we be in hand with any thing for the advancement of Gods Glory, were
it not wicked to say the Queen likes not of it, or Commanded that we shall not
deal in it? greatly were these Speeches to her Majesty's dishonor, and an hard
opinion were it, Mr Speaker, that these things should enter into her Majesty's
thought; much more wicked and unnatural were it that her Majesty should like or
Command any thing against God, or hurtful to her self and the State. The Lord
grant this thing may be far from her Majesty's Heart. Here this may be
objected, that if the Queens Majesty should have intelligence of any thing
perilous or beneficial to her Majesty's Person or the State, would you not
have her Majesty give knowledge thereof in this House, whereby her peril may be
prevented, and her benefit provided for? God forbid, then were her Majesty in
worse case than any of her Subjects. And in the beginning of our Speech I
showed it to be a special Cause of our Assembly, but my intent is, that nothing
should be done to Gods dishonor, to her Majesty's peril, or the peril of the
State. And therefore I will show the inconveniences that grow of these two.

First, If we follow not the Princes mind, Solomon says, the Kings displeasure
is a Messenger of Death: This is a terrible thing to weak nature, for who is
able to abide the fierce Countenance of his Prince, but if we will discharge
our Consciences, and be true to God, and Prince and State, we must have due
consideration of the place and the occasion of our coming together, and
especially have regard unto the matter wherein we both shall serve God, and our
Prince and State faithfully, and not dissembling as Eye Pleasers, and so justly
avoid all displeasures both to God and our Prince; for Solomon says, in the
way of the righteous there is life, as for any other way it is the path to
Death. So that to avoid Everlasting Death and Condemnation with the High and
Mighty God, we ought to proceed in every Cause according to the matter, and not
according to the Princes Mind; and now I will show you a reason to prove it
perilous always to follow the Princes Mind. Many times it falls out, that a
Prince may favor a cause perilous to himself and the whole State; what are we
then if we follow the Princes Mind, are we not unfaithful unto God, our Prince
and State? Yes truly, we are Chosen of the whole Realm, of a special Trust and
Confidence by them reposed in us, to foresee all such Inconveniences. Then I
will set down my opinion herein, that is, he that dissembleth to her Majesty's
peril, is to be counted as an hateful Enemy; for that he gives unto her
Majesty a detestable Judas his Kiss; and he that contrarieth her mind to her
Preservation, yea though her Majesty would be much offended with him, is to be
adjudged an approved Lover, for faithful are the wounds of a Lover, faith
Solomon, but the Kisses of an Enemy are deceitful: And it is better, says
Antisthenes, to fall amongst Ravens than amongst Flatterers, for Ravens do but
devour the dead Corpse, but Flatterers the Living. And it is both Traitorous and
Hellish through Flattery to seek to devour our natural Prince, and that do
Flatterers; therefore let them leave it with shame enough.

Now to another great matter that rises of this grievous rumor, what is it
forsooth? whatsoever thou art that pronouncest it, thou do pronounce thy own
discredit; why so? for that thou do what lies in thee to pronounce the
Prince to be rerjured, the which we neither may nor will believe, for we ought
not without too too manifest proof to credit any dishonor to our Anointed, no
we ought not without it to think any Evil of her Majesty, but rather to hold
him a Liar what credit soever he be of; for the Queens Majesty is the Head of
the Law, and must of necessity maintain the Law, for by the Law her Majesty is
made justly our Queen, and by it she is most chiefly maintained: hereunto
agrees the most Excellent words of Bracton de Legibus Angliae, Lib. 1. Cap. 7.
Bracton, who says, the King has no Peer nor Equal in his Kingdom; he has no
Equal, for otherwise he might lose his Authority of Commanding, sithence that
an Equal has no Rule of Commandment over his Equal. The King ought not to be
under man, but under God and under the Law, because the Law makes him a King:
Let the King therefore attribute that to the Law, which the Law attributes
unto him, that is, Dominion and Power; for he is not a King in whom Will and
not the Law does rule, and therefore he ought to be under the Law. I pray you
mark the Reason why my Authority says, the King ought to be under the Law, for
says he, he is Gods Vicegerent here upon Earth, that is, his Lieutenant to
execute and do his Will, the which is Law or Justice, and thereunto was her
Majesty Sworn at her Coronation, as I have heard learned men in this place
sundry times affirm; unto the which I doubt not but her Majesty will for her
Honor and Conscience sake have special regard; for free Speech and Conscience
in this place are granted by a special Law, as that without the which the
Prince and State cannot be preserved or maintained: So that I would wish every
man that fears God, regards the Princes Honor, or esteems his own
Credit, to fear at all times hereafter to pronounce any such horrible Speeches,
so much to the Princes Dishonor; for in so doing he shows himself an open
Enemy to her Majesty, and so worthy to be contemned of all faithful hearts. Yet
there is another inconvenience that rises of this wicked rumor, the Utterers
thereof seem to put into our Heads, that the Queens Majesty has conceived an
evil opinion, diffidence and mistrust in us her faithful and loving Subjects;
for if she had not, her Majesty would then wish that all the things dangerous
to her self should be laid open before us, assuring her self that loving
Subjects, as we are, would without Schooling and direction, with careful minds
to our Powers, prevent and withstand all perils that might happen unto her
Majesty: and this opinion I doubt not but her Majesty has conceived of us, for
undoubtedly there was never Prince that had faithfuller hearts than her Majesty
has here; and surely there were never Subjects had more cause heartily to love
their Prince for her quiet Government than we have. So that he that raises
this rumor, still increases but discredit in seeking to sow Sedition as much
as lies in him, between our merciful Queen and us her most loving and faithful
Subjects, the which by Gods Grace shall never lie in his Power, let him spit
out all his venom and there withal show out his malicious heart; yet I have
collected sundry reasons to prove this a hateful and a detestable rumor, and
the Utterer thereof to be a very Judas to our Noble Queen, therefore let any
hereafter take heed how he publish it, for as a very Judas unto her Majesty,
and Enemy to the whole State, we ought to accept him.

Now the other was a Message Mr Speaker brought the last Sessions into the
House, that we should not deal in any matters of Religion, but first to receive
from the Bishops: Surely this was a doleful Message, for it was as much as to
say, Sirs, ye shall not deal in Gods Causes, no, ye shall in no wise seek to
advance his Glory; and in recompense of your unkindness, God in his wrath will
look upon your doings, that the chief cause that ye were called together for,
the which is the preservation of their Prince, shall have no good success: If
some one of this House had presently made this interpretation of this said
Message, had he not seemed to have the Spirit of Prophecy? Yet truly I assure
you Mr Speaker, there were diverse of this House that said with grievous hearts,
immediately upon the Message, that God of his Justice could not prosper the
Session; and let it be holden for a principle Mr Speaker, that Counsel that
comes not together in Gods name, cannot prosper: for God says, Where two or
three are gathered together in his name there am I in the midst among them:
Well, God even the great and mighty God, whose name is the Lord of Hosts, great
in Council, and infinite in thought, and who is the only good Director of all
hearts, was the last Session shut out of Doors; but what fell out of it
forsooth? his great indignation was therefore poured upon this House, for he
did put into the Queens Majesty's Heart to refuse good and wholesome Laws for
her own Preservation, the which caused many faithful hearts for grief to burst
out with sorrowful tears, and moved all Papists Traitors to God and her
Majesty, who envy good Christian Government, in their Sleeves to laugh all the
whole Parliament House to scorn; and shall I pass over this weighty matter so
slightly? Nay, I will discharge my Conscience and Duties to God, my Prince and
Country. So certain it is Mr Speaker that none is without fault, no not our
Noble Queen, since then her Majesty has committed great fault, yea dangerous
faults to her self.

Love, even perfect love void of Dissimulation, will not suffer me to hide
them, to her Majesty's peril, but to utter them to her Majesty's Safety: and
these they are, it is a dangerous thing in a Prince unkindly to abuse his or
her Nobility and People, and it is a dangerous thing in a Prince to oppose or
bend her self against her Nobility and People, yea against most loving and
faithful Nobility and People. And how could any Prince more unkindly entreat,
abuse, oppose her self against her Nobility and People, than her Majesty did
the last Parliament? did she not call it of purpose to prevent Traitorous
perils to her Person, and for no other Cause? did not her Majesty send unto us
two Bills, willing us to make choice of that we liked best for her safety, and
thereof to make a Law, promising her Majesty's Royal Consent thereunto? And did
we not first choose the one, and her Majesty refused it, yielding no reason, nay
yielding great reasons why she ought to have yielded to it? Yet did we
nevertheless receive the other, and agreeing to make a Law thereof, did not her
Majesty in the end refuse all our Travels? And did not we, her Majesty's
faithful Nobility and Subjects, plainly and openly decy pher our selves unto
her Majesty and our hateful Enemies; and has not her Majesty left us all to
the open revenge? Is this a just recompense in our Christian Queen for our
faithful dealings? The Heathen do requite good for good, then how much more is
it to be expected in a Christian Prince? And will not this her Majesty's
handling think you, Mr Speaker, make cold dealing in any of her Majesty's
Subjects toward her again? I fear it will. And has it not caused many already
think you, Mr Speaker, to seek a Salve for the Head that they have broken? I
fear it has, and many more will do the like if it be not prevented in time.
And has it not marvellously rejoiced and encouraged the hollow hearts of her
Majesty's hateful Enemies and Traitorous Subjects? no doubt but it has: And I
beseech God that her Majesty may do all things that may grieve the hearts of
her Enemies, and may joy the hearts that unfeignedly love her Majesty; And I
beseech the same God to endue her Majesty with his Wisdom, whereby she may
discern faithful advice from traitorous sugared Speeches, and to send her
Majesty a melting yielding heart unto sound Counsel, that Will may not stand
for a Reason: and then her Majesty will stand when her Enemies are fallen, for
no Estate can stand where the Prince will not be governed by advice. And I
doubt not but that some of her Majesty's Counsel have dealt plainly and
faithfully with her Majesty herein; if any have, let it be a sure token to her
Majesty to know them for approved Subjects; and whatsoever they be that did
persuade her Majesty so unkindly to entreat, abuse and to oppose her self
against her Nobility and People, or commend her Majesty for so doing, let it be
a sure token to her Majesty to know them for sure Traitors and Underminers of
her Majesty's Life, and remove them out of her Majesty's presence and favor:
for the more cunning they are, the more dangerous are they unto her Majesty.
But was this all? No, for God would not vouchsafe that his Holy Spirit should
all that Session descend upon our Bishops; so that that Session nothing was
done to the advancement of his Glory. I have heard of old Parliament men, that
the Banishment of the Pope and Popery, and the restoring of true Religion had
their beginning from this House, and not from the Bishops; and I have heard
that few Laws for Religion had their Foundation from them; and I do surely
think, before God I speak it, that the Bishops were the Cause of that doleful
Message, and I will show you what moves me so to think: I was amongst others
the last Parliament sent unto the Bishop of Canterbury for the Articles of
Religion that then passed this House, he asked us why we did put out of the
Book the Articles for the Homilies, Consecrating of Bishops, and such like?
Surely, Sir, said I, because we were so occupied in other matters, that we had
no time to examine them how they agreed with the word of God: what, said he,
surely you mistook the matter, you will refer your selves wholly to us therein?
No, by the Faith I bear to God, said I, we will pass nothing before we
understand what it is; for that were but to make you Popes; make you Popes who
list, said I, for we will make you none. And sure, Mr Speaker, the Speech
seemed to me to be a Pope-like Speech, and I fear lest our Bishops do attribute
this of the Popes Canons unto themselves, Papa non potest errare; for surely if
they did not, they would reform things amiss, and not to spurn against Gods
People for writing therein as they do; but I can tell them News, they do but
kick against the prick, for undoubtedly they both have and do err, and God will
reveal his truth, maugre the hearts of them and all his Enemy, for great is
the truth and it will prevail: and to say the truth, it is an Error to think
that Gods Spirit is tied only to them; for the Heavenly Spirit says, first
seek the Kingdom of God and the Righteousness thereof, and all these things
(meaning temporal) shall be given you: these words were not spoken to the
Bishops only, but to all; and the Writ, Mr Speaker, that we are called up by,
is chiefly to deal in Gods Cause; so that our Commission both from God and our
Prince is to deal in Gods Causes: therefore the accepting of such Messages, and
taking them in good part do highly offend God, and is the acceptance of the
breach of the Liberties of this Honorable Council; for is it not all one thing
to say, Sirs, you shall deal in such matters only, as to say, you shall not
deal in such matters? and so as good to have Fools and Flatterers in the House,
as men of Wisdom, grave Judgment, faithful Hearts, and sincere Consciences, for
they being taught what they shall do can give their consents as well as the
others: Well, he that has an Office, says St Paul, let him wait on his
Office, or give diligent attendance upon his Ofsice. It is a great and special
part of our duty and office, Mr Speaker, to maintain the freedom of
Consultation and Speech, for by this, good Laws that do set forth Gods Glory,
and for the preservation of the Prince and State are made. St Paul in the same
place says, hate that which is avil, cleave unto that which is good: then with
St Paul, I do advise you all here present, yea and heartily and earnestly
desire you from the bottom of your hearts to hate all Messengers,
Tale-Carriers, or any other thing whatsoever it be that any manner of way
infringes the Liberties of this Honorable Council; yea hate it or them as
venomous and poison unto our Commonwealth, for they are venomous Beasts that
do use it; therefore I say again and again, hate that which is evil and cleave
unto that which is good; and this being loving and faithful hearted, I do wish
to be conceived in fear of God, and of love to our Prince and State; for we are
incorporated into this place, to serve God and all England, and not to be
Time-Servers, as Humour-feeders, as Cancers that would pierce the Bone, or as
Flatterers that would fain beguile all the World, and so worthy to be Condemned
both of God and Man; but let us show our selves a People endued with Faith, I
mean with a lively Faith, that brings forth good Works, and not as Dead. And
these good Works I wish to break forth in this sort, not only in hating the
Enemies before-spoken against, but also in open reproving them as Enemies to
God, our Prince and State that do use them, for they are so. Therefore I would
have none spared or forborne that shall from henceforth offend herein, of what
calling soever he be, for the higher place he has the more harm he may do;
therefore if he will not eschew offenses, the higher I wish him hanged. I speak
this in Charity, Mr Speaker, for it is better that one should be hanged, than
that this Noble State should be subverted; well I pray God with all my heart to
turn the hearts of all the Enemies of our Prince and State, and to forgive them
that wherein they have offended, yea and to give them grace to offend therein
no more; even so I do heartily beseech God to forgive us for holding our peaces
when we have heard any injury offered to this Honorable Council; for surely it
is no small offense, Mr Speaker, for we offend therein against God, our Prince
and State, and abuse the confidence by them reposed in us. Wherefore God for
his great mercies sake, grant that we may from henceforth show our selves
neither Bastards nor Dastards therein, but that as rightly begotten Children,
we may sharply and boldly reprove Gods Enemies, our Princes and State; and so
shall every one of us discharge our Duties in this our High Office, wherein he
has placed us, and show our selves haters of Evil, and Cleavers to that, that
is good, to the setting forth of Gods Glory and Honor, and to the Preservation
of our Noble Queen and Commonwealth: for these are the marks that we ought
only in this place to shoot at. I am thus earnest I take God to witness, for
Conscience Sake, Love, Love unto my Prince and Commonwealth, and for the
advancement of Justice; for Justice says an Ancient Father, is the Prince of
all Virtues, yea the safe and faithful Guard of man's Life, for by it Empires,
Kingdoms, People and Cities be governed, the which if it be taken away, the
Society of man cannot long endure. And a King, says Solomon, that sits in
the Throne of Judgment and looks well about him, chaseth away all evil; in
the which State and Throne, God for his great mercies sake, grant that our
Noble Queen may be heartily vigilant and watchful; for surely there was a great
fault committed both in the last Parliament; and since also that was, as
faithful hearts as any were unto the Prince and State, received most
displeasure, the which is but an hard point in Policy, to encourage the Enemy,
to discourage the faithful-hearted who of fervent love cannot dissemble, but
follow the Rule of St Paul, who says, let love be without dissimulation.

Now to another great fault I found the last Parliament committed by some of
this House also, the which I would desire of them all might be left; I have
from right good men in other Causes, although I did dislike them in that doing,
sit in an evil matter against which they had most earnestly spoken: I mused at
it, and asked what it meant, for I do think it a shameful thing to serve God,
their Prince or Country, with the tongue only, and not with the Heart and Body.
I was answered that it was a common Policy in this House, to mark the best sort
of the same, and either to sit or arise with them; that same common Policy I
would gladly have banished this House, and have grafted in the stead thereof,
either to rise or sit as the matter gives Cause: For the Eyes of the Lord
behold all the Earth to strengthen all the hearts of them that are whole with
him. These be Gods own words, mark them well, I heartily beseech you all; for
God will not receive half part, he will have the whole. And again, he misliketh
those two faced Gentlemen, and here be many Eyes that will to their great shame
behold their double dealing that use it. Thus I have holden you long with my
rude Speech, the which since it tends wholly with pure Conscience to seek the
advancement of Gods Glory, our Honorable Sovereigns Safety, and to the sure
defense of this noble Isle of England, and all by maintaining of the Liberties
of this Honorable Council, the Fountain from whence all these do Spring; my
humble and hearty Suit unto you all is, to accept my good will, and that this
that I have here spoken out of Conscience and great zeal unto my Prince and
State, may not be buried in the Pit of Oblivion, and so no good come thereof.

Upon this Speech the House out of a reverend regard of her Majesty's Honor,
stopped his further proceeding before he had fully finished his Speech. The
Message he meant and intended was that which was set by her Majesty to the
House of Commons in the said fourteenth year of her Reign upon Wednesday the
28th day of May, by Sir Francis Knolles Knight, Treasurer of her Majesty's
Household, inhibiting them for a certain time to treat or deal in the matter
touching the Scottish Queen. Now follows the proceeding of the House upon this
Speech out of the Original Journal Book it self.

Mr Wentworth being Sequestered the House as aforesaid for his said Speech, it
was agreed and Ordered by the House upon the Question (after sundry Motions and
Disputations had therein) that he should be presently Committed to the
Serjeants-Ward as Prisoner, and so remaining should be Examined upon his said
Speech for the extenuating of his fault therein, by all the Privy Council being
of this House, the Master of the Requests, the Captain of the Guard, Mr
Treasurer of the Chamber, the Master of the Jewel-House, the Master of the
Wardrobe, Mr Lieutenant of the Tower, Sir Thomas Scott, Sir Rowland Hayward, Mr
Attorney of the Duchy, Mr Henry Knolles the Elder, Mr Sampoole, Mr Randall, Mr
Birched, Mr Marsh, who were appointed to meet this Afternoon between two and
three of the Clock at the Star Chamber, and to make report at this House to
Morrow next. And then the said Peter Wentworth was brought to the Bar, and
Committed thereupon to the said Serjeants-Ward according to the said Order.

This Afternoon-Passages being thus transcribed for the most part out of the
Original Journal Book of the House of Commons, now follows the Examination of
the said Mr Wentworth before the Committees before appointed, which is
transcribed out of a Memorial or Copy thereof set down by the said Mr Wentworth
himself, being as follows.

Post Meridiem.

A true Report of that which was laid to my Charge in the Star Chamber by the
Committees of the Parliament House (viz. the House of Commons) that same
Afternoon (viz. Wednesday February the 8th) after that I had delivered the
Speech in the House that Forenoon, and my Answer to the same.

Committees. FIrst, Where is your late Speech you promised to deliver in
writing?


Wentworth. Here it is, and I deliver it upon two Conditions; The first is,
that you shall peruse it all, and if you can find any want of good will to my
Prince and State in any part thereof, let me Answer all as if I had uttered
all. The second is, that you shall deliver it unto the Queens Majesty; if her
Majesty or you of her Privy Council can find any want of Love to her Majesty or
the State therein also, let me Answer it.


Commit. We will deal with no more than you uttered in the House.


Went. Your Honors cannot refuse to deliver it to her Majesty, for I do send
it to her Majesty as my Heart and Mind, knowing it will do her Majesty good, it
will hurt no man but my self.


Commit. Seeing your desire is to have us deliver it to her Majesty, we will
deliver it.


Went. I humbly require your Honors so to do.


Commit. Then the Speech being read, they said, Here you have uttered certain
rumors of the Queens Majesty, where and of whom heard you them?


Went. If your Honors ask me as Counselors to her Majesty, you shall pardon
me; I will make you no Answer: I will do no such injury to the place from
whence I came; for I am now no private Person, I am a public, and a Councellor
to the whole State in that place where it is lawful for me to speak my mind
freely, and not for you as Counselors to call me to account for any thing that
I do speak in the House; and therefore if you ask me as Counselors to her
Majesty, you shall pardon me, I will make no Answer; but if you ask me as
Committees from the House, I will make you the best Answer I can.


Commit. We ask you as Committees from the House.


Went. I will then Answer you, and the willinger for that mine Answer will be
in some part so imperfect as of necessity it must be. Your Question consists
of these two points, where and of whom I heard these Rumors? The place where I
heard them was the Parliament House; but of whom, I assure you I cannot tell.


Commit. This is no Answer to say you cannot tell of whom, neither will we take
it for any.


Went. Truly your Honors must needs take it for an Answer, when I can make you
no better.


Commit. Belike you have heard some Speeches in the Town of her Majesty's
misliking of Religion and Succession; you are loath to utter of whom, and did
use Speeches thereupon.


Went. I assure your Honors I can show you that Speech at my own House,
written with my hand two or three years ago. So that you may thereby judge that
I did not speak it of any thing that I heard since I came to Town.


Commit. You have Answered that, but where heard you it then?


Went. If your Honors do think I speak for excuses sake, let this satisfy
you. I protest before the living God I cannot tell of whom I heard these
Rumors: yet I do verily think that I heard them of a hundred or two in the
House.


Commit. Then of so many you can name some.


Went. No surely, because it was so general a Speech, I marked none; neither do
men mark speakers commonly when they be general: and I assure you if I could
tell, I would not. For I will never utter any thing told me, to the hurt of any
man, when I am not enforced thereunto, as in this Case I may choose. Yet I would
deal plainly with you, for I would tell your Honors so, and if your Honors do
not Credit me, I will voluntarily take an Oath, if you offer me a Book, that I
cannot tell of whom I heard those Rumors. But if you offer me an Oath of your
Authorities, I will refuse it, because I will do nothing to infringe the
Liberties of the House. But what need I to use these Speeches? I will give you
an instance whereupon I heard these Rumors to your satisfying, even such a one,
as if you will speak the truth you shall confess that you heard the same as
well as I.


Commit. In so doing we will be satisfied, what is that?


Went. The last Parliament (by which it may be conceived he meant and intended
that Parliament in an. 13 Reginae Eliz.) he that is now Speaker ( viz. Robert
Bell Esquire, who was also Speaker in the first Session of this present
Parliament in an. 14 Reginae ejusdem) uttered a very good Speech for the
calling in of certain Licenses granted to four Courtiers, to the utter undoing
of six or eight thousand of the Queens Majesty's Subjects. This Speech was so
disliked of some of the Council, that he was sent for, and so hardly dealt
with, that he came into the House with such an amazed Countenance, that it
daunted all the House in such sort, that for ten, twelve, or sixteen days,
there was not one in the House that durst deal in any matter of importance. And
in those simple matters that they dealt in, they spent more words and time in
their preamble, requiring that they might not be mistaken, than they did in the
matter they spoke unto. This inconvenience grew unto the House by the
Counselors hard handling of the said good member, whereupon this rumor grew in
the House. Sirs, you may not speak against Licenses, the Queens Majesty will be
angry, the Council will be too too angry, and this rumor I suppose there is not
one of you here but heard it as well as I. I beseech your Honors discharge
your Consciences herein as I do.


Commit. We heard it we confess, and you have satisfied us in this; but how say
you to the hard interpretation you made of the Message that was sent into the
House? (The words were recited.) I assure you I never heard an harder
interpretation of a Message.


Went. I beseech your Honors, First, was there not such a Message sent unto
the House?


Commit. We grant that there was.


Went. Then I trust you will bear me Record that I made it not; and I answer
you that so hard a Message could not have too hard an interpretation made by
the wisest man in England. For can there by any possible means be sent a harder
Message to a Council gathered together to serve God, than to say, you shall not
seek to advance the glory of God? I am of this opinion that there cannot be a
more wicked Message than it was.


Commit. You may not speak against Messages, for none sends them but the
Queens Majesty.


Went. If the Message be against the Glory of God, against the Princes Safety,
or against the Liberty of this Parliament House whereby the State is
maintained, I neither may nor will hold my Peace. I cannot in so doing
discharge my Conscience, whosoever does send it. And I say, that I heartily
repent me, for that I have hitherto held my Peace in these Causes, and I do
promise you all (if God forsake me not) that I will never during Life hold my
Tongue, if any Message is sent, wherein God is dishonored, the Prince
perilled, or the Liberties of the Parliament impeached; and every one of you
here present ought to repent you of these faults and to amend them.


Commit. It is no new Precedent to have the Prince to send Messages. (Then were
two or three Messages recited sent by two or three Princes.)


Went. Sirs (said I) you do very evil to allege Precedents in this Order. You
ought to allege good Precedents to comfort and embolden men in good doing, and
evil Precedents to discourage and terrisie men to do evil.


Commit. But what meant you to make so hard interpretation of Messages?


Went. Surely I marvel what you mean by asking this Question. Have I not said,
so hard a Message could not have too hard an interpretation; and have I not set
down the reason that moved me in my Speech, that is to say, that for the
receiving and accepting that Message, God has poured so great indignation upon
us, that he put into the Queens Majesty's heart to refuse good and wholesome
Laws for her own preservation; which caused many loving and faithful hearts for
grief to burst out with sorrowful tears, and moved all Papists, Traitors to
God, to her Majesty, and to every good Christian Government, in their Sleeves
to laugh the whole Parliament House to scorn. Have I not thus said, and do not
your Honors think it did so?


Commit. Yes truly. But how durst you say that the Queens Majesty had unkindly
abused her self against the Nobility and People?


Went. I beseech your Honors tell me how far you can stretch these words of
her unkindly abusing and opposing her self against her Majesty's Nobility and
People? can you apply them any further than I have applied them, that is to
say, in that her Majesty called the Parliament of purpose to prevent Traiterous
perils to her Person, and for no other Cause, and in that her Majesty did send
unto us two Bills, willing us to take our choice of that we liked best for her
Majesty's Safety, and thereof to make a Law promising her Royal Consent
thereunto; and did we not first choose the one and her Majesty refused it? yet
did not we nevertheless receive the other? and agreeing to make a Law thereof,
did not her Majesty in the end refuse all our Travels? And did not the Lord
Keeper in her Majesty's Presence in the beginning of the Parliament, show this
to be the occasion that we were called together? And did not her Majesty in the
end of the Parliament refuse all our Travels, is not this known to all here
present, and to all the Parliament House also? I beseech your Honors discharge
your Consciences herein, and utter your knowledge simply as I do, for in truth
herein her Majesty did abuse her Nobility and Subjects, and did oppose her self
against them by the way of advice.


Commit. Surely we cannot deny it, you say the truth.


Went. Then I beseech your Honors show me if it were not a dangerous doing to
her Majesty in these two respects. First in weakening, wounding and discouraging
the hearts of her Majesty's loving and faithful Subjects, thereby to make them
the less able or the more fearful and unwilling to serve her Majesty. Another
time, on the other side was it not a raising up and encouraging the hearts of
her Majesty's hateful Enemies to adventure any desperate enterprise to her
Majesty's peril and danger?


Commit. We cannot deny but that it was very dangerous to her Majesty in those
respects.


Went. And is it not a loving part of a Subject to give her Majesty warning to
avoid danger?


Commit. It is so.


Went. Then why do your Honors ask how I dare tell a truth, to give the Queens
Majesty warning to avoid her danger?

I Answer you thus, I do thank the Lord my God, that I never found fear in my
self to give the Queens Majesty warning to avoid her danger, be you all afraid
thereof if you will, for I praise God I am not, and I hope never to live to see
that day, and yet I will assure your Honors that twenty times and more, when I
walked in my Grounds revolving this Speech to prepare against this day, my own
fearful conceit did say unto me that this Speech would carry me to the place
whither I shall now go, and fear would have moved me to have put it out; then I
weighed whether in good Conscience, and the duty of a faithful Subject, I might
keep my self out of Prison, and not to warn my Prince from walking in a
dangerous course; my Conscience said unto me that I could not be a faithful
Subject, if I did more respect to avoid my own danger than my Princes danger:
herewith all I was made bold and went forward as your Honors heard, yet when I
uttered those words in the House, that there was none without fault, no not our
Noble Queen; I paused and beheld all your Countenances, and saw plainly that
those words did amaze you all: Then I was afraid with you for Company, and fear
bad me to put out those words that followed, for your Countenances did assure
me that not one of you would stay me of my Journey; yet the consideration of a
good Conscience and of a faithful Subject did make me bold to utter it in such
sort as your Honors heard, with this heart and mind I spoke it, and I praise
God for it, and if it were to do again I would with the same mind speak it
again.


Commit. Yea but you might have uttered it in better terms, why did you not so?


Went. Would you have me to have done as you of her Majesty's Privy Council do,
to utter a weighty matter in such terms as she should not have understood, to
have made a fault, then it would have done her Majesty no good, and my intent
was to do her good.


Commit. You have Answered us.


Went. Then I praise God for it, and as I made a Courtesy, another spoke these
words.


Commit. Mr Wentworth will never acknowledge himself to make a fault, nor say
that he is sorry for any thing that he does speak, you shall hear none of these
things come out of his mouth.


Went. Mr Seckford, I will never confess that to be a fault to love the Queens
Majesty whilst I live, neither will I be sorry for giving her Majesty warning
to avoid danger while the breath is in my Body; if you do think it a fault to
love her Majesty, or to be sorry that her Majesty should have warning to avoid
her danger, say so, for I cannot; speak for your self Mr Secksord.


This Examination of Mr Wentworth being thus transcribed out of that Copy I had
of it, now follows the next days passages out of the Original Journal Book of
the House of Commons; and it is not here to be over-passed, that the said Mr
Wentworth was by the Queens special favor restored again to his Liberty and
place in the House on Monday the 12th day of March ensuing.

On Thursday the 9th day of February, it was Ordered by this House upon a
Motion that John Lord Russell, Son and Heir Apparent of the Right Honorable
the Earl of Bedford, being a Burgess for the Borough of Birtport in the County
of Dorset, shall continue a Member of this House according to the like former
President in the like Case had heretofore of the said new Earl his Father.

This day Mr Treasurer in the name of all the Committees yesterday appointed
for the Examination of Peter Wentworth Burgess for Tregony, declared, that all
the said Committees did meet Yesterday in the Afternoon in the Star Chamber
according to their Commission, and there Examining the said Peter Wentworth
touching the violent and wicked words Yesterday pronounced by him in this House
touching the Queens Majesty, made a Collection of the same words; which words
so Collected, the said Peter Wentworth did acknowledge and confess. And then
did the said Mr Treasurer read unto the House the said Note of Collection,
which being read, he declared further that the said Peter Wentworth being
Examined what he could say for the extenuating of his said fault and offense,
could neither say any thing at all to that purpose, neither yet did charge any
other person as Author of his said Speech, but did take all the burden thereof
unto himself; and so the said Mr Treasurer thereupon moved for his punishment
and Imprisonment in the Tower as the House should think good and consider of;
whereupon after sundry Disputations and Speeches, it was Ordered upon the
Question, that the said Peter Wentworth should be committed close Prisoner to
the Tower for his said offense, there to remain until such time as this House
should have further Consideration of him. And thereupon immediately the said
Peter Wentworth being brought to the Bar by the Sergeant received his said
Judgment accordingly by the Mouth of Mr Speaker in form above-recited: And so
Mr Lieutenant of the Tower was presently charged with the Custody of the said
Peter Wentworth. But the said Peter Wentworth was shortly by the Queens special
Favor restored again to his Liberty and place in the House, Ut vide on Monday
the 12th day of March following.

Mr Moor, Mr Norton, Mr Yelverton and Mr Fenner were appointed to draw a Bill
against stealing away of Men's Children by color of privy Contracts.

It was resolved by this House, that any person being a Member of the same, and
being either in service of Embassage, or else in Execution, or visited with
sickness, shall not in any wise be amoved from their place in this House, nor
any other to be during such time of service, Execution or sickness Elected.
Vide consimile January the 19th Thursday in Anno 23 Reginae Eliz.

Mr Seckford Master of the Requests, Sir Nicholas Arnold, Mr Atkins and Mr
Marsh were appointed to confer together touching the number of Knights and
Burgesses of the Parliament.

Three Bills lastly of no great moment had each of them their first reading; of
which the last was the Bill for assurances of Lands and Tenements in ancient
Demesne, and for preservation of the Lords Seignories.

On Friday the 10th day of February, upon a Motion made by Mr Dalton in the
behalf of the Lord Russell, supposing he should not be continued a Member of
this House, it is nevertheless generally resolved by this House that he may not
be discharged of the same: upon present notice whereof given unto him by the
Sergeant, the said Lord Russell came into this House accordingly.

Nota, That this Lord Russell was Son and Heir Apparent of Francis the second
Earl of Bedford of this Surname, who having no place in the Upper House might
very well be admitted a Member of the House of Commons, and the Precedents of
this kind have been so frequent in all the Parliaments of latter times since
Queen Elizabeth's Death, as there shall need no vouching of them. And it lies
also in the favor of the Prince to make such Heirs Apparent of Earldoms
Members of the Upper House by Summoning them thither by Writ, but then they
take not place there as the Sons of Earls, but according to the Antiquity of
their Fathers Baronies.

Two Bills of no great moment had each of them their first reading; of which
the second was the Bill touching Bastardy.

Mr Chancellor of the Exchequer declaring the great charges of the Queens
Majesty many and sundry ways since her Entry to the Crown, as well in Foreign
as Domestical occasions, for the benefit and peaceable Government of the State
and Commonwealth, and the great and imminent necessity of present provision to
be had and made for the continuance of the same, did after many great and
weighty reasons showed, move for a Subsidy: which Speech in respect that it is
but thus abstractedly set down in the Original Journal Book of the House of
Commons, and contains in it matter of very good moment, I have thought good
to supply it at large out of a Copy thereof I had by me being as follows:

That in the beginning of this our meeting such matters as be of importance may
be thought on in time, I am bold with your favors to move you of one that in
my opinion is both of moment and of necessity. To the end if you likewise find
the same to be so, you may commit it further to the consideration of such as
you shall think convenient.

And that you may the better judge of that which I shall propound, it is
requisite that I put you in remembrance, First, how the Queen found the Realm,
next how she has restored and conserved it; and thirdly, how we stand now.
Touching the first no man can be ignorant how that our most gracious Queen at
her Entering found this noble Realm, by reason of the evil Government
preceding; miserably overwhelmed with Popery, dangerously afflicted with War,
and grievously afflicted with Debts; the burden of which three cannot be
remembered without grief, especially if we call to mind how this Kingdom being
utterly delivered from the Usurped Tyranny of Rome, and that many years
together, was nevertheless by the iniquity of later time brought back again
into the former Captivity, to the great thraldom both of Body and Soul of all
the People of this Land. A wretched time, and wretched Ministers to bring to
pass so wretched and wicked an Act to strengthen this Bondage of Rome. We saw
how there was brought hither a strong Nation to press our Necks again into the
Yoke; terrible this was to all the Inhabitants of this Land, and so would have
proved, if their abode had been here so long as was to be feared from them; and
by their occasion came the War that we entered into with France and Scotland,
and not upon any Quarrel of our own; but to help them forward to their great
advantage and our great loss and shame, by means whereof and of other disorders
the Realm grew into great Debt both at home and abroad, and so was left to the
intolerable loss and charge of her Majesty and the State. The Realm being thus
miserably oppressed with Popery, with War and with Debts, the Queen our most
Gracious Sovereign has thus restored and conserved it, she has delivered us
from the Tyrannous Yoke of Rome, and restored again the most Holy Religion of
the Gospel, not slacking any time therein; but even at the first doing that
which was for the Honor of God, to the unspeakable joy of all good Subjects.

But adventuring thereby the malice of the mighty Princes of the World, her
Neighbors being Enemies of our Religion; whereby it did appear how much she
preferred the Glory of our God before her own Quietness: this done, she made
Peace with France and Scotland, the one a mighty Nation, the other though not
so Potent, yet in regard of their nearness and of their Habitation with us upon
our Continent more dangerous: which may easily appear by consideration of
former times, wherein it has been seen how dangerous Scottish Wars have proved
to this Realm above those of any other Nation. But such has been the
Providence of our Gracious Queen as the Peace with Scotland, which in times
past was found very tickle, is now become so firm as in no Age there has been
so long and so good Peace between them and us.

And that is brought to pass the rather for that her Majesty by two notable
Exploits with her Forces, the one to Lies and another to Edenburgh-Castle,
has both quieted that Realm, and taken away all occasions of Hostility that
might arise against this Country; also by the first delivering Scotland from
the French which had so great a footing there, as without aid from hence they
must needs in short time have Tyrannized over that Country to their perpetual
servitude, and to the peril also of this Country, being so near them, and they
so ill Neighbors to dwell by. And by the second ending and putting out the
fire of the Civil Wars amongst them to the preservation of their young King and
the perpetual quietness of that Realm, both which as they have brought unto her
Majesty great and immortal Honor and Renown, and to this Country and that,
Peace and Surety: So you cannot but think therewith upon the Charges which
necessarily follow such two Journeys furnished by Land and by Sea, as for the
atchieving of so great Enterprises was requisite. What her Majesty has done,
besides for the suppressing of a dangerous and unnatural Rebellion practiced by
the Pope, the most principal and malicious Enemy of this State, and put in ure
by certain undutiful Subjects in the North parts of this Realm was seen so late
even in your view, as it needs not to be remembered, neither the charge that
belongs to a matter of such importance as did threaten the utter ruin to our
most Gracious Sovereign and to all the People of this Land, if God of his Mercy
had not prevented it.

Notwithstanding all which costly Journies both into Scotland and within the
Realm, her Majesty has most carefully and providently delivered this Kingdom
from a great and weighty Debt, wherewith it has been long burdened. A Debt
begun four years at the least before the Death of King Henry the Eighth, and
not cleared until within these two years, and all that while running upon
Interest, a course able to eat up not only private men and their Patrimonies,
but also Princes, and their Estates; but such has been the care of this time,
as Her Majesty and the State is clearly freed from that eating corrosive, the
truth whereof may be testified by the Citizens of London, whose Bonds under the
Common Seal of the City of assurance of payment being usually given and
renewed, and which have hanged so many years to their great danger, and to the
peril of the whole traffic are now all discharged, cancelled, and delivered
into the Chamber of London to their own hands. By means whereof the Realm is
not only acquitted of this great burden, and the Merchants free, but also her
Majesty's credit thereby both at home and abroad greater than any other Prince
for money, if she have need, and so in reason it ought to be, for that she has
kept Promise to all men, wherein other Princes have often failed to the
hindrance of many. Lastly, for this point how the Justice of this Realm is
preserved and ministered to her People by her Majesty's political and just
Government is so well known to all men, as our Enemies are driven to confess,
that Justice which is the Band of all Commonwealths does so tie and link
together all degrees of Persons within this Land, as there is suffered here no
violence, no oppression, no respect of persons in Judgment; but Jus equabile
used to all indifferently. All which godly, provident and wise acts in
Government, have brought forth these effects that we be in Peace, and all our
Neighbors in War; that we be in quietness at home, and safe enough from
troubles abroad; that we live in Wealth and all Prosperity, and that which is
the greatest, we enjoy the freedom of our Consciences delivered from the
Bondage of Rome, wherewith we were so lately oppressed: and thus we stand.

But for all this as wise Mariners in calm weather do most diligently prepare
their tackles, and provide to withstand attempts that may happen: even so in
this our blessed time of Peace that we enjoy by the blessing of God through the
Ministry of her Majesty, we ought in time to make provision to prevent any
storm that may arise either here or abroad, and neither to be too careless or
negligent, but think that the tail of these storms, which are so bitter and so
boisterous in other Countries may reach us also before they be ended,
especially if we do not forget the hatred that is born us by the Adversary of
our Religion both for our profession, and for that this Realm is also a
merciful Sanctuary for such poor Christians as sly hither for succor; so as
now one of the most principal cares that we ought to care in this great Council
of the Realm is both to consider aforehand the dangers that may come by the
malice of Enemies, and to provide in time how to resist them; and seeing that
by those great occasions which I have remembered, you can easily understand how
low her Majesty's Coffers are brought, it is our parts frankly and willingly to
offer unto her Majesty such a Contribution as shall be able to restore the same
again in such sort as she may be sufficiently furnished of Treasure to put in
order and maintain her Forces by Land and by Sea to answer any thing that shall
be attempted against her and us; and unless it might seem strange to some that
her Majesty should want this, some considering that not long sithence Aid was
granted by the Realm. To that I Answer, That albeit her Majesty is not to yield
an account how she spends her Treasure, yet for your satisfactions I will let
you understand such things as are very true, and which I dare affirm, having
more knowledge thereof than some other, in respect of the place I hold in her
Majesty's Service.

First how favorable the Taxations of Subsidies be through the whole Realm
cannot be unknown to any, whereby far less comes to her Majesty's Coffers than
by the Law is granted, a matter now drawn to be so usual as it is hard to be
reformed. Next the clearing of all Debts that run upon Interest to the
insupportable charge of the Realm. Thirdly, the charge is suppressing the
Rebellion in the North. Fourthly, the free and honorable repayment of the last
Loans, the like whereof was not seen before. Fifthly, the Journey to
Edenburgh-Castle for the quieting of that Country and this. And lastly, the
great and continual Charges in Ireland by the evil disposition of the people
there, all which could not have been performed by the last Aid, except it had
pleased her Majesty to spare out of her own Revenues great Sums of money for
the supplying of that which lacked, wherein she more respected the Realm than
her own particular Estate, living as you see in most temperate manner, without
either Building or other superfluous things of pleasure; and like as these be
causes sufficient to move you to devise how these wants may be repaired, so you
ought the rather to do it, for that her Majesty lacks and cannot have without
great inconvenience, those helps which in the times of her Father, her Brother
and Sister were used, as the abasing of Coin, which brought infinite sums to
them, but wrought great damage to the Realm, which we yet feel, and should do
more, had not her Majesty to her perpetual Fame, restored the same again, so
much as the time could suffer. The sale of Lands whereof came also very great
sums of money, but that is not hereafter to be used, saving that by the same
the Revenues of the Crown are greatly diminished, which it cannot more bear,
the borrowing of money upon Interest the burden whereof the Realm has felt so
heavy as that is never more to be done, if by any means it may be avoided. And
yet notwithstanding all those helps, it is apparent that Subsidies were
continually granted in those times, if so then, much more now then, besides War
and other extraordinary Charges may happen, her Majesty's very ordinary Charges
which she cannot but sustain, are far greater by dearth of prices and other
occasions, than in any other Princes days, as you may see by the ordinary and
annual Charges of the Household, the Navy, the Ordnance, the Armory, the
Garrison of Berwick, the standing Garrison and Officers within the Realm of
Ireland. And whether these are like to be more costly to her Majesty than in
former times in respect of the prices of all things, let every man judge by the
experience he has of his private expenses.

And so to draw to an end for avoiding of your trouble. I trust these few
things may suffice to remember us how her Majesty found the Realm, how she has
restored and preserved it, and how the present State is now, and therewith all
may serve as reasons sufficient to persuade us to deal in this necessary cause
as her Majesty being the Head of the Commonwealth: be not unfurnished of that
which will be sufficient to maintain both her self and us against the private
or open malice of, Enemies, wherein let us so proceed as her Majesty may find
how much we think our selves bound to God that has given us so Gracious a
Queen over us, and show thereby also such gratuity toward her as she may
perform the course of her Government cum alacritate.

This foregoing Speech of Sir Walter Mildmay Knight, Chancellor of the
Exchequer, being thus transcribed out of the Copy thereof I had by me, now
follow the Proceedings thereupon out of the Original Journal Book of the House
of Commons, by which it appears that diverse Members of the said House were
appointed immediately after it to have Conference for drawing of a Bill for a
Subsidy, which Committees were as follows, viz. All the Privy Council being
of this House, Mr Captain of the Guard, the Master of the Requests, Sir Thomas
Scott, Sir Rowland Hayward, Sir Nicholas Arnold, Sir Thomas Shirley, Sir George
Speak, Sir Henry Lea, Sir Robert Wingfeild, Sir John Thynne, Sir George
Turpin, Sir William Winter, Sir William Morgan, Sir Edward Stanhope, Mr Edward
Horsey Master Recorder of London, Mr Sergeant Lovelace, Mr Sampoole, Mr
Grimston, Mr More, Mr Popham, Mr Telverton, and Mr Hilliard, to meet this
Afternoon at the Star Chamber, or some other place near unto it at three of the
Clock.

Mr Wilson Master of the Requests, Mr Norton, Mr Marsh, Mr Edward Stanhope, Mr
Sands, Mr Atkins, and Mr George Ireland, were appointed to draw a Bill for the
safe keeping of the Church Books or Registers of the Christnings, Marriages and
Burials, and to meet upon Sunday next in the Afternoon at Mr Wilsons Chamber in
the Arches at three of the Clock.

Mr Comptroller, Mr Chancellor of the Exchequer, Mr Recorder of London, Mr
Attorney of the Duchy, Mr Popham, Mr Marsh, Mr Sampoole, Mr Cromwell, Mr
Thomas Brown, and Mr Robert Snagg, were appointed to have Conference in the
Star Chamber to Morrow at three of the Clock in the Afternoon for drawing of a
Bill against the oppression of common Promoters.

The Bill lastly, for setting the poor on work and for avoiding of Idleness,
was read the second time.

On Saturday the 11th day of February, Two Bills of no great moment had each of
them one reading; of which the first being the Bill for Mr Hatton was read the
first time.

Upon sundry Arguments made unto the Bill for setting the poor on work and for
avoiding of Idleness, it was committed unto Mr Treasurer, Sir Rowland Hayward,
Sir Nichlas Arnold, Mr More, Mr Robert Bows, Mr Atkins, Mr Alford, Mr Aldrich,
Mr Sampoole, Mr Norton, Mr Cromwell, Mr Snagg, Mr Layton, Mr Way, Mr Popham,
Mr Woley, Mr Fleet, Mr Honnywood, Mr Longley, Mr Ailmer, Mr Newdigate, Mr
William Thomas, Mr Tate, Mr Owen, Mr Grimston, and Mr Cure, to meet at this
House upon Monday next at three of the Clock in the Afternoon.

Christopher Dighton Gent. one of the Citizens for the City of Worcester, was
licensed by Mr Speaker to take his Journey unto the said City of Worcester for
Execution of Dedimus potestatem in the Service of our Sovereign Lady the Queens
Majesty.

On Monday the 13th day of February, Five Bills of no great moment had each of
them one reading; of which the last being the Bill that in Actions upon the
Case brought for words, the County may be traversed was read the second time,
and committed presently after this Forenoon.

Mr Treasurer for himself and the residue of the Committees for the Subsidy
(whose names see on Friday the 10th day of this instant February foregoing)
declared that upon Conference had amongst them at their meeting together upon
Friday last, they did then Assent unto certain Articles for drawing of a Bill
for one Subsidy and two Fifteenths and Tenths to be paid at several times,
whereupon the same Articles were read by the Clerk, and then by Order of the
House were the same Articles delivered to some of the Committees being of the
Privy Council, that some of the Queens Majesty's Learned Council may by Warrant
from this House cause the same Bill to be drawn accordingly. Vide concerning
this matter on Wednesday the 27th day of this instant February ensuing.

The Bill for traversing of the County in Actions upon the Case was committed
unto Mr Seckford Master of the Requests, Mr Colshill, Mr Newdigate, and others
who were appointed to meet upon Thursday next at three of the Clock in the
Afternoon in the Temple Church.

The Petitions touching Ports was read and committed unto all the Privy Council
being of this House, the Lord Russell, Mr Captain of the Guard, Sir Thomas
Scott, Sir William Winter, Mr Recorder of London, the Burgesses for Dover, Mr
Sampoole, Mr Grice, Mr. John Hastings, Mr. Norton, Sir Arthur Basset, Mr.
Diggs, Sir Henry Gate, Sir Henry Wallop, Mr. Langley, Mr. Hawkins Richardson,
Mr. Randall, Mr. Gardener, Mr. Sanders, Mr. Jenison, Mr. Beale, Mr. Honnywood,
Mr. Tremaine, Sir George Speak, Mr. Captain of the Wight, Sir Henry Ratcliffe,
Mr. Elesdon, Mr. Layton, and the Burgesses of Linne, to meet to Morrow at three
of the Clock in the Afternoon in the Exchequer Chamber.

Sir Nicholas Arnold, Mr. Snagg, Mr. Norton, and Mr. Atkins, were added to the
former Committees for drawing of a Bill against the Promoters (whose names see
on Friday the 10th day of February) to meet upon Thursday next in the Afternoon
at two of the Clock in the Treasury-Chamber near the Star Chamber.

The Bill for reformation of Errors in Fines and common Recoveries was read the
second time and committed unto Mr. Recorder of London, Mr. Attorney of the
Duchy, Mr. Baber, Mr. Yelverlon, and others to meet at three of the Clock this
present day in the Exchequer Chamber.

Charles Johnson of the Inner Temple Gent. being Examined at the Bar for coming
into this House, this present day (the House sitting) confessing himself to be
no Member of this House, is Ordered that Mr Wilson Master of the Requests, Mr.
Recorder of London, and Mr. Cromwell to examine him (wherein he seigned to
excuse himself by ignorance) he was committed to the Sergeants Ward, till
further Order should be taken by this House.

Sir Richard Read, and Mr. Doctor Berkley brought into this House a Bill from
the Lords touching the diminishing and impairing of the Coins of this Realm and
of other Foreign Coins not current within this Realm.

Two Bills lastly, had each of them their several readings; of which the second
being the Bill for the preservation of the Lords Seignories was read the second
time and Ordered to be engrossed.

On Tuesday the 14th day of February, the Bill for Mr. Hatton was read the
second time and Ordered to be engrossed, and committed unto Mr. Treasurer, Mr.
Heneage, Mr. Cromwell, Mr. Dalton, Mr. John Spencer, Mr. Norton, and Mr.
Alford, to examine the suggestion of the Bill touching the consent of the
parties to the passing of the same Bill; whereupon Mr. John Spencer one of the
Committees, being also one of the persons named in the said Bill so resolved
the residue of the Committees, that upon the report thereof made to the House
by Mr. Treasurer it was presently Ordered that the Bill should be engrossed,
and the Proviso omitted and left out.

The Bill for the true payment of the Debts of William Isley Esquire, was read
the second time, and the Proviso to the same Bill being twice read, it was
committed to Mr. Secretary Walsingham, Mr. Chancellor of the Exchequer, Mr.
Treasurer of the Chamber and others.

Two Bills lastly of no great moment had each of them one reading; of which the
first being the Bill for Jeofailes was read the first time.

On Wednesday the 15th day of February, Three Bills of no great moment had each
of them one reading; of which the third being the Bill against diminishing and
impairing the Coins of this Realm, or of other Foreign Realms current within
this Realm, was read the second time and committed to Mr. Treasurer, Mr.
Chancellor of the Exchequer, Mr. Secretary Smith, Mr. Secretary Walsingham, Mr.
Captain of the Guard, Mr. Chancellor of the Duchy, Mr. Heneage, Mr. Lieutenant
of the Tower, Mr. Sands, Mr. Darrington, Mr. Popham, and Mr. Norton, to confer
with the Lords at the next time that any Bill shall be sent to the Lords from
this House.

The Bill against Bastardy was upon the second reading committed unto Mr.
Comptroller, Mr. Secretary Smith, Sir Thomas Scott, and others to meet upon
Friday next at three of the Clock in the Afternoon at the Star Chamber.

The Bill for reformation of Jeofailes, etc. was read the second time and
committed unto Mr. Seckford Master of the Requests, Mr. Sergeant Lovelace, Mr.
Recorder of London and others.

The Bill for the Freemen of the City of London was read the second time and
Ordered to be engrossed.

Upon sundry Motions this day made touching the further proceeding with, or
delivery of Charles Johnson Prisoner in the Sergeants Ward, it was Ordered that
the matter be referred to be further resolved to Morrow next, sitting the
Court. Vide concerning this matter on Monday the 13th day of this instant
February foregoing.

On Thursday the 16th day of February, the Bill for one Subsidy and two
Fifteenths and Tenths was read the first time. Vide concerning this Bill of the
Subsidy on Wednesday the 27th day of this instant February ensuing.

Mr. Lieutenant of the Tower, Sir Nicholas Arnold, and Mr. Sergeant Lovelace
were appointed to Examine the matter touching the Arrest of Mr. Hall's Servant
before Mr. Speaker at his Chamber this Afternoon. Vide concerning this matter
on Saturday the 10th day of March ensuing.

The Bill touching the making of Woollen Cloths in the Counties of Wilts,
Somerset, and Gloucester, was read the first time.

Mr. Doctor Berkley and Mr. Powle brought from the Lords the Bill against
excess in Apparel, and the Bill for Confirmation of Letters Patents.

The Bill touching the making of Woollen Cloths was committed unto Mr.
Comptroller, Sir Rowland Hayward, Sir John Thynne, and others who were
appointed to meet upon Saturday next at the Guild Hall at two of the Clock in
the Afternoon.

The Bill lastly for assurances of Lands late of Edward Dacre was read the
second time, and Ordered to be engrossed.

On Friday the 17th day of February, Five Bills of no great moment had each of
them one reading; of which the fourth being the Bill against making of double
double Ale, and double double Beer, and the fifth against Inholders and
Tiplers, were each of them read the first time, and committed unto Sir Henry
Gates, Sir Rowland Hayward, Mr. Edward Popham and others, who were appointed to
meet to Morrow in the Afternoon at Westminster Hall at three of the Clock.

Two Bills also of no great moment had each of them one reading; of which the
second being the Bill against the dangerous abusing of Daggs, Pistolets, etc.
was read the second time and committed unto Mr. Secretary Smith, Mr.
Comptroller, Mr. Lieutenant of the Tower, and others to meet upon Tuesday next
in the Exchequer Chamber at two of the Clock in the Afternoon.

The new Bill for reformation of Errors in Fines and common Recoveries was read
the first time.

Upon sundry Motions it was concluded by this House, that according to the old
precedents of this House, Mr. Sergeant Ieffrie being one of the Knights
returned for Sussex may have Voice or give his attendance in this House as a
Member of the same, notwithstanding his attendance in the Upper House as one of
the Queens Sergeants, for his Council there as the place where he has no Voice
indeed, nor is any Member of the same.

The Bill for reformation of Under-Sheriffs and other Officers, was read the
second time and committed on the day next following. Quod nota.

On Saturday the 18th day of February, Six Bills of no great moment had each of
them one reading; of which the last being the Bill for cutting and working of
tanned Leather was read the first time and committed unto Mr. Treasurer, Sir
Nicholas Arnold, Sir John Thynne, Sir George Bows, and others to meet upon
Tuesday next at the Guildhall at two of the Clock in the Afternoon.

The Bill for assurance of Lands to be made without Coven, was read the second
time and argued unto by Mr. Ireland, Mr. Fenner, Mr. Brickhed, Mr. Mersh, Mr.
Flowerdewe, Mr. Popham, and others.

Mr. Comptroller, Sir John Finch, Sir Henry Gate, Sir Morris Berkley, Sir
Arthur Basset, and diverse others were appointed to meet to Morrow in the
Afternoon in the Temple Church at two of the Clock in the Afternoon upon the
Committee of the Bill of Sheriffs.

On Monday the 20th day of February, Four Bills of no great moment had each of
them one reading; of which the first being the Bill for one Subsidy and two
Fifteenths and Tenths was read the second time and Ordered to be engrossed.
Vide concerning this Bill on Monday the 27th day of this instant February
ensuing.

The Provisoes also to the Bill for reformation of Errors in Fines, etc. were
twice read and Ordered to be engrossed.

Upon the Question and also upon the Division of the House, it was Ordered that
Edward Smalley Yeoman, Servant unto Arthur Hall Esquire, one of the Burgesses
for Grantham, shall have privilege. Vide concerning this matter on Saturday
the 10th day of March following.

On Tuesday the 21th day of February, Six Bills of no great moment had each of
them their first reading; of which the first was for the perfecting of Grants
made by the Dean and Chapter of Norwich, and the second was touching certain
Prisoners in Execution escaped out of the Kings Bench.

Four Bills also of no great moment had each of them their third reading and
passed the House, and were sent to the Lords by Mr. Treasurer and others; of
which one was for the Freemen of the City of London, and another of Woodstock.

The Masters of the Request, Mr Recorder, Mr Attorney of the Duchy, Mr
Sampoole, and Mr. Snagg were appointed to meet at the Rolls Chapel between two
and three of the Clock this day in the Afternoon, touching the manner of
delivery of Mr. Hall's Servant. Vide de ista materia on Saturday the 10th day
of March following.

The Bill for reformation of Errors in Fines and common Recoveries was read the
third time and passed the House, and a Proviso to the same Bill was thrice read.

The Committees in the Bill for Jeofailes were appointed to meet to Morrow in
the Afternoon in Serjeants-Inn in Chancery Lane, at two of the Clock.

Two Provisoes to the Bill for the true payment of the Debts of William Isley
Esquire, were twice read, and with the Bill Ordered to be engrossed.

Two Bills finally of no great moment had each of them one reading; of which
the second being the Bill for Butlerage and Prisage of Wines was read the
second time and committed unto Mr. Treasurer, Mr. Secretary Smith, Mr.
Chancellor of the Duchy, Mr. Chancellor of the Exchequer, and others who were
appointed to meet on Friday next in the Afternoon in Chequer Chamber at two of
the Clock.

On Wednesday the 22th day of February, Three Bills of no great moment had each
of them one reading; of which the last being the Bill for the true payment of
the Debts of William Isley Esquire was read the third time and passed upon the
Question.

Nota, Report was made by Mr. Attorney of the Duchy upon the Committee for the
delivery of Mr. Hall's Man, that the Committees found no precedent for setting
at large by the Mace any person in Arrest but only by Writ, and that by diverse
precedents of Records perused by the said Committees it appears, that every
Knight, Citizen and Burgess of this House which does require privilege, has
used in that Case to take a corporal Oath before the Lord Chancellor, or Lord
Keeper of the Great Seal for the time being, that the party for whom such Writ
is prayed came up with him and was his Servant at the time of the Arrest made,
and that Mr Hall was thereupon moved by this House that he should repair to the
Lord Keeper and make Oath in form aforesaid, and then to proceed to the taking
of a Warrant for a Writ of privilege for his said Servant according to the
said Report of the said former precedents. Vide concerning this matter on
Saturday the 10th day of March ensuing.

On Thursday the 23th day of February, Ten Bills of no great moment had each of
them one reading; of which the last being the Bill touching Presentations by
Lapse was read the third time and passed the House, and sent up to the Lords by
Mr. Treasurer and others.

The Bill for Cables and Cordage was read the second time, and upon the
question rejected.

Sir Richard Read and Mr. Doctor Barkley brought from the Lords four Bills; of
which one was the Bill for the repairing of Chepstow-Bridge, and another for
the perpetual maintenance of Rochester-Bridge.

The Bill lastly against the diminishing or impairing of Coin was read the
third time and pasthe House.

On Friday the 24th day of February, Six Bills of no great moment had each of
them one reading; of which the last being the Bill for reformation of Sheriffs
was read the first time and committed unto Sir Thomas Scott, Mr. Attorney of
the Duchy, Mr. Sampoole, and others, to meet this Afternoon at the Temple
Church at two of the Clock.

The Bill that the Queens Majesty may entreat the Subjects of Foreign Princes
in such sort as they shall entreat the Subjects of this Realm, was read the
second time and committed unto all the Privy Council being of this House, the
Masters of the Requests, Mr. Captain of the Guard, Sir Henry Knivett, and
diverse others to confer presently.

Three Bills also of no great moment had each of them one reading; of which the
third being the Bill for Explanation of the Statute against Dilapidations, etc.
was read the first time and committed to Sir Thomas Cecill, Mr. Recorder of
London, Mr. Popham, and others who were appointed to meet to Morrow in the
Afternoon at two of the Clock in the Exchequer Chamber.

Two Bills more had each of them one reading; of which the first being the Bill
for the Jurors of Middlesex, was read the first time and committed to Mr.
Lieutenant of the Tower, Mr. Wroth, Mr. Sands, and others to confer to Morrow
in the Morning in this House at seven of the Clock.

The Bill for Trial of Nisi prius in the County of Middlesex was read the
second time and committed to the former Committees nominated in the Bill for
Jurors.

Three Bills lastly of no great moment had each of them one reading; of which
the first being the Bill against fraudulent Gifts and Conveyances made by the
late Rebels in the North was read the first time.

On Saturday the 25th day of February, the Bill for the County Palatine of
Chester was read the first time and committed unto Mr. Sergeant Lovelace, Mr.
Recorder of London, Mr. French, Mr. Norton, Mr. Snagg, and Mr. Townesend, to
meet at Serjeants-Inn at Mr. Lovelace's Chamber to Morrow in the Afternoon at
three of the Clock.

Five Bills of no great moment had each of them one reading; of which the
fourth being the Bill for Confirmation of Letters Patents was read the second
time, and committed after the reading and passing of the next Bill.

The Bill for the repairing of the Gaol of St Edmunds-Bury, was read the third
time and passed the House.

The Bill for Confirmation of Letters Patents was committed unto all the
Privy Council being of this House, Mr. Captain of the Guard, Mr. Attorney of
the Duchy, Mr. Sergeant Lovelace, and others who were appointed to meet at Mr.
Treasurers Chamber this Afternoon at two of the Clock.

Three Bills also of no great moment had each of them one reading; of which the
third being the Bill touching fraudulent Conveyances made by the late Rebels in
the North Parts, was read the second time and committed unto all the
Privy Council being of this House, Mr. Captain of the Guard, Sir Henry Knivett,
Sir Henry Gates, Sir George Bows, and others to meet this Afternoon at two of
the Clock at Mr Treasurers Chamber.

The Bill for Rogues, etc. was read the second time, and the Provisoes or
Additions to the same Bill had their first reading.

The Bill for Explanation of the Statute of 31 H. 8. was this day amended
according to the request of the Lords in that behalf.

On Monday the 27th day of February, the Bill for the Subsidy, etc. was read
the third time and passed the House, of which Vide on Friday the 10th day,
Thursday the 16th day, and on Monday the 20th day of this instant February
foregoing.

After sundry Reasons and Arguments it was resolved that Edward Smalley Servant
unto Arthur Hall Esquire, shall be brought hither to Morrow by the Sergeant and
set at liberty by Warrant of the Mace, and not by Writ; Vide on Saturday the
10th day of March ensuing.

Mr. Solicitor and Mr. Dr. Barkley did require from the Lords that such six of
this House as are best acquainted with the Bill for Mr. Isley be sent to confer
presently with their Lordships touching the same, whereupon were appointed and
presently sent Mr. Chancellor of the Exchequer, Mr. Sergeant Lovelace, Mr.
Popham, Mr. St Ledger, Mr. Diggs, and Mr. Baber, by whom with Mr. Treasurer and
diverse others were sent up the Bill for the Subsidy with two others of no great
moment, and also the Bill for the Explanation of the Statute of 31 H. 8. with
some amendments.

On Tuesday the 28th day of February, the Bill for the Lady Gray was read the
second and third time and passed the House.

Four other Bills of no great moment had each of them one reading; of which one
being for Chepstow-Bridge, and another for the perpetual maintenance of
Rochester-Bridge, were each of them read the second time, but no mention is
made that they were either Ordered to be engrossed or referred to Committees,
because they had been sent from the Lords on Thursday the 23th day of this
instant February foregoing.

The Bill against Broggers and Drovers was read the first time and committed
unto Mr. Comptroller, Sir Nicholas Arnold, Sir William Winter, Sir Rowland
Hayward, and others who were appointed to meet to Morrow in the Afternoon at
two of the Clock in the Star Chamber.

The Bill for the Haberdashers was read the second time, and a Proviso to the
same Bill was read the first time, and thereupon the Bill was committed unto
Mr. Comptroller, Mr. Treasurer, Mr. Hastings, Mr. Hoddy, Mr. French, Mr.
Alford, and Mr. Norton, to meet to Morrow in the Afternoon at three of the
Clock in the Exchequer Chamber.

Certain Amendments in the Bill of Rogues, etc. reported by Mr. Treasurer upon
the last Committee of the Bill, which amendments were read and thereupon the
Bill Ordered to be engrossed.

Two Bills lastly had each of them their first reading; of which the latter was
the Bill for Trials by Juries.

Edward Smalley Servant unto Arthur Hall Esquire being this day brought to the Bar
in the House by the Sergeant of this House, and accompanied with two Sergeants
of London, was presently delivered from his Imprisonment and Execution
according to the former Judgment of this House, and the said Sergeants of
London discharged of their said Prisoner: and immediately after that the said
Sergeants of London were sequestered out of this House, and the said Edward
Smalley was committed to the charge of the Sergeant of this House. And
thereupon the said Edward Smalley was sequestered till this House should be
resolved upon some former Motions, whether the said Edward Smalley did procure
himself to be Arrested upon the said Execution, in the abusing and contempt of
this House, or not. Vide Mar. 10. Saturday postea.

All the Privy Council being of this House, the Lord Russell, Mr. Captain of
the Guard, Mr. Wilson, Mr. Lieutenant of the Tower, Sir William Winter, Mr.
Sergeant Lovelace, Sir Henry Knivett, Mr. Crook, Mr. Coleby, Mr. Popham, and
Mr. Norton, were appointed to meet upon Friday next in the Afternoon at three
of the Clock in the Exchequer Chamber, but through the great negligence of Fulk
Onslow Esquire, at this time Clerk of the House of Commons, the business about
which the foresaid Members of the House were appointed to meet, does not at all
appear.

On Wednesday the 29th day of February, Seven Bills of no great moment had each
of them one reading; of which one being the Bill for Chepstow-Bridge, another
for Rochester-Bridge, and the third for the Town of Reading, were each of them
read the third time and upon the Question passed the House.

Upon a Motion made by Robert Bainbrigge Gent. one of the Burgesses for the
Borough of..... in the County of..... against one Williams, as well for sundry
unsitting Speeches pronounced by the said Williams in misliking of the present
State and Government of the Realm, and also for threatening and assaulting of
the said Robert Bainbrigge, the Sergeant of this House was thereupon by Order
of this House presently sent for the said Williams to be brought unto this
House, to Answer such matters as shall be objected against him.

Two Bills of no great moment had each of them one reading; of which the second
being the Bill against excess in Apparel was read the first time.

The Petition and Motions made touching the reformation of Discipline in the
Church, was committed only to all the Privy Council of this House. Vide
concerning this matter on Friday the 10th day of March ensuing.

Mr. Solicitor and Mr. Doctor Berkley brought from the Lords four Bills; of
which the first was the Bill for the assurance of the Manor of New Hall to
Thomas Earl of Sussex, the second for the appointing of Justices in the Shires
of Wales, the third concerning Offices found in the Counties Palatines, and the
last for the assurance of certain Lands unto Sir John Ryvers Knight.

All the Privy Council being of this House, the Lord Russell, the Masters of
the Requests, Sir Thomas Scott, Sir Henry Gates, Sir Henry Wallope, and diverse
others were appointed to meet this Afternoon in the Exchequer Chamber, between
two and three of the Clock, and agree touching the nature of the Petition to be
made to the Queens Majesty upon the Motions for reformation of Discipline in
the Church, and that the matter of the Petition so agreed upon: then those of
the Privy Council only to move the same to the Lords of the Privy Council after
report first made thereof to this House. Vide concerning this matter on Friday
the 10th day of March following.

Walter Williams being brought to the Bar confessed that he did strike Mr.
Bainbrigge, and that he offered to strike at him with his Dagger: Whereupon it
was Ordered that he remain in the Sergeants Ward till the Order of this House
be further known: to Morrow Vide.

On Thursday the first day of March, Seven Bills of no great moment had each of
them one reading; of which one being the Bill for the true making of
Woollen-Cloths, another for Kentish and Suffolk Cloths, and another for
toleration of certain Clothiers in the Counties of Somerset, Wilts, and
Gloucester, were each of them read the first time, and thereupon committed to
the former Committees (who were nominated on Thursday the 16th day of February
foregoing) and unto Sir Thomas Scott, Mr. Sergeant Lovelace, Mr. Savile, Mr.
Peacock, Mr. Gargrave, Mr. Mickleborn, Mr. Langley, and Mr. St John, to meet
this Afternoon in the Star Chamber at two of the Clock, as also to conser
touching the unlawful engrossing of Woolls.

Two Bills also had each of them their first reading; of which the second was
the Bill against common Promoters.

Sir Richard Read and Mr. Doctor Vaughan brought from the Lords the Bill for
the payment of Tithes within the Parish of Hallifax, and the other to take away
the benefit of Clergy from Offenders in Rape and Burglary.

Martin Cole one of the Burgesses for Sudbury in the County of Suffolk, was
this day Licensed by Mr. Speaker for his great business to be absent for four
days.

The Bill lastly for setting the poor on work and for avoiding of idleness, was
read the third time and passed the House.

On Friday the second day of March, Six Bills of no great moment had each of
them one reading; of which the second being the Bill for assurance of certain
Lands to Sir John Rivers Knight, was read the second time, but no mention is made
that it was either Ordered to be engrossed or referred to Committees, because
it had been formerly sent from the Lords.

The Bill against wearing of unlawful Weapons was twice read, and committed
thereupon unto Mr. Comptroller, Sir Henry Radcliffe, Sir Thomas Scott, Sir
Henry Knivett, Sir Henry Gates, and others to be considered of presently.

Two Bills also had each of them one reading; of which the second being the
Bill against the buying and selling of rooms and places in Colleges, Schools,
etc. was read the first time.

Mr. Treasurer, one of the Committees for the Petition touching reformation of
the Discipline of the Church, reported that he and the residue of the
Committees have met and agreed upon a Bill to be made for that purpose, which
Bill was then offered and received in the said House, and then read
accordingly. Vide concerning this matter on Friday the 9th day of this instant
March ensuing.

The two Bills, viz. for maintenance of Colleges, and against buying and
selling of rooms and places in Schools were appointed to be considered of
presently by Mr. Chancellor of the Exchequer, Mr. Secretary Smith, Mr. Wilson
Master of the Requests, Mr. Heneage, Mr. Fortescue, and others.

The Bill touching Grants made by the Dean and Chapter of Norwich, was read the
second time and committed unto Mr. Chancellor of the Exchequer, Mr. Secretary
Smith, Mr. Captain of the Guards, and others who were appointed to meet to
Morrow at three of the Clock in the Afternoon in the Exchequer Chamber.

Mr. Doctor Jews and Mr. Dr. Berkley did bring from the Lords the Bill for the
Subsidy of the Clergy.

The Bill for setting the Poor on work and for avoiding of Idleness with two
others of no great moment were sent up to the Lords by Mr. Treasurer and others.

Two Bills of no great moment had each of them one reading; of which the second
being the Bill for toleration of certain Clothiers within the Counties of
Wiltshire, Somerset and Gloucestar, were each of them read the second time and
Ordered to be engrossed.

Mr. Doctor Vaughan and Mr. Dr. Berkley did bring from the Lords the Bill for
Confirmation of an Hospital in Leicester.

Two Bills lastly, had each of them one reading; of which the first being the
Bill for the true making of Woollen-Cloths, was read the second time and
Ordered to be engrossed.

On Saturday the third day of March, Four Bills of no great moment had each of
them one reading; of which the second being the Bill for the Tithes of
Hallifax, was read the second time, but no mention is made whether it was
engrossed or referred to Committees, because it had been sent from the Lords on
Thursday the first day of this instant March foregoing.

The Bill touching the Children of Strangers Parents born in this Realm, was
read the second time and committed unto Mr. Treasurer, Mr. Recorder of London,
Mr. Norton, Mr. Cowper, Mr. Cromwell, Mr. Snagg, Mr. Alford and Mr. Dalton. Mr.
Solicitor and Mr. Sergeant Barham, brought word from the Lords that on Monday
next at Eight of the Clock in the Morning the Lords have appointed to have
Conference with the Committees of this House touching the Bills for
Confirmation of Letters Patents, and the Bill touching the Lands of the late
Rebels in the North parts: Whereupon it was Ordered that the former Committee
for the said Bill of Confirmation of Letters Patents, have added unto them Mr.
Norton, Mr. Topcliffe, and Sir George Bows.

Two Bills lastly had each of them one reading; of which the first being the
Bill for reformation of Errors in Fines and common Recoveries within the County
Palatine of Chester, was read the third time and passed the House.

Post Meridiem.

In the Afternoon seven Bills of no great moment had each of them one reading;
of which the last being the Bill for the Assize of Wood within the City of
London, was read the second time and committed unto Mr. Treasurer, Mr
Lieutenant of the Tower, Sir Rowland Hayward, and others, to confer to Morrow
at three of the Clock in the Afternoon at Mr. Treasurers Chamber.

The Bill for the Hospital in the Town of Leicester was read the first, second
and third time, and passed the House. Quod nota.

The Bill finally for two Justices to be had in Wales, and the County Palatine
of Chester, was read the second time, but no mention is made either that it was
referred to Committees, or Ordered to be engrossed, because it had been sent
from the Lords.

On Monday the 5th day of March, the Bill for the paving of the City of
Chichester was twice read and Ordered to be engrossed.

Seven Bills of no great moment had each of them one reading; of which the
third being the Bill for mending the Highways and Bridges near Oxford, was
read the second time and Ordered to be engrossed.

The Bill for Rochester-Bridge, and the Bill for Trial of nisi prius in the
County of Middlesex, and the Bill for reformation of Errors in Fines and common
Recoveries in the County Palatine of Chester, with four others of no great
moment were sent up to the Lords by Mr. Comptroller and others.

Three Bills also of no great moment had each of them one reading; of which the
third being the Bill for the Artificers, Foreign and Denizens, was read the
first time, and committed unto the Masters of the Requests, Mr. Lieutenant of
the Tower, Mr. Treasurer of the Chamber, and others, to meet at Guild Hall to
Morrow in the Afternoon at three of the Clock.

The Bill touching Inholders, common Cooks and Wine-Sellers, etc. was read the
second time and Ordered to be engrossed.

Mr Doctor Yale and Mr Doctor Berkley did bring from the Lords the Bill
touching Presentations by Lapse with some Amendments, which Bill was before
sent unto them from this House.

The Bill for toleration of certain Clothiers in the Counties of Wilts,
Somerset and Gloucester, was sent up unto the Lords by Mr. Comptroller and
others.

Two Bills also of no great moment had each of them one reading; of which the
second being the Bill against Inholders, etc. was committed unto the former
Committees, and unto Mr Stanhope, Mr Edgcomb, Mr Dalton, Mr Alford, Mr Scone,
and Mr St John, who were appointed to meet here this Afternoon in the Committee
Chamber of this House.

Two Bills of no great moment had each of them their second reading; of which
the first being the Bill touching Goldsmiths, etc. was Ordered to be engrossed.

Post Meridiem.

In the Afternoon the Bill against the wearing and using of unlawful Weapons
was twice read.

The new Bill of Jeofailes was twice read, and Ordered to be engrossed.

The Bill for Trials by Juries was read the second time, and committed unto Mr
Lieutenant of the Tower, Sir Henry Knivet, Sir George Penrudock, Mr Sampoole,
Mr Brown, and others, who were appointed to meet to Morrow at seven of the
Clock in the Morning in the Committee Chamber of this House.

Four Bills lastly had each of them one reading; of which the last being the
Bill against taking and killing of Partridges and Pesants was read the second
time and Ordered to be engrossed.

On Tuesday the 6th day of March, four Bills of no great moment had each of
them one reading; of which the last being the Bill touching the Tanning and
Currying of Leather was read the third time and passed the House, and was sent
up to the Lords by Mr Treasurer and others.

The Bill against the Inning of Salt-Marshes was twice read, and committed unto
Mr Treasurer, Mr Comptroller, Mr Andrews, Sir William Winter, Sir Valentine
Brown, Sir George Penrudock and others, to be considered of presently.

Three Bills also of no great moment had each of them their third reading and
passed the House; of which the second being the Bill for reformation of
Jeofailes, and the third against the abuses of Goldsmiths, were sent up to the
Lords with the Bill for Chepstow, by Mr Comptroller and others.

The Bill for Trial by Juries was Ordered to be engrossed.

On Wednesday the 7th day of March, Two Bills of no great moment had each of
them one reading; of which the first being the Bill for the paving of the City
of Chichester was read the third time, and passed the House.

The Bill for the maintenance of the Colleges in the Universities, and of
Eaton and Winchester, was twice read and Ordered to be engrossed.

The Bill for Butlerage and prisage of Wines was read the first time.

The Bill for collateral Warranties was twice read and committed unto the
Master of the Wardrobe, Sir Henry Knivet, Mr. Sergeant Jeffries, Mr. Colby, Mr.
French, Mr. Snagg, Mr. Lewkenor, and others, to confer this Afternoon.

Peremptory day was given for the Council of the Lady Waynman and her adverse
party, to be here at this House to Morrow next at eight of the Clock in the
Forenoon.

All the Privy Council being of this House, Mr. Captain of the Guard, the
Masters of the Requests, Sir Nicholas Arnold, Mr. Sampoole, and Mr. Cromwell,
were appointed to meet this Afternoon at one of the Clock in the Chequer
Chamber; but it does not appear about what business these foresaid Members of
the House of Commons were appointed to meet.

All the Privy Council being of this House, Mr. Captain of the Guard, Mr.
Sergeant Lovelace and Mr. Sergeant Jeffryes were added to the former Committees
for Fines and Recoveries.

Mr. Pursell, Mr. Glascoe, Mr. Hanmer, Mr. Townesend, Mr. Davies, Mr. Bostock,
Mr. Price, Mr. Aylmer, and Mr. Broughton, were appointed to have Conference
with the Lords this Afternoon touching the Bills for reformation of Errors in
Fines and common Recoveries in the County Palatine of Chester, and in Wales,
and also touching some general Bill for that purpose to be devised.

Mr. Treasurer, Sir Nicholas Arnold, Mr. Cromwell, Mr. Sands, and Mr.
Sampoole, were appointed to confer presently with the Lords touching the Bill
of Rogues.

The Bill for the having of two Justices in the Shires of Wales, was read the
third time and passed the House.

Mr. Doctor Yale and Mr. Doctor Barkley brought from the Lords a Bill for the
restitution in Blood of the Heirs of the Lord Stourton.

The Bill for reformation of Letters Patents was read the third time with some
Amendments.

The Bill to take away the benefit of Clergy from such as commit Rapes and
Burglaries, and touching the purgation of Clerks Convict was thrice read, and
committed unto Sir Henry Knivett, Mr Sergeant Lovelace, Mr Sergeant Jeffries,
Mr Sampoole, Mr Windham, Mr Atkins, Mr Dannet, Mr Diggs, and others.

Mr Doctor Yale and Mr Powle did bring from the Lords a Bill touching certain
Authority given to the Justices of the Queens Majesty's Forests, Chaces, and
Parks, with commendation for expedition.

Mr Sergeant Barham and Mr Doctor Vaughan did bring word from the Lords, that
their Lordships do require that the Committees of this House may confer with
them to Morrow in the Morning before eight of the Clock in the Parliament
Chamber.

The Bill against the abuse of Goldsmiths, the Bill for Confirmation of Letters
Patents, the Bill touching fraudulent Conveyances by the late Rebels in the
North, and the Bill for paving of the City of Chichester, with one other of no
great moment were sent up to the Lords by Mr Comptroller and others.

Post Meridiem.

In the Afternoon an Abstract of a Devise for setting the Poor on work by the
sowing and using of Rape-seed, Hemp Seed, and Flax-seed, was read to this House.

Two Bills of no great moment had each of them their third reading, and passed
the House; of which the first was the Bill for repairing of Highways and
Bridges near Oxford.

Upon the question it was Ordered that Mr Hall be sequestered the House while
the matter touching the supposed contempt done to this House be argued and
debated.

Edward Smalley upon the question was adjudged guilty of contempt, and abusing
of this House by fraudulent practice of procuring himself to be Arrested upon
the Execution of his own assent and intention, to be discharged as well of his
Imprisonment as of the said Execution.

Matthew Kirtleton Schoolmaster to Mr Hall was likewise upon another question
adjudged guilty by this House of like contempt and abusing of this House, in
Confederacy and practice with the said Smalley in the intentions aforesaid.

Upon another question it was adjudged by the House, that the said Smalley be
for his misdemeanor and contempt committed to the Prison of the Tower.

Upon the like question it was also adjudged by this House, that the said
Kirtleton Schoolmaster, be also for his said lewd demeanor and contempt in
abusing of this House committed to the Prison of the Tower.

Upon another question it was also resolved that the Sergeant of this House be
commanded to bring the said Edward Smalley and the said Matthew Kirtleton
Schoolmaster to Mr Hall into the House to Morrow next in the Forenoon to hear
and receive their said Judgments accordingly.

And further that the matter wherein the said ARthur Hall Esquire is supposed to be
touched either in the privity of the said matter of arrest, or in the abusing
of the Committees of this House, shall be deferred to be further dealt in till
to Morrow. Vide concerning this matter on Saturday the 10th day of this instant
March ensuing.

On Thursday the 8th day of March, Five Bills of no great moment had each of
them one reading; of which the last being the Bill for maintenance of the
Colleges in the Universities, and of Eaton and Winchester, was read the third
time and passed with two Provisoes added.

Mr Sergeant Lovelace, Mr Yelverton, Mr Boyer, Mr Layton, and Mr Robert Bows,
were sent to the Lords to confer presently touching the amendments in the Bill
of fraudulent Conveyances made by the late Rebels in the North.

Two Bills also had each of them one reading; of which the first being the Bill
against buying and selling of rooms and places in Colleges and Schools, and
the second for maintenance of Colleges in the Universities, and of Eaton and
Winchester, had each of them their third reading and passed the House, and were
sent up to the Lords with two others by Secretary Smith and others.

The new Bill for Highways was read the first time and committed to certain of
the House to be presently amended.

The Bill for certain Authority to be given to the Justices of the Queens
Majesty's Forests, Chaces, Parks and Warrens, was read the first time. Vide de
ista materia in fine hujus diei.

Mr Doctor Barkley and Mr Powle did bring from the Lords a Bill entitled an Act
for the Lord Viscount Hayward of Bindon, and Henry Hayward Esquire, and Francis
his Wife, with commendation for expedition.

Two Bills had each of them one reading; of which the first being the Bill
against abuses of License for transportation of prohibited Wares was read the
first time.

Mr Doctor Vaughan and Mr Doctor Yale brought from the Lords the Bill for
setting the Poor on work and for avoiding of Idleness, with certain amendments
and a Proviso.

Mr Treasurer, one of the Committees in the Lady Wainman's Cause, reported that
both the Parties have submitted themselves to the Arbitrament of the Lord
Treasurer, the Lord Chamberlain, the Earl of Leicester, Mr Treasurer, Mr
Comptroller, Mr Chancellor of the Duchy, and Mr Captain of the Guard, or the
most part of them to be made within one Year next after the Session of this
present Session of Parliament, for the performance and accomplishment of the
same Arbitrament.

A Proviso with some Amendments was offered to the Bill for reformation of
Inholders, common Cooks and Tavern Keepers, and being twice read after the
Question was upon the Division of the House, by the advantage of the number of
forty persons, Ordered to be engrossed and added to the Bill, and then
afterward upon another Question and like Division of the House, the Bill with
the Proviso was dashed with the difference of twenty eight persons.

Post Meridiem.

In the Afternoon the Master of the Rolls, and Mr Sergeant Barham did bring
from the Lords a Bill for the appointing of Wharfs and Keys for the unlading
and discharging of Merchandises and withal a Message from them that some of
this House may be appointed to have Conference with some such of their
Lordships as shall be thought meet touching such private Bills in both Houses,
as upon their Conference together shall be thought fittest to be Examined:
whereupon it was Ordered that twelve of this House shall be appointed for that
purpose, viz. Mr Treasurer, Mr Captain of the Guard, Mr Wilson Master of the
Requests, Sir Henry Ratcliffe, Sir Rowland Hayward, Sir Thomas Scott, Sir John
Thynne, Sir Henry Wallope, Sir George Penrudock, Mr Popham, Mr Sampoole, and Mr
Yelverton.

The Bill concerning Authority given to the Justices of the Queens Majesty's
Forests, Chaces and Parks, was read the second time and committed this day
afterward.

The two Bills for Denizens and the Bill for Presentations by Lapse being
amended, were sent up to the Lords by Mr Treasurer and others.

Mr Sergeant Barham and Mr Doctor Vaughan brought word from the Lords, that
their Lordships do require that the Committees of this House may confer with
them to Morrow in the Morning before eight of the Clock in the Parliament
Chamber.

Mr Comptroller Mr Chancellor of the Exchequer, Mr Captain of the Guard, Sir
Henry Gates, Sir Henry Ratcliffe, Sir Thomas Barrington, Sir Nicolas Arnold,
Sir Henry Knivett, Mr Recorder of London, Mr Sampoole, Mr Stanhoppe, Mr Crook,
Mr Snagg, Mr John Vaughan, Mr Sergeant Jeffries, Mr Sergeant Lovelace, Mr
Edward Horsey, Mr Robert Wroth, Mr Colby, Mr Topclyffe, Mr Bowyer, Mr John St
John, Mr Dawney, Mr Robert Colshill, Mr Digbie, and Mr Birkhed, were appointed
in Committee for the Bill concerning certain Authority given to the Justices of
the Queens Majesty's Forests, Chaces, Parks and Warrens.

Nota, That this Bill having been sent down from the Lords to the House of
Commons on Wednesday the 7th day of this instant March foregoing, should
without all question never have been referd to Committees upon the second
reading this instant Thursday, except the said House of Commons had taken such
just exceptions at the same, as they afterward made known to a Committee of
the Lords, and by reason of which finally the same was stopped from further
passing. The further carriage and proceeding of which business, being wholly
omitted in the Original Journal Book of the House of Commons through the great
negligence of Fulk Onslow Esquire at this time Clerk of the same, I have thought
good to supply it out of a written Memorial or Copy thereof I had by me;
because it may appear upon what just grounds and solid reasons the Members of
the said House did refuse to pass the said Bill: and although it does not
certainly appear whether the said Proceedings in the said Bill between the
Committees of either House were this day or no, yet I have referred it
thereunto as the most probable and likely time, in respect that there is no
further mention made of this Bill or business in either of the Original
Journal-Books of the Upper House or House of Commons, upon any ensuing day
during this present Session of Parliament. These things being thus premised the
foresaid Memorial or written Discourse of this business does now ensue to be
inserted.

The Committees before-named, having upon deliberate consideration of the
parts, and of the scope of the said Bill (touching Authority to be given to the
Justices of the Queens Majesty's Forests, etc. found the same not convenient to
proceed, did nevertheless out of their respect unto the Lords from whom the
Bill had been sent down, desire first to satisfy them before they utterly
refused and dashed the said Bill; and did thereupon send unto their Lordships
(who as it appears by the Original Journal Book of the Upper House did this
Afternoon sit) to offer them Conference, which they accordingly accepted: and
thereupon there did assemble in a place appointed as Commissioners (or rather
as Committees) for the Lords the Earl of Sussex, the Earl of Rutland, the Earl
of Leicester, the Lord Gray of Wilton, and the Lord Hunsdon, having for their
assistance standing by, the two Chief Justices and the Queens Attorney General;
upon these the foresaid Committees of the House of Commons by Order of the same
House gave their attendance, and by Sir Walter Mildmay Knight, Chancellor of the
Exchequer, the second of the said Committees, in the name and by consent of the
rest, said to the Lords in effect as follows, viz.

That whereas a Bill touching the enlargement of the Justices of
Forest-Authority had passed from their Lordships, and was sent to the House of
Commons, the same had received there two readings, and upon the second reading
was greatly impugned by many Arguments made against it; nevertheless the
respect they had to their Lordships moved them to stay any further proceeding
therein to the hazard of the Bill, until by some Conference with their
Lordships the House in such things as were objected, might be satisfied. To
that end he said, the House of Commons had sent them to attend upon their
Lordships, and so entering into the matter said, That of many things spoken to
the hindrance of the Bill they would trouble their Lordships but with some few,
such as they had noted to have been of most value; by which he said their
Lordships should find that the House of Commons did take the Bill to be
unnecessary chargeable, dangerous, obscure.

For the first, that whereas in the preamble of the Bill it was pretended that
one principal cause of this Act was, that the Justices of the Forests having no
Authority to sit but within the several Forests, which to execute in their own
persons could not be done through the distances of the Countries, and through
the great charges that would follow in expenses, if men of their calling should
be driven to travel once every third year to keep their sittings in so many
several places, by means whereof the Justice Seats were greatly delayed, and
seldom holden, whereby the Offenders either by general Pardons comeing between,
or by the Death of the Parties did escape unpunished: to that he said all these
defects were sufficiently helped by Laws, heretofore provided. In the time of
King Henry the Eighth, it was Enacted, that both the Justices of the Forests on
this side Trent, and the Justices of the Forests beyond Trent, might make in
every Forest a Deputy, that should have in all things like Authority to
themselves; and therefore seeing they had, and usually had made Deputies men of
less degree than they are, and most commonly inhabiting the Countries where the
Forests do lie, there was no necessity that the Justices in their own Persons
should ride, but those his Substitutes might very well perform the service with
a small charge: and so there appeared no cause for that respect to make this
Law, for it might be supplied otherwise sufficiently.

For the second, he said that whereas by this new Law, the Justice should have
power to open the Swainmote Books at his pleasure, and to convent before him
the Offenders at such time and place as he thought good, the same must needs
prove a very chargeable matter to the Subjects; for men being compellable only
to appear and answer in the County where the Forest lies, and where for the
most part they abide, and there to receive their Trial: if now they shall be
driven to appear and answer in any place, and at any time where and when the
Justices shall appoint them, it may easily be seen how far greater charge this
will breed to the Subject both in travel, expense, and loss of time, than
heretofore has been used; chargeable besides it would be to such as should
happen to be impannelled upon Juries for trial of offenses, if they should be
driven to come out of the Forests, to appear before the Justice in any place
which he shall assign, contrary to the ancient Laws heretofore Ordained for
such causes.

For the third, he said that if the Justice sending for the Swainmote Books,
and opening them should proceed to the punishment of the Offenders according to
such Presentiments as he should find there, that might prove very dangerous to
the Subject, and especially to such as dwell within or near any Forests; for
those Presentiments being made by the Oath of the Keepers, do as often proceed
upon suspicion and upon malice, as upon any good or sufficient ground; and then
if they be so peremptory to the Offenders, as some men think they are, or if
the trial be not very indifferent which taken out of the Country may be
doubted, it is easily seen how perilous that will be to the Subject: for either
the party shall be forced to submit himself to the discretion of the Justice,
or else abide such Trial as he shall not be able to endure.

Besides, whereas the Queen most graciously does use to grant oftentimes
general Pardons by Act of Parliament, whereby the Subjects of the Land are
discharged of far greater offenses than these; such as might happen to offend
this way, or to be brought in Question for the same, should never be partakers
of that grace, which all other Subjects do enjoy, but by yearly vexation be in
danger of trouble and charge almost without hope to be released, although the
offenses be (as oftentimes they are) very small and slenderly proved: whereas
now the Justice cannot by the Law keep his Seat, but once in three years; and
if a Pardon come in the mean time all those offenses are discharged.

Touching the last and fourth point, he said in making of Laws, one principal
and special care is to be taken, that nothing pass in dark words, but that it
may be clear and evidence to the understanding of the Makers, thereby to know
to what they bind themselves and their Posterity; the contrary whereof was to
be doubted in this Bill as it was penned, wherein Authority should be given to
the Justices of the Forests to proceed in the Execution of punishment and other
matters, not only according to the Laws but also according to the Customs,
Usages, and Ordinances of the Forests; which latter words are very obscure, and
therefore dangerous to pass in that form, for what the Laws of the Forests are,
such as be established by Authority of Parliament, are evident and open to all
men, and every Subject is bound to take knowledge of them, but what the
Customs, Usages and Ordinances of the Forest be, and how far these words may
extend is very doubtful and uncertain, the same being only known to Officers
and Ministers of Forests, and are so far from the common knowledge of other
men, as few or none that are Learned in the Laws of the Realm, have any
understanding in them: so as if any Subject of the Land should be Impeached for
an offense committed in the Forests, he shall not be able to receive advice by
Council in the Law for his reasonable defense; and therefore under those
general words to bind the Subject to those things that neither they do nor may
easily get knowledge of: The House of Commons do think it a matter very
inconvenient, and do also think that the Forest Laws already established by
Parliament, are strict enough, and being put in due Execution may suffice
without any further addition to increase the burden of them.

To these Objections the Earl of Sussex a wise man of good understanding in
Forest matters, being Justice of the Forests on this side Trent, said for
Answer in effect as follows:

To the first confessing that by Authority of Parliament the Justices of the
Forests might appoint their Deputies, said, nevertheless that those also could
not hold their sittings without great charge, and their doings shall not be so
obeyed, nor esteemed as the Acts and Proceedings of the Justices themselves;
and therefore thought this Law necessary.

To the second, third and fourth, he said that there was no meaning by the
Lords that past the Bill to bring upon the Subjects any of those inconveniences
that were noted by the House of Commons; howsoever the Bill might be penned
contrary to their intentions, and yet he thought that the words were
misconceived and drawn to a harder sense than there was cause. Nevertheless he
said the Lords could be well contented that the House of Commons should reform
such things in the Bill, touching those points, as they should find convenient,
so as the same were done with good consideration, and upon sufficient cause,
whereof they doubted not.

This being the substance of the Conference, it was the next day reported by
one of the Committees to the House of Commons: Whereupon the Speaker moved the
said House to appoint some to amend those things which the Lords had yielded to
have reformed, that so the Bill might pass: but the whole House (a very few
excepted) said they would hear no more of it, and so it stayed without any
further proceeding, because it appeared the House of Commons did not think
their Objections sufficiently answered by the Lords.

This foregoing proceeding of the two Houses in the abovementioned Bill,
touching Authority to be given to the Justices of her Majesty's Forests, etc.
being transcribed out of the Copy thereof I had by me; now follows the next
days Passages out of the Original Journal Book of the House of Commons.

On Friday the 9th day of March, the Bill for restitution in Blood of the Lord
Norris was twice read.

The Bill for re-edifying of the Town of Cringleford near unto the City of
Norwich, was read the third time and passed the House, and was sent up to the
Lords with the Bill for the Hospital in the Town of Leicester by Mr Treasurer
and others.

The Bill touching Suffolk Cloths and Essex Cloths, was read the first time and
committed unto Mr Secretary Smith, Mr Lieutenant of the Tower, Sir Nicholas
Arnold, and others to have Conference touching the double searching of Cloths
generally, now presently in the Committee-Chamber.

The Bill for Confirmation of the Subsidy of the Clergy was read the second
time; but no mention is made that it was either Ordered to be engrossed or
referred to Committees, because it had been formerly sent from the Lords.

Mr Chancellor of the Exchequer touching the Petition for reformation of
Discipline in the Church, did bring word from the Lords that their Lordships
having moved the Queens Majesty touching the said Petition, her Highness
answered their Lordships that her Majesty before the Parliament had a care to
provide in that case of her own disposition; and at the beginning of this
Session her Highness had Conference therein with some of the Bishops, and gave
them in Charge to see due reformation thereof, wherein as her Majesty thinks,
they will have good consideration according unto her pleasure and express
Commandment in that behalf: So did her Highness most graciously and honorably
declare further, that if the said Bishops should neglect or omit their Duties
therein, then her Majesty by her Supreme Power and Authority over the Church of
England, would speedily see such good redress therein as might satisfy the
expectation of her loving Subjects to their good contentation, which Message
and Report was most thankfully and joyfully received by the whole House with
one accord. And immediately thereupon John Crook Esquire, one of the Knights
for the County of Buckingham, took occasion in most humble and dutiful wise to
make a Motion unto the House for another Petition to be moved to the Lords for
persuading of her Majesty for Marriage. Vide concerning Church Discipline on
Wednesday the 29th day of February preceding, and on Friday the second day of
this instant March foregoing, and touching the Queens Marriage on Monday the
12th day of the same Month of March ensuing.

The new Bill also for the Lady Wainman was read the first time.

Post Meridiem.

In the Afternoon the Bill for the Lord Viscount Howard of Bindon was twice
read.

Six other Bills of no great moment had each of them one reading; of which one
being the Bill for restitution in Blood of Henry Lord Norris, another for
Confirmation of the Subsidy granted by the Clergy, and a third for Preservation
of Pheasants and Partridges, were each of them read the third time and passed
the House.

On Saturday the 10th day of March, Two Bills had each of them their third
reading, and passed the House; of which the first was for repressing of Murders
and Felonies in the Counties of Northumberland and Cumberland.

Five Bills were sent up to the Lords from the House of Commons; of which one
was the Bill for setting the Poor on work and for avoiding of Idleness, and
another for preservation of Pheasants and Partridges.

The Bill against excess in Apparel was read the second time, and committed
unto all the Privy Council being of this House, Mr Captain of the Guard, Mr
Treasurer of the Chamber, the Masters of Requests, and others who were
appointed to meet at the Exchequer-Chamber at two of the Clock in the Afternoon.

Mr Doctor Barkley and Mr Powle did bring from the Lords a Bill for the
Hospital of St Cross, with special commendation for expediting thereof, and
Declaration of the assent of the Parties given in that behalf before their
Lordships.

Two Bills of no great moment had each of them one reading; of which the first
being the Bill for the Lady Wainman, was read the third time and passed the
House.

Mr Sergeant Barham and Mr Doctor Vaughan brought from the Lords two Bills with
Amendments and Provisoes, which before passed the House, viz. the Bill for
repairing and amending of the Bridges and Highways near Oxford, and the Bill
for maintenance of Colleges in the Universities, and of Eaton and Winchester.

The Bill against Arthur Hall Esquire, Edward Smalley and Matthew Kirtleton his
Servant, was read the first time.

Edward Smalley Servant unto Arthur Hall Esquire appearing in this House this day
at the Bar, it was pronounced unto him by Mr Speaker in the name and by the
appointment and order of this House, for Execution of the former Judgment of
this House awarded against him, That he the said Edward Smalley shall be
forthwith committed Prisoner from this House to the Tower of London, and there
remain for one whole Month next ensuing from this present day; and further
after the same Month expired, until such time as good and sufficient assurance
shall be had and made for payment of 100l of good and lawful money of England,
to be paid unto William Hewet Administrator of the goods, Chattels, and Debts
of Melchisedech Malory Gent. deceased upon the first day of the next Term,
according to the former Order in that behalf by this House made and set down,
and also forty Shillings for the Sergeants Fees; the notice of which assurance
for the true payment of the said hundred pounds in form aforesaid, to be
certified unto Mr Lieutenant of the Tower by Mr Recorder of London before any
delivery or setting at liberty of the said Edward Smalley to be in any wise
had, or made at any time after the Expiration of the said Month, as is
aforesaid; and that he shall not be delivered out of Prison before such notice
certified, whether the same be before the said first day of the next Term, or
after. Vide concerning this matter on Thursday the 16th day, Monday the 20th
day, Wednesday the 22th day, Monday the 27th day, and on Tuesday the 28th day
of February preceding; as also on Wednesday the 7th day of this instant March
foregoing.

Post Meridiem.

In the Afternoon the Bill for Butlerage and Prisage of Wines was read the
second time, and upon the Question and Division of the House dashed.

Three Bills were sent up to the Lords from the House of Commons; of which one
was the Bill for taking away the benefit of Clergy from persons Convict of Rape
and Burglary.

Mr Doctor Vaughan and Mr. Doctor Barkley brought word from the Lords, that
their Lordships do desire to have Conference with some of this House presently.

The Bill for restitution in Blood of the Heirs of the Lord Stourton was twice
read; which said Bill was doubtless at this time but once read, or at least it
stood but for the first reading, and was entered through negligence, for it had
its second reading on Monday the 12th day of this instant March, and was
thereupon committed, and had lastly its third reading upon Tuesday the 13th day
of the same Month and so passed the House; with which also agrees a certain
written Memorial or Copy of the Carriage of this business between the two
Houses, in respect that it occasioned much dispute betwixt them, as see more at
large on Wednesday the 14th day of the foresaid March ensuing.

Two Bills lastly of no great moment had each of them one reading; of which the
second being the Bill for the Hospital of St Cross was read three times and
passed the House.

On Monday the 12th day of March, Two Bills of no great moment had each of them
their third reading; of which the first being the Bill for the Lord Viscount
Bindon, upon the Question passed the House.

Mr. Captain of the Guard declaring her Majesty's..... but what should here
follow is wholly omitted through the great negligence of Fulk Onslow Esquire,
at this time Clerk of the House of Commons, in the Original Journal Book
thereof, although there were one whole blank page left under the foresaid words
to have inserted such matter as ought here to have followed; of which the want
will be the less, in respect that I had very happily by me a written draught or
memorial of the very business here omitted, as I have had in many other places
in the transcribing of the Journals of her Majesty's Reign for this business,
was no other than a Declaration of her Majesty's Goodness and Clemency in
restoring this day unto the House, and to his own Liberty, Peter Wentworth
Esquire, who had been Committed to Prison on Thursday the 9th day of February
in the beginning of this Session of Parliament, which said Declaration or
Discourse does now in its due place follow, the first man that spoke being
Christopher Hatton Esquire, Captain of the Guard.

Mr. Captain of the Guard did first shortly declare and make report unto the
House, that whereas a Member of the same had the first day of this Session,
which was the 8th day of February last past, uttered in a prepared Speech
diverse offensive matters touching her Majesty, and had for the same been sent
Prisoner to the Tower by the House, yet that her Majesty was now graciously
pleased to remit her just occasioned displeasure for the said offense, and to
refer the enlargement of the party to the House, which was most thankfully
accepted by the same upon the said report.

And thereupon Sir Walter Mildmay Knight, Chancellor of the Exchequer, spoke as
follows:

That by this whole Action and by her Majesty's dealing in this cause we had
just occasion to consider,

These three things. 1. Her Majesty's good and clement nature. 2. Her respect
to us. 3. And our Duty toward her.


Touching the first, that Sovereign Princes placed by God, are to be honored
with all humble and dutiful reverence, both in word and deed, especially if
they be good and virtuous, such as our most gracious Sovereign is, a Princess
that has governed this Realm so many years, so quietly, so justly, and
providently; which being true, as no man can deny, then see how great an
offense this was to reprove so good and gracious a Queen so unjustly, and that
to be done not by any common person abroad, but by a Member of this House; and
not in any private or secret place, but openly in this most honorable Assembly
of the Parliament, being the Highest Court and Council of the Realm. And
thereby see also her most gracious and good nature, that so mercifully and so
easily can remit so great an offense, a thing rarely found in Princes of so
great Estate, that use commonly to think themselves touched in honor if they
should pass over smaller injuries so lightly: the greater is her Majesty's
Commendation and the more are we bound to thank God for her.

Secondly, We may see what gracious respect her Majesty had to us, that
notwithstanding the just cause that was given her to punish severely so
great'an offense; yet the favor that she had conceived toward us, proceeding
from the just trial of our dutiful affections toward her, had so qualified her
displeasure as she was contented for our sakes to pardon the whole, and that so
freely as she would not at any time think of it again (for those were her
words) a mavelous grace toward us and never hereafter on our parts to be
forgotten, the rather for that the same proceeded merely from her self, thereby
preventing the Suit which we in all humbleness might have made unto her.

Thirdly, that for so gracious a dealing it was our bounden Duties to yield
unto her Majesty our most humble and hearty thanks, and to beseech Almighty God
to enlarge her days as the only stay of our felicity; and not only so but to
learn also by this Example how to behave our selves hereafter; and not under
the pretense of liberty to forget our bounden duty to so gracious a Queen: true
it is, that nothing can be well concluded in a Council where there is not
allowed in debating of Causes brought in deliberation, Liberty and Freedom of
Speech; otherwise if in Consultation men be either interrupted or terrified so
as they cannot, nor dare not speak their Opinions freely, like as that Council
cannot but be reputed for a servife Council; even so all the Proceedings
therein shall be rather to satisfy the wills of a few, than to determine that
which shall be just and reasonable. But herein we may not forget to put a
difference between liberty of Speech, and licentious Speech; for by the one men
deliver their Opinions freely, and with this caution, that all be spoken
pertinently, modestly, reverently and discreetly; the other contrariwise
utters all impertinently, rashly, arrogantly and irreverently, without
respect of person, time, or place: and though freedom of Speech has always
been used in this great Council of Parliament, and is a thing most necessary to
be preserved amongst us; yet the same was never nor ought to be extended so
far, as though a man in this House may speak what and of whom he list. The
contrary whereof both in our own days, and in the days of our Predecessors, by
the punishment of such inconsiderate and disorderly Speakers, has appeared.
And so to return, Let this serve us for an Example to beware that we offend not
in the like hereafter, lest that in forgetting our duties so far we may give
just cause to our gracious Sovereign to think that this her Clemency has given
occasion of further boldness: and thereby so much grieve and provoke her, as
contrary to her most gracious and mild consideration, she be constrained to
change her natural Clemency into necessary and just severity; a thing that he
trusted should never happen amongst wise and dutiful men, such as the Members
of this House are thought always to be.

Between which Speech and the reftoring of the said Mr Wentworth unto the House
(although it be not mentioned in the before-cited written Memorial of the said
Speech I had by me) as appears plainly by the Original Journal Book of the
House of Commons, these ensuing Passages intervened in the said House as
follows, viz.

Mr Treasurer, Mr John Thynne, Sir Nicholas Arnold, Sir Henry Gate, Mr Marsh
and Mr Cromwell, were sent to the Lords for Conference presently touching the
reforming of some amendments of this House in the Bill, which came from the
Lords for taking away the benefit of the Clergy from persons Convict of Rape
and Burglary.

Mr Doctor Vaughan and Mr Doctor Barkley did bring from the Lords the Bill for
preservation of Pheasants and Partridges.

All the Privy-Councel being of this House, the Lord Russell, Mr Captain of the
Guard, the Masters of Requests, Mr Treasurer of the Chamber, the Master of the
Wardrobe, the Master of the Jewel-House, Sir Henry Knivett, Sir Thomas Scott,
Sir John Thynne, Sir William Winter, Mr Crook, Mr Popham, Mr Yelverton, Mr
Norton, Mr Sampoole, Mr Alford, and Mr Skinner, were appointed to meet this
Afternoon at two of the Clock in the Exchequer Chamber, touching Conference for
the manner of Petition to be made unto the Queens Majesty touching Marriage.
Vide on Friday the 9th day of this instant March foregoing, and on Wednesday,
March the 14th in the Afternoon ensuing.

These intervening Passages being thus transcribed out of the Original
Journal Book of the House of Commons, now follows the manner of the restoring
of the aforesaid Peter Wentworth Esquire, being partly transcribed out of the
abovesaid Original Journal Book, and partly out of the beforementioned written
Memorial or Copy thereof in manner and form ensuing.

Mr Peter Wentworth was brought by the Sergeant at Arms that attended the
House, to the Bar within the same, and after some Declaration made unto him by
Mr Speaker in the name of the whole House both of his own great fault and
offense, and also of her Majesty's great and bountiful mercy showed unto him,
and after his humble Submission upon his Knees acknowledging his fault, and
craving her Majesty's Pardon and Favor, he was received again into the House,
and restored to his place to the great contentment of all that were present.

This business of Mr Wentworth being thus at large set down, now follows a
great part of the residue of this days Passages out of the Original
Journal Book of the House of Commons it self.

The Bill for the Lord Stourton was read the third time, in setting down of
which Bill it seems the time of the reading is erroneously entered; for this
was doubtless the second reading, and that the third as appears plainly by
the Original Journal Book it self, was not until Tuesday the 13th day of this
instant March ensuing, when the Bill also passed, and it is the rather probable
that this was but the second reading as is also set down in a written Memorial
of this business I had by me, in respect that it was upon this reading spoken
unto, 'and referred to Committees: but as it should seem before the said Bill
was agitated in the House, or referred to Committees, this business intervened
which is Entered in the Original Journal Book of the House of Commons in manner
and form following.

Mr Doctor Jews and Mr Doctor Yale did bring from the Lords the Bill touching
taking away the benefit of the Clergy from Persons Convict of Rape and Burglary
to be amended in the former addition of amendment thereof by this House;
whereupon the same being presently amended, was together with the Bill of
Addition to the former Statutes for amending and repairing of Highways, the
Bill with the Amendments and Proviso for the repairing of the Bridges and
Highways near unto the City of Oxford, the Bill for the Hospital of St Cross
near Winchester, and the Bill for the Lord Viscount Howard of Bindon, sent up
to the Lords by Mr Secretary Smith and others, with the Bill also for
maintenance of the Universities, and of the Colleges of Eaton and Winchester
to be reformed in the Amendments of their Lordships in the same Bill.

Which business being over-passed, as it is inserted out of the Original
Journal Book of the House of Commons, now follows the dispute in the House upon
the foresaid second reading of the Lord Stourton's Bill, which is supplied out
of a written Memorial or Copy of that business I had by me with very little
alteration or addition.

It was first alleged in the House of Commons against the further proceeding
of the Bill for the restitution in Blood of the Lord Stourton (whose Father was
Attainted of Murder, and thereby his Blood corrupted) by some in the said
House, that the said party who now sued to be restored in Blood, had before
given cause for men to think that he would not hereafter be worthy of so much
favor, and by some other, that there wanted in the Bill sufficient provision
for such as had been Purchasers from his Father, Grandfather, and other his
Ancestors.

To the first Objection it was said in the House, That seeing her Majesty had
so graciously yielded to his Petition, there was no doubt but she was well
satisfied in all such things as might touch him, and therefore no cause that
this House should mislike her gracious Favors to be extended to any of her
Subjects in such Cases; but rather to hope that he being a young Nobleman would
prove a good Servant to her Majesty and the Realm, as diverse of his Ancestors
had done.

The second Objection was thought worthy of consideration, That if the saving,
which was already in the Bill, were not sufficient, there might be other
provision added.

This dispute concerning the foresaid Bill being thus transcribed out of the
foresaid written Memorial or Copy thereof I had by me, now follows the
Committees names who were appointed thereupon out of the Original Journal Book
of the House of Commons, being as follows.

Mr Chancellor of the Exchequer, the Master of the Wardrobe, Mr Recorder of
London, Mr Norton, Mr Sampoole, Mr Dalton, Mr Savile, Mr Marsh, Mr Yelverton,
Mr Popham, Mr Stanhope, Mr Colbie, and Mr Broughton.

The Bill against abusing of Licenses to transport forbidden Wares, was
delivered to Mr Comptroller.

Post Meridiem.

In the Afternoon five Bills of no great moment had each of them one reading;
of which the second being the Bill touching Inquisitions and Offices to be
taken within the Counties Pallatine, and the third being the Bill touching
Wharfs and Keys, were each of them read the second time; but no mention is
made that they were either Ordered to be engrossed or referred to Committees,
because they had been formerly sent from the Lords.

The former Committees for the Bill of Apparel (who were appointed on Saturday
the 10th day of this instant March foregoing) were sent up to the Lords for
Conference as well in that Bill, as in the Bill for preservation of Pheasants
and Partridges.

Thus far out of the Original Journal Book of the House of Commons; that which
follows touching the proceeding of the Committees in the Bill for restitution
in Blood of the Heirs of the Lord Stourton is inserted out of that large
Memorial or written Discourse of the whole Carriage of that business I had by
me, being prout sequitur.

The Committees reading deliberately the Bill and the whole Contents thereof,
partly upon causes alleged in the House, and partly upon causes remembered
among themselves, took the saving in the Bill not to be sufficient, but added a
Proviso unto it, the special point whereof was to bar the Lord Stourton that he
should not take advantage of any error that might happen to be in any Fine,
Recovery, or other Conveyance, passed by his Father or his Ancestors, but he
should be in that respect as though his Blood were not restored; in which State
he can bring no Writ of Error. The occasion of which Proviso grew chiefly, for
that the Lords had within few days before dashed a Bill that passed in the
House of Commons for the helping of such Errors; whereupon they thought it
dangerous to give that scope to any man that should be restored in Blood: and
therefore they added such a Proviso both to this Bill and to another Bill of
the like tenor that did concern one Anthony Mayny of Kent Esquire.

During the time of this Conference of the Committees the Lord Stourton being
informed how his Case was Ordered in the House of Commons, came to the place
where the Committees sat, and desired that himself and his Council might be
heard, which they allowed him of their own discretion without the privity of
the House: his Council labored to show to the Committees, that the saving
already in the Bill was sufficient, so as they then needed no addition of any
other Proviso: but being answered to all that he said he could not much reply,
but seemed to be satisfied.

After which the Committees having agreed upon a Proviso repaired unto the
House and made a report thereof; but the Lord Stourton nothing contented
therewithal, procured immediately a Message from the Lords to the House of
Commons in his favor; which Message being more fully set down in the Original
Journal Book of the House of Commons than in that written Memorial or Discourse
of this said cause I had by me (out of which the foregoing proceedings are
transcribed) I have thought it better to supply it out of the same in manner
and form following, viz.

Mr Sergeant Barham and Mr Doctor Vaughan did bring from the Lords four Bills,
viz. for restitution in Blood of Anthony Mayney Esquire, the Bill for
reformation of abuses in Goldsmiths, the Bill to give Costs and Charges to the
Defendant that shall be wrongfully vexed by slanderous and untrue Suits, and
the Bill for relief of Vicars, with a Message also from their Lordships that
the Committees of this House appointed for Conference with their Lordships in
the Bill of Apparel, may also have Commission from this House to show unto
their Lordships the reasons which did move this House to deal so hardly in the
Bill, which being signed by her Majesty passed their Lordships for the
restitution in Blood of the Lord Stourton being a Nobleman, and seeking but the
same course and form of restitution which other Noblemen in like cases have
done, and had heretofore; which Message being opened unto the House was not
well liked of, but thought perilous and prejudicial to the Liberties of this
House: Whereupon it was resolved by this House that no such reason should be
rendered, nor any of this House to be appointed unto any such Commission. Vide
plus concerning this business on Wednesday the 14th day of this instant March
ensuing.

Two Bills lastly had each of them their first reading; of which the first was
the Bill for restitution in Blood of Anthony Mayney Esquire

On Tuesday the 13th day of March, the Bill for restitution in Blood of Anthony
Mayney Esquire was twice read, and a Proviso to the same Bill was read three times.

Mr Solicitor and Mr Powle did bring from the Lords a Bill for the annexing of
Gateside to New Castle, and withal a Message from their Lordships to desire
Conference with such of this House, as this House shall appoint touching
Conference with their Lordships for the Bill of the Lord Stourton, which their
Lordships do hear has had offers of Provisoes or some other thing to the stay
of the proceeding of the said Bill: Whereupon the said Mr Solicitor and Mr
Powle being called into this House received Answer, that by the resolution of
this House according to the ancient Liberties and Privileges of this House,
Conference is to be required by that Court, which at the time of the Conference
demanded shall be possessed of the Bill, and not of any other Court: And
further that this House being now possessed of the Bill, and minding to add
some amendment to the said Bill, will (if they see cause and think meet) pray
Conference therein with their Lordships themselves, and else not. Vide
concerning this matter on Wednesday the 14th day of this instant March ensuing.

Two Bills of no great moment had each of them one reading; of which the first
being being the Bill against the excess of Apparel, was read the second time
and Ordered to be engrossed.

Mr Attorney General and Mr Solicitor did bring from the Lords the Bill of the
Queens Majesty's most gracious general and free Pardon.

Mr Treasurer, Mr. Chancellor of the Exchequer, Mr. Secretary Walsingham, Mr.
Captain of the Guards, Sir Nicholas Arnold, Sir Henry Gate, Mr. Snagg, Mr.
Grimsditch, and diverse others were appointed to confer in the Bill touching
Wharfs and Keys in the Chequer-Chamber immediately after Dinner this present
day.

Mr. Sergeant Barham and Mr. Powle did bring word from the Lords, that their
Lordships did desire to have the former Committees in the Bill for Leather, to
confer with their Lordships presently touching the same Bill, whereof they
specially pray that Mr. Marsh may be one: whereupon the said Committees were
sent presently, and the Bill of restitution in Blood of Anthony Mayney Esquire,
was sent up to the Lords by Mr. Treasurer and the said others.

The Bill against the abuses of Goldsmiths was read the second time, but no
mention is made that it was either Ordered to be engrossed or referred to
Committees; because it had been formerly sent from the Lords on the day
immediately foregoing.

Mr. Doctor Barkley and Mr. Powle did bring from the Lords the Bill touching
the Confirmation of an Arbitrament to be made between Richard Hudleston
Esquire, and Dame Isabell Wainman on the one part, and Francis Wainman
Gentleman on the other part.

Mr. Treasurer, Mr. Secretary Smith, Mr. Chancellor of the Exchequer, Mr.
Treasurer of the Chamber, the Master of the Jewel-House, Sir Rowland Hayward,
and others were appointed to meet this Afternoon at three of the Clock, and to
hear the Learned Council of the Goldsmiths.

Mr. Doctor Vaughan and Mr. Doctor Yale did bring from the Lords the Bill of
Jeofails with some Amendments.

The Bill for restitution in Blood of the Lord Stourton, was read the third
time; and two Provisoes twice read and passed the House. Vide concerning this
business of the Lord Stourton in fine diei sequentis.

The Bill also against excess in Apparel was read the third time and passed the
House.

Post Meridiem.

In the Afternoon the Bill for the Lord Stourton, and the Bill against excess
in Apparel, were sent up to the Lords by Mr. Comptroller and others. Vide
concerning the business of the Lord Stourton on Wednesday the 14th day of this
instant March ensuing.

Four Bills also of no great moment had each of them one reading; of which the
last being the Bill for relief of Vicars and Curates, was read the second time
and committed unto Mr. Sampoole, Mr. Cromwell, Mr. Savile, Mr. Boyer, Mr. St
John Mr. Broughton, and others, who were appointed to meet at this House to
Morrow in the Morning at six of the Clock.

The Bill touching unjust and slanderous Suits, was read the second time; but
no mention is made that it was either Ordered to be engrossed or referred to
Committees, because it had been sent from the Lords on Monday the 12th day of
this instant March foregoing.

The Bill touching unjust and slanderous Suits, and the Bill for the annexing
of the Town of Gateside to New Castle, were read the first time.

Mr Justice Mounson and Mr. Sergeant Barham did bring word from the Lords, that
whereas their Lordships have made diverse requests for Conference with some of
this House touching the Bill for the Lord Stourton, and the Bill for Mr. Mayney
their restitutions in Blood, and as yet have received no Answer thereof of this
House at all; Their further desire now is, that a further Committee be
appointed for this House to meet with their Lordships in the Parliament Chamber
to Morrow next before eight of the Clock for that purpose: whereupon were
chosen, after sundry Motions and Speeches,

All the Privy Council being of this House, Mr. Captain of the Guard, and the
former Committees (whose names see on Monday the 12th day of this instant March
foregoing) and Mr. Diggs; whereunto were added also Mr. Treasurer of the
Chamber, Mr. Lieutenant of the Tower, Sir Henry Gate, Sir Henry Ratcliffe, Sir
James Harrington, Sir Edward Bainton, Mr. Atkins, Mr. Birkenhed, Mr. Cromwell,
and Mr. Alford. Vide concerning this business on Wednesday the 14th day of this
instant March ensuing.

On Wednesday the 14th day of March the Queens Majesty's general and free
Pardon was once read.

Sir John Thynne, Sir Henry Knivett, and Mr. Topelysse, were added to the Bills
yesterday last appointed. Which said former Committees with these now newly
added were doubtless appointed to have Conference with a Committee of the Lords
this Morning, touching their Proviso added unto the Bill for the restitution in
Blood of the Heirs of the Lord Stourton, which had been sent down to the House
of Commons from the Lords on Wednesday the 7th day of this instant March
foregoing: but the Issue of this Conference, through the great negligence of
Fulk Onslow Esquire, at this time Clerk of the House of Commons, is wholly
omitted in the Original Journal Book of the same House; and therefore (in
respect it is of very good use and moment for the Declaration and Justification
of the Liberties of the said House) I have caused it to be inserted at large,
out of that often beforementioned written Memorial or Discourse I had by me of
the whole proceedings of this business, in manner and form following.

The beforementioned Committees (or the greater part of them between eight and
nine of the Clock this Morning, as is very probable) repaired unto the
Parliament Chamber, or Upper House Door, and there gave attendance, sending in
word by the Usher of that House of their being there: The Lords after a great
pause came forth at last into the outward Chamber, the number of them were
many, and the persons of the principal Noblemen of that House, after they had
taken their places at a long Table, and used some Conference amongst
themselves, they called for those of the House of Commons, to whom the Lord
Treasurer in the name of all the rest present and absent, said in effect as
follows:

THat the Lords of the Upper House could not but greatly mislike the dealing of
the House of Commons in the Lord Stourton's Bill, especially for that they had
passed the Bill with a Proviso annexed, notwithstanding their sundry Messages
sent unto them in his favor: And lastly, one Message to have Conference with
them for resolution of such doubts as were moved, wherein they took themselves
greatly touched in honor, and thought that the House of Commons did not use
that reverence toward them which they ought to do; the cause he said besides,
was such as they saw no reason why the House of Commons should proceed in that
Order; for the Bill being signed by her Majesty, he said, none might presume to
alter or add any thing to it without the assent of her Majesty, which they for
their parts durst not do, and for proof hereof he showed the Committees sundry
Provisoes in King Henry the Eighths time annexed to the like Bills signed by
the King; inferring thereby that none might pass otherwise. Moreover he said
that by the opinion of the Judges which were in the Upper House, the saving
already in the Bill was so sufficient that there needed not any addition of
such Proviso as the House of Commons had annexed; and therefore required to
know what reasons did lead them to proceed in this Order.

This and some large Speeches being uttered to this end, the Committees
answered that their Commission was only to hear what their, Lordships would
say, they would return and make report to the House, and so attend again upon
them with Answer.

When this was reported to the House of Commons, it moved them all greatly, and
gave them occasion of many Arguments and Speeches, all generally misliking this
kind of dealing with them, thinking their Liberties much touched in three
points: one, that they might not add or alter any Bill signed by the Queen;
another that any Conference should be looked for, the Bill remaining with them,
except themselves saw cause to require it; and the third to yield a reason why
they passed the Bill in that sort. After all these things were sufficiently
debated, an Answer was agreed on to be returned to the Lords by the same
Committees, and they gave their attendance upon the same Lords in the former
place, to whom was said in effect by Sir Anthony Mildmay Knight Chancellor of
the Exchequer, one of the Committees in the name and by the consent of the rest.

That they had delivered to the House of Commons the sense of that which their
Lordships had said unto them, which as they had conceived, did stand upon two
parts: One the manner of their proceedings in this Case of the Lord Stourtons;
and the other matter wherein they had proceeded.

To both which they had a Commission from the House to make unto their
Lordships this Answer.

First that they were very sorry that their Lordships had conceived such an
opinion of the House, as though they had forgotten their Duty to them, praying
their Lordships to think that the House of Commons did not want consideration
of the superiority of their Estates, in respect of their honorable calling,
which they did acknowledge with all humbleness, protesting that they would
yield unto their Lordships all dutiful reverence so far as the same were not
prejudicial to the Liberties of their House, which behooves them to leave to
their Posterities in the same freedom they have received them; and touching
this particular case the manner of their proceedings has not been as they
think, any ways undutiful or unseemly, for the Bill being sent from their
Lordships to the House of Commons received there within little space two
readings; and because upon the second reading, some Objections were made to
let the course of the Bill, the House thought fit to commit it, which does
show that they had no disposition to overthrow the Bill, but to further it,
both in respect of her Majesty's Signatures, and that it came passed from their
Lordships; and whether the Lord Stourton had cause or no to think himself
favorably used in being heard of the Committees with his Learned Council, they
referred to their Lordships Judgments. That after the Committees report of
their doings, the House gave the Bill a third reading, and so passed the same
in such sort as now their Lordships had; notwithstanding their sundry Messages
to the contrary.

And lastly, notwithstanding their Message of Conference they said they could
not otherwise have done, without breach of their Liberties; for they take the
order of the Parliament to be, that when a Bill is passed in either House, that
House wherein the Bill remains, may require Conference with the House that
passed the Bill, if they think good, but not otherwise. And so this Bill
passing from the Lords to the House of Commons, might if they had thought it
convenient, have required a Conference, but not their Lordships of a Bill
passed from themselves: and thus much for the manner of their Proceedings.

Touching the matter wherein they have proceeded, in that that they annexed a
Proviso to this Bill, the same being her Signature, signed with her Majesty's
Hand, they thought they might lawfully do it without offense to her Majesty,
taking her Signature to be only a recommendation of the Cause to both the
Houses, without which they could not treat of any Bill of that nature; the
House not being thereby concluded, but that they might alter or add any thing
that should be thought meet either for her Majesty or for her Subjects, which
Proviso they have added upon good deliberation, not hastily or inconsiderately,
but upon great and sufficient reasons moving them, praying their Lordships so
to conceive it: Nevertherless to declare those reasons in particular to their
Lordships as they required in that part, the House desired their Lordships to
bear with them, for that were to yield an account of their doings, and of
things passed in their House, which they could not in any wise agree unto,
being so prejudicial to their Liberties.

This Speech finished the Committees were willed by the Lords to retire to the
lower end of the Chamber; and after some pause and consultation amongst the
Lords, they called again the Committees, and to them was said by the Lord
Treasurer, that the Lords had considered the Answer that the Committees had
brought them from the House of Commons; and touching the first part thereof he
said, that albeit through such information as was given them, they might have
cause to conceive amiss of the House in the manner of their Proceedings, yet
because themselves were the truest Reporters of their own actions, and the best
Interpreters of their own meanings, the Lords did accept of their Answer, and
rested well satisfied with the same.

But touching the other part he once again pressed the Committees to show the
reasons that moved the House to add that Proviso, which the Lords took to be
superfluous, the Bill as he said containing in it already a saving that was
sufficient for all Causes that might happen.

To that was said by one of the Committees that they humbly thanked their
Lordships that it pleased them so well to accept of their Answer to the first
part; but for the second which concerned the matter it self, and the reasons
that moved the House, he said the Committees had no further Authority to deal,
in having only Commission to deliver to their Lordships the Answer which they
received from this House.

Whereupon the Assembly brake, and the Lords returning to the Upper House; and
the Commitees to the House of Commons, where at their coming, one of them
reported their whole Proceeding with the Lords, wherein the House was much
satisfied, seeing that so great a storm was so well calmed, and the Liberties
of the House so well preserved, which otherwise in time to come might have been
prejudiced in those three points before remembered, which are indeed if they be
well considered, of great weight and importance.

The Proceeding and Issue of this foresaid great Committee of both Houses,
being thus transcribed out of that written Memorial thereof I had by me, now
follows the last Passage in this business out of the Original Journal Book of
the House of Commons; by which it may be easily gathered, that the Committee of
the Lords did not rest satisfied with the former Conference, but sent down yet
another Message to the Commons House, although this Session of Parliament were
now upon the Conclusion, to have had some further satisfaction therein: which
Message is there Entered as follows.

Mr Solicitor and Mr Doctor Barkley did come from the Lords to demand if there
be any Bills ready to send to their Lordships, for that now their leisure well
serves them; and also they do desire to know, whether this House will make
them a further Answer to the matter of the last Conference, or no. Whereupon
after sundry Motions and Arguments it was agreed, that the former Committees,
with the residue afterward added unto them, both yesterday and also this day,
as also Mr St John now lastly added, be sent up to the Lords with Answer to be
pronounced by Mr Chancellor of the Exchequer in the name of the whole House,
that as touching the unkindness wherewith their Lordships do charge this House,
which this House has not done, does not and will not give their Lordships any
such occasion.

Nota, That this is the last Passage in this so long and controverted business
betwixt the two Houses, which this Morning had been thoroughly handled at a
Committee of the said Houses: for the Upper House having first passed this
Bill, and sent it down to the House of Commons on Wednesday the 7th day of this
instant March foregoing, it had its several readings there on Saturday the 10th
day of the same Month in the Afternoon, and on Monday the 12th day, and on
Tuesday the 13th day of the same; having also added a Proviso unto it, with
which they sent it up again to the Lords, who disliking the said Proviso,
required Conference with some Committees of the said House that very foresaid
13th day of March, when the Bill had been sent up unto them: upon which meeting
this Morning they had full Conference, as is before at large set down; but the
Lords (as it should seem) utterly disliking the said Proviso, and not being
satisfied with the said Conference, did never give the said Proviso any reading
in their House, and so the Bill was dashed.

Now follows the residue of this days Passages, with the Conclusion of this
Session of Parliament by Prorogation, out of the Original Journal Book of the
House of Commons: some things only of form or otherwise necessary to be
inserted being added.

The Bill against the abuses of Goldsmiths, was read the third time and passed
the House.

Post Meridiem.

The Bill last passed touching abuses of Goldsmiths, was this Afternoon sent
unto the Lords by Mr Treasurer, and others.

Two Provisoes and certain Amendments to the Bill touching Wharfs and Keys,
were thrice read; and upon the Question with the Bill rejected.

Mr Doctor Barkley and Mr Powle did bring word from the Lords, that their
Lordships do desire to know whether there be any more Bills ready to be sent
unto them; unto whom Answer was made, There is none.

This Afternoon also, her Majesty came in Person to the Upper House, where
Robert Bell Esquire Speaker of the House of Commons, did amongst other things in
his Speech move her Majesty, in the name of the House to Marry: by which it may
be collected, that it was agreed in the House (where this matter had been
propounded on Friday the 9th day of this instant March foregoing, and further
debated of on Monday the 12th day of the same Month) that it was I say agreed,
that the Speaker should thus move her Majesty in the behalf of her Marriage
upon the Conclusion of this Session; in this Speech also the said Speaker did
according unto the usual Custom present her Majesty with the Bill of the
Subsidy, in the name of the Commons.

After which her Majesty having given her Assent unto twenty three public
Acts, and thirteen private, the Lord Keeper Adjourned the Parliament by her
Majesty's Commandment, until two of the Clock in the Afternoon of the day
following.

And on the said Thursday the 15th day of March in the Afternoon, her Majesty
came again unto the Upper House Accompanied with Sir Nicholas Bacon Knight Lord
Keeper of the Great Seal, and diverse Lords Spiritual and Temporal; but I cannot
gather that there was any other cause or occasion of her Majesty's coming
thither, than only for the further Prorogation of this Session, which otherwise
must have been done by a Commission under the Great Seal, and thereupon the
Parliament was Prorogued accordingly unto the 5th day of November then next
ensuing.

After which followed diverse other Prorogations of this Parliament unto the
re-assembling of it again upon Monday the 16th day of January, in An. 23
Reginae Eliz. upon which said day, the third and last Session of this instant
Parliament began.

THE JOURNAL OF THE House of LORDS.
An Exact and perfect Journal of the Passages of the House of Lords in the
Session of Parliament holden at Westminster, Anno 23 Reginae Eliz. Anno Domini
1580. which began there (after many Prorogations and Adjournments of the same)
on Monday the 16th Day of January, and there continued until it was first
Prorogued on Saturday the 18th Day of March, and lastly Dissolved on Friday the
19th Day of April, Anno 25 Reginae ejusdem, Anno Domini 1583.

THIS Session in Anno 23 Reginae Eliz. Anno Domini 1580. makes but one and the
same Parliament with that in Anno 14 Reginae Eliz. Anno Domini 1572. which was
the first Session of it, and with that in Anno 18 Reginae Eliz. Anno Domini
1575. which was the second Session of the same: so that this present Assembly
of the Peers and Commons of the Realm in this their great Council was but the
third and last Session of it, being one and the same Parliament as aforesaid,
being continued without any Dissolution, near upon the space of twelve years by
fourscore several Prorogations, or thereabouts, viz. from Thursday the 8th day
of May in the fourteenth year of the Queen, on which said Thursday it first
began, until the Dissolution thereof upon the 19th day of April, Anno 25
Reginae Eliz. Anno Domini 1583.

The Prorogations between that former Session in An. 18 Reginae Eliz. which was
as has been observed, the second and middle Session of this Parliament, and
this in Anno 23 Reginae ejusdem (with those after it) which was the third and
last Session thereof, were about threescore; of which the two first happening
within the said eighteenth year, are both of them placed at the end of the
Journal of the said year; of which the first was on Saturday the 18th day of
March in Anno 18 Reginae Eliz. Anno Domini 1580. by which the Parliament was
Prorogued unto the 5th day of November, Anno 18 Regin. Eliz. Anno Domini 1581.
at which day it was the second time Prorogued unto the 26th day of March in
Anno 19 Reginae ejusdem Anno Domini 1582. upon which day it was further
Prorogued by Commission unto the 3d day of June following.

On the third day of June, to which day the Parliament had been last Prorogued,
it was again further Prorogued unto the 12th day of November next following; at
and from which time it was Prorogued from day to day unto the 16th day of
January, being Monday, on which day this Session following in Anno 23 Reginae
Eliz. Anno Domini 1580, began.

But her Majesty because it was no new Parliament, was not present, nor did the
Lords wear their Robes on this said Monday, being the first day of their
meeting; nor was their any solemn Speech made by the Lord Keeper, but either
House assembling themselves together severally, in their due places, fell to
their ordinary businesses as upon other days is usually accustomed; yet the
beginning of this Session is as solemnly Entered in the Original Journal Book as
if it had been a new Parliament, where it appears to be in manner and form
following.

Die Lunae 16 die Januarii 1580, Anno Regni Excellentissimae and metuendissimae
Dominae nostrae Elizabethae, Dei gratia, Angliae, Franciae, and Hiberniae
Reginae, Fidei Defensatricis, etc. Vicesimo tertio, in quem diem post varias ac
diversas Prorogationes praesens haec Sessio Parliamenti Prorogata fuit, teneri
and inchoari apud Westmonasterium die and loco praedict. Domini tam Spirituales
quam Temporales, quorum nomina subsequuntur praesentes suerunt.

Episcopus London. Episcopus Sarisburien. Episcopus Wigorn. Episcopus Roffen.
Episcopus Coventr. and Litchfield.
These Bishops are thus placed in the Original Journal Book on the dexter-side
of the Lords, not by reason of preheminency, unless the Archbishop of
Canterbury had been present, but by reason of their Ecclesiastical Dignity,
these being all that are noted in the said Journal Book to have been present
this day; now follow the names of the Lord Keeper and the Temporal Lords.

Thomas Bromley Miles Dominus Cancellarius. Dominus Burleigh Thesaurarius
Angliae. Marchio Winton. Comes Lincoln. Magnus Admirallus Angliae. Comes
Arundell. Comes Northampton. Comes Wigorn. Comes Cumberland. Comes Bathon.
Comes Norwicen. Comes Southampton. Comes Pembrook. Comes Hartford. Comes
Leicester. Vice-comes Mountague. Vice-comes Bindon.
Barons.
Dominus Burgavenny. Dominus Willoughby de Erisby. Dominus Dacres. Dominus
Stafford. Dominus Dudley. Dominus Lumley. Dominus Stourton. Dominus Mountjoy.
Dominus Darcy de Darcy. Dominus Windsor. Dominus Cromwell. Dominus Evers.
Dominus Wharton. Dominus Willoughbie de Parham. Dominus Howard. Dominus North.
Dominus St John de Bletso. Dominus de la Ware. Dominus Cheyney. Dominus Norris.
Nota, There were no names of Receivors or Triors of Petitions read, because
this was but the third and last Session of a former Parliament, as has been
observed; and those names are never read but in the beginning of a new
Parliament.

One Bill was read this Morning, being for the reformation of Sheriffs,
Under-Sheriffs, and their Ministers prima vice.

Hodie retornatum est Breve, quo Preregrinus Bartye, Dominus Willoughby silius
and haeres Katherinae Ducissae Suff. siliae and haeredis Willielmi Willoughby
nuper Domini Willoughby praesenti Parliamento interesse summonitus est, qui
admissus est ad suum praeheminentiae sedendi in Parliamento locum salvo jure
alieno: viz. the said Lord Willoughby was seated and took place next under the
Lord Audley and above the Lord Barkley.

The like Writ returned for Edward Parker Lord Morley, who accordingly was
admitted, salvo jure alieno, and placed next under the Lord Barkley, and above
the Lord Dacres.

The Lords being thus set and in agitation of their own businesses, Sir Francis
Knolles Knight Treasurer of her Majesty's Household, Accompanied with Sir James
Crosts Knight Comptroller of her Highness Household, Sir Francis Walsingham
Knight one of her Majesty's Principal Secretaries, and Mr Doctor Wilson
Esquire, another of her Majesty's Principal Secretaries, Sir Walter Mildmay
Knight Chancellor of her Majesty's Exchequer, and diverse others, being sent up
to the said Lords by the House of Commons upon some urgent and weighty
occasions, desired to be admitted into the said Upper House there to make known
to their Lordships somewhat of importance, wherein they should require their
advice and need their assistance; upon which being admitted the said Mr
Treasurer assisted with the Personages and Company aforesaid, did in comely
order and discreet manner, make manifest and known unto the said Lords, that
Sir Robert Bell Knight late Lord Chief Baron, and Speaker of the said House,
who had been Elected to the said place in the first Session of this Parliament
in the fourteenth year of her Majesty, and had continued also the second
Session thereof, being in the eighteenth year of her said Highness Reign in the
said place, was now dead, which had been openly and manifestly made known and
testified unto them; for remedy of which defection, they humbly prayed their
Lordships advice. After which the Lord Keeper first requiring the said
Personages a while to withdraw themselves, and then commending the order of the
matter unto the said Lords sitting in Consultation for the same, it was upon
considerate advice therein had by them all, thought fitting to signify unto
the said Commons, by the Personages aforesaid who had been sent from them, that
they thought it expedient and good, that such of the Lords of the said House as
were of her Highness Privy Council, with the Lord Marquess of Winchester, and
the Earl of Arundel, Accompanied with such a number of the Commons House as by
them should be agreed upon, should in the name of both the Assemblies make
intimation of their said Estate, and the Petition thereupon depending, unto her
said Highness; to which advice the said Commons upon knowledge had of the same
wholly assented.

Then followed the Adjournment of the said Parliament by the Lord Keeper
according to the usual form, which is thus Entered in the Original Journal Book.

Dominus Cancellarius Adjournavit praesens Parliamentum usque in diem Mercurii
proximum hora nona.

On Wednesday the 18th day of January, Billa for reformation of abuses in
Sheriffs, Under-Sheriffs and their Ministers, secunda vice lecta.

Two other Bills also of no great moment were read prima vice.

The Queen having been moved as it seems (according to the resolution of the
two Houses jointly agreed upon between them, on Monday last past the 16th day
of this instant January) about the Death of Sir Robert Bell late Lord Chief
Baron, their former Speaker, and the choice of a new one in the House of
Commons by the Marquess of Winchester, and those other right honorable
Personages who were then and there named to move her Highness in it; did give
Order that this present Wednesday both the Lords and Commons should assemble
and meet together in the Upper House, commonly called the Lords Parliament
Chamber, there to receive her Majesty's Answer, where being Assembled Sir
Thomas Bromley Knight Lord Chancellor of England, showed forth a Commission
from her Highness under the Great Seal of England, which was directed to him
only, wherein her Majesty taking notice of the Death of Sir Robert Bell their
former Speaker, did Authorize the Lord Keeper for her Majesty and in her name,
to will and Command the Knights, Citizens and Burgesses of the House of Commons
to resort unto their accustomed place, and there to elect and choose amongst
themselves, one able and sufficient person to be their Speaker for the rest of
this present Parliament yet to come; and after they should have made their
Election, that then three or four of them for and in all their names, should
signify the same unto her Majesty: and thereupon her Highness would further
signify her pleasure unto them, what day and time they should present him so
Elected before her, as it had been formerly in like Cases accustomed to be done.

Nota, That this Commission is set down at large in the Journal of the House of
Commons, de isto Anno 23 Reginae Eliz. to which it more properly belongs.

This day lastly, was returned one unusual Proxy from John Bishop of Exeter,
which is thus Entered in the Original Journal Book, the words only a little
misplaced.

18 die Januarii, Johannis permissione divina Episcopi Exoniensis introductae
sunt literae Procuratoriae, in quibus Procuratorem suum constituit reverendum
in Christo Patrem Johannem Episcopum Wigorniensem.

Nota, That though there were no names of Triors or Receivors of Petitions read
at this time, because it was but the latter Session of a former Parliament, and
those said Receivors and Triors are never assigned but at the beginning of a
new one; yet it is very usual for the Lords of the Upper House to send their
Proxies after a Prorogation as well as at the beginning of a new Parliament,
and especially if there be any long space or distance between the Sessions, as
was likewise used in the former Parliaments, viz. in that second Session of
Parliament held in Anno 8 Reginae Eliz. and the foregoing Session of Parliament
held in Anno 18 Reginae ejusdem.

The Proxy before set down, I therefore call an unusual, because a spiritual
Lord Constituted but one Proctor; whereas for the most part they seldom or
never nominate fewer than two, and the Temporal Lords as seldom more than one;
and therefore those ordinary Proxies are for the most part wholly omitted, and
the extraordinary only transcribed out of the Journal Book: and at this Session
of three Earls and ten Barons, who sent their Proxies, only one, viz. Henry
Earl of Huntington Constituted two Proctors, which Proxies with some other
unusual ones are set down the 23th day of this instant January following; on
which said day being Monday they are all set down in the Original Journal Book
to have been introducted.

The Earl of Leicester had this Parliamentary Session, six several Proxies sent
unto him (set down in the Original Journal Book in the same Order they here
follow) viz. from Henry Earl of Darby, Henry Lord Scroope, Thomas Lord
Buckhurst, George Earl of Shrewsbury, John Lord Darcy of Aston, and from Henry
Earl of Huntington, who Constituted him the said Earl of Leicester his Proctor
severally and jointly with Francis Earl of Bedford, all which said Proxies or
Letters Procuratory, are Entered in the Original Journal Book to have been
returned, or introducted on Wednesday the 25th day of this instant January.

On Thursday the 19th day of January, Billa for avoiding of slanderous
Libelling, prima vice lecta; and two other Bills of no great moment were each
of them read secunda vice: after which the continuance of the Parliament is
thus Entered in the Original Journal Book.

Dominus Cancellarius continuavit praesens Parliamentum usque in diem prox.
hora secunda post meridiem.

On Friday the 20th day of January, the House met not till about two of the
Clock in the Afternoon, when her Majesty was her Self present, with Sir Thomas
Bromley Lord Chancellor, and diverse of the Lords both Spiritual and Temporal;
who being all set, the Knights, Citizens and Burgesses had notice given them
thereof, and thereupon repaired unto the Upper House with John Popham Esquire,
the Queens Solicitor, whom they had Elected and Chosen their Speaker on
Wednesday the 18th day of this instant January last past.

The said Speaker or Prolocutor, with as many of the House of Commons as
conveniently could, being let in, was led up between two of the most eminent
Personages of the said House of Commons unto the Rail or Bar at the lower end
of the Upper House, and being there placed after three Reverences made, spoke
to the effect following:

That whereas at the humble Suit of the Knights, Citizens and Burgesses of the
Commons House of Parliament now Assembled, it had been signified from her
Majesty by the Mouth of the Lord Chancellor, and by force of her Highness
Commission under the Great Seal of England; that it was her Pleasure and
Command, that the said Knights, Citizens and Burgesses should choose a Learned
man for their Speaker, instead of Sir Robert Bell late Lord Chief Baron and
their Speaker, whom it had pleased God to take out of this World: that
thereupon they had Chosen and compelled himself to take upon him that weighty
Charge, for which finding himself altogether unable, and further at large
pressing his own disability, he lastly, desired that her Majesty out of her
gracious favor, would be pleased to free him from that great employment; and
that the said Knights, Citizens and Burgesses might have Authority to Elect and
Choose some other more able and sufficient Member amongst them, to undertake and
perform the same.

Then the Queen called the Lord Chancellor unto her, declaring her Opinion in
that which he should Answer to the said Speaker or Prolocutor; who thereupon
returning to his place, Answered the said Speaker, that her Majesty had fully
heard, and did well allow of his modest and humble disabling of himself, but
yet being also acquainted with his faithfulness, care and many abilities, her
Majesty was resolved he should undertake this Charge, and therefore did both
allow and approve of the said Election of the House of Commons.

Whereupon the said Speaker rendering his most humble thanks to her Majesty, and
acknowledging her gracious favor toward him, promised his most faithful and
careful endeavor for the discharge of the said place, after which he proceeded
to Petition her Majesty, in the name of the House of Commons, (according to the
usual course) for freedom of Speech, freedom of Access to her Majesty, and
freedom from Arrests and Suits for themselves, and their necessary Attendants.
And lastly, that if in any thing he should unwittingly mistake, the blame might
not lie upon the House, but upon himself, and that her Majesty would be pleased
graciously to Pardon him.

To which the Lord Chancellor by Command from her Majesty, Answered, that she
did well accept of his humble thankfulness, and the promise of his best
endeavor and diligence, and that for all his Petitions her Majesty was well
pleased that himself, and the Knights, Citizens and Burgesses of the House of
Commons, should have and enjoy all such freedoms and privileges, as had been
formerly in like Case enjoyed and used in the times of her Majesty's most Royal
Progenitors.

And then he concluded with a special Admonition, that the House of Commons
should not deal or intermeddle with any matters touching her Majesty's Person,
or Estate, or Church Government.

Nota, That in the Original Journal Book of the Upper-House, de Anno isto 23
Reginae Eliz. the Queens presence, and the presence of the other Lords is only
noted, but no mention is made who was chosen Speaker, or that he was presented
this Afternoon; which happened by the very great negligence of Mr Anthony Mason
at this time Clerk of the said House: wherefore this Presentment of the Speaker
in manner and form, as is aforesaid, is supplied for the most part out of the
Original Journal Book of the House of Commons in this Session of Parliament, in
the twenty third year of her Majesty, being there Entered fol. 4. a.

Besides the further Adjournment of the Parliament, or continuance of it,
Entered commonly in these words, viz. Dominus Cancellarius Adjournavit praesens
Parliamentum, etc. or, continuavit praesens Parliamentum, etc. being but matter
of course, are in this ensuing Journal omitted; unless where somewhat in it
does happen extraordinary, in respect of the time, place, or person.

On Monday the 23th day of January, to which day the Parliament had been last
Adjourned, a Bill for the maintenance of the Borders and Frontiers against
Scotland, was read prima vice; and one other Bill for avoiding of slanderous
Libelling, was read secunda vice.

This day also were introducted, or delivered unto the hands of the Clerk of
the Parliament, diverse extraordinary and unusual Proxies, which are thus Entered
in the Original Journal Book, or in not much different words.

23 die Januarii introductae sunt literae Procuratoriae Richardi Episcopi
Dunelmensis, in quibus Procuratores suos constituit Edwinum Archiepiscopum
Eboracen. Johannem Episcopum Sarisburiensem, and Willielmum Episcopum
Cestrensem.

Item introductae sunt literae Procuratoriae Willielmi Episcopi Cestrensis, in
quibus Procuratorem suum constituit Willielmum Episcopum Coventr. and Litchf.

Item introductae sunt literae Procuratoriae Gilberti Episcopi Bathon. and
Wellen. in quibus Procuratores suos constituit Johannem Episcopum London,
Thomam Episcopum Lincoln. Johannem Episcopum Wigorn. and Johannem Episcopum
Sarisburien.

Item introductae sunt literae Procuratoriae Henrici Comitis Huntingtoniae, in
quibus Procuratores suos constituit Franciscum Comitem Bedford, and Robertum
Comitem Leicestr.

Nota, That whereas the Spiritual Lords do for the most part name but two
Proctors, and not fewer than two; here the Bishop of Durham Constituted three,
the Bishop of Bath and Wells four, and the Bishop of Chester but one: and in
like manner whereas the Temporal Lords seldom Constitute above one Proctor,
here the Earl of Huntington nominated two.

Finally it is to be noted, that none of these Lords could be thus absent, or
Constitute their Proctors, but by the Queens Majesty's License first obtained.

On Tuesday the 24th day of January, to which day the Parliament had been last
continued, the Lord Chancellor and diverse Lords met, but nothing was done
saving the Adjournment of the Parliament by the Lord Chancellor.

It seems that no businesses or Bills being as yet sent up from the House of
Commons to the Upper House, the Lords had no great employment; and hence it is
usual for them in the beginning of a new Parliament, or of a new Session after
many Prorogations, to meet and without any further agitation or business, only
to continue or Adjourn the Parliament to a further day.

On Thursday the 26th day of January, to which day the Parliament had been last
Adjourned, The Bill against slanderous words and rumors, and other seditious
practices against the Queens Majesty, was read prima vice; and two other Bills
also of no great moment had each of them one reading.

On Saturday the 28th day of January, to which day the Parliament had been
continued on Thursday last, the foresaid Bill against slanderous words, etc.
was read secunda vice, and commissa ad ingrossandum.

Two other Bills had each of them one reading at the same time.

On Monday the 30th day of January, to which day the Parliament had been on
Saturday foregoing last Adjourned, the foresaid Bill against slanderous words,
etc. was read tertia vice and communi omnium Procerum assensu conclusa; and
with another Bill of no great moment concluded also this day, was sent down to
the Commons House by the Queens Attorney and Doctor Clerk.

There was one other Bill also for reformation of disorders and abuses in
Sheriffs, Under-Sheriffs, and their Ministers, read secunda vice.

On Tuesday the 31th day of January, Two Bills of no great moment had each of
them their first reading: Two other Bills also were sent up to the Lords from
the House of Commons, viz. Billa for the speedy recovery of Debts, quae prima
vice lecta; and a Bill for avoiding of certain encumbrances against Purchasers,
which was also read prima vice.

On Wednesday the first day of February, Billa for the reformation of disorders
and abuses in Sheriffs, Under-Sheriffs, and their Ministers, was read tertia
vice, and then upon the Conclusion thereof, sent down to the House of Commons.

The Bill also touching John Tailor and Mr Terril being read prima vice, was
committed. Quod nota, that a Bill was committed upon the first reading, which
is seldom used till the second.

Another Bill also touching Fines and Recoveries, was read and committed.

On Saturday the 4th day of February, to which day the Parliament had on
Wednesday last past been Adjourned, Billa for the maintenance and strengthening
of the Borders against Scotland, and two other Bills of no great moment had
each of them one reading.

On Monday the 6th day of February, Two Bills were each of them once read;
whereof the latter was for coming to Church, hearing of Divine Service, and
receiving of the Communion.

On Tuesday the 7th day of February, Three Bills had each of them one reading;
whereof the last was touching Leases made by Corporations.

On Wednesday the 8th day of February, A Bill touching the Hospital of Ledbury
in the County of Hereford, was read secunda vice and commissa ad ingrossandum.

On Thursday the 9th day of February, the former Bill touching the Hospital of
Ludbury, etc. was read the third time, and upon the Conclusion thereof was sent
down to the House of Commons.

On Saturday the 11th day of February, to which day the Parliament had been
last Adjourned, the Lord Chancellor and diverse Lords met in the Forenoon, but
nothing was done, saving the continuance of the Parliament unto two of the
Clock in the Afternoon the same day; at which hour meeting also, nothing was
done but only the Parliament again Adjourned to a further day.

On Monday the 13th day of February, to which day the Parliament had been on
Saturday last Adjourned. There were three Bills each of them once read; whereof
the last being a Bill for the fortifying of the Frontiers toward Scotland, was
read the third time, and after the conclusion thereof sent down to the House of
Commons.

On Wednesday the 15th day of February, to which day the Parliament had been
last Adjourned, the Lord Chancellor and diverse Lords met in the Upper House,
but no Bills were read, only the Lord Chancellor continued the Parliament to
nine of the Clock in the Forenoon the day following.

On Thursday the 16th day of February, Billa for increase of Mariners and
Navigation of England, was read prima vice; and another Bill also of no great
moment had its first reading.

On Saturday the 18th day of February, to which day the Parliament had been
last Adjourned, four Bills were sent up to the Lords from the House of Commons;
whereof the last was an Act for Explanation of a Statute against forging of
Evidences and Writings, which with the other three Bills, had each of them
their first reading.

On Monday the 20th day of February, to which day the Parliament had been last
Adjourned, the Bill touching the Lord Compton, etc. was read prima vice.

Two Bills also were brought up to the Lords from the House of Commons (which
are more particularly expressed in the Journal of that House.)

On Tuesday the 21th day of February, Three Bills also were sent up to the
Lords from the House of Commons; whereof the last was an Act ratifying an award
between some private persons, but there is no mention in the Original
Journal Book of any Bill read this Morning, but only of the continuance of the
Parliament according to the usual form.

On Wednesday the 22th day of February, Five Bills had each of them one
reading; whereof the first was a Bill against Counterfeiting of the hands of
any of her Majesty's Privy Council, and for the avoiding of counterfeit
Instruments and Writings under Seal, or counterfeiting of the Seal of any
Office or Officer, which said Bill was read prima vice.

On Thursday the 23th day of February, Two Bills had each of them one reading;
of which the latter being a Bill against slanderous words and rumors, and other
seditious practices against the Queens Majesty, with a new Addition of certain
Amendments, was read secunda vice.

It should rather seem that only the Addition and Amendments which had been
inserted de novo into this aforesaid Bill, were now read the second time; for
the Bill it self had passed the Upper House upon the third reading on Monday
the 30th day of January foregoing, and was the same Forenoon sent down to the
Commons House, and there passed; and from them was sent up again to the Lords
on Monday the 20th of this instant February last past, with a new Addition and
certain Amendments: So that the Bill it self which has once passed the House
is never read again, but only such new Additions and Amendments as are inserted
in it must be passed again de novo, because they are of the same nature as if a
new Bill were brought in.

On Saturday the 25th day of February, to which day the Parliament had been
last Adjourned; was read a Bill touching Fines and Recoveries secunda vice; and
another Bill of no great moment had also its second reading.

Memorand. that on this foresaid 25th day of February being Saturday, which day
was before given to certain Parties then in difference for assignation of some
Errors supposed by them to be in a certain Suit Commenced against them: Mr
Cooper came in for the said Plaintiff, and openly before the Lords in the
Parliament House, assigned the Errors; after the hearing whereof the Lord
Chancellor with consent of the Lords, Ordered that the Plaintiff should have a
scire facias returnable either the first day of the next Session, or the first
day of the next Parliament.

On Monday the 27th day of February, to which day the Parliament had been last
continued, the Bill for Explanation of the Statute against forging of Evidences
and Writings, was read prima vice; and another Bill of no great moment was read
secunda vice: Then were there two Bills of no great moment sent up to the Lords
from the House of Commons; whereof the first had its first reading.

Three other Bills finally after this, were each of them once read; whereof the
last being a Bill touching my Lord Compton, etc. was after the second reading
committed to be engrossed.

On Tuesday the 28th day of February the Bill for ratifying an Award in the
Chancery concerning Copyhold and Customary Tenants of the Manors of Moore and
Newman, Synderich, Knyhton and Pensokes, in the County of Worcester, was read
secunda vice: after which also seven other Bills had each of them one reading;
of which the fourth Bill being as the rest of no great moment, was after the
passing of it sent down to the House of Commons. But the first Bill of the said
seven which was touching the Inning of Erith and Plumsted-Marsh, being upon the
third reading concluded; yet it was Ordered by the Lords that the same Bill
should be staid from the sending of it down to the House of Commons, until the
Parties had brought in their several Bonds.

On Wednesday the first day of March, the Bill for the Explanation of the
Statute against forging of Evidences was read tertia vice: which coming to the
Question, and the numbers of the Contents on the one side, and the numbers of
the Not-contents on the other side found to be equal and alike with their
Proxies, it was Commanded to be laid up in the Desk till the next Parliament.

On Thursday the second day of March a Bill for the increase of Mariners and
maintenance of Navigation, was after the second reading, committed to be
engrossed. Five Bills also were sent up to the Lords from the House of Commons;
whereof the first was the Subsidy Bill, the other four of no great moment. The
Bill also for the Confirmation of a Subsidy granted by the Clergy prima and
secunda vice lecta, and commissa ad ingrossandum. There were two other Bills
each of them read once this Morning; whereof the first being a Bill for the
punishment of those who should counterfeit the hands of any of her Majesty's
Privy Council, or the Seals of others, was after the third reading rejected.
Quod nota, because it is feldom seen that any Bill after it has passed the
third reading should be rejected.

Then was the Parliament continued by the Lord Chancellor unto two of the Clock
in the Afternoon; at which time the Lords meeting, there were only two Bills
read prima vice; whereof the first was the Subsidy Bill, and then the Lord
Chancellor Adjourned the Parliament unto the day following.

On Friday the third day of March, Six Bills of no great moment had each of
them one reading; whereof the last was a Bill that Gavelkind Lands within the
County of the City of Exeter may be Inheritable as Lands at the Common Law,
which was read the third time and concluded.

Nota, That this Custom of Gavelkind (by which all the Sons do Inherit the
Lands of their Ancestors equally) is not only in Kent, but has been also in
the City of Exeter in the County of Devon. and as is very probable either is,
or has been in other parts of the Kingdom.

The Lord Chancellor continued the Parliament unto two of the Clock in the
Afternoon; about which time the Lords meeting, the Bill for the grant of a
Subsidy and two Fifteenths and Tenths by the Temporalty, was read secunda vice.

On Saturday the 4th day of March, were four Bills of no great moment each of
them once read; whereof the first being a Bill for the confirmation of a
Subsidy granted by the Clergy, was after the third reading concluded.

Mr Oughtred that was sent for by Order of the Lords, made his appearance, and
to him day was given for bringing of his Council on Tuesday next, and the same
day was also appointed for my Lady Marquess of Winchester.

This Forenoon finally, two Bills of no great moment were sent up to the Lords
from the House of Commons, and one Bill for the assurance of an yearly rent to
the Bishop of Coventry and Litchfield in Fee, was tertia vice lecta; and then
sent down from the Lords to the said House of Commons.

On Monday the 6th day of March, to which day the Parliament had been last
Adjourned, were two Bills of no great moment read; whereof the first was
touching Fines and Recoveries.

On Tuesday the 7th day of March, Six Bills were brought up to the Lords from
the House of Commons; whereof the last was for keeping of the Queens Majesty's
Subjects in due obedience: there were two Bills also each of them once read;
whereof the last touching Fines and common Recoveries, was after the third
reading sent down to the House of Commons.

This day appeared before the Lords, as was appointed, the Lord Marquess with
his Council on the one side, and the Council of the Lady Marquess on the other
side, and Mr Oughtred for himself; The Lord Chancellor with consent of the
Lords, after hearing of all the Parties, and upon Conference, thought it best
for the better Expedition of the matter, that certain of the Lords, if the
Parties consented thereunto, should have the hearing of all the Controversies
betwixt them, and of the several accounts of Mr Oughtred; to which the Parties
being called again, every one for himself did personally assent, only further
Order was taken that the Lady Marquess should deliver her assent the next day
by her Council. The Lords that were named to hear the said Controversies were
these, which were chosen by the Parties themselves, the Lord Chancellor, the
Lord Treasurer, the Lord Chamberlain, and the Earl of Bedford; and for the
Causes between the Lord Marquess and the Lady Marquess, were chosen by the said
Parties, the Lord Chancellor, Lord Treasurer, Lord Chamberlain, and the Lord
Buckhurst.

Then the Lord Chancellor continued the Parliament unto two of the Clock in the
Afternoon, at which hour the Lords meeting, Three Bills of no great moment had
each of them one reading; whereof the last being a Bill touching the Lord
Zouch, was read secunda vice, and then committed to be engrossed.

On Wednesday the 8th day of March, Three Bills of no great moment had each of
them one reading; whereof the last was Billa for keeping the Queens Majesty's
Subjects in their due Obedience.

Two Bills also were brought up to the Lords from the House of Commons; whereof
the last being a new Bill for the fortifying of the Borders toward Scotland
(which they returned with a former Bill passed by the Lords before with great
deliberation to the same purpose, and sent down to them so passed with the same
title) it gave the Lords much distaste, because they thought this course to be
both derogatory to the superiority of the place, and contrary to the ancient
course of both Houses; and as they misliked the disorder, so was it their
pleasure that this their misliking should be entered in the Records of
Parliament, lest so evil an Example might hereafter be abused, as a precedent.
Vide plus de ista materia die 10 Martii sequente.

Then the Lord Chancellor continued the Parliament unto two of the Clock in the
Afternoon, at which the Lords meeting, four Bills had each of them one reading;
whereof the first being the Bill for the Grant of a Subsidy and two Fifteenths
and Tenths by the Temporalty, was read tertia vice and communi omnium Procerum
assensu conclusa.

On Thursday the 9th day of March, Five Bills had each of them one reading;
whereof the first being a Bill for restitution in Blood of Philip Earl of
Arundel, was read prima vice.

On Friday the 10th day of March, were five Bills read; the first three being
of no great moment had each of them one reading, the fourth being a Bill for
restitution in Blood of two of the Saintlegers, was read secunda and tertia
vice, and then was sent down to the House of Commons with another Bill for the
Earl of Arundels restitution, which had likewise passed the Lords this
Forenoon. The new Bill lastly for the fortifying of the Borders toward
Scotland was read prima vice.

Nota, That though the Lords did take great offense at the House of Commons for
sending up this new Bill unto them, and rejecting a former Bill by them passed
and sent down to the said House of Commons, which had been framed by them to
the same purpose, without acquainting their Lordships first upon what grounds
or for what reasons they had rejected the former Bill (as may be seen at large
on Wednesday the 8th day of March foregoing;) and though their Lordships did
then likewise Order that this Act should be Entered in the Records or the Upper
House as a thing derogatory to the dignity thereof, yet it pleased their
Lordships not only on this Friday this 10th day of March to give the said new
Bill its first reading, but on Tuesday the 14th of March following caused it to
be read the second time, and on the next day following being Wednesday having
added certain amendments unto it, did finally upon the third reading conclude
and pass it. Vide Martii 17 postea.

One Act lastly for the repair of Dover Haven, was sent up to the Lords from
the House of Commons, which was read prima vice.

On Monday the 13th day of March, to which day the Parliament had been last
Adjourned, Five Bills were sent up to the Lords from the House of Commons; of
which the first being an Act for the true making, melting and working of Wax,
with two others were read prima vice.

Six other Bills also were read this Morning; of which the fifth being a Bill
for restitution in Blood of Anthony Mayney, was read secunda and tertia vice,
and so concluded; but the rest had each of them but one reading and no more.

On Tuesday the 14th day of March, Four Bills had each of them one reading; of
which the last being a Bill for the fortifying of the Borders toward Scotland
was read secunda vice.

On Wednesday the 15th day of March, Three Bills had each of them one reading
apiece; of which the last being the Bill for the fortifying of the Borders
toward Scotland was read tertia vice, and so concluded: Six Bills also were
sent up to the Lords from the House of Commons; of which the last being a Bill
touching Iron-Mills near unto the City of London, on the River of Thames, was
read prima vice.

On Thursday the 16th day of March, Two Bills had each of them one reading;
whereof the last being a Bill touching deceit in dying of Cloths, was read
tertia vice, and then sent down to the House of Commons.

On Friday the 17th day of March, Two Bills were brought up to the Lords from
the House of Commons; whereof the first was for the fortifying of the Borders
toward Scotland, with request that certain words might be left out for that
they were superfluous.

It seems the Commons having formerly given the Lords distaste about this Bill
(as may appear on Wednesday the 8th day of March last past) did now send unto
them about some amendments, which their Lordships had added to the said Bill,
which before they would alter or once read (for the Bill it self had already
passed both Houses) they gave them notice thereof on this instant Friday the
17th day of this instant March, desiring as may easily be collected) that some
supefluous words might be put out of the said amendments: whereupon it seems
the Upper House did yield to this respectful and seasonable request of the
Commons (although it be not mentioned in the Original Journal Book;) for the
Bill being altered according to their desires, and sent down again to them this
Forenoon, they there presently passed the said amendments, and returned the
Bill concluded.

Two other Bills were also sent up to the Lords from the House of Commons; of
which the first being a Bill for the repressing of seditious practices against
the Queens Majesty, was read prima and secunda vice.

On Saturday the 18th day of March, the Bill for the increase of Mariners and
maintenance of the Navigation returned from the House of Commons conclusa with
certain amendments, and a Proviso added by them which was read prima, secunda
and tertia vice, and communi omnium procerum assensu conclusa est.

Two other Bills also of no great moment; (whereof the last touching Iron-Mills
about the City of London, etc. was read tertia vice and communi omnium procerum
assensu conclusa, with certain amendments, and two Provisoes to be taken out,
were sent down to the House of Commons.

Then was Entered the continuance of the Parliament in these words, viz. Dominus
Cancellarius continuavit praesens Parliamentum usque in horam secundam post
meridiem.

At which hour the Lords meeting, the two former Bills last abovementioned,
which had been sent down to the House of Commons, were returned from them up to
the Lords again concluded.

Not long after the Lords were set, her Majesty came to the Upper House, and
the Knights, Citizens and Burgesses of the House of Commons having notice of
her Majesty being there, with John Popham their Speaker repaired unto the said
House, and as many as could conveniently being let in, the said Speaker
standing at the Rail or Bar at the lower end of the Upper House, after his
humble reverence made, and some expressions of his zealous affection toward
her Majesty, and humble acknowledgment of her many gracious favors toward
him, he then proceeded according to the usual course to desire her Majesty's
Assent to such wholesome Laws as in this Session of Parliament had passed either
House; and withal did in the name of the House of Commons humbly offer unto her
Majesty the Bill of one Subsidy and two Fifteens and Tenths, as a small
testimonial of their unfeigned Lovalty, and thankful acknowledgment of the
great happiness they enjoyed under her Majesty's most gracious Government.

To which Speech the Lord Chancellor, having received instructions from her
Majesty, Answered, that she did graciously accept the said Speakers many
dutiful expressions, and did well allow of those wholesome Laws they had made,
hoping that all such whose places it might concern, would be careful to put
them in Execution: And lastly concluded with her Majesty's thankful acceptance
of the aforesaid Subsidy, Fifteenths and Tenths, granted unto her by the House
of Commons.

Then were the Titles of all the public and private Acts read in their due
Order, and her Majesty's Assent thereunto, and then the Bill of Subsidies, to
which the Clerk of the Parliament standing up, did read the Queens Answer in
manner and form following:

La Roigne remercie ses loiaulx subjects, and accept leur henevolence and ainsi
le veult.

The Clerk of the Parliament having read the Queens acceptance and thanks for
the Subsidy given as aforesaid, did then upon the reading of the Pardon
pronounce in these French words following, the thanks of the Lords and Commons
for the same.

Les Prelates Seigneurs and Communes en se present Parliament assembles an nom de
touts vous autres Subjects remercient tres humblement vostre Majesty, and
prient a dieu que ils vous done sante bonne, vie and longue.

Nota, That here to the Subsidy Bill, because it is the mere gift of the
Subject, the Queens Consent is not required for the passing of it, but as it is
joined with her thankful acceptance; nor to the Bill of Pardon, because it is
Originally her free gift, is other circumstance required than that the thankful
acceptance thereof by the Lords and Commons be likewise expressed, it being but
once read in either House, before it come thus at last to be expedited.

Then followed the Prorogation of the Parliament, which is Entered in the
Original Journal Book in manner and form following.

Dominus Cancellarius ex mandato Dominae Reginae tune praesentis, Prorogavit
praesens Parliamentum usque in vicesimum quartum diem Aprilis proximum futurum.

At which day this said Parliament was again Prorogued, and so was still
continued by sixteen other Prorogations, each after other, till it was at last
Dissolved upon the 19th day of April in the twenty fifth year of her Majesty's
Reign; the substance of all which Prorogations, with the manner of the
Dissolution, does next follow.

Nota, The word or term Adjourned is used for Prorogued throughout.

Vicesimo quarto die Aprilis, in quem diem Prorogatum fuerat hoc praesens
Parliamentum, Sir Thomas Bromley Knight Lord Chancellor, the Bishop of London,
and the Lord Cromwell, Commissioners, etc. did Adjourn the Parliament ad and in
29 diem Maii.

Vicesimo nono die Maii, in quem diem Prorogatum fuerat praesens Parliamentum,
The Parliament was by the Lord Chancellor, the Earl of Darby, and the Bishop of
Sarisbury, Commissioners, etc. Adjourned ad and in 12 diem Junii.

Duodecimo die Junii, in quem diem Prorogatum fuerat, etc. The Parliament was
by the Lord Chancellor, Lord Treasurer, and five other Commissioners, Adjourned
ad and in 28 diem jam instantis Junii.

Vicesimo octavo die Junii, Anno 23 Eliz. Reginae, in quem diem Prorogatum
fuerat hoc praesens Parliamentum, The Parliament was by the Lord Chancellor,
the Earl of Arundell, and the Lord Dacres, Commissioners, etc. Adjourned ad and
in 26 diem Julii prox. futurum.

Vicesimo sexto die Julii, Anno 23 Eliz. Reginae, The Parliament was by Sir
Thomas Bromley Lord Chancellor, and three other Commissioners, Adjourned ad and
in 12 diem Augusti, Anno 23 Eliz. Reginae, prox. futurum.

Vicesimo primo die Augusti, Anno 23 Eliz. Reginae, in quem diem Prorogatum
fuerat, etc. The Parliament was by the Lord Wentworth, and the Bishop of
London, Commissioners, etc. Prorogued ad and in quintum diem Octobris prox.
futurum.

Quinto die Octobris, Anno 23 Eliz. Reginae, The Parliament was by the Bishop
of London, and the Lord Dacres, Prorogued by virtue of the Queens Majesty's
Commission, etc. ad and in 23 diem Novembris prox. futurum.

Vicesimo tertio die Novembris, Anno 24 Eliz. Reginae, The Parliament was
Adjourned by Sir Thomas Bromley Lord Chancellor, and Edward Lord Stafford, by
virtue of the Queens Majesty's Commission, ad and in quintum diem Decembris
prox. futurum.

Quinto die Decembris, Anno 24 Eliz. Reginae, The Parliament was by the Lord
Chancellor, and Edward Lord Stafford, Adjourned according to the Queens
Majesty's Commission in that behalf, etc. ad and in 18 diem Januarii prox.
futurum.

Decimo octavo die Januarii, Anno 24 Eliz. Reginae, The Parliament was
Adjourned by the Lord Chancellor, the Lord Treasurer, the Bishop of London, and
the Lord Howard of Effingham, by virtue of the Queens Majesty's Commission, ad
and in duodecimum diem Februarii proxime futurum.

Duodecimo die Februarii, Anno 24 Eliz. Reginae, The Parliament was Adjourned
by the Lord Chancellor, the Lord Treasurer, the Bishop of London, and the Lord
Buckhurst, by Virtue of a Commission, ad and in 12 diem Martii prox. futurum.
Upon which said 12th day of March in the same twenty fourth year of her
Majesty's Reign, the Lord Chancellor, and other Lords met, and Prorogued the
Parliament unto a further day, which after five other Prorogations was at last
Dissolved, all which follow in their several places, viz.

Duodecimo die Martii, Anno 24 Eliz. Reginae, The Parliament was by the Lord
Chancellor, the Bishop of London, and Gregory Lord Dacres, by virtue of a
Commission, Adjourned ad and in 26 diem Aprilis prox. futurum.

Vicesimo sexto die Aprilis, Anno 24 Eliz. Reginae, The Parliament was
Adjourned by the Lord Chancellor, one Earl, one Bishop, and two Lords, by
virtue of a Commission, ad and in 26 diem Maii prox. futurum.

Vicesimo sexto die Maii, Anno 24 Eliz. Reginae, The Parliament was Adjourned
by the Lord Chancellor, and Roger Lord Morley, by virtue of a Commission, etc.
ad and in decimum diem Octobris prox. futur.

Decimo die Octobris, Anno 24 Eliz. Reginae, the Parliament was in usual form
Adjourned by the Bishop of London, and Gregory Lord Dacres, by virtue of a
Commission, etc. ad and in 29 diem Novembris prox. faturum.

Vicesimo nono die Novembris, Anno 25 Eliz. Reginae, The Parliament was in
usual manner Adjourned by the Bishop of London, and Gregory Lord Dacres, by
virtue of a Commission, etc. ad and in 24 diem Januarii prox. futurum. Nota the
word Adjourned is used for Prorogued.

Vicesimo quarto die Januarii, Anno 25 Eliz. Reginae; the Parliament was in
usual form Adjourned by the Lord Chancellor, the Lord Treasurer, and the Bishop
of London, by virtue of a Commission, etc. ad and in 19 diem Aprilis prox.
futurum.

Memorand. quod hodierno die, decimo nono die Aprilis, Anno Regni 25
Elizabethae Reginae, in quem diem Prorogatum fuit hoc praesens Parliamentum,
convenere Proceres, tam Spirituales quam Temporales, quorum nomina
subseribuntur, Thomas Bromley Miles Cancellarius Angliae, Willielmus Dominus
Burleigh, Dominus Thesaurarius Angliae, Philippus Comes Arundell, Franciscus
Comes Bedford, Johannes Episcopus London, Edwardus Dominus Stafford, Fredericus
Dominus Windefor, Henricus Dominus Hunsdon, Henricus Dominus Norris; Qui cum
convenissent, Thomas Bromley Miles Dominus Cancellarius Angliae literas Regias
Commissarias Anthonio Mason Clerico Parliamenti public legendas in manus
tradidit, virtute quarum Dissolutum est hoc praesens Parliamentum.

Earum autem tenor hic erat.
ELizabetha Dei gratia Angliae, Franciae and Hiberniae Regina, Fidei
Defensatrix, etc. praedilecto and fideli Consiliario suo Thomae Bromley Militi
Domino Cancellario Angliae, reverendissimoque in Christo Patri Edwino Ebor.
Archiepiscopo Angliae Primati and Metropolitano; ac praedilecto and Consiliario
suo Willielmo Domino Burleigh Domino Thesaurario Angliae, ac etiam charissimis
consanguineis and Consiliariis suis, Edwardo Comiti Lincoln. magno Admirallo
suo Angliae, Thomae Comiti Sussex Domino Camerario suo; Necnon charissimis
consanguineis suis Philippo Comiti Arundell, Henrico Comiti Northumbr. Henrico
Comiti Darby, Willielmo Comiti Wigorn. ac etiam charissimis consanguineis and
Consiliariis suis, Henrico Comiti Huntingdon, Domino Praesidenti Concilii sui
in partibus Borealibus, Ambrosio Comiti Warwici Magistro Ordinationum suarum,
Francisco Comiti Bedford; Charissimis consinguineisque suis, Henrico Comiti
Pembroke, Edwardo Comiti Hertford; ac Charissimo consanguineo and Consiliario
suo Roberto Comiti Leicestr. Migistro Equorum suorum, ac etiam charissimo
consanguineo suo Anthonio Vicecomiti Mountague; necnon reverendis in Christo
Patribus Johanni Episcopo London. Johanni Episcopo Sarisburien. Johanni
Episcopo Roffen. ac etiam praedilectis and fidelibus suis Willielmo Domino
Cobham, Domino Gardiano Quinque Portuum suorum, Peregrino Domino Willoughby,
Gregorio Domino Dacre, Edwardo Domino Stafford, Johanni Domino Lumley,
Frederico Domino Windesor, Thomae Domino Wentworth, Lodovico Domino Mordant,
Henrico Domino Cromwell, Carolo Domino Howard de Effingham, Rogero Domino
North, praedilecto and fideli Consiliario suo Henrico Domino de Hunsdon, Domino
Gardiano Marchiarum Orientalium versus Scotiam; ac praedilectis and fidelibus
suis Thomae Domino Buckhurst, Henrico Domino Compton, Henrico Domino Cheyney de
Tuddington, and Henrico Domino de Norris de Ricott, salutem. Cum nuper pro
quibusdam arduts and urgentibus negotiis, Nos statum and Defensionem Regni
nostri Angliae ac Ecclesiae Anglicanae concernentibus, praesens hoc
Parliamentum nostrum apud Civitatem nostram Westmonasterii octavo die Maii,
Anno regni nostri 14o inchoari and teneri ordinaverimus; a quo die idem
Parliamentum nostrum tunc and ibidem tentum and continuatum fuerat usque
tricesimum diem Junii tunc prox. sequentem; Eodemque die idem Parliamentum
nostrum post diversas Prorogationes, usque octavum diem Februarii, Anno regni
nostri 18o Prorogatum fuerat; ac ibidem tunc tentum and continuatum fuerat
usque 15 diem Martii tunc prox. sequentem; Eodemque die idem Parliamentum
nostrum post diversas Prorogationes, usque ad and in 16 diem Januarii, Anno
Regni nostri vicesimo tertio, Prorogatum fuerat; ac ibidem tunc tentum and
continuatum fuerat usque 18 diem Martii tunc prox. sequentem; Eodemque die idem
Parliamentum nostrum usque ad and in 24 diem Aprilis tunc prox. sequentem,
Prorogatum fuerat; Eodemque die Parliamentum nostrum ad and in 29 diem Maii
tunc prox. sequentem, Prorogatum fuerat; Eodemque die Parliamentum nostrum
usque ad and in 12 diem Junii tunc prox. sequentem, Prorogatum fuerat; Eodemque
die idem Parliamentum nostrum usque ad and in 28 diem ejusdem Mensis Junii tunc
prox. sequentem, Prorogatum fuerat; Eodemque die idem Parliamentum nostrum
usque ad and in 26 diem Julii tunc prox. sequentem, Prorogatum fuerat; Eodemque
die idem Parliamentum nostrum usque ad and in 21 diem Augusti tunc prox.
sequentem, Prorogatum fuerat; Eodemque die idem Parliamentum nostrum usque ad
and in quintum diem Octobris tunc prox. sequentem, Prorogatum fuerat; Eodemque
die idem Parliamentum nostrum usque ad and in 23 diem Novembris tunc prox.
sequentem, Prorogatum fuerat; Eodemque die idem Parliamentum nostrum usque ad
and in quintum diem Decembris tunc prox. sequentem, Prorogatum fuerat; Eodemque
die idem Parliamentum nostrum usque ad and in 18 diem Januarii tunc prox.
sequentem, Prorogatum fuerat; Eodemque die idem Parliamentum nostrum usque ad
and in 12 diem Februarii tunc prox. sequentem Prorogatum fuerat; Eodemque die
idem Parliamentum nostrum usque ad and in 12 diem Martii tunc prox. sequentem,
Prorogatum fuerat; Eodemque die idem Parliamentum nostrum usque ad and in 26
diem Aprilis tunc prox. sequentem, Prorogatum fuerat; Eodemque die idem
Parliamentum nostrum usque ad and in 26 diem Maii tunc prox. sequentem,
Prorogatum fuerat; Eodemque die idem Parliamentum nostrum usque ad and in
decimum diem Octobris tunc prox. sequentem Prorogatum fuerat; Eodemque die idem
Parliamentum nostrum usque ad and in 29 diem Novembris tunc prox. sequentem,
Prorogatum fuerat; Eodemque die idem Parliamentum nostrum usque ad and in 24
diem Januarii tunc prox. sequentem, Prorogatum fuerat: Nec non idem
Parliamentum nostrum a praedicto 24 die Januarii usque ad and in instantem 19
diem Aprilis Prorogatum fuerat ibidem tenend. and prosequend. Sciatis tamen
certis urgentibus causis and considerationibus nos specialiter moventibus, de
sidelitate igitur, prudentia and circumspectione vestris plurimum confidentes,
de avisamento and assensu Concilii nostri, assignavimus vos Commissionarios
nostros, dantes vobis triginta and quatuor, triginta and tribus, triginta and
duobus, triginta and uni, triginta, and novem viginti, and octo viginti, and
septem viginti, and sex viginti, and quinque viginti, and quatuor viginti, and
tribus viginti, and duobus viginti, and uni viginti, viginti, novemdecim,
octodecim, septemdecim, sexdecim, quindecim, quatuordecim, tredecim, duodecim,
undecim, december, novem, octo, septem, sex, quinque quatuor vel tribus vestrum,
tenore Praesentium, plenam potestatem and authoritatem hoc instante die
Veneris, ad praesens Parliamentum nostrum nomine nostro plenarie dissolvendum;
Et ideo vobis mandamus, quod circa praemissa diligenter intendatis, ac ea in
forma praedicta effectualiter expleatis: Damus autem universis and singulis
Archiepiscopis, Marchionibus, Comitibus, Vicecomitibus, Episcopis, Baronibus,
Militibus, Civibus and Burgensibus, ac omnibus aliis quorum interest ad dictum
Parliamentum nostrum conventuris, tenore Praesentium, firmiter in mandatis,
quod vobis in praemissis faciend. agend. and exequend. pareant, obediant, and
intendant, prout decet. In cujus rei testimonium has Literas nostras fieri
fecimus Patentes. Test me ipsa apud Westmonasterium decimo nono die Aprilis,
Anno Regni nostri vicesimo quinto.

Per ipsam Reginam, etc.

THE JOURNAL OF THE House of COMMONS.
A Journal of the House of Commons in the Session of Parliament holden at
Westminster, Anno 23 Reginae Eliz. Anno Domini 1580. which began there. (after
many Prorogations of the same) on Monday the 16th Day of January, and then and
there continued until it was first Prorogued on Saturday the 18th Day of March,
and was lastly Dissolved (after sixteen other Prorogations) on Friday the 19th
Day of April, Anno 25to Reginae ejusdem, Anno Domini 1583.

THIS Session in Anno 23 Reginae Eliz. Anno Domini 1580. makes but one and the
same Parliament with that in Anno 14 Reginae Eliz. Anno Domini 1572. which was
the first Session of it, and with that in Anno 18 Eliz. Reginae Anno Domini
1575. which was the middle and second Session of the same: so that this present
Assembly of the Peers and Commons of the Realm in this their great Council, was
but the third and last Session of it, being one and the same Parliament as
aforesaid, continued still, each after other, without any Dissolution, near
upon the space of twelve years by fourscore several Prorogations, or
thereabouts, viz. from Thursday the 8th day of May in the sourteenth year of
the Queen, on which said Thursday it first began, until the Dissolution thereof
on the 19th day of April, Anno 25 Reginae Eliz. Anno Domini 1583. In this said
third and last Session finally, besides many good Passages touching the Orders
and Privileges of the House, there fell out an unusual dispute in the same
concerning the appointment of a public Fast, which in the end occasioned her
Majesty's displeasure and inhibition thereof.

The Parliament began upon this present Monday the 16th day of this instant
January, to which it had been last Prorogued; both the Lords and Commons did
each of them Assemble and meet in their several Houses, as at any other
ordinary time without pomp or solemnity, this being as has been observed, no
new Parliament, but the last Session of that Parliament which had been first
begun on Thursday the 8th day of May in Anno 14 Reginae Eliz. Anno Domini 1572.
and continued by many several Prorogations and Adjournments unto this present
Monday, at which day diverse of the Knights of the Shires, Citizens of Cities,
Burgesses of Buroughs, and Barons of the Ports did appear and sit down in the
House of Commons; but the number of them was not great, partly by reason of
sundry former Prorogations of the same Session made so near unto the days
thereof appointed; and partly also for that many of the Knights, Citizens,
Burgesses and Barons since the last former Sessions were changed, some by
Death, and some by other occasions, and new returned in some of their places,
and in some others none, which now could not sit in the House till they had
first taken the Oath for acknowledging the Queens Highnesses Supremacy over all
Estates within her Majesty's Realms and Dominions; which as then was not done,
neither could then be done because there was then no Lord Steward at all named
or appointed for that purpose, according to the form of the Statute in that
case made and provided.

And being so set, Sir Francis Knolles Knight Treasurer of her Majesty's most
honorable Household stood up, and putting the House in remembrance as well of
the Death of Sir Robert Bell Knight, late Lord Chief Baron of her Highness
Exchcquer, their Speaker since the last Session, by reason whereof the House
was then without a Speaker, and could not therefore proceed in any thing; as
also of some course to be taken for procuring her Majesty's Commandment to
choose another Speaker, he declared unto them that as it was well known by often
experience and usage, that at the first Summons or beginning of a Parliament,
the Order is in that case to sit still till the House be sent for to the Upper
House there to receive her Highness Commandment to choose a Speaker; so was it
now uncertain what Order should be used when a Speaker dying after a former
Session Prorogated, a new is to be chosen in another Session ensuing holden by
such Prorogation, in which Case he said there were not many Precedents to his
knowledge, albeit yet one within our Memory which was in the eighth year of her
Majesty's Reign, when Richard Onslow Esquire the Queens Majesty's Solicitor
was chosenSpeaker in that Session de an. 8 Reginae Eliz. which made but one and
the same Parliament with the former Session held in Anno 5 Reginae ejusdem, in
which Thomas Williams Esquire had been Speaker, and died before the said second
Session held by Prorogation in the said eighth year of the Queen; he offered a
Copy of that precedent, but because Mr Fulk Onslow the Clerk was present
sitting as Clerk, and had there his Original Book of notes, out of which the
said Copy was taken, he was Commanded to read it out of his Book which was to
this purpose.

But in respect it is omitted both in the foul Copy which Fulk Onslow now Clerk
of the House of Commons took concerning the Passages of this Session of
Parliament, fol. 1. a. and also in the fair written or perfected Copy of the
Journal of this said Session (out of both which this present Journal is
collected and enlarged) fol. 106. b. therefore (it being a Precedent useful) I
have supplied it out of the Original Journal Book of the Upper House in the
Parliament de Annis 8, and 9 Reginae Eliz. Anno Domini 1565. in manner and form
following, viz.

That on Monday the 30th day of December in the eighth year of the Reign of
Queen Elizabeth, a new Session of Parliament being holden by Prorogation at
Westminster, and the Knights, Citizens and Burgesses according to their usual
Order and Custom meeting thereupon in the House of Commons, did there find that
Thomas Williams Esquire their late Speaker in the first Session of this Parliament
holden in the fifth year of the said Queen Eliz. was dead, and that the said
Commons falling by that means into Consultation what course was fittest to be
taken in respect that until a new Speaker was chosen, no business could be
Entered upon or expedited in the said House, did at length all resolve as the
best course to send certain of the most eminent Personages, being Members of
the said House, up unto the Lords to desire likewise their advice and
assistance in whatsoever their Lordships in that Case should think fittest to
be done. And thereupon their Lordships joining four Members of their House with
four more of the House of Commons, did advise that with all humbleness and
speed they should all jointly repair to her Majesty, and make intimation of
their said Estate, and so further desire to know her pleasure therein: And her
Majesty did accordingly most graciously on the next day, being Tuesday the
first day of October, send her Commission under the Great Seal of England,
directed unto the Lord Keeper, by which the said Knights, Citizens and
Burgesses of the House of Commons were Authorized to Elect and choose a new
Speaker, which accordingly they did, and thereupon presented him being Richard
Onslow Esquire the Queens Solicitor, on the very next day following, being
Wednesday the second day of October.

But notwithstanding this precedent, some were of opinion (although they did
not utter it, because they supposed themselves not warranted to treat of any
thing, much less of any dealing with the Upper House without a Speaker, or
without her Majesty's Commandment) that this was the only precedent that could
be showed in such manner of proceeding, and was but an innovation, and not
warranted upon good grounds, but rather subject to inconvenience and peril. So
first they thought it was a breach of Duty to the Queen, that we should enter
into that or any other Consultation before her Majesty's Pleasure known
touching a Speaker.

Item there was no warrant to resolve us any thing, so that there was no person
to take the Voices or moderate the Consultation.

Item those who should go on such Message, could have no good warrant to
deliver it in the name of the House, when the House could treat of nothing.

Item it had some inconvenience of drawing a special Prerogative to those of
the House that were of her Majesty's Council from the rest of the House.

Item it had greater peril of precedent to draw the Petitions of the House to
her Majesty, to be done by mediation of the Upper House; and they thought it to
stand much in duty and humility to the Queen, not to presume to make such
Petition, or to make difference in proceeding upon a Parliament newly Summoned,
and a Session of Parliament held by Prorogation as it is used upon new Summons,
so to sit still in all humility, expecting that the House should be sent for to
the Upper House, there to receive her Majesty's Pleasure and Commandment to
choose a Speaker; which her Pleasure might either be delivered by the Lord
Chancellor in her Majesty's Presence, or in her absence by Commission, as in
Cases of Prorogations and such like doings is used. And for that it might be
doubted how her Majesty should have notice that the Speakers place was void: it
was to be Answered, that the House it self judicially has no notice but by
relation of his Death as her Majesty has. And her Majesty has the more
certain notice, for that her self had made Sir Robert Bell Lord Chief Baron,
and so his place of Speaker void as some thought, although some others thought
that the Chief Baron may be Speaker, and she had since his Death made a new
Chief Baron, viz.

Nota, That this Argument does very solidly and fully prove, that the Knights,
Citizens and Burgesses of the House of Commons ought not at this time to have
joined with the Upper House in Petitioning the Queen for liberty to choose a new
Speaker, in respect that her Majesty could not but take notice of it as well as
themselves, and the rather at this present because she had first made Sir
Robert Bell Knight their former Speaker Chief Baron of the Exchequer, by which
many supposed his place of Speaker was void in the said Commons House, because
he was to be called by Writ as a necessary attendant of the Upper House; and
lastly, because her Majesty had now afterward also upon his Death, made
another Chief Baron in his room: by all which it appeared most plainly as is
before urged, that her Majesty could not but know as well as themselves that
the said place of Speaker was void.

But whether Mr Fulk Onslow the now Clerk of the House of Commons did conceive
these reasons in his own mind, and so by communicating them unto others of the
said House, and finding them to concur in the same opinion, did thereupon Enter
them in the Journal Book of this Parliament, or whether others of the House did
first conceive it themselves, and utter it to him in private in the said House;
yet certainly it having not been openly spoken in the House as appears by his
own setting of it down, but privately muttered, it ought to have been Entered as
a private opinion, and not as any part of the Journal, and to have been
distinguished by being written in some other different hand, from that in which
the rest of the Journal was set down or the like.

But yet notwithstanding all those foresaid reasons already set down, it was at
last agreed by the greater number of the few Voices that the said Precedent
should be followed which had before passed in the eighth year of her Highness
Reign: And accordingly were appointed the said Mr Treasurer and Sir James
Crofts Knight Comptroller of her Majesty's most honorable Household, and Thomas
Wilson Esquire one of her Highnesses Principal Secretaries with a convenient
number of others of the House, to go to the Upper House to make Petition to the
Lords for their Mediation to her Majesty for License to choose a Speaker, the
place being void first by the making of the said Sir Robert Bell to be Lord
Chief Baron of the Exchequer, and lastly by his Death: which Message being by
the said persons executed accordingly, and they brought Answer again to the
House from the Lords, that their Lordships had appointed all the Lords of the
Privy Council, with the Marquess of Winchester, the Earl of Arundell, and the
Bishop of London, to make that Suit to her Majesty, and required to have four
of this House being of her Majesty's Privy Council to join therein with them,
according to the said Precedent: whereupon forasmuch as it appeared to this
House that the Lords in appointing their number, had varied from the said
Precedent, it was moved that likewise the number appointed by this House might
also be altered, that in precedent it might remain a thing Arbitratory to the
House, and that so five of this House being of the Privy Council, should be
added to the Lords, and the rather because it was then affirmed of some, that
the cause why only four of the Council being of this House were appointed in
the said eighth year, was for that the Lords number was then but four, and for
that also there were at that time but four of the Council in this House. The
now Lord Treasurer then being the one only Principal Secretary to her Majesty;
but at last the said Precedent was precisely urged and followed, and the said
Mr Treasurer, Mr Comptroller, and Sir Francis Walsingham Knight, one of her
Majesty's two Principal Secretaries, and Sir Walter Mildmay Knight Chancellor
of her Highness Court of Exchequer, were appointed by this House to join with
the said Lords in the said Suit to her Majesty, and Order was then also given,
that this House should also daily assemble to continue the Session and attend
the Answer of her Highnesses Pleasure therein.

On Tuesday the 17th day of January, some number of this House Assembled this
day to attend for the causes aforesaid.

On Wednesday the 18th day of January, the Right Honorable the Earl of Lincoln
Lord Steward of the Queens Majesty's most honorable Household came into this
House, and before him diverse Knights, Citizens and Burgesses returned into this
House, did openly receive and pronounce the Oath according to the form of the
Statute in that case made and provided; and he did also then and there signify
and declare the right Honorable Mr Treasurer, Mr Comptroller, Mr Secretary
Wilson and Mr Chancellor of the Exchequer to be his Deputies during this
Session of Parliament, that before them or any of them, all such persons as
should, during this Session be returned to be of this House, might openly
receive and pronounce the said Oath accordingly, which Deputation they did then
execute.

This matter of the Lord Stewards Ministering the Oath of Supremacy unto such
Members of the House of Commons, as were newly Elected and returned to this new
Session of Parliament, being thus transcribed out of the Original Journal Book
of the House of Commons; now follows the whole manner of the proceeding of her
Majesty in giving Authority by her Commission under the Great Seal unto the
House of Commons, to Elect a new Speaker, and of their receiving the said
Authority, out of the Original Journal Book of the House of Lords, in respect
that the same is but shortly and imperfectly set down in the Original
Journal Book of the said House of Commons.

This foresaid Wednesday Morning the Knights, Citizens and Burgesses of the
House of Commons (being mindful of the great business of the Election of a new
Speaker, which they had treated of on Monday foregoing being the 16th day of
this instant January) repaired to the Upper House commonly called the
Parliament Chamber, where being Assembled with the Lords, those noble
Personages and others who had been appointed to repair unto the Queen on Monday
foregoing, signified her Majesty's Pleasure unto all the Lords and Commons
there present concerning the Choice of a new Speaker by the Members of the
House of Commons. And thereupon the Lord Chancellor showed forth a Commission
under the Broad Seal of England, which he Commanded the Clerk openly to read;
the the tenor whereof was as follows.

ELizabeth, etc. To our Right Trusty and Right well Beloved Counselor Sir
Thomas Bromley Knight, Lord Chancellor of England, Greeting. Whereas in the
beginning of this our present Parliament holden at Westminster the eight day of
May in the fourteenth year of our Reign, the Knights, Citizens and Burgesses
being Assembled in the same Parliament were Commanded by us to go to their
accustomed place, and there to choose to themselves one to be their Speaker
according to the accustomed manner: Whereupon the same Knights, Citizens and
Burgesses did Elect and Choose one Robert Bell Esquire afterward Knight, and Chief
Baron of our Exchequer now deceased to be their Speaker, and the same their
Election did afterward certify unto us; which Election we did allow and
ratify: since which time this our present Parliament has been continued by
diverse Prorogations until the 8th day of February in the eighteenth year of our
Reign, at which time the said Parliament was holden and continued from the said
8th day of February until the 15th day of March then next following, from which
time also the said Parliament has continued by diverse and sundry Prorogations
until the 16th day of January in this present twenty third year of our Reign.
At which day the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and also the said Knights,
Citizens and Burgesses have declared unto us that the said Robert Bell since
the last Session of this present Parliament is dead, and thereupon have made
their humble Suit and Petition to us, that they might have License and
Commandment from us to proceed to Elect amongst themselves one other to be
their Speaker for the rest of this present Parliament yet to come. Wherefore we
having certain and perfect knowledge that the said Robert Bell is dead as they
have alleged, and considering their humble Petition and Request is very meet
and necessary to be granted, have appointed and Constituted you, and by the
these Presents we do Will, Command, Constitute and Appoint you for us and in
our Name to Call the said Knights, Citizens and Burgesses before you and other
the Lords Spiritual and Temporal Assembled in this our present Parliament in
the Higher House of our Parliament at Westminster, and there present, for us
and in our Name to Will and Command the said Knights, Citizens and Burgesses to
resort to their accustomed place, and there to Elect and Choose amongst
themselves one sufficient and able Person to be their Speaker for the rest of
this present Parliament yet to come; and after they have once made their
Election, that then three or four of them for and in all their names shall
signify the same unto us; and thereupon we will further signify our Pleasure
unto them what day and time they shall present the Person Elected before us, as
heretofore has been in like Cases accustomed to be done. Wherefore our Will
and Pleasure is, that you do diligently attend about doing of the premises, and
execute the same with effect. In Witness whereof we have caused these our
Letters Patents to be Sealed with our Great Seal. Witness our Self at
Westminster the 16th day of January in the twenty third Year of our Reign.

Thus far out of the Original Journal Book of the Upper House; now follows the
continuance of this days Passages, as also of the residue of the matters
handled in the House of Commons during this Session of Parliament, out of the
Original Journal Book of the same House.

At the return of such Members of the House of Commons into their own House as
had been present in the Upper House during the time the recited Commission was
in reading (for many of the House of Commons conceiving that their sending for
to the Upper House aforesaid, being only by their own Sergeant whom they had
sent up to the Lords to see if the Lord Chancellor and the rest of their
Lordships were come thither or no, was no orderly giving them notice of their
Lordships desires in that behalf according to former usage, in respect that the
said Commons are to be sent for by.....) amongst the said Members as aforesaid,
who had been so present in the said Upper House, Sir Francis Knolles Knight
Treasurer of her Majesty's Household, did at his return declare, that for
Answer to the Suit her Majesty's Commission was read to license and Command the
Commons to Choose a Speaker, and that four of this House being of the
Privy Council should make report of the Election to her Majesty, that her
Highness might thereupon signify her further Pleasure for appointing the day
for presenting of him.

Mr Treasurer further declared unto the House before their proceeding to
Election, that he and others had just now seen in the Upper House one that is a
Member of this House, to wit Mr John Popham, her Majesty's Solicitor General,
being one of the Citizens for Bristol, and therefore made a Motion that some of
this House might be sent to their Lordships with request that the said Mr
Popham being a Member of this House might forthwith be remanded and restored to
this House again, which some thought not needful to be done before the
Election, and others again denying that he or any other could be Chosen Speaker
except he were present himself. The Clerk was Commanded to read the said
Precedent again of choosing Mr Onslow in the said eighth year of her Majesty's
Reign (which said Precedent see on Monday the 16th day of this instant
foregoing) and thereupon that course being agreed upon to be followed, the said
Mr Treasurer and others were sent up to the Lords to demand the restitution of
the said Mr Popham, and brought Answer again that their Lordships had resolved
he should be sent down, the rather because he was a Member of this House, and
this House possessed of him before he was Solicitor, or had any place of
Attendance in the Upper House. Upon relation whereof a Motion was presently
made, that it was not meet or convenient to choose a Speaker by persons that
were not of the House, and withal it was thought of some that diverse persons
being newly returned in the places of others yet living, were not, or ought not
to be accounted Members of this House. Whereupon to avoid length of Argument
and the impediment of the Election, the said Mr Treasurer by the Assent of the
House pronounced an Admonition, that all such as were newly returned in the
places of others yet living should forbear to repair to the House till their
case were further considered. Then immediately Mr Anderson the Queens Sergeant
at Law, and Sir Gilbert Gerard Knight her Highness Attorney General, brought
from the Lords the said Mr Popham her Majesty's Solicitor General, one of the
Citizens for the City of Bristol, and restored him to this House as a Member of
the same, and so departed. And then was a Motion made by Mr Lewkenor for Prayer
to be used before the Election, that it might please God both in that and in
the residue of the Proceedings of this House, to direct them with his Holy
Spirit; and a form of Prayer was then read to the House by the Clerk. And then
afterward the House proceeding to the Election of a Speaker, the said Mr
Treasurer first speaking did for his own part name and commend the said Mr
Popham, alleging many good reasons and causes moving him thereunto, but still
leaving nevertheless liberty without prejudice to the residue of the House to
name whom they would or thought good. And thereupon the whole House with full
consent of Voices agreed upon the choosing of the said Mr Popham; who standing
up and much disabling himself in dutiful and reverend wise, and alleging for
himself many reasonable causes and excuses, besought them humbly to proceed to
a new Election, whereof the House did not allow; and so then was he forthwith
by the said Mr Treasurer and Mr Comptroller brought up and placed in the Chair,
and order thereupon given that the House should the next day Assemble together,
both to understand her Majesty's Pleasure for presenting of the Speaker, and
also to determine of the case of the said persons newly returned into this
House in the places of others yet living.

On Thursday the 19th day of January the House again Assembled, the Speaker
Elect sitting in the Chair.

The matter began to be debated touching the said Burgesses, of whom question
was made the day before; and the Case was opened by Mr Norton a Citizen of
London to the effect following, viz.

That there be Members of this House absent in her Majesty's Service, as in
Embassage, or in her affairs in Ireland, in whose place new be returned.

Item, some persons be sick of durable Diseases, as Agues, etc. and new be
returned in their places.

Item, one Mr Flowerden was the last Session Burgess for Castle-Rising in
Norfolk, and in the Vacation was sick: Upon suggestion of which sickness a Writ
went to choose a new. Whereupon Sir William Drewry is Chosen and returned for
Castle-Rising, who now appears, and Mr Flowerden also. In the same Vacation
one Beamond a Citizen for Norwich is sick of the Gout, upon suggestion whereof
a Writ went out to choose a new for Norwich; Mr Flowerden is chosen, returned
and newly sworn for Norwich. Vide March 18th Saturday postea.

The Questions are whether such as be returned in places of persons sick, or of
persons absent in the Queens Service, be Burgesses, and the old discharged. Mr
Norton thought the old Burgesses remained, and that the said causes of sickness
and service are good excuses for their absence, but no causes to remove them
and to choose new. And for this he alleged diverse Precedents, as of Doctor Dale
Ambassador in France, and of Sir Henry Sidney Deputy of Wales, who having been
formerly both of them Members of the House of Commons, and absent by reason of
both their said Employments, yet when their case was once made known unto the
House and there questioned, they were still retained as Members of the said
House, and no new chosen, or admitted. But however although such absent Members
by reason of sickness or Foreign Employment might be removed, yet that ought
not to be done upon a suggestion in the Chancery, but by the Judgment of the
House of Commons upon information thereof.

Mr Sergeant Flowerden, Mr Robert Snagg, Mr Seintpoole, and Mr Sergeant
Fleetwood Comptroller argued to the contrary, and said, that in all these cases
new are to be chosen, and the old discharged. And that it needs not to have
discharge by the Judgment of the House, but it suffices to make suggestion in
the Chancery, and to procure a Writ thereupon for a new Election. And to
question this was to discredit the Lord Chancellor and to scandalize the
Judicial Proceedings of that Court.

And it was further alleged, that not only in these before-recited Cases, but
also in all others where any new Elections are to be made, if the Lord
Chancellor send out a Writ upon any suggestion to choose a new Burgess in the
place of an old, whether the cause be sufficient or non-sufficient to remove
the old, or whether the suggestion be true or false, yet if a new be returned
the House of Commons is to accept the Burgess and to allow the return, and the
old Burgess remains discharged until the matter be further cleared upon the
Examination and Judgment of the said House.

And according to these opinions the new Burgesses Elected and returned in
places of men living, were received and allowed in the said House; Mr Flowerden
keeping his place for Norwich, Sir William Drewry for Castle-Riseing, Mr
Richard Herbert in place of Mr Pugh for Montgomery, and so the like of the rest
that were new Elected. Vide the contrary resolved March the 18th postea.

Nota, That all this was done after the Election of John Popham Esquire the
Queens Solicitor for Prolocutor or Speaker, but before his Presentation to the
Queen, or her Majesty's allowance of him. The agitation of which question was
doubtless either privately muttered in the House, or if it were disputed openly
it was suddenly and unwarrantably done, in respect that the House of Commons
have no power to determine or resolve of any thing after the Election of the
Speaker, till he be presented and allowed, as may easily be Collected by all
Precedents both of latter and former times. Neither did this opinion of the
House thus irregularly given take any great effect, because the contrary was
resolved March 18 postea.

In the mean time of those foregoing Arguments and Disputations in the House,
it was signified unto the said House that her Majesty's Pleasure was, that the
Speaker should be presented unto her Highness on the next day following at two
of the Clock in the Afternoon in the Upper House.

On Friday the 20th day of January the House Assembled together, and about two
of the Clock in the Afternoon they had notice that the Queen with the Lords
Spiritual and Temporal were all set in the Upper House. Whereupon the Knights,
Citizens and Burgesses hasted thither with Mr Popham their Speaker, and being
let in as many as conveniently could, and the said Speaker brought up to the
Bar at the lower end of the said House by two of the most eminent Personages of
the House of Commons, he there made his humble excuse, and alleged his
insufficience for discharge of his place in such manner and form as in like
case is usually accustomed.

But notwithstanding his said excuse her Majesty by the Lord Chancellor
signified her Allowance of him, for which the said Speaker rendered his humble
thanks, and Petitioning in the name of the House of Commons for Liberty of
Speech, for free access to her Majesty, and for freedom from Arrests, according
to the usual form, the Lord Chancellor by the Queens Commandment made him a
gracious Answer; after which ended the Knights, Citizens and Burgesses with
their said Speaker returned unto their own House.

And being come thither and the Speaker set in his Chair, one Bill according to
the usual form was read, which was for the assurance of Purchasers against
encumbrances.

On Saturday the 21th day of January the Litany being read by the Clerk, and
the old Prayer, that was used in former Sessions, read also by the Speaker, Mr
Speaker made a short Oration to the House, partly touching himself and partly
touching them. For his own part acknowledging his infirmities and praying both
their patience and assistance; and for them he advised them to use reverent and
discreet Speeches, to leave curiosity of form, and to speak to the matter: and
for that the Parliament was likely to be very short, willed them further to
forbear speaking to Bills at the first reading, and not to spend too much time
in unnecessary Motions or supersiuous Arguments. And further desired them that
they would see their Servants, Pages and Lackies attending on them kept in good
order.

Which ended, a Motion was made that Mr Speaker and the residue of the House of
the better sort of Calling, would always at the rising of the House depart and
come forth in comely and civil sort, for the reverence of the House in turning
about with a low Courtesy, like as they do make at their coming into the
House, and not so unseemly and rudely to thrust and throng out as of late time
has been disorderly used; which Motion made by Sir James Croft Knight
Comptroller of her Majesty's Household, was very well liked of and allowed of
all this House.

The Bill for reformation of disorders of the Clerk of the Market and his
Deputies was read the first time.

Mr Paul Wentworth made a Motion for a public Fast and daily Preaching; the
Fast to be appointed upon some one certain day, but the Preaching to be every
Morning at seven of the Clock before the House did sit; that so they beginning
their proceeding with the Service and Worship of God, he might the better bless
them in all their Consultations and Actions.

Sir Francis Knolles Treasurer of the Queens Household spoke against this
Motion, Mr Thomas Cromwell spoke for it, Mr Alford against it, Mr Cook for it,
Mr Secretary Wilson for it, Mr Sergeant Flowerden for it; and Mr Norton showed
Precedents that there had been Fasts in London by Order only from the Council
(by which it seems he intended to infer that a Parliament might much rather
appoint it.)

Hereupon the House being divided, and many Arguments being spent pro and con,
at length the said matter in question was put to Voices, and the better side
had the greater number; for there were a hundred and fifteen Voices for it, and
but a hundred against it; and so it was Ordered, that as many of the House of
Commons as convenient could, should on the Sunday seven-night after, being the
29th day of this instant January, Assemble and meet together in the Temple
Church there to hear Preaching and join in Prayer together with Humiliation and
Fasting for the assistance of Gods Spirit in all their Consultations during
this Parliament, and for the Preservation of the Queens Majesty and her Realms;
and that the Preachers who should perform the work and service of that day,
might be appointed by such of her Majesty's Council as were of the House, to
the intent that they may be discreet persons and keep convenient proportion of
time, without intermedling with matter of innovation or unquietness.

This day also it was Ordered that the House should be called on Wednesday next
being the 25th day of this instant January in the Afternoon, that so it might
appear who did diligently intend the business of the House, and who did
negligently absent themselves.

Mr Broughton also this Forenoon made a Motion to know the mind of the House
touching his Companion or Fellow Burgess, who now stood indicted of Felony,
whether he ought to remain of the House or to forbear coming, or that a new one
should be Elected in his place. Whereupon after the matter had been a while
agitated and disputed of in the House, it was adjudged, that he ought to remain
of the House till he were Convicted: for it may be any man's case who is
guiltless to be accused, and thereupon indicted of Felony or a like Crime.

After which Judgment given by the House, Mr Norton did further inform them,
that the Lord Chancellor willed him to signify unto the House that this matter
had been moved to him, and that a new Writ had been desired of him for the
Election of another in the place of the said Burgess; but that his Lordship had
refused to yield thereunto, and had further alleged that he ought first to be
removed by the Judgment of the House; and that thereupon the House signifying
so much to his Lordship, he would thereupon grant a new Writ for a second
Election to be made.

The Judgment of the Lord Chancellor, who was both Learned in the Laws, and had
been an ancient Parliament man, was much commended by the House, and the
rather, because it so opportunely concurred at this time with the Judgment of
the House. Which resolution seems cross to that former opinion before-given
in the House on Thursday last past the 19th day of this instant January, viz.
that new Burgesses being returned in the place of others living were to be
allowed and received in the House.

But yet I conceive that these two opinions may well stand together; for here
the Lord Chancellor was pleased not to grant a Writ for a new Election, but to
stay the Judgment of the House, which was without all question the most just
and safe way of Proceeding; whereas in those other before-recited Cases he had
granted out Writs for new Elections upon mere suggestions; and then without all
question the Burgesses returned upon those Writs are to be received into the
House and must remain as Members thereof until they be again rejected by the
Judgment of the House. So also it is if a Sheriff shall return one for a Knight
of a Shire who was unduly or not at all Elected, yet he that is so returned
remains a Member of the House until his said Election be declared void by the
Judgment of the House. But why in the said former Case one Elected in a place
of a Burgess sick, (upon suggestion doubtless that he could not recover) should
be adjudged by the House to be well Elected, and returned notwithstanding that
the former Burgess was present in the Parliament and had recovered his health,
I cannot possibly guess. Vide March 18th postea.

January 22. Sunday.

On Monday the 23th day of January the House being Assembled did sit till
eleven of the Clock without the Speaker, for that he was all that time at the
Court; in which mean time the Sergeant of the House apprehended one William
Hanney Servant to Anthony Kirle of the Middle Temple Gent. sitting in this
House, who being none of this House, and further Examined, confessed upon his
Knees that he had sitten here this present day by the space of half an hour at
the least, craving pardon and alleging that he knew not the Orders of this
House, and was thereupon committed to the Sergeants Custody till further Order
should be taken with him by this House.

Mr Speaker coming to the House after eleven of the Clock read the usual
Prayer, omitting the Litany for the shortness of time, and declared unto the
House that the time was then so far spent as leisure could not then well serve
them to proceed unto the reading of any Bill, and therefore willed all the
House then present to meet there again on the Morrow at eight of the Clock in
the Forenoon: And also that every one of the House which were then present,
should give notice thereof unto all such of the residue of this House then
absent as they could in the mean time happen to see or meet with, to the end
that all they might likewise attend in this House at the time aforesaid
accordingly.

On Tuesday the 24th day of January, Three Bills of no great moment had each of
them one reading; of which the last being the Bill that Actions upon the Case
shall be brought in proper Counties was read the first time.

Mr Speaker declared himself for his own part to be very sorry for the error
that happened here in this House upon Saturday last in resolving to have a
public Fast, and shows her Majesty's great misliking of the proceeding of
this House therein, declaring it to fall out in such sort as he before did fear
it would do; and advising the House to a Submission in that behalf, further
moved them to bestow their time and endeavor hereafter during this Session in
matters proper and pertinent for this House to deal in, and to omit all
superfluous and unnecessary Motions and Arguments, with all due regard and
consideration to the Order of the House.

Mr Vice-Chamberlain declaring a Message from her Majesty to this whole House,
by her Highness Commandment showed unto them her great admiration of the
rashness of this House in committing such an apparent contempt against her
Majesty's express Commandment very lately before delivered unto the whole House
by the Lord Chancellor in her Highness name, as to attempt and put in Execution
such an innovation as the same Fast without her Majesty's Privity and Pleasure
first known; blaming first the whole House and then Mr Speaker, and declaring
her Majesty's Protestation for the allowing of Fasting and Prayer, with the use
and exercise thereof in her own Person; but reproving the undutiful proceeding
of this House as against the duty of Subjects, did nevertheless very eloquently
and amply set forth her Majesty's most honorable and good acceptance of the
Zeal, Duty and Fidelity of this whole House toward Religion, the Safety of her
Highness Person, and the State of this Commonwealth (in respect whereof her
Majesty has so long continued this Parliament without Dissolution) declared
further to the great joy and comfort of this whole House, that her Majesty
nevertheless of her inestimable and Princely good Love and Disposition, and of
her Highness most gracious Clemency construeth the said offense and contempt to
be rash, unadvised and an inconsiderate Error of this House, proceeding of Zeal
and not of the wilful and malicious intent of this House or of any Member of
the same, imputing the cause thereof partly to her own lenity toward a Brother
of that man which now made this Motion (Mr Wentworth) who in the last Session
was by this House for just causes reprehended and committed, but by her Majesty
graciously pardoned and restored again. And after many excellent Discourses and
Dilatations of her Highness most honorable and loving care for the advancement
of Religion, and the State wherein she had before signified her Prohibition to
this House by the Lord Chancellor, showed that her Highness has already deeply
consulted upon those matters in all due and needful respects, and prepared sit
and apt courses to digest them, meet and ready to be delivered unto this House
from her Highness by such direction as her Majesty thinks most convenient.
And so persuading this House to employ the time about the necessary service of
the Queens Majesty and of the Commonwealth, with due and grave regard to the
ancient Orders of this House, concludes, that he thinks it very meet that
this whole House or some one of this House, by Warrant of the House, in the
name of the said House, do make most humble submission unto her Majesty,
acknowledging the said offense and contempt, and in most humble and dutiful
wise to pray remission of the same at her Highness hands, with full purpose
hereafter to forbear committing of the like offense.

Mr Comptroller followed him and spoke to the same effect, but urged and
enforced the fault of the House with much more violence.

Mr Nicholas St Ledger spoke next, and with a great deal of discretion and
moderation extenuated the said offense of the House; urging first their great
affection to her Majesty, the sincerity of their intention in that Motion of
the Fast; Then the imperfections and sins to which not only private men but
public States are also subject, and therefore needed to be supported by Prayer
and Humiliation; And then he urged the great fault and remissness of the
Bishops who suffered that most necessary Duty of Fasting and Humiliation to
grow even out of use in the Church; And lastly he concluded, that he trusted
that both her Majesty and all her Subjects would be ready to express their true
repentance to God in humbling themselves in Sackcloth and Ashes.

Mr St Poole followed Mr St Ledger, but spoke somewhat differing from him,
aggravating the fault of the House, and urging Submission.

Mr Chancellor of the Exchequer spoke next, and admonished the House of their
duty which they did owe to so good and gracious a Prince as her Majesty has
expressed her self to be in all this long time of her Government, and therefore
urged the House to Submission.

Mr Sackford one of the Masters of the Requests urged the same Submission, but
withal he thought it very sitting and could wish it that Mr Vice-Chamberlain
who had brought the Message from her Majesty of her displeasure, might also
carry the Houses Submission back again untoher Highness.

Mr Flowerden spoke next and showed the sincerity of his intention in speaking
for the Fast, when it was first moved; but now concluded, that it was most
fitting for the House to make their Submission to her Majesty.

Mr Carleton stood up and offered to have spoken, but was interrupted by Mr
Speaker and the House.

Then Mr Speaker asked the Question, whether Mr Vice-Chamberlain should carry
the Submission of the House to her Majesty, and it was agreed by the consent of
the whole House.

Mr Carleton offered again to speak, saying with some repetition, that what he
had to move was for the liberty of the House; but the Speaker notwithstanding
and the House (out of a tender care as it seems to give no further distaste to
her Majesty) did stay him.

On Wednesday the 25th day of January, the Bill for Children born in England of
Fathers that were Aliens, not to be accounted or reputed as English, was read
the second time.

Mr Cromwell now upon the second reading as the Order is, spoke against the
Bill, Mr Norton for it, with Motion also that Englishmen taking Oath to the
Pope or Foreign Potentates beyond Sea, for Obedience in England, shall have no
benefit as Englishmen.

Mr Broughton spoke against the said Bill, Sir Francis Knolles Treasurer of her
Majesty's Household spoke for it, and Mr Dalton spoke against it. Whereupon the
said Bill was after the foresaid second reading (according to the course and
order in that case usual and accustomed) committed to Mr Treasurer aforesaid,
Mr Chancellor of the Exchequer, Doctor Dale one of the Masters of Requests, Mr
Norton, Mr Aldrich, Mr Aldersey, Mr Dalton, Mr Fleetwood Recorder of London,
and Mr Sergeant Fenner; who were appointed to meet on Friday the 27th day of
January now next following at two of the Clock in the Afternoon in the
Exchequer Chamber.

Mr Vice-Chamberlain brought Answer from her Majesty of her most gracious
acceptance of the Submission, and of her Majesty's Admonition and Confidence
of their discreet proceeding; with one special note, that they do not misreport
the cause of her misliking, which was not, for that they desired Fasting and
Prayer, but for the manner in presuming to indict a form of public Fast
without Order and without her Privity, which was to intrude upon her Authority
Ecclesiastical.

Sir Walter Mildmay spoke next, and delivered a most Honorable, Grave, Wise
and Honest Speech; which being not found either in the first Original draught
of the Journal of the House of Commons taken by Fulk Onslow Esquire Clerk of the
same, nor otherwise set down in one other fair transcribed Copy of the said
Journal by the same Mr Onslow's direction then abstractedly and summarily
taken; I have therefore caused it to be transcribed at large out of a Copy of
the said Speech I had by me in manner and form following.

The principal cause of our Assembly here being to consult of matters that do
concern the Realm, I have thought good with your patience to remember you of
such things as for the weight and necessity of them I take to be worthy of your
considerations. Wherein I mean to note unto you what I have conceived first of
the present state we be in, next of the dangers we may justly be in doubt of,
and lastly what provision ought to be made in time to prevent or resist them.
These showed as briefly as the matters will suffer, I leave them to your
Judgments to proceed further as you shall find it expedient.

That our most Gracious Queen did at her first Entry loosen us from the Yoke of
Rome, and did restore unto this Realm the most pure and holy Religion of the
Gospel, which for a time was over-shadowed with Popery, is known of all the
World, and felt of us to our singular Comforts. But from hence as from the Root
has sprung that implacable malice of the Pope and his Confederates against
her, whereby they have and do seek not only to trouble, but if they could to
bring the Realm again into a Thraldom; the rather for that they hold this as a
firm and settled Opinion, that England is the only settled Monarchy that most
does maintain and countenance Religion, being the Chief Sanctuary for the
afflicted Members of the Church that fly thither from the Tyranny of Rome, as
men being in danger of Shipwreck do from a raging and tempestuous Sea to a calm
and quiet Haven. This being so, what has not the Pope assaied to annoy the
Queen and her State, thereby as he thinks to remove this great obstacle that
stands between him and the overflowing of the World again with Popery? For
the proof whereof these may suffice.

The Northern Rebellion stirred up by the Pope, and the quarrel for Popery.

The maintenance sithence of those Rebels and other Fugitives.

The publishing of a most impudent, blasphemous and malicious Bull against our
most Rightful Queen.

The Invasion into Ireland by James Fitz Marrice, with the assistance of some
English Rebels.

The raising of a dangerous Rebellion in Ireland by the Earl of Desmond and
others, intending thereby to make a general Revolt of all the whole Realm.

The late Invasion of Strangers into Ireland, and their fortifying it.

The Pope turned thus the venom of his Curses and the Pens of his malicious
Parasites into men of War and Weapons, to win that by Force, which otherwise he
could not do. And though all these are said to be done by the Pope, and in his
name, yet who sees not that they be maintained underhand by some Princes his
Confederates? And if any man be in doubt of that, let him but note from whence
the last Invasion into Ireland came, of what Country the Ships, and of what
Nation the most part of the Soldiers were, and by direction of whose Ministers
they received their Victual and Furniture.

For the Pope of himself at this present is far unable to make War upon any
Prince of that Estate which her Majesty is of, having lost as you know many
years by the Preaching of the Gospel those infinite Revenues which he was wont
to have out of England, Scotland, Germany, Switzerland, Denmark and others, and
now out of France and the Low Countries; so as we are to think that his name
only is used, and all or the most part of the charge born by others.

The Queen nevertheless by the Almighty Power of God stands fast, maugre the
Pope and all his Friends; having hitherto resisted all attempts against her, to
her great honor and their great shame. As

The Rebellion in the North suppressed without effusion of Blood, wherein her
Majesty may say as Caesar did, veni, vidi, vici; so expedite and so honorable
was the Victory that God did give her by the diligence and valor of those
noble men that had the conducting thereof.

The Enterprise of James Fitz Morris defeated, and himself slain.

The Italians pulled out by the ears at Smirwick in Ireland, and cut in pieces
by the notable Service of a noble Captain and Valiant Soldiers.

Neither these nor any other threatenings or fears of danger has or does make
her to stagger or relent in the Cause of Religion, but like a constant
Christian Princess she still holds fast the profession of the Gospel that
has so long upholden her, and made us to live in Peace twenty two Years and
more under her most Gracious Government, sice from those troubles that our
Neighbors have felt; so as this now seems to be our present State, a
blessed, peaceable and happy time, for the which we are most bound to God and
to pray unto him for the continuance thereof.

But yet notwithstanding, seeing our Enemies sleep not, it behooves us not to
be careless, as though all were past; but rather to think, that there is but a
piece of the storm over, and that the greater part of the Tempest remains
behind, and is like to fall upon us by the malice of the Pope, the most Capital
Enemy of the Queen and this State, the determinations of the Council of Trent,
and the Combination of the Pope with other Monarchies and Princes devoted unto
Rome, assuring our selves that if their Powers be answerable to their Wills,
this Realm shall find at their hands all the Miseries and Extremities that they
can bring upon it. And though by the late good Success which God has given in
Ireland, these lewd and malicious Enterprises seem for a time to be as it were
at a stand; yet let us be assured that neither their attempts upon Ireland,
neither the mischiefs intended against England will cease thus; but if they
find us negligent they will be ready with greater Forces than have been yet
seen. The certain determination which the Pope and his Combined Friends have to
root out the Religion of the Gospel in all places, and to begin here as their
greatest impediment, is cause sufficient to make us the more vigilant, and to
have a wary eye to their doings and proceedings, how smoothly soever they speak
or dissemble their Friendships for the time: for let us think surely, that they
have jointed hands together against us, and if they can, they will procure the
Sparks of the Flames that have been so terrible in other Countries, to fly over
into England, and to kindle as great a Fire here. And as the Pope by open
Hostility, as you see, has showed himself against her Majesty; so the better
to Answer in time the purposes that he has set down in the mean season till
they may come to ripeness, he has and does by secret practices within this
Realm leave nothing unproved, emboldening many undutiful Subjects to stand fast
in their disobedience to her Majesty and her Laws. For albeit the pure Religion
of the Gospel has had a free course, and has been freely Preached now many
years within this Realm by the Protection of her Majesty's most Christian
Government; yet such have been the practices of the Pope and his secret
Ministers, as the obstinate and stiffnecked Papist is so far from being
reformed, as he has gotten Stomach to go backward, and to show his
disobedience not only in arrogant words but also in contemptuous Deeds.

To confirm them herein and to increase their number you see how the Pope has
and does comfort their hollow hearts with Absolutions, Dispensations,
Reconciliations, and such other things of Rome. You see how lately he has sent
hither a sort of Hypocrites, naming themselves Jesuits, a rabble of Vagrant
Friars newly sprung up and running through the World to trouble the Church of
God, whose principal Errand is by creeping into the Houses of men of behavior
and reputation, not only to corrupt the Realm with false Doctrine, but also
under that pretense to stir up Sedition, to the peril of her Majesty and her
good Subjects.

How these practices of the Pope have wrought in the disobedient Subjects of
this Land is both evident and lamentable to consider. For such impression has
the estimation of the Pope's Authority made in them, as not only those which
from the beginning have refused to obey, but many, yea very many of those which
diverse years together did yield and conform themselves in their open Actions,
sithence the Decrees of that unholy Council of Trent, and sithence the
publishing and denouncing of that blasphemous Bull against her Majesty, and
sithence those secret Absolutions and Reconciliations, and the swarming hither
of a number of Popish Priests and Monkish Jesuits, have and do utterly refuse
to be of our Church, or to resort unto our Preaching and Prayers. The sequel
whereof must needs prove dangerous to the whole State of the Commonwealth.

By this you see what cause we have justly to doubt great mischief threatened to
this Realm; and therewith you may easily see also how for the preventing and
withstanding of the same it behooves her Majesty not only to provide in time
sufficient Laws for the continuing of this peaceable Government, but also to be
ready with Forces to repress all attempts that may be enterprized either by
Enemies abroad, or by evil Subjects at home.

What difference there is between the Popes persecuting Church and this mild
Church of the Gospel, has been seen in all Ages, and especially in the late
Government compared with the merciful time of her Majesty's Reign; the
continuance of which Clemency is also to be wished so far as may stand with
Gods Honor and the Safety of the Realm: but when by long proof we find that
this favorable and gentle manner of dealing with the Disobeyers and Contemners
of Religion to win them by fair means if it were possible, has done no good,
but has bred in them a more arrogant and contemptuous Spirit, so as they have
not only presumed to disobey the Laws and Orders of the Realm, but also to
accept from Rome secret Absolutions, Reconciliations and such like; and that by
the hands of lewd Runnagates, Priests and Jesuits, harboring and entertaining
them even in their Houses, thereby showing an Obedience to the Pope, by their
direction also nourishing and training up their Children and Kinsfolks, not
only at home but also abroad in the Seminaries of Popery; now I say it is time
for us to look more narrowly and strictly to them, lest as they be corrupt, so
they prove dangerous Members to many born within the entrals of our
Commonwealth.

And seeing that the Lenity of the time and the mildness of the Laws heretofore
made, are no small cause of their arrogant disobedience, it is necessary that
we make a provision of Laws more strict and more severe to constrain them to
yield their open Obedience, at the least, to her Majesty in causes of Religion,
and not to live as they list to the perilous Example of others, and to the
encouraging of their own evil affected minds: but if they will needs submit
themselves to the Benediction of the Pope, they may feel how little his Curses
can hurt us, and how little his Blessings can save them from that punishment
which we are able to lay upon them; letting them also find how dangerous it
shall be for them to deal with the Pope or any thing of his, or with those
Romish Priests and Jesuits, and therewith also how perilous it shall be for
those seditious Runnagates to enter into the Land, to draw away from her
Majesty that Obedience which by the Laws of God and Man are due unto her.

This then is one of the Provisions which we ought to take care of in this
Council, whereby we may both enjoy still that happy Peace we live in, and the
Pope take the less boldness to trouble us by any favor he shall find here.

The next is Provision of Forces sufficient to Answer any violence that may be
offered either here or abroad; for the which you know it is requisite that her
Majesty do make Preparation both by Sea and by Land.

God has placed this Kingdom in an Island environed with the Sea as with a
natural and strong Wall, whereby we are not subject to those sudden Invasions
which other Frontier Countries be. One of our greatest defenses standing by
Sea, the number of good Ships is of the most importance for us. What the Queens
Navy is, how many notable Ships, and how far behind the Navy of any other
Prince, is known to all men, and therewith also it may be easily considered how
great Charges be incident to the same.

Necessary also it is that her Majesty have Forces by Land sufficient to
chastise the Rebels in Ireland, and to repress any Foreign attempts either
there or here. For which Services either by Land or by Sea her Majesty needs
not, as other Princes are fain to do, to entertain necessary Soldiers of
Foreign Countries hardly gotten, costly and dangerously kept, and in the end
little or no service done them; but may bring sufficient Forces of her own
natural Subjects, ready and easy to be levied, that carry with them willing,
valiant and faithful minds, such as few Nations may easily compare with. But
these Forces with their Furniture and Munition, can neither be prepared nor
maintained to have continuance without provision of Treasure sufficient to bear
the Charge, being as you know termed of old Nervus belli.

This belongs to us to consider, and that in time there be not lack of the
Sinews that must hold together the strength of our Body. And because through
the malice of our Enemies her Majesty is driven to keep great Forces in Ireland
for the better suppressing of that Rebellion to her exceeding Charge, and for
that also it is uncertain how sudden and how great other attempts may be;
therefore in reason, our supply of that maintenance ought to be the more,
especially the Wars being at this day so costly as every man in his private
expense may easily judge. But lest that peradventure some may judge that the
Contribution granted by us now five Years past both frankly and dutifully,
might suffice for many years without any new; I dare assure you for the
acquaintance I have (though I be unworthy) with those her Majesty's Affairs,
that the same has not been sufficient to Answer the extraordinary Charges
happened since then, especially those of Ireland, by the one half; but her
Majesty has supplied the rest out of her own Revenues, sparing from her self
to serve the necessity of the Realm, and shunning thereby Loans upon interest
as a most pestilent Cancer that is able to devour even the States of Princes.
Which being so, as it is most true, we are not to think upon the charge that is
past, but the good we have received by it, being by that provision well and
honorably desended against the malice of our Enemies. And therefore
considering the great benefit we have received, by the last payment being
easily taxed and easily born, whereby we have kept all the rest in Peace; let
us as provident Counselors of this State prepare again in time that which may
be able to withstand the mischiefs intended against us. To do this willingly
and liberally, our duty to our Queen and Country, and our Safeties move us. The
love and duty that we owe to our most Gracious Queen, by whose Ministry God
has done so great things for us, even such as be wonderful in the Eyes of the
World, ought to make us more careful for her preservation and security than for
our own. A Princess known by long experience to be a principal Patron of the
Gospel, virtuous, wise, faithful, just, unspotted in word and deed, merciful,
temperate, a maintainer of Peace and Justice amongst her People without respect
to Persons; a Queen besides of this noble Realm, our Native Country, renowned
of the World, which our Enemies daily gape to overrun, if by force or slight
they could do it; For such a Queen and such a Country, and for the defense of
the Honor and Safety of them both, nothing ought to be dear unto us, that with
most willing hearts we should not spend and adventure freely.

The same love and duty that we owe to our Gracious Sovereign, and to this our
Native Country, ought to make us all to think upon the Realm of Ireland as upon
a principal Member of this Crown, having continued so this four hundred Years
or more. To lose that Land or any part thereof, which the Enemies seek, would
not only bring with it dishonor, but also prove a thing most dangerous to
England considering the nearness of that Realm to this, and the goodness of so
many notable Havens as be there. Again to reform that Nation by planting there
of Religion and Justice, which the Enemies labor to interrupt, is most godly
and necessary; the neglecting whereof has and will continue that People in all
Irreligion and Disorder, to the great offense of God, and to the infinite
Charge of this Realm.

Finally let us be mindful also of our safety, thereby to avoid so great
dangers, not seen afar off, but imminent over our heads.

The quietness that we have by the Peaceable Government of her Majesty, does
make us to enjoy all that is ours in more freedom than any Nation under the Sun
at this day: but let not that breed in us a careless Security, as though this
clear Sun-light could never be darkened; but let us think certainly that the
Pope and his Favorers do both envy our Felicity, and leave no practice
unsought to overthrow the same. And if any man be so dull (as I trust there be
none here) that he cannot conceive the blessedness of this our golden Peace,
except he felt the lack of it; let him but cast his Eyes over the Seas, into
our Neighbors Countries, and there behold what trouble the Pope and his
Ministers have stirred against such as profess the same Religion of Jesus
Christ as we do: there he may find Depopulations and Devastations of whole
Provinces and Countries, over-throwing, spoiling and sacking of Cities and
Towns, Imprisoning, ransoming and murdering of all kind of People; besides
other infinite Calamities which the insolency of War does usually bring with it.

From these God in his Mercy has delivered us; but this nevertheless is the
State and condition that our Enemies would see us in, if by any device they
could bring it to pass; and to that end be then assured they will spare for no
cost, nor leave any means unassayed.

Therefore to conclude, seeing the malice of the Pope and his Confederates are
so notorious unto us, and seeing the dangers be so great, so evident and so
imminent, and seeing that Preparations to withstand them cannot be made without
support of the Realm; and seeing that our Duties to God, our Queen and Country,
and the necessity that hangs upon our own Safeguards, be reasons sufficient
to persuade us, let us think upon these matters as the weight of them
deserves, and so provide in time both by Laws to restrain and correct the evil
affected Subjects, and by provision of that which shall be requisite for the
maintenance of Forces, as our Enemies finding our minds so willing, and our
hands so ready to keep in Order-our Country, and to furnish her Majesty with
all that shall be necessary, may either be discouraged to attempt any thing
against us, or if they do, they may find such resistance, as shall bring
confusion to themselves, honor to our most Gracious Queen, and Safety to all
of us.

Mr Norton pursued the same Admonition, and required the House to proceed to a
manner of executing it, which in his opinion was to appoint all the
Privy Council of this House and certain other fit Persons to consult of Bills
convenient to be framed according to the said Motion to be presented to the
House; which Motion also was well allowed, and Committees appointed to meet in
the Exchequer-Chamber that Afternoon at two of the Clock, viz. All the Privy
Council of this House, Sir Thomas Heneage Treasurer of the Chamber, the Masters
of Requests, Sir George Carry Knight Marshal, Mr Fortescue Master of the
Wardrobe, Mr Recorder of London, Mr Sergeant Fenner, Mr Sergeant Fleetwood, Sir
James Harrington, Sir William More, Sir Thomas Scott, Sir John Brockett, Sir
Henry Radclyffe, Mr Yelverton, Mr Henry Gates, Mr Hutton, Mr Philip Sidney, Sir
Henry Leigh, Mr Woolley, Sir Thomas Shirley, Sir Henry Knivett, Mr Norton, Mr
Aldersey, Sir Rowland Hayward, Mr Matthew, Sir Robert Wingfeild, Sir Thomas
Porter, Sir Thomas Parrot, Mr John Price, Mr Aylmer, Sir George Speak, Mr
Lieutenant of the Tower, Sir Thomas Cecill; Sir Arthur Bassett, Mr Crook, Mr
Robert Wroth, Mr Edward Lewkenor, Mr Thompson, Mr Layton, Mr Edward Stanhope,
Mr Charles Morrison, Mr Gilbert Talbot, Mr. Edward Carry, Mr. Peter Wentworth,
Mr. Sands, Sir Robert Stapleton, Sir Nicholas St Ledger, Sir James Mervin, Sir
William Winter, Sir Edward Unton, Mr. Fabian Philipps, Mr. Edgecombe, Sir Henry
Woodhouse, Mr. Payton and Mr. Digby.

It was Ordered that the House should be called upon Saturday next at two of
the Clock in the Afternoon.

William Hanney Servant to Mr. Anthony Kirle, having on Monday the 23th day of
January last past been present in the House of Commons about the space of half
an hour, being no Member of it, and having been thereupon committed to the
Sergeant of the House, was this Forenoon brought to the Bar by the Sergeant,
who humbly upon his Knees submitted himself to the grace and favor of this
House, acknowledging his fault to proceed only upon simplicity and ignorance;
whereupon after some Examinations when he had willingly taken the Oath against
the Popes Supremacy, he was remitted by the House paying his Fees.

In the Afternoon about two of the Clock the said Committees did meet in the
Exchequer Chamber, where Mr Norton spoke very well to those matters which had
been propounded by Sir Walter Mildmay in the Forenoon, and did thereupon
exhibit certain Articles to the like purpose, which were by the Committees
considered and some others added unto them. And it was Ordered that Mr Sergeant
Flectwood, Mr Sergeant Fenner, Mr Sergeant Flowerden, and Mr Yelverton and Mr.
Norton should set down the matters upon which they had there agreed, and having
digested them into Articles should exhibit them at the next meeting of the
Committees, which was appointed to be on Friday next at two of the Clock in the
Afternoon.

On Thursday the 26th day of January, the Bill for avoiding of Counterfeit
Instruments under Counterfeit Seals of any Office or Offices, was read the
second time, and committed unto Mr. Vice-Chamberlain, Mr. Chancellor of the
Exchequer, Mr. Treasurer of the Chamber, Sir Thomas Brown, Mr. Sands, Mr.
Cromwell and Mr. Atkins; who were appointed to meet on Saturday next at two of
the Clock in the Afternoon in the Exchequer Chamber.

The Bill for avoiding of Encumbrances against Purchasers was read the second
time and Ordered to be engrossed.

The Bill that Actions upon the Case shall be brought in proper Counties was
read the second time, and after sundry Arguments was upon the question
committed to Sir George Carry, Sir George Speak, Mr. Sergeant Fenner, Mr. Wroth
and others, who were appointed to meet this Afternoon at two of the Clock in
the Temple-Church.

On Friday the 27th day of January, Seven Bills of no great moment had each of
them one reading; of which the first being the Bill for the speedy recovery of
Debts was read the first time.

The Bill for the Reformation of the Clerk of the Market, and the Proviso added
unto it was read the second time, and committed unto Mr. Treasurer, Mr.
Comptroller, Mr. Lieutenant of the Tower, Sir Thomas St Poole, Mr. Grimsditch
and others, who were appointed to meet on Monday next in the Afternoon at two
of the Clock, and the Clerk of the Market to be Licensed to attend them, and to
be heard before them if he will.

The House being moved did grant that the Sergeant who was to go before the
Speaker being weak and somewhat pained in his Limbs, might ride upon a
Foot-Cloth Nag.

This day lastly in the Afternoon was a Motion made by Mr. Norton to have a
Committee appointed to draw two Bills, the one against secret and stolen
Contracts of Children without the consent of Parents, etc. The other against
exacting upon the Clergy by Ordinaries and by under-Collectors of Tenths, and
it was committed to Sir Walter Mildmay and himself.

Post Meridiem.

The Committees appointed on Wednesday last the 23th day of this instant
January to meet this Afternoon at two of the Clock in the Exchequer Chamber,
about the framing and drawing up the two Bills of Religion and the Subsidy, met
accordingly, where the Articles and heads that concerned them were appointed to
Mr. Norton to Pen and bring to the House the next day.

On Saturday the 28th day of January, Three Bills of no great moment had each
of them one reading; of which the last being the Bill for the preservation of
Woods, was read the second time and committed unto Mr. Lieutenant of the Tower,
Sir Thomas Scott and others, who were appointed to meet at the Temple-Church
upon Monday next at two of the Clock in the Afternoon.

Two Bills also had each of them their second reading; of which the first being
a Bill against the erecting of Iron-Mills near the City of London and the River
of Thames, was read the second time and committed to the former Committees in
the Bill for preservation of Woods.

It was Ordered that the House should be called on Wednesday next in the
Afternoon.

The Bill touching the Defeasances of Statutes of the Staple was read the
second time, and committed unto Mr. Vice-Chamberlain, Mr. Chancellor of the
Exchequer, Mr. Humfrey Gilbert, Mr. Sands and others, who were appointed to
meet on Monday next at three of the Clock in the Afternoon in the Exchequer
Chamber.

The Bill for the Assize of fuel was read the second time, and committed unto
the same former Committees in the Bill for Woods, and at the same time and
place.

A Motion was made by Mr. Alsord, and pursued by Mr. St Poole and Mr. Snagg,
touching composition for Purveyances, and assented to have Conference by Mr.
Treasurer and Mr. Comptroller on Thursday next.

Post Meridiem.

In the Afternoon the Committees met again in the Exchequer Chamber about the
two Bills for Religion and Subsidy.

The Articles which were exhibited by Mr. Norton concerning the Bill of Subsidy
were allowed by the Committees, and he appointed to draw the said Bill
accordingly; and the Articles agreed for the rates and times of Taxations
Certificates and payment of a Subsidy and two Fifteenths.

On Monday the 30th day of January, the Bill touching (...) of the Sea was read
the second time, and committed unto the Master of the Jewel-House, Sir Thomas
Scott, Sir William Winter, Sir William Moore, Sir Arthur Bassett, Mr.
Grimsditch, Mr. Layton, Mr. Aldersee, Mr. Rogers, Mr. Shirley, Mr. Boys, Mr.
Knight and Mr. Borrey, who were appointed to meet to Morrow at two of the Clock
in the Afternoon in the Exchequer Chamber.

Three Bills of no great moment had each of them one reading; of which the last
being the Bill for the speedy recovery of Debts was read the third time and
passed upon the question.

Mr. Attorney General and Mr. Doctor Clerk did bring from the Lords two Bills,
viz. An Act against slanderous words and rumors, and other seditious practices
against the Queens Majesty, and an Act for avoiding of slanderous Libelling.

The Bill for avoiding of certain Encumbrances against Purchasers was read the
third time.

And a Proviso to this Bill was once read and dashed upon the question, and
likewise the Bill passed upon the question.

On Tuesday the 31th day of January, the Bill for the speedy recovery of Debts
which passed this House yesterday, was upon Motion made to this House by Mr.
Speaker upon the mistaking of this House of some part of the said Bill, amended
upon the question, with interlining of these words, viz. [such and of Debts]
the whole sentence wherein these interlined words are contained being thrice
read, and the Bill again passed upon the question accordingly.

The two Bills sent yesterday to this House from the Lords being against
seditious practicing and slanderous Libelling, had each of them its first
reading.

The two Bills that passed this House yesterday being for the speedy recovery
of Debts, and for the avoiding of certain Encumbrances against Purchasers, were
sent up to the Lords by Mr. Vice-Chamberlain, Mr. Chancellor of the Exchequer,
and others.

The Bill for furniture of Armor and Weapons had its first reading.

Upon Motions made yesterday to this House by Mr. Diggs for maintenance of the
Navy and Mariners, and also for a supply of Soldiers, and setting idle persons
on work, and by Fishing to procure increase of Gain and Wealth to the whole
State of this Realm, it is Ordered, that the consideration hereof be committed
unto all the Privy Council being of this House, and that as many of this House
as are acquainted with that matter of Plot and device may attend them at their
pleasure, and to meet upon Friday next at two of the Clock in the Afternoon in
the Exchequer Chamber.

The Bill for punishing of unlawful having two Wives at once, was read the
second time, and committed to Mr. Doctor Dale Master of the Requests, Sir
Thomas Brown, Mr. Recorder of London, Mr Layton, Mr. Alford, Mr. Grimsditch,
Mr. Newdigate, Mr. Snagg, Mr. Thomas Bowyer and Mr Greenfeild, who were
appointed to meet at two of the Clock in the Afternoon upon Saturday next in
the Exchequer Chamber.

On Wednesday the first day of February, Two Bills of no great moment had each
of them one reading; of which the first being the Bill touching Partition of
Lands between the Coheirs of John sometime Earl of Oxford, was read the first
time.

Upon a Motion made unto this House by Mr. Norton, that two Porters of
Serjeants-Inn in Fleetstreet have much misused him in his attending the service
of this House, it is Ordered by this House that the Sergeant at Arms do
forthwith fetch the same two Porters unto this House.

Mr. Chancellor of the Exchequer in the name of the residue of the Committees
for the Bill against counterfeit Instruments and Seals of Offices, and of
himself declared unto the House, that they have upon consideration had amongst
them thought good to make a new Bill for those purposes to be offered to this
House; and so delivered in both the old Bill and the new.

Three Bills also had each of them one reading; of which the third being the
Bill against slanderous words and rumors, and other seditious practices against
the Queens Majesty was read the second time, and an Addition offered to this
Bill by Mr. Norton was once read, and with the Bill committed unto all the
Privy Council being of this House, Mr Treasurer of the Chamber, all the
Sergeants at Law of this House, and others. And the Bill was delivered to Mr.
Treasurer who with the rest was appointed to meet upon Friday next at two of
the Clock in the Afternoon; and the Committee for Mr. Diggs his Motions are
deferred till Saturday next at two of the Clock in the Afternoon in the said
Exchequer Chamber. Vide Febr. 14. following.

Nota, That here a new Addition (inserted into a Bill which had been twice
read) was committed with the said Bill, although it had been read but once.

Mr. Sergeant Anderson and Mr. Dr. Barkley did bring from the Lords a Bill for
avoiding of disorders and abuses in Sheriffs and Under-Sheriffs, and other like
Ministers.

John Owld Porter of Serjeants-Inn in Fleetstreet and William Kenn his Servant
being present here at the Bar and charged with their misbehaviour, rather
excusing than submitting themselves, it is, upon good proof of their said
misbehaviour testified by three Gentlemen of this House besides Mr. Norton,
Ordered that both the Master and Servant be committed to the Sergeants Ward
till further Order shall be taken; And that Mr. Speaker may in the mean time
set the said William Kenn the Servant at Liberty, upon his Submission, if he
shall so think good.

Two Bills of no great moment had each of them one reading; of which the second
being the Bill against the multitude of common Inns and Alehouses, was read
the first time and rejected.

It is Ordered, that Mr Speaker in the name of this House do require the Warden
of the Fleet, being a Member of this House, that he do cause from henceforth
two of his Servants to attend at the Stair-head near unto the outer Door of
this House, and to lay hands upon two or three of such disordered Serving-men
or Pages as shall happen to use such lewd disorder and outrage as has been
accustomed to be exercised there this Parliament time, to the end they may
thereupon be brought into this House and receive such punishment as to this
House shall seem meet.

On Thursday the second day of February it seems that neither House sat, for
in the Journal of the House of Commons there is no mention at all of the day or
of any passages in it; And that the Upper House sat not it is most certain,
for on the Wednesday foregoing, being the first day of this instant February,
Sir Thomas Bromley the now Lord Chancellor Adjourned the Parliament unto
Saturday following, being the 4th day of this instant Month.

On Friday the third day of February, Eight Bills of no great moment had each
of them one reading; of which the seventh being the Bill against slanderous
Libelling, was upon the second reading committed to Mr Vice-Chamberlain, Mr
Chancellor of the Exchequer, Mr Chancellor of the Duchy, Sir Henry Knivett, Mr
Attorney of the Duchy, Mr Sergeant Fenner and others, to meet in the Exchequer
Chamber at two of the Clock in the Afternoon.

Mr Treasurer brought in a Bill touching Children of Strangers born in England,
and a new Bill devised by the Committees for that purpose, which Bill had its
first reading.

John Owld Porter of Serjeants-Inn in Fleetstreet, who on Wednesday last past
being the first day of this instant February, had been by Order of this House
committed to the Sergeants Ward for his miscarriage toward Mr Norton a Member
of this House, being this day brought to the Bar, upon his humble submission
and acknowledgment of his fault was set at liberty paying his Fees.

On Saturday the 4th day of February, Six Bills had each of them one reading;
of which the third being the Bill for Cloths called Tauntons, Bridgewaters and
Charde, was upon the second reading committed unto Mr Chancellor of the
Exchequer, Sir George Speak, Sir William Moore, Mr Norton and others, who were
appointed to meet on Wednesday next at two of the Clock in the Afternoon in the
Exchequer Chamber.

Sir Thomas Scott one of the Committees in the Bill for preservation of Woods,
offered a new Bill for that purpose to this House, drawn by the privity and
assent of himself and of the residue of the said Committees.

Mr Sergeant Anderson and Mr Doctor Clark did bring word from the Lords, that
their Lordships do require a Conference with some of this House in the Council
Chamber at the Court on Tuesday next in the Afternoon, touching the Bill passed
this House for avoiding of certain Encumbrances against Purchasers. Whereupon
are appointed all the Privy Council being of this House, Sir Thomas Sampoole,
Mr Attorney of the Duchy, Mr Recorder of London, Mr Sergeant Flowerdewe, Mr
Sergeant Fenner, Mr Colbie, Mr Yelverton, Mr Sands and Mr Dalton.

The Bill for reformation of disorders in Sheriffs, etc. was read and committed
to Mr Vice-Chamberlain, Mr Comptroller, Mr Chancellor of the Exchequer, Mr
Osborne and others, who were appointed to meet at the Exchequer Chamber upon
Thursday next at two of the Clock in the Afternoon, and withal to consider of
the former Bills of like effect offered to this House now or heretofore.

Upon a Motion made to this House by Mr Norton, in which he declared that some
person of late had caused a Book to be set forth in print, not only greatly
reproachful against some particular good Members of this House of great Credit,
but also very much slanderous and derogatory to the general Authority, Power
and State of this House, and prejudicial to the validity of the Proceedings of
the same, in making and establishing of Laws, charging this House with
Drunkenness as Accompanied in their Councils with Bacchus, and then also with
Choler, as those which had never sailed to Anticyra, and the Proceedings of
this House to be opera tenebrarum; and further that by the circumstance of the
residue of the Discourse of the said Book he conjectured the same to be done
and procured by Mr. Arthur Hall one of this House, and so prayed thereupon the
said Mr. Hall might be called by this House to Answer, and the matter further
to be duly examined as the weight thereof, in due consideration of the gravity
and wisdom of this House and of the Authority, State and Liberty of the same
requires. It is resolved that the said Mr. Hall be forthwith sent for by the
Sergeant at Arms attending upon this House, to make his appearance here in
that behalf accordingly.

And then immediately Mr. Secretary Wilson did thereupon signify unto this
House, that the said Mr. Hall had upon his Examination therein, before the
Lords of the Council, heretofore confessed in the hearing of the said Mr.
Secretary, that he did cause the said Book to be printed indeed; Upon relation
whereof and after some Speech then also uttered unto this House by Mr.
Chancellor of the Exchequer, of the dangerous and lewd contents of the Book,
the Sergeant was forthwith by Order of this House sent to apprehend the said
Arthur Hall, and presently assisted for that purpose with Sir Thomos Scott and
Sir Thomas Brown, by the appointment of this House.

A Commission was also given by this whole House unto Mr. Vice-Chamberlain, Mr.
Chancellor of the Exchequer, Mr. Secretary Wilson, Mr. Treasurer of the
Chamber, Sir Henry Lea, Sir Thomas Cecill, Sir William fitz Williams, and Sir
Henry Gate, to send for the Printer of the said Book, and to examine him
touching the said matter, and afterward to make report thereof to this House
accordingly. And also to take Order and advice further for the sending for and
apprehending of the said Arthur Hall, if it should so fall out that he did
withdraw himself or depart out of Town before such time as the said Sergeant
could find him; with this further Resolution also, that any such Member of this
House as should happen first to see him or meet him, might and should in the
name of this whole House stay him and bring him forth to Answer the said matter
forthwith before the whole House with all possible speed. Vide concerning this
matter on Wednesday the 14th of this instant February following, and also on
Saturday the 18th day of March next following.

On Monday the 6th day of February the Bill for ratifying of an award for
certain Copyholders in the County of Worcester, and the Bill for Partition of
Lands amongst the Coheirs of the late Lord Latimer, were each of them read the
second time and committed unto Mr Recorder of London, Mr. Sergeant Fenner, Mr.
Sands, Mr. Grevill, Mr. Christmas, Mr. Boys, Mr. Cromwell, and Mr: Newdigate.

Mr. Henry Knolles the younger and Mr. Townesend were appointed to be with Mr.
Speaker at this House at two of the Clock this Afternoon to examine the matter
of Outlawry pretended against Walter Vaughan Esquire, Knight for the County of
Caermarthen; And that the said Mr. Vaughan be then there present to Answer
therein for himself as well as he can, and the said Committees to make report
unto this House of the state of the Case, to the end this House may thereupon
proceed to order accordingly. Vide concerning this matter on the 18th day of
this instant February following.

Mr. Secretary Wilson declaring the travel of the Committees in Examining of
the Printer that did Print Mr. Halls Book, signified unto this House, that the
said Printer, whose name is Henry Bynnyman, upon his Examination before the
Committees said, that one John Wells a Scrivener in Fleetstreet did deliver the
written Copy to him; and when the Book was Printed he delivered one Book to
Henry Shirland in Fridaystreet Linnen-Draper, to be sent to Mr. Hall, and that
afterward about a year past he delivered to Mr. Hall six of the said Books,
and at Michaelmas Term last six other of the said Books, and one more to Mr.
Halls man shortly after; and said, that Mr. Hall promised to get him a
Privilege, whereupon he adventured (he says) to Print the Book, and says
that the Copy was written by Wells the Scrivener, and that he received of the
said Shirland Linen Cloth to the value of 6l 13s 4d. for Printing the said
Book. And that he staid of his own accord the publishing of the said Books till
he were paid, where Mr. Hall was contented that they should have been put to
sale presently. Which report so made by Mr. Secretary, and withal that Mr. Hall
and the Printer were both then at the Door, the said Mr. Hall thereupon was
brought to the Bar, and being charged by Mr. Speaker in the behalf of the whole
House, with the setting forth the said Book containing very lewd and slanderous
reproach, not only against some particular Members of this House, but also
against the general State and Authority of this whole House, denied not the
setting forth of the said Book, protesting the same to be done by him without
any malicious intent or meaning, either against the State of this House, or
against any Member of the same; praying this whole House (if he had offended in
so doing) they would remit and pardon him; affirming withal very earnestly that
he never had any more than one of the said Books: and upon due consideration of
his own rashness and folly therein, willed that all the said Books should be
suppressed, and then was Mr. Hall sequestered.

Henry Bynnyman the Printer was brought to the Bar, who affirmed in all things
as Mr. Secretary Wilson before reported; and further, that he had Printed
fourscore or an hundred of the said Books, and was thereupon sequestered.

Henry Shirland was brought to the Bar, who there confessed that Mr. Hall did
write a Letter unto him and sent the said Book unto him, willing him to get it
Printed. And that thereupon he delivered the Book to the said Bynnyman to have
it Printed, Wells the Scrivener being present with him; and said further that
Mr. Hall had paid him again the twenty Nobles which he before had paid the
Printer; and so he was then sequestered.

And the said Wells brought to the Bar upon his Examination says, that when he
was Apprentice with one Mr. Dalton a Scrivener in Fleetstreet, the said Mr.
Hall lying then about Pauls-Wharf, sent unto his said Master to send one of his
Men unto him, and that thereupon his said Master sent him unto the said Mr.
Hall, who when he came delivered to him a Book in written hand, willing him to
carry it home with him and Copy it out, and said, that when he had showed it to
his Master, his Master Commanded him to write part of it, and his Fellows some
other part of it; and his said Master as he remembers did write the rest of
it. What his Master had for the writing of it, he knows not. And being
further Examined says, that yesterday last past he delivered one of the said
Books to Sir Randal Brierton from the said Mr. Hall, and then the said John
Wells was sequestered. And afterward all the Privy Council being of this House,
Mr. Knight Marshal, Mr. Recorder of London, Mr. Sergeant Flowerdewe, Mr. St
Leiger, Mr. Cromwell, Mr. Atkins the Master of the Jewel-House, Sir Thomas
Brown, Sir Thomas Scott, Mr. Nathanael Bacon, Mr. Beale, Mr. Norton and Mr.
Alford, were added to the former Committees for the further proceeding to the
Examination of the matter touching Mr. Hall the Printer, the Scrivener and all
other persons, Parties or privy to the publishing of the said Book, set forth
in Print by the means and procurement of the said Mr. Hall, and to meet upon
Wednesday next at two of the Clock in the Afternoon in the Exchequer Chamber.

Which done Mr. Hall being brought to the Bar again, Mr. Speaker declared unto
him that this House minds further to examine the particularities of the
matter wherewith they have charged him, and do therefore commit him to the
Sergeants Ward with this Liberty, that upon Wednesday next in the Afternoon
being accompanied with the Sergeant he may attend at the Exchequer Chamber upon
the Committees in the Cause, and was thereupon had out of the House.

Henry Bynnyman the Printer, John Wells the Scrivener, and Henry Shirland
Linnen-Draper being brought all three to the Bar, were by Mr. Speaker injoined
in the name of the whole House to give their attendance upon the said
Committees at the time and place aforesaid, and also at all times in the mean
season thereof if they shall happen to be called by them or any of them, and so
were had out of the House.

And further it is Ordered by this House, that Mr. Speaker do send the Sergeant
for John Dalton late Master of the said John Wells, and to charge him also to
attend upon the said Committees at the said time and place in like manner. Vide
concerning this matter on Tuesday the 14th day of this instant February
following.

On Tuesday the 7th day of February, the Bill for the Cloth-Workers of London
was read the second time and committed to the former Committees in the Bill for
Cloths called Tauntons and Bridgwaters (who were appointed on Saturday the 4th
day of this instant February foregoing.)

Mr. Treasurer one of the Committees for the great causes, brought in a Bill
for restraint of disobedient Subjects, and also Articles for the granting of
the Subsidy, which Articles were then read by the Clerk, and agreed by the
whole House to be delivered by Mr. Speaker to Mr. Attorney General, to draw a
Bill according to the same Articles, to be read and passed in this House
accordingly.

Upon a Motion made by Mr. Norton it is Ordered, that such persons as shall be
appointed by this House at any time to have Conference with the Lords, shall
and may use any reasons or persuasions they shall think good in their
discretions, so as it tend to the maintenance of any thing done or passed this
House before such Conference had and not otherwise. But that any such persons
shall not in such wise yield or assent to any such Conference to any new thing
there propounded, until this House be first made privy thereof, and give such
Order.

The Bill that Children of Aliens not being Denizens and born in England shall
not be reputed English, was read the third time, and after many Arguments
committed unto Mr. Vice-Chamberlain, Mr. Chancellor of the Exchequer, Mr.
Sergeant Flowerdewe, Mr. Sands, Mr. Cromwell, Mr. Dalton, Mr. Cowper and Mr.
Norton, to set down in Paper such words for amendment unto the said Bill
against to Morrow Morning, to be offered unto this House for their better
satisfaction of passing of the same Bill as may Answer the meaning and intent
of this House gathered upon the said Arguments accordingly.

On Wednesday the 8th day of February, Three Bills of no great moment had each
of them one reading; of which the third being the Bill touching Kersies,
defaults of Weavers and the abuses of Searchers and Alneagers, was read the
second time and committed to the former Committees, and Sir John St Ledger, and
Sir Arthur Bassett, were added to the same former Committees.

The Bill for Obedience to the Queens Majesty against the Sea of Rome was read
the first time, and then -- --

Upon a Motion made by Mr. Vice-Chamberlain that the Lords have a Bill once
read amongst them in the Upper House, much tending to many of the things
contained in this Bill, and that therefore he thought good (if the House should
so like of it) that a Committee of this House were appointed to have Conference
with the Lords in those matters, which course he thought would much expedite
and further the good proceedings and meanings both of their Lordships and also
of this House in that behalf; It is agreed upon the Question by the whole
House, that all the former Committees which traveled in the drawing of the
said Bill last read in this House, should likewise be appointed for the said
Conference, and that all the Privy Council being of this House, with a
convenient number of others, should now presently repair unto the Lords to pray
the said Conference in the name of this whole House. Whereupon Mr Treasurer, Mr
Vice-Chamberlain, Mr. Chancellor of the Exchequer and Mr. Secretary Wilson,
with diverse others of this House went up to the Lords, and brought Answer
again, that they had delivered unto their Lordships the Message of this House
which they had in Charge, and that their Lordships Answered they would consider
of the request of this House therein, and then make further Answer.

Mr. Comptroller declared that he and diverse others of the Committees appointed
to have Conference with the Lords yesterday in the Afternoon at the Court,
touching the Bill before-passed in this House for avoiding of certain
Encumbrances against Purchasers, were there present with their Lordships, and
that their Lordships upon the Conference liked well of the intent and meaning
of this House in the said Bill; but that their Lordships were of opinion that
it were meet to have some other words added to the said Bill, the better to
explain and carry the effect of the intent of the said Bill, as (said he) those
of the said Committees toward the Law could better declare. Whereupon after
some further Speeches thereof used by Mr. Sergeant Flowerdewe and Mr. Sergeant
Fenner, the said Sergeants were further advised and required, that as of
themselves and not by appointment of the House they should offer some such
course of amendment thereof to their Lordships as might give good furtherance
to the passing of the said Bill.

Three Bills of no great moment had each of them one reading; of which the last
being the Bill for Examination of Witnesses in Towns Corporate was read the
first time.

Mr Sergeant Anderson and Mr. Doctor Clark did bring word from the Lords that
their Lordships upon the request made unto them by this House, have appointed
eighteen of themselves to meet at the Court this Afternoon in the Council
Chamber immediately after Dinner, to have Conference with such of this House as
it shall please this House to appoint for that purpose to meet there with them
touching matters of Religion. Whereupon all the said former Committees of this
House were Commanded to give their attendance this Afternoon at the Court for
that purpose accordingly.

And it is Ordered, that Mr Halls matter be Examined by the Committees to
Morrow in the Afternoon, for that the same cannot be dealt in this day by
reason of the Conference to be had with the Lords this Afternoon at the Court
touching matters of Religion. Vide February 14. being Tuesday following.

The Bill for ratifying an Award for certain Copyholders in the County of
Worcester, and the Bill for Partition of Lands between the Coheirs of the late
Lord Latimer, are appointed to be considered of by the Committees upon Friday
next at two of the Clock in the Afternoon in the Exchequer Chamber.

It is Ordered that three Bills touching Cloths which are before committed all
to one Committee be deferred until to Morrow next at two of the Clock in the
Afternoon in the Exchequer Chamber.

Further day is given to the Committees in the Bill against Libelling till
Friday next at two of the Clock in the Afternoon in the Exchequer Chamber.

Upon Declaration this day made by Mr. Speaker unto this House touching the
Case of Mr Walter Vaughan Knight for the County of Caermarthen supposed to be
outlawed, that upon Examination had by the Order and appointment of this House
of the Actions brought against him in the same Suits it appears that they
were all grown by Suretiship for other persons and not for his own debts or
causes, and withal that yet nevertheless he had to his own great charge and
hindrance very honestly compounded and taken order for all or the most part of
them already; It was then agreed by the whole House that he should stand and
continue as in his former Estate of the good opinion of this whole House
sufficiently purged and discharged of the said suspicions before in Question.
Vide concerning this matter on Monday this 6th day of this instant February
foregoing.

On Thursday the 9th day of February, the Bill against unlawful Hunting of
Conies was read the second time and committed unto Mr Lieutenant of the Tower,
Sir Thomas Scott, Sir Thomas Brown, Sir William Moore, Mr Crook, Mr Tilney,
Mr Newdigate and Mr Cowper, to consider presently of the Bill in the Committee
Chamber of this House.

Three other Bills also of no great moment had each of them one reading; of
which the last being the Bill for addition for paving the street without
Aldgate was read the second time and committed to Mr Secretary Wilson, Mr
Lieutenant of the Tower, Sir William Winter, Sir Rowland Hayward, Mr. Robert
Wroth and Mr. Aldersey, who were appointed to meet on Saturday next at two of
the Clock in the Afternoon at the Court in Mr. Secretaries Chamber.

Mr. Doctor Jews and Mr. Doctor Gibbon did bring from the Lords a Bill
touching the Hospital of Ledbury in the County of Hereford.

Two Bills of no great moment had each of them one reading; of which the second
being the Bill for Explanation of the Statute against the forging of Deeds and
Evidences, etc. was read the second time and Ordered to be engrossed.

Mr. Treasurer moved that the Committees of this House, which were yesterday
with the Lords, might meet together at two of the Clock this Afternoon in the
Exchequer Chamber.

The Bill against counterfeit Instruments and counterfeit Seals of Offices was
read the third time; and after many Arguments both against the Bill and with
the Bill was referred to further Argument till to Morrow next.

On Friday the 10th day of February, Six Bills of no great moment had each of
them one reading; of which the first touching Gavelkind Land within the City of
Exeter, and the last being the Bill for granting of one Subsidy, two Fifteenths
and Tenths, had each of them their first reading.

On Saturday the 11th day of February, Three Bills of no great moment had each
of them one reading; of which the second being the Bill for the true making of
Woollen-Cloths, and the Bill for the abolishing of certain deceitful stuffs
used in dying of Cloths were each of them read the second time and committed to
the former Committees for Cloths, who were appointed on Saturday the 4th day of
this instant February foregoing.

After sundry further Arguments upon the Bill touching counterfeit Seals, it
was upon the Question Ordered that Committees be appointed to consider of the
Bill as it stands only in the matter of the Seals of Corporations to be
helped with a Proviso. And thereupon also Authority was given unto the former
Committees, and unto Mr. Thomas Sampoole, Sir Thomas Scott, Mr. Recorder, Mr.
Carleton, Mr. Norton, Mr. St Leiger, Mr. Lewkenor, Mr. Cromwell and Mr. Atkins,
who were appointed to meet upon Monday next in the Morning at seven of the
Clock in the Committee Chamber of this House.

The Bill for Explanation of the Statute for forging of Evidences and Writings
was read the third time and passed upon the Question, after the amendment of
certain words likewise three times read.

Four Bills also of no great moment had each of them one reading; of which the
last being the Bill against inordinate selling of Wool and Yarn, was read the
second time and committed unto Sir Thomas Bointon, Sir William Moore, Mr George
Speak, Mr Layton, Mr Keale and others, who were appointed to meet at two of the
Clock this Afternoon at the Guild Hall.

Mr. Cromwell one of the Committees in the Bill for ratification of an award
for certain Copyholders in the County of Worcester (who were appointed on
Monday the 6th day of this instant February foregoing) brought in the Bill with
the amendment of one Letter in a man's name, viz. Dallowe for Ballowe, and also
with an Addition of a general saving. Which being twice read, the Bill upon the
Question was Ordered to be engrossed.

Mr Secretary Wilson one of the Committees for the paving of a Street without
Aldgate (who were appointed on Thursday the 9th day of this instant February
foregoing) brought in the Bill; which being amended in these words put out,
viz. [the same] and these words put in, viz. [the lately paved] which words
being twice read, the Bill was upon the Question Ordered to be engrossed.

The new Bill against the Erecting of Iron Mills near the City of London and
River of Thames was read the first time.

Mr. Sergeant Anderson and Mr. Doctor Barkley did bring word from the Lords,
that their Lordships do desire that the Committees of this House appointed to
meet with their Lordships in the Bill for Religion, do meet with them to Morrow
at two of the Clock in the Afternoon in the Star Chamber. Whereupon the House
being moved, it was resolved they should so do, and so it was Answered unto the
said Mr. Sergeant Anderson and Mr. Doctor Barkley accordingly.

Mr. Sergeant Anderson and Mr. Doctor Clark did bring from the Lords a Bill
touching the fortifying of the Borders toward Scotland.

After sundry Arguments made to the Bill last read, it is upon the doubtfulness
in the Answer to the Question resolved upon the Division of the House, that the
Bill to be drawn by the Committees shall contain the number of eighteen Miles
distant from the City of London by the difference of forty three persons.

And upon another Question clearly resolved that the same Bill so to be drawn
shall contain but eight Miles from the River of Thames.

And upon another Question it is Ordered, that the House be called upon
Thursday next at two of the Clock in the Afternoon.

Nota, That there is no mention made of Monday the 13th day of this instant
February or of any Passages thereof in the House of Commons in the Original
Journal Book of the same House; and it may thereupon be very probably
concluded, that the said House sat not upon the said day, which may seem the
more strange also because the Lords of the Upper House did sit.

On Tuesday the 14th day of February, the Bill for ratification of an award
made between William Hide Esquire and William Darrell Esquire, was read the second
time, and committed unto Mr. Chancellor of the Exchequer, Mr. Sergeant
Flowerdewe, Mr. Cromwell, Mr. Boys and Mr. Norton, and the Bill was delivered
to Mr. Norton.

Two Bills also of no great moment had each of them one reading; of which the
second being the Bill for Explanation of the Statute of 32 H. 8. for limitation
of prescription, was read the second time, and committed unto Mr. Sergeant
Fenner, Mr. Sergeant Flowerdewe and Mr. Cromwell, and the Bill was delivered to
the said Mr. Cromwell.

Mr Vice-Chamberlain for himself and the residue of the Committees appointed to
Examine Mr Hall, the Printer, the Scrivener, and all other persons privy to the
setting forth and publishing of the Book, declared that they had charged the
said Mr Hall with contempt against this House the last Session, in that being
injoined by this House to appear, he departed out of Town in contempt of the
Court; and afterward testified the same his wilful contempt by an unseemly
Letter addressed by him to this House; and charged him further with diverse
Articles of great importance selected by the said Committees out of the said
Book; as first, with publishing the Conferences of this House abroad in Print,
and that in a Libel with a counterfeit name of the Author, and no name of the
Printer, and containing matter of infamy of sundry good particular Members of
the House, and of the whole State of the House in general, and also of the
Power and Authority of this House, affirming that he knew of his own knowledge
that this House had de facio judged and proceeded untruly.

And was further charged, that he had injuriously impeached the memory of the
late Speaker deceased, and had impugned the Authority of this House in
appointing Committees without his assent; and that in defacing the credit of
the Body and Members of this House, he practiced to deface the Authority of the
Laws and Proceeding in the Parliament, and so to impair the Ancient Orders
touching the Government of the Realm and Rights of this House and the form of
making Laws, whereby the Subjects of the Realm are governed. And further was
charged, that since his being before the Lords of the Council for his said
offense, and after that he had received rebuke of them for the same, and had
offered some form of a submission, he had eftsoon again published the said
Book, and that whereas upon his Examination in the House he had denied the
having any more than one of the said Books, it was yet proved he had twelve or
thirteen, and six of them since the time he was called before the said Lords of
the Council.

Unto all which things as the said Mr Hall could make no reasonable Answer or
denial, so the said Mr Vice-Chamberlain very excellently setting forth the
natures and qualities of the said offenses in their several degrees, moved in
the end, that Mr Hall being without at the Door might be called in to Answer
unto those points before the whole House, and so thereupon to proceed to some
end; and therewithal persuading a due consideration of spending the time, as
much as might be, in matters of greatest moment, wherein much less has been
done this Session than in any other these many years in like quantity of time.
And thereupon after diverse other Motions and Speeches had in the said matter,
the Printer was brought to the Bar, and being Examined, avowed, that Mr Hall
after that he had been before the Lords of the Council, came to him and told
him that he had Answered the matter for the Books before the Council, and that
therefore the Printer might deliver the said Books abroad; and also where the
said Printer wished unto the said Mr Hall since his last committing, that all
the said Books had been burned before he meddled with them, Mr Hall should say
to him again, he would not for a hundred pound. And then being sequestered,

Mr Hall was brought to the Bar, where after some reverence done by him, though
not yet in such humble and lowly wise as the state of one in that place to be
charged and accused requires whereof being admonished by Mr Speaker, and
further by him charged with sundry of the said parts collected out of the said
Book, he submitted himself to the House, refusing to make any Answer or defense
at all in the matter, but acknowledging his error prayed pardon of the whole
House with all his heart; and that done, was sequestered.

After which upon sundry Motions and Arguments had touching the quality and
nature of his faults, and of some proportionable forms of punishment for the
same, as Imprisonment, Fine, banishment from the Fellowship of this House, and
an utter Condemnation and retractation of the said Book; it was upon the
Question resolved by the whole House without any one negative voice, that he
should be committed to Prison.

And upon another Question likewise resolved, that he should be committed to
the Prison of the Tower, as the Prison proper to this House.

And upon another Question it was in like manner resolved, that he should
remain in the said Prison of the Tower by the space of six Months, and so much
longer as until himself should willingly make a Retractation of the said Book
to the satisfaction of this House, or of such Order as this House shall take
for the same during the continuance of this present Parliament.

And upon another Question it was also in like manner resolved, that a Fine
should be assessed by this House to the Queens Majesty's use, upon the said Mr
Hall, for his said offense.

And upon another question it was also resolved in like manner, that the said
Fine should be five hundred Marks.

And upon another Question also it was likewise resolved, that the said Mr Hall
should presently be severed and cut off from being a Member of this House any
more during the continuance of this present Parliament, and that Mr Speaker by
Authority of this House should direct a Warrant from this House to the Clerk of
the Crown-Office in the Chancery, for awarding of the Queens Majesty's Writ to
the Sheriff of the said County of Lincoln, for a new Burgess to be returned
into this present Parliament for the said Borough of Grantham, in lieu and
stead of the said Arthur Hall, so as before disabled any longer to be a Member
of this House.

And upon another Question it was also in like manner resolved, that the said
Book and slanderous Libel should and shall be holden, deemed, taken and
adjudged to be utterly false and erroneous, and that the same shall be
publicly testified, affirmed and set forth to be false, seditious and
erroneous in such sort, order and degree as by this House shall be during this
Session of Parliament further determined in that behalf.

Which done the said Mr Hall was brought in again to the Bar, unto whom Mr
Speaker in the name of the whole House pronounced the said Judgment in form
aforesaid, and so the Sergeant Commanded to take charge of him and convey him
to the said Prison of the Tower, and to deliver him to Mr Lieutenant of the
Tower by Warrant from this House to be directed and signed by Mr Speaker for
that purpose. Which done and the said Mr Hall being had away by the Sergeant,
it was agreed (upon a Motion made by Mr Speaker) that the whole course and form
of the said Proceedings and Judgment of this House against the said Mr Hall
should be afterward orderly digested and set down in due form to be first read
in this House, and then so Entered by the Clerk as the residue of the Orders and
Proceedings of this House in other Cases are used to be done, and so it was
afterward drawn into form, read unto the House and Entered by the Clerk
accordingly in haec verba, viz.

Where it was informed unto this House upon Saturday being the fourth day of
this present February, that Arthur Hall of Grantham in the County of Lincoln
Esquire had sithence the last Session of this Parliament made, set forth in Print,
and published a Book Dedicated unto Sir Henry Knivett Knight a good Member of
this House, without his Privity, liking or allowance in part, tending greatly
to the slander and reproach not only of Sir Robert Bell Knight deceased, late
Speaker of this Parliament, and of sundry particular Members of this House, but
also of the Proceedings of this House in the same last Session of Parliament in
a Cause that concerned the said Arthur Hall and one Smalley his Man. And that
there was also contained a long Discourse tending to the diminishment of the
ancient Authority of this House. And that thereupon by Order of this House the
said Arthur Hall was sent for by the Sergeant of this House to appear upon
Monday following, which he did accordingly. Whereupon being called to the Bar
and charged by the Speaker with the information given against him, he confessed
the making and setting forth thereof. Whereupon the said Arthur Hall being
sequestered, the House did presently appoint diverse Committees to take a more
particular Examination of the said Cause, and of all such as had been doers
therein. Which Examination being finished by the said Committees, they informed
this House that they had charged the said Arthur Hall with contempt against
this House the said last Session, In that being enjoined by this House to
appear there at a time by this House prefixed, he departed out of the Town in
contempt of the Court, and afterward testified and enforced the same his
wilful contempt by an unseemly Letter addressed by him to this House, and
charged him also with publishing the Conferences of this House abroad out of
the House, and that also in Print in manner of a Libel, with a counterfeit name
of the Author, and without any name of the Printer, in which Book or Libel was
contained matter of reproach and infamy to sundry good Members of this House in
particular, and of the whole State of the House in general, reproaching and
imbasing what in him lay, the Power and Authority of this House, and untruly
reporting the Orders of this House, affirming amongst other great teproaches
that he knew of his own knowledge that this House had proceeded and judged
untruly. And further charged him that he had therein also injuriously impeached
the memory of the late Speaker deceased, affirming that the Orders of this
House were not by him truly delivered or set down, but altered and changed.

And not herewith satisfied has in some part thereof contained a false and
slanderous Discourse against the Antiquity and Authority of the Commons House,
or third Estate of the Parliament, wherein he has falsely sought as much as in
him is to impugn, deface, blemish and diminish the Power, Antiquity and
Authority of this House, and the interest that it has always, and in all Age
had, to the great impeachment of the ancient Order and Government of this
Realm, the Rights of this House and the form of making Laws; And that since his
being before the Lords of the Council for his said offense, and after he had
received rebuke of them for the same, and had offered some form of submission
in that behalf, he had eftsoons again published the said Book; and that upon
his Examination in this House he had denied the having of any more than one of
the said Books, yet it was proved that he had twelve or thirteen of them, and
six of them since the time he was called before the Lords of the Council, and
that he had by his Letters given Order to have of those Books Printed, which
was done accordingly with more, and that he had caused one of the same Books
sithence this Session of Parliament, to be sent to Sir Randal Brierton Knight.

Unto all which as the said Arthur Hall could make no denial or sufficient
Answer, so the said Committees setting forth the nature and quality of the said
offenses in their several degrees, moved in the end that the said Arthur Hall
might be called into the House to Answer unto those points before the whole
House, and so thereupon to proceed to some speedy end, persuading therewithal a
due consideration to be had of spending the time, as much as might be, in such
matters of the Realm for which this Parliament was chiefly called. Whereupon
after diverse other Motions and Speeches had in the said matter the said Printer
was brought to the Bar, and being Examined, avowed, that Arthur Hall after that
he had been before the Lords of the Council came to him and told him, that he
had Answered the matter for the said Books before the Council, and that
therefore the said Printer might deliver the said Books abroad; affirming also
that where the said Henry Bynnyman the Printer sithence this Session of
Parliament, and since his last committing, wished unto the said Arthur Hall
that all the said Books had been burned before he meddled with them; That Arthur
Hall should say to him again, he would not so for one hundred pounds. And then
he being sequestered, Arthur Hall was brought to the Bar, where some mean
reverence was by him done, though not in such humble and lowly wise as the
state of one in that place to be charged and accused required. Whereof being
admonished by the Speaker, and further by him charged, as well with the said
parts collected out of the said Book, as with other his misdemeanors and
contempts aforesaid, he in some sort submitted himself to the House,
acknowledging in part the matters wherewith he was charged, and in some other
parts denied the same; but not making any defense in the matter, but
acknowledging in part his errors, imputing it for the most part to his
misprision, and that in other parts the matters were gathered otherwise than he
meant, he thereupon prayed pardon of the House, and that done was sequestered.
After which upon sundry Motions and Arguments had touching the quality and
nature of his fault, and of some proportionable forms of such punishment for
such grievous offenses, it was upon the Question resolved and Ordered by the
whole House without any one negative Voice, that he should be committed to
Prison.

And upon another Question likewise resolved and Ordered, that he should be
committed to the Prison of the Tower, as the Prison usual for Offenders to be
committed unto by this House.

And upon another Question it was in like manner resolved and Ordered, that he
should remain in the said Prison of the Tower by the space of six Months, and
so much longer as until himself should willingly make a particular Revocation
or Retractation under his hand in writing of the said errors and slanders
contained in the said Book, to the satisfaction of this House, or of such Order
as this House shall take for the same, during the continuance of this present
Session of Parliament.

And upon another Question it was also in like manner resolved and Ordered,
that a Fine should be assessed by this House to the Queens Majesty's use upon
the said Arthur Hall for his said offense.

And upon another Question it was resolved and Ordered in like manner, that the
same Fine should be five hundred Marks.

And upon another like question it was likewise resolved and Ordered, that the
said Arthur Hall should presently be removed, severed and cut off from being
any longer a Member of this House during the continuance of this present
Parliament, and that the Speaker by Authority from this House should direct a
Warrant from this House to the Clerk of the Crown-Office in the Chancery for
awarding of the Queens Majesty's Writ to the Sheriff of the said County of
Lincoln for a new Burgess to be returned into this present Parliament for the
said Borough of Grantham, in the lieu and stead of the said Arthur Hall so as
before disabled any longer to be a Member of this House.

And upon another question it was also in like manner resolved and Ordered,
that the said Book and Libel was and should be holden, deemed, taken and
adjudged to be for so much as does concern the errors aforesaid condemned.

Which done, the said Arthur Hall was brought in again to the Bar, unto whom
the Speaker in the name of the whole House pronounced the said Judgment in form
aforesaid, and so the Sergeant Commanded to take Charge of him and convey him
to the said Prison of the Tower, and to deliver him to the Lieutenant of the
Tower by Warrant from this House to be directed and signed by the said Speaker
for that purpose. Vide concerning this matter on Saturday the 4th day, Monday
the 6th day, and Wednesday the 8th day of this instant February foregoing.

On Wednesday the 15th day of February, Four Bills of no great moment had each
of them one reading; of which the third being the Bill for granting of one
Subsidy, two Fifteenths and Tenths was read the second time and Ordered to be
engrossed.

On Thursday the 16th day of February, the Bill against the Family of Love, was
read the second time, and committed unto Sir Thomas Scott, Sir William Moore,
Sir John Brockett, Mr Beale and others, who were appointed to meet this
Afternoon at two of the Clock in the Exchequer Chamber.

Mr Vice-Chamberlain one of the Committees in the Bill for counterfeit Seals
(who were appointed on Thursday the 26th day of January foregoing) brought in
the old Bill amended by the Committees, and a new Bill drawn by the said
Committees according to the same amendments, whereupon the same new Bill was
twice read and Ordered to be engrossed.

The Bill for punishment of unlawful Marriages which was delivered to Mr Doctor
Dale and other Committees, was this day brought in by Mr Grimsditch one other
of the Committees, and a new Bill for that purpose made by the consent of the
same Committees.

After sundry Speeches used against Sir Rowland Hayward one of the Committees
in the Bill against Iron-Mills for an error by him done in preferring a new
Bill for that purpose to the House, not agreed upon by the more part of the
residue of the Committees, urging some infliction to be laid upon him, or at
least his Submission with an acknowledgment of his said error therein to the
House, it was upon a Motion made by Mr Speaker, and his Declaration of the
Proceeding of the said Sir Rowland Hayward with him in the bringing in of the
said latter Bill, Ordered by the House, that the matter of the said Prosecution
should be no further dealt in or meddled with, as a thing of too small moment
for this House to be troubled with or spend time in.

Three Bills also of no great moment had each of them one reading; of which the
last being the Bill for ratification of an award for certain Copyholders in the
County of Worcester, was read the third time and passed upon the Question.

The Calling of this House appointed to have been this Afternoon is for greater
causes deferred till another time.

On Friday the 17th day of February, Five Bills of no great moment had each of
them one reading; of which the fourth being the Bill for limitation of Formedon
in the Descender, and the fifth being the Bill against the excessive multitude
of Attorneys in the Court of Common Pleas, was read the second time, and with
the former committed unto both Masters of the Requests, Mr Lieutenant of the
Tower, Sir Thomas Sampoole, Mr Attorney of the Duchy, Mr Sands, Mr Carleton,
Mr Layton, Mr Grimpston, Mr Vaughan, Mr Dalton, Mr Boys, and Mr Grimsditch,
and both the Bills were delivered to Mr Doctor Dale Master of the Requests, who
with the rest was appointed to meet in the new Hall in the Temple, at two of
the Clock this Afternoon.

The Bill touching the Children of Aliens and Strangers was once more read with
the former amendments, and other amendments now presently inserted three times
first read, was passed upon the Question, after many Arguments first had and
made.

Francis Drake Esquire was Licensed this day by Mr Speaker to depart for
certain his necessary business in the service of her Majesty.

Francis Vaughan Esquire one of the Burgesses for the Borough of Wilton in the
County of Wiltshire, was this day Licensed by Mr Speaker to be absent for his
necessary business at the Assizes.

On Saturday the 14th day of February, Two Bills of no great moment had each of
them one reading; of which the second being the Bill for the naturalizing of
certain English men's Children born beyond the Seas, was read the first time.

The Bill for the repealing of certain branches of certain Statutes touching
the making of Woollen-Cloths, and another Bill touching the Shipping of Cloths,
were each of them committed upon the first reading unto the former Committees
for Cloths (who were appointed on Saturday the 4th day of this instant February
foregoing.)

The Bill for preservation of Pheasants and Partridges was read the second
time, and committed unto Mr Chancellor of the Duchy, Mr Knight Marshal, Sir
Thomas Cecil, Sir Thomas Scott, Mr Beamond and others, who were appointed to
meet at Mr Chancellors of the Duchy at two of the Clock in the Afternoon upon
Monday next.

The Bill for Gavelkind Land within the City of Chester was read the third time.

The four Bills last past before this present day were sent up to the Lords by
Mr Treasurer and others.

The Bill against unlawful Hunting of Conies was read the second time, and
after many Arguments rejected upon the question of engrossing.

Mr Chancellor of the Exchequer declared that the Committees appointed by this
House to have Conference with the Lords touching the Bill for Religion, have
sundry times met together with their Lordships about the same Bill, and that
the same Bill is by the said Committees in some parts altered, changed and
amended, and in some other parts abridged, and some others added unto, and so
delivered in the same Bill so amended, requiring that the same should now be
presently read as for the first reading thereof. Whereupon the said Bill was
read accordingly for the first reading.

The Committees in Mr Hydes Bill are appointed to meet on Monday Morning next
in the Treasury Chamber.

It is Ordered that the House be called upon Monday next in the Afternoon.

On Monday the 20th day of February, Five Bills of no great moment had each of
them one reading; of which the fourth being the Bill for the paving a Street
without Aldgate was read the third time and passed upon the Question.

The Bill for Explanation of the Statute of Limitation made in the 37th year of
H. (...). was brought in by Mr Cromwell one of the Committees with some
amendments

The Bill for ratification of a Decree between Mr. Hyde and Mr. Darrell was
brought in by the Committees, and the amendments being twice read, the Bill was
Ordered to be engrossed.

Sir Thomas Scott one of the Committees in the Bill against the Family of Love
(who were appointed on Thursday the 16th day of this instant February
foregoing) brought in the old Bill with a new Bill also for that purpose drawn
by the said Committees, but (he protested) not assented unto only by himself,
and that for one only Article in the same new Bill contained.

Mr. Sergeant Flowerdewe, Mr. Beale, Mr. Topcliffe, Mr. Cromwell, Mr.
Newdigate, Mr. Alford and Mr. Layton were added to the former Committees in the
Bill touching the Attorneys, and appointed to meet in the Inner Temple Hall at
two of the Clock in the Afternoon.

The Bill for the relief of the Creditors of Sir Thomas Gresham Knight
Deceased, was read the second time.

The Bill against slanderous Speeches and rumors, and other seditious practices
against the Queens Majesty, was brought in by the Committees, with certain
Amendments and Additions, all three times read and so now the Bill was read the
third time and passed upon the Question, and was sent up to the Lords by Mr.
Vice-Chamberlain and others, together with the other Bill passed this day, viz.
the Bill for paving of the Street without Aldgate.

Mr. Treasurer, Mr. Vice-Chamberlain, Mr. Chancellor of the Exchequer, Sir
William Moore, Mr. Recorder, Mr. Sergeant Flowerdewe, Mr. Wroth, Mr. Cromwell
and others, were appointed to meet in the Exchequer-Chamber on Tuesday next at
two of the Clock in the Afternoon for the Bill touching the Creditors of Sir
Thomas Gresham, and License given to all persons and parties whom it may
concern, to bring their Learned Council as well before the said Committees as
also before this House, if it shall be so thought requisite.

The Bill touching colored Cloths made in the Counties of Suff. and Essex was
read the second time, and committed to the former Committees for Cloths, and
the Bill was delivered to Mr Grimston.

On Tuesday the 21th day of February, Six Bills of no great moment had each of
them one reading; of which the third being the Bill for Explanation of the
Statute of Limitation of prescription of 32 H. 8. with the Amendments, was
twice read, and with the Bill Ordered to be engrossed.

The Bill for Partition of the Lands late of the Lord Latimer Deceased, was
brought in by the Committees, with a Proviso for the Earl of Oxford and Sir
Thomas Tindale; the same Proviso being twice read, the Bill and Proviso were
Ordered to be engrossed by assent of both parties.

The Bill for Assize of Fuel and touching Iron-Mills were brought in by Mr
Comptroller, with a new Bill for the Assize of Fuel, another touching
Glass-Houses, and another for the Assize of Fuel within the City of Worcester.

The Bill last read was upon the Question and Division of the House passed with
the advantage of the number of twelve Voices.

The three Bills last passed were sent up to the Lords by Mr Vice-Chamberlain
and others.

Two Bills of no great moment had each of them one reading; of which the first
being the new Bill for the punishing of the Family of Love, was read the first
time.

Mr Sergeant Anderson and Mr Doctor Clark did bring word from the Lords, that
their Lordships having considered of the Amendments and Additions of this House
in a Bill touching slanderous Speeches and Rumors, and other seditious
practices against the Queens Majesty, and minding to understand the meaning and
intent of this House in some part of the same Amendments and Additions, have
appointed twelve of themselves to have Conference with some of this House to
Morrow at two of the Clock in the Afternoon in the Council Chamber at the
Court, and did pray that a convenient number of this House might be appointed
to meet with them at the said time and place for Conference with the Lords in
that behalf accordingly. Whereupon were appointed for that purpose all those of
this House which were in the former Committee of the same Bill before (whose
names see on Wednesday the first day of this instant February foregoing.)

On Wednesday the 22th day of February, Three Bills of no great moment had each
of them one reading; of which the third being the Bill for the true making of
Hats and Caps was read the second time, and committed unto Mr Lieutenant of the
Tower, Sir Rowland Haywood, Mr Recorder, Mr Askwith, Mr Perry and others, and
the Bill was delivered to Mr Lieutenant of the Tower, who with the rest was
appointed to meet at Guildhall upon Friday next at two of the Clock in the
Afternoon.

On Thursday the 23th day of February, the Bill against sowing of Lineseed or
Hempseed within the County of Hertford by force of any penal Laws, was read the
second time and committed unto Sir Henry Cock, Sir Henry Knivett, Sir Thomas
Brown, Sir Thomas Scott, Sir James Harrington, Sir William More and others;
and the Bill was delivered to Sir William More aforesaid, who with the rest was
appointed to meet this Afternoon at two of the Clock in the Temple.

Two Bills also of no great moment had each of them one reading; of which the
second being the Bill for the true folding and winding of Woolls was read the
second time and committed unto Sir Rowland Hayward, Sir George Turpin, Sir
James Barrington, Mr Keale, Mr Benbridge and others; and the Bill was delivered
to Mr Benbridge, who with the rest was appointed to meet this Afternoon in the
Middle Temple Church at two of the Clock.

On Friday the 24th day of February, Two Bills had each of them one reading; of
which the first being the Bill for re-edifying of the Borough of New-Woodstock,
was read the second time and Ordered to be engrossed.

The Bill touching the Mayor, Bailiffs and Commonalty of the City of Coventry
was brought in by Mr Grimsditch with Amendments agreed upon by all the Parties
to the same Bill.

Two Bills also had each of them one reading; of which the second being the
Bill for the true melting and working of Wax, was read the second time, and
committed unto Mr Comptroller, Mr Edgecombe, Mr Lieutenant, Mr Recorder and Mr.
Cromwell, to consider presently in the Committee Chamber.

Mr. Chancellor of the Exchequer brought in the Bill for Sheriffs with some
Amendments and Additions, and also a new Bill touching the return of Jurors,
which all were read.

Post Meridiem.

The House being called and some returned into the places of others Deceased
since the last Session of this present Parliament, and yet some of them
supposed to be living, some in place of others sick and diseased, and some in
place of others employed in the Queens Majesty's Service, it is Ordered, that
all the said returns of this Session be Examined, and the Orders and Precedents
of this House in like Cases formerly used be also considered by some of this
House, and thereupon report to be made to this whole House of the state of the
said Returns and Precedents, to the end further order may be taken therein
accordingly. Whereupon were appointed for that purpose Mr Treasurer, Mr
Chancellor of the Duchy, Mr Treasurer of the Chamber, Sir Thomas Shirley, Sir
Edward Horsey, Sir William Moore, Sir Henry Gate, Sir John Hibbott, Mr Attorney
of the Duchy, Mr Diggs, Mr Cromwell and Mr Poole.

William Boreman Esquire one of the Burgess for the Town of Wells was Licensed by
Mr. Speaker to be absent for his necessary Affairs at the next Assizes in the
County of Somerset.

On Saturday the 25th day of February, Two Bills of no great moment had each of
them one reading; of which the second being the Bill for the Explanation of the
Statute of 32 H. 8. for Limitation of prescription, was read the third time and
passed upon the Question.

Tuesday next in the Afternoon in the Exchequer Chamber is appointed for the
Committees to meet together to examine the returns and defaults appearing upon
the calling of the House.

The Bill for the better fortifying of the Borders and Frontiers toward
Scotland was read the second time, and after many Arguments committed unto all
the Privy Council being Members of this House, Mr Treasurer of the Chamber, Mr
Knight Marshal, Sir Thomas Cecil, Sir Henry Lea, Sir Henry Knivett and others,
who were appointed to meet upon Monday next in the Exchequer Chamber at two of
the Clock in the Afternoon.

On Monday the 27th day of February, Four Bills of no great moment had each of
them one reading; of which the first being the Bill touching the Examination of
Witnesses in Towns Corporate, was read the second time and Ordered to be
engrossed.

The two Bills which passed yesterday were now sent up to the Lords by Mr
Comptroller and others.

The Bill touching Leases of Tenants in Tail was read the second time and
committed unto Sir Thomas Sampoole, Mr Sands, Mr Amerdeth, Mr Cromwell, Mr
Edward Stanhope and Mr Shirley, who were appointed to meet this Afternoon at
two of the Clock in the Exchequer Chamber.

The Bill for the City of Carliol was read the second time and committed unto
Mr. Comptroller, Mr. Knight Marshal, Sir Henry Knivett, Sir John Dawney, Sir
Edward Horsey, Sir Robert Stapleton, Sir Henry Gate and others; who were
appointed to meet on Wednesday next at two of the Clock in the Afternoon in the
Exchequer Chamber.

Mr. Sergeant Anderson and Mr. Dr. Barkeley did bring from the Lords word that
their Lordships have appointed to meet with the Committees of this House at the
Court in the Council Chamber at two of the Clock in the Afternoon touching the
Bill of disobedient Subjects.

It is Ordered thereupon for this time that the former Committees with some
others now added and no more, shall attend the Lords to Morrow in the Afternoon
according to the Message brought from their Lordships in the Bill for Religion.

The Bill for the punishment of Heretics called the Family of Love, was read
the second time and committed unto Mr. Comptroller, Mr. Vice-Chamberlain, Mr.
Chancellor of the Exchequer, Mr. Secretary Wilson and others, who were
appointed to meet upon Wednesday next at two of the Clock in the Afternoon.

It was Ordered that the House should be called again upon Saturday next at two
of the Clock in the Afternoon.

On Tuesday the 28th day of February, Five Bills of no great moment had each of
them one reading; of which the third being the Bill touching Clothes called
Tauntons and Bridgewaters, was read the third time, and Ordered to be engrossed.

Mr. Doctor Barkley and Mr. Doctor Ford did bring from the Lords a Bill
touching the assurance of certain Lands to the Lord Compton.

The Bill against Moor-burning was read the second time.

The Bill touching Examination of Witnesses in Corporate Towns, and these
words, viz. [without Commission or Warrant from some of her Majesty's Courts or
Councels] and these words [or nisi prius] are upon the Question Ordered to be
put into the Bill, and the word [heretofore] already in the Bill was upon the
division of the House after the doubtfulness of the Question, Ordered to remain
in the Bill by the advantage of the number of nine persons, and the Bill so
amended was passed upon the Question.

On Wednesday the first day of March, Three Bills had each of them one reading;
of which the third being the Bill for granting one Subsidy, two Fifteenths and
Tenths was read the third time and passed upon the Question.

On Thursday the second day of March, Six Bills of no great moment had each of
them one reading; of which the last being the Bill for the Mayor, Bailiffs and
Commonalty of the City of Coventry, was read the third time and passed upon the
Question.

Five Bills were sent up to the Lords by all the Privy Council being of this
House and others; of which one was the Bill touching Limitation of prescription
in a Formedon in the Descender, and another against the false packing of Hops.

Three Bills also had each of them one reading; of which the third being the
Bill against the Corporation of the Merchant Adventurers being Freemen of the
City of London was read the second time, and committed unto Mr. Treasurer, Mr.
Chancellor of the Exchequer, Mr. Comptroller, Mr. Chancellor of the Duchy, Mr.
Vice-Chamberlain, Mr. Secretary Wilson, Mr. Lieutenant of the Tower, the Master
of the Jewel-House, Mr Dale Master of the Requests and others, who were
appointed to meet in the Exchequer Chamber to Morrow at two of the Clock in the
Afternoon; And further that the said Committees shall have Authority to hear
such proofs on both parts as shall make request to come before them touching
the contents of the said Bill.

On Friday the third day of March, the Additions and Amendments in the Bill
touching Tinners and Spaliers were twice read, and the Bill Ordered to be
engrossed.

Two Bills also of no great moment had each of them one reading; of which the
first being the Bill for the preservation of Woods was read the second time.

After sundry Motions and Arguments touching some Reformations in matters of
Religion, contained in the Petitions exhibited unto this House the last Session
of this present Parliament, it was at last resolved by the whole House, that
Mr. Vice-Chamberlain, both Mr. Secretaries, and Mr. Chancellor of the Exchequer
shall by Order of this House, and in the name of this whole House, move the
Lords of the Clergy to continue unto her Majesty the prosecution of the
purposes of reformation, which they the said Mr. Vice-Chamberlain, Mr.
Secretaries, and Mr. Chancellor of the Exchequer had before of themselves, and
not as from this House moved unto their Lordships, and also shall further
impart unto their Lordships the earnest desire of this House for redress of
such other griefs contained likewise in the said Petitions, as have been
touched this day in the said Motions and Arguments, as to their good wisdoms
shall seem meet. And then upon a Motion made by Mr Speaker, it was further
agreed, that all the said Speeches, Motions and Arguments should by the whole
House be deemed in every man to proceed of good and godly zeal, without any
evil intent or meaning at all, and so and for such to be construed and reported
accordingly, and not otherwise, or in any other manner. Vide March the 7th.

On Saturday the 4th day of March, Two Bills of no great moment had each of
them one reading; of which the second being the Bill for naturalizing of
certain English men's Children born beyond the Seas was read the third time, and
passed upon the Question.

The Bill touching Wrecks of the Seas was read the second time, and the
Amendments were twice read and Ordered to be engrossed.

The Bill against disobedience to her Majesty in respect of the usurped See of
Rome, etc. was brought in by Mr Treasurer one of the Committees, and then read
the first time, and was also upon the Question Ordered by this House to be now
presently read again, and so was read the second time, and after many Speeches
was Ordered to be engrossed.

Mr Attorney General and Mr Doctor Jews did bring from the Lords three Bills,
viz. One for Consirmation of a Subsidy of the Clergy, Another for increase of
Mariners and for the maintenance of the Navy, And the third for the Inning of
Erith and Plumsted Marsh.

The Bill for Leases for Tenant in Tail was read the third time, and passed
upon the Question.

The Bill for re-edifying of Cardiffe-Bridge, and the Bill for Leases of Tenant
in Tail were sent up to the Lords by Mr Secretary Wilson and others.

Three Bills had each of them their third reading and passed upon the Question;
of which the last was the Bill touching Cloths called Tauntons and Bridgewaters.

Post Meridiem.

The Bill for repair of Dover-Haven was read the second time, and committed
unto Sir William Winter, Sir Edward Horsey, Mr. Recorder of London, Mr. Sands,
Mr. Dalton and others; and the Bill was delivered to the said Sir Edward
Horsey, who with the rest was appointed to meet upon Monday next at seven of
the Clock in the Forenoon in the Exchequer Chamber.

The Bill for the Hospital of Ledbury in the County of Hereford was read the
second time, and committed unto Mr. Skidmore, Mr. Cromwell, Mr. Philipps, Mr.
Powley and Mr. Edward Stanhope; and the Bill was delivered to Mr. Cromwell, who
with the rest was appointed to meet in the Committee Chamber of this House upon
Monday next at seven of the Clock in the Forenoon.

Four Bills also of no great moment had each of them one reading; of which the
first being the Bill for the maintenance of Mariners and of Navigation, was
read the first time.

The Bill touching Iron-Mills near the City of London, and the River of Thames,
was read the second time, and this reading to stand for no reading. Quod nota.

On Monday the 6th day of March, Three Bills of no great moment had each of
them one reading; of which the third being the Bill to retain the Queens
Subjects in their due obedience, was read the third time and passed upon the
Question.

Mr. Doctor Gibbon and Mr. Doctor Clark did bring from the Lords a Bill
touching a certain Rentcharge unto the Bishop of Coventry and Litchfield and
his Successors, out of the Lands of Edward Fisher Esquire.

Six Bills were sent up to the Lords from the House of Commons by all the
Privy Council being Members of this House; of which one was the Bill for
Confirmation of the Subsidy granted by the Clergy, and another to retain the
Queens Majesty's Subjects in their due obedience, with special recommendation
from this House unto their Lordships touching the latter of the said Bills.

The Bill for the repairing of Dover-Haven was twice read, and committed unto
the former Committees and all the Privy Council being Members of this House; Mr
Dale Master of the Requests, and Mr. Recorder of London were added unto them,
and appointed to meet at the Exchequer Chamber upon Wednesday next at two of
the Clock in the Afternoon.

On Tuesday the 7th day of March, the Bill against secret Conveyances and
deceitful sale os Lands was read the first time.

Mr. Chancellor of the Exchequer declared, that Mr. Vice-Chamberlain, both Mr.
Secretaries and himself, have according to their Commission from this House
conferred with some of my Lords the Bishops touching the griefs of this House
for some things very requisite to be reformed in the Church, as the great
number of unlearned and unable Ministers, the great abuse of Excommunication
for every matter of small moment, the Commutation of Penance, and the great
multitude of Dispensations and Pluralities, and other things very hurtful to
the Church; and in the name of this House desired their Lordships to join with
them in Petition to her Majesty for reformation of the said abuses: declaring
further, that they found some of the said Lords the Bishops not only ready to
confess and grant the said defects and abuses, wishing due redress thereof; but
also very willing to join with the said Committees in moving of her Majesty in
that behalf. Whereupon they afterward joined in humble suit together unto her
Highness, and received her Majesty's most Gracious Answer, That as her Highness
had the last Session of Parliament of her own good consideration (and before
any Petition or Suit thereof made by this House) committed the charge and
consideration thereof unto some of her Highness Clergy, who had not performed
the same according to her Highness Commandment; so her Majesty would eftsoons
commit the same unto such others of them, as with all convenient speed without
remissness and slackness should see the same accomplished accordingly, in such
sort as the same shall neither be delayed nor undone. For the which as they did
all render unto her Majesty most humble and dutiful thanks, so did Mr.
Chancellor further declare, that the only cause why no due reformation has
been already had, was only by the negligence and slackness of some others, and
not of her Majesty nor of this House; alleging withal that some of the said
Bishops had yet done something in those matters delivered by her Majesty to
their Charge, as in a more advised care of following and making of Ministers,
but yet in effect little or nothing to the purpose. And so concluding moved
this House to rest satisfied with her Majesty's said most Gracious Answer, and
to resolve upon some form of yielding thanks unto her Highness for her most
Gracious Acceptance of the humble Petition of this House unto her Highness in
that behalf, and also in putting her Majesty in remembrance for Execution
thereof at her Highness good pleasure. Vide concerning this business on Friday
the third day of this instant March foregoing.

Two Bills also of no great moment had each of them one reading; of which the
second being the Bill for maintenance of the Borders and Frontiers against
Scotland, was twice read and Ordered to be engrossed.

Mr. Chancellor of the Exchequer after sundry Motions and Arguments for the
manner and form of proceeding in giving most humble thanks unto her Majesty for
her Highness said most Gracious Acceptance of the most humble Petition of this
House unto her Highness for redress of sundry Enormities in the Church, and for
the further putting of her Majesty in remembrance for Execution of the same,
moved, that not this whole House nor any chosen or selected number of the same,
but rather Mr Speaker in his Oration upon the last day of this Session do in
the name of this whole House then yield unto her Highness their most humble and
dutiful thanks, with their like remembrance and continuation of their most
humble and lowly Petition and Suit unto her Majesty for the speedy Execution
and accomplishment thereof at her Highness good pleasure. Vide concerning this
business on Friday the third day of this instant March foregoing.

Mr Sergeant Anderson and Mr Doctor Clark did bring from the Lords an Act for
reformation of errors in Fines and common Recoveries.

It is resolved by the House upon the Question, that Mr Speaker in the name of
this whole House do in his Oration to her Majesty upon the last day of this
present Session of Parliament give unto her Highness most humble and dutiful
thanks in the name of this whole House for her Majesty's said most Gracious
Acceptance and Consideration of the said humble Petition and Suit of this
House unto her Highness, and do also put her Majesty in remembrance for the
Execution and accomplishment thereof at her Highness good pleasure in such sort
as to Mr Speaker (without receiving instruction or direction of any of this
House) shall seem most meet and convenient. Vide concerning this matter on
Friday the third day of this instant March foregoing.

On Wednesday the 8th day of March, the Bill for Inning of Erith and
Plumsted-Marsh was read the first time, and committed unto Sir Thomas Scott,
Sir William Moore, Sir Thomas Brown, Sir Rowland Hayward, Mr. Grimsditch and
others; and the Bill was delivered to the said Mr. Grimsditch, who with the
rest was appointed to meet this Afternoon in the Temple-Hall at two of the
Clock.

The Bill for the assurance of Rentcharge of eighty two pounds ten shillings
to the Bishop of Coventry and Litchfield and his Successors, was read the first
time, and thereupon committed to the last former Committees ( Quod nota) and
was delivered to Sir Rowland Hayward one of the said Committees to meet at the
said time and place beforementioned.

Three Bills also of no great moment had each of them one reading; of which the
second being the Bill against erecting of Iron-Mills near unto the City of
London or River of Thames, was read the second time and Ordered to be engrossed.

The two Bills last passed were sent up to the Lords by Mr. Chancellor of the
Duchy, Mr. Chancellor of the Exchequer and others.

Mr. Attorney General and Mr. Sergeant Anderson did bring from the Lords the
Bill against slanderous rumors and other seditious practices against the Queens
Majesty, which first passed the Upper House, and being brought down into this
House was afterward sent from hence thither again with a certain Schedule of
Amendments, and also with an Addition thereunto of this House engrossed in
Parchment, but not indorsed with soit baille aux Seigneurs, for want whereof
their Lordships had no Warrant to deal therewith any further, and therefore
willed that this House would either withdraw the said Addition engrossed and so
to pass the Bill, or else cause the same to be indorsed, that their Lordships
might further proceed accordingly. Whereupon immediately after the departing of
the said Mr. Attorney and Mr. Sergeant Anderson the said Addition was indorsed,
and sent up by Mr. Treasurer and others.

The Bill for the relief of the Creditors of Sir Thomas Gresham Knight deceased,
was read the first time.

Mr. Lieutenant of the Tower, Sir Thomas Scott, Mr. Cromwell, Mr. Atkins and
Mr. Norton were appointed to confer together touching the answering and
satisfying of the Contents of a Letter written by Mr Hill to Mr Speaker, which
was here read in the House by the Clerk, and delivered to Mr Cromwell one of
the Committees to be considered by him and the residue of the said Committees
accordingly. Vide de ista materia on Tuesday the 14th day of February
foregoing, as also on Saturday the 18th day of this instant March following.

On Thursday the 9th day of March, Two Bills of no great moment had each of
them one reading; of which the second being the Bill for coloring of strangers
goods was read the first time.

Sir Rowland Hayward, one of the Committees in the Bill for confirmation of an
assurance of a Rentcharge of eighty two pounds ten shillings to the Bishop of
Coventry and Litchfield and his Successors, and for the Bill touching the
Inning of Erith and Plumsled Marsh (who were appointed immediately on the day
foregoing) declared that such saving as they think meet to be had in both the
said Bills, is conceived by the Committees already.

The Bill for Confirmation of an assurance of a Rentcharge of eighty two
pounds ten shillings to the Bishop of Coventry and Litchfield and his
Successors, was read the second time; and thereupon Mr Recorder of London and
Mr Cowper were added to the former Committees, and appointed to meet this
Afternoon at the said Temple-Hall.

The Bill for repair of Dover Haven was twice read and Ordered to be engrossed.

Mr Attorney General and Mr Doctor Gibbon did bring from the Lords the Bill
against slanderous Speeches and seditious practices against the Queens Majesty,
declaring that their Lordships do require the consent of this House to some
things altered and added by their Lordships to the said former alterations and
Additions of this House, and withal that their Lordships have already reformed
the said Bill according to some parts of the Alterations sent by this House
unto them; and did also bring a Bill from their Lordships touching Edward Lord
Zouch; with special recommendation also from their Lordship to this House for
expediting the Bill for the Hospital of Ledbury, which was before sent from
their Lordships to this House.

Two Bills lastly had each of them one reading; of which the second being the
Bill for relief of the Creditors of Sir Thomas Gresham Knight deceased was read the
second time, and committed unto Sir Thomas Sampoole, Mr Recorder, Mr Sands, Mr
Cowper, Mr Alford and Mr Norton, who were appointed to meet in the Exchequer
Chamber at two of the Clock in the Afternoon this present day.

On Friday the 10th day of March, Five Bills of no great moment had each of
them one reading; of which the last being the Bill for the repairing of Dover
Haven was read the third time, and passed upon the question.

Mr Doctor Jews and Mr Doctor Barkley did bring from the Lords two Bills, viz.
one for restitution in blood of Philip Earl of Arundel, another for the Pardon
and Restitution in Blood of John and Dudley Sr Ledger; with request also to this
House to have consideration of the Bill of Fines and Recoveries which came to
this House from their Lordships.

The Bill for the repair of Dover Haven was sent up to the Lords by Mr
Treasurer and others.

The Bill touching the true making, melting and working of Wax was read the
third time and passed upon the Question.

The Amendments in the Bill for the relief of the Creditors of Sir Thomas
Gresham Knight deceased were twice read, and so the Bill upon the question was
Ordered to be engrossed.

The Bill for reformation of Errors in Fines and common Recoveries was read the
second time, and committed unto Sir Thomas Sampoole, Mr Recorder of London, Mr
Cromwell, Mr Cobly and others, who were appointed to meet this Afternoon at
Serjeants-Inn Hall.

On Saturday the 11th day of March, Eight Bills of no great moment had each of
them one reading; of which the two last, the one being for the Inning of Erith
and Plumsted Marsh, and the other for reformation of errors in Fines and
Recoveries were each of them read the third time and passed upon the Question.

The Bill touching slanderous words, rumors and other seditious practices
against her Majesty, which coming first from the Lords unto this House, and
afterward with some alterations and Additions passed this House and so sent up
again unto their Lordships, and again sithence brought from thence to this
House with some other alterations by their Lordships made unto the said former
Additions and Alterations of this House, and not disallowing the amendments of
this House, was upon the Question after sundry Motions and Arguments resolved
by this House to be sent up again unto their Lordships and left with them as a
Bill that this House cannot deal withal.

On Monday the 13th day of March, the Bill for relief of the Creditors of Sir
Thomas Gresham Knight deceased was read the third time and passed upon the
Question.

Five Bills were sent up to the Lords from the House of Commons; of which one
was the Bill for reformation of Errors in Fines and Recoveries, and another for
the restitution in Blood of Anthony Mayney Esquire.

Three Bills of no great moment had each of them one reading; of which the last
being the Bill for confirmation of an assurance of a certain yearly Rentcharge
of eighty two pounds ten shillings to the Bishop of Coventry and Litchfield and
his Successors was read the third time and passed upon the Question.

Mr. Treasurer with others which carried up the last Bills to the Lords coming
into this House again from their Lordships, Mr. Treasurer did declare that
after he had delivered the other Bill, he then showed their Lordships that this
House had sent up to be left with their Lordships a Bill against slanderous
words and rumors and other seditious practices against her Majesty, for that
the same Bill when it was last sent to this House by their Lordships was and is
such as this House cannot deal with; and that thereupon the Lord Chancellor
answered that as their said Lordships were not to take knowledge of the opinion
of this House touching the state of the said Bill, so their Lordships would not
receive the said Bill. Which Report being made by Mr Treasurer, the Bill was
thereupon left in this House. Vide March the 14th Tuesday following.

The Bill touching Iron-Mills near unto the City of London and the River of
Thames was read the third time, and three Provisoes likewise thrice read, and
all after many Arguments passed upon the Question.

Mr Doctor Barkley and Mr Doctor Ford did bring from the Lords a Bill for the
Exposition of the Statute of Bankrupts, and also that their Lordships do
require a Conference to be had with ten of their Lordships at two of the Clock
this Afternoon at the Court in the Council Chamber touching the Bill for
maintenance of the Borders toward Scotland, and thereupon were appointed the
former Committees in the same matter, who were appointed on Saturday the 25th
day of February foregoing.

The Bill for the Lord Zouch, and the Bill for the Lord Compton, had each of
them one reading, being the second reading.

After some Motions and Speeches offered upon the reading of the said Bill for
the Lord Zouch, it was resolved, That as well the Lord Zouch with his Learned
Council, as also any person or persons any thing claiming or pretending in the
Lands mentioned in the said Bill, and their Council, should be heard in this
House to Morrow next. And that Sir James Dyer Lord Chief Justice of the
Common Pleas, should likewise there be heard in this House to Morrow next,
touching the Record mentioned in the said Bill, and remaining in the said Court
of Common Pleas; and also that the same Record should likewise be then brought
into this House, there to be seen and perused for the better satisfaction of
this House in their further proceedings in the said Bill. And withal that Mr
Speaker should by Order of this House, give notice unto the said Lord Chief
Justice to be here at the said time, and bring with him the said Record
accordingly. Vide concerning this matter on Tuesday the 14th day, and on Friday
the 17th day of this instant March following.

On Tuesday the 14th day of March, Three Bills of no great moment had each of
them one reading; of which the third being the Bill against secret Conveyances
and deceitful sale of Lands, was read the second time, and committed unto Sir
Thomas Sampoole, Mr Recorder of London, Mr. Atkins, Mr. Lewkenor, Mr. Cowper
and others, who were appointed to meet in the Middle Temple Hall at two of the
Clock this Afternoon.

Sir James Dyer Knight, Lord Chief Justice of the Common Pleas, having informed
this House touching the State of the Record mentioned in the Bill for the Lord
Zouch; and the said Lord Zouch having been here likewise heard at the Bar, and
the said Record having been here seen and perused in this House and read by the
Clerk, it was resolved that Sir Thomas Sampoole, Mr. Recorder of London, Mr.
Harrington, Mr. Cromwell, Mr. Lewkenor and Mr. Cowper do consider of the Decree
heretofore made in the Chancery touching the said matter, and of the
Exemplification of the said Record, and meet to Morrow Morning at seven of the
Clock in the Forenoon in the Committee Chamber of this House, and afterward to
make Report. Vide touching this matter on Friday the 17th day of this instant
March following.

Mr. Treasurer touching the Committee yesterday with the Lords for the Bill of
maintenance of the Borders against Scotland, declared, that their Lordships in
the Conference yesterday seemed to marvel much that their Lordships having
first passed a Bill with them for the said purpose, and sending it down to this
House, this House would without requiring further Conference with their
Lordships take upon them to make a new Bill for the same matter, and not
proceed with the said Bill thereof which came from their Lordships. And their
Lordships thought this House ought not so to have done, neither could well by
Warrant of any former Precedents of this House. And further that some of the
said Committees of this House then answered unto their Lordships, that this
House had cause to do as they did, and might likewise well so do.

Mr. Vice-Chamberlain very excellently setting forth the great benefits and
blessings of God upon this Realm in the Godly, most loving and careful
Government and Ministry of her Majesty, and withal the great, earnest, most
faithful and dutiful zeal and obedience of this House unto her Highness, no
less in every particular Member of the same, than is or can be in any other
Subject of this Realm whosoever, noble or other, as has and may well appear by
them all in their Actions. And also taking occasion of the Bill lately very
gravely, carefully and dutifully considered and dealt in by this House for the
due care and preservation of her Majesty's Honor, Fame and Dignity, but
nevertheless dashed by the Lords in the Upper House, and not in this House nor
in the default of this House, moved that this House would yet notwithstanding
for many great and weighty respects by him most excellently, amply and
effectually, and no less aptly declared, proceed to some such course for due
provision to the same end of the safety of her Highness Honor, Fame and
Dignity, as by some of this House for that purpose to be selected shall seem
meet to express and show the faithful hearts, careful love and dutiful
obedience of such thankful Subjects unto so Gracious, Provident and Merciful a
Prince. Whereupon were appointed all the Privy Council being of this House, Mr
Treasurer of the Chamber, Mr Knight Marshal, Mr Doctor Dile Master of the
Requests, Sir Thomas Sanpoole, Sir William fitz William, Sir William Moore, Sir
Thomas Shirley, Mr Recorder of London, Mr Sands, Mr Atkins, Mr Cowper, Mr
Cromwell, Mr Norton, Sir Henry Gate, Sir George Turpin, Mr Wolley, Mr Beale, Mr
Thomson, Mr Crook, Mr Nicholas St Ledger, Mr Vincent Skinner, Mr Pister, Mr.
Edward Lewkenor, Mr. Diggs, Mr. Dalton and Mr. Alford, to meet in the Exchequer
Chamber between one and two of the Clock this Afternoon, to confer for the
drawing of a Bill against to Morrow Morning for the safety and preservation of
her Majesty's Honor, Fame and Person accordingly. Vide concerning a Bill on
Wednesday the first day of February foregoing much to this purpose, as also on
March the 13th Monday foregoing.

The Bill for restitution in Blood of Philip Earl of Arundel was read the third
time and passed upon the Question.

On Wednesday the 15th day of March, Two Bills of no great moment had each of
them one reading; of which the first being the Bill for maintenance of Mariners
and of the Navigation, was read the second time; and two Provisoes also to the
same Bill were twice read, and committed unto Mr. Lieutenant of the Tower, Sir
Thomas Sampoole, Mr. Aldersey, Mr. Grice, Mr. Lewkenor, Mr. Norton and others,
who were appointed to meet at the Temple-Hall at two of the Clock this
Afternoon.

Two Bills also had each of them one reading; of which the Bill for the more
indifferent Trial by Juries was read the third time, and dashed upon the
Question.

Six Bills were sent up to the Lords by Sir Henry Ratclyffe, Sir Thomas Cecill,
Sir Edward Horsey, Mr. Lieutenant of the Tower and others; whereof the fifth
was the Bill for restitution in Blood of John and Dudley St Ledger, and the last
for the more indifferent Trial by Juries.

Mr. Treasurer reported, that according to the Order and Commission of this
House to him yesterday and others, he and others of the Committees had met
together, and drawn a new Bill; and so delivered the Bill in the House to be
read.

The Bill against seditious words and rumors uttered against the Queens most
Excellent Majesty was twice read, and upon the Question Ordered to be engrossed.

Mr. Attorney General and Mr. Doctor Gibbon did bring from the Lords the Bill
for fortifying of the Borders against Scotland with some Amendments; which Bill
had passed this House before, and was sent to their Lordships from this House.

On Thursday the 16th day of March, Three Bills of no great moment had each of
them one reading; of which the third being the Bill for Exposition of the
Statute of Bankrupts, was read the third time, and dashed upon the Question.

Sir Thomas Sampoole, one of the Committees in the matter for the Lord Zouch
(whose names see on Monday the 13th day of this instant March foregoing) made
report of their Travel therein, and of the Estate of the Title of the said Lord
Zouch to the Manor in demand; and thereupon the said Lord Zouch was afterward
with his Council heard at the Bar. Vide concerning this matter on Tuesday the
14th day of this instant March foregoing, and also on Friday the 17th day of
the same Month following.

Mr. Doctor Clark and Mr. Doctor Barkley did bring from the Lords a Bill
before-passed this House touching the abolishing of certain deceitful stuffs
used in the dying of Cloths, and now returned by their Lordships with some
Amendments and Provisoes thereunto added.

The Bill against seditious words and rumors uttered against the Queens most
Excellent Majesty, was read the third time, and after sundry Motions and
Arguments and some Amendments added were thrice read, and the Bill passed upon
the question.

Mr. Cope standing up and offering to speak unto the House, said unto Mr.
Speaker and Charged him with these Speeches, that is to say, That Mr. Speaker
in some such matters as he has favored, has without License of this House
spoken to the Bill; and in some other Cases which he did not favor and like
of, he would prejudice the Speeches of the Members of this House with the
Question.

On Friday the 17th day of March, the Bill for maintenance of Mariners and of
the Navigation, was read the third time.

The Bill against seditious words and rumors uttered against the Queens most
Excellent Majesty, which passed in this House yesterday, was sent up to the
Lords by Mr Treasurer and all the residue of the Privy Council being of this
House, and then present with others; and also the Bill for the Borders, wherein
their Lordships are to be moved for the perfecting only of the sense in some
parts of their Amendments, that this House may proceed to their further dealing
in the said Bill accordingly.

Mr Sergeant Anderson and Mr Doctor Gibbon did bring from the Lords again the
Bill for the Borders amended according to the request of this House; with
Commendation also from her Majesty from the Lords, of the Bill for the
maintenance of Mariners and of the Navigation. Whereupon the amendments being
finished, and three times read and passed upon the question, the Bill was
remanded unto their Lordships by Mr Comptroller and others, together with the
Bill against deceitful stuff used in dying of Cloths, wherein their Lordships
are to be moved for the perfecting of some part of their Lordships Amendments
sent by them to this House, viz. the mistaking of a line in the Bill; to the
end that the same being done, this House may proceed in perfecting of the said
Bill accordingly in the said amendments.

Mr Chancellor of the Exchequer, Mr Henry Ratclyffe, Sir Thomas Sampoole, Mr
Aldersey, Mr Wroth, Mr Cromwell, Mr. Norton, Mr. Alford and Mr. Grice were
appointed to consider presently in the Committee Chamber of the Bill for
maintenance of Mariners and of the Navigation.

The Bill for the Lord Zouch was read the third time.

Mr Comptroller returning from the Lords brought word from their Lordships,
that they do add some amendments to the Bill against seditious words and rumors
uttered against her Majesty, and did pray that when their Lordships shall now
forthwith send down the same Bill and amendments to this House, it may then
have speedy Expedition, and did eftsoons recommend unto this House the Bill for
maintenance of Mariners and of the Navigation.

Mr. Doctor Jews and Mr. Doctor Clark did bring word from the Lords that their
Lordships do pray present Conference with half a score of this House touching
the Bill against seditious words and rumors uttered against her Majesty. And
thereupon were appointed Mr. Treasurer, Mr. Comptroller, Mr. Chancellor of the
Exchequer, Mr. Vice-Chamberlam, Sir Thomas Sampoole, Mr. Doctor Dale Master of
the Requests, Mr. Recorder of London, Mr. Cromwell, Mr. Cowper and Mr. Alford,
to confer with their Lordships accordingly. Vide concerning this matter on
Wednesday the first day of February foregoing.

Mr Doctor Jews did bring from the Lords the Bill for abolishing certain
deceitful stuff used in the dying of Cloths, with the reformation in their
Lordships said amendments, done and made according to the Request of this House
to their Lordships in that behalf.

It is Ordered upon the Question that the Bill for the Lord Zouch be committed
to be reformed by Mr Treasurer, Mr Chancellor of the Exchequer, Mr Cromwell, Mr
Wentworth, Mr Snagg, Mr Diggs, Mr St Ledger, Mr Lewkenor, Mr Carleton and Mr
Ameredith, and appointed to meet in the Exchequer Chamber this Afternoon. Vide
de ista materia on Tuesday the 14th of this instant March foregoing.

Mr. Treasurer and others coming from Conference with the Lords, Mr. Treasurer
declared, that their Lordships have delivered unto them certain notes in
writing to move unto the House touching the Bill against seditious words and
rumors uttered against her Majesty; which notes in writing were by Mr.
Vice-Chamberlain declared, that their Lordships would feel the opinion of this
House, whether this House could be content to leave in force unrepealed so much
of the Statute of the first and second of King Philip and Queen Mary, as
concerns such matter as in this said Bill is not provided for or met with, as
partly touching slanderous words against Noblemen and the Lords of the Clergy;
And further whether this House can like to have the words [directly or
indirectly] added to the said Bill in such parts thereof as do make mention of
tending to her Majesty's Death. It was upon the Question of these Motions to
the House in these points resolved, That the repeal of the said Statute of the
first and second of King Philip and Queen Mary should stand in sort as it is
already passed by this House in the said Bill, for that her Majesty may at any
time by her Commission renew or receive thereof repealed at her Highness
Pleasure. And also that these words [or any words directly to that effect]
shall be put in, and inserted in their Lordships said notes to be added to the
said Bill, in that part thereof which makes mention of any person willing,
wishing or desiring her Majesty's Death. Vide concerning this matter on
Wednesday the first day of February foregoing.

On Saturday the 18th day of March, the Amendments and Proviso in the Bill
against certain deceitful stuff used in the dying of Cloths, was read the third
time, and passed upon the question.

Mr. Cromwell one of the Committees for Examination of the returns and defaults
noted upon the last calling of the House, made report unto the House of the
state of the same Examinations. Whereupon after sundry Motions and Arguments it
was resolved by the House, That all such Persons as have not been duly returned
into this present Parliament, as in lieu and place of others absent, being
either sick or employed in her Majesty's Services or otherwise, and not dead,
shall be for this time holden excused of their attendance and of their sitting
in this House until this present time; but shall from henceforth stand and be
utterly discharged and disabled of their said rooms and places, in the stead of
such other persons not being dead, unless special Order shall be therein taken
by this House to the contrary. And then perusing the said returns and defaults,
and also the former Precedents of this House in like Cases, it is adjudged and
Ordered by this House, That Edward Flowerdewe Esquire Sergeant at Law, and who the
last former Session of this present Parliament did stand and appear a Burgess
of Castle-Riseing in the County of Norff. and was nevertheless returned into
this present Session of Parliament a Citizen for the City of Norwich, in lieu
and place of Thomas Beamont sick, shall still stand and remain in his place for
Castle-Riseing, and not for the said City of Norwich. And for as much also as
it is now credibly informed to this House by John Aldrich Gentleman, one of the
Citizens returned for the City of Norwich, and also by Sir Roger Woodhouse
Knight, one of the Knights for the said County of Norff. and also by Edward
Grimstone Esquire, one of the Burgesses for the Town of Ipswich in the County
of Suff. that the said Thomas Beamont is impotent and incurably sick and
diseased, it was (at the earnest motion of the said John Aldrich made to this
House for another Citizen to be chosen and returned for the said City of
Norwich in the place and stead of the said Thomas Beamont) Ordered and resolved
by this House, that a Warrant be made forthwith by this House to the Clerk of
the Crown-Office in the Chancery, for the directing of a new Writ for the
choosing and returning of another Citizen of the said City of Norwich in the
place and stead of the said Thomas Beamont accordingly.

And for as much as Hugh Graves one of the Citizens for the City of York, did
the last former Session of this present Parliament move the House and make
request, that by Order of this House another Citizen might be chosen and
returned for the said City of York, in lieu and stead of Gregory Peacocke his
fellow Citizen, being then and yet still incurably sick and diseased; and for
that also that Robert Askewith is already returned and has attended this
present Session in the room and place of the said Gregory Peacocke, it was now
Ordered and resolved by this House, that the said Robert shall stand and remain
still as a Citizen for the said City of York, in the lieu and place of the said
Gregory Peacocke according to the return thereof made.

The Bill for the Lord Zouch was after sundry Motions and Arguments put to the
Question and dashed.

It was also upon further consideration of the said returns and defaults
Ordered and resolved, That Thomas Fleming Gentleman being returned into this
Session and appearing in the place of James Dalton one of the Burgesses for
Kingstone upon Hull in the County of York, being incurably sick and diseased,
shall stand and continue according to the return in that behalf already made.

And that John Fawcher likewise returned a Burgess for the said Town of
Kingston upon Hull in the lieu and stead of James Clerkson sick; and Samuel Cox
Esquire returned a Burgess for the City of Rochester in the County of Kent, in
the room and place of William Partridge Esquire being sick; Sir William Drury
Knight returned a Burgess for Castle Riseing in the County of Norff. in the
room and place of Edward Flowerdewe Esquire being sick; Richard Mollineux Esquire
returned a Burgess for the Town of Wigan in the County of Lancaster, in the
room and place of Edward Fitton Esquire, being in the Queens Majesty's Service;
Fulke Grevill Esquire returned a Burgess for the Town of Southampton, in the
room and place of Sir Henry Wallop Knight, being in the Queens Majesty's
Service, and Richard Herbert Esquire returned a Burgess for the Town of
Montgomery in the room and place of Rowland Pugh Esquire, supposed to be dead,
but yet known to be in plain life, shall be forthwith amoved from their said
places; and the said James Clerkson, Edward Flowerdew Esquire, Edward Fitton
Esquire, William Partridge Esquire, Sir Henry Wallop Knight, and Rowland Pugh
Esquire and every of them, shall stand and continue for their said several rooms
and places, notwithstanding any such causes of sickness, the Queens Majesty's
Service, or supposed allegation of being dead. Vide Januar, 19. and Januar. 21.
antea.

And it is also further agreed upon and resolved by this House, That during the
time of sitting of this Court, there do not any time any Writ go out for the
choosing or returning of any Knight, Citizen, Burgess, or Baron without the
Warrant of this House first directed for the same to the Clerk of the Crown,
according to the ancient Jurisdiction and Authority of this House in that
behalf accustomed and used.

Nota. This resolution of the House is no other than had been formerly taken by
them in the beginning of this Parliament, upon Saturday the 21th day of January
foregoing; which also was further ratified and confirmed by the opinion and
judgment of Sir Thomas Bromley Knight at this time Lord Chancellor of England.

Mr Doctor Gibbon and Mr Doctor Clerk did bring word from the Lords, that their
Lordships did desire present Conference with ten of this House or more touching
the Bill lately passed in this House concerning Iron-Mills. Whereupon were
appointed Mr Comptroller, Mr Treasurer of the Chamber, Sir Thomas Shirley, Sir
William Moore, Sir Thomas Sampoole, Mr Recorder of London, Mr Norton, Mr
Cowper, Mr Aldersey, Mr Gaymes and Mr Leife.

The Bill against certain deceitful stuff used in the dying of Cloths was sent
up to the Lords by Mr Comptroller and the said Committees, and the provision
passed and assented unto, and amended according to the request of their
Lordships.

The Bill for maintenance of Mariners and of the Navigation (all the
Amendments, Provisions and Additions being three times read) was passed upon
the Question.

Where by a former Order of this House Arthur Hall Esquire was committed
Prisoner to the Tower of London, there to remain by the space of six Months,
and so much longer as until himself should willingly make a general revocation
or retractation under his hand in writing of certain Errors and slanders
contained in a certain Book set forth in print and published in part, greatly
tending to the slander and reproach of Sir Robert Bell Knight deceased, late
Speaker of this present Parliament, and of sundry other particular Members of
this House, and also of the Power, Antiquity and Authority of this House, to
the satisfaction of this House, or of such Order as this House should take for
the same during the continuance of this present Session of Parliament, as by
the same Order made and set down by this House upon Tuesday being the 14th day
of February foregoing in this present Session of Parliament more at large does
and may appear: And where also the said Arthur Hall has ever since the said
Order taken, remained in the said Prison of the Tower, and yet still does, and
has not at all made any revocation or retractation of the said slanders,
errors and untruths, to the satisfaction of this said House according to the
said Order; It is now therefore Ordered and resolved by this House, That the
further allowance of such revocation or retractation to be hereafter made as
aforesaid, shall be referred unto the Right Honorable Sir Francis Knolles Knight,
one of her Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council and Treasurer of her
Highness most Honorable Household, Sir James Crofte Knight, one other of her
Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council, and Comptroller of her Majesty's said
most Honorable Household, Sir Christopher Hatton Knight, one other of her
Highness said most Honorable Privy Council and Vice Chamberlain to her
Majesty, Sir Francis Walsingham Knight, and Thomas Wilson Esquire her Highness two
Principal Secretaries, Sir Walter Mildmay Knight, one of her Majesty's most
Honorable Privy Council and Chancellor of her Highness Court of Exchequer, and
Sir Ralph Sadler Knight, one other of her Majesty's said most Honorable
Privy Council and Chancellor of her Highness Duchy of Lancaster, being all
Members of this House, or unto any three of them, to be by them or any three of
them further declared and reported over unto this House in the next Session of
Parliament to be holden after the end of this said Session accordingly. Vide
concerning this matter on Saturday the 4th day, Monday the 6th day, Wednesday
the 8th day, and Tuesday the 14th day of February foregoing.

Mr Sergeant Anderson and Mr Doctor Clerk did bring word from the Lords, that
the Lord Chancellor commanded them to signify unto this House, that the Queens
Majesty purposes (God willing) to come to the Upper House this present day in
the Afternoon. And therefore his Lordship wills that this House be then there
present to attend upon her Highness; and withal that the Bill of the Subsidy
shall then be delivered to Mr Speaker to be presented by him in the name of
this whole House unto her Majesty.

Mr Doctor Jews and Mr Doctor Gibbon did bring from the Lords the Bill for the
Subsidy, and withal a report that their Lordships do say, that the use is
indifferent either to take it there or send it hither; which being after their
departure reported to the House by Mr Speaker, it was by the House resolved,
that the use thereof is not indifferent, but always has been and is, that it
be sent down into this House and not left there. ( Quod nota.)

Mr. Comptroller returning from the Lords with the others which were sent up
with them to the Lords, did bring word, that their Lordships are well satisfied
with the Messages of this House sent up to their Lordships by them.

Mr. Sergeant Anderson and Mr. Doctor Clerk did bring from the Lords the Bill
against slanderous words and rumors uttered against her Majesty, and also the
Bill touching Iron-Mills with offer of certain Amendments in both the same
Bills; which Bills were then presently amended according to their Lordships
request, and sent up unto them by Mr. Treasurer and others.

Post Meridiem.

It is Ordered and resolved by this House upon the question, That every Knight
for the Shire that has been absent this whole Session of Parliament without
excuse allowed by this House, shall have by Order and appointment of this House
twenty pound for a Fine set and assessed upon him to her Majesty's use for such
his default, and for and upon every Citizen, Burgess and Baron for the like
default ten pound.

And for some mild and favorable course of dealing to be used by way of
admonition or warning for the better preventing of greater Fines and
amerciaments hereafter, It is now Ordered, that all such Knights for Shires,
Citizens for Cities, Burgesses for Boroughs, and Barons for Ports, as have been
here, and attended at any time this Session of Parliament, and have departed
without License, shall for his and their such default forfeit and lose the
benefit of having or receiving his or their wages due or to be due for his or
their attendance in that behalf.

And for the better Execution of this Order the Clerk of the Crown shall not at
any time hereafter deliver out any Writ for levying of the Wages or allowance
of any such Knight, Citizen, Burgess or Baron without Warrant first had from
the Clerk of this House for the same.

And it is also further Ordered by this House, that from henceforth no Knight,
Citizen, Burgess or Baron being a Member of this House, shall upon any occasion
depart from his attendance or service in this House without License from this
House or from the Speaker for the time being, and the same License to be Entered
and set down by the Clerk of this House accordingly, upon pain of such Fine and
Amerciament for his such contempt, over and besides the loss of his Wages or
allowance, as to this House upon Examination of the matter shall seem requisite.

Mr Attorney General and Mr Doctor Jews did bring from the Lords the Queens
Majesty's most Gracious General and free Pardon; which being reported unto the
House by Mr Speaker, the said Pardon was once read, and so passed upon the
question accordingly.

The Queens Majesty being come into the Upper House of Parliament, and there
sitting in her Royal Seat, the Lords and Commons attending upon her Highness,
Mr Speaker in his Oration to her Majesty did very aptly and briefly declare the
chief and principal purpose in making of Laws to consist of three several
parts, to wit, the first for the true and sincere service and glory of God;
secondarily for the surety and preservation of her Majesty's most Royal Person;
and thirdly for the good quiet and benefit of the Commonwealth of this her
Highness Realm and Subjects of the same, ascribing the sincere and plentiful
Preaching of Gods word with the due and right use of Prayer and Administration
of the Sacraments and the true exercise and discipline in the Churches, to be
the ordinary means both of the advancement of Gods Glory, her Majesty's Safety,
and of her Subjects Prosperity, the dew of the word watering and bringing forth
in all good Christian Consciences the true knowledge and fear of God, faithful
Love and due Obedience unto her Majesty, and perfect unity in the general
Society of this Commonwealth. And the exercise of the Sword of Discipline to
cut off, repress and correct all excesses and errors tending to the impeachment
of all good effects aforesaid. Declaring further unto her Highness, that her
Majesty's Nobles and Commons in this present Parliament Assembled, had very
carefully gravely and dutifully traveled in this present Session to devise and
ordain good and wholesome Laws for those ends and purposes to be established and
allowed by her Highness; and also some other good and necessary Laws, as well
for the whole State of the Commonwealth in general, as for the private benefit
and necessary relief of sundry her Majesty's particular good Subjects: And so
recommending all the same unto her Highness, and especially two of them,
whereof one does chiefly and principally tend to the bridling and reforming of
her Majesty's disobedient and obstinate Subjects, the utter Adversaries of true
Religion, and the most pernicious and dangerous Enemies of her Highness most
Royal Person, State and Government; the second for the due maintenance and
preservation of her Majesty's Honor, good Fame and Dignity; humbly besought
her Majesty to give life unto all the said Laws by her Royal Assent. And then
yielding unto her Highness most humble thanks in the name of the whole House
for her Majesty's most Gracious good acceptance of their most humble Petition
unto her Highness for reformation of some abuses yet remaining in the Church,
and most humbly renewing the speedy consideration thereof unto her Majesty's
good remembrance at her good will and pleasure, did further most humbly beseech
her Highness in the name and behalf of the whole State of the Commons of her
Realm, that her Majesty would (at their most humble Suit the rather) have a
vigilant and provident care of the safety of her most Royal Person against the
malicious attempts of some mighty Foreign Enemies abroad, and the Traiterous
practices of most unnatural disobedient Subjects both abroad and at home,
envying the blessed and most happy and quiet Government of this Realm under her
Highness, upon the thread of whose Life only, next under God, depends the
Life and whole State and stay of every her good and dutiful Subjects.

And withal, that it might please her Highness to have such good care and
regard generally for the maintenance of Mariners and of the Navigation, the
very strength and Walls of her Majesty's Realms and Dominions, as may seem most
convenient unto her Highness most godly wisdom from time to time. And so
declaring that her Majesty's Nobles and Commons having had consideration of her
Highness great Charges many ways for defense of her Realms and People against
Foreign Enemies, and other Rebellious Subjects, both already employed and
hereafter to be employed, have granted unto her Highness one Subsidy and two
Fifteenths and Tenths, which they besought her Highness to accept in good part
according to their humble Duties; and gave her Majesty most humble thanks for
her Highness most Gracious, general and free Pardon.

Which done, the Lord Chancellor by her Majesty's Commandment, Answering very
Excellently and briefly the parts of Mr Speaker his Oration, did amongst other
things deliver her Majesty's most hearty thanks unto both Houses for their
great and good care for the safety of her Highness Person, and also of her
Honor, good Fame and Dignity, not yet comprehending within those general
thanks such Members of the House of Commons as have this Session dealt more
rashly in some things than was fit for them to do; and giving them withal like
hearty thanks for the said Contribution of a Subsidy and two Fifteenths and
Tenths, in that it was granted as willingly and frankly, and also as largely
and amply, and to be Answered as speedily, as any other like ever has been;
taking the same in as good part as if it had been to her own private use; where
in very deed it is to be employed to the general service and benefit of the
whole Realm. And so giving her Royal Assent to thirty Acts (fifteen public and
fifteen private) the said Lord Chancellor did by her Highness Commandment
Prorogue this present Parliament until the 24th day of April next coming.

Nota, That all this days Passages with the manner of the Conclusion of the
Parliament are wholly transcribed out of the Original Journal Book of the House
of Commons, and in that respect are here more largely set down than in the
Journal of the Upper House; and the rather because there is no Conclusion of
any Parliament so exactly described in any other of the said Original Journal
Books of the House of Commons during the Queens Reign.

The third and last Session finally of this present Parliament was upon the
foresaid 24th day of April Prorogued again unto the 29th day of May; and was at
last after seventeen other Prorogations Dissolved by virtue of her Majesty's
Commission under the Great Seal of England in that behalf directed, upon the
19th day of April, in the twenty fifth year of her Majesty's Reign.

THE JOURNAL OF THE House of LORDS.
A. Journal of the Passages of the House of Lords in the Parliament holden at
Westminster, Anno 27 Reginae Eliz. Anno Domini 1584. which began there on
Monday the 23th Day of November, and then and there continued until the
Prorogation thereof on Monday the 29th Day of March Anno Domini 1585. after
which it was lastly Dissolved on Wednesday the 14th Day of September, Anno 28
Reginae ejusdem, Anno Domini 1586.

THIS Parliament Summoned and holden in the twenty seventh year of her
Majesty's Reign, lasted a long time in respect of the continual sitting of
either House for the space of about three Months, at two several Meetings,
between which there intervened only one Adjournment of about forty days space.
There were no public matters of any great consequence debated in it, but many
Excellent Passages for the Power, Privilege and Order of the Upper House may
be observed from it. At the first Prorogation thereof on Monday the 29th day of
March in Anno 27 Reginae Eliz. Anno Domini 1585. there passed near upon fifty
several Acts or Statutes public and private; from which time it continued
until the Dissolution thereof as abovesaid.

The day before the Parliament began being Sunday, and the 22th day of
November, the Original Journal Book sets down amongst others two unusual or
extraordinary Proxies to have been introducted or returned thereon into the
hands of the Clark of the Upper House; for any Proxy if it be delivered into
the hands of the said Clark, whether it be before the Parliament begin or
after, is well returned: and it is most likely that these two with some other
ordinary or usual Proxies which are here omitted, were delivered as aforesaid
this Sunday toward the Evening, because the Parliament was to begin the next
Morning. Which said Letters Procuratory are Entered as aforesaid in manner and
form following.

22o die Novembris introductae sunt literae Procuratoriae Johannis Episcopi
Carliolen' in quibus Procuratorem suum constituit Johannem Episcopum London.

Item introductae sunt literae Procuratoriae Willielmi Episcopi Cestren' in
quibus Procuratorem suum constituit Edwinum Archiepiscopum Eboracen'.

Nota. That here two Bishops did constitute but one Proxy apiece, whereas it
seldom happens that any spiritual Lord nominateth fewer than two. But for any
further observation upon the Proxies returned this Parliament, Vide on Friday
the 27th day of this instant November following.

On Monday the 23th day of November the Parliament began according to the
Summons. Which had been sent forth.

The Queens Majesty went to this Parliament in her accustomed Pompous and Royal
manner, being attended first unto the Cathedral Church of Westminst.: from her
Palace of Whitehall by the Lords and others; where having heard a Sermon, she
was afterward conducted by them in the like Royalty into the Parliament
Chamber, commonly called the Upper House, whither she came about two of the
Clock in the Afternoon.

Nota, That the whole manner and form aforesaid of her Majesty's most Royal
going to this Parliament, is set down at large in Mr Mills his Catalogue of
Honor, imprinted at London Anno Domini 1610. page 64.

The Queen and the Lords Spiritual and Temporal being all set in their several
places, the Knights, Citizens and Burgesses of the House of Commons had notice
thereof; who thereupon repairing thither, as many as conveniently could, were
let in, and standing all together at the Rail or Bar at the lower end of the
Upper House, Sir Thomas Bromley Knight Lord Chancellor, by the Queen,
Commandment declared unto them the Causes of the Assembling of this Parliament.

But what those Causes were, neither the Original Journal Book of the Upper
House nor that of the House of Commons do at all mention, in setting down the
other daily Passages of this Parliament de Anno isto 27 Reginae Eliz. But in
respect they are set down the abovementioned Catalogue of Honor, imprinted at
London An. Domini 1610. page (...). and that it is most probable that were
there inserted out of the Collections or Memorial of some Member of the House
of Commons at this Parliament, therefore I have thought good to supply it
verbatim as it is there set down.

The said Lord Chancellor declared unto them in her Majesty's name, that this
Assembly of Parliament was for three causes called, viz. For the glory of
Almighty God and the furthering of Religion, for the health and preservation of
her Royal Majesty, and the welfare of the Commonweal. Which after that he had
a loud and most eloquently at large declared, turning his Speech unto the
Knights and Burgesses standing on a heap together below, he willed them to make
choice of their Prolocutor, and to give notice of him so Chosen unto the Lords
of the Privy Council, from whom they should expect what the Queens Pleasure and
Answer was concerning him so Chosen to be afterward presented.

The substance of this Speech being so shortly set down in the said Catalogue
of Honor, I thought good to transcribe, although it were imprinted, because it
does much augment and perfect this present Journal of the Upper House. The
residue whereof does next in order follow out of the Original Journal Book of
the same House, there being only added now and then, as the occasion offered it
self, some Observations and Animadversions upon it.

Nota, Also that no names of any of the Lords Spiritual or Temporal are noted
to have been present this day, which happened through the negligence of the
Clerk of the Parliament; but it may be conjectured who they were by the names
of such whose presence is noted on Thursday next following being the 26th day
of this instant November, on which said day the presence of such Lords as
attended this Parliament is first marked.

Then follow the names of the Receivors and Triors of Petitions, which is the
more remarkable at this time because it is said that the Clerk of the
Parliament did read them by the Lord Chancellors Commandment, whereas it should
seem at other times, and which is agreeable also to the course at this day, he
does presently stand up of himself as soon as the Lord Chancellors or Lord
Keepers Speech is ended, and reads the said Receivors and Triors names; yet the
entrance aforesaid is at this time set down in the said Journal Book in manner
and form following.

Tunc (having beforementioned the Lord Chancellors Speech) Parliamenti
Clericus ex mandato Cancellarn omnibus Petitionibus exhiberi volentibus
Receptorum and Examinatorum nomina forma subsequenti recitavit.

Then follows all in French, of which the names were these.

Receivors of Petitions for England, Ireland, Wales and Scotland.

Sir Christopher Wray Lord Chief Justice of England, Sir Gilbert Gerrard Master
of the Rolls, Sir Thomas Gawel; Knight one of the Justices of the King's Bench,
Doctor Clarke and Doctor Ford.

Receivors of Petitions for Gascoigne and other Countries beyond the Seas and
the Isles.

Sir Edmund Anderson Knight Lord Chief Justice of the Common Pleas, Sir Roger
Manwood Lord Chief Baron, Francis Windam one of the Justices of..... Doctor
Awbery and Doctor Barkley.

Such as will deliver Petitions must so do within six days next ensuing.

Triors of Petitions for England, Ireland, Wales and Scotland.

The Archbishop of Canterbury, the Earl of Leicester Lord High Steward of
England, the Earl of Darby, the Earl of Rutland, the Bishop of Winchester, the
Bishop of Salisbury, the Lord Howard of Effingham Chamberlain of the Queens
House, the Lord Gray of Wilton, the Lord North.

All these or any four of them calling unto them the Lord Keeper of the Great
Seal, the Lord Treasurer and also the Queens Sergeants, at their leisure to
meet and hold their place in the Chamberlains Chamber.

Triors of Petitions for Gascoigne and the Countries beyond the Seas, and the
Isles.

The Archbishop of York, the Earl of Oxford Great Chamberlain of England, the
Earl of Warwick, the Earl of Pembroke, the Bishop of Norwich, the Bishop of
Chester, the Bishop of Rochester, the Lord Cobham, the Lord Lumley and the Lord
Buckhurst.

All these or four of them, calling to them the Queens Sergeants and the Queens
Attorney and Solicitor, to hold their place when their leisure did serve to
meet in the Treasurers Chamber.

Breve returnatum (which was returned this Morning) quo Johannes Episcopus
Gloucestren. praesenti Parliamento interesse summonitus fuit, qui admissus est
ad suum praeheminentiae sedendi in Parliamento locum, salvo jure alieno.

Dominus Cancellarius continuavit praesens Parliamentum usque in diem crastinum
hora nona.

On Tuesday the 24th day of November, the Lords met in the Upper House, but
nothing was done, saving the continuance of the Parliament by the Lord
Chancellor until nine of the Clock the next Morning.

On Wednesday the 25th day of November there was a like meeting of the Lords,
but nothing done saving the continuance of the Parliament by the Lord
Chancellor unto two of the Clock in the Afternoon the day following: But no
presence of the Lords is noted on this day in the Original Journal Book.

On Thursday the 26th day of November, the Commons having chosen their Speaker,
who upon his Presentment to the Queen was this day to be allowed of in the said
place, her Majesty Accompanied with diverse of the Nobility came into the Upper
House about three of the Clock in the Afternoon, whose name and the names of
such Lords Spiritual and Temporal as are marked in the Original Journal Book of
this Parliament to have been present this day, do here ensue.

Regina.
Archiepiscopus Cantuar. Dominus Thomas Bromley Miles, Cancellarius.
Archiepiscopus Eboracen. Dominus Barleigh Dominus Thesaurarius Angliae. Marchio
Winton.
Comites.
Comes Oxon. Magnus Camerarius. Comes Arundell. Comes Kantiae. Comes Darbiae.
Comes Wigorn. Comes Rutland. Comes Cumberland. Comes Sussex. Comes Bathon.
Comes Pembrooke. Comes Hartford. Vice-Comes Mountague. Vice-Comes Bindon.
Episcopi.
Episcopus London. Episcopus Winton. Episcopus Meneven. Episcopus Sarisburien.
Episcopus Petriburgen. Episcopus Norwicen. Episcopus Roffen. Episcopus Cestren.
Barons.
Dominus Howard Camerar. Dominus Zouch. Dominus Willoughbie. Dominus Dacres.
Dominus Cobham. Dominus Gray de Wilton. Dominus Lumley. Dominus Stourton.
Dominus Mountjoy. Dominus Darcie. Dominus Mounteagle. Dominus Windsor. Dominus
Wentworth. Dominus Borough. Dominus Cromwell. Dominus Evers. Dominus Wharton.
Dominus Rich. Dominus Willoughby de Parham. Dominus Darcy de Chiche. Dominus
North. Dominus Shandois. Dominus St John de Bletsoe. Dominus Buckhurst. Dominus
de la Ware. Dominus Cheyne. Dominus Norris.
Her Majesty with the Lords being set, the Knights, Citizens and Burgesses of
the House of Commons repaired to the Upper House with John Puckering Sergeant
at Law their Speaker, and being as many as could conveniently let in, the said
Speaker was led up between two of the most eminent Personages of the House of
Commons to the Rail or Bar at the lower end of the Upper House; and being there
placed, after humble reverence made, he declared, that the said House of
Commons amongst many other more able Members of the said House had Elected and
Chosen him for their Speaker, and that knowing his manifold weaknesses and
inability to undergo so great a Charge, he did there implore her Gracious
Majesty to free him from the same, and to Command them to Elect and choose
amongst themselves some other more Experienced and better fitted for that
employment.

To which the Lord Chancellor having received Instructions from her Majesty
Answered, that the said Speaker had showed a great deal of humility and modesty
in disabling himself, but that her Highness well knowing his great sufficiency,
did very well allow and approve of the choice which the Knights, Citizens and
Burgesses of the said House of Commons had made of him to be their Speaker.

Whereupon the said Speaker after humble reverence made and many expressions of
his great thankfulness to her Majesty for her gracious Approbation of him made
certain Petitions of Course in the name of the House of Commons, viz. for
freedom of speech and freedom of access to her Majesty; and that themselves and
their necessary attendants might be exempted from Suits and Arrests in such
manner and form as has been accustomed; and lastly, that if himself should in
any thing mistake or misreport the sayings or doings of the said House it might
be imputed unto himself, and that her Majesty would be graciously pleased to
pardon it.

To which Speech the Lord Chancellor having further instructions from her
Majesty replied, that all such liberties and immunities as had been formerly
enjoyed in the like case in the times of any of her Majesty's most Royal
Progenitors, should still be continued unto them.

The Writ was returned this day whereby Henry Lord Wentworth was Summoned to
the Parliament, who thereupon admissus fuit ad sunm praeheminentiae in
Parliamento sedendi locum, salvo cuiquam jure suo.

Then followed the continuance of the Parliament which is Entered in the
Original Journal Book de Anno isto 27 Reginae Eliz. in these words following.

Dominus Cancellarius continuavit praesens Parliamentum usque in diem Sabbati
prox. hora consueta.

On Friday the 27th day of November, although the Upper House sat not (because
the Parliament had been continued yesterday unto Saturday Morning at nine of
the Clock) yet were diverse Proxies returned or introducted, whereof the only
unusual or extraordinary one was this ensuing, viz.

27 die Novembris introductae sunt literae Procuratoriae Henrici Comitis
Huntingtoniae, in quibus Procuratores suos constituit Franciscum Comitem
Bedford and Robertum Comitem Leicester.

Nota, That whereas the Temporal Lords do very seldom constitute more than one
Proctor, the Earl of Huntington here nominateth two, which appeared also, by
the other Proxies returned this Parliament, for of three other Earls and eleven
Barons who were absent this Parliament by her Majesty's License, not any of
them constituted more than one Proctor apiece; whereas on the other side the
spiritual Lords do for the most part nominate two Proctors at the least, for of
nine Bishops who were likewise absent during this Parliament, two of them only
nominated each his Proctor. Ut vide on Sunday the 22th day of this instant
November foregoing, and the other seven made every of them two Proctors.

Nota also, that Robert Dudley Earl of Leicester had this Parliament ten
several Proxies sent unto him, all Entered in the beginning of the Original
Journal Book in such order as they now follow, viz. from Edward Lord Dudley,
Henry Lord Scroop, Lodowick Lord Mordant, Edward Lord Stafford, Henry Lord of
Abergavenny, Edward Earl of Lincoln, Ambrose Earl of Warwick, Henry Earl of
Huntington (who constituted Francis Earl of Bedford joint Proctor with him)
Lord Audeley, and John Lord Lumley. By which and many other Precedents in all
other Parliaments it plainly appears, that any Lord of the Upper House was
capable of as many Proxies as should be sent unto him, until in Anno 2do Caroli
Regis Anno Domini 1626. It was Ordered by the Lords then sitting in Parliament,
that no Member of the said House should be capable of above two Proxies at the
most.

On Saturday the 28th day of November, to which day the Parliament had been
last continued, three Bills had each of them one reading; of which the first
being the Bill to provide remedy against fraudulent Conveyances was read the
first time.

Hodie returnatum est breve quo Henricus Comes Suffex praesenti huic
Parliamento interesse summonebatur, qui ad suum praeheminentiae in Parliamento
sedendi locum admissus fuit, salvo jure alieno.

Nota, That the daily continuing of the Parliament in those words, Dominus
Cancellarius continuavit praesens Parliamentum, etc. is hereafter omitted as
matter of course, unless where somewhat in it does happen extraordinary or
unusual in respect of the time, place or manner.

On Monday the 30th day of November, to which day the Parliament had been last
continued, three Bills of no great moment had each of them one reading; of
which the first was the Bill for appointing fit and convenient places for
Landing and Shipping of Merchandise.

On Tuesday the first day of December, whereas James Diggs, one of the ordinary
Gentlemen of my Lord's Grace of Canterbury, was committed to the Fleet upon a
Reddit se in the Exchequer, since the beginning of this present Parliament; the
Lords at the Motion of the Lord Archbishop of Canterbury, claiming the ancient
privilege of this High Court, gave Commandment to the Gentleman Usher, that
the said James should be brought before them.

And this day the said Lords having openly heard both Sir Roger Manwood then
Lord Chief Baron of the Exchequer, and the same James Diggs; They Ordered that
the said Diggs by virtue of the privilege of this Court, should be enlarged
and set at liberty.

And it was further Ordered, that the Warden of the Fleet should be discharged
of the Prisoner and of the Action that might be brought against him the said
Warden of the same.

Lastly, Touching the Lord Chief Baron, the said Lords have resolved for such
causes and reasons as they have heard, that the said Lord Chief Baron had not
committed any contempt against this Right Honorable Court.

And further Ordered 13o die Decembris, that the appearance of the same James
Diggs, by rendering himself into the Exchequer, was and should be a sufficient
discharge of his Sureties and their Bonds, and that the Bonds shall be
redelivered.

Provided nevertheless, that for as much as the said James Diggs was not
Arrested in Execution at the Suit of Richard How, but was committed after
Judgment by the Barons of the Exchequer upon a Reddit se, for discharge of his
Sureties. It is therefore further Ordered by the said Lords, that touching the
sum of money recovered by the said How against the said James Diggs, the said
How and James Diggs shall stand to such Order as the Lord Chief Baron and
other of the Barons of the Exchequer shall set down for the same. Vide more
afterward concerning this matter upon Monday the 14th, and on Tuesday the 15th
day of this instant December following.

On Thursday the third day of December, to which day the Parliament had been on
Tuesday last continued, the Bill for fit and convenient places for landing and
shipping of Merchandise was read secunda vice, and then committed to the Lord
Treasurer and others, and to the two Senior Barons of the Exchequer.

Nota, That here two Judges who are but Assistants unto the Upper House, are
made joint Committees with the Lords.

On Friday the 4th day of December, Two Bills were sent up to the Lords from
the House of Commons; of which the first being an Act for the maintenance of
Navigation was read prima vice, and the second touching the Clothiers of Essex
was read prima and secunda vice, and then committed.

On Saturday the 5th day of December, Three Bills of no great moment had each
of them one reading; of which the second being the Bill for the Inning of Erith
and Plumsted Marsh, was read secunda vice, and committed unto three Earls, one
Bishop and five Barons: which Committees did appoint to hear amongst themselves
as well the Parties Owners, as Inners touching the same Bill.

The Bill also concerning the Essex Clothiers which had been sent up yesterday
to the Lords from the House of Commons, was this day upon the third reading and
conclusion thereof sent back again thither.

On Monday the 7th day of December, to which day the Parliament had been last
continued, two Bills had each of them one reading; the first for maintenance of
Navigation, and the second for increase of Mariners.

Two Bills also were sent up to the Lords from the House of Commons; the one
touching the Essex Clothiers, the other for the better and more reverent
observing of the Sabbath day.

Nota, That this Bill concerning the Sabbath day was long in passing the two
Houses, being committed, and amendments upon amendments added unto it, as Vide
afterward on Tuesday the 8th day, on Monday the 14th day, and on Saturday the
19th day of this instant December ensuing; as also on Wednesday the third day,
and on Saturday the 6th day of March following. Vide etiam on Wednesday the 9th
day of this instant December foregoing.

Whereas the Lord Viscount Bindon moved the Lords for the privilege of the
House for Robert Finnies, alleging that he was his Servant, the Lords gave
Commandment to the Gentleman Usher to go to the Counter in Woodstreet, where
the said Robert Finnies then lay upon an Execution, and to bring him and the
Parties that Arrested him before them.

And this day the said Lords after the hearing of the Cause thought it not
convenient that the said Robert Finnies should enjoy the privilege of this
House, as well because he claimed not the privilege when he was first
Arrested, nor in the Counter when he was charged with the Execution; as also
for that he was not a menial Servant, nor yet ordinary Attendant upon the said
Viscount. And further Ordered, that the Officers of the Sheriffs of London
should take again in Execution the said Finnies and convey him to the place
from whence he came, and that the bringing of the said Finnies before the said
Lords at their Commandment should not be in any wise prejudicial to the
Sheriffs or their Officers.

On Tuesday the 8th day of December, the Bill for the better and more reverent
observing of the Sabbath day was read prima vice. Vide concerning this Bill on
Monday the 7th day of this instant December foregoing.

On Wednesday the 9th day of December, Five Bills had each of them one reading;
of which the first being the Bill for the increase of Mariners was read the
second time, and thereupon committed.

And the second of the said Bills being for the better and more reverent
observing of the Sabbath day was read the second time and committed to the
Archbishop of Canterbury, the Lord Treasurer, the Lord Steward, the Earl of
Kent, the Earl of Darby, the Earl of Sussex, the Earl of Bedford, Viscount
Mountague, the Bishop of London, the Bishop of Winchester, the Bishop of
Salisbury, the Bishop of Chester, the Lord Chamberlain, the Lord Zouch, the
Lord Willoughby, the Lord Gray, the Lord North, the Lord Norris, the Lord Chief
Baron, and Justice Windham.

Nota, That here two Judges being here mere Assistants of the Upper House were
made joint Committees with the Lords; whereas of later times they are always
Commanded to attend the Lords Committees, of which also there was another
Precedent this Morning.

The Bill to provide remedy against fraudulent means used to defeat Wardships,
Liveries and primier seisin was read secunda vice, and committed to the Lord
Treasurer (being Master of the Wards) to two Earls, Viscount Mountague, two
Bishops, five Barons, the two Chief Justices, and the Queens Attorney.

The continuance or Adjournment of the Parliament this day is not at all Entered
in the Original Journal Book, which seems to have happened through the Clerks
negligence.

On Thursday the 10th day of December, Three Bills of no great moment had each
of them their first reading; of which the first was concerning Sir Thomas Lucy
Knight, and others.

On Saturday the 12th day of December, to which day the Parliament had been on
Thursday last continued, Five Bills of no great moment had each of them one
reading; of which the last being the Bill to provide remedy against fraudulent
Conveyances and another concerning certain assurances of Sir Thomas Lucy and
others, were after the third reading sent down unto the House of Commons.

A Bill lastly being for the assurance of certain Lands unto George Chewne
Esquire, and others in Fee-simple, was sent up to the Lords from the House of
Commons.

On Monday the 14th day of December, to which day the Parliament had been on
Saturday last continued, the Bill for the better and more reverent observing of
the Sabbath day, with certain amendments, was read tertia vice, and with
another bill of no great moment was sent down to the House of Commons by two
Doctors.

Nota, That though this Bill were upon Wednesday last past, being the 9th day
of this instant December, referred to Committees; yet no mention is made in the
Original Journal Book, when it was again returned or brought into the House by
the said Committees, by whom it is most probable that these amendments were
added unto it, and for the passing of which the said Bill was at this time sent
down to the House of Commons, having formerly passed that House, and been sent
up from thence to the Lords (before the aforesaid new amendments had been added
by them) on Monday last past being the 7th day of this instant December.

The Bill touching the Lord Dacres and the Lord Norris was read prima vice.

Memorand. That upon the Petition of the Lord Norris, the Lords Ordered that he
and the Lord Dacres with their Council should be heard upon Saturday next to
Answer the said Bills.

Memorand. That touching the former Order Entered primo die Decembris concerning
James Diggs, for that there wanted words for the discharge of the Bond and
Sureties of the said James Diggs; This day the Lords Ordered that the
appearance of the said James Diggs by rendering himself in the Exchequer, was
and should be a sufficient discharge of his Sureties and their Bonds, and that
the Bonds should be redelivered, and that this Order should be added to the
former Order.

Memorand. That where the said James Diggs exhibited to the Court a Bill of
complaint in form of supplication against Sir Roger Manwood Knight Lord Chief
Baron, the Lords having heard the Parties and the Witnesses of Mr Diggs, and
deliberately considered the Contents thereof, with one consent agreed and
adjudged, that the said complaint was untrue and unjustifiable against the Lord
Chief Baron: And further Ordered, that the said James Diggs by humble
submission and open recognition should confess and acknowledge his fault. And
that the Earl of Rutland, the Bishop of Winchester, the Lord Lumley, the Lord
North, and the Lord St John of Bletsoe, the Master of the Rolls and Mr Sergeant
Gaudy should peruse and consider the said recognition, whether it were made in
due form, and that then it should be Entered on Record. Vide touching this
matter on Tuesday the first day of this instant December foregoing.

On Tuesday the 15th day of December four Bills of no great moment had each of
them one reading; of which the first being the Bill for confirmation of her
Majesty's Letters Patents granted to Queens-Colleage in Oxford was read secunda
vice, and commissa ad ingrossandum.

This day James Diggs Gent. did according to their Lordships Order made
yesterday, humbly submit himself in manner and form following, as it stands
Entered upon Record in the Original Journal Book of this Parliament.

The humble Submission of James Diggs unto the High Court of Parliament, as
well for his contempt unto the said Court, as unto Sir Roger Manwood Lord Chief
Baron, by his untrue and unadvised Speeches in his Bill of complaint.

Whereas I James Diggs did of late exhibit a Bill of complaint unto your
honorable Lordships in this High Court of Parliament, against the said Lord
Chief Baron, wherein amongst other things is contained as follows, that is to
say, That the said Lord Chief Baron does still continue an obstinate intention
to frustrate your Lordships honorable Order, taken for the discharging of the
great Bonds of the said James Diggs his Sureties, boldly saying, that the same
your Lordships honorable Order should be undone or brought about again, as by
the said Bill of complaint does appear. And whereas also it pleased your most
honorable Lordships upon the humble Petition of me the said James Diggs to
call before your honorable Lordships that Witness which I the said James Diggs
did avow for the proof of the Allegations before rehearsed in the said Bill of
Complaint against the said Lord Chief Baron, which Witness being heard and
examined at large touching the said Allegations, with the circumstances of the
same openly before your honorable Lordships in this High Court of Parliament,
it has plainly and evidently appeared that there was no such obstinate
intention in the said Lord Chief Baron, nor that he did utter the said words or
Speeches abovementioned. Whereupon it has pleased your honorable Lordships
to Order that I the said James Diggs should before your Lordships openly in
this honorable Court of Parliament recognize my fault for this my untrue and
unadvised complaint against him.

Wherefore I the said James Diggs being now heartily sorry for my said untrue
and unadvised complaint in the Speeches aforesaid exhibited against the Lord
Chief Baron, do openly before your Lordships in this most High Court of
Parliament consess and acknowledge my said offense in my said unadvised and
untrue complaint made against the said Lord Chief Baron. And do here before
your Lordships heartily pray and desire the said Lord Chief Baron to remit and
forget my said offense in my untrue and unadvised complaint made against him;
and withal do most humbly beseech all your Lordships to pardon my contempt and
offense committed to this most High Court in exhibiting unto your Lordships of
the said unadvised and untrue complaint.

Vide the former proceedings of this case of James Diggs Gentleman on Tuesday
the first day, and on Monday the 14th day of this instant December foregoing.

Nota also, That there is no continuance or adjournment of the Parliament by
the Lord Chancellor in usual form entered in the Original Journal Book, which
seems to have happened through the negligence of the Clerk of the Parment;
but it is easy to be conjectured the Lord Chancellor continued the Parliament
unto nine of the Clock in the forenoon of Wednesday next following.

On Wednesday the 16th day of December two Bills of no great moment had each of
them one reading; of which the second being the Bill against scandalous
Libelling was read secunda vice, and committed to the Archbishop of Canterbury,
the Archbishop of York, the Lord Treasurer and others, the Master of the Rolls,
the two Chief Justices, the Queens Sergeant and Attorney.

Nota, That here not only the Judges which are but Assistants to the Lords, but
also the Queens Council, which are but mere Attendants upon the upper House,
are made joint Committees with the Lords.

On Thursday the 17th day of December the Bill for restitution in blood of
Thomas Howard, Son of Thomas Howard, late Dake of Norfolk, was read prima vice.

And the same Bill was again read secunda and tertia vice, and by all the Lords
concluded and sent to the House of Commons by two Doctors being Masters of the
Chancery.

Nota, The speedy passing of this Bill by vouchsasing of it three readings at
one time each after other, did express the special desire of the Lords to pass
this Bill with as much honor as lay in them to do.

Eight other Bills of no great moment had each of them one reading; of which
the second being the Bill for the paving of Newark upon Trent in Com. Not. was
read tertia vice and conclusa and sent to the House of Commons.

On Saturday the 19th day of December, to which day the Parliament had been on
Thursday last continued, four Bills were brought up to the Lords from the House
of Commons; of which the last was the Bill for the restitution in blood of the
Lord Thomas Howard, which it seems the House of Commons passed with great
expedition, having given it one reading yesterday morning, when they sent it
again up to the Lords, as appears by the Original Journal Book of the House
of Commons de Anno isto 27o Reginae Eliz. page 44, and 50.

The Bill also for the paving of Jews in the County of Suffex was read prima
vice.

Lectae sunt the Reasons and Allegations of the Lord Norris, why the Bill
exhibited by the Lord and Lady Dacres should not be enacted.

Memorandum. This day the Lords, as they had ordered before, having heard both
the Council of the Lord Dacres and Lord Norris and Samson Leonard Esquire, upon
offer and agreement of the parties to commit the Cause to the hearing of four
of the Lords and two of the Judges, the Lords thought it most convenient that
they should be named by the parties themselves. The Lord Dacres and Samson
Leonard named William Lord Burleigh Lord Treasurer, Robert Earl of Leicester
Lord Steward, and Sir Roger Manwood Knight Lord Chief Baron. The Lord Norris
named the Earl of Kent, the Earl of Bedsord and Sir Gilbert Gerrard Knight
Master of the Rolls. And further Ordered, That the Lords and Judges should end
the matter between the said parties before the next Session of Parliament if
they could; and if they could not, then to make Report thereof to the whole
House. And further Ordered, That all the parties should have Letters directed
to such Witnesses to appear before the said Lords as they thought convenient;
and that the said Lords should have Authority to examine all parties upon their
Oaths, if occasion so required.

Memorandum, That whereas the Lords received a Bill from the House of Commons,
viz. for the better and more reverent observing of the Sabbath day, the said
Lords having passed the same with some amendments, sent down the said Bill to
the House of Commons, who sent up the same with other amendments of theirs;
which because the Lords thought it not to stand with the Order of the House to
pass the same Bill again with their new amendments, they returned the said Bill
to them again, and signisied the same unto them by Mr Sergeant Gaudy, etc.

On Monday the 21th day of December, Consedentibus Proceribus Dominus
Cancellarius exposirit Regiam Majestatem satis perpendere Fcstum solemn
Nativitatis is Domini in proximo esse, nec posse ante idem hoc Parliamentum
terminari, nec in longum tempus prorogari; propter quas and alias causas and
considerationes idem Cancellarius jussu suae Majestatis lectis Literis
Patentibus magno Sigillo suo sigillat. hoc Parliamentum in quartum diem
Februarii prox sequentem adjournavit, adhortatusque est omnes and singulos ut
tunc adsint, facturi quod decuerit. Earumque autem tenor sequitur in haec verba.

ELizabetha Dei gratia Angliae, Franciae and Hiberniae Regina Fidei Defensor,
etc. Reverendissimo in Christo Patri Johanni Cantuar' Archiepiscopo, totius
Angliae Primati and Metropolitano, and praedilecto and fideli Consiliario suo
Thomae Bromley Militi Domino Cancellario Angliae, ac etiam Reverendissimo in
Christi Patri Edwino Eboracen' Archiepiscopo Angliae Primati and Metropolitano,
necnon praedilecto and fideli Consiliario suo Willielmo Domino Burleigh Domino
Thesaurario Angliae, ac charissimo consanguineo Edwardo Comiti Oxon' magno
Camerario Angliae, ac etiam charissimis consanguineis and consiliariis suis
Edwardo Comiti Lincoln' magno Admirallo suo Angliae, Georgio Comiti Salop'
Comiti Mareschallo Angliae, Roberto Comiti Leicester magno Seneschallo Hospitii
sui, necnon charissimis consanguineis suis Philippo Comiti Arundel, Henrico
Comiti Kantiae, Henrico Comiti Darbiae, Willielmo Comiti Wigorn', Elwardo
Comiti Rutland, Georgio Comiti Cumberland, Henrico Comiti Sussex, ac
charissimis consanguineis and consiliariis suis Ambrosio Comiti Warwici
Magistro Ordinationum suarum, Francisco Comiti Bedford, ac etiam charissimis
consanguineis suis Henrico Comiti Pembroke, Edwardo Comiti Hartford, Anthonio
Vicecomiti Mountague, necnon Reverendis in Christo Patribus Johanni Episcopo
London, Thomae Episcopo Winton', ac praedilectis and fidelibus suis Carolo
Domino Howard Domino Camerario Hospitii sui, Edwardo Domino Zouch, Peregrino
Domino Willoughby, Edwardo Domino Morley, Willielmo Domino Cobham Domino
Gardiano quinque Portuuni, ac etiam praedilecto and fideli suo Henrico Domino
de Hunsdon Domino Gardiano Marchiarum Orientalium versus Scotiam, Salutem. Cum
nuper pro quibuselam arduis and urgentibus negotiis nos, statum and defensionem
Regni nostri Angliae and Ecclesiae Anglicanae concernentibus, praesens hoc
Parliamentum nostrum apud Civitatem nostram Westmonasterii vicesimo vertio die
Novembris ultimo praeterito inchoari and teneri ordinaverimus, a quo die idem
Parliamentum nostrum tunc and ibidem tentum and continuatum fuerat usque in
instantem vicesimum primum diem Decembris: Sciatis tamen quia negotia
Parliamenti nostri in eodem communicata ante Festum Natalis Domini nunc prox'
instantis terminari non possunt, and propter alias causas and considerationes
nos specialiter move ntes, praedictum Parliamentum nostrum and omnes causas and
materias inceptas and non adhuc terminatas adjornand' duximus. De fidelitate
igitur, prudentia and circumspectione vestris plurimum confidentes, de
avisamento and assensu Concilii nostri assignavinius vos Commissionarios
nostros, dantes vobis and aliquibus sex vel pluribus vestrum tenore praesentium
plenam potestatem and authoritatem hoc instante die Lunae ad praesens
Parliamentum nostrum, ac omnia negotia and materias supradict' adhuc ut
praesertur non terminata, nomine nostro ad and in quartum diem Februarii jam
prox' futurum usque praedictam Civitatem nostram Westmonasterii adjornand' and
continuand' ibidem tunc tenend' and prosequend'. Et ideo vobis mandamus, quod
circa praemissae diligenter intendatis, ac ea in forma praedicta effectualiter
expleatis. Damus autem universis and singulis Archiepiscopis, Marchionibus,
Comitibus, Vicecomitibus, Episcopis, Baronibus, Militibus, Civibus and
Burgensibus, ac omnibus aliis quorum interest ad dictum Parliamentum nostrum
conventuris, tenore praesentium firmiter in mandatis, quod vobis in praemissis
faciend', agend' and exequend' pareant, obediant and intendant, prout decet. In
cujus rei testimonium has Literas nostras sicri fecimus Patentes. Test meipsa
apud Westmonasterium vicesimo primo die Decembris, Anno Regni nostri vicesimo
septimo.

Nota, That by these Letters Patents the Parliament was adjourned forty four
days, viz. from Monday the 21th day of December unto Thursday the 4th day of
February ensuing. From which, as also from many other like Precedents, it
appears, that it is and always has been the power of the Prince not only to
summon, dissolve and prorogue, but also to adjourn his Parliament at his
pleasure; yet this must be done either by himself in person or by matter of
Record; yet it is also in the power of either House when they shall think it
expedient to adjourn it self.

The meeting of the two Houses at the end of this foresaid Adjournment was in
such manner as it uses to be at the end of a Prorogation without all Solemnity
and Pomp; yet with this difference: At the end of every Prorogation a new
Session begins, though the same Parliament continues; but at the end of an
Adjournment there begins neither new Session nor new Parliament, but (be the
Adjournment for one day or for many) the business is so entered upon at the next
meeting as it was left, and as it stood at the time of the Adjournment.

Yet because the Adjournment was for so many days, I have caused all the Names
of the Lords who were present this Thursday following, being the 4th day of
February, to be transcribed out of the Original Journal Book; which course,
though it be usually observed in all these Journals at the beginning only of a
new Parliament, or at least of a new Session, yet it is in one respect somewhat
necessary at the beginning of this new meeting after the Adjournment, because
the presence of the Lords on this said ensuing Thursday, though it appears not
that any new Proxies were returned, (which is usual after a long Adjournment as
well as after a Prorogation) differs much from that former number of the
Lords noted to have been present on Tuesday the 26th day of November foregoing,
as may appear by this which follows.

On Thursday the 4th day of February, to which day the Parliament had been on
Monday the 21th day of December last past by her Majesty's Commission under the
Great Seal adjourned, the Lords and Commons repaired each of them without all
manner of Pomp or Solemnity to their several Houses, and there fell upon such
ordinary business as had been left unperfected at their last Adjournment. The
Names of the Lords who were this day present in the Upper House being as
follows out of the Original Journal Book.

Archiepiscopus Cantuar. Archiepiscopus Eboracen. Thomas Bromley Miles Dominus
Cancellarius. Dominus Burleigh Dominus Thesaurarius. Marchio Winton.
Comites.
Comes Oxon. Magnus Camerarius. Comes Leicester Magnus Seneschallus. Comes
Kantiae. Comes Sussex. Vice-Comes Mountague.
Episcopi.
Episcopus Winton. Episcopus Sarisburien. Episcopus Oxon. Episcopus Meneven.
Barons.
Dominus Zouch. Dominus Willoughbie. Dominus Dacres. Dominus Cobham. Dominus
Stourton. Dominus Mountjoy. Dominus Wentworth. Dominus Borough. Dominus
Cromwell. Dominus Evers. Dominus Rich. Dominus Darcy de Chiche. Dominus North.
Dominus Hunsdon. Dominus de la Ware. Dominus Compton. Dominus Norris.
This day also three Bills of no great moment had each of them one reading; of
which the first being the Bill for Confirmation of her Majesty's Letters
Patents granted to the Queens College in Oxford was read tertia vice and
conclusa, and sent to the House of Commons by two Sergeants at Law.

And the last being the Bill for the Savoy was read secunda vice and commissa
Archiepiscopis Cantuar. and Eboracen. Dominis Thesaurario and Seneschallo,
Comitibus Kantiae and Bedford, Episcopis London and Winton. Dominis North and
Hunsdon, Baroni Shute and Servienti Gaudy.

On Saturday the 6th day of February to which day the Parliament had been on
Thursday last continued, returnatum fuit breve quo Episcopus Wigorn. praesenti
Parliamento summonebatur, qui admissus est ad suum praeheminentiae in
Parliamento sedendi locum, salvo jure alieno.

The Bill also against Jesuits, Seminary Priests and other such like
disobedient persons was read prima vice, and commissa Archrepiscopo Cantuar.
Domino Thesaurario, Domino Senesebatio Comiti Kantiae, Comiti Bedford, Episcopo
London, Episcopo Winton. Episcopo Sarisburien. Domino Camerario, Domino Cobham,
Domino North, Domino Hunsdon, Domino Primario Justiciario and Baroni Shute.

On Monday the 8th day of February, the Bill for the paving of Jews was read
secunda vice and commissa.

On Tuesday the 9th day of February, Returnatum suit breve quo Thomas Dominus
Darcy de Chiche praesenti Parliamento summonebatur, qui admissus est ad suum
praeheminentiae in Parliamento sedendi locum, salvo jure alieno.

Three Bills were brought up to the Lords from the House of Commons; of which
the second was the Bill that Parsonages impropriate may be disposed to godly
and charitable uses.

The matter which had been debated on Tuesday the 7th day of March in the last
Parliament ( de anno 23 Reginae Eliz. Anno Domini 1580.) between Mr Oughtred
and the Lord Marquess of Winchester concerning certain accounts, was again this
Tuesday Morning brought into the Upper House before the Lords, who for the more
speedy ending of the same committed it with the consent of the parties unto the
Lord Treasurer, the Lord Steward, the Earl of Arundel, the Earl of Hartford
Viscount Mountague, the Bishop of Winchester, the Bishop of Salisbury, the Lord
Cobham, the Lord Gray, the Lord Lumley, and the Lord North. And it is Ordered
that the said Lords should hear and end the matter between the Parties if they
could, or otherwise to make report thereof to the whole House: and appointed
the Lord Chief Justice of England, Justice Windham and Sergeant Gaudy, to
attend the Lords. Vide plus concerning this matter on Thursday the 4th day of
March ensuing.

Nota, That here the Judges and the Queens Council are not nominated as joint
Committees with the Lords, but only appointed to attend upon them, which is
very rare in any Parliaments of the Queens time until in Anno 39 and 43 Reginae
ejusdem.

On Wednesday the 10th day of February four Bills of no great moment had each
of them one reading; of which the second being the Bill that Parsonages
impropriate may be disposed to godly and charitable uses, was read prima vice.

On Thursday the 11th day of February, Two Bills of no great moment had each of
them one reading; of which the first being the Bill for the better foundation
and relief of the Hospital of Eastbridge in the City of Canterbury, was read
prima vice.

Five Bills also were brought up to the Lords from the House of Commons; of
which the first was the Bill for paving Newark upon Trent in the County of
Nottingham.

Dominus Cancellarius continuavit praesens Parliamentum usque in diem Lunae
prox. hora consueta.

On Monday the 15th day of February, to which day the Parliament had been last
continued on Thursday foregoing, four Bills of no great moment had each of them
their first reading; of which the first was a Bill for returning of Justices,
Jurors, and for expedition of Trials.

The Lords Ordered that Edward Fisher and Katherine his Wife should personally
appear before them on Wednesday next the 17th day of this instant February, for
the better satisfying of their Lordships of their consent to the passing of a
Bill Entitled An Act for the assurance of certain Lands unto George Chewne,
Giles Flood, Christopher Puckering, and their Heirs. Vide concerning this
matter on Wednesday the 17th day of this instant February ensuing.

The Lords also Ordered that the Master of the Rolls, the Lord Chief Baron,
Justice Gaudy and Baron Shute should have the hearing of the matter of the Writ
of Error between Akrode, etc. and Mr Whawley.

On Tuesday the 16th day of February, Four Bills of no great moment had each of
them one reading; of which the first being the Bill for the continuance of a
former Statute Entitled, An Act to redress disorders in common Informers upon
penal Laws, made in the eighteenth year of the Queens Majesty's Reign, was read
tertia vice and communi omnium Procerum assensu conclusa.

Six Bills of no great moment had each of them one reading; and had been
brought to the Lords from the House of Commons; of which the first was the Bill
against Class-Houses and making of Glass by Aliens born.

On Wednesday the 17th day of February, Five Bills of no great moment had each
of them one reading; of which the last save one being the Bill concerning the
Lord Dacres and the Lord Norris was read tertia vice and conclusa, and sent to
the House of Commons by Sergeant Rodes and the Queens Attorney.

Then the Lord Chancellor continued the Parliament unto two of the Clock in the
Afternoon.

At which time as the Lords had Ordered, Mr Edward Fisher with his Council,
viz. Mr Sergeant Walmesley and Mr Cowper appeared before them. The Lords having
heard the consent of the said Edward Fisher to the passing of the Bill
Entitled, Au Act for the assurance of certain Lands unto George Chewne, etc.
and their Heirs, committed again the said Edward Fisher to the Custody of the
Warden of the Fleet; and further Ordered that the bringing of the said Edward
Fisher before their Lordships at their Commandment, should not in any wise be
prejudicial to the said Warden.

The said Edward Fisher and his Council made two Petitions to the Lords; the
one that the Preamble of the Act alleging the cause of the making of the same
Act to be for doubtfulness of his ill dealing, because he was judged in the
Star Chamber to have made two false and forged Writings to the prejudice of the
said Bargains, might be amended, and that the same might be taken out of the
Act, and not to remain in perpetual memory of his shame for ever.

The second that Sergeant Puckering, to whose behalf the said Lands were sold,
having him and his Lands in Execution upon a Statute of eight thousand pound
for not performance of the Covenants of the same, yet also enjoying the Lands
sold would release him the said Execution, and take a new Statute in that
behalf; to which the said Sergeant Puckering whom the cause chiefly concerned,
being present by the appointment of the Lords, answered as to the first
request, That if to alter or take out of the said Act the said Preamble being
parcel of the Bill and matter passed from the House of Commons to this
Honorable House in that form should be no hurt or prejudice to the Bill so
passed from the Lower House to the Lords, he was well content therewith, and
therein submitted himself to their honorable Lordships. And as to the second
Request he Answered, That whenever the said Edward Fisher shall have cleared
and discharged the said Lands and Tenements by him bargained and sold as
aforesaid, of and from all Statutes Staple and Recognizances, charges and
encumbrances liable or chargeable upon the same, then he having a new like
Recognizance in nature of a Statute Staple made unto him by the said Edward
Fisher of the sum of eight thousand pound for performance of Covenants
mentioned in the said Indenture of Bargain and Sale from thenceforth to be
performed, unto which Recognizance all the Lands and Tenements of the said
Edward Fisher which shall not be sold for the payment of his Debts, shall be
liable and chargeable, and that there were no former Statutes and Recognizances
knowledged by the said Edward Fisher to the prejudice of the same, he was
contented then after that done to discharge the said new Execution, having and
taking a new Recognizance in form aforesaid. Vide concerning this matter on
Monday the 15th day of this instant February foregoing.

On Thursday the 18th day of February, Nine Bills of no great moment had each
of them one reading; of which the two first were upon the third reading
concluded and sent down to the House of Commons by Sergeant Rolls and Dr Carey,
the one being the Bill to explain the Statute concerning Tellors and Receivors,
etc. made An. 13 Reginae Eliz. and the other being for the better relief of the
Hospital of Eastbridge within the City of Canterbury.

Nota, That the Original Journal Book of the House of Commons sets down a third
Bill assented unto and concluded at this time.

The last of the said Bills touching diverse Assurances made by the Bishop, and
Dean and Chapter of Exeter was read secunda vice and commissa Archiepiscopo
Eboracen. Comiti Sussex, Episcopo Exon. Domino Stourton and Domino Buckhurst.

On Saturday the 20th day of February, to which day the Parliament had been on
Thursday last continued, a Proviso added by the House of Commons to the Bill
concerning certain assurances of Sir Thomas Lucy and others, was read and
concluded.

The Bill also to make a Fine levied by Peter Heam and Johan his Wife, and
Tredolias Leza and his Wife during the Minority of the said Johan and Anne, to
be void against the said Anne, was read secunda vice.

The Lords appointed Monday next in the Afternoon for the hearing of the Cause,
and have given Order that the Parties shall have warning to be then there with
their Council by two of the Clock in the Afternoon.

Five other Bills also of no great moment had each of them one reading; of
which the fourth being the Bill for the well-ordering and governing of the
Savoy, was read the third time and sent to the House of Commons.

On Monday the 22th day of February, to which day the Parliament had been last
continued on Saturday foregoing, Five Bills of no great moment had each of them
one reading; of which the first being the Bill for preservation of Grain and
Game, with another Bill against Moor-burning in the Counties of Northumberland,
Cumberland, Westmerland and Durham (with an amendment added unto it by the
Lords) were upon the third reading sent down to the House of Commons by
Sergeant Rolls and Doctor Ford.

Three Bills also had each of them one reading, being brought from the House of
Commons; of which the first was for redress of erroneous Judgments in the Court
called the King's Bench.

Then the Lord Chancellor continued the Parliament unto two of the Clock in the
Afternoon, at which time the Lords Assembling themselves, two Bills of no great
moment had each of them one reading; of which the first being against
Glass-Houses and making of Glass by Aliens born, was read the first time.

This Afternoon also the Lords having heard the Council of both Parties
touching the Bill Entitled An Act to make a Fine levied by Peter Heam and
Johan his Wife, and Tredolias Leza and Anne his Wife, during the minority of
the said Johan and Anne, to be void against the said Anne, for a more speedy
end of the said cause, with the consent of the said Parties, committed the
matter to the hearing of certain of the Lords which should be named by the
Parties themselves. The Plaintiff Anne did choose the Lord Treasurer, the Earl
of Arundell, the Bishop of Salisbury, and the Lord North; and Mr Vinion the
Defendant chose the Lord Steward, the Earl of Bedford, the Bishop of Exeter and
the Lord Buckhurst. And further Ordered, that the said Lords should end the
matter between the Parties if they could; and if they could not, then to
certify the State of the matter as they found it to the whole House. And the
Lord Chief Justice and the Lord Chief Baron, were appointed to attend the Lords.

On Tuesday the 23th day of February, Six Bills of no great moment had each of
them one reading; of which the first being the Bill for the furtherance of
Justice was read prima vice.

Two Bills also were sent up to the Lords from the House of Commons; of which
the first was concerning the Jointure of the Countess of Huntington.

On Wednesday the 24th day of February, Three Bills of no great moment had each
of them one reading; of which the first being the Bill for the better assurance
of her Majesty's Letters Patents granted for the better foundation of the
Hospital called Sherborn-House, was read prima vice and Commissa Archiepiscopo
Eboracen. Episcopo London. Domino Darcy, Domino Evers, the Lord Chief Baron and
Justice Gaudy.

On Thursday the 25th day of February, Three Bills of no great moment had each
of them one reading; of which the first being the Bill for Confirmation of her
Majesty's Letters Patents to the Masters, Fellows and Scholars of Clare-Hall in
Cambridge was read secunda vice; but no mention is made whether it was Ordered
to be engrossed, or referred to Committees.

On Saturday the 27th day of February, to which day the Parliament had been on
Thursday last continued, the Bill for following of Hue and Cry was read secunda
vice, and committed to one Earl, three Lords, the Lord Chief Baron and one
Judge. Where still Nota the Judges are joint Committees with the Lords.

One Bill also touching Plymouth-Haven, was sent up to the Lords from the House
of Commons. And three other Bills of no great moment, the first concerning
Rochester-Bridge was read secunda vice.

On Monday the first day of March, to which day the Parliament had been on
Saturday last continued, Four Bills of no great moment had each of them one
reading; of which the first being the Bill for returning of sufficient Jurors
for the better expediting of Trials was read tertia vice and concluded.

The Master of the Rolls and Mr Sergeant Rodes were appointed Committees to
hear the matter between Mr Vinion and Mr Tredolias Leza and his Wife, and
Commission given to the said Committees to end the matter between the Parties
if they could; and if they could not, then the Parties with their Council to be
before the Lords at this House upon Thursday next.

Two Bills lastly had each of them one reading; of which the first being the
Bill against Jesuits, Seminary Priests, etc. was read secunda vice, with
certain Amendments, and a Proviso added by the Lords.

On Wednesday the third day of March, to which day the Parliament had been last
continued on Monday foregoing, Four Bills of no great moment had each of them
one reading; of which the first being the Bill against Jesuits, Seminary
Priests, etc. with the Amendments and Provisoes added by the Lords, was read
tertia vice and conclusa, and sent to the House of Commons by Serjcant Rodes
and the Queens Attorney.

Two Bills also were sent up to the Lords from the House of Commons; of which
the last was the Bill for the repairing and maintenance of the Sea-Banks and
Sea-Works on the Seacoast in the County of Norf.

Committees were appointed to hear the matter between the Lord Willoughby and
Mr Heronden, who were chosen by the Parties themselves, viz. the Earl of Kent
and the Lord Zouch for the Lord Willoughby, and Viscount Mountague and the Lord
Cobham for Mr Heronden. And the Lords further Ordered that the said Lords
Committees should end the matter between the said Parties if they could.

Committees lastly were this day Chosen to examine the Record touching passing
Amendments of Amendments moved by the House of Commons, viz. the Lord
Treasurer, the Earl of Suff. Viscount Mountague, the Bishop of Winchester, the
Lord Hunsdon, the Lord Buckhurst, the Master of the Rolls and Mr Attorney,
about the Bill for the better and more reverent observing of the Sabbath day;
to which the House of Commons had added Amendments upon Amendments. The
Precedents they named were the Bills for Treasons and bringing in of Bulls,
Acts passed in Anno 13o of the Queen.

Nota, That this Bill concerning the Sabbath, as has been before observed, was
long in passing the two Houses. and much debated betwixt them, being committed,
and Amendments upon Amendments added unto it, which as appears in this place
was the cause of some Disputation between the Lords and the said Commons. Of
the other several Passages of this Bill Vide on Monday the 7th day, Tuesday the
8th day, Wednesday the 9th day, Monday the 14th day, and on Saturday the 19th
day of December foregoing; As also on Thursday the 4th day, Saturday the 6th
day, and on Saturday the 13th day of this instant March following.

Nota also, That the Master of the Rolls and the Queens Attorney being no
Members of the Upper House are here made joint-Committees with the Lords.

On Thursday the 4th day of March, Three Bills of no great moment had each of
them one reading; of which the first being the Bill for the assurance of
certain Lands in the Counties of Norsolk, Suff. Lincoln and Warwick unto the
Lord Willoughby of Willoughby and Erisby against the Heirs and Assigns of Mr
Heronden was read tertia vice and conclusa, and sent to the House of Commons by
Sergeant Gaudy and Sergeant Rolls.

Memorandum, That this day before the passing of my Lord Willoughbies Act,
Edward Heronden came before the Lords and gave his Assent thereunto. Vide
concerning this matter on Wednesday the third day of this instant March
foregoing.

Saturday next was appointed by the House for the appearance of Mr Oughtred and
the Earl of Sussex, and Viscount Mountague, appointed to talk with the Lady
Marchioness about the assurance of her Jointure by a Parliament.

Nota, That this matter was formerly debated on Tuesday the 7th day of March in
the last Parliament de anno 23 Reginae Eliz. and before also in this present
Parliament on Tuesday the 9th day of February last past, when Committees were
appointed about it. Vide also on Monday the 29th day of this instant March
following.

Mr Vinions matter (of which Vide antca on Monday the first day of this instant
March foregoing) was again referred to the Master of the Rolls and Mr Sergeant
Rodes.

The Bill lastly for redress of erroneous Judgment in the King's Bench was read
tertia vice and communi omnium procerum assensu conclusa.

Sir Christopher Wray Knight, Lord Chief Justice of England brought in also a
certain Record touching a Writ of Error according to a Bill preferred to her
Majesty and Signed with her Highness hand, concerning the same. Which see at
large on Monday the 8th day of this instant March following. For though it was
this day brought into the Upper-House, yet it is likely it was not there
publicly read until the said Monday, and therefore it is Entered at large on
that day in the Original Journal Book upon which it was read, and not upon this
day when it was brought into the House by the Lord Chief Justice as aforesaid.

On Friday the 5th day of March, Seven Bills of no great moment had each of
them one reading; of which the second being the Bill for following of Hue and
Cry was read tertia vice and communi omnium procerum assensu conclusa.

On Saturday the 6th day of March, Four Bills were brought up to the Lords from
the House of Commons; of which the last was the Bill for the better and more
reverent observing of the Sabbath; to which the Lords having formerly added
some Amendments, had sent it back to the House of Commons (where it first
passed on Monday the 14th day of December foregoing.)

And upon this instant Saturday the said Commons sent it back again to the
Lords with new Amendments upon their Amendments; which said new Amendments of
the Commons their Lordships did this Morning pass without further Disputation,
having read them prima, secunda and tertia vice.

Vide concerning this Bill of the Sabbath on Monday the 7th day, Tuesday the
8th day, Wednesday the 9th day, Monday the 14th day, and Saturday the 19th day
of December foregoing: As also on Wednesday the third day of this instant March
last past, and on Saturday the 13th day of the same Month ensuing. In all which
days it will appear fully how hardly and difficultly it passed either House.
And yet at last when it was agreed on by both the said Houses, it was dashed by
her Majesty at the last day of this Parliament, upon that prejudicated and ill
followed Principle (as may be conjectured) that she would suffer nothing to be
altered in matter of Religion or Ecclesiastical Government. Vide itidem on
Thursday the 18th day of this instant March following.

Memorandum, That whereas Ferdinando Clark one of the Ordinary Gentlemen of the
Right Honorable Robert Earl of Leicester Lord Steward, was committed to the
Prison commonly called the King's Bench, upon a Reddit se in the King's Bench,
for the discharge of his Sureties, since the beginning of this present
Parliament, the Lords at the Motion of the Lord North, in the name of the Lord
Steward claiming the ancient privilege of this High Court, after the hearing
of the Cause between the said Ferdinando and one John Lacy Citizen of London,
Ordered, that the said Ferdinando by virtue of the privilege of this High
Court should be enlarged and set at liberty. And further for as much as the
said Ferdinando was not Arrested in Execution at the suit of the said John
Lacy, but was committed after Judgment by the Lord Chief Justice and the rest
of the Justices of the King's Bench upon a Reddit se for discharge of his
Sureties and their Bonds, the said Lords Ordered, that touching the sum of
money recovered by the said John Lacy against the said Ferdinando Clark, should
stand to such order and mitigation therein as the said Lord Chief Justice of
the King's Bench shall set down and order for the same. And further Ordered,
that the appearance of the said Ferdinando Clark by rendering himself into the
said Court of King's Bench, was and should be a sufficient discharge of his
Sureties and their Bonds, and that the Bonds should be redelivered. And it was
further Ordered, that..... Catesby, Marshal of the King's Bench, should be
discharged of the Prisoner and of any Action that might be brought against the
said Marshal for the same.

On Monday the 8th day of March, to which day the Parliament had been last
continued on Saturday foregoing, the Record touching a Writ of Error (which the
Lord Chief Justice had brought into the Upper House on Thursday the 4th day of
this instant March foregoing) was Entered in the Original Journal Book, and as
it should seem read publicly in the House, being in manner and form following.

Memorandum quod Christopherus Wray Miles Capitalis Justiciarius de Banco Regis
secum adduxit in Cameram Parliamenti inter Dominos Breve de errore and Billam
per Reginam indorsat' and Rotul' in quibus supponebatur error, and ibidem
reliquit transcriptum totius Recordi cum Clerico Parliamenti simul cum
praedicto Breve de Errore in Parliamento.

Et super hoc venerunt Richardus Harbert, Johannes Awbery, Willielmus Filian
and Simon Brown in propriis personis suis in Parliamento, and statim dixerunt
quod in Recordo and processu praedictis, ac etiam in redditione Judicii
praedicti manifest est erratum in hoc, quod posiquam Judicium praedictum in
loqkela hac versus praefatum Thomam Gonnel redditum fait, and antequam
praedictus Joh. Hunt hunc prosecutus suit and impetravit praedictum primum
breve de seire facias versus praefatum Richardum Harbert, Johannem Awbery,
Willielmum Filian and Simonem Brown Manucaptores praedicti Thomae Gonnell,
nullum breve de Cap. ad satisfaciendum pro debito and damnis praedictis per
praefatum Johannem Hunt in placito praedicto prosecutum and returnatum suit
versus praefatum Thomam Gonnell, ubi per consuetudinem Curiae dictae Dominae
Reginae coram ipsa Regina ac tempore cujus contrarii memoria hominum non
existit, in eadem usitat and approbat breve de Cap. ad satisfaciendum versus
cundem Tho. Gonnell pro debito and damnis praedictis in placito praedicto
prosequi and returnari deberet, antequam aligned breve de seire facias versus
manucaptores praedictos in loquela illa impetrari seu prosequi deberet, licet
consuetudo and sorma captionis recognitionum in Curia praedict a usae suerunt
in sorma praedicta, viz. Si contigerit cundem Thomam Gonnel in placito
praedicto convinci, tunc iidem Manucaptores concesserunt and quilibet little per
se concessit tam debitum praedictum quam omnia hujusmodi damna nune and custag'
quae praesato Johanni Hunt in ea part adjudicentur, de terris and Catallis
suis and cerum (...) it sieri, and ad opus praedicti Johannis Hunt (...), si
consigerit praedictum Thomam Gonnell debitum and damna illa praefato Johanni
Hunt minime (...), aut si pri onae Marescal' Dominae Reginae coram ipsa Regina
ea occasion non reddere, etc. Et peturt iidem Richardus Harbert, Johannes
Awbery, Willielmus Filian and Simon Brown, quod Judicium praedictum and
processus super (...) praedicta de seire (...) prosecut in Curia dict' Dominae
Reginae coram ipsa Regina revocetur, adnulletur and penitus pro nullis
habeatur. Et super hoc Domini per (...) Justiciariorum post longam and maturam
deliverationem uno consensu adjudicaverunt..... quod judicium praedictum and
processus super brevia praedicta de scire sac' prosecut' in Curia dictae
Dominae Reginae coram ipsa Regina revocetur, adnulletur and penitus pro nullis
habcatur.

On Wednesday the 10th day of March, to which day the Parliament had been on
Monday last continued, Eight Bills of no great moment had each of them one
reading; of which the first being the Bill for Confirmation of Letters Patents,
made unto the Dean and Chapter of Norwich, was read prima vice.

Six Bills also were brought up to the Lords from the House of Commons; of
which the first being the Bill for Provision to be made for the Surety of the
Queens Majesty's most Royal Person and the continuance of the Realm in Peace,
was read prima vice.

On Thursday the 11th day of March, Six Bills had each of them one reading; of
which the first being the last recited Bill for Surety of the Queens Royal
Person, etc. was read secunda vice. And the second being the Bill for the good
Government of the City and Borough of Westminster in the County of Middlesex
was read tertia vice, with a Schedule and certain Amendments, quae communi
omnium procerum assensu conclusa and dat' Doctori Barkeley and Servienti Rolls
in Domum Communem deferend.

Then the Lord Chancellor continued the Parliament unto two of the Clock in the
Afternoon. About which hour the Lords Spiritual and Temporal meeting six Bills
of no great moment had each of them one reading; of which the second being the
Bill concerning the Lady Marchioness of Winchesters Jointure, was read secunda
vice and commissa to the Master of the Rolls, and the Lord Chief Justice of the
Common Pleas.

For as much as in the matter depending now in Parliament by Writ of Error
brought by John Akerode, Thomas Stanfeild and diverse others, against Richard
Whalley Defendant, for reversing of certain Errors supposed by the said
Plaintiff to be in the said Defendants Grandfathers form of Pleading, and other
things in his Recovery of the Manor of Eringden in the County of York; it has
appeared to this honorable Court by the Certificate of the Lords Chief
Justices, the Master of the Rolls and others, being by this Honorable Court
appointed Committees to hear and examine the matter privately before them, that
the Writ of Error and the scire facias are insufficient in Law for diverse
Causes opened to this Court. Therefore it is Ordered by the Lords that the same
Writ of Error shall abate, and the Plaintiffs to pursue their further remedy as
they shall thing good.

On Saturday the 13th day of March, to which day the Parliament had been on
Thursday last continued, the Bill for Provision to be made for the Surety of
the Queens Majesty's most Royal Person, and the continuance of the Realm in
Peace was read tertia vice, quae communi omnium Procerum assensu conclusa, with
one amendment in the 44. line, that is after this word [left] put out [so as]
and in place thereof put in [foreseeing that.] This amendment was made after
the third reading, and before the Bill was put to the question, and was
delivered to Doctor Barkeley and Sergeant Rodes to be carried to the Lower
House, with the Bill for the better observing of the Sabbath day; with request,
for that there are whole Sentences inserted into the said Bill for the Sabbath
day, and the Bill would remain a very soul Record, it might be fair written
again. Vide concerning this Bill of the Sabbath on Wednesday the third day, and
on Saturday the 6th day of this instant March foregoing.

Two other Bills lastly of no great moment had each of them one reading; of
which the second being the Bill for Oxford-Haven was read tertia vice and
expedita.

Four Bills lastly were brought up to the Lords from the House of Commons; of
which the first was the Bill of one entire Subsidy and two Fifteenths granted
by the Temporalty.

On Monday the 15th day of March, to which day the Parliament had been on
Saturday last continued, prima, secunda and tertia vice lecta est schedula of
the amendments of the Bill against Jesuits sent from the House of Commons, quae
communi omnium procerum assensu conclusa est, with an Addition to the said
Schedule added by them of the House of Commons, and data Doctori Barkeley and
Servienti Rolls in Domum Communem deferend.

Six several Bills also of no great moment had each of them one reading; of
which the first being the Bill for Consirmation of the Subsidy of six shillings
in the pound granted by the Clergy, was read prima vice and commissa ad
ingrossandum.

Three Bills lastly were sent up to the Lords from the House of Commons, of
which the first was the Bill for the renewing, continuance, explanation and
perfecting of diverse Statutes.

Then the Lord Chancellor continued the Parliament unto two of the Clock in the
Afternoon, about which time the Lords Spiritual and Temporal Assembling, Four
Bills of no great moment had each of them one reading; of which the first being
the Bill for the payment and satisfaction of the Debt of William last Lord
Marquess of Winchester deceased, due to the Queens Majesty, was read prima vice.

On Tuesday the 16th day of March, Seven Bills of no great moment had each of
them one reading; of which the first being the Bill for the incorporation of
Christ's Hospital was read tertia vice and communi omnium procerum assensu
conclusa, and data Doctori Barkeley and Servienti Rodes in Domum Communem
deferend. And the second being the Bill to give her Majesty Authority to alter
and new make a Calendar according to the Calendar now used in other Countries,
was read prima vice.

Four Bills also of no great moment were brought up to the Lords from the House
of Commons; of which the first was the Bill whereby Marriage was declared
lawful at all times of the Year.

Two other Bills were lastly read each of them secunda vice; of which the last
being the Bill for the grant of one entire Subsidy and two Fifteenths granted
by the Temporalty was read secunda vice.

About two of the Clock in the Afternoon, to which hour the Lord Chancellor had
in the Forenoon continued the Parliament, the Lords Spiritual and Temporal
meeting, nine Bills of no great moment had each of them one reading; of which
the first being the Bill for the Haven of Plymouth, was read secunda vice.

The Amendments lastly in the Bill concerning the Hospital of East-Bridge, were
read prima, secunda and tertia vice, and conclusae dissentientibus Vicecomite
Mountague and Comite Hertford.

On Wednesday the 17th day of March, Four Bills of no great moment had each of
them one reading; of which the first being the Bill of one entire Subsidy and
two Fifteenths granted by the Temporalty, was read tertia vice and communi
omnium Procerum assensu conclusa. The fourth also being an Act for the
assurance of certain Lands unto the Lord Hunsdon, was read secunda vice and
commissa ad ingrossandum.

After which Robert Elrington and Alice his Wife, mentioned in the said Bill
touching the Lord Hunsdons assurance, came into the House, and gave their
consent to the passing of the said Bill.

The Bill against the making of Starch was brought up to the Lords from the
House of Commons, and had its first reading.

After which lastly three Bills of no great moment had each of them one
reading; of which the first being the Bill for bringing in of Staple Fish and
Herrings into the Realm, was read secunda vice.

On Thursday the 18th day of March six Bills of no great moment had each of
them one reading; of which the first being the Bill for the assurance of
certain Lands to the Lord Hunsdon, and the second being the Bill touching the
breadth of white Woollen Clothes made within the Counties of Wilts, Gloucester
and Oxon' with the amendments, were each of them read tertia vice and conclusae
and datae servienti Rodes. It should seem that these Bills were delivered to
him to carry down to the House of Commons, although so much be not expressed.

There were also brought up to the Lords from the House of Commons four Bills
of no great moment; of which the first being the Bill that Parsonages
impropriate may be disposed to godly and charitable uses, and the third for the
better and more reverent observing of the Sabbath day, were each of them read
the first time.

Vide concerning this Bill of the Sabbath on Saturday the 6th day of this
instant March foregoing. But what the intent or scope of this Bill was, (her
Majesty refusing to pass it upon the last day of this Parliament) cannot be
certainly set down, it being not now remaining in the bundle of the Acts de
Anno isto 27 Reginae Eliz. in the Clerk of the Upper House his Office: in which
said bundle I searched for it on Thursday the 8th day of October in the year
1629.

About two of the Clock in the Afternoon, to which hour the Lord Chancellor had
in the Forenoon continued the Parliament, Proceres tam Spirituales quam
Temporales, quorum nomina subscribuntur, praesentes fuerunt, and so is the
entrance of every sitting in the Afternoon upon such continuance, ut supra,
viz. the same form which is used in entering the sitting of the House in the
Forenoon, which for brevity is in this Collection elsewhere omitted.

Two Bills had this Afternoon each of them one reading; of which the first
being the Bill against covenous and sraudulent Conveyances with certain
amendments was read tertia vice.

On Friday the 29th day of March five Bills of no great moment had each of them
one reading of which the first being the Bill against covenous and fraudulent
Conveyances with the amendments was read tertia vice, and communi omnium
Procerum assensu conclusa and data servienti Rodes and Doctori Barkeley in
domum communem deferend.

Nota, That this Bill is said to have been read tertia vice in the Afternoon of
the day past which was Thursday, and therefore it could not be now read again:
but to reconcile this difference, it should seem the Bill it self had then its
third reading, and the amendments but the second; and this day the said
amendments passed upon the third reading: but the Bill it self which had passed
yesterday, was no more read, which by the negligence of Mr. Mason, at this time
Clerk of the Parliament, was suffered to be set down thus confusedly in the
Original Journal Book, and so to stand.

On Saturday the 20th day of March the Bill for the explanation of the Statute
made Anno 13 of the Queens Majesty, entitled An Act to make the Lauds,
Tenements, Goods and Chattels of Receivors, etc. liable to pay their debts, was
read prima, secunda and tertia vice, and communi omnium Procerum assensu
conclusa.

Three other Bills of no great moment had each of them one reading.

There were also brought up to the Lords from the House of Commons nine Bills;
of which the first was an Act for the good Government of the City and Borough
of Westminster, and the second being for the Subsidy of the Clergy was returned
and expedited.

The Lord Bishop of Exeter showed unto the Lord Chancellor Sir Francis
Walsingham's Letter dated at the Court this 14th day of March 1584. importing
her Majesty's license for the said Bishop to depart home to his charge.

Nota, That it appears not by the Original Journal Book, whether the Bishop
of Exeter aforesaid, absenting himself for this time from the Parliament by her
Majesty's license, did constitute any Proctor or no, and it should seem that he
did not, because his departure from it was but for some few weeks during the
last sitting thereof, and that also in open Parliament, and as it were with the
allowance also of the rest of the Lords.

On Monday the 22th day of March, to which day the Parliament had been on
Saturday last continued, six Bills of no great moment had each of them one
reading; of which the first being the Bill for reformation of Errors in Fines
and Recoveries in the twelve Shires of Wales with a Proviso added by the Lords
from the Earl of Kent, was read tertia vice and communi omnium Procerum assensu
conclusa and data Doctori Barkeley and servienti Rodes in domum communem
deferend'.

The Bill to make a Fine levied by Peter Heame and Johan his Wife and John
Tredolias alias Leha and Anne his Wife, during the Minority of the said Johan
and Anne, to be void against the said Anne, was put to the question, and was
rejected by the most Voices; for the Preamble of the Bill was scandalous, and
no proof made thereof.

Nota, That this Bill preferred by Anne the Wife of the abovenamed Tredolias,
to reverse a Fine levied by her during her Nonage, by Authority of Parliament,
(because it seems, being at this time of full Age she could not otherwise do
it by ordinary course of Law) was very deliberately and advisedly proceeded in
by the Lords, who having given it the first reading upon Thursday the 17th day
of December, and the second reading upon Saturday the 20th day of February
foregoing, did before any further proceeding in it, on Monday next following,
being the two and twentieth day of the said February foregoing, refer the same
to certain Lords being chosen Committees therein by the said Anne on the one
part who was the Plaintiff, and Mr (...) on the other who was the Defendant,
and to whose use it seems the said Fine had been levied, after which the said
Lords Committees having not ended the said difference, it was again committed
on Monday the first day of March foregoing, to the Master of the Rolls and Mr
Sergeant Rodes to hear it, and to make some conclusion thereof, which being not
effected, it was again on Thursday following, being the 4th day of this instant
March, referred to the said Mr of the Rolls and the Sergeant aforesaid; who
still endeavoring without any effect to make any accord between the said
Parties, it was now at last upon the foresaid Monday the 22th day of this
instant March put to the Question in the Upper House, and there the said Bill
preferred by the said Anne to be relieved in Parliament contrary to her own
Fine, was rejected: where it may be seen how tender their Lordships were to
relieve any Party contrary to the course of the common Law. For the Case
appears singly to be this: Baron and Feme levy a Fine, the Wife being under
Age, then the Husband dies, (as John Tredolias Leza or Leha did here) the Wife
being of full Age, and she sues in Parliament to be relieved; for at Common Law
if an Infant levy a fine and then die, or becomes of full Age before it be
reversed, the Fine stands good as if it had been levied by one of full Age, as
was delivered in the Common Pleas per totam Curiam in the Lady Caesar's Case,
then Wife of Sir Julius Caesar Knight Master of the Rolls, which is entered in
termino Trinitatis Anno 21 Jacobi Regis Rotulo 1971.

On Tuesday the 23th day of March, Three Bills of no great moment had each of
them one reading; of which the first being the Bill concerning the
Water-Bailiff was read secunda vice, but not mentioned to be either referred to
Committees or Ordered to be engrossed.

Four Bills also were brought up to the Lords from the House of Commons; of
which the first being the Bill for the Explanation of a Statute made Anno 13.
of the Queens Majesty's Reign, entitled An Act to reform sundry disorders
touching Ministers of the Church, was read prima vice.

On Wednesday the 24th day of March, The Bill against Rogues, Idle and Vagrant
Persons, was read secunda vice; but no mention is made that it was either
referred to Committees or Ordered to be engrossed: and the reason hereof may
be, that this Bill having passed the House of Commons, and being sent up to the
House of Lords fairly engrossed in Parchment, can be no more engrossed, neither
do the Lords ordinarily refer such Bills to Committees unless there be very
great cause, in respect that each House holding correspondency with other, they
do not willingly submit that to the agitation of a private Committee which has
been allowed and approved by the wisdom of a whole House. There may also be two
other reasons (besides the Clerks negligence who may sometimes omit it) why a
Bill upon the second reading is so left without any mention made of the
committing or engrossing; as where the referring of it to Committees is
deferred till some other day, as it fell out in the Parliament de Anno 13
Reginae Eliz. when the Bill touching the Commission of Sewers being read
secunda vice on Friday the 20th day of April, was referred to Committees on the
day following, being Saturday the 21th day of the same Month. The third and
last reason finally why a Bill may be mentioned to be read secunda vice without
any further Order taken in it as aforesaid, may be assigned in some
extraordinary Cases; as where Bills of Grace, viz. for the restitution in Blood
of any; and such like are sent to the House from her Majesty fairly engrossed
in Parchment and Signed with her hand, which for the most part do pass the
House without any stop or question. But it is to be noted, that in later times
the committing of a Bill upon the second reading is always when it is so read,
and is never deferred until another day.

Three Bills also of no great moment were brought up to the Lords from the
House of Commons; of which the first was an Act for the Incorporation of the
Hospital of Christ in the Town of Sherbourn.

Nota, That no continuance of the Parliament is Entered this day in the Original
Journal Book, which seems to have happened through the negligence of the
Clerk of the Parliament.

On Friday the 26th day of March, to which day it seems the Parliament had
been on Wednesday last continued, Introductum suit breve quo Richardus
Petriburgen. Episcopus praesenti Parliamento summonebatur interesse, qui
admissus est ad suum praeheminentiae in Parliamento sedendi locum, salvo
cuiquam jure suo.

The Amendments for the Bill touching the Incorporation of Christ's Hospital in
the Town of Sherbourn, were read tertia vice, and communi omnium Procerum
assensu conclusae.

Two Bills also of no great moment had each of them one reading; of which the
first was the Bill for the reviving, continuance and explanation and perfecting
of diverse Statutes.

Six Bills lastly were brought up to the Lords from the House of Commons; of
which the first being for the naturalizing of certain Englishmens Children born
beyond the Seas, was read prima, secunda and tertia vice and expedita.

And the second being the Bill for the safe keeping of the Armor of obstinate
Recusants was read prima, secunda and tertia vice, and sent down to the House
of Commons by Sergeant Rodes and Mr Powle.

Nota, That the Original Journal Book of the House of Commons de Anno isto 27
Reginae Eliz. makes mention of some amendments added to this Bill by the Lords
before it was thus immediately returned (a thing very observable and
extraordinary) within a short time after the Lords themselves had received it.

It appears also in the said Journal Book that one Bill more concerning the
good Government of the City of Westminster was sent up with certain amendments
to the Lords from the House of Commons; and that two other Bills, whereof this
very Bill concerning the City of Westminster was one, and the Bill for the
keeping of the County Court at Morpeth, and the Town of Anwicke in the County
of Northumberland was the other, had been this day sent down to the House of
Commons from the Lords by Sergeant Rodes and Mr Powle, who thereupon did
presently read them prima, secunda and tertia vice, as the Lords it should seem
led by their Example did the two Bills abovementioned this same Morning
afterward, and with some small alteration sent them up to the Lords. All which
matter is by the negligence of Mr Mason at this time Clerk of the Upper House,
omitted in the said Original Journal Book of that House, and supplied out of
the Original Journal Book of the House of Commons, page 166, and 167. Collected
by Mr Fulk Onslow at this time Clerk of the said House.

On Saturday the 27th day of March, the Bill for the maintenance of the Pier
and Cobb of Lime-Regis in the County of Dorsett, was read tertia vice and
conclusa.

The Petition also of the Lord Marquess of Winchester against Mr Oughtred
concerning certain Accounts by him to be made, was this day read before the
Lords. Vide concerning this matter on Monday the 29th day of this instant March
following.

On Monday the 29th day of March, to which day the Parliament had been on
Saturday last continued, a Proviso to the Bill concerning the Pier and Cobb of
Lime Regis added by the Lords, was read tertia vice, and then sent down to the
House of Commons by Mr Sergeant Rodes and Mr Powle.

Mr Oughtred appeared before the Lords. The Lord Chancellor by the advice and
consent of the said Lords, asked the said Oughtred whether he meant to take the
benefit of a Release heretofore mentioned. The said Oughtred (...) before the
said Lords that he would (...) advantage of any Release concerning (...) sum of
twelve thousand pound and more, (...) further, that the said Release extended
(...) the said sum, but to other accounts before (...) time of his
Executorship. The Lord Chancellor demanded further of the said Oughtred, (...)
would be contented that his said Speeches should be entered by the Clerk in the
Journals of the House. The said Oughtred Answered that he was very well pleased
therewith. Whereupon the Lord Chancellor Commanded that his said Speeches
should be Registered.

Nota, That this matter was formerly debated on Tuesday the 7th day of March in
the last Parliament de Anno 23 Reginae Eliz. and before also in this present
Parliament on Tuesday the 9th day of February last past, and on Tuesday the 4th
day, and on Saturday the 27th day of this instant March foregoing, and
Committees were likewise appointed about it on the foresaid 9th day of February
being Tuesday.

Dominus Cancellarius continuavit praesens Parliamentum usque in horam secundam
post meridiem.

About which hour the Lords meeting, the Bill for the Queens Majesty's most
Gracious general and free Pardon, lecta est, quae commum omnium Proccrum
assensu conclusa est, and data Servienti Rodes in Domum Communem deferend', una
cum subsidio Temporalitatis.

Nota, That the general Pardon passes here upon the first reading.

There was also brought from the House of Commons two Bills; of which the first
was the Bill for the preservation of the Pier or Cobb of Lime Regis in the
County of Dorset, and the second being an Act for the preservation of Pheasants
and Partridges with amendments was rejected; for that they of the House of
Commons had with their amendments taken away the principal intent of the Bill.

This Afternoon her Majesty Accompanied with the two Archbishops of Canterbury
and York, Sir Thomas Bromley Knight Lord Chancellor, the Lord Burleigh Lord
Treasurer of England, the Lord Marquess of Winchester, the Earl of Oxford and
diverse other Lords Spiritual and Temporal were personally present in the
Parliament Chamber commonly called the Upper House, who being all set in their
Parliamentary Robes, and the Knights, Citizens and Burgesses of the House of
Commons having notice thereof, repaired thither with John Puckering Sergeant at
Law their Speaker, who being placed at the Rail or Bar at the lower end of the
said Upper House, after his humble reverence made, and some expressions of his
thankfulness to her Majesty, he proceeded according to the usual course to
desire her Majesty to give Life to such Laws by adding her Gracious Allowance
unto them, as had passed either House, and remained as yet but as a dead
Letter; and withal gave her Majesty knowledge of the free gift of the House of
Commons of one Subsidy and two Fifteenths and Tenths.

To which Speech of the said Prolocutors the Lord Chancellor by her Majesty's
commandment answered, That she did graciously accept of the said gift of her
Commons, and was come thither to give her Royal assent to diverse of those Laws
which had passed the two Houses.

Then were the Titles of all the Acts read, and first the Bill of Subsidy, to
which the Clerk of the Parliament standing up, did read the Queens Majesty's
Answer in manner and form following.

La Royne remercie ses loyaulx Subjects, accept leur benevolence, and ainsi le
veult.

The Clerk of the Parliament having read the Queens acceptance and thanks for
the Subsidy given as aforesaid, did then upon the reading of the Pardon
pronounce in these French words following the thanks of the Lords and Commons
for the same.

Les Prelates, Seigneurs and Communes en se present Parliment assembles, au nom
de touts vous autres Subjects remercient treshumblement vostre Majesty, and
prient a Dieu que il vous done en sante, bone vie and longue.

Nota, That her Majesty's Answer to these two Acts of the Subsidy and Pardon do
differ from all the rest to any other Bills, because in the first is expressed
her Majesty's thanks to the Subjects, and in the second the Subjects humble
acknowledgment of her said Majesty's Pardon as an act of her own free grace and
goodness.

To every public Act allowed by the Queen, the Clerk of the Parliament reads
in these French words following.

La Royne le veult.

To every private Act that passes, the said Clerk of the Parliament reads the
Queens Answer in these French words following.

Soit fait come il est desire.

These two last Answers to the public and private Acts that pass, are to be
written by the Clerk of the Parliament at the end of every Act.

To such Acts as her Majesty does forbear to allow, the Clerk of the Parliament
reads in French these words following.

La Royne s'advisera.

Nota, That all the Acts which passed this Parliament were in number forty
nine, whereof thirty were public, and nineteen private, ut vide in the
Statute-Book at large printed Anno Domini 1585.

Nota also, That the express and direct manner of her Majesty's giving her
Royal assent to such Acts as passed at this Parliament, as is before set down,
is not so entered in the Original Journal Book of the same, but is supplied out
of that de Anno 39 Reginae Eliz. where it is at large inserted; according to
which Precedent (the form being always the same) the rest of the Journals of
her Majesty's Regin, as well as this present Journal, are enlarged and
perfected.

To the further amplifying of which also, here does now in the next place ensue
a most pious and gracious Speech of her Majesty's, uttered by her upon the
conclusion of this Parliament, which being not found in the Original
Journal Book of the Upper House, is therefore supplied out of a Copy thereof I
had by me, written by John Stow the Chronicler with his own hand, being
verbatim as follows.

MY Lords and ye of the Lower House, my silence must not injure the Owner so
much as to suppose a Substitute sufficient to render you the thanks that my
heart yields you, not so much for the safe keeping of my life, for which your
care appears so manifest, as for the neglecting your private future peril, not
regarding other way than my present State.

No Prince herein, I confess, can be surer tied or faster bound than I am with
the link of your good will, and can for that but yield a heart and a head to
seek for ever all your best; yet one matter touches me so near, as I may not
overskip, Religion, the ground on which all other matters ought to take root,
and being corrupted, may mar all the tree. And that there be some
fault-finders with the Order of the Clergy, which so may make a slander to my
self and the Church, whose over-Ruler God has made me, whose negligence cannot
be excused, if any Schisms or Errors heretical were suffered. Thus much I must
say that some faults and negligences may grow and be, as in all other great
Charges it happens, and what vocation without? All which if you my Lords of
the Clergy do not amend, I mean to depose you. Look ye therefore well to your
Charges. This may be amended without heedless or open exclamations. I am
supposed to have many studies, but most Philosophical. I must yield this to be
true, that I suppose few (that be no Professors) have read more. And I need not
tell you that I am so simple, that I understand not, nor so forgetful, that I
remember not; and yet amidst my many Volumes I hope Gods Book has not been my
seldomest Lectures, in which we find that which by reason (for my part) we
ought to believe; that seeing so great wickedness and greeves in the World in
which we live, but as wayfaring Pilgrims, we must suppose that God would never
have made us but for a better place, and of more comfort than we find here. I
know no Creature that breaths, whose life stands hourly in more peril for
it than mine own, who entered not into my state without sight of manifold
dangers of life and Crown, as one that had the mightiest and greatest to
wrestle with. Then it follows that I regarded it so much, as I left my life
behind my care; and so you see that you wrong me too much (if any such there
be) as doubt my coldness in that behalf; for if I were not persuaded that mine
were the true way of Gods will, God forbid that I should live to prescribe it
to you. Take you heed lest Ecclesiastes say not too true, They that fear the
hoary frost, the snow shall fall upon them. I see many over-bold with God
Almighty, making too many subtle scannings of his blessed will, as Lawyers do
with humane Testaments. The presumption is so great, as I may not suffer it
(yet mind I not hereby to animate Romanists, which what Adversaries they be to
mine Estate, is sufficiently known) nor tolerate new-fangleness. I mean to
guide them both by Gods holy true Rule. In both parts be perils, and of the
latter I must pronounce them dangerous to a Kingly Rule, to have every man
according to his own censure to make a doom of the validity and privity of his
Princes Government with a common veil and cover of Gods Word, whose followers
must not be judged but by private men's exposition. God defend you from such a
Ruler that so evil will guide you. Now I conclude that your love and care
neither is nor shall be bestowed upon a careless Prince, but such as but for
your good will passes as little for this World as who cares least, with
thanks for your free Subsidy, a manifest show of the abundance of your good
wills, the which I assure you but to be employed to your weal, I could be
better pleased to return than receive.

This Speech of her Majesty being thus transcribed out of the foresaid Copy,
written by John Stow the Chronicler, as is already mentioned; now follows the
Prorogation of the Parliament, which is entered in the Original Journal Book of
the Upper House in manner and form following.

Domina ipsa Regina prorogavit praesens Parliamentum usque in vicesimum diem
Maii proximum.

Upon which said 20th day of May the Parliament was again prorogued, and so
continued by five other several Prorogations unto Wednesday the 14th day of
September in Anno 28 Reginae Eliz. Anno Domini 1586. upon which said 14th day
of September it was at last dissolved.

The manner of which Dissolution, and the substance of all the foresaid
Prorogations do next ensue.

Memorandum, quod vicesimo die Maii, Anno Regni Reginae Eliz. 27o convenere
Proceres tam Spirituales quam Temporales, quorum nomina subscribuntur. Johannes
Archiepisiopus Cantuar. Thomas Bromley Miles Dominus Cancellarius Angliae,
Henricus Comes Darby, Johannes Episiopus London, Edwardus Dominus Zouch.

Qui cum convenissent, Dominus Cancellarius Literas Regias commissarias
Anthonio Mason Clerico Parliamenti public legendas in manus tradidit. The
tenor whereof was a Commission unto the Archbishop of Canterbury; the Lord
Chancellor, the Archbishop of York, the Lord Treasurer, the Earl of Oxford Lord
great Chamberlain of England, George Earl of Shrewsbury Earl Marshal of
England, and six other Earls, also to the Earl of Warwick Master of the
Ordnance, four other Earls, Charissimoque Consanguineo suo Anthonio Vicecomiti
Mountague, John Bishop of London, John Bishop of Sarum, John Bishop of
Rechester, Charles Lord Howard Lord Chamberlain of her Majesty's House, and
eight other Barons, giving to them or any three or more of them (...)
potestatem, facultatem and authoritatem hoc instante die Jovis ad praesens
Parliamentum nostrum nomine nosiro ad and in (...) diem Junii prox. futurum
usque praedictam Civitatem nostram Westmonasterii prorogand' and continuand
(...) tunc tenend' and prosequend' etc. In cujus rei testimonium etc. Tejte,
etc. 20th die Maii, Anno Regni nostri 28o

Septimo die Junii Anno Regni Elizabethae 27o the Archbishop of Canterbury, Sir
Thomas Bromley Knight Lord Chancellor, one Earl, one Bishop and three Barons by
virtue of a Cemmission under the Great Seal to them and others directed, did
prorogue and continue the Parliament unto the 21. day of this instant June.

At which time the Parliament was in like sort prorogned until the 11th day of
October next.

Vicesimo die Octobris the Parliament was in like sort by Commissioners
prorogued unul the 10th day of February next, viz. Anno 28o Reginae Eliz.

Decimo die Februarii Anno Regni Elizabethae Reginae 28o the Parliament was in
like sort by Commissioners prorogued until the 26th day of April next, viz.
Anno 28o Reginae Eliz.

On the 26th day of April Anno 28o Elizabethae Reginae the Parliament was in
like sort by Commissioners prorogued until the 14th day of November next, viz.
Anno 28o Eliz. before which day it was dissolved on September the 14th at vide
insra.

Decimo quarto die Septembris Anno Regni Reginae Eliz. vicesimo octavo.

Memorandum, quod cum praesens Parliamentum in decimum quartum diem Novembris
prox. futurum prorogatum fuisset tamen maximis gravissimisque causis
intervenientious, and negotiis ita flagitantibus, Regiae Majestati per
avisamentum Constiti sui consultissimum visum est, dictum Parliamentum hoc
instame decimo quarto die Septembris pemtus dissolvere, ob eamque rem per
Literas suas Patentes quibusdam Proceribus plenam potestatem, facultatem and
authoritatem praedictum Parliamentum nomine suo dissolvend' concessit. Additio
etiam speciali mandato, ut circa praemissa diligenter intenderent and
effectualiter explerent. Igitur hodierno die 14o Septembris Proceres isti in
Camera Parliamenti convenerunt, quorum nomina subsequuntur.

Thomas Bromley Miles Dominus Cancellarius Angliae.

Georgius Comes Salop.

Edwardus Dominus Zouch.

Arthurus Dominus Gray de Wilton.

Qui cum consedissent, Dominus Cancellarius praecepit ut dictae Literae
Patentes public legerentur, quibus lectis, praefati Proceres dictum
Parliamentum nomine dictae Reginae dissolverunt, and ipso facto dissolut.
pronunciaverunt. Literarum autem Patentium tenor sequitur in hae verba.

ELizabetha Dei gratia Angliae, Franciae, and Hiberniae Regina, Fidei Defensor,
etc. reverendissimo in Christo Patri ac Consiliario suo Johanni Cantuariensi
Archiepiscopo totius Angliae Primati and Metropolitano, and praedilecto and
fideli confiliario suo Thomae Bromley Militi Domino Cancellario Angliae, ac
reverendissimo in Christo Patri Edwino Eboracen' Archiepiscopo Angliae Primati
and Metropolitano; necnon praedilecto and fideli consiliario suo Willielmo
Domino Burleigh Domino Thesaurario Angliae, ac charissimo consanguineo suo
Edwardo Comiti Oxon' Magno Camerario Angliae, ac etiam charissimo consanguineo
and consiliario suo Georgio Comiti Salop' Comiti Marescallo Angliae,
charissimoque consanguineo suo Henrico Comiti Kantiae; necnon charissimo
consangnineo and consiliario suo Henrico Comiti Darbiae, ac charissimis
consanguineis suis Willielmo Comiti Wigorn', Edwardo Comiti Rotel', Georgio
Comiti Cumberland, Henrico Comiti Sussex; Ac etiam charissimo consanguineo and
consiliario suo Ambrosio Comiti Warwici Magistro Ordinationum suarum, necnon
charissimis consanguineis suis Henrico Comiti Pembroke, Edwardo Comiti
Hartford, Anthonio Vicecomiti Mountague; necnon reverendis in Christo Patribus
Johanni Episcopo London, Johanni Episcopo Sarisburien, Johanni Episcopo
Roffen'; ac praedilectis and consiliariis suis Carolo Domino Howard Magno
Admirallo suo Angliae, Henrico Domino de Hunsdon Domino Camerario Hospitii sui;
Ac etiam praedilectis and fidelibus suis Edwardo Domino Zouch, Edwardo Domino
Morley, Georgio Domino Dacres; necnon praedilecto and fideli consiliario suo
Willielmo Domino Cobham, Domino Gardiano quinque portuum suarum, ac
praedilectis and fidelibus suis Arthuro Domino Gray de Wilton, Johanni Domino
Lumley, Henrico Domino Cromwell, ac praedilecto and fideli consiliario suo
Thomae Domino Buckhurst salutem. Cum nuper pro quibusdam arduis and urgentibus
negotiis nos, statum and defensionem regni nostri Angliae ac Ecclesiae
Anglicanae concernentibus praesens hoc Parliamentum nostrum apud civitatem
nostram Westmonasterii 23 die Novembris Anno Regni nostri 27o inchoari and
teneri ordinaverimus, a quo die idem Parliamentum nostrum tunc and ibidem
tentum and continuatum fuerat usque ad and in 29 diem Martii, tunc prox'
sequentem, Eodemque die idem Parliamentum nostrum usque ad and 20 diem Maii
tunc prox' sequentem prorogatum suerat, Eodemque die idem Parliamentum nostrum
usque ad and in septimum diem Junii tunc prox' sequentem prorogatum fuerat,
Eodemque die idem Parliamentum nostrum usque ad and in vicesimum diem ejusdem
Mensis Junii prorogatum fuerat, Eodemque die idem Parliamentum nostrum usque ad
and in vicesimum diem Octobris tunc prox' sequentem prorogatum fuerat, Eodemque
die idem Parliamentum nostrum usque ad and in decimum diem Februarii tunc prox'
sequentem prorogatum fuerat, necnon idem parliamentum nostrum usque ad and in
vicesimum sextum diem Aprilis tunc prox' sequentem prorogatum fuerat, necnon
idem Parliamentum nostrum a praedicto vicesimo sexto die Aprilis usque ad and
in decimum quartum diem Novembris jam prox' futurum prorogatum fuerat, ibidem
tunc tenend' and prosequend': Sciatis tamen quod certis urgentibus causis and
considerationibus nos ad praesens specialiter moventibus idem Parliamentum
nostrum hoc instante decimo quarto die Septembris duximus dissolvend'. De
fidelitate igitur prudentia and circumspectione vestris plurimum confidentes,
de avisamento and assensu consilii nostri assignavimus vos and aliquos tres vel
plures vestrum Commissionarios nostros, Dantes vobis and aliquibus tribus vel
pluribus vesirum tenore praesentium plenam potestatem, facultatem and
authoritatem hoc instante decimo quarto die Septembris ad dictum Parliamentum
nostrum nomine nostro plenarie dissolvend'. Et ideo vobis mandamus quod vos,
aliqui tres vel plures vestrum, idem Parliamentum nostrum idem instante decimo
quarto die Septembris virtute harum literarum nostrarum patentium nomine nostro
plene dissolvatis and determinetis. Et ulterius volumus and per praesentes
concedimus and declaramus, quod idem Parliamentum nostrum vigore praesentium
hoc instante decimo quarto die Septembris dissolutum and determinatum sit, and
per has literas nostras patentes idem Parliamentum nostrum penitus dissolvimus
and determinamus. Et ideo vobis mandamus quod circa praemissa diligenter
intendalis, ac ea in forma praedicta effectualiter expleatis and exequamini.
Volumus etiam and concedimus quod omnes and singuli Archiepiscopi, Marchiones,
Comites, Vicecomites, Episcopi, Barons, Milites, Cives and Burgenses, ac omnes
alii quorum interest, ad dictum Parliamentum nostrum conventuri de omni eo quod
eis pertinet in praemissis faciend' and exequend, sint omnino tenore
praesentium exonerati and quieti in omnibus prout decet. In cujus rei
testimonium has literas nostras fieri fecimus patentes. Test me ipsa apud
Westmonasterium decimo quarto die Septembris Anno Regni nostri 28o.

Per ipsam Reginam.

Nota, That this last Dissolution of the aforesaid Parliament in Anno 28
Reginae Eliz. Anno Domini 1586. was somewhat above one whole year and a half
from and after the first Prorogation thereof, which was on Monday the 29th day
of March (Anno 27 Reginae ejusdem Anno Domini 1585.) by which it is probable
that her Majesty had intended at first to have made this and the Parliament
that follows to have been but two Sessions, and not two several Parliaments as
afterward it sell out, and as they now remain. And it is the more strange that
this resolution was at all altered, because the ensuing Parliament held in Anno
28, and 29 Reginae Eliz. Anno Domini 1586. began within some forty five days
after this last recited day, on which this aforesaid Parliament was Dissolved
as is aforesaid.

And that which yet makes this foresaid Dissolution of the abovementioned
Parliament on this 14th day of September, the more strange, is, because it had
been last prorogued on the 26th day of April Anno 28 Reginae Eliz. unto the
14th day of November following, which if it had held, would have fallen out
full two Months after this day of the Dissolution thereof, and at least a
Fortnight after the 29th day of October, on which the next and new Parliament
began in the said twenty eighth year of her Majesty's Reign. But to clear this,
doubtfully there was no other cause or ground upon which her Majesty altered
that her first resolution, but the blessed and strange discovery of that most
horrible and merciless Conspiracy plotted between the Scottish Queen, Ballard,
Babington and others, for the speedy Murdering of her Majesty and Extirpation
of true Religion. The manner and Execution whereof having continued in
agitation between them from July to September, in this said twenty eighth year
of her Majesty's Reign, upon the 20th day of the last mentioned Month, the two
foresaid Conspirators and five more of their notablest Accomplices, were Executed
in St Giles-Fields near London, having been Condemned upon Tuesday the 13th day
of the said Month, which was the very day foregoing the said 14th day of the
same Month on which the foresaid Parliament was Dissolved, as appears fully by
the fore-recited Commission. After which also before the new Parliament began
on Saturday the 29th day of October following, the Queen of Scots was tried at
Fothringhay. Castle in Northamptonshire, and after Condemned in the
Star Chamber by the lawful Verdict of her Peers, the proceedings Vide Camden
Annal. p. 432.
whereof lasted from the 11th day of the Month aforesaid, being Wednesday unto
the 25th day of the same being Tuesday, which Sentence was affirmed and allowed
by the Parliament following in Anno 28 Regin. Eliz.

THE JOURNAL OF THE House of COMMONS.
A Journal of the Passages of the House of Commons in the Parliament holden at
Westminster, Anno 27 Reginae Eliz. Anno Domini 1584. which began there on
Monday the 23th Day of November, and then and there continued until the
Prorogation thereof on Monday the 29th Day of March Anno Domini 1585. and was
lastly Dissolved on Wednesday the 14th Day of September, Anno 28 Reginae
ejusdem, Anno Domini 1586.

THIS Ensuing Parliament is replenished with many Excellent Passages concerning
the Orders, Privileges and Usages of the same, from which also diverse good
Precedents may be gathered touching Elections and Joint-Conferences with the
Lords of the Upper House; neither finally does it want sufficient matter of
public Agitations, the danger of the State and the Ecclesiastical Government
of the Church being at large debated in it; in which also appears the zeal of
the said House against one Doctor Parrie, a notorious Traitor, being a Member
thereof.

The Parliament beginning on Monday the 23th day of November in Anno hoc 27
Reginae Eliz. her Majesty came from her Palace of Whitchall in her accustomed,
and Royal and stately manner, unto the Cathedral Church of Westminster,
about.... of the Clock in the Forenoon, during whose being there, the Earl of
Leicester at this time Lord Steward of her Highness Household, came into the
Utter Room of the House of Commons, and then and there before his Lordship, did
the right honorable Mr Treasurer, and Mr Comptroller of her Majesty's
Household, and Mr Chancellor of the Exchequer, being severally chosen and
returned Knights into the said House of Commons for the Counties of Oxon,
Hereford and Northampton, take and pronounce the Oath according to the Statute
in that behalf made and provided; which done, the said Lord Steward departed
from the House into the lower end of the Room called the White Hall, or Court
of Requests, and then also did the right honorable Mr Secretary Walsingham,
returned one of the Knights for the County of Surrey, likewise take and
pronounce the said Oath before his Lordship. And then his Lordship caused as
many of the said Knights, Citizens, Burgesses and Barons, as at that time were
returned into the Crown-Office, to be called and returned, and the names to be
pricked of so many of them as then appeared; and so nominating and appointing
the said four honorable Personages to be his Lordships Deputies, to see the
said Oath taken and pronounced by all the residue of the said House of Commons,
departed; and thereupon his Lordships said Deputies proceeded to the further
ministering of the said Oath unto the residue of the said House of Commons.

But before such time as these four right honorable Personages, deputed by the
Earl of Leicester as aforesaid, had administered the said Oath to all such of
their fellow Members of the House of Commons as were present, although the
greatest part of them had taken it, they had notice about two of the Clock in
the Afternoon, that her Majesty, with diverse of the Lords Spiritual and
Temporal, were then already set in the Upper House and there expected them; who
thereupon all of them together repaired thither, and as many as conveniently
could being let in, Sir Thomas Bromley Lord Chancellor having made an Oration
unto the whole Assembly, did in the end declare unto the Knights, Citizens and
Burgesses of the said House of Commons, that it was her Majesty's will and
pleasure that they should go together unto their own House, and there amongst
themselves should choose a Speaker, and of the day of his Presentation her
Majesty would hereafter give them further Order.

Whereupon they departed thence, and came into their own House, where being
set, and the number appearing upon the view not to be much less than the whole,
Sir Francis Knowles Knight Treasurer of her Highness's Household stood up, and
put them in mind how lately the Lord Chancellor had signisied unto them her
Majesty's pleasure for the choice of a Speaker. And further added, that for his
part he did very well allow of Mr Sergeant Puckering, as of a very able Member
of the said House, to be chosen into the said place, and to undergo it; yet
nevertheless did leave every man to his own free opinion to nominate any other
of whom they might think better.

After whose Speech many of the said House named also Mr Sergeant Puckering,
and none was heard to disallow or speak against the said choice; whereupon Mr
Treasurer standing up again, did then and there put it to the question, asking
them whom they would be pleased to allow of for their Speaker, and to name him.
To which the greater part of the House making Answer again, that they did allow
of and choose the said Mr Sergeant Puckering for their Speaker as before, he
stood up, and in a modest and humble Speech disabled himself, yet withal
acknowledging the great favor of the House unto him, in that they had been
pleased to nominate and choose him unto a place of so great charge and weight.
Which excuse of his being not allowed, he was led up between two of the most
eminent Personages of the said House unto the Chair, and placed in it.

On Tuesday the 24th day of November, it seems the House met not, because the
Speaker was not yet presented, neither is there any mention of the said day in
the Original Journal Book of the House of Commons de Anno isto 27o Reginae Eliz.

On Wednesday the 25th day of November Mr Treasurer signified unto the House
that her Majesty's pleasure was, that the Speaker be presented unto her
Highness in the Upper House to morrow next at two of the Clock in the
Afternoon; and therefore willed every one of this House to take notice thereof
to the end they may then and there wait upon her Majesty accordingly.

On Thursday the 26th day of November the Queens Majesty and diverse of the
Lords Spiritual and Temporal being set in the Upper House, the Knights,
Citizens and Burgesses of the House of Commons had notice thereof about two of
the Clock in the Afternoon, and thereupon with John Puckering Sergeant at Law
their Speaker Elect, they repaired thither, the said Prolocutor or Speaker
being led up by two of the most honorable Personages of the said House, and
there having made his excuse according to the usual sorm at the Bar or Rail at
the lower end of the Upper House, it was not allowed by her Majesty; whereupon
the said Speaker having with all humble acknowledgement of her Majesty's favor
submitted himself (according to the usual course) to the undergoing of the said
Prolocutorship, made certain Petitions in the name of the House of Commons for
freedom of speech, of access to her Majesty, and immunity from Arrests and
Saits for themselves and their necessity Attendants. And lastly petitioned for
himself, that if in any thing he should err or mistake unwillingly, her
Majesty would be pleased to pardon it.

To which Speech the Lord Chancellor delivered her Majesty's Answer by her
commandment, that she was graciously pleased to allow of his said Petitions,
and therefore wished them to use their said Liberties and Privileges with
moderation and reverence. Then the Knights, Citizens and Burgesses departing
with their Speaker to their own House, there was read one Bill only the first
time, being for the better and more reverent observing or the Sabbath day;
after the reading whereof the House rose.

On Friday the 27th day of November two (...) had each of them one reading; of
which the second being the bill for the better and more reverent observing of
the Sabbath day, was read the second time, and committed unto Sir Walter
Mildmay, Sir John Higham, Sir Francis Drake, Mr. Recorder of London, Mr. James
Dalton, Mr. George Moore, Mr. Brook, Mr. Doctor Turner, Mr. Francis Hastings,
Mr. Fox, Mr. Andersan, Sir Richard Greenfield, Mr. William Mohun, Sir Drew
Drury, Sir Henry Nevill, Sir William Moore, Sir Nicholas Woodroose, Sir William
Herbert, Mr. Robert Beale, Mr. Edward Popham, Mr. (...), Mr. Edward Lewkenor,
Sir Robert Germin, Mr. Lieutenant of the Tower, Mr. George Carry, Sir Thomas
Manners, Mr. Daniel, Mr. John (...), Mr. Grice, Mr. Richard Prowze, Mr. Thomas
Brercton, Sir Richard Knightly, and Sir William Mallory, who were appointed to
meet this Afternoon at two of the Clock in the Exchequer-Chamber, and the Bill
was delivered to Sir William Mallory one of the said Committees.

Nota, That this Bill of the Sabbath did not pass the two Houses, but another,
and that also not without great difficulty and long debatement being committed,
and amendments upon amendments added unto it, ut vide on Wednesday the 17th day
of March following.

On Saturday the 28th day of November three Bills of no great moment had each
of them their first reading; of which the first was concerning the better
pursuit of Hue and Cry.

Sir Walter Mildmay Chancellor of the Exchequer taking occasion to speak of the
sudden calling of this Parliament at so unseasonable a time of the year, and of
the likelihood of the short continuance thereof, did thereupon declare the same
to be called for very urgent and necessary causes.

Sir Christopher Hatton, Vice-Chamberlain of her Majesty's Household, spoke
next, and it seems much to the same effect with Mr. Chancellor of the
Exchequer; but what the very words were, or the substance of them, is wholly
omitted in the Original Journal Book of the House of Commons, although these
two Speeches did last about two hours, as is afterward showed. At the end
whereof it seems further, that a Committee was appointed to consider of a
Bill to be drawn concerning the matter of Subsidy.

One being no Member of this House, being found to have sit here this present
day by the space of two hours, during the whole time of the Speeches delivered
by Mr Chancellor and Mr Vicechamberlain, as aforesaid, did upon Examination
confess his name to be Richard Robinson, and that he was by occupation a
Skinner, and dwelt at the Hearts Horns in Gracious street London, the house of
one Mark Friar a Skinner also his Father-in-law: Whereupon himself having been
stripped to his shirt, and his pockets all searched, the Custody and further
Examination of him was by this House referred to Mr Recorder of London, Mr
Topelisse, Mr Beale, and another.

Charles Morgan Gentleman, Servant unto Sir George Carry Knight, returned this
Parliament for one of the Knights of the County of Southampton, being himself
no Member of this House, was found to be standing within the said House near
unto the door, and as it was thought of mere ignorance and simplicity without
any evil purpose or meaning; and therefore, was committed by Order of the House
unto the Sergeants Ward till the next sitting of this Court, and then such
further Order to be taken therein, as by this House shall be requisite.

On Monday the 30th day of November Mr Recorder of London showed to the House,
that he and Mr Topelisse had taken the Examination of Richard Robinson found to
be sitting there on Saturday last, although he were no Member of it, the taking
whereof had been then also referred unto them, and thereupon he delivered the
same in writing; which having been read by the Clerk of the Parliament, the
said Robinson was brought to the Bar, and was there censured by the House,
having taken the Oath (as it should seem of Allegiance and Supremacy) to suffer
Imprisonment in the Sergeants Ward until Saturday next, and then having swore
to keep secret what he had heard, to be released without further moving the
House. Vide touching this business in fine dici praecedentis.

Mr Recorder also offered and commended to the House a certain Bill touching
Barks or Stocks, which had been tendered in like manner before in a former
Session.

Mr Speaker made another motion to the House, to take Order with their Servants
and Pages to forbear such misbehaviour and disorder as has formerly been used,
and that they may henceforth avoid from the stairs which lead up to the House
out of Westminster Hall.

Charles Morgan Gentleman, who had been present in the House on Saturday last,
being no Member of it, and had thereupon been committed unto the Sergeants
Ward, was this day brought to the Bar, and having taken the Oath of Supremacy,
was discharged upon payment of his Fees.

Five Bills of no great moment had each of them one reading; of which the first
being the Bill, that Parsonages impropriate might be converted to charitable
and pious uses, was read the first time.

Upon a motion this day made to the House, that Thomas Bodley Gentleman being
returned a Burgess into this Parliament for the Town of Portsmouth in the
County of Southampton, and also a Baron for the Port of Hieth, and can appear
but for one of the same places, it was (upon the said Mr Bodley his choice made
to appear for the said Town of Portsmouth in the County aforesaid) Ordered that
a Warrant from this House should be directed to the Clerk of the Crown-Office
in the Chancery for a new Writ to be awarded for the choosing and returning of
another Baron of the said Port of Hieth into this House in lieu and stead of
the said Mr Bodley accordingly.

On Tuesday the first day of December five Bills of no great moment had each of
them one reading; of which the first being the Bill concerning Parsonages
impropriate to be disposed to charitable and pious uses, was after the second
reading and sundry Arguments about it, committed to Mr Treasurer, Sir John
Higham, Mr Solicitor, Mr Recorder, Mr Heal, Mr Skinner, and other, who were
appointed to meet this Afternoon at one of the Clock in the Exchequer-Chamber,
and the Bill was delivered to Mr Treasurer one of the said Committees.

Upon a motion for a Committee of some few of this House, being learned in the
Laws, to peruse all such Statutes as are to have their continuance but unto the
end of this present Session of Parliament, diverse of the House were appointed
to collect the Titles of all such Statutes; to the end that upon view and
consideration to be severally had of them by the House, it may further be
considered which of them are still to be continued, and which not. The names of
which persons so appointed were as follows, viz. Mr Recorder of London, Mr
Solicitor General, Mr Morris, Mr Sands, Mr Henry Beamond, Mr Waterhouse, Mr
Fanshaw, Mr Richard Lewkenor, Mr Cromwell, Mr Thimbleby, and Mr Hamman.

On Wednesday the second day of December three Bills of no great moment had
each of them one reading; of which the second being the Bill for reformation of
disorders in common Informers, was upon the second reading committed to Mr
Chancellor of the Exchequer, Mr Alford, Mr Henry Beamond, and others who were
appointed to meet on Friday next at one of the Clock in the Afternoon in the
Exchequer Chamber. And the third and last Bill concerning Actions upon the Case
to be tried in their proper Counties, was upon the second reading committed
unto Mr Dale one of the Masters of Requests, Mr Solicitor, Mr Attorney of the
Court of Wards, and others, who were appointed to meet upon Saturday next being
the fifth day of this instant December, at two of the Clock in the Afternoon,
in the Exchequer Chamber.

This Bill had been much argued upon, before it was committed; and it seems
some Arguments being not liked, diverse of the House had endeavored by coughing
and spitting to shorten them. Whereupon Sir Francis Hastings made a Motion
(that as upon like occasion offered, others had moved, that words of note, as
Town Clerk and such like, should not offensively be applied to the persons of
such as had formerly spoken) that in like manner it were now to be wished that
in respect of the gravity and honor of this House, when any Member thereof
shall speak unto a Bill, the residue would forbear to interrupt or trouble him
by unnecessary coughing, spitting or the like.

On Thursday the third day of December, Six Bills of no great moment had each
of them one reading; of which the fourth being the Bill concerning Hue and Cry
was read the second time, and committed unto Sir Richard Greenfield, Sir Henry
Cock, Mr Richard Lewkenor and others, who were appointed to meet to Morrow at
one of the Clock in the Afternoon in the open Exchequer Court.

The fifth Bill also was brought into the House by Mr Chancellor of the
Exchequer, being a new Bill for the better and more reverend observation of the
Sabbath day, which had been framed by the Committees appointed to consider of
the old Bill on Friday the 27th day of November foregoing, and had this day its
first reading.

Nota, That though the old Bill was altered, and this new Bill concerning the
Sabbath, framed by the Committees appointed on the said 27th day of November as
aforesaid, were now brought into the House and read; yet it did not pass the
two Houses without much dispute and great difficulty, being committed and
amendments upon amendments added unto it, ut vide on Wednesday the 17th day of
March following.

The last Bill of the said six being for a Bank of general Charity to be
appointed for the relief of common necessity was put to the Question upon the
first reading, and rejected. Quod nota, because it is not usual for a Bill to
be put to the Question upon the first reading.

Upon the report of Sir James Croft Comptroller of her Majesty's Household, and
Mr William Howard, of the great disorder of Serving-men and Boys in hurting and
misusing of other Persons, and of whom Mr Comptroller and Mr Howard did see and
take two of the said disordered persons; It was Ordered, that the Sergeant of
the House should wait upon Mr Comptroller to know the same two Persons, and to
bring them to this House to Morrow, sitting the Court.

The Bill lastly for the true Answering of Tithes was read the second time, and
thereupon committed unto Sir Richard Greenfield, Sir John Peter, Sir William
Harbert, Mr Dale one of the Masters of the Requests, and the Bill was delivered
to the said Mr Dale, who with the rest was appointed to meet on Monday the 8th
day of this instant December following at two of the Clock in the Afternoon in
the Middle Temple Hall.

On Friday the 4th day of December, Three Bills of no great moment had each of
them one reading; of which the third being the Bill against partial Juries and
Trials, was upon the second reading committed unto Mr Recorder of London, Mr
Tanfield, Mr Cromwell and others; and the Bill was delivered to Mr Attorney of
the Court of Wards, one of the said Committees, who with the rest was appointed
to meet upon Monday the 7th day of this instant December following at two of
the Clock in the Afternoon in the Inner Temple Hall.

The Bill for the maintenance of Navigation, and another Bill concerning Cloth
at Boated in Essex, having passed the House upon the third reading, were sent
up to the Lords by Mr Treasurer of her Majesty's Household, Mr Vice-Chamberlain
and others.

The Bill for the better and more reverend observation of the Sabbath day was
read the second time and Ordered to be engrossed. De qua Vide plus on Wednesday
the 17th day of March following.

Upon a Motion made this day unto the House by Mr Speaker, that Mr Marmaduke
Wivell one of the Burgesses for the Borough of Richmond in the County of York,
is lately fallen very sick, and not able to give his attendance on this House
till he shall have recovered better health, and therefore desires in the mean
time License of this House to go a little into the Country to take change of
Air for a short time for the seeking of his better health and strength, it was
gramed, and agreed by this House that he may do so with the good favor and
leave of this House accordingly.

Upon another Motion also made by Mr Speaker for Mr Edward Leigh Esquire, one
of the Knights returned into this present Parliament for the County of
Stafford, and since that time chosen to be Sheriff of the said County of
Stafford; It was likewise Ordered by this House, that the said Edward Leigh may
with the good leave of this House have liberty to absent himself in and about
his necessary charge and service in the said Office of Sheriffwick.

Nota, That hence it may be probably gathered, that neither her Majesty nor the
House of Commons did conceive these two places to be incompetible, but that
they might well stand and be in one and the same Man at one and the same time;
for her Majesty did first make him Sheriff of the County of Stafford, not only
after he was chosen, but returned a Knight of the same County also, which it is
very plain she could not be ignorant of; and therefore her self and the House
of Commons did both allow of his being made Sheriff as a thing well agreeing
with the privilege of his former place, and the service of that House, and did
not therefore give him a sinal discharge, but only liberty of recess about his
necessary affairs into the Country, as in the foregoing case of sickness, which
being expedited, he might return again to that service. For doubtless if the
said House had conceived that he had been utterly disabled from his serving
there by his new Office, it would have been Ordered, That a Warrant should have
been sent to the Clerk of the Crown to have sent down a new Writ into the said
County of Stafford for a new Election to have been made, as in the case of
double Returns, death or the like is used. Besides, if her Majesty might have
disabled as many Members from serving in that House as she should or could have
made Sheriffs it had lain in her power (and may lie in the power of any King or
Queen of this Realm for the time being) to have disfurnished the House of
Commons at any time of all or the greater part of the ablest Members thereof.

Against this Opinion the words of the very Writ, by Authority whereof the
Knights, Citizens, Burgesses and Barons of the House of Commons are elected,
has been and may be still objected, viz. Nolumus antem quod tu, nec aliquis
alius Vicecomes dicti Regni nostri aliqualiter sit electus, etc. which words
were not in the Writ during the Reign of King Henry the Third, E. 1. E. 2. and
the beginning of the Reign of King Edward the Third, but crept in afterward by
virtue of an Ordinance of Parliament upon some special occasion to that end
made, which is entered in Rotulo Parliamenti de Anno 46 E. 3. number. 13. And
therefore This Ordinance inhlbitis also as well the Election of Lawyers as of
Sheriffs.
the constant practice in many Parliaments since to the contrary may well be
admitted and followed, as the greater and more swaying Authority, which also
appears in the aforesaid Precedent, the said Mr Leigh being allowed to
maintain and retain both the said places, and to serve in them without all
manner of dispute or question. Vide plus concerning this business on Tuesday
the 23. day of February following.

On Saturday the 5th day of December two Bills of no great moment had each of
them one reading; of which the last being the Bill against the delay of
Justice, was upon the second reading committed unto Mr Vicechamberlain, Mr
Chancellor of the Exchequer, Mr Sands, Mr Solicitor, and others, who were
appointed to meet on Monday the 7th day of this instant December following in
the Afternoon in the Exchequer-Chamber or Star Chamber.

The Bill also for the better and more reverent observing of the Sabbath day
was read the third time, and upon the question passed the House. Vide touching
this Bill on Wednesday the 17th day of March following.

The Lords also sent back to the House of Commons the Bill touching Boxted
Clothes with some amendments and additions, which had been carried up yesterday
to their Lordships by Mr Treasurer and others from the said House.

The Bills, lastly, for reformation of Informers, and for Actions upon the Case
to be brought in their proper Counties, were appointed to be dealt in in the
Exchequer-Chamber at two of the Clock this Afternoon by the Committees of the
same Bills, upon warning thereof given unto them by this House, at the motion
of Mr Chancellor of the Exchequer.

On Monday the 7th day of December three Bills of no great moment had each of
them their first reading; of which the second being the Bill concerning the
Town of Richmond was rejected upon the Question. Quod nota.

The third Bill also being for the assurance of certain Messuages and Lands,
late Edward Fishers, unto George Chewne Esquire and others in Fee simple, was
upon the first reading committed unto Mr Recorder, Mr Morris, Mr Sands and Mr
Clement Fisher, and it was Ordered, That the said Mr Edward Fisher shall have
word thereof by the Sergeant of this House this present day, and a reasonable
time given him to attend upon the said Committees, and to be heard (if he will)
what he can say why the said Bill should not pass this House. Nota also, that
this Bill was here committed upon the first reading. De qua vide plus on Monday
the 22th day of February following.

Mr Chancellor of the Exchequer in the name of himself and the other Committees
for the Bill for reformation of disorders in common Informers, showed, that
they had met together and had conference touching the same Bill, and have in
some parts amended the same and added thereunto, and so offered it to the
House. Whereupon the said Bill being with the amendments and additions twice
read, was ordered to be engrossed.

The Bill for the more reverent observation of the Sabbath day, and the Bill
concerning Boxted Clothes with the amendments and additions of the Lords,
allowed and thrice read and passed, were sent up unto them by the House of
Commons by Mr. Comptroller and others. Vide plus concerning the Bill of the
Sabbath on Wednesday the 17th day of March following.

The Committees in the Bills for Hue and Cry, for true answering of Tithes, and
against Trials by partial Juries, were appointed to meet in the Middle
Temple-Hall to morrow at two of the Clock in the Afternoon, upon Consideration
that the most part of the Committees are to meet this Afternoon in the great
Committee.

Mr Comptroller and Mr Lieutenant of the Tower, were appointed by the House to
examine the affray even now made in the White Hall or Court of Requests, as Mr
Comptroller and the residue were carrying up the two last mentioned Bills to
the Lords.

The Bill touching Suffolk-Cloths was read the second time, and committed unto
Mr Treasurer, Mr Comptroller, Mr Vice-Chamberlain, Mr Chancellor of the
Exchequer, Sir Robert Germin, Sir William Drurie, Mr Rawleigh and others; and
the Bill was delivered to Mr Treasurer, who with the rest was appointed to meet
upon Thursday next being the 10th day of this instant December following at one
of the Clock in the Afternoon in the Exchequer Chamber.

The Committees also in the Bill against the delay of Justice, were appointed
to meet upon Wednesday next being the 9th day of this instant Month of December
in the Afternoon, (but the hour is not specified) in the Exchequer Chamber.

The Bill lastly for bringing in of staple Fish and Ling, was upon the second
reading committed unto Sir Francis Drake, Mr Fenner, Mr Grice, Sir Edward
Dymock and others; and the Bill was delivered to the said Sir Edward Dymock,
who with the rest was appointed to meet on Thursday the 10th day of this
instant December following, at one of the Clock in the Afternoon in the
Exchequer Chamber.

On Tuesday the 8th day of December, the Bill for preservation of Timber in the
County of Sussex was read the second time, and committed unto Mr Comptroller,
Sir Thomas Shirley, Sir Philip Sidney, Mr Alsord, Mr Robert Sackvile and
others, who were appointed to meet on Saturday the 12th day of this instant
December following at two of the Clock in the Afternoon in the Star Chamber
Court.

Upon a Motion made by Mr Speaker for the opinion of this House touching the
validity of some Knights returned for some Shires of this Realm, not being (as
it is supposed) chosen at the next County after the date of the Writ of Summons
of this Parliament, and after some Speech also therein offered by Mr Bevill, by
which he seemed to suspect that the matter of the Motion tended to and
concerned himself and Mr Darrington returned Knights for the Shire of
Huntington, it was referred unto Mr Treasurer, Mr Vice-Chamberlain, Mr.
Solicitor and Mr. Recorder of London, who were appointed to meet on Saturday
the 12th day of this instant December following in the Forenoon (but no hour
specified) in the Exchequer Chamber. Vide plus concerning this matter on
Saturday the 12th day, and on Monday the 21th day of this instant December
ensuing.

Upon a Motion made unto this House by Mr. Lieutenant of the Tower, that the
Armor of Papists being Recusants might not remain in their own Custody; It was
Ordered that Mr. Sands and Mr. (...) do draw a Bill to that end.

The Committees in the Bill against the delay of Justice were appointed to meet
upon Friday the 11th day of this instant December following, at two of the
Clock in the Afternoon in the Exchequer Chamber.

On Wednesday the 9th day of December, Three Bills of no great moment had each
of them one reading; of which the last touching Banners, Curriers, Shoomakers,
etc. was upon the second reading committed unto Mr. Solicitor, Sir William
Moor, Mr. Recorder of London, Mr. Dalton and others, who were appointed to meet
upon Monday the 14th day of this instant December following, at one of the
Clock in the Afternoon in the Guild Hall.

The Bill for redress of disorders in common Informers, was after the third
reading and many Arguments committed again to the former Committees (Mr.
Treasurer and Mr. Vice-Chamberlain being added unto them) Mr. Solicitor, Mr.
William Moore, Mr. Recorder of London, Mr. Harne, Mr. Morice, Mr. Dilton, Mr.
Francis Bacon, Mr. Beale and Mr. Owen, who were appointed to meet upon Saturday
the 12th day of this instant December following at one of the Clock in the
Afternoon, but no place mentioned where.

Nota, That this Bill was committed upon the third reading, having been
formerly committed upon the second, which is not usual.

Another Bill also of no great moment concerning Sheriffs was upon the second
reading committed; but to whom it was committed, or when and where the said
Committees should meet, is not at all set down in the Original Journal Book of
the House of Commons, but seems to have been omitted through the negligence
of Mr Fulk Onslow at this time Clerk of the same.

On Thursday the 10th day of December, Two Bill of no great moment had each of
them their first reading; of which the first was the Bill for the preservation
of Plymouth Haven.

Mr Sergeant Gaudy and Mr Attorney General did bring a Message from the Lords,
that their Lordships do pray Conference with some of this House to join with a
Committee of their Lordships touching the Bill lately passed this House and
sent up unto their Lordships for the better and more reverend observing of the
Sabbath day. Whereupon Mr Treasurer, Mr Comptroller, Mr. Vice-Chamberlain, the
Lord Russell, Sir William Herbert, Sir William Moore, Mr. Edward Lewkenor, Mr.
Francis Hastings and Mr. George Moore were appointed by this House to attend
their Lordships therein to Morrow at two of the Clock in the Afternoon in the
Parliament Chamber. Vide concerning this matter of the Sabbath on Wednesday the
17th day of March following.

The Bill against dying with Sumach, and some other Bills wholly omitted
through the negligence of the Clerk, and therefore seem to have been of no
great moment, were upon the second reading committed unto Mr. Treasurer, Mr.
Recorder of London, Mr. Hutton, Mr. Henry Nevill and others; and the Bills were
delivered to the said Mr. Henry Nevill, who with the rest were appointed to
meet upon Monday next the 14th day of this instant December following in the
Afternoon in the Middle Temple Hall.

The Bill also against vicious life and idleness was upon the second reading
committed unto Sir William Herbert, Sir Edward Dymock and others, and the Bill
was delivered to the said Sir Edward Dymock, who with the rest were appointed
to meet to Morrow at one of the Clock in the Afternoon in the Middle Temple
Hall.

Mr. Recorder one of the Committees appointed on Monday the 7th day of this
instant December foregoing in the Bill for the assurance of certain Messuages,
Lands and Tenements late Edward Fishers unto George Chewne Esquire and others
in Fee-Simple, according to the true intent and meaning of certain Conveyances
unto them by the said Edward Fisher made, reported to the House that upon
Examination by himself and the other Committees therein had, and also by
comparing and conferring the Contents of the preamble of the said Bill with the
Conveyances of the premises, and also with the Judgment upon the forgery in
the Star Chamber, and also of their Conferences had with the said Edward Fisher
and Katherine his Wife, as well together as a part and asunder touching the
premises and circumstances of the same, they have amended the said Bill
according to the said Conveyances, not only in the form thereof, but also in
the principal matter and substance, and offered both the said Bill so amended,
the said Evidences or Conveyances (being two several Deeds) indented and
enrolled in the Court of Chancery, and also the said Judgment in the
Star Chamber exemplified under the Great Seal of England. Whereupon the Bill
was presently read, and the said amendments also twice read, and so the Bill
thereupon Ordered to be engrossed. Vide plus on Monday the 22th day of February
following.

On Friday the 11th day of December, Six Bills of no great moment had each of
them one reading; of which the Bill concerning the aforesaid business of Edward
Fisher, and for the assurance of certain Lands lately sold by him unto George
Chewne Esquire and others in Fee-simple, did pass upon the third reading. Vide
plus on Monday the 22th day of February following.

Mr. Vice-Chamberlain in the behalf of himself and of the residue of the
Committees in the great Causes, showed unto the House, that they have had
sundry Meetings together, and endeavored to draw two several Bills to such
ends as they thought fittest, and having one of the said Bills ready drawn, but
not the other, yet for want of longer time to meet, and which yet cannot now be
before Monday next, offered unto the said House the Bill that was ready drawn.
But what the Title of the Bill was, or what these great matters were, is wholly
omitted through the Clerks negligence: yet it may be probably conjectured, that
they were concerning the Subsidy and Religion, or the Bill for the preservation
of her Majesty's most Royal Person. De qua vide on Monday the 14th day of
December following.

The Bill lastly touching Grants by Corporations was upon the second reading
committed unto Mr Comptroller, Mr Recorder and others.

But the time and place appointed for their meeting is in the Original
Journal Book of the House of Commons through the Clerks negligence wholly
omitted.

On Saturday the 12th day of December, Notice being given to the House of one
Mr Hall a Member of the same, that had not attended all this Parliament, it was
Ordered that the Sergeant should give him warning to attend upon Monday next.
Vide plus in fine hujus diei.

Mr. Recorder of London and Mr. Solicitor were appointed by the House to
examine the Record of the return of Mr. Bevill and Mr. Darrington the two
Knights chosen for the Shire of Huntington, and of the circumstances thereof.

Nota, That the Recorder of London is in this place and in all other Passages
of this Journal, for the most part named and ranked before the Queens
Solicitor, although his place at this time be after him.

Mr. Bevill one of the Knights returned for the said County of Huntington,
declared, that he was charged by a Member of this House, that he had lied in
his former Speech to this House touching the Declaration of the manner of
choosing himself and Mr. Darrington Knights for the Shire of Huntington; wherein
as he takes himself to be very much abused being a Member of this House, so
appealing himself to the same, he prayed remedy and order to be given therein
by this honorable House upon the hearing of the cause. Vide plus concerning
this matter on Tuesday the 8th day of this instant December foregoing, as also
on Monday the 21th day of the same Month following.

The Bill for the assurance of certain Messuages, Lands and Tenements, late
Edward Fishers unto George Chewne Esquire and others in Feesimple, was sent up
to the Lords by Mr. Treasurer and others. Vide de ista materia on Monday the
22th day of February following.

Mr. Sergeant Gaudy and Mr. Attorney General did bring from the Lords a Bill
for remedy against fraudulent Conveyances, with recommendation thereof from
their Lordships to this House, and request also for present Conference with the
Committees of this House touching the Bill for the observation of the Sabbath
day. Of which see more on Wednesday the 17th day of March following.

Sir William Knolles, Mr. Fanshaw and others were appointed Committees this
Afternoon to meet in the Middle Temple Hall about the Oath for Sheriffs, etc.

Three Bills of no great moment had each of them one reading; of which the last
being the Bill touching Collectors of Issues by Juries, was upon the second
reading committed unto Mr. Cromwell, Mr. Nathanael Bacon, Mr. Henry Barkley and
others, and the Bill was delivered to the said Mr. Barkley, who with the rest
was appointed to meet in the Middle Temple Hall to Morrow at two of the Clock
in the Afternoon.

The Lords did this Morning send down to the House of Commons a Bill touching
the assurance of certain Lands to Sir Thomas Lucy Knight and others.

The business of Mr. Arthur Hall, of which the House had been informed upon
their first meeting this Morning, was before the rising of the House referred
to Mr. Wolley, Mr. Cromwell, Mr. Diggs and Mr. Sands, to peruse the order
touching the same against Monday next, being the day appointed by the House for
the said Mr. Hall to appear before them.

On Monday the 14th day of December further day was given unto the Committees
for the Bill touching Tanners, etc. and to meet at the Yeeld-Hall (alias
Guild Hall) to Morrow at two of the Clock in the Afternoon.

The Bill for Confirmation of Letters Patents granted unto Walter Rawleigh
Esquire for the discovery of Foreign Countries was read prima vice.

Three Petitions touching the liberty of Godly Preachers, and to exercise and
continue their Ministries, and also for the speedy supply of able and
sufficient men into diverse places now destitute and void of the ordinary means
of Salvation, were offered unto the House; the first by Sir Thomas Lucy, the
second by Sir Edward Dymock, and the third by Mr. Gates: which were all
thereupon read, and further proceedings therein deferred until a more
convenient time. Vide concerning this matter on Monday the 22th day of February
following, and more largely on Thursday the 25th day of February ensuing.

Which notwithstanding Doctor Turner a little after rose up, and put the House
in remembrance of a Bill and Book heretofore offered by him unto the said
House, which had been digested and framed by certain Godly and Learned
Ministers, and which said Bill and Book did tend to no other end, as he
conceived, than the Glory of God, the Safety of her Majesty and the benefit of
the Commonwealth; and therefore prayed that it might be read.

Against which Sir Francis Knolles Knight, Treasurer of her Majesty's Household
spoke first, but in few words; and after him Sir Christopher Hatton Knight her
Majesty's Vice-Chamberlain more largely, who pressed and moved the House so far
therein, that it was at length resolved, that the said Book and Bill should not
be read. But touching all necessary and fit liberty of the aforesaid Ministers,
or supply of able men, in places that wanted, they did not doubt but that her
Majesty would take some speedy order concerning the same, according to
whatsoever was justly required, either in the aforesaid Petitions that had been
read, or in the last mentioned Book and Bill, the reading whereof had been
forborne: of which also the said Mr. Vice-Chamberlain did affirm that he doubted
not but that it would be done accordingly. Vide concerning this business on
Saturday the 27th day of March following.

He also further moved that for the better and more speedy expedition of other
great matters now in hand, this Court would be pleased to appoint to sit again
at two of the Clock this Afternoon to give reading to a Bill but now lately
finished, wherein provision was made for the safety and preservation of the
Queens Majesty's most Royal Person. Which he the rather desired, because he
conceived that this House would very shortly be adjourned till after Christmas.

The Bill against fraudulent Conveyances was read the third time.

Post Meridiem.

In the Afternoon the beforementioned Bill for provision to be made for safety
of the Queens Majesty's most Royal Person, and the quiet State of the Realm,
was read the first time.

The Bill also for provision of maintenance for Ministers and Preachers in
Towns Corporate, etc. was after the second reading and much dispute, put to the
question, whether it should be committed; and upon the division of the House,
the major part of the Voices fell out to be against the commitment. After which
also upon another Question whether it should be engrossed or no, the Bill it
self was lastly upon another division of the House dashed.

The Bill lastly for Confirmation of Letters Patents made unto Mr Walter
Rawleigh was read the second time and committed unto Mr Vice-Chamberlain, Mr
Secretary, Sir Philip Sidney, Sir Francis Drake, Sir Richard Greensield, Sir
William Courtnay, Sir William Mohun and others.

On Tuesday the 15th day of December three Bills of no great moment had each of
them one reading; of which the first being for the relief of the Creditors of
Edward Fisher Esquire, was after the second reading committed unto Mr
Solicitor, Mr Morris, Mr Cromwell, Mr John Fisher and Mr Cradock, who were
appointed to meet at two of the Clock this Afternoon in Lincolns-Inn-Hall.

The Committees for Mr Rawleighs Bill were appointed to meet presently in the
Committee-Chamber of this House.

The Bill for the good Government of the City of Westminster was after the
second reading, committed unto Sir George Carry, Mr Recorder of London, Mr
Thomas Knivet, Mr Thomas Cecill and others, who were appointed to meet this
Afternoon in the open Exchequer-Court.

The Bill against Informers was brought in by Mr Vice-Chamberlain one of the
Committees, in the name of all the Committees, with allowance of the same; only
he further moved the reviving and continuing the former Act in that behalf made
in the 18th year of her Majesty's Reign.

The Bill for provision to be made for the surety of the Queens Majesty's most
Royal Person and the good estate of the Realm, was upon the second reading
Ordered to be engrossed.

The Bill for bringing in of Staple Fish and Ling was brought in again by Sir
Edward Dymock one of the Committees, without any thing done in the same; for
that the Committees could not in their meeting assent to any alteration of the
same Bill.

The Bill against Jesuits, Seminary Priests, and such like disobedient persons,
was upon the second reading ordered to be engrossed.

On Wednesday the 16th day of December three Bills of no great moment had each
of them one reading; of which the second being a new one touching Hue and Cry,
was read the first time.

Mr Ash one of the Committees in the Bill for Swearing of Under-Sheriffs, in
the name of himself and the residue of the same Committees brought in the old
Bill, and also a new Bill framed by them, praying the reading thereof.

Mr Treasurer, one of the Committees in the Bill for disposing of Parsonages
impropriate to charitable and pious uses, for himself and the residue of the
same Committees brought in the old Bill, and also a new Bill praying the
reading thereof.

The Bill for perfecting of Assurances was upon the second reading committed
unto Mr Solicitor, Mr Attorney of the Wards, Mr Sands and others, and the Bill
was delivered to Mr Solicitor, who with the rest was appointed to meet to
morrow in the Afternoon in Lincolns-Inn-Hall.

After some Motions made touching the former Petitions exhibited and read in
this House on Monday the 14th day of this instant November foregoing, which
concerned the liberty of some Ministers, and the placing of others in places
that wanted, many Arguments ensuing; but it was at last resolved upon the
motion of Sir Walter Mildmay Chancellor of the Exchequer (who spoke exceeding
well touching this business) that some Committees should be appointed by the
House to view over the said Petitions, and to reduce the contents of the same
into some particular Heads or Articles, which being put in writing, might be
imparted unto the Lords of the Upper House, and that request might thereupon be
made to their Lordships to join with the House of Commons in such further
course as should be thought meet. And thereupon diverse Committees were chosen
to consider of the said business accordingly, viz. Sir Thomas Heneage, Sir
Thomas Manners, Mr Rawleigh, Mr Solicitor, Mr George Carry, Sir Edward Dymock,
Sir Robert Germin, Sir William Herbert, Sir Jahn Higham, Mr Cromwell, Mr Doctor
Hammond, Mr Doctor James and Mr Edward Lewkenor, who were appointed to meet
this Afternoon in the Exchequer-Chamber for that purpose. Vide plus concerning
this business on Monday the 21th day of this instant December following, and on
Thursday the 25th of February ensuing.

After which the House conceiving the weight of this business required a
greater number of Committees, did further nominate these following, viz. Mr
Attorney of the Wards, Mr Beale, Mr Candish, Mr Blage the Master of the
Requests, Mr. Wolley, Mr. Doctor Fletcher, Mr. Skinner, Mr. William Stoughton,
Mr. Thomson, Mr. Recorder, Mr. Morris, Mr. Alford, Sir William Moore and Mr.
Wroth, who were appointed to meet this Afternoon at the place aforesaid.

Two Bills, lastly, had each of them one reading; of which the second being the
Bill for the continuation and explanation of certain Statutes, was read the
first time.

On Thursday the 17th day of December the Bill for assurance of certain Lands
of Sir Thomas Lucy and others was upon the second reading committed unto Mr.
Digby, Mr. Barker, Mr. Cradock and others, who were appointed to meet to morrow
in the Middle Temple Hall.

The Bill for confirmation of Letters Patents granted unto Mr. Walter Rawleigh,
was brought in by the Committees not altered in any word; and upon motion for
engrossing, was after some Arguments upon the Question, ordered to be engrossed.

Mr. Doctor Awberry and Mr. Doctor Barkeley did bring from the Lords two Bills;
the one for the restitution in blood of the Lord Thomas Howard, and the other
for the paving of Newarke upon Trent; with request from the Earl of Rutland
unto Mr. Speaker for expediting of the same Bill for the paving of Newark upon
Trent.

The Bill against Jesuits, Seminary Priests, and such like disobedient
Subjects, having upon the third reading passed the House, was sent up to the
Lords by Mr. Treasurer, Mr. Chancellor of the Exchequer and others.

The Bill upon the reading passed the House with little or no Argument, except
it were from one Doctor Parry, who in very violent terms spoke directly against
the whole Bill, affirming it to favor of Treasons, to be full of blood,
danger, despair and terror or dread to the English Subjects of this Realm, our
Brethren, Uncles and Kinsfolks, and also full of Confiscations, but unto whom?
Not, said he, to her Majesty, (which he wished they were) and said, he did not
think the contrary, but that zeal would cause the Bill to have passage both in
this House and with the Lords, but yet he hoped when it should come into her
Highnesses most merciful hands, that it would stay and rest there; until which
time (he said) he would reserve his reasons of his negative voice against the
Bill, then to be discovered by him only unto her Majesty. Whereupon Dr. Parry,
by Order of this House, was appointed to be sequestered into the outer Room of
this House into the Sergeants Custody, and without conferring with any, whiles
the matter now in question concerning his former Speeches against the Bill last
passed is in debating or arguing, until he shall be called in again. And
afterward being brought to the Bar, and there kneeling upon his knee, he was
told by Mr. Speaker in the name of the whole House, that if he thought good,
the House was contented to hear him what reasons he could yield for himself in
maintenance of his said Speeches against the aforesaid Bill to the better
satisfaction of this House, or what other matter of excuse he could allege
touching his former contempt uttered in the presence of this said House in very
unseemly manner, and in unfitting words, in that he did speak so directly,
reproachfully and absolutely against a Bill first traveled in and publicly
allowed of in the House, and then considerately and maturely perused and
digested by so great and grave a Committee selected and framed out of the
ablest Members of this House, who having further diligently and dutifully
labored therein, and brought it again into the House with one unanimous
approbation of it as of a good and necessary Bill; and that, lastly, it had
been also so approved of this day, and upon the third reading had passed the
House; and yet that he the said Doctor Parry had termed the said Bill to be a
Bill savouring of Treasons, and to be full of Confiscations, blood, danger,
despair and terror to the Subjects of this Realm; and withal that he would
well prove and justify the same by good reasons which nevertheless (he said)
he would not deliver to this House; but would reserve them only to be revealed
to her Majesty. Whereupon being further demanded, as aforesaid, what further
excuse or defense he could make for himself, he answered, that what he had said
(and bound it with a protestation) was without any intent of offense toward
the Queens Majesty (to whom he owed all dutiful obedience) or toward the
House; and made repetition of his said former words, and still avowed the
justification of the same. And so entering into some declaration of his own
estate tending altogether to his own credit, as of his sundry good Services
done to her Majesty, his reputation with persons of good sort, and other such
like Speeches in his own commendation, concluded in the end, that as before
when he spoke to the Bill, and gave his negative voice to the same, he then
concealed his said reasons from this House, so he would now conceal the same
still. Whereupon being sequestered again, it was resolved, That for that he did
speak to the Bill and gave his negative voice so directly and undutifully, and
in contempt of this House would not show his reasons for the same, being merely
against the ancient Orders and usage of this High Court, and not for that he
said he would show them only to be discovered to her Majesty, it was resolved,
That he should be committed to the Sergeants Ward till the matter shall be
further considered of by this House, the day being then very far spent. Vide
concerning this matter on Friday the 18th day, Wednesday the 23. day, and on
Thursday the 24th day of this instant December following.

On Friday the 18th day of December the Bill touching Appeals out of the
Ecclesiastical Court, was upon the second reading committed unto Mr. Treasurer,
the Master of the Requests, Mr. Doctor Hammond, Mr. Sands, Mr. Cromwell, Mr.
Doctor Cousin, Mr. Barker, Mr. Flower, Mr. Wolley, Mr. Beale; and the Bill was
delivered to Mr. Treasurer, who with the rest was appointed to meet this
Afternoon in the Exchequer-Chamber.

The Bill also for the restitution in blood of the Lord Thomas Howard had this
day its first reading; and the Bill for confirmation of Letters Patents made
unto Walter Rawleigh Esquire, was upon the third reading after many Arguments
and a Proviso added unto it, passed upon the Question.

Sir Christopher Hatton Knight, her Majesty's Vicechamberlain, declared unto
the House, That her Majesty having heard of the great and dutiful care of this
House in devising and providing of Laws for the preservation of her Majesty's
Royal Person, does accept the same in most humble, loving and thankful part;
and having thereupon inquired of the manner and parts of the same Laws, does
both very well like and allow of the same, and is also of her own most loving
and merciful disposition pleased that all persons barred or disabled by force
of the same Law, as it now is, shall be first called to answer and be heard
what they can say in excuse of themselves, before they shall be prejudiced in
their pretended Right or Titles. And also that her Majesty will take away the
Proviso in that Law, by which any of these Subjects which have taken the Oath
of Association, might any way hereafter by any possibility be touched in
conscience. And then made a motion that a convenient Committee of the wise and
grave Members of this House might be appointed to consider of the said former
Bill already engrossed, and so then to devise another to be conceived according
to the purport of her Majesty's Pleasure in that behalf, so as before is
signified. Whereupon it was then resolved, that all the former Committees, and
Mr George Ireland now added unto them, should meet together for that purpose
this Afternoon in the Exchequer Chamber.

And further the said Mr Vice-Chamberlain also declared unto this House, that
her Majesty having been made privy unto the mis-behaviour of Mr. Doctor Parry
yesterday showed in this House, and of the order of this House taken therein
with him for the same, her Highness does not only deem him to have given just
cause of offense unto this House in the same his misdemeanor, but also does
very well allow of the grave discretion of this House in forbearing for the
time to use any sharp course of Correction against him for his said offense, in
respect that he had said he reserved his reasons to be imparted to her Majesty
only; which as he had discovered unto some of the Lords of the Council by her
Highnesses appointment, and that partly to the satisfaction of her Majesty, so
her Highness did think that upon his humble submission unto this House with a
dutiful acknowledgment of his fault, this House would the rather dispense with
him therein.

Which done, Mr Doctor Parry was called to the Bar, where humbly acknowledging
his fault upon his knees, it was told him by Mr Speaker, after he had put him
in remembrance of the manner of his offense, that it might be the House would
nevertheless deal favorably with him, if they should see such cause upon his
unfeigned and earnest confession and repentance of his fault, and his humble
submission unto the House with good and dutiful endeavor of amendment
hereafter. And then kneeling upon his knee in very humble manner affirmed
directly, that he had very undutifully misbehaved himself, and had rashly and
unadvisedly uttered those Speeches he used, and was with all his heart very
sorry for it; alleging withal that he had never been of this House before this
Session, and so could not so well know the Orders of the House as he should do,
and that he would not willingly offend this House nor any man in it, and so
humbly prayed their good favor toward him.

Whereupon being sequestered again out of the House, it was after some Arguments
and Speeches had, resolved, That upon that his said acknowledgment of his fault
and his humble submission, he should be received into this House again as a
Member of the same, and take his place as before, so that he would afterward
use himself in good sort as he ought to do. And thereupon being called again to
the Bar, and there kneeling upon his knee, and directly reiterating his former
confession of his fault, and also his former humble submission, protesting
further that if ever after he should give any just cause of offense again to
this House or any Member thereof, he would then never after crave any more
favor of them.

Whereupon Mr Speaker declared the good pleasure of this House in remitting his
said offense by receiving him again into them, with condition and hope of his
better behavior hereafter. Which as he prosessed and promised to perform
accordingly, so did he in very good dutiful sort give most humble thanks unto
God and to her Majesty, and also unto this whole House and every Member of the
same, for their good, courteous and favorable dealing toward him in this
behalf. Vide February the 18th and February the 24th postea.

On Saturday the 19th day of December four Bills of no great moment had each of
them one reading; of which the second being the Bill touching the keeping of
the great Sessions of the Peace and the Assizes for the Town of Caernarvon to
be kept in the Town of Caernarvon, was read the third time. And the third being
the By for restitution in blood of the Lord Thomas Howard had this day its
second and third reading. And three Bills thereupon were at this time sent up
to the Lords by Mr Treasurer and others, which had not been delivered, because
their Lordships were risen and departed before their coming. Vide on December
the 14th last past, when two of them had been sent up.

A Motion was made in the House, that their Lordships might be sent unto, to
know the reason of the new manner of indorsing their Bills. For whereas in
former times all Bills sent down from the Lords to the House of Commons were
ever indorsed in the lower part of the same Bills; contrary to the said
accustomed use, the Bills which were lately sent down from their Lordships,
were indorsed in the upper or higher part of the same, which the said Mr
Treasurer and the rest at this time sent up to the Upper House with the
aforesaid three Bills, did accordingly impart to their Lordships. Vide plus de
ista materia on Monday the 21th day of this instant December following.

The Bill for Hue and Cry was read the second time during the absence of Mr
Treasurer and the rest, as aforesaid.

The reading of which Bill being ended, Mr Treasurer and the residue returning
from the Lords, brought word, that he the said Mr Treasurer imparted unto their
Lordships the Request of this House for Conference with their Lordships both
for the Bill touching the Sabbath ( de qua Billa vide on Wednesday the 17th day
of March ensuing) and also for the Petitions of the griefs of this House; unto
both which the Lords said, they would by and by send their Answer. Vide
concerning Petitions on Thursday the 25th day of February ensuing.

Mr Vice-Chamberlain declared unto this House, That her Majesty graciously
considering the great pains and careful travel of this House in the Service and
Affairs of the Realm, has determined upon Monday next to adjourn the Court of
Parliament until some other convenient time after Christmas, that such
Gentlemen and other Members of this House may the more conveniently repair home
to their houses in the mean time for their better ease and recreation. And so
moved further, That (as before that time of Adjournment being upon Monday next)
there can nothing of great moment possibly be prepared to passing; so he wished
that the same short time may be employed in the speeding of such Bills as are
nearest to the passing; and mentioned some of those which came unto us from the
Lords, and that the residue may rest in the same case of furtherance in the
mean time as now they are in.

Mr Sergeant Gaudy and Mr Doctor Ford did bring from the Lords again the Bill
for the restitution in blood of the Lord Thomas Howard amended in the
indorsement, viz. indorsed under the Bill, and the former indorsement above
razed out.

The Bill for restitution in blood of the Lord Thomas Howard was sent up to the
Lords by Mr Treasurer and others; and also the Bill for paving of the Town of
Newark upon Trent, the Bill for the Town of Caernarvon, and the Bill for
fraudulent Conveyances (all which came from their Lordships before not rightly
indorsed) were sent up to their Lordships to have the same indorsements
reformed and amended, as that in the Bill for the Lord Thomas Howard was before
amended.

The Bill for the true answering of the Debts of Edward Fisher was read the
first time. Vide on Monday the 22. day of February ensuing.

Mr Richard Lewkenor (one of the Committees in the Bill to avoid partial Juries
and Trials) in the name of himself and the residue of the same Committees
brought in the old Bill, and also a new Bill, praying that the same new Bill
may be read accordingly.

The Bill for reformation of Errors in Fines and Common Recoveries in the
twelve Shires of Wales, was upon the second reading committed unto Mr
Solicitor, Sir William Herbert, Mr Penruddock, Mr David Williams and others,
who were appointed to meet upon Thursday next in the Afternoon in
Lincolns-Inn-Hall. After which the Bill for continuance and explanation of
diverse Statutes, had its second reading.

Mr Sergeant Gaudy and Mr Doctor Barkeley did bring from the Lords the Bill
touching the Sabhath day, with Message from their Lordships, that they can find
by no Precedent that they can now add any thing at all (upon our Conference) to
their former Additions inserted into the said Bill, and do think withal, that
those things we desire are already provided for in their said Additions as the
Bill now stands; and do therefore pray, that being so good a Bill as this is,
they will have care it do not miscarry; and so departed. Whereupon it was then
thought good to reserve the Bill, in state as it was, till it may be further
considered of by view of the Precedents of this House in like cases. And Sir
Thomas Heneage, Mr Solicitor, Mr Recorder, Sir William Moore, Mr Cromwell, and
Mr Sands were appointed to search the Precedents of this House for that
purpose in the mean time of the next sitting of this Court after the said
Adjournment. Vide plus de ista materia on Wednesday the 17th day of February
ensuing.

The Bill for the preservation of Grain was ordered upon the Question to be
discontinued; and diverse others of no great moment, as touching Ecclesrastical
Livings, Maintenance of the Navy, and the like, were continued until the end of
this Adjournment, which was now drawing on, on Monday next, being the 21th day
of December. And the Committees appointed for the continuance of them were
these following, viz. Mr Vice-Chamberlain, Mr Chancellor of the Exchequer, Sir
Thomas Heneage, Sir Thomas Cecil, Sir William Moore, Mr Solicitor, Mr
Lieutenant of the Tower, Sir Richard Knightley, Mr Francis Hastings, Sir
Nicholas Woodroofe, Mr Dannet, Mr Haymond, Mr Cromwell, Mr Owen, Mr Rawleigh,
Mr Grafton, Sir Francis Drake, Mr Doctor Hammond, Mr Wolley, Mr Grice, Sir
Henry Nevill, Sir John Peter, Sir William Drury, Sir Robert Conestable, Sir
Robert Germin, Sir Henry Cock, who were appointed to meet on Thursday after
Christmas Day in the Afternoon at two of the Clock at Ely place.

After Mr Vice Chamberlain's late former Speeches delivered unto this House of
her Majesty's good and grateful acceptance of the earnest and dutiful care and
proceedings of this House in providing for the safety of her most Royal Person,
and of her Highnesses said most loving and favorable regard of adjourning this
Court of Parliament for some such convenient time, as during which the greater
part of the Members of this House may at their pleasure repair home to their
dwellings, as well for their better recreations and ease, as for their further
dealing in their own private affairs; it was moved by Mr. Speaker, That some
due form or course of yielding unto her Majesty most humble and dutiful thanks
for the same her said Highnesses most honorable and gracious acceptance and
consideration, in the name and behalf of this whole House, in most loyal,
humble, dutiful and obedient manner, may be considered of and devised.
Whereupon after a few Speeches resolved and prayed, that the same should and
might be done most fitly and conveniently by those honorable Personages
Members of this House, which are of her Majesty's most honorable Privy
Council, who being then present, did very willingly and honorably undertake to
execute the same most faithfully and effectually.

On Monday the 21th day of December three Bills of no great moment had each of
them one reading; of which the first being the Bill for the true payment of the
Debts of Edward Fisher Esquire, was after the second reading committed to the
former Committees, (who were appointed on Tuesday the 15th day of this instant
December foregoing) and Mr. Recorder was added unto them. Vide February the
22th Monday pojlea.

The second of the said Bills being for Hue and Cry, was brought in again by
the Committees somewhat amended; and the amendments being twice read, the Bill
with the said amendments was ordered to be engrossed, and the third Bill
touching Under-Sheriffs had its first reading.

Mr. Solicitor and Mr. Recorder were added to the former Committees for Sir
Thomas Lucy's Bill.

Sir George Carry, one of the Committees in the Bill for the good Government of
the City of Westminster, in the name of himself and the residue of the
Committees, brought in the Bill with some amendments.

Mr. Treasurer declared that he and the residue of this House which are of her
Majesty's Privy Council, did yesterday according to the charge of this House
laid upon them recommend unto her Majesty the most humble, dutiful and loyal
thanks of this House for her Highnesses good nion conceived of this whole
House, and her loving and thankful acceptance of their Service; which as (he
said) her Majesty did take in most loving and good part, so did he refer her
Highness's further Answer therein to the report of Mr Vice-Chamberlain, being
charged by her Majesty to deliver the same Speeches unto this House from her
Highness.

Whereupon Sir Christopher Hatton Knight her Majesty's Vice-Chamberlain
standing up did very eloquently and very earnestly set forth her Majesty's most
Princely, gracious and kind acceptance of the humble and most dutiful
thankfulness of this House so presented unto her Highness, to her right great
and high satisfaction, joy and comfort; and declared withal that her Highness
did for the same give most hearty and loving thanks unto this whole House, yea
and that in redoubling to them their thanks ten thousand thousand fold; and so
further very excellently, amply and aptly showed both the ready, careful and
obedient affections of this whole House to the dutiful service of her Majesty,
and also on the other side her Highness incomparable Princely account and
regard of all such loyal, loving and faithful Subjects; and concluded, that her
Majesty's pleasure was, that this House should well know, that in the
consideration of the free course of the Gospel of Jesus Christ amongst us, our
long continued Peace and plenty of Gods good Blessings and Benefits bestowed
upon us under the Ministry of her Highness, her Majesty does most sincerely
ascribe all the same only and wholly to the great goodness and mercy of
Almighty God, attributing the cause of these good effects (next under Gods
Providence) to the good demerits of so religious, godly and obedient Subjects,
of whom how well and kindly her Majesty does think and conceive, her Highness
had much rather have told them in her own most Royal Person, than have
signified it unto them by any other, if it might have conveniently been so
done, as upon the opportunity of a Prorogation or Dissolution of this Court.
And further declared, that her Majesty having regard to the great charges and
expenses of their attendance in the service of this great Council of the Realm,
wishes them at their next meeting again to bestow the time as much as may be
in public and general Actions fittest for the Commonweal of this Realm, and
that with as little loss of time as may be. And withal, that those of this
House toward the Law would join together to do their best endeavors to devise
some good Laws to abridge and cut off the long tedious courses and extreme
chargeable Circuits and superfluous delays of Suits in Law; not doubting but
that in so doing God will bless their Wealth and good Estates, both in
themselves and in their Posterity. And so having, as he thought, dutifully
imparted unto them the sum and substance of her Majesty's Pleasure and Message
committed unto this House by him, though not in such effectual and singular
kind terms and forms as her Princely Wisdom delivered the same unto him; and so
referring himself to the residue of this House of her Majesty's Council then
and now present to be put in remembrance by them, if he have omitted any part
thereof, and they affirming he had not, he ended his Speech.

Mr Doctor Ford and Mr Doctor Barkeley did bring from the Lords the Bills
amended in the indorsement, which before were sent from this House unto them
for that purpose, after they had been first sent unto this House from their
Lordships.

Nota, That on Saturday the 19th day of December last past the House of Commons
taking exceptions at this last mentioned matter about indorsing of Bills in the
upper parts of them, whereas it ought to be done at the nether and lower part,
the Lords did very respectively both then and now take away their said
grievance by the alteration of the indorsements aforesaid according to the
usual and ancient form.

Mr. Treasurer touching the Petitions and grievances of this House drawn into
some certainty of convenient particularities to be then afterward moved by
them unto the Lords by way of Petition, and request unto their Lordships in the
name of this whole House to join with this House in the considerations of the
said Petitions and grievances, and to exhibit unto her Majesty the humble suit
of this House in that behalf, showed, that he and the residue of the Committees
according to the charge of this House unto them, have sundry times met together
and set down in writing such particular Contents of the said Petitions and
griefs as they resolved to impart unto the Lords. And further, that having
moved their Lordships already in the matter, they have received Answer, that
when their Lordships have further considered and conferred thereof amongst
themselves, they will then send for the said Committees of this House to
receive their Lordships Answer therein. Vide concerning this business on
Thursday the 25th day of February ensuing.

Word was brought to Mr. Speaker by the Sergeant of this House, that one at the
Door was come from the higher House to require that the Committees of this
House do presently repair unto their Lordships; which done and signified unto
this House by Mr. Speaker, the said Committees went up presently unto their
Lordships accordingly.

Mr. Solicitor touching the returns of some Knights returned into this present
Parliament, and for some doubts and questions arising in this House upon the
same, and afterward by this House referred unto him and Mr Recorder of London
for making of search of the returns of the Writs and Indentures thereof,
showed, that they can only find the cause of this question to arise upon the
Election of Mr. Bevill and Mr. Darrington to be Knights for the County of
Huntington, which they are the rather confident of, because none others
attended them or came unto them in this matter but only the said Elected
Knights, who, as those also who opposed them, brought their Council on both
sides, and were fully heard what they could say: After which also Mr. Recorder
and himself desiring fully to inquire into this matter, had conferred and
devised therein with the Clerk of the Crown-Office in the Chancery, and
comparing those Records together with some of the Statutes Ordained in those
Cases, they do find such difference in them tending to matter of effect, and to
be Answered by the Sheriff if there be cause, and not for any matter in their
opinions for this House to deal with, whereby to cassate or make void the said
Election as they take it. And yet because that rests now chiefly upon matter
of Precedents to see further how this House may decide this cause, he declared,
that Mr. Recorder and he will make further search of the Precedents in like
Cases with the Clerk of the higher House for that purpose, and then further to
advertise this House as cause shall require. Vide concerning this matter on
Tuesday the 8th day, and on Saturday the 12th day of this instant December
foregoing.

The Bill for the preservation of the Haven of Plymouth, was upon the second
reading committed unto Sir Francis Drake, Mr Wroth, Mr. Edgcombe and others,
who were appointed to meet the third day of the next sitting of this Court in
Lincoln's Inn Hall in the Afternoon of the same day.

A new Bill that Parsonages impropriate may be disposed to godly and charitable
uses, was read the first time.

Mr. Solicitor touching the excessive number of penal Laws in force, very
intolerable to the Subjects, neither possible to be kept, and yet not any put
in Execution, as that for Apparel in King H. 8. his time and such like, moved
that a Committee be had of some selected Members of this House learned in the
Laws to make a view of the same Laws against the next sitting of this Court
after the Adjournment of the same, to the end that this House may then
thereupon proceed to some course of diminishing the great number of the same,
as upon due considerations in that behalf to be had shall be further thought
meet and convenient. And thereupon were named and chosen for that purpose all
the Privy Council being of this House, Mr. Solicitor, Mr. Recorder of London,
Mr. Morris, Mr. Sands, Mr. Attorney of the Wards and others, who were
appointed to meet on Wednesday before the next Term in the Afternoon in
Lincoln's Inn Hall.

The Bill for paving of the Town of Newark upon Trent, after the third reading,
passed upon the question.

Mr. Treasurer and the residue of the Committees returning from the Lords he
declared, that they have received some Answer from their Lordships upon the
Conference, and referred the report thereof to Mr. Chancellor of the Exchequer,
as unto whom the same was by their said Lordships appointed to be delivered
over unto this House. Whereupon

Mr. Chancellor of the Exchequer declared, that their Lordships had caused the
said Notes in writing to be read in the House, and their Lordships found the
said grievances to concern but some particular Countries and not the whole
Realm, to wit, the Countries only of Warwick, Lincoln and Essex, and therefore
might be considered to be reformed in time by some other convenient means: But
being Answered by the Committees of this House, that albeit there were
Petitions in writing exhibited but for these three Counties, yet by Motions and
Speeches in the House it well appeared to be the grief of the whole Realm.
Which their Lordships having understood did feelingly express how sensible they
were of it, and how truly they did join with us of the House of Commons in
wishing the reformation thereof, and were now ready to aid us with their best
assistances therein as erst in the two last former Sessions of Parliament they
had done, at both which times her Majesty had thereupon Commanded some of the
Lords of the Clergy to take care and consideration of the same causes, wherein
as little or nothing has been done for case or redress of the same, so their
Lordships of the Upper House (not minding to impute the fault thereof to any,
and yet remembering withal that their Lordships were present when her Majesty by
the Mouth of the Lord Chancellor did give Commandment unto Mr. Speaker not to
deal in the House of Commons with matters concerning Religion or the Church
without her Highness pleasure first known, and therefore do also take the same
Commandment to extend as well to their Lordships as to this House) have
resolved that those of the Lords which are of her Majesty's Privy Council do
first move her Highness to know her Majesty's Pleasure therein before they
proceed any further in the matter.

The Lord Chief Justice of England, the Lord Chief Justice of the Common Pleas,
the Lord Chief Baron of the Exchequer and the Master of the Rolls being sent
down from the Lords to the House of Commons and admitted into the said House,
the said Lord Chief Justice having in his hand a Commission under the Great
Seal of England declared unto Mr. Speaker that her Majesty having given
Authority by Commission under the Great Seal of England unto diverse of my Lords
the Bishops, Earls and Barons of the Upper House to Adjourn this Parliament
unto the 4th day of February next coming, the said Lords Commissioners have
Adjourned the same in the Upper House, and their Lordships have thereupon also
sent them to this House to signify the same Adjournment over unto this House,
that the Knights, Citizens and Burgesses and Barons of this House may likewise
take notice of the same Adjournment accordingly. Which thing was also after
their departure out of this House declared unto this House by Mr. Speaker. And
so thereupon this Court by Warrant and in sorm aforesaid, was adjourned unto
the said 4th day of February next coming.

Which done, Mr Vice-Chamberlain standing up and putting the House in
remembrance of her Majesty's most Princely and loving kindnesses signified unto
this House in the former Messages and Declarations of her Highnesses thankful
acceptations of the dutiful cares and travails of this House in the Service of
her Majesty and the Realm, moved the House, that besides the rendering of our
most humble and Loyal thanks unto her Highness, we do, being assembled,
altogether join our hearts and minds together in most humble and earnest prayer
unto Almighty God for the long continuance of the most prosperous preservation
of her Majesty, with most due and thankful acknowledgment of his infinite
benefits and blessings poured upon this whole Realm through the mediation of
her Highnesses Ministry unde him. And he said, he had a Paper in writing in his
hand devised and set down by an honest, godly and learned man, and which,
albeit it was not very well written, yet he would willingly read it as well as
he could, if it pleased them to follow and say after him, as he should begin
and say before them. Which being assented unto most willingly of all the whole
House, and every one kneeling upon his knees the said Mr Vice-Chamberlain begun
the said prayer. Which being ended, every one departed away for that time,
until the said day of Adjournment.

Nota, That the aforesaid Commission did bear date this present 21th day of
December, and that this Parliament was adjourned by it from the said day unto
the 4th day of February ensuing, which was for the space of forty four days; at
the end of which said days either House met again according to their usual and
accustomed manner as follows, ( viz.)

On Thursday the 4th day of February (to which day the Parliament had been on
Monday the 21th day of December foregoing last adjourned) either House
assembled together without all manner of Pomp or Solemnity, as at other
ordinary and usual times, and so fell to the reading of such Bills, and
treating of such other businesses as did remain unfinished upon their last
Adjournment.

The first work which the House of Commons entered upon this morning after
Prayers, was the reading of some Bills not yet passed in their last Meeting,
being four in number, whereof the last being the Bill for following of Hue and
Cry, was upon the third reading committed unto Sir Henry Cock, Mr Morris, Mr
Wroth, Mr Sands, Mr Conisby, and others; and the Bill was delivered to Mr
Sands, but neither the place or time of their meeting are set down.

On Friday the 5th day of February the Bill for confirmation of her Majesty's
Letters Patents granted to the Queens College in Oxford was twice read, and
thereupon committed unto Mr Sands, Mr Mills, Mr Wade, and others, (and the
Bill was delivered to Mr Sands) who were appointed to meet to morrow in the
Afternoon in the Middle Temple Hall.

After which four other Bills of no great moment had each of them one reading;
of which the last being the Bill for explanation of the Statute lately made for
the maintenance of Rochesier Bridge, was upon the second reading committed unto
Sir Philip Sidney, Mr Wotton, Mr Diggs, and others and the Bill was delivered
to Mr Wotton, who with the rest was appointed to meet to morrow in the
Afternoon in the Middle Temple Hall.

It was agreed upon the Motion of Mr Speaker that the House should be called to
morrow morning.

On Saturday the 6th day of February two Bills after the third reading passed
upon the Question; of which the last was the Bill that Parsonages impropriate
may be disposed to godly and charitable uses.

The Bill for the Hue and Cry was delivered in again by the Committees with an
addition of amendment to the same in paper; which addition being twice read,
was ordered to be engrossed and added to the same Bill.

On Monday the 8th day of February three Bills of no great moment had each of
them one reading; of which the last being the Bill to provide remedy against
fraudulent Conveyances was after the second reading put to the Question,
whether it should be committed or no; and the Voices for the No appearing upon
the division of the House to be 156, and the Voices for the Yea to be but 140,
was ordered not to be committed.

The addition to the Bill for Hue and Cry being engrossed, was read the third
time, whereupon it passed upon the Question.

On Tuesday the 9th day of February the Committees in the Bill for the Staple
Fish were appointed to meet upon Friday next in the Middle Temple Hall.

The Committees also in the Bill for Shoo-makers were appointed to meet on
Saturday next at the Guild Hall in the Afternoon, and Mr Wotton and Mr Harries
of Lincoln's Inn were added unto them.

Four Bills of no great moment had each of them one reading; of which the last
being the Bill for repairing and maintenance of Sea-banks and Sea-works on the
Seacoasts in the County of Norfolk was upon the second reading committed unto
Sir William Dymock, Sir Robert Germin, Sir Drew Drury and others, and the Bill
was delivered to Sir Drew Drury, who with the rest was appointed to meet upon
Friday next in the Afternoon in the Middle Temple Hall.

The Bill for following of Hue and Cry, the Bill for Swearing of
Under-Sheriffs, and the Bill that Parsonages impropriate may be disposed to
godly and charitable uses, were sent up to the Lords by Mr. Treasurer, Mr.
Vice-Chamberlain and others.

Mr. Lewkenor, one of the Committees for Rochester Bridge and the Glass-houses,
brought in the Bill touching Rochester Bridge with some amendments; which Bill
being then read again, and the amendments being twice read, it was ordered to
be engrossed.

A new Bill also concerning Glass-houses was delivered in by the said Mr.
Lewkenor with some alterations and amendments.

Another Bill also of no great moment concerning the dying of Woollen Clothes,
was upon the second reading committed.

On Wednesday the 10th day of February six Bills of no great moment had each of
them one reading; of which the last being the Bill touching Collectors of
Issues by Juries, was read the third time, and upon the Question was committed
to the present consideration for a Proviso unto Mr Chancellor of the Exchequer,
Mr Cromwell, Mr Sands, and others, to confer presently in the Treasury-Chamber.

Upon a Motion this day made touching the opinion of this House for Privilege
in a case of Subpoena out of the Chancery, served upon Richard Cook Esquire a
Member of this House, returned a Burgess to this present Parliament for the
Borough of Limmington in the County of Southampton, It was ordered, That Mr
Recorder of London, Mr Sands and Mr Cromwell attended on by the Sergeant of
this House, shall presently repair in the Name of the whole House into the Body
of the Court of Chancery, and there to signify unto the Lord Chancellor and
the Master of the Rolls, that by the ancient Liberties of this House the
Members of the same are privileged from being served with Subpoena's; and to
require withal not only the discharge of the said Mr Cook his appearance before
them upon the said Subpoena, but also to desire that from henceforth upon like
cases the said Lord Chancellor and Master of the Rolls will allow the like
Privileges for other Members of this House to be signified unto them in
writing under Mr Speakers hand. Vide de ista materia in die sequenti.

It was Ordered, That Mr Anthony Kirle of the Middle Temple shall be warned by
the Sergeant of this House to morrow in the Afternoon (sitting the Court) to
answer unto such matters as shall be then and there objected against him by
this House on the behalf of Alban Stepneth Esquire, being a Member of this
House, returned a Burgess into the same for the Town of Haverford West. Vide
plus de ista materia on the day next ensuing.

On Thursday the 11th day of February the Bill against partial Juries and
Trials, was upon the second reading ordered to be engrossed.

Mr Recorder of London, Mr Cromwell, and Mr Sands being returned from the
Chancery, did declare unto the House, that they have been in Chancery within
the Court, and there were very gently and courteously heard in the delivery of
the Message and charge of this House committed unto them, and were answered by
the Lord Chancellor, that he thought this House had no such liberty of
Privilege for Subpoena's, as they pretended, neither would he allow of any
Precedents of this House committed unto them formerly used in that behalf,
unless this House could also prove the same to have been likewise thereupon
allowed and ratified also by the Precedents in the said Court of Chancery. And
after some other Speeches and Arguments, the said Mr. Sands and Mr. Cromwell
were further appointed to search the Precedents of this House against to
morrow, that thereupon this House may enter into further Consideration of the
state of the Liberties and Privileges of this House accordingly. Vide plus
concerning this matter amongst the passages of the day foregoing.

Three Bills of no great moment had each of them one reading; of which the last
being the Bill to avoid partial Trials and Juries, was read the third time, and
passed upon the Question.

Mr. Roger Erith Esquire, one of the Burgesses for the Borough of Wilton in the
County of Wilts being sick, was upon a Motion made to this House, licensed to
depart into the Country for the better recovery of his health.

Upon a Motion made by Mr. Recorder, that those of this House toward the Law,
being the most part of them at the Bars in her Majesty's Courts attending their
Clients Causes, and neglecting the Service of this House, be called by the
Sergeant to repair unto this House presently, and to give their attendance in
the service of the same, It was Ordered, That the Sergeant of this House do
forthwith repair unto all the said Courts, and there give notice and charge
from this House, that all those of this House that are in any the same Courts,
or at any of the Bars of the same Courts, shall presently make their repair
unto this House, and give their attendance here. And the said Sergeant being
sent shortly after, many of them came into this House upon the said Commandment
accordingly. After which said Motion the Bill touching Collectors of Issues
lost by Juries, was passed upon the Question, without allowance of any Proviso
from the Clerks of the Extracts in the Exchequer.

Upon a Motion made by Sir William Herbert, that Mr. Recorder of London who
erst made a Motion to this House, That those of the Law being Members of this
House, and then attending at the Bars in the Courts in the Hall, might be sent
for to give their attendance here in this House, being now since their coming
in gone out of the House himself, and as he was informed, was presently
pleading at the Common Pleas Bar, to the great abuse of this whole House, might
be forthwith sent for by the Sergeant to answer his said contempt; It was
Ordered, That the Sergeant of this House do forthwith go to the said Common
Pleas Bar, and charge the said Mr. Recorder to make his present repair unto
this House for his attendance, but not to answer to any contempt.

The Bill touching the Water-Bailiff was read the first time.

Five other Bills of no great moment had each of them their last reading, and
were sent up to the Lords by Mr. Treasurer and others; of which the last was
the Bill of Explanation and Addition unto the former Statute for maintenance of
Rothester Bridge.

Mr. Anthony Kirle was brought to the Bar by the Sergeant of this House, and
charged by Mr Speaker in the Name of this whole House with a Contempt to this
House, for that he had served Alban Stepneth Esquire, being a Member of this
House (returned into the same a Burgess for the Town of Haverford West) with a
Subpoena out of the Star Chamber in the Parliament time, and within the Palace
of Westminster, as the said Mr. Stepneth was coming to this House to give his
attendance there, and further afterward procucured an Attachment out of the
said Court against him, to the great hinderance and impediment of the said Mr.
Stepneth his service and attendance in this House, and also to his great cost
and charge. To which he answered, True it was he served a Subpoena upon the
said Mr. Stepneth in a Cause of Suit, not then knowing him to be a Member of
this House, and afterward understanding that the said Mr. Stepneth made
default of his appearance upon the said Subpoena, and that four or five days
after the return of the Writ he made an Affidavit in the said Court of the
serving of the said Subpoena, and so obtained an Attachment against the said
Mr. Stepneth; at which time he was told by one of the Attorneys of that Court,
that the said Mr. Stepneth was a Member of this House; alleging that before
that time he knew him not to be of this House, and did then also forbear to
cause the said Attachment to be executed upon him: In doing whereof if he have
given cause of offense or contempt unto this House, as he had done the same
ignorantly, so did he (he said) humbly submit himself therein to the good and
favorable Consideration of this House. Which done, he was sequestered out of
the House.

And then after sundry Motions had in the same matter, and by some of which it
appeared that the said Mr. Stepneth had with payment of Money to Mr. Kirle's
Attorney redeemed his liberty from being arrested by the said Attachment; It
was at last resolved by this House, That the said Mr. Kirle had committed a
great contempt to this whole House, and the Liberties and Privileges of the
same, both in serving the said Subpoena upon the said Mr. Stepneth, and also in
procuring the said Attachment against him, and in all the residue of the parts
of the said Suit from the time of serving the said Subpoena thitherto. And
thereupon ordered and adjudged by this House, That the said Anthony Kirle shall
for his said contempt be committed Prisoner to the Sergeants Ward and Custody,
there to remain during the pleasure of this House, and shall also satisfy and
pay unto the said Mr. Stepneth as well all such his Costs and Charges and
Expenses by him expended in and about the same Suit as shall be set down and
agreed upon by Mr. Morris and Mr. Miles Sands, who were for that purpose
appointed by this House to confer with the said Mr. Stepneth, and to examine
those Charges; as also all other Charges which the said Mr. Stepneth has been
at, or defrayed unto the said Sergeant in or about the arresting which should
have been executed upon him by virtue of the foresaid Attachment out of the
said Star Chamber at the Suit of the said Mr. Kirle.

After which the said Mr. Anthony Kirle was brought again to the Bar, and there
kneeling upon his knees, was asked by Mr. Speaker, whether he had received of
Mr. Stepneth any Money for the Charges of the said Attachment? He answered he
had not, but his Attorney had. And being asked, whether his Attorney did
receive it to his use or no? He said his Attorney did allow it to him in the
payment for the Copy of Mr. Stepneth his Answer. And then Mr. Speaker
pronounced unto him the said Judgment in form aforesaid in the Name of this
whole House. After the pronouncing whereof he humbly besought this House of
their favorable goodness to grant him liberty to follow some Causes of his
own, and also some other of his Clients; but it was denied him, and so he was
had away by the Sergeant. And after his departure upon some motions, that
Consideration might be had of his Clients Causes, the Term now continuing but
one day more, it was referred to Mr. Speaker's liberty to let him follow his
own Causes and his Clients with his Keeper attending upon him. Vide principium
hujus materiae die praecedente, and vide consimilem casum in Parliamento de
Anno 31 Reginae Eliz. on Friday the 12th day of February.

On Friday the 12th day of February five Bills were had in agitation in the
House, whereof two concerning the Government of the City of Westminster and the
assurance of Sir Thomas Lucy were brought into the House by the several
Committees of them with Proviso's and Amendments added unto them; which they
did humbly offer to the Consideration of the House; and the other three of no
great moment had two of them one reading apiece, and the third two readings,
which was the Bill for the good Government of the City of Westminster, viz. the
body of the Bill had one reading, and the Amendments two, and then it was
ordered to be engrossed upon the Question.

One of the said three Bills last mentioned to have been read was a new Bill
brought into the House for the true answering of the Debts of Edward Fisher
Esquire; after the first reading whereof upon a Motion made concerning it, it
was Ordered, that the said Edward Fisher should be sent to by the Sergeant of
this House to warn him to be in this House himself upon Monday next, if it
please him to procure himself a Writ for that purpose, or else that his Council
be then there for him to show cause, if he have any, why this House should not
proceed to the expediting and passing of the same. Vide plus de ista materia on
Monday the 15th day of this instant February following.

On Saturday the 13th day of February, the Bill touching the breadth of
Woollen-Cloths was upon the second reading committed unto Mr. Vice-Chamberlain,
Mr. Treasurer, Mr. Chancellor of the Exchequer, Sir Thomas Heneage, Sir John
Peeter and others, and the Bill was delivered to Mr. Treasurer, who with the
rest was appointed to meet on Monday next in the Afternoon in the Parliament
Chamber or Pension Chamber of the Middle Temple.

Mr Recorder of London, Mr Morris and Mr Penruddock, were appointed to hear
and examine the State and manner of the serving of Process upon any the Members
of this House from time to time during this Session as occasion thereof shall
fall out, and after such information and intelligences thereof then further to
impart the same to this House as occasion shall serve for further resolution.

Three Bills of no great moment had each of them one reading; of which the
second being the Bill for Explanation of the Statute of 21 H. 8. touching
Pluralities of Benefices, etc. was upon the second reading committed unto Sir
Drew Drewry, Sir Robert Germin, Sir Richard Knightley, Mr Recorder of London
and others, who were appointed to meet upon Tuesday next in the Afternoon in
the Middle Temple Hall.

A Proviso to the Bill concerning certain assurances of Sir Thomas Lucy and
others, was twice read and Ordered to be engrossed.

Mr Morris, Mr Atkins and Mr Alford, were added to the former Committees to
meet this Afternoon in the Middle Temple Hall to hear Mr Arnold and his Council
touching the said Bill and Proviso.

The Amendments in the Bill against Glass-Houses and Glass-making was twice
read and Ordered to be (with the Bill) engrossed.

On Monday the 15th day of February, Mr William Stoughton offered unto this
House a certain supplication in Parchment of certain abuses in the Ministry
within the County of Leicester, and also a note of certain Articles in Paper
concerning some disorders in the Bishops Ministry; and also Mr Edward Lewkenor
offered another Petition in Parchment touching the abuses in the Ministry in
the behalf of the Inhabitants in the East part of the County of Sussex. All
which by Order of the House were read. And then also was read another like
Petition in Paper for the Inhabitants of the Parish of Holkstone in the County
of Kent, which was before the last Adjournment of this Court offered unto this
House by Mr John Moore; and after sundry Speeches and Motions had touching the
said Petitions, Mr Chancellor of the Exchequer putting the House in mind of the
like Petitions in effect offered unto this House in the sitting before the last
Adjournment, and imparted to the Lords by a Committee of this House, with
humble Suit unto their Lordships to be a mean therein to her Majesty, desired
them that they would now forbear any further to deal with these Petitions,
until this House have first received Answer from the Lords of the said others;
alleging further, that he had very lately put some of their Lordships in
remembrance thereof on the behalf of this House; and that he was Answered, we
should hear from their Lordships to Morrow next touching their Answer of the
same Petitions. Whereupon it was then thought good by this whole House to
expect their Lordships said Answer therein till then accordingly. Vide
concerning Petitions on Thursday the 25th day of February ensuing.

The Committees in the Bills for Actions upon the Case for perfecting of
Assurances, and for Fines and Recoveries in the twelve Shires of Wales, were
appointed to meet to Morrow in the Afternoon in Lincoln's Inn Hall.

Upon a Motion made by Mr Edward Lewkenor, that some of this House may be
appointed to draw a Form of Prayer and Thanksgiving to be used in this House
for the great benefits and blessings of God bestowed upon this whole Realm in
her Majesty, and for the long continuance of the same, especially in this time
of Consultation this day appointed to be had and prosecuted in making of Laws
for the preservation and safety of her Majesty's most Royal Person; It was
agreed, That the said Mr. Lewkenor himself should take such of this House to
him as he should think good, and devise and digest the same form of prayer and
thanksgiving accordingly.

The Master of the Rolls and the Lord Chief Baron did bring word from the
Lords, that their Lordships do desire present Conference with some of this
House in a matter of great importance, and that their Lordships have appointed
of themselves seventeen. Whereupon were Chosen presently thirty four of this
House, viz. Mr Treasurer, Mr Comptroller, Mr Chancellor of the Exchequer, the
Lord Russell, Sir Thomas Heneage, Mr Solicitor, Mr Beale, Mr Wolley, Sir
Robert Germin, Sir John Higham, Mr Doctor James, Sir Richard Knightley, Sir
George Carey, Mr Edward Lewkenor, Sir Henry Cock, Sir William Moore, Mr Edward
Barker, Mr Branker the Master of the Requests, Mr George Greenfield, Sir Edward
Dymock, Mr Skinner, Mr Attorney of the Wards, Sir William Mallory, Mr
Strickland, Mr David Williams, Mr Harris, Mr Henry Barkley, Sir Thomas Shirley,
Mr Robert Bows, Mr Recorder of London, Mr Morris, Mr William Knolles, Mr
Faunshaw, Sir Drew Drury, Mr Oughtred, Mr George Digby, and Mr. Cheek, who
repaired then presently to the Lords accordingly.

Mr. Yelverton being of the Learned Council of one of the Creditors of Edward
Fisher Esquire, and coming into this House for him, and also some of the
Creditors of the said Edward Fisher being likewise present in this House at the
Bar, the Bill had in their presence its second reading; and further Order was
then given that they be here again to Morrow in the Morning at the first
sitting of this Court. Vide concerning this matter on Monday the 22th day of
February ensuing.

Three Bills of no great moment had each of them one reading; of which the last
being the Bill concerning the assurances of Sir Thomas Lucie and others (the
Proviso of it having been once read) had it self the third reading, and passed
upon the question with the foresaid Proviso.

The last former Committees returning from the Lords, Mr. Chancellor of the
Exchequer one of the said Committees declared unto the House, that they
attended the Lords in the Upper House according to the direction of this House
to them in that behalf given, and that they found the Lords not to want many of
that number which was signified unto this House from them; and withal that
there were likewise almost as many of the Committees of this House as were by
this House appointed for that purpose. And that the Lord Treasurer being the
chiefest of the Committees of the Lords, showed unto the said Committees of
this House, that their Lordships of the Upper House being of such quality and
calling as they are known to be, are one Member of the Parliament; And also
that the Knights, Citizens and Burgesses of this House representing the whole
Commons of this Realm are also another Member of the same Parliament, and her
Majesty the Head; And that of these three Estates does consist the whole Body
of the Parliament able to make Laws. And that none of the said two Houses
without the other can in any wise make Laws. And withal, that therefore of
ancient Courtesy and Custom, both the same Houses have used mutual Conference
each with other in matters of doubt happening amongst them from time to time in
making and establishing of Laws, and that yet notwithstanding their Lordships
have heard by Speeches abroad, not out of this House (for they are not to take
knowledge of any thing in this House) that a Bill to provide remedy against
fraudulent Conveyances passed with their Lordships, and lately sent down from
them to this House, was upon a second reading thereof in this House denied to
receive a Committee, whereof their Lordships do greatly marvail and think it
very strange not having known the like course used in this House before,
especially the Bill being so good and necessary for the Commonwealth, and so
specially recommended from their Lordships to this House, both at the first
sending down thereof to this House, and sithence. And being (as their Lordships
are informed) upon the reading thereof the first time nothing spoken unto at
all, and now lately at the second reading thereof argued unto both with the
Bill and against the Bill by sundry on both sides learned in the Laws and of
good account and discretion otherwise, which does greatly import the Bill very
much to deserve Conference without all contradiction. And further declaring
that the said Bill was very well favored and liked of her Majesty, yea in so
much that her Highness used to call it her own Bill, that it was framed and
drawn by her Highness learned Council, very maturely and advisedly digested in
the Upper House with the privity and assistance of the Judges there attending,
considered of also in a Committee amongst their Lordships themselves, and with
very great deliberation passed also with them, and as before specially
recommended unto this House from them; moved in Conclusion, that this House
would have such further consideration for proceeding in some convenient course
in the said Bill by Conference or otherwise, as may in good discretion seem
requisite. And not doubting, but as their Lordships think many of this House
have mistaken and misconceived some part of the said Bill, so their Lordships
upon Conference had (they doubt not) will resolve and satisfy them in the
same. And therefore they desire to be advertised of the Answer of this House
therein as soon as may be conveniently. Vide de ista materia in die sequenti.

On Tuesday the 16th day of February a Motion was made for Mr. Kirles
releasment from his Imprisonment, and thereupon he was brought into this House,
and kneeling upon his Knees, making very humble submission unto this House and
acknowledging his fault, alleging it also to have proceeded of ignorance and
not of wilfulness, and likewise having paid to the Sergeant of this House, to
Mr Stepneth's use, three pound six shillings eight pence, set down by Mr
Morris and Mr Sands according to the former Order of this House, was
discharged paying his Fees, after he had first taken the Oath of Supremacy.
Vide concerning this matter on Wednesday the 10th day, and on Thursday the 11th
day of this instant February foregoing.

Upon a Motion made by Mr Doctor James, that a Member of this House yesterday
having given great offense unto this whole House in charging this whole House
generally with matter of accusation in those things which they do offer and
prefer unto this House only by way of Petitions and Motions for redress of
certain griefs in dutiful and convenient manner, may not so go away with those
undecent forms of Speech, but be further called to Question for the same.

Mr Atkins was thereupon Licensed by the House to interpret his said Speeches
in his place without being Commanded to the Bar, who in very humble sort
declared his intention, was very sorry for his oversight, craved their good
opinions and submitted himself to the good satisfaction of this House.

Five Bills of no great moment had each of them one reading; of which the last
being against Moor-burning, did upon the third reading pass the House, and was
with two more of the said Bills, and two other Bills formerly passed (the one
for confirmation of her Majesty's Letters Patents granted to the Queens
College in Oxford) sent up unto the Lords by Mr. Treasurer and others, with
Commission also given them to attend their Lordships Answer to this House for
the Petitions of this House exhibited unto them.

Mr. Nicholas Hare being one of the Committees in the Bill for repairing and
amending of the Sea-Banks and Sea-Works upon the Seacoasts in the County of
Norfolk brought in the old Bill, and also a new Bill, which new Bill had its
first reading.

Mr. Treasurer and the residue returning from the Lords, Mr. Treasurer
declared, That according to the appointment of this House they had moved the
Lords touching their Lordships Answer to the Petitions of this House, and that
thereupon their Lordships sequestring the Committees of this House in the outer
Chamber, did soon after send them word by the Master of the Rolls and the Lord
Chief Baron, That when their Lordships shall first have received an Answer from
this House unto them touching their Motion yesterday of the Consideration of
this House to be had touching the Bill against fraudulent Conveyances, their
Lordships would then make Answer unto this House of the said Petitions; and
willed further to know the Answer of this House touching the said Bill to
morrow in the morning. Vide concerning this business on Thursday the 25th day
of this instant February following.

After the foresaid Speech of Mr. Treasurer Sir Walter Mildmay Chancellor of
the Exchequer stood up, and having recited the sum of it, did further put the
House in mind, that the Lords did look for Answer touching the said Bill to
morrow, and therefore advising to consider of it presently, showed for his part
his opinion touching the state of the said Bill in sort as it is now, to be no
further by this House dealt in but one of these two ways, to wit, either at the
next reading thereof, being the third time of reading it, without any manner of
addition or other alteration whatsoever to put it to the question for passing,
or else leaving it as it now is, to begin a new Bill in this House for the
purpose of redress against frauds in such manner as this House should think
fittest. And so after sundry other Speeches and Arguments had in the said
matter the time being very far spent, it was deferred to be further considered
of and spoken to again to morrow. Vide touching this business on the day
immediately foregoing.

For that the Warden of the Fleet attending at the door of this House with
Edward Fisher Esquire cannot now for lack of time bring in the said Fisher to
make his appearance, further day was given him to be here again to morrow in
the morning. Vide concerning this business on Monday the 22th day of this
instant February ensuing.

On Wednesday the 17th day of February the Committees in the Bill concerning
Staple Fish were appointed to meet in the open Exchequer-Court at two of the
Clock this Afternoon.

The Committees also for Shoomakers and Curriers and Clothiers were appointed
to meet in the Middle Temple Hall this Afternoon.

Mr. Morris brought in the old Bill against vicious life and idleness, and
brought in two new Bills made and drawn out of some of the Contents of the old.

The Committees in the Bill for breadth of Clothes were appointed to meet this
Afternoon in the Exchequer-Chamber.

Three Bills also of no great moment had each of them one reading; of which the
last being the Bill for the furtherance of Justice, was upon the second reading
ordered to be engrossed.

The Warden of the Fleet brought Edward Fisher Esquire to the Bar and some of
the Creditors, with Mr. Yelverton being of Counsel with the Creditors; the said
Edward Fisher was heard at large what he could say against the Bill exhibited
to this House for order of payment of his Creditors; and at last being
sequestered out of the House two several times, while the house did consider of
sundry his frivolous requests made unto them, and of his dilatory devices and
shifting answers, did at the last give his full and plain consent unto this
house, as well of his instance and request unto this house mentioned in the
Preamble of the said Bill for passing of the same, as also any thing this house
should think good in their own discretions to add in the said Bill for the
passing of the same, to authorize the Commissioners to deal also with the
Bishop of Coventry and Litchfield for Composition of a Rentcharge of 82 l. 10
s. distrainable upon all the Lands of the said Edward Fisher. The said Warden
of the Fleet was then commanded to take away the said Edward Fisher, and Mr.
Sands and Mr. Morris were appointed to amend the said Bill in that part
against to morrow, and the Bill to be engrossed. Vide concerning this matter on
Monday the 22th day of February ensuing.

On Thursday the 18th day of February five Bills of no great moment had each of
them one reading; of which the first being a Bill for preservation of the
Bridges in the Town of Redding, was read the first time.

Sir William Moore, one of the Committees in the Bill against dying with
Sumach, brought in the same Bill again as a frivolous Bill utterly unfit to
remain in this house.

Sir Edward Dymock, one of the Committees in the Bill for bringing in of Staple
Fish, Ling, and Herings, brought in the old Bill and also a new Bill agreed
upon and made by the said Committees.

Mr. Chancellor of the Exchequer taking occasion to put this house in
remembrance of some consideration to be had by this house of the Bill to
provide remedy against fraudulent Conveyances passed with the Lords and brought
from them to this House, did the last day saving one treat and debate till the
rising of the same House, without any resolution therein then had; and showing
his own opinion therein divided his Speech into three parts, first to consider
what this House has already done touching the said Bill, then what this House
may do in the same, and lastly what is most convenient for this House to do
further in the same. Showing that what is done already in the said Bill in this
House, is this (as he takes it) viz. That the Bill first passing the Lords and
brought down hither was twice orderly read in this House, and upon the second
reading thereof was likewise orderly argued unto in this House both against the
Bill and with the Bill, very gravely and learnedly on both sides for to have
the same Bill committed to further consideration, which for his part he could
well have liked it should have so been; yet because this House thought good it
should not be committed, and denied to have it committed, he thinks this House
has done therein very orderly without any Error, because it seemed good to
this House so to do. And that albeit many times Committings and Conferences be
very necessary between both the Houses, yet it is at the liberty of each of the
same Houses whether they will admit any such or no, and so no error in that
which is done. And that the said Bill as it now stands is a Bill that may
have a third reading (in this House as he thinks) if this House shall so
thing good. And is of mind that this House may..... Here it seems Mr Fulk
Onslow at this time Clerk of the House of Commons, intending to supply the
residue of this said Speech and of other Arguments and Disputations had and
passed in this matter, did leave a blank of near upon a side and a half; but
whether through negligence or forgetfulness this (as diverse other places) was
never perfected.

But what the resolution of the House at the end of the said Arguments was, may
probably be gathered out of other Passages this very day concerning the same
business, viz. That they would justify their former Proceedings in not
committing the said Bill concerning fraudulent Conveyances sent down unto them
from the Lords to have been justly, discreetly and orderly resolved on in the
House, where the manner and form of the said Bill was and is utterly disliked,
and that therefore the said House of Commons would speedily frame a new Bill to
the same effect.

Vide concerning this business on Monday the 15th day and on Tuesday the 16th
day of this instant February foregoing.

Mr Sergeant Rodes and Mr Doctor Carey did bring down from the Lords to the
House of Commons three Bills; of which one was concerning the Lord Dacres and
the Lord Norris, the second concerning the relief of the Hospital of Eastbridge
in Canterbury, and the third concerning the Explanation of a former Statute
touching Tellors and Receivors made Anno 13 Reginae Eliz. of which said three
Bills the Original Journal Book of the Upper House mentions only the two
latter to have been sent down as aforesaid, and as it seems omitted the first.

The foresaid Mr Sergeant Rodes and Mr Doctor Carey brought also a Message from
the Lords for present Conference with some of the House of Commons touching the
Bill of Jesuits lately passed the said House. Whereupon these Committees
following were appointed to repair presently unto their Lordships accordingly,
viz. Mr. Comptroller, Mr. Vice-Chamberlain, Mr Treasurer of the Chamber, Mr.
Chancellor of the Exchequer, Mr Solicitor, Sir Philip Sidney, Mr Recorder of
London, Mr Beale, Mr Topclyffe, Sir John Higham, Mr Howard, Mr Morris, Sir
William Herbert, Sir Henry Nevill, Sir William Moore, Mr Fulk Grevill, Mr
Wolley and Mr Sands.

And before the going of the said Committees it was resolved by this House,
that they should further signify unto their Lordships that this House has
resolved, that as touching the late Proceeding of this House in the Bill to
provide remedy against fraudulent Conveyances sent unto this House from their
Lordships, This House has in all parts and points of their dealing therein
proceeded discreetly, gravely and orderly, according to the Liberties of this
House, without any errors of this House, or cause of offense by them given to
their Lordships. And that as this House very well likes that fraud be met with
and prevented, though not in such manner and form as in the said Bill was
devised; so they do purpose to frame a Bill in this House for the same effect
in such sort as to this House shall be thought good. And lastly should move
their Lordships for Answer of the Petitions, if it might so please their
Lordships. Vide concerning these Petitions on Thursday the second day of this
instant February ensuing.

Upon a Motion made by Mr Diggs that Doctor Parry a late unworthy Member of
this House and now Prisoner in the Tower, in his late submission to this House
upon his former contempts was reconciled, with condition (at his now request)
of his good behavior afterward, and has sithence so misbehaved himself as
deserves his said Imprisonment in the Tower; It was resolved by this House,
that he be disabled to be any longer a Member of this House, that a Warrant be
made to the Clerk of the Crown Office for a Writ to be directed to the Sheriff
of Kent for choosing and returning into this present Parliament another Burgess
for the Borough of Queenborough, in lieu and stead of the said Doctor Parry.
Which promise of his future amendment Vide on Friday the 18th day of December
foregoing.

Five Bills of no great momemt had each of them one reading; of which the
second being the Bill of Plymouth-Haven was upon the second reading committed
again to the former Committees, and Mr Grafton was added unto them, and the
Bill was delivered to Mr Wroth, who with the rest was appointed to meet in the
Middle Temple, Hall to morrow in the afternoon.

The Committees returning from the Lords, Mr Vice-Chamberlain..... here it
seems that Mr Fulk Onslow at this time Clerk of the House of Commons
intending to supply the residue of this speech, did leave a blank of two half
sides at the least for that purpose, but very negligently omitting to supply
it, has left those two great businesses of the Petitions and the not
committing of the said Bill of fraudulent Conveyances upon the second reading
sent down from the Lords to the House of Commons, (of which said matters see
before in the passages of this very day) altogether naked and undetermined,
which might else have served for great use and good precedent for the
privileges of the said House.

But yet it may be probably conjectured out of the ensuing passages of some
other days, what the Lords did answer to these foresaid Petitions, of which
said answer Mr Vice-Chamberlain made report, viz. That for the Petitions in
which the House of Commons desired their Lordships to join with them, they
would yet defer their resolution till a further time; And for the committing of
their said Bill concerning fraudulent Conveyances sent down from them upon the
second reading thereof, they did not altogether disallow the defense and
justification which the said House of Commons had made for and concerning their
proceeding therein by the said Committees; As also that they should frame a new
Bill to the same purpose. And it is most likely that their Lordships did well
approve of that Message sent by the foresaid Committees concerning the framing
of a new Bill for the prevention of the foresaid frauds, because immediately
upon Mr Vice-Chamberlain's Speech ended, a special Committee was appointed by
the House upon Mr Speakers motion for that purpose, prout sequitur.

Mr. Speaker, after Mr. Vice-Chamberlain had (as it seems) ended his Speech,
moved the House to appoint a Committee for the framing of a new Bill against
fraudulent Conveyances. Whereupon the said House named these following, viz.
all the Privy Council, Mr. Cradock, Mr. Solicitor, Mr. Sands, Mr. Attorney of
the Court of Wards, Mr. Morris, Mr. Owen, Mr. Diggs, Mr. Harris, Mr. Faunshaw,
Mr. Beamond and Mr. Recorder of London. The old Bill that came from the Lords
was delivered to Mr. Vice-Chamberlain, and all these were appointed to meet to
morrow in the afternoon in the Exchequer Chamber to draw a Bill to the same
purpose instead of the said former Bill.

Mr. Solicitor one of the Committees in the Bill for reformation of Errors in
the twelve Shires of Wales brought in the old Bill and also a new Bill for that
purpose.

Upon a motion for reading of the Bill of Tithes, Mr Speaker showed forth the
Bill brought into the House in so many several pieces, some written on both
sides of the paper and so sowed one upon another in the midst of some of the
leaves that it cannot be read or known how to be read, or taken in the right
places for the reading. Whereupon it was again to be better written, and
ordered that every part thereof should be rightly placed by the Committees.

On Friday the 19th day of February six Bills of no great moment had each of
them one reading; of which one of them being a new Bill for the bringing in of
Staple Fish and Herring had its first reading; and another being the sixth and
last ( viz.) for the continuance and explanation of certain Statutes had its
first reading, and a Proviso offered to the same Bill was once read, and
another Proviso also offered and the same once read, and a saving also offered
to the same was once read. Quod nota.

Upon a motion read by Mr George Moore touching some provision to be made
against Libellers, these Committees following were appointed to consider
thereof, ( viz.) Mr George, Moore, Mr Grafton, Mr Thomson, Mr Skinner, Mr
Edmund Saunders, Mr Cradock, Mr Crew, Mr Nicholas Hare and Mr John Hare, and to
meet to morrow in the Afternoon in the Middle-Temple-Hall for that purpose.

An addition to the Bill for the true answering of the debts of Edward Fisher
Esquire made by order of this House by certain Committees appointed for the
same, was twice read and ordered to be engrossed. Vide concerning this matter
on Monday the 22th day of this February ensuing.

On Saturday the 20th day of February, Three Bills of no great moment had each
of them one reading; of which the second being the Bill for the maintenance of
the Hospital of Eastbridge in Canterbury was upon the second reading committed
unto Mr Chancellor of the Exchequer, Mr Recorder of London, Mr Morris and
others, and the Bill was delivered to the said Mr Chancellor of the Exchequer,
who with the rest was appointed to meet on Tuesday next being the 23th day of
this instant February ensuing, in the Exchequer Chamber in the Afternoon.

The Bill for the true payment of Tithes was brought in again by Mr Sands one
of the Committees better and more plainly reformed and amended than it was last
delivered in by Sir John Peter.

The Bill exhibited by the Curriers which was not yet read, was appointed to be
delivered to the former Committees, and they then to resolve whether the same
Bill shall be read in this House or no, who were appointed to meet on Monday
next in the Afternoon in the Inner Temple Hall.

The Bill for Plymouth-Haven was brought in again with a Proviso.

Mr Chancellor of the Exchequer and others, having presently been in the
Committee Chamber of this House to consider of the State of the Bill touching
the Sabbath day, showed, that by the precedents of this House, this House may
add to the Lords former additions to the said Bill; and further also, that this
House may without all doubt make a Proviso to the same Bill if this House shall
so think good. But having recited two special Precedents of this House meeting
with the very points of this Bill, wishes therefore in respect of the
maintenance and preservation of the liberties of this House, that this House do
in all convenient and seemly sort stand to the Liberty and Choice of this House
to add to their Lordships additions, and not otherwise at all. Vide concerning
this business on Wednesday the 17th day of March ensuing.

Three Bills of no great moment had each of them one reading; of which the last
being the Bill for furtherance of Justice was read the third time and passed
upon the Question.

Two Bills of no great moment were sent down from the Lords to the House of
Commons by Sergeant Rodes and Mr Powle; whereof one was for establishing of a
Jointure to the Countess of Huntington.

On Monday the 22. day of February five Bills of no great moment had each of
them one reading; of which the last being the Bill for the true payment of the
debts of Edward Fisher Esquire was read the third time and passed the House, and
the word or Figures xxviij. put instead of the word or Figures xxiiij. in
sundry places of the said Bill, were read three times before the passing of the
same as aforesaid. Vide concerning this matter on Friday the 12th day, Monday
the 15th day, Tuesday the 16th day, Thursday the 18th day, Friday the 19th day
of this instant February foregoing.

This aforesaid Bill with two others of no great moment that had formerly
passed this House, were sent up to the Lords by Mr Treasurer and others the
Committees for Conference touching the Bill for better observation of the
Sabbath day, and the Committees also for the petitions, with order from this
House to move their Lordships presently in both these Causes accordingly. Vide
concerning the Bill for the Sabbath on Wednesday the 17th day of March ensuing.

Mr Sergeant Rodes and Mr Doctor Ford did before the sending up of the former
Bills to their Lordships bring down from them to the House of Commons two
Bills; the one touching the disposing of Parsonages Impropriate before passed
in this House with some amendments, and the other for the preservation of Grain
and Game.

Nota, That the Journal of the Upper House agrees with this Journal of the
House of Commons, that the last of these two Bills concerning the preservation
of Grain and Game, was at this time sent down from the Lords to the House of
Commons, but differs in the form; which Bill touching Parsonages Impropriate
is there set down to have been sent to the said House of Commons on Saturday
the 28th day of February; and at this time another Bill concerning Moor-burning
in the Counties of Northumberland, etc. to have been sent down with the
foresaid Bill concerning Grain and Game, etc.

The Bill for confirmation of Errors in Fines and Recoveries in the 12. shires
of Wales was read the second time.

The Bill concerning Insufficient Justices, Sheriffs, etc. in Wales was read
the first time, and committed to the former Committees in the last former Bill,
and Mr Recorder, Mr Attorney of the Wards and Mr Harris were added unto them,
and the Bill was delivered to Mr Attorney, who with the rest was appointed to
meet this Afternoon in Lincoln's Inn Hall.

Mr Treasurer and the residue returning from the Lords, Mr Treasurer declared,
that according to the appointment of this House they have dealt with the Lords
both as touching the Bill for the better observation of the Sabbath day, and
also for their Lordships answer to the Petitions; and showing unto their
Lordships that by Warrant of the Precedents of this House, this House might
very well make additions unto their Lordships additions in the same Bill,
wherewith (as he thought) their Lordships seemed somewhat satisfied; so
touching their Lordships answer to the said Petitions he said, That it so much
passed his Capacity to conceive and understand all the effect of it, as that he
would not undertake upon him to make a report of it, but would leave it to such
other of the said Committees as could both better remember it and deliver it.

Whereupon Mr Chancellor of the Exchequer affirming Mr Treasurer his former
speech touching their said proceedings for the said Bill of the Sabbath, showed
further, that as concerning their said motion for their Lordships answer to the
said Petitions, Their Lordships Sequestring the Committees of this House into
the outer Chamber, there came shortly after unto them the Lord Treasurer and
the Lord Archbishop of Canterbury; The said Lord Treasurer declaring first unto
them the answer of the Lords to the said Petitions in general, and afterward
the said Lord Archbishop showing the same in particular having a certain note
in his hand for his remembrance, but uttering much more in his Speech; which he
said was so long and consisted of so many parts, as he thought for his own part
he could not sufficiently signify unto this House: And did therefore make a
motion that those of the Committees which were also then present thereat, might
meet this Afternoon in the Exchequer Chamber, and helping each other's memory
set down the substance and effect of the said answer in all the parts thereof
as near as they can; and so then afterward to signify the same unto this
House to morrow. Which was thereupon so agreed and resolved accordingly. Vide
touching these Petitions on Thursday the 25th day of this instant February
following.

The Bill concerning the Lord Dacres and the Lord Norris was read the third
time, and thereupon passed the House.

On Tuesday the 23. day of February Two Bills of no great moment had each of
them one reading; of which the last being the Bill for the true Answering of
Tithes, etc. had its first reading.

Upon a Motion begun by Sir Thomas Lucy and continued by Sir Thomas Moore, that
those of this House which are of her Majesty's Privy Council may in the name of
this whole House be humble Suitors unto her Majesty, that for as much as that
villainous Traitor Parry was a Member of this House in the time of some of his
most horrible and traitorous Conspiracies and attempts against her Majesty's
most Royal Person (whom Almighty God long preserve) her Majesty would vouchsafe
to give License to this House, for that many of this House are of the
Fellowship of the Association, to proceed to the devising and making of some
Law for his Execution after his Conviction, as may be thought fittest for his
so extraordinary and most horrible kind of Treason: It was resolved that those
of this House being of her Majesty's most honorable Privy Council and now
present at this Motion, to wit Mr. Treasurer and Mr. Vice-Chamberlain, shall
exhibit the same humble Suit of this House unto her Majesty accordingly at
their convenient opportunity.

A Proviso was added to the Bill for Plymouth-Haven, and was twice read and
Ordered with the Bill to be engrossed.

Mr Cromwell was added to the former Committees for Privileges, and touching
serving of Process upon the Members of this House and their Servants.

Mr John North Knight for Cambridgeshire, was added to the former Committees
for reviving of Statutes, and the same Bill with the three Provisoes before
read were again committed to the same Committees and to the same Mr North,
together with the Bill touching Cables, Halters and Ropes.

Sir Edward Dymock being Sheriff of the County of Lincoln, was Licensed by this
House to depart into the Country for the service of her Majesty in the charge
of his said Office.

Nota, That Sir Edward Dymock here being Sheriff of Lincolnshire was also a
Member of the House of Commons and continued in the service of it without
interruption or question a great part of this Parliament, and now upon the
License of this House departed into the Country about some necessary occasions
concerning his said Office. Vide concerning this matter on Friday the 4th day
of December foregoing.

A like Precedent also there was in Anno 31 Reginae Eliz. on Friday the 21th
day of February. Quod vide.

The Bill for the Jointure of the Countess of Huntingdon was twice read and
passed upon the Question.

The new Bills last passed were sent up to the Lords by Mr Treasurer, Mr
Vice-Chamberlain and others, with Commission also to put their Lordships in
remembrance touching their search for Precedents with the Clerk of the Upper
House alleged by the Committees of this House for Warrant of this House in
proceeding with the Bill for the better observation of the Sabbath day by
additions of this House to be added unto their Lordships former Additions in
the same Bill. Vide concerning this matter on Thursday the 25th day of this
instant February ensuing.

It should seem (though it be not expressly set down in the Original
Journal Book) that the House did this day fall into consultation and
consideration of all the dangers which were imminent over the Kingdom, of the
means to prevent them, and of the great expenses her Majesty had been at in the
defense of her Dominions and Allies fit to be supplied; which is set down at
the end of this day in manner and form following.

The open dangers threatened to this Kingdom are from Spain, the Pope and the
holy League in France; the secret from the Jesuits, that secretly lurked here
to stir up her Majesty's Subjects of the Roman Religion to all manner of
Treason and Rebellion: Both which dangers though the time of them were a while
intermitted in respect of the Execution, yet the purpose was not, which their
late Conspiracies and attempts both here and in Ireland did plainly show.

The means to prevent these dangers were to suppress the spreading of Jesuits
and the growing of Popery, to exact such Oaths of the Papists as had been
already Ordained, to provide for the preservation of her Majesty's Person, to
terrify Ireland, and to provide sufficient Forces at home both by Land and Sea.

The great expense that her Majesty had been at even since the last Parliament
did appear plainly in respect of diverse places and Forts which had been
repaired, much Powder and Munition had been stored up, and her Navy also since
that time increased: besides many other extraordinary Charges and Expenses
which she had been at in the assisting of her Allies and the preserving of
Ireland, and that her Majesty did specially shun danger from Ireland, of which
they conceived this Proverb to be true, Look to Ireland if we will rest quiet
in England. And therefore (it seems) some of the Privy Council did move to
think of what supply were now fit to be given to her Majesty toward the
supporting and sustaining of all her said great Expenses and Charges.

On Wednesday the 24th day of February, Three Bills of no great moment had each
of them one reading; of which the last being the Bill for employing of Lands
and Tenements given to the maintenance of Highways, Bridges, etc. was read the
second time, and committed unto Mr Wroth, Mr. Sands, Mr. Cradock and others,
and the Bill was delivered to Mr. Sands, who with the rest was appointed to
meet this Afternoon in the Middle Temple Hall.

Mr. John North and Mr. Heile were added to the former Committees for
continuance of Statutes; the Bill and Provisoes, and also the Bill for Cables,
Halters and Ropes were delivered to Mr. Vice-Chamberlain, who with the rest was
to meet in the Exchequer Chamber this Afternoon.

Mr. Attorney of the Court of Wards, one of the Committees in the Bill for
Jonas Scot, brought in the Bill again into the Court.

It seems that some of the Privy Council or others moved this day for
consideration to be had in what measure and manner they should supply her
Majesty by Subsidy; And it seems that the House did thereupon further assent
unto it. All which is very negligently omitted by Mr. Fulk Ouslow at this time
Clerk of the House of Commons; for there is only set down the names of the
Committees in manner and form following, viz. All the Privy Council being
Members of this House, the Lord Russell, Sir Philip Sidney, Sir Thomas Heneage,
Mr. Solicitor, Sir William Moore, Sir Robert Germin, Sir George Carry, Sir
Henry Nevill, Mr. George Rotheram, Mr. Sands, Sir William Mohun, Sir Robert
Bows, Mr. John North, Sir Walter Rawleigh, Mr. Trenchard, Mr. Ralph Evers, Sir
John Tracy, Mr. Bevill, Sir Henry Cock, Sir Thomas Cecill Sir Francis Hastings,
Mr. Mollineux, Mr. Wroth, Mr. William Herbert, Sir Thomas Manners, Sir Drew
Drewry, Mr. Digby, Mr. Edward Audeley, Mr. Leveson, Mr. Attorney of the Wards,
Mr. Henry Barkley, Sir Thomas Shirley, Mr. Anthony Mildmay, Mr. Henry Talbot,
Mr. Russell, Sir Thomas Lucie, all the Knights for Wales, Sir Nicholas
Woodroofe, Mr. Recorder, Mr. Robinson, Mr. Layer and Mr. Wolley, who were
appointed to meet this Afternoon in the Exchequer Chamber for the Subsidy.

At the nominating of this Committee (as it seems) the whole Treasons plotted
between Henry Nevill and Doctor Parry according to their own Confessions were
related, where these fragmentary particulars only (through the Clerks
negligence) are set down to this or the like purpose following, viz.

That the said Doctor Parry having behaved himself unreverently and disorderly
in the House of Commons, upon revealing his mind to her Majesty which he denied
to do there, had been pardoned both by her Majesty and the House, as see on
Thursday the 17th day of December, and on Friday the 18th day of the same
Month, as also on Thursday the 18th day, and on Tuesday the 23th day of this
instant February foregoing. And since upon discovery of fouler matters had been
Imprisoned and disabled from being a Member of this House.

That the said Nevill and he had had diverse Conferences and Projects for the
advancement of the King of Spains Conquest of England, from whose Wars the said
Nevill having served in them had lately returned poor into England.

That the said Parry and Nevill had amongst other things Plotted to go into the
North, there to raise Rebellion or to take the Island in Kent, or to sell
Barwick, or lastly to Murder her Majesty.

That they had read together Doctor Allens Seditious Book concerning the
Deposition and Murdering of Heretical Princes (as he styles them.)

That they had sworn together mutual Secrecy, with diverse other matters partly
agreed upon between the said Nevill and Parry in their Confessions, and partly
confessed by either of them singly and deemed by the other.

To which purpose Sir Christopher Hatton Vice-Chamberlain made a very exact and
Elaborate Speech, of which there are only some short heads or notes set down in
the Original Journal Book, much to the purpose following, viz.

That the said Nevill and Parry had resolved either to Murder her Majesty in
her Garden at St James's, or else to set upon her whilst she should be in her
Coach in the Fields, each of them having for their assistance five or six men
with Pistols.

That Nevill began first to be touched with remorse of Conscience, and
notwithstanding his Oath of Secrecy did threaten Parry, that except he would
desist from his said intended Treason he would reveal it.

That the said Nevill thereupon departing from the said Parry, upon his next
meeting again with him continued with him in the same mind, and still refused
to join with him in the Execution of their former Complotted Treason, and that
shortly after Parries Commitment and Imprisonment he had discovered it.

That the said Parrey in the Year 1580. having been Pardoned by the Queen after
a Capital offense committed by him, departed with License into France, where
being reconciled to the Roman Church he traveled to Venice, and there having
been diversely and severally instructed and encouraged by Benedict Palms a
Jesuit, by Campegio the Pones Nuntio there; and lastly again afterward at
Paris in France, by one Morgan an Agent of the Queen of Scots; here upon the
Encouragement of Cardinal Como and the Pope himself, he returned into England
with a mind full of Treason and Disloyalty, with diverse other things in the
like purpose, which are at large set down in Annal. Regin. Eliz. conscript. a
Guiliel. Cambden Edit. Latin Lugd. Bat. Anno Domini 1625. a page 391. ad page
395.

Vide concerning this matter on Thursday the 17th day, and on Friday the 18th
day of December foregoing; as also on Thursday the 18th day, and on Tuesday the
23th day of this instant February last past.

On Thursday the 25th day of February, Three Bills of no great moment had each
of them one reading; of which the last being a Bill for repairing of Sea-Banks
and Sea-Works, was upon the second reading Ordered to be engrossed.

The Articles for two Fifteenths and Tenths, and one entire Subsidy granted to
her Majesty, were brought in by Mr. Chancellor of the Exchequer, and read in
the House, and appointed to be delivered by Mr Speaker to her Majesty's Learned
Council to draw the Bill for the same.

Sir Francis Knolles Knight, Treasurer of her Majesty's Household, declared this
day unto the House their Lordships Answer touching the Petition so often before
mentioned, in which the House of Commons had desired their Lordships to join
with them.

But what these Petitions were, is by the negligence of Fulk Onslow Esquire, at
this time Clerk of the House of Commons wholly omitted, not only here, but in
all other places of this present Journal where they are often before mentioned,
as may appear by the enumeration of the several days proceeding that concern
them at the end of this Animadversion, although they might be in part collected
out of those fragmentary Answers (which are likewise very imperfectly set down)
which were reported by the foresaid Mr Treasurer to have been delivered to the
Committees of the House of Commons by the Archbishop of York, and are found in
the said Original Journal Book it self. But in respect the matters contained in
the said Petitions were of great weight and well worthy to be left entire to
Posterity (that so the zealous care of the Commons at this time may not die in
silence) I have caused them to be transcribed wholly and exactly in this place
of this present Journal out of a very good Copy of them I had by me, by the
help whereof also the Archbishops Answer to all the several Articles or
Petitions aforesaid (which were in number sixteen) may be the better
understood. But before the inserting of the said Petitions it shall not be
amiss to make reference unto the several days on which they were mentioned.
Vide therefore on Monday the 14th day, on Tuesday the 16th day, and on Monday
the 21th day of December foregoing; As also on Monday the 15th day, Tuesday the
16th, Thursday the 18th, and Monday the 22th, and now lastly on this present
Thursday the 25th day of this instant February. And now follow the said
Petitions out of the foresaid Copy of them I had by me, before which was
prefixed this Title following.

The humble Petitions of the Commons of the Lower House of Parliament to be
offered to the consideration of the Right Honorable the Lords Spiritual and
Temporal of the Higher House.
1. WHere by a Statute made the thirteenth of her Majesty's Reign it was
Enacted, That none should be made a Minister unless he be able to Answer and
render to the Ordinary an account of his Faith in Latin, according to certain
Articles set forth in a Synod holden Anno 1562. and mentioned in the said
Statute, or have special gift and ability to be a Preacher; It may please their
honorable Lordships to consider whether it were meet to be Ordained, that so
many as have been taken into the Ministry since the making of this Statute, and
be not qualified according to the true meaning and intent of the same, be
within a competent time Suspended from the Ministry and Execution of any
Function thereto appertaining, unless they shall be found of that ability which
the Statute requires.

2. That where in a Synod holden 1575. It was provided that unlearned Ministers
heretofore made by any Bishops should not from thenceforth be admitted to any
Cure or special Function, it may also like their Lordships to advise whether so
many as have been since that time admitted contrary to the form of that
Article, shall be within a competent time removed; And that for better
Explanation of that Article such be taken for unlearned, as be not qualified
according to the Statute before-recited, and provision made for the due
Execution of that Article so declared for ever hereafter.

3. Where also in that great and weighty charge which in the Book containing
the form of Ordering of Priests established by the Statutes of this Realm, is
prescribed to be delivered to all such as shall be received into the Ministry,
they are admonished that they be the Messengers, the Watchmen, the Pastors and
Stewards of the Lord, to teach, to premonish, to feed and to provide for the
Lords Family, to seek for Christ's Sheep that be dispersed abroad, and for his
Children which be in the midst of this naughty World, to be saved through
Christ for ever, with other remembrances of other sundry weighty parts of their
Duties; It may like their Honors to consider of some good Order to be given,
that none hereafter be admitted to the Ministry but such as shall be
sufficiently furnished with gifts to perform so high and so earnest a Charge,
and that none be superficially allowed as persons qualified according to the
Statute of the thirteenth of her Majesty's Reign before recited, but with
deliberate Examination of their knowledge and exercise in the Holy Scriptures
answerable to the true meaning of that Statute.

4. Further, That for so much as it is prescribed in the form of Ordering
Ministers, That the Bishops with the Priests present shall lay their hands
severally upon the head of every one that receives Order, without mention of
any certain number of Priests that shall be present; and that in a Statute made
21th of King H. the Eighth is affirmed, that a Bishop must occupy six Chaplains
at giving of Orders; it may be considered whether it may be meet to provide
that no Bishop shall Ordain any Minister of the word and Sacraments, but with
the assistance of six other Ministers at the least, and thereto such only be
chosen as be of good report for their Life, learned, continually resiant upon
their Benefices with Cure, and which do give testimony of their Cure for the
Church of God, by their diligence in teaching and preaching in their Charge.
And that the said Ministers do testify their presence at the admission of such
Ministers by Subscription of their hands to some Act Importing the same. And
further that this admission be had and done publicly and not in any private
House or Chapel.

5. And where admission of unnecessary multitudes to the Ministry at one time
has been an occasion that the Church at this day is burdened with so great a
number of unable Ministers, It may like their Lordships to advise, whether some
provision might be made that none be admitted to be a Minister of the Word and
Sacraments but in a benefice having Cure of Souls then vacant in the Diocese of
such a Bishop as is to admit him, or to some place certain where such Minister
to be made is offered to be entertained a preacher, or such Graduate as shall
be at the time of their admission into the Ministry placed in some Fellowship
or Scholarship within the Uniniversities, or at the least that trial be made of
this Order for such time as to their Honors wisdoms shall be thought convenient.

6. That it be likewise considered whether for the better assurance that none
creep into the charge and Cures being men of corrupt life or not known
diligent, it might be provided that none be Instituted or by Collation
preferred to any benefice with cure of Souls or received to be Curate in any
Charge, without some competent notice before given to the Parishes where they
take charge, and some reasonable time allowed wherein it may be lawful to such
as can discover any defect in conversation of life in the person who is to be
so placed as is aforesaid, to come and object the same.

7. That for the encouragement of many to enter into the Ministry which are
kept back by some conditions of Oaths and Subscriptions whereof they make
scruple, it may be considered whether this favor may be showed them, that
hereafter no Oath or subscription be tendered to any that is to enter into the
Ministry or to any benefice with Cure or to any place of preaching, but such
only as be expressly prescribed by the Statutes of this Realm; Saving that it
shall be lawful for every Ordinary to try any Ministers presented to any
Benefice within his Diocese by his Oath, whether he is to enter corruptly or
incorruptly into the same.

8. Whereas sundry Ministers of this Realm diligent in their calling and of
godly conversation and life, have of late years been grieved with Indictments
in Temporal Courts and molested by some exercising Ecclesiastical Jurisdictions
for omitting small portions or some Ceremony prescribed in the Book of
Common Prayer, to the great disgrace of their Ministry and imboldening of men
either hardly affected in religion or void of all Zeal to the same, which also
has ministered no small occasion of discouragement to the forwardness of such
as would otherwise enter into the Ministry, some good and charitable means may
be by their honorable discretions devised, that such Ministers as in the
public service of the Church and in the administration of the Sacraments do
use the Book of Common Prayer allowed by the Statutes of this Realm and none
other, be not from henceforth called in question for omission or change of some
Portion or rite as is aforesaid, so there doings therein be void of contempt.

9. That for as much as it is no small discouragement to many that they see
such as be already in the Ministry openly disgraced by Officials and
Commissaries, who daily call them to their Courts to answer complaints of their
doctrine and life or breach of Orders prescribed by the Ecclesiastical Laws and
Statutes of this Realm, It may please the reverend Fathers or Archbishops to
take to their own hearings, with such grave assistance as shall be thought
meet, the causes of Complaint made against any known Preacher within their
Diocese, and to proceed in the examination and Order thereof with as little
discredit to the Person so complained of, without great cause and in as
charitable sort as may be, restraining their said Officials and Commissaries to
deal in any Sort in those Causes.

10. It may also please the reverend Fathers to extend their charitable favors
to such known godly and learned Preachers as have been Suspended or deprived
for no public offense of life, but only for refusal to subscribe to such
Articles as lately have been tendered in diverse parts of this Realm, or for such
like things, that they may be restored to their former Charges or places of
Preaching, or at least set at liberty to preach where they may be hereafter
called.

11. Further, That it may please the reverend Fathers aforesaid to forbear
their examinations ex officio mero of Godly and learned Preachers not detected
unto them (...) Offense of life or for public maintaining of apparent error in
Doctrine, and only to deal with them for such matters as shall be detected in
them. And that also her Majesty's Commissioners for Causes Ecclesiastical be
required, if it shall so seem good, to forbear the like proceedings against
such Preachers and not to call any of them out of the Diocese where he
dwells, except for some notable offense, for Reformation whereof their aid
shall be required by the Ordinary of the said Preachers.

12. Item, For the better increase of knowledge of such as shall be employed in
the Ministry, It may please their Lordships to advise, whether it may be
permitted to the Ministers of every Archdeaconry within every Diocese to have
some common exercise or conference amongst themselves, to be limited and
prescribed by their Ordinary, both touching the moderation and also the time,
places and manner of the same, so as the moderators of these exercises be
Preachers resiant upon their benefices having Cure of Souls, and known to bear
good affection to the furtherance of such profit as may grow by the same
exercises.

13. Where complaint is made of the abuse of Excommunication which is the
highest censure that Christ has left to his Church, and many are grieved as
well in regard of the causes and matters wherein it is at this day used, as of
the persons which have the common execution thereof, and no redress can be had
herein but by Act of Parliament, that some remedy may be thought of in that
behalf before the end of this Session, and for reformation to be had herein, it
may please their Lordships to consider whether some Bill might not be
conveniently framed to this effect, viz. That none having Ecclesiastical
Jurisdiction shall in any matter already moved or hereafter mentioned give or
pronounce any Sentence of Excommunication, and that for the continuance of any
Person in Cases depending before them, it shall be lawful to pronounce him only
contumax, and so to denounce him publicly; And if upon such Denuntiation, as
in Excommunications has been used, the Party shall not submit himself nor
stand to abide such Order as is to him assigned within forty days, then it
shall be lawful to signify his contumacy in such manner and sort, and to such
Court as heretofore has been used for persons so long standing Excommunicate,
and that upon such Certificate a Writ de contumace capiendo shall be awarded of
like force to all effects and purposes, and with like Execution as the Writ de
excommunicato capiendo is.

14. Nevertheless for as much as it seems not meet that the Church should be
left without this censure of Excommunication, it may be provided, that for
enormous crimes, as Incest, Adultery and such like, the same be Executed by the
Reverend Fathers the Bishops themselves, with the assistance of grave Persons,
or else by other persons of Calling in the Church with like assistance, and
with such other Considerations as upon deliberation shall be herein advised of,
and not by Chancellors, Commissaries or Officials as has been used.

15. Where Licenses of non-Residence are offensive in the Church, and be
occasion that a great number of this Realm do want instruction, and it seems
that Cases certain wherein the same may be allowed can hardly be devised, such
as shall be void of great inconvenience and danger; It may therefore be
considered by their Honorable Lordships, whether it were more convenient or
necessary that the use of them were utterly removed out of the Church; and so
likewise of Pluralities.

16. But howsoever it shall be thought convenient to order these Faculties, yet
for so much as besides the known duty of a Minister prescribed by the word of
God, her Majesty's Injunctions do require in every Curate a further quality of
learning than ability to read only, as may be gathered by the forty third
Article, and by other Charges imposed upon him to teach the Principles of
Religion as is set down in the forty fourth Article; and since also that no
faculty of plurality or non-residence but with condition to see the Cure from
which he is absent sufficiently served; May it please their Lordships to
consider, whether it were expedient to provide, that none now having License of
non-residence, either by Law or by Faculties, shall hereafter be permitted to
enjoy the benefit of such License, except he depute an able and sufficient
Preacher to serve the Cure, and that no Curate by him placed be suffered to
continue in his service of that Cure except he be of sufficient ability to
Preach, and does Weekly teach that Congregation, and perform the other Duties
of instructing the Youth in the Catechism prescribed by her Majesty's
Injunctions.

These Petitions being thus transcribed out of the beforementioned Copy of
them I had by me, now follow the Answers of the Lord Treasurer and the
Archbishop of York out of the Original Journal Book of the House of Commons, as
they were reported this instant Thursday Febr. 25. by Sir Francis Knolles
Knight, Treasurer of her Majesty's Household to the said House; which being
imperfect in themselves I have caused to be a little altered and enlarged:
whereby, as also by casting an Eye back to the several Petitions according to
the several numbers or figures by which they relate each to other, they may the
more fully be understood.

The Answer now which their Lordships had given unto the Committees of the
House of Commons being delivered unto them by the Lord Treasurer and the
Archbishop of York, was related unto the said House by Mr Treasurer one of the
Committees, and is set down in the Original Journal Book of the House of
Commons in this (or rather a more imperfect) manner and form following.

The Lord Treasurer in general made Answer, That the Lords did conceive many of
those Articles which the House of Commons had proposed unto them, to be
unnecessary, and that others of them were already provided for, and that the
Uniformity of Common Prayer had been established by Parliament.

The Archbishop of York made an Answer more at large to all those several
Articles which the House of Commons had proposed to their Lordships.

To the two first Articles he said, He conceived them not fit to be allowed of,
because diverse qualified persons were dispensed withal by Law. Secondly, That
it was against the Rule of Charity to suppose that those who were non-resident
had not some lawful avocation. Thirdly, That where Parishes had not sufficient
Preaching Ministers, Divine Service and Godly Homilies were for the most part
read; yet he promised that concerning non-residency it should be helped and
redressed as soon as might be.

The third Article he confessed to be very necessary.

The fourth Article he utterly disallowed.

The fifth Article tending to the avoiding of Ministerium vagum, he allowed;
yet said he it was sufficiently provided for already, saving he thought it
might stretch too far, viz. to Deans, etc.

The sixth Article he utterly disallowed, which savoured of popularity and
might raise many Controversies and Dissensions.

The Seventh Article he utterly misliked, alleging, that the Bishops
themselves were not discharged from the taking of that Oath; and for
subscription, he said he doubted not but that it was lawful, and that it might
prove the Cause of much order and quietness in the Church.

The Eighth and Ninth Articles he utterly disallowed, as freeing them from
Jurisdiction Temporal, and from the Bishops and all..... But what should hre
follow is left imperfect through the great negligence of Fulk On slow Esquire,
at this time Clerk of the House of Commons, in the Original Journal Book of the
same House; and yet it may seem that here should these words follow, viz......
their Ministers, after these words, viz. from the Bishops and all.....: And
what these two Articles concerned, may easily be seen by casting an Eye back to
the Petitions foregoing, n. 8. and n. 9.

The Tenth Article he said he could not but dislike, because deprivation was
often necessarily used in terrorem, and that the party so deprived might upon
his Submission (as in the Case of Excommunication) be received into favor.

The Eleventh Article he misliked.

The Twelfth Article he said that himself (in the name of their Lordships whom
in all that he had before said he had but personated) did think it necessary,
and would take Order for such Exrecises as the..... But what should here follow
is most negligently omitted by the Clerk of the House of Commons, yet it may be
gathered by this Article n. 12. foregoing, that it was required that the
exercises of private Conferences and Fasting might be more frequently enjoyed.

The Thirteenth and Fourteenth Articles he confessed to require no more than
seemed reasonable; yet being more narrowly searched into, would breed much
inconvenience: for if Excommunication shall not be allowed upon Contumacy and
such other Delinquencies, though small in themselves, then must there be some
new censure brought into the Church, which would be the occasion of much
Innovation. To which also he added, that Excommunication in these Cases was
used to no other end than Outlawries and Attachments in the Courts of Law and
Justice, it being only to bring Parties to their lawful Answers, who upon their
appearance are absolved of course: But yet promised that himself and the rest
of the Bishops would take pains therein themselves; And that no Excommunication
should hereafter be sent out but for Adultery and some other weighty Cause, or
for such Contumacies as could not otherwise be possibly remedied.

The Fifteenth and Sixteenth Articles he acknowledged to stand with good
reason, and that for himself he never granted any dispensation perpetual, but
to one man who was then Aged eighty Years. And for himself he professed he
would never again allow of any Pluralities for Life. And that the Original
Faculty thereof belonged to her Majesty. Further alleging, that himself (in
the name of their Lordships) did very well allow of that Proviso of theirs,
That when any temporary Dispensations were granted, provision should be made of
very able, godly and sufficient Curates.

And lastly he added, that because he feared some of the House of Commons were
too ready to think and speak hardly of that Ancient and Godly Order of Bishops,
yet he desired them that they would be pleased to think well of himself and the
rest of his Brethren now living, if not in respect of their places, yet for
Charity sake, and for that some of them were Preachers when many of the House
of Commons had been in their Cradles.

Upon this Relation made by Mr Treasurer unto the House of Commons touching
their Lordships Answer delivered by the Archbishop of York and the Lord
Treasurer to himself and the rest of the Committees touching the foresaid
Petitions, diverse Motions and sundry long Speeches were made; in the conclusion
whereof it was at last agreed, that first the former Committees calling to them
such other grave Members of this House, learned in Divinity and in the Common
Laws of the Realm, and also in Canon Law, as they shall think good, shall
confer together in the Exchequer Chamber to Morrow in the Afternoon, touching
the Answer of the Lords unto this House concerning the Petitions of this House
exhibited unto their Lordships, and after such Conference and consideration had
of the same Answer, then to resolve for further proceeding therein as then
shall be thought meetest by this House. Vide concerning this business on Monday
the 14th day, Wednesday the 16th day, and on Monday the 21th day of December
foregoing: As also on Monday the 15th day, Tuesday the 16th, Thursday the 18th,
and on Monday the 22th day of this instant February last past.

Mr Wharton one of the Committees in the Bills touching Curriers Shoomakers,
etc. brought in the old Bill and also a new.

On Friday the 26th day of February, Four Bills of no great moment had each of
them one reading; of which the second being a new Bill against Idleness and
Incontinent Life, and for the punishment of Rogues and Vagabonds, was upon the
second reading committed to the former Committees, and Mr Grafton, Mr Doctor
Fletcher, Mr Alford and Mr Lewkgnor were added unto them, who were appointed to
meet to Morrow in the Afternoon at two of the Clock in the Middle Temple Hall.

A Bill against unlawful Licenses to Marry was upon the first reading committed
unto Sir Robert Germin, Mr Strickland, Mr Sands, Mr Greenfield and others, and
the Bill was delivered to Mr Sands, who with the rest was appointed to meet to
Morrow in the Afternoon in the Middle Temple Hall.

The Bill against unlawful Marriages in some cases was upon the second reading
committed to the former Committees in the Bill against incontinent life, etc.
and the Bill was delivered to Mr Doctor Fletcher; Mr Beale the Master of the
Requests, and Mr Aldersey were added unto them.

The Bill for swearing of Bishops and Archbishops was read the second time.

Mr Vice-Chamberlain one of the Committees for framing of a Bill against
fraudulent Conveyances showed, that the said Committees had met and traveled
therein and drawn a new Bill accordingly; and thereupon delivered in the same
Bill, together with the former old Bill which was sent from the Lords.

On Saturday the 27th day of February Four Bill of no great moment had each of
them one reading; of which the last being a Bill for the maintenance of the
Pier and Cobb of Lime-Regis was upon the second reading thereof committed unto
Mr Vice-Chamberlain, Mr Fitz James, Mr Hammon, Mr Hassard and others, and the
Bill was delivered to Mr Hassard, who with the rest was appointed to meet upon
Tuesday the second day of March following in the Afternoon in the open Court in
the Exchequer.

The Bill for bringing in of staple Fish and Ling had its second reading.

A Proviso to the Bill for Barwick upon Trent was twice read, and upon the
Question it was resolved, that both the Bill and the Proviso must not be
committed but engrossed.

The Bill for Preservation of Plymouth-Haven passed upon the Question after the
third reading, and was presently sent up to the Lords by Mr Treasurer and
others, with request to their Lordships to know whether their Lordships have
sought out their Precedents touching the Bill for the Sabbath day, vide on
Wednesday the 17th day of March ensuing.

Three Bills also of no great moment had each of them one reading; of which the
last being the Bill for the relief of the Hospital of Eastbridge in Canterbury
was read the third time, but passed not the House, because Mr Solicitor was by
them appointed to be added to the former Committees in the Bill, and all of
them to consider of the Queens Majesty's Interest to an Annual Rent of Seven
Pound Ten Shillings issuing out of the possessions of the said Hospital, that
the House being further advertised thereof the Bill may go to the question.

Mr Treasurer and others coming from the Lords, he showed that according to the
appointment of this House they have moved their Lordships to know their
pleasure touching the search of the Precedents concerning the further
proceeding in the Bill for the better observation of the Sabbath day; and that
the Lord Chancellor answered, that the Lords had caused the said Precedents to
be searched and do find them true as they were alleged by the Committees of
this House; saying further, that because both the said Precedents are but new
and only in her Majesty's time, their Lordships would have further search of
more ancient Precedents; and then afterward their Lordships will make further
answer therein unto this House. And the said Mr Treasurer further then
declared, that their Lordships desired that a Committee of this House might be
appointed to have conference with their Lordships upon Monday next in the
Afternoon touching the Bill for the good government of the City of Westminster
lately sent from this House to their Lordships. Vide concerning this Bill of
the Sabbath on Wednesday the 17th day of March following.

Mr Vice-Chamberlain moved, that the Committees for the framing of the Bill for
her Majesty's safety, and those also for the Bill for continuance of Statutes
which Mr Hammon added unto them, may meet this Afternoon in the Exchequer
Chamber, and those also that are appointed for Conference touching the answer
to the Petitions. Vide concerning these Petitions on the day immediately
foregoing, where further references are made to such other days upon which they
are handled.

On Monday the first day of March the House being set, though of no great
number (Mr Speaker being absent) and the Letany and prayers first said by the
Clerk in the House, the Clerk afterward signified unto this House from Mr
Speaker his present occasion of absence by reason of taking some Physic
yesterday, whereby he now at this instant keeps his Bed, and is not able
without danger of greater peril of extremity to give his attendance in this
House at this time. And further, that he desires this whole House to bear with
his said necessary occasion of absence for this present day, well hoping he
shall be the better able to do them service the whole residue of this Session
afterward. All which done the House did then rise, and every man departed away
well satisfied accordingly, and were sorry for his Sickness. Whereupon it
seems they adjourned the House until to Morrow.

On Tuesday the 2d day of March Mr Hammon one of the Committees in the Bill for
continuance of Statutes brought in the same Bill.

Four other Bills also of no great moment had each of them one reading; of
which the second being the Bill for Augmentation of Justices Fees was upon the
second reading committed to Mr Vice-Chamberlain, Mr Chancellor of the
Exchequer, Mr Recorder and others. But the time and place when and where these
Committees were to meet, is through the Clerks negligence wholly omitted.

Mr Cromwell one of the Committees in the Bill against Licenses granted to
Marry, brought in the old Bill and also a new.

The Bill for the maintenance of the Hospital of East-bridge in Canterbury was
brought in again, with a Proviso agreed upon, by Mr Solicitor and Mr Recorder
of London, which Proviso was twice read and Ordered to be engrossed.

The Bill last read touching Tellors and Receivors was now committed unto Mr
Treasurer, Mr Chancellor of the Exchequer, Mr Solicitor and others, and the
Bill was delivered to the said Mr Treasurer, who with the rest was appointed to
meet in the Exchequer Chamber this Afternoon.

Nota, That the Bill touching Eastbridge had been before committed on Saturday
the 20th day of this instant February to Mr Recorder and others, and by him
afterward brought into the House again on the Saturday following being the
27th day of the same Month, just in the same sort as it had been committed unto
them upon the foresaid day after the second reading. But the House it seems
desiring that further consideration should be had therein, the Committees
desired Mr Solicitor and Mr Recorder to consider thereof accordingly, who
thereupon this day brought it in again with a new Proviso, which being twice
read, the said Bill touching the Hospital of Eastbridge in Canterbury, was with
the said Bill committed to be engrossed.

The Bill for assurances of certain Lands and Tenements to Jonas Scott, was
upon the third reading assented unto.

Mr Cromwell was added to the former Committees for Examination of Process upon
the Members of this House, and to make report to Morrow accordingly thereof
unto this House.

The Bill against covenous and fraudulent Conveyances was upon the second
reading committed unto Mr. Recorder, Mr. Solicitor, Mr. Morris and others,
and the Bill was delivered to Mr. Recorder, who with the rest was appointed to
meet this Afternoon in the Exchequer Chamber.

Upon Friday next in the Afternoon the House was appointed to be called.

The Bill touching Apprentices in the City of London was committed unto Mr.
Woodruffe, Mr. Recorder, Mr. Cromwell, Mr. Wroth and others, but no mention is
made either of the time or place when and where these foresaid Committees were
appointed to meet.

On Wednesday the third day of March, Seven Bills of no great moment had each
of them one reading; of which the second being the Bill against the detestable
sin of Adultery had its first reading; and the sixth being the Bill for the
true Answering of Tithes, was upon the second reading committed to the former
Committees, and Mr. Recorder and Mr. Conisby were added unto them.

Mr. Vice-Chamberlain touching the Bill for the safety of her Majesty's most
Royal Person, declaring the often meeting of the Committees in the same, who
have been sometimes commanded to other services, besides in the mean time,
showed, that the same Committees have drawn a Bill for that purpose, and
offers the same to the House, praying it might be read; and thereupon it was
then read accordingly, viz.

The new Bill for the safety of the Queens Majesty's most Royal Person was read
the first time.

Mr. Sergeant Rodes and Mr. Attorney did bring from the Lords two Bills, viz.
the one touching Jesuits, with some amendments and a Proviso, and the other
touching certain assurances from the Bishop of Winchester and the Dean and
Chapter of the same; with request also from their Lordships, that the
Committees of this House in the Bill for the better Government of the City of
Westminster may presently be sent to have Conference with their Lordships in
the same Bill, and but in a small thing concerning the same.

The Bill for the repairing and maintenance of the Sea-Banks and Sea-Works on
the Coasts of Norf.; and the Bill for the assurance of certain Lands and
Tenements to Jonas Scott, were sent up to the Lords by Mr. Vice-Chamberlain and
others, with request of this House also, that their Lordships would have the
Bill for the better observation of the Sabbath day in remembrance for the
better expediting thereof. Vide de Billa Sabbathi, on Wednesday the 17th day of
this instant March following.

The Bill for two Fifteenths and Tenths and one entire Subsidy was read the
first time.

Mr. Vice-Chamberlain and the residue returning from the Lords, he showed the
delivering of the Bills and Message, and that their Lordships would send an
Answer of the Message as soon as they have considered of the Precedents which
their Clerk delivered unto them this day.

Mr. Sergeant Gawdie and Mr. Sergeant Rodes did desire from their Lordships
that this House would appoint that six of this House and the Clerk may have
Conference with their Lordships to Morrow in the Morning before the sitting of
the Court, touching the Orders of amendments in Bills in both Houses. Whereupon
were appointed for that purpose Mr. Vice-Chamberlain, Mr. Chancellor of the
Exchequer, Mr. Solicitor, Mr. Saudes, Mr. Cromwell, Sir William Moore and Mr.
Morris, but thought needless that the Clerk should attend therein, for that
all the Precedents of amendments in both Houses are always left and do still
remain with the Clerk of the Upper House. Vide concerning this matter on
Saturday the 27th day of February foregoing.

On Thursday the fourth day of March, Two Bills of no great moment had each of
them one reading; of which the first being the Bill concerning certain
assurances of the Bishop and Dean and Chapter of Exeter had its first reading.

Mr. Thimbleby upon a Motion made by Mr. Speaker, was Licensed to repair home
into the Country to an Assizes.

Sir Robert Germin also being sick was upon a Motion made Licenced to be absent
for the recovery of his Health.

The Bill for the preservation of Grain and Game was upon the second reading
committed to Sir Edward Hobby, Sir John Tracy, Mr. Lieutenant of the Tower, Sir
Henry Nevill, Sir Thomas Lucy and others, and the Bill was delivered to the
said Sir Thomas Lucy, who with the rest was appointed to meet this Afternoon in
the Parliament House or Parlour of the Middle Temple.

The Bill for maintenance of the Pier and Cob of Lime Regis, and the Bill
against unlawful Marriages in some Cases, were brought in by Mr. Hammon one of
the Committees with some Amendments.

Three Bills of no great moment had each of them one reading; of which one was
touching the breadth of Cloths with some Amendments and Additions (the same
Amendments and Additions being twice read) the Bill was Ordered to be engrossed.

Mr. Sergeant Gawdie and Mr. Sergeant Rodes did bring from the Lords two Bills;
the one for the Haven of Chichester, and the other for the assurance of certain
Lands to the Lord Willoughby from one Herenden, with report from the Lords of
the assent of the said Herenden to the passing of the same Bill in the Upper
House: And showed withal, that the said Herenden was then at the Door of this
House ready to affirm the same assent both there and here. Whereupon the said
Herenden was called in, and alleging his name to be Edward Herenden, and so
known to be by Mr. Grafton one of the Members of this House, affirmed and
avowed his said assent to the passing of the said Bill accordingly.

Mr. Treasurer declared from the Lords touching the Precedents in the Bill for
the Sabbath day, that their Lordships having considered of the said Precedents
do think good that by the privity of some of both Houses to be appointed for
that purpose, some such course be taken by mutual assent of both Houses as may
from henceforth be certainly used in like Cases hereafter. Vide concerning this
matter on Wednesday the 17th day of this instant March ensuing.

The Committees for the Bill concerning Teliors and Receivors, etc. and in the
Bill concerning Justices Fees, were appointed to meet this Afternoon in the
Exchequer Chamber, and the said latter Bill was delivered to Mr. Chancellor of
the Exchequer.

The Committees for the Bill concerning Tellors and Receivors, etc. and for the
Bill for Justices Fees, being appointed to meet this Afternoon as aforesaid,
The Bill against covenous and fraudulent Conveyances with some Amendments and
Additions (the same Amendments and Additions being twice read) was Ordered to
be engrossed.

The Bill against Idle and Incontinent Life, and for punishment of Rogues and
Vagabonds, was read three times, and two Provisoes in the latter end were
likewise twice read.

Mr. Edward Sanders one of the Committees in the Bill for preservation of
Timber in the County of Sussex, brought in the old Bill and also a new Bill.

On Friday the 5th day of March Mr. John Russel one of the Knights for the
County of Worcester was for his great business Licensed by the House to depart.

Three Bills of no great moment had each of them one reading; of which the last
being the Bill concerning the Latitats of the Peace in the King's Bench, was
upon the second reading committed unto Mr. Morris, Mr. Bacon, Mr. Hammon, Mr.
Wroth, Mr. Cromwell and Mr. Nicholas Hare, who were to repair presently into
the Committee Chamber of this House.

The Bill also against delays of Executions was upon the second reading
committed unto Mr. Attorney of the Wards, Mr. Morris, Mr. Cromwell, Mr. Owen
and others, and the Bill was delivered to Mr. Attorney of the Wards, who with
the rest was appointed to meet this Afternoon in the Committee Chamber of this
House.

The Bill for the safety of her Majesty's most Royal Person, etc. was upon the
second reading committed to the former Committees, Mr. Harris, Mr. Grice and
Mr. Lewkenor being added unto them, and the Bill was delivered to Mr.
Vice-Chamberlain, who with the rest was appointed to meet this Afternoon in the
Exchequer Chamber.

The Bill for the Subsidy was appointed this Afternoon for a second reading

Mr. Chancellor of the Exchequer one of the Committees in the Bill touching
Receivors, Tellors, etc. brought in the Bill again with a Proviso and some
certain Amendments.

The Bill against Idle and Incontinent Life, and for the punishment of Rogues
and Vagabonds, after the Provisoes thereof had been twice read the day
foregoing, was now again committed to the former Committees, viz. Mr. Morris,
Mr. Diggs, Mr. Heyle, Mr. Alford, Mr. Jenings, Mr. Utreght, Mr.
Vice-Chamberlain and Mr. Chancellor of the Exchequer, who were appointed to
meet in the Afternoon in the Exchequer Chamber.

A new Bill for continuance of Statutes was brought in by Mr. Vice Chamberlain
one of the Committees.

The Bill also against covenous and fraudulent Conveyances had its third
reading.

Post Meridiem.

In the Afternoon two Bills of no great moment had each of them one reading; of
which the first being the Bill for two Fifteenths and Tenths, and one entire
Subsidy, was upon the second reading Ordered to be engrossed.

On Saturday the 6th day of March, Two Bills of no great moment had each of
them one reading; of which the second being the Bill for the true Answering of
Tithes, and for the avoiding of the multiplicity of Excommunications and
Perjuries, was upon the third reading committed again to the former Committees,
to which were also added Mr. Shirley, Mr. Alford, Mr. Heyle and Mr. Morley, who
were appointed to meet this Afternoon in the Middle Temple Hall, and to put in
the Provisoes in the former Act of 2 E. 6. and all the residue thereof without
any alteration, saving only of the forty years before that Statute to be
altered hereafter before the Libel exhibited.

Mr. Tasborough one of the Committees in the Bill for employing of Lands, etc.
to the maintenance of Highways and Bridges, brought in a new Bill agreed on by
the said Committees for that purpose.

Two Bills also of no great moment had each of them their third reading and
passed the House; of which the last was the Bill for the maintenance of
Orford-Haven in the County of Suff. which Bills Mr. Vice-Chamberlain and others
did carry up to the Lords from the House of Commons, as also the Bill
concerning the Sabbath day, and that they should move their Lordships to
proceed to the perfecting of the said amendments and expediting of the same
Bill by both Houses accordingly, for both the Bill and the amendments upon the
amendments had before fully passed the House of Commons. Vide plus concerning
this Bill on Wednesday the 17th day of this instant March following.

Mr. Vice-Chamberlain one of the Committees in the Bill for her Majesty's
Safety, declared their meeting yesterday and great travel in the Bill wherein
they have made some amendments, delivered in the Bill which was then read, and
the said amendments being twice read, the Bill upon the question was Ordered to
be engrossed.

Sir Edward Hobby one of the Committees in the Bill for the preservation of
Grain and Game brought in the Bill with some Amendments and Additions made by
the Committees.

The Bill concerning the breadth of certain Wollen-Cloths had its third
reading, and after many Arguments passed upon the question.

A Proviso was offered to the Committees for the Bill of continuance of
Statutes by Mr. Strickland, the Proviso being not read was delivered to Mr.
Hammon.

On Monday the 8th day of March, Two Bills of no great moment had each of them
one reading; and after long Arguments upon the second of the said Bills being
for the better ordering and good Government of the City of Westminster, it was
upon the second reading committed unto Mr. Vice-Chamberlain, Mr. Chancellor of
the Exchequer, Mr. Treasurer, Sir Thomas Heneage and others, who were appointed
to meet to Morrow in the Afternoon in the Exchequer Chamber.

Mr. Richard Carey one of the Committees in the Bill for plain white straights
and pinned white straights brought in the Bill with new Amendments, which
Amendments being also twice read the Bill was Ordered to be engrossed.

Two Bills of no great moment were Ordered to be engrossed, the first after the
Bill it self had been read the second time, being against trying of Tithes of
Lands in Foreign Counties; the second after certain Amendments and Additions
unto it had been twice read, it being the Bill for the maintenance of the Pier
and Cobb of Lime Regis in Dorsetshire.

The Amendments in the Bill touching Latitats of the Peace being twice read,
the Bill was Ordered to be engrossed.

Two Bills also of no great moment had each of them one reading; of which one
being the Bill for reformation of errors in Fines and Recoveries in the twelve
Shires of Wales had its third reading.

Mr. Attorney of the Wards one of the Committees in the Bill for perfecting of
assurances, brought in the Bill again.

Mr. Vernon with his Learned Council was upon a Motion by one of this House
appointed to be heard, who came into this House with his Council accordingly;
where being heard at large, and the Council also of the other fide, they were
sequestered out of the House: and after their departure it was resolved, after
many and long Arguments upon the question, that a Proviso be added to the Bill.
And thereupon Mr. Solicitor, Mr. Recorder, Mr. Sands and others were
appointed to draw the Proviso.

Post Meridiem.

Six Bills of no great moment had each of them one reading; of which one being
the Bill touching Highways, another for continuance of Statutes, and a third
concerning Tanners, Curriers, Shoomakers, etc. being all new Bills, were each
of them read the first time.

On Tuesday the 9th day of March, Five Bills of no great moment had each of
them one reading; of which the second being the Bill for the better employing
of Lands, Tenements, etc. for the repairing of Highways, etc. were each of them
upon the second reading committed to the former Committees and to Mr. Cromwell,
Mr. Edgecombe, Mr. Barker and Mr. Shirley. But the time and place when and
where the said Committees should meet is wholly omitted through the negligence
of the Clerk.

Mr. Attorney of the Court of Wards and Mr. Shirley brought in the Bill again
against delays in Executions with some Amendments only in form.

A Proviso by Mr. Cradock offered to the Bill of safety, and the Proviso read
and rejected, and the Bill passed upon the question without the said Proviso.

The Bill touching Jesuits, etc. being somewhat considered in the Amendments,
and the Additions in the same once read, after some Speeches and Arguments
touching the same Amendments and Additions, was committed further to be
considered of unto all the Privy Council being Members of this House, Mr.
Solicitor, Mr. Attorney of the Wards, Mr. Recorder, Mr. Sands, Sir William
Moore, Mr. Diggs, Mr. Doctor James, Mr. Heyle, Sir Thomas Heneage, Sir Henry
Cock, Sir Drew Drewry and others, who were appointed to meet at two of the
Clock this Afternoon in the Exchequer Chamber.

A Bill also that Actions upon the Case and for Trial of title of Lands shall
not be brought in Foreign Counties, passed upon the question after the third
reading.

The Amendments in the Bill against delay of Executions was twice read, and
thereupon the Bill was Ordered to be engrossed.

On Wednesday the 10th day of March two Bills of no great moment had each of
them their second reading; of which the first touching the true making of Hats
and Caps was rejected, and the second touching the Water-Bayliff was upon the
second reading committeed unto Mr Treasurer, Sir Henry Nevill, Sir Nicholas
Woodruffe, and others, and the Bill was delivered to Sir Nicholas Woodruffe and
others, who were appointed to meet this Afternoon in the Exchequer Chamber.

A Proviso to the Bill for Shoomakers, etc. was thrice read, and the Bill with
the Same Proviso being put to the question passed.

A Proviso to the Bill touching Tellors and Receivors, etc. was twice read, and
the Proviso and Bill committed to the former Committees, and there were added
unto them these following (viz.) Mr Solicitor, Mr John Hare, Mr Skinner, Mr
Aldred, Mr Fenner and Mr Audeley, who were appointed to meet in the Committee
Chamber of this House to morrow Morning.

A Proviso also agreed unto by the Committees and to be added to the Bill for
reformation of Errors in Fines and Recoveries in the twelve Shires of Wales and
Counties Palatine, with the privity and likeing also of Mr Vernon himself and
one of his Council, and of the Solicitor and one of the Council learned of Sir
Edward Herbert Knight, was brought in by Mr Solicitor, and being twice read
was ordered to be engrossed.

Six Bills were sent up to the Lords from the House of Commons by Mr Treasurer
and others; of which the last being a Bill against delay of Executions did at
this time pass the House upon the third reading immediately before it was sent
up, ut supra.

Four-Bills of no great moment had each of them one reading; of which the last
being the Bill for maintenance of the Pier and Cobb of Lime Regis in the County
of Dorset had its third reading: upon which a Proviso was offered unto it,
which being twice read was allowed by the House and ordered to be engrossed,
and so was engrossed in the end of the said Bill and afterward read the third
time. And so thereupon the Bill passed upon the question.

Mr Treasurer with the residue returning from the Lords, he showed that they
have moved their Lordships for conference in certain points touching the Bill
of Jesuits, and that the Committees of this House moved their Lordships to
amend some such words in their own amendments, as which albeit the Committees
of that House thought meet to be done for the matter, yet they said they could
not do it but by order of the House. And the said Mr Treasurer said, that yet
nevertheless because that imperfection might be very well helped by a Proviso
of this House, he wished rather to take that course in the matter, than further
to urge the Lords in that point. And said further, that for other parts also of
their Lordships amendments and additions to the said Bill it was thought good
by the Committees of both the said Houses to have further conference together
therein again for the more speedy dispatch of the same.

The Bill touching process of the peace awarded out of the Court of Chancery
and Kings Bench was upon the third reading committed again unto Sir Heury
Nevill, Mr Solicitor, Mr Cromwell and others, and the Bill was delivered to
the said Mr Cromwell, who was with the rest appointed to meet to morrow in the
Afternoon in Lincoln's Inn Hall.

Mr Recorder of London one of the Committees in the Bill against Idle and
incontinent life brought in the old Bill and also a new Bill.

Mr Sands one of the Committees in the Bill touching Apprentices brought in
the old Bill and also a new Bill.

On Thursday the 11th day of March it was ordered that the House should be
called together upon Saturday in the Afternoon, and then also a Collection to
be made for the poor.

Mr Francis Hastings being employed in Post in the service of her Majesty was
upon a motion made thereof by Mr Speaker dispensed with and excused for his
absence.

Francis Bromley Esquire one of the Knights for the County of Salop, was Licensed
for his great business at the Assizes to depart.

Sir William Moore, Mr Cromwell and Mr Utreght were appointed to examine one
John Bland a Currier, of whom the House had heard that he said concerning the
Tanners Bill lately read in the House, that the Bill had been allowed upon the
reading although a great part of it had been omitted. Vide on Saturday the 13th
day of this instant March following.

Three Bills of no great moment had each of them one reading; of which the
second being the Bill for continuance of Statutes was upon the second reading
committed again to the former Committees to whom were added these following,
viz. Mr Strickland Mr Recorder, Mr Heyle, Mr Solicitor and Mr Sands; to which
Bill six Provisoes or additions were twice read, and two of them rejected, and
four of them Committed to the four Committees, who were appointed to meet this
Afternoon in the Exchequer Chamber and so for the Bill of the Savoy.

Mr Sergeant Rodes and Mr Doctor Barkeley did bring from the Lords three Bills;
of which the second was the Bill for the increase of Pheasants and Partridges.

Mr Hammon one of the Committees in the Bill for the true answering of Tithes
brought in the old Bill and also a new Bill.

The Amendments and Additions of the Lords to the Bill against Jesuits, and
also the amendment of this House added to their Lordships said amendments, and
also to their Lordships Schedule, were read and at large considered and agreed
upon by the whole House. Which done, upon further debating of the form and
manner of the finishing thereof, it was thought fittest by some of the oldest
Parliament men of this House and by the Clerk, that their Lordships should be
moved to reform their amendments according to the direction of our amendments
in their said amendments, before we insert theirs into the said Bill.

On Friday the 12. day of March, The Bill for two Fifteenths and Tenths and one
entire Subsidy granted by the Temporalty was read the third time and passed
upon the question.

The Proviso to the Bill for reformation of Errors in Fines and Recoveries in
the twelve Shires of Wales and Counties Palatine was read the third time, and
passed with the Bill upon the question.

The Proviso to the Bill for the maintenance of the Hospital of Eastbridge in
Canterbury had its third reading, and the Ordinances of the now Bishop of
Canterbury were then read also, and so left to be further considered of in
conference with the Lords touching some words needful to be added in some part
of the said ordinances.

The Bill touching the Water-bayliff with some amendment by Proviso was brought
in again by Sir Henry Nevill one of the Committees.

Sir Walter Mildmay Chancellor of the Exchequer one of the Committees in the
Bill for the Savoy, showed that they the said Committees have met together
about the said Bill, and that they think meet that the Master of the Savoy do
deliver unto this House a note of the names of the Lessees, that they may be
called and heard what they can say for themselves touching their several
interests.

The Bill for continuance of Statutes was brought in with some amendments by Mr
Cromwell and Mr Hammon two of the Committees, with one Proviso also for the
Ports allowed of by the Committees, and the three other Provisoes residue of
the four former disallowed by them, and so rejected by the House; and the
amendments twice read the Bill was ordered to be engrossed. And the Proviso
this day offered touching limitation of time for bringing in of Suits upon the
Penal Laws now revived, was after sundry Speeches respited to be further
considered of in the mean time of engrossing the Bill.

Mr. Tasborough one of the Committees in the Bill for the better employing of
Lands, Tenements, etc. given to the maintenance of Highways and for relief of
the Poor, brought in the Bill with some Amendments and Additions of Provisoes.

On Saturday the 13th day of March, Mr. Cromwell one of the Committees in the
Bill touching Process of the Peace, brought in the Bill with some Amendments,
which were twice read and then Ordered to be inserted into the Bill which was
already engrossed: after which the said Bill and amendments did pass the House
upon the question after the third reading.

Two Bills of no great moment had each of them one reading; of which the first
being the Bill against the abuse of Corn and Grain was twice read and Ordered
to be engrossed.

Upon report made unto this House by Mr. Speaker, that one John Bland a Currier
of London had given out to some honorable persons, that this House passing the
Bill of the Shoomakers had proceeded contrary to an Order taken in the same
House, which he said was, that the Shoomakers Bill should not be further read
till the Curriers Bill were first read before; and has likewise reported, that
the Curriers could have no Justice in this House; and also that this House
passed the said Shoomakers Bill when there were scantly fifty persons in the
House; and that if their Friends had been there at that time, the said
Shoomakers Bill had not passed at all. And further reported, that the Bill for
the Tanners lately read in this House was not all read out, but some leaves
thereof left unread at all. Which Speeches being very slanderous and
prejudicial to the State of this House, and not meet to be passed without due
consideration therein to be had, it was thereupon resolved, That Sir William
Moore, Mr. Cromwell and Mr. Utreght should presently examine the said Bland
being now without the Door of this House, who did then go forth for that
purpose accordingly; and returning back into the said House from the
Examination of the said John Bland, Sir William Moore showed, that the said
Bland being charged by them with his said lewd demeanor, also avowed to his
face before them by two Witnesses, the one alleging in this House, that he
said the Curriers could have no Justice in this House, and the other, that the
Curriers could have no Equity in this House, did not, nor could not much deny
the same Speeches, as that there were not fifty persons in the House when the
said Shoomakers Bill passed, and that the said Tanners Bill was not all read
out; and that it was Ordered before by the House, that the Shoomakers Bill
should not be read any more till the Curriers Bill had been first read before.
And further answered, that he had been told so, but utterly refused in any wise
to show them who told him so. Whereupon the said Bland was brought by the
Sergeant to the Bar, where being particularly and severally charged by Mr.
Speaker, and confessing his name to be John Bland, and that he was a Currier of
London, could not much deny the matter he was charged with, but in some sort
excusing himself, and alleging that he had spoke some words to the foresaid
effect to some of the Shoomakers and none others, and that he was told of some
(he knew not he said of whom) both of the said Order of staying the said
Shoomakers Bill from further reading till the Curriers Bill was first read, and
also of the not through reading of all the whole Tanners Bill, and praying this
House to be good to him and to forgive him his fault if, he said, he had
offended. He was then sequestered the House. Whereupon it was afterward
resolved after sundry Motions and Speeches, that in respect he was a poor man
and had a great charge of Children, he should, if he would acknowledge his
fault and submit himself to the satisfaction of this House, be then delivered
paying his Fees, and that he should pay to the Sergeant therein for his Fee
twenty shillings, and taking the Oath of Supremacy. Which done, the said Bland
was brought in again to the Bar, who kneeling upon his knee and being signified
by Mr. Speaker of the pitiful and favorable consideration of this House
toward him, upon condition of such his submission (as aforesaid) to be made,
he then made the same submission accordingly, pronounced the said Oath at the
Table after the Clerk with his right hand upon the Bible, kissed the Book, and
so then departed. Vide concerning this matter on Thursday the 11th day of this
instant March foregoing.

The Bill for the increase of Pheasants and Partridges had its first reading;
which being read Mr. Treasurer did thereupon presently disavow and relinquish
any authority or ability by the said Bill of giving License to any to take any
Pheasants or Partridges for the provision of her Majesty's House. Which done,
Sir Henry Cock did the like openly in the House in the behalf and by the
appointment of the right honorable the Lord Steward.

The Bill for continuance of Statutes was read the third time; and a Proviso
touching the times limited for commencing of Suits upon the penalties in the
Statutes revived for the increase of Tillage, was twice read, and upon the
question Ordered to be engrossed; and the same Proviso being once read again
after the engrossing thereof, the Bill was put to the question, and passed
accordingly.

Mr. Sergeant Rodes and Mr. Doctor Barkley brought from the Lords two Bills;
the one for provision to be made for the safety of her Majesty's most Royal
Person and continuance of the Realm in Peace, with some little amendments; And
the Bill for the better and more reverend observing of the Sabbath day; with
Message from their Lordships touching that Bill, that as the same Bill upon
diverse Conferences had between both Houses has received diverse Alterations,
Additions and Amendments upon Amendments, so their Lordships do desire that the
said Bill standing in such case of Amendments, Additions and other things as
now it is in, may be fair written again in Parchment, and then so further to be
Examined by the Committees of both Houses, that by the Agreement of both Houses
the Record of so good and godly Law may remain fair and perfect, and then the
Bill to be new passed again in both Houses. Which matter being opened to the
House by Mr. Speaker (after the departure of the said Mr. Sergeant Rodes and
Mr. Doctor Barkley) the said Motion from the Lords therein was assented unto by
this House accordingly, and liked well of. Vide concerning this matter on
Thursday the third day of December foregoing.

The Amendments in the Bill for provision to be made for the safety of her
Majesty's most Royal Person, and continuance of the Realm in Peace added by the
Lords before their late sending down thereof, were only these, ( viz.) the
words [foreseeing that] were put in for the words [so as] which said words so
newly added by their Lordships were at this time twice read, the Bill it self
having before passed this House, and from hence sent up to the Lords on
Wednesday last past (being the 10th day of this instant March) and being well
allowed by the said House, the same were inserted into the same Bill
accordingly, and presently after were read the third time, and so passed upon
the question. And the said Bill was sent back again to the Lords by Mr.
Treasurer and others, with four other Bills of no great moment, with direction
to pray their Lordships, that Conference may be had touching the Bill against
Jesuits, according to the former resolution of this House.

The Amendments in the Bill for the better employing of Lands, Tenements, etc.
given to the maintenance of Highways, etc. and for relief of the Poor, and
Provisoes added to the same Bill, were all twice read; and so the Bill and all
the Amendments and Provisoes were Ordered to be engrossed.

The Amendments and Provisoes added to the Bill touching the Water-Bailiff were
twice read and Ordered with the Bill to be engrossed.

On Monday the 15th day of March, Three Bills of no great moment had each of
them one reading; of which the second being the Bill that Marriages may be
lawfully solemnized at all seasons of the Year, was twice read and Ordered to
be engrossed.

Mr. Sergeant Rodes and Mr. Doctor Barkley did bring from the Lords three
Bills; of which one was for establishment of an Award made between the Lord
Rich and Sir Thomas Barrington Knight; and the third was a Bill for the Inning
of Erith and Plumsted Marsh. Nota, That these two Bills are not at all
mentioned in the Original Journal Book of the Upper House, to have been sent
down at this time from the Lords to the House of Commons; but only the Bill
against Jesuits: and it is very probable that they were omitted through the
negligence of Anthony Mason Esquire at this time Clerk of the Upper House.

The Bill against abuses in making of Devonshire Kersies was upon the second
reading committed unto Sir William Mohun, Mr Edgcombe, Sir Francis Drake and
others, and the Bill was deliverd to Mr Prowze, who with the rest was appointed
to meet this Afternoon in the Middle Temple Hall.

It was ordered upon a motion this day by Mr Recorder of London that a Warrant
for a Writ of Privilege be awarded for setting at liberty of John Pepler now
prisoner for debt in the Counter in London, servant unto Sir Philip Sidney a
Member of this House.

A new Proviso and certain amendments now newly added to the Bill for
maintenance of the Hospital of Eastbridge in Canterbury were three times read,
and all passed upon the question.

The Bill for keeping the County Court at Morpeth for the County of
Northumberland, was upon the second reading committed unto Mr Treasurer, Mr
Comptroller, Sir Thomas Heneage and others, and the Bill was delivered to the
said Mr Treasurer, who with the rest was appointed to meet this Afternoon in
the Exchequer Court.

The amendments in the Bill against Idle and Incontinent life and for the
punishment of Rogues and Vagabonds, and the Proviso for Southwark were twice
read, the said Proviso was committed, and the Bill in the mean time order ed to
be engrossed.

Mr Doctor Barkley and Mr Doctor Carey did bring word from the Lords that their
Lordships do desire that a Committee of this House may be appointed to have
conference with their Lordships this Afternoon touching the Bill for the
breadth of Clothes, lately sent from this House unto their Lordships Whereupon
the former Committees of this House in the same Bill are appointed for that
purpose accordingly.

Three Bills of no great moment were sent up to the Lords from the House of
Commons by Mr Vice-Chamberlain and others; whereof the last was touching
certain Assurances of the Bishop of Exeter and the Dean and Chapter of the same.

On Tuesday the 16th day of March four Bill of no great moment had each of them
one reading; of which the third being the Bill for the establishment of the
Company of Curriers of London had its first reading; and the fourth touching
the taking of Apprentices was upon the second reading committed unto Sir
William Moore, Mr Solicitor, Mr Recorder and others, who were appointed to
meet this Afternoon in Lincoln's Inn Hall.

The Bill for the true using and making of Malt was upon the second reading
committed unto Mr Treasurer, Mr John Hare, Sir William Moore, and others, and
the Bill was delivered to Mr Treasurer, who with the rest was appointed to meet
this Afternoon in the Exchequer Chamber.

Mr Cromwell one of the Committees touching Devonshire Kersies called Dozens,
brought in the Bill with some amendments.

Three Bills of no great moment had each of them one reading; of which the
first being the Bill against the abuse of Corn and Grain, had its third
reading, and certain amendments which had been added unto it, after they were
twice read, were engrossed.

Four Bills were sent up to the Lords from the House of Commons by Mr Treasurer
and others, of which the last was the Bill concerning the Water-Bayliff.

The amendments and additions to the Bill that the Lands, Tenements, etc. of
Tellors, Receivors, etc. shall be liable to the payment of their debts, were
twice read, and the additions ordered to be engrossed.

Two Bills were sent down from the Lords to the House of Commons; of which the
last was for the Incorporation of the Hospital of Christ in the Town of
Sherburn; and the first for the Grant of a Subsidy of the Clergy with the
confirmation of the Lord Archbishop of Canterbury; which said Bill is mentioned
in the Original Journal Book of the Upper House to have passed this day, but
not to have been sent down to the House of Commons.

The Bill that Recusants shall not have Armor, Weapons or shot in their
Custody, was upon the second reading committed unto all the Privy Council, Sir
Henry Cock, Sir John Higham, Mr Attorney of the Wards and others, who were
appointed to meet to morrow in the Afternoon in the Exchequer.

The Bill for the maintenance of Forts, Bulwarks, etc. near to the Town of
Southampton had its second reading, and was rejected upon the question.

Post Meridiem.

Five Bills of no great moment had each of them one reading; whereof the second
being a new Bill for the true answering of Tithes had its first reading; and
the third being the Bill for the establishment of an Award made between the
Lord Rich and Sir Tho. Barrington Knight was read the third time, and committed
unto Mr Audeley, Mr Atie, Mr Wiseman and Mr Grafton, who were appointed to meet
to morrow Morning in the Exchequer Court.

On Wednesday the 17th day of March The Bill touching Slanderous Books and
Libels was read the first time, and upon the question rejected.

The Bill for keeping of the County Court at Morpeth for the County of
Northumberland was brought in again by Mr Treasurer one of the Committees, who
reported to the House, that the Committees thought good in the Bill after the
word Morpeth in the 31th line of the same Bill, to have these words [or
Alnwick] inserted and put in by the Lords.

The Amendments and Schedule in the Bill for the good Government of the City of
Westminster were twice read, and committed to Mr Treasurer, Mr Recorder, Mr
Cromwell, Mr Grafton and others, and the Bill was delivered to Mr Treasurer,
who with the rest was appointed to meet this Afternoon in the Exchequer Court.

The Bill touching Apprentices was brought in again by Mr Attorney of the
Wards, one of the Committees, who reported that he attended for the residue of
the Committees yesterday at the place and time appointed, but that none of them
came thither.

The Bill against Idle and Incontinent Life, and and for the punishment of
Rogues and Vagabonds, was read the third time, and two Provisoes added unto it
were twice read and Ordered to be engrossed. Whereupon the said Bill and the
Proviso passed upon the Question.

Mr. Attorney General and Mr. Powle did bring from the Lords a Bill for the
paving of the Town of New Windsor, and a Message from their Lordships for
present Conference with some of this House touching the Bill against fraudulent
Conveyances, etc. before passed from this House unto them; with further Message
from their Lordships, that their Lordships have sent sundry Bills to this House
which are not returned unto them again, and therefore think that those Bills
have not that ordinary course of reading and expedition which were requisite,
and therefore do pray better speed in those Bills that are nearest and readiest
to the course of passing, and then to deal with other Bills as their course
shall require.

Mr. Vice-Chamberlain, Mr. Chancellor of the Exchequer, Mr. Morris, Mr.
Attorney of the Wards, Mr. Recorder of London, Mr. Grafton and Mr. Alford were
appointed presently to repair to the Lords for Conference in the Bill against
covenous and fraudulent Conveyances. And the Bill passed this House against the
abuse of Corn and Grain, was sent up to their Lordships by the said Mr.
Vice-Chamberlain and others. And the Bill likewise for the better and more
reverent observing of the Sabbath day, fair written in Parchment according to
the former Amendments and Additions therein of both Houses, with desire that
the same new written Bill may be Examined by the former old Bill, and the
Amendments and Additions therein of both Houses, according to the former
Agreement of both the same Houses in that behalf, and so then to be passed in
both Houses accordingly. Vide on Thursday the third day, Saturday the 5th day,
Monday the 7th day, Thursday the 10th day, Saturday the 12th day, and on
Saturday the 19th day of December foregoing; as also on Monday the 22th day,
and on Tuesday the 23th day of February preceding.

The Bill for increase of Pheasants and Partridges was upon the second reading
committed unto Mr. Treasurer, Mr. Vice-Chamberlain, Sir William Moore and
others, and the Bill was delivered to Mr. Treasurer, who with the rest was
appointed to meet this Afternoon in the Exchequer Chamber.

The Amendments and Additions in the Bill for the preservation of Grain and
Game, were read and committed to Sir John Higham, Mr. William Staughton, Mr.
Audeley, Mr. Topcliffe and others, who were added to the former Committees for
increase of Pheasants and Partridges, and made with them (as it seems) one
Committee for both the foresaid Bills, being to meet as for the former this
Afternoon in the same place.

The Amendments in the Bill that Parsonages Impropriate may be disposed to
godly and charitable uses were twice read, and were Ordered to be inserted in
the Bill; which being so done, the same Amendment engrossed was read and also
passed upon the question.

Sir Christopher Hatton her Majesty's Vice-Chamberlain returning from the Lords
showed, that he and the residue of the Committes of this House appointed to
have Conference with their Lordships in the same Bill, and that their Lordships
will presently send down the same Bill to this House with some Amendments as
their said Lordships do think meet. And showed further, that he and the residue
moved their Lordships touching the foresaid new written Bill for the better and
more reverent observing of the Sabbath day; and that thereupon their Lordships
and the Committees of this House did examine the said new written Bill with the
said old former Bill, and the Amendments and Additions of the same Bill, the
said whole new Bill being read and found to agree without alteration or want of
any one word, moved, that the said new written Bill may be passed presently,
which was thereupon so done accordingly. Vide de ista materia on the day
foregoing.

The Bill that was first read this day, and which was upon the reading thereof
rejected, viz. the Bill touching slanderous Books and Libels was by Mr.
Speakers Commandment delivered by the Clerk of the Parliament unto him in the
Afternoon of the same day before the siting of the House, and was he said,
delivered over by him to Mr. Attorney General, with whom it seems it still
remained.

Post Meridiem.

Mr Wiseman one of the Committees in the Bill for the establishing of an Award
made between the Lord Rich and Sir Thomas Barrington Knight, brought in the
Bill with an amendment of the alteration of one word only.

Four Bills of no great moment had each of them one reading; of which the last
being the Bill for Incorporation of the Hospital of Christ in the Town of
Sherburn was upon the second reading committed unto Mr Chancellor of the
Exchequer, Mr Recorder, Sir Drew Drury and others, and the Bill was delivered
to Mr Recorder, who with the rest was appointed to meet to morrow in the
Afternoon in the Exchequer Court.

On Thursday the 18th day of March, Seven Bill of no great moment had each of
them one reading; of which one being the Bill that Lands, Tenements, etc. of
Tellors, Receivors, etc. Shall be liable to the payment of their debts was read
the third time, and the amendment and Schedule annexed was also read the third
time, and the Bill and all passed upon the question. And another being the Bill
for the Inning of Erith and Plumstead-Marsh was upon the second reading
committed unto Mr. Treasurer, Mr Vice-Chamberlain and others, who were
appointed to meet this Afternoon in the Exchequer Chamber.

Mr Treasurer one of the Committees in the Bill for the true making of Malt
remembered the Committees to meet in the Exchequer Chamber this Afternoon.

The Bill for the better Execution of the Statute of the thirteenth of her
Majesty for reformation of certain disorders in Ministers of the Church was
read the first time.

Four Bills of no great moment were sent up to the Lords from the House of
Commons; of which the second was the Bill, That the Lands, Tenements, etc. of
Tellors, Receivors, etc. may be liable, etc. And the last was the Bill for the
better and more reverent observing of the Sabbath day. Which said Bills were
sent up by Mr Vice-Chamberlain and others.

Mr. Sergeant Rodes and Mr. Doctor Barkley did bring from the Lords three
Bills, viz. the Bill touching the breadth of Wollen-Cloths with some
Amendments, which Bill before passed this House; The Bill against fraudulent
means used to defeat Wardships, Liveries and Primer seisins, and the third was
a Bill for the assurance of certain Lands to the Lord Hunsdon, with report
touching that Bill, that Robert Elrington and Alice his Wife were present
before the Lords and gave their consent to the passing of the Bill.

Nota, That the second of the said Bills is omitted in the Original
Journal Book of the Upper House through the negligence of the Clerk.

The Bill for preservation of Woods near the Town of Crambrooke in Kent was
upon the second reading committed unto Sir Philip Sidney, Sir Henry Nevill and
others, who were appointed to meet upon Saturday in the Afternoon in the open
Exchequer Court.

Three Bills of no great moment had each of them one reading; of which the last
being the Bill touching the Curriers of London, was upon the second reading
committed unto Sir Philip Sidney, Sir Henry Nevill, Mr. Rotheram and others,
and the Bill was delivered to Sir William Moore one of the said Committees, who
with the rest was appointed to meet this Afternoon in the open Exchequer Court.

The Amendments and Schedule in the Bill for the good Government of the City of
Westminster, were three times read and so passed upon the question.

On Friday the 19th day of March the Bill for the assurance of certain Lands to
the Lord Hunsdon, was read the second time.

Mr. Elrington and Alice his Wife being brought to the Bar did there give their
open assents to the passing of the said Bill.

Sir William Moore one of the Committees in the Bill for the Curriers, brought
in the Bill with some Amendments, and declared further, that upon their
Conference together they misliked much of many parts of the Bill, as to have
persons made free of London by Act of Parliament, and that it should breed a
very hard course and prejudicial precedent to all sorts of Artificers dwelling
within three Miles of the City of London.

Mr. Treasurer one of the Committees in the Bill touching the true making of
Malt showed, that they have met but have done nothing in the same Bill, and so
brought in the same Bill to be now read only for the reviving of the former
Statute in that behalf without any Alteration or Addition, which Bill was then
in that course so read accordingly, and the Amendment therein for the
limitation of the continuance twice read, and so the Bill was Ordered to be
engrossed.

The Amendments in the Bill against Jesuits, Seminary Priests and such other
disobedient Subjects being perfected according to the said Agreement of this
House therein, were now upon the question likewise passed and assented unto
accordingly.

Mr. Sergeant Rodes and Mr. Doctor Barkley did bring from the Lords the Bill
against Covenous and fraudulent Conveyances returned with some Amendments.

Two Bills of no great moment had each of them one reading; of which the first
being a Bill for the better Execution of the Statute of the thirteenth of her
Majesty's Reign for reformation of certain disorders in the Ministers of the
Church, was upon the second reading committed unto Mr. Treasurer, Mr.
Solicitor, Mr. Recorder and others, who were appointed to meet this Afternoon
in the Exchequer Chamber.

The Amendments in the Bill touching the breadth of Woollen Cloths were read
three times, and so the said Amendments passed upon the question.

The Bill against fraudulent means used to defeat Wardships, Liveries and
primer seisins was upon the second reading committed unto Mr. Vice-Chamberlain,
Mr. Chancellor of the Exchequer and others, who were appointed to meet this
Afternoon in the Exchequer Chamber.

Mr. Sergeant Rodes and Mr. Doctor Barkley did bring from the Lords the Bill
for preservation of Timber in the County of Surrey, Sussex and Kent returned
with some Amendments, and a request also from their Lordships, that some of
this House may be appointed to have Conference with their Lordships at three of
the Clock this Afternoon, touching a branch in the Bill for continuance of
Statutes which concerns the eating of Fish upon Wednesday. Whereupon were
appointed thereunto all the Privy Council, Mr. Morris, Sir William Moore, Sir
Thomas Heneage, Sir Henry Cock, Mr. Cromwell, Mr. Recorder and others.

Two Bills of no great moment had each of them one reading; of which the first
being the Bill for the perfecting of assurances was read the third time and
stayed from the question till to Morrow.

On Saturday the 20th day of March, Three Bills of no great moment had each of
them one reading; of which the second being the Bill for the better employing
of Lands, Tenements, etc. to the repairing of Highways and for the relief of
the Poor, had its third reading, and was rejected upon the question.

The Amendments in the Bill against Moorburning were twice read and agreed to
be inserted in the engrossed Bill, and being so presently inserted was read the
third time and passed upon the question.

The Amendments in the Bill against Covenous and fraudulent Conveyances were
twice read and agreed unto by the House, and Ordered to be engrossed in the
Bill accordingly.

Mr. Chancellor of the Exchequer one of the Committees in the Bill for the
Inning of Erith and Plumstead-Marsh, and in the Bill for the incorporation of
the Hospital of Eastbridge, brought in the same Bill with some Amendments.

Mr. Treasurer one of the Committees in the Bill for the better Execution of
the Statute of the thirteenth of her Majesty for reformation of disorders of
Ministers of the Church, brought in the old Bill and also a new Bill, praying,
that the said new Bill may be read, which was thereupon twice read and Ordered
upon the question to be engrossed.

There were sent up to the Lords from the House of Commons nine Bills by Mr.
Treasurer and others, of which the last was the Bill for Chichester-Haven.

The Amendments in the Bill for the Inning of Erith and Plumstead-Marsh were
thrice read and agreed upon by the House to be passed with the Bill, and Mr.
Baptist on the one part, with one Jacob Seal on the other part, were heard in
the House, and after their departure out again the House did offer some
Speeches and Motions in the matter, but did rise without any resolutions
therein. Vide March 24. postea.

On Monday the 22th day of March, the Bill for the draining of Fens, Marshes,
etc. was upon the second reading committed unto Mr. Chancellor of the
Exchequer, Sir Richard Knightley, Mr. John North and others, who were appointed
to meet to Morrow in the Afternoon in the Exchequer Chamber.

The Bill against excessive Fees and Taxations in Ecclesiastical Courts, was
upon the second reading committed unto Mr. Beale, Mr. Strickland, Mr. Thomson,
Sir William Herbert, Mr. Morris and others, who were appointed to meet this
Afternoon in the Exchequer Chamber.

The Bill for perfecting of Assurances after sundry Arguments was read the
fourth time, and again after the same reading thereof the Bill was referred to
the Conference of the former Committees, as also of Mr. Owen, Mr. Shirley, Mr.
Dalton and Mr. David Williams to meet this Afternoon in the Exchequer Chamber,
to confer this Bill with that against Covenous and fraudulent Conveyances
together, and aftewards further to inform this House.

Mr. Sergeant Rodes and Mr. Doctor Barkley did bring from the Lords three
Bills, viz. The Bill with one only word amended touching Artificers using the
Cutting of Leather, which before passed in this House; the Bill with some
Amendments and Additions for reformations of errors in Fines and Recoveries in
the twelve Shires of Wales and Counties Palatine; and a Bill to provide remedy
for her Majesty's Wardships, Liveries and primer seizins in certain Cases.

And they also showed that their Lordships did desire present Conference with
half a dozen of this House touching the good Government of the City of
Westminster. Whereupon were presently appointed Mr. Treasurer, Mr. Robert
Cecill, Mr. Recorder, Mr. Cromwell, Mr. Wroth, Mr. Owen and Mr. Morris, who
returning from their Lordships showed, that their Lordships do not very well
allow of the Addition of this House in the said Bill to restrain the Liberty
and Jurisdiction of the Dean of Westminster, as well in his own Liberty as in
his Government of the Prebendaries and Ministers of the Church there, and so he
thinks their Lordships will add something to that purpose to the Additions of
this House.

The second Proviso to the Bill for incorporation of the Hospital of Christ in
the Town of Sherborn was twice read and Ordered to be engrossed.

The Bill for the Execution of the Statute of the thirteenth of the Queens
Majesty, for reformation of certain disorders in the Ministers of the Church,
was read the third time, and after many Arguments passed upon the question.

On Tuesday the 23th day of March, Mr. Attorney of the Wards one of the
Committees in the Bill to provide remedy against fraudulent means used to
defeat Wardships, Liveries and primer seisins, brought in the same Bill again,
which had this day its first reading.

Mr. Morris one of the Committees in the Bill for perfecting of Assurances
brought in the same; And also the Bill against Covenous and fraudulent
Conveyances, and also a new Bill.

The Amendments in the Bill touching the taking of Apprentices were twice read,
and Committeed to the former Committees, and to Mr. Williams, Mr. Hare, Mr.
Cromwell, Mr. Wroth, Mr. Cole and Mr. Prowze; and the Bill was delivered to Mr.
Wroth, who with the rest was appointed to meetu pon Thursday next in the
Afternoon in the Middle Temple Hall.

Mr Vice-Chamberlain one of the Committees in the Bill against defeating of
Wardships, Liveries and primer Scisins, Showed, that the Committees have
travailed and for some things by them thought requisite to be amended do think
(if this House shall so like.) That some of the same Committees may pray
Conference with the Lords therein. Whereupon it was agreed, that the said
former Committees, or some convenient number of them may so do. And then Four
Bills of no great Moment were sent up to the Lords by Mr Vice-Chamberlain and
others; of which the last was the Bill for the Paving of the Town of
New-Windsor in the County of Berks.

Three Bills of no great moment had each of them one reading; of which the
first being the Bill for incorporation of the Hospital of Christ in the Town of
Sherborn near Durham was read the third time and passed upon the Question.

The Amendments in the Bill for disarming of Recusants were twice read, and the
Bill Ordered to be engrossed.

Upon further Arguments and Motions had touching the proceeding in the Bill for
the Inning of Erith and Plumstead Marsh, it was agreed, that Mr Smith, Mr
Baptist, Mr Youngue and Roger James be warned by the Sergeant of this House to
be here to morrow Morning, that upon some Conference to be had with them by
this House, the said Bill may the better proceed to the passing.

On Wednesday the Twenty fourth day of March, Four Bills of no great moment had
each of them one reading; of which the first being the Bill for the true
payment of the Debts of Philip Bassett Esquire, was upon the second reading
Committed unto Mr Vice-Chamberlain, Mr Chancellor, Sir Richard Knghtley, Mr
Digby and others, and the Bill was delivered to Mr Vice-Chamberlain: all these
to meet to morrow in the Afternoon in the Exchequer Chamber.

And the second being the Bill for suppressing of Pirates and Piracy was upon
the second reading Committed unto Mr Treasurer, Sir Drew Drewrie, Sir Nicholas
Woodruff, Mr Richard Brown, Mr Docter Fletcher and others, who were appointed
to meet on Saturday next in the Afternoon in the Exchequer Chamber.

The Amendments and Additions in the Bill for reformation of Errors in Fines
and Common recoveries in the twelve Shires of Wales and Counties Palatine, were
read Three times and passed accordingly.

Mr Sergeant Rodes and Mr Doctor Barkely did bring from the Lords word, that
their Lordships do presently desire Conference with some of this House touching
the Bill for Continuance of Statutes.

The Bill for the incorporation of the Hospital of Christ in the Town of
Sherborn near Durham with two others of no great moment were sent up to the
Lords by Mr Treasurer and others, who were also appointed to attend the Lords
in the Conference touching the Bill for continuance of Statutes according to
their Lordships requests.

Mr Vice Chancellor of the Exchequer one of the Committees in the Bill against
frauds used in defeating of Wardships, Liveries and primer Seisins, showed,
that they have met and travailed in the same Bill, and have thought good to
make a new Bill; but yet nevertheless not meaning to impeach the old Bill
coming from the Lords; and that the said new Bill (he said) he thought was not
so sufficiently considered of by the said Committees, but that it requires
further consideration amongst them; praying notwithstanding a present reading
of the said Bill. Which was thereupon so read accordingly, Mr Grafton one of
the Committees in the Bill for preservation of Woods near Crambrook in Kent,
brought in the Bill again.

Two Bills of no great moment had each of them one reading; of which the first
being the Bill for the true payment of Tithes was read the Third time, and
after many long Arguments dashed upon the Question.

Mr Chancellor of the Exchequer returning from the Lords showed, that this
morning as he came to this House he found Mr Baptist, Mr Customer Smith, and
the Solicitor of Jacob Seal, who were all of them agreed to such Conditions of
recompense and consideration to be had toward the said Jacob, as that the Bill
may with their liking be read to the passing; whereupon the Amendments.....
same..... But that which should here follow is through the negligence of the
Clerk wholly omitted; yet it may seem, as may be Collected out of a former
passage of this business, on Tuesday the 23d day of this instant March
foregoing, that this Bill here mentioned by Sir Walter Mildmay Chancellor of
the Exchequer, was the Bill touching the Inning of Erith and Plumstead Marsh;
and that the Amendments of the same Bill which had been formerly thrice read on
Saturday the 20th day: of this instant March, did at this time pass the House.

Mr Treasurer and the residue returning from the Lords, Mr Treasurer showed,
that the cause for which their Lordships desired conference was, that in
respect of the great experienced benefit grown to increase of the Navy and
Mariners of this Realm by the late Law for eating of Fish upon Wednesdays,
their Lordships wished a Provision to be made for the eating of Fish and no
flesh at all hereafter upon the Wednesday in all places of this Realm Twenty
five miles distant from the Sea, and also in the Cities of London, York and
Bristol, and in all places of this Realm within five miles of the said Cities.
Whereunto he said, as he and the residue could say nothing, because they knew
not the pleasure of this House therein; so he said he thought their Lordships
Additions in the Bill passed this House unto the Lords for the good Government
of the City of Westminster, did seek too much to abridge the Dean of
Westminster being the Lord of the said Borough, in his Liberty and Jurisdiction
of his own House and Servants, and of the Prebendaries and other Churchmen and
their Servants, being all under his own peculiar government: And also that he
thought their Lordships could likewise help the same again with some Amendment
to the Amendments of this House in the same Bill to be sent down hither and
assented unto by this House.

On Thursday the 25th day of March, Thomas Patrick being brought to the Bar for
serving a Subpoena upon Mr Cook a Member of this House during the time of this
present Session of Parliament, in the behalf and at the Suit of Margery Dike,
was ordered upon his Submission to deliver a Copy of the Bill to Mr Cook
gratis, to give him Twenty Shillings for the Charge of his answer, and to pay
the Sergeants Fees.

Roger Vanconge a Dutchman and Merchant Stanger being this day brought by the
Sergeant to the Bar for Arresting of John Werrall Servant unto Thomas Powell
Esquire a Member of this House, for Debt, and carrying him into the Counter of
Woodstreet in London; And the said John Werrall being also brought to this
House, it was after several Examinations had by this House as well of the said
Roger Vanconge, as of the said John Werrall, at last after many long Motions
and Arguments upon the circumstances falling out in the said Examinations
resolved, after the doubtfulness of the greater Number of Voices upon the
Question, by the Division of the House, That the said John Werrall should not
have privilege of this House, but should first openly in the House take Oath
against the Supremacy of the Bishop of Rome, and then be remanded to the said
Prison of the Counter again in state as he was before, which was so done
accordingly, for that it did manifestly appear unto this House as well by the
Confession of the same Werrall, as also by the confession and by a Letter of
his own subscribed with his own hand (and so confessed by himself) directed to
one Dakings, that fraudulently and Covenously he procured himself to be
received into the Service of the said Mr Powell this Parliament time to escape
from Arrests, to the delaying and defeating of his Creditors; upon which
dividing of the House there were with the Yea or I eighty five Voices, and with
the No but sixty nine.

Mr Vice-Chamberlain one of the Committees in the Bill touching Wards and
Liveries, brought in the Bill again with some Amendments, and referred the same
Amendments to the further reading of the Bill; which Bill was then read
accordingly, and the Amendments twice read, and the Bill was Ordered to be
Engrossed.

Mr Chancellor of the Exchequer one of the Committees in the Bill touching
draining of Fenns brought in the Bill again, as a Bill thought good by the same
Committees to be reserved till the next Parliament, and to be left in the House
for that purpose.

On Friday the 26th day of March the Amendments and Additions in the Bill for
preservation of Woods near unto the Town of Crambrook in the County of Kent was
upon the second reading Ordered to be committed again to the former Committees.

The Bill for naturalizing of certain English men's Children born beyond the
Seas was upon the third reading passed.

Mr Wroth one of the Committees in the Bill for the increase of Pheasants and
Partridges brought in the Bill again with some Amendments, and the same
Amendments being twice read the Bill was again after sundry speeches and
Arguments committed to the former Committeees.

Mr Sergeant Rodes and Mr Powle did bring from the Lords two Bills; of which
one was the Bill for the good Government of the City of Westminster.

Mr Chancellor of the Exchequer one of the Committees in the Bill for the true
payment of the Debts of Philip Bassett Esquire, brought in the Bill again as a
Bill agreed by them to be reserved until the next Parliament.

Six Bills of no great moment had each of them one reading, and were sent up to
the Lords from the House of Commons; of which one was the Bill (with the
Amendments) for the keeping of the County Court at Morpeth and the Town of
Alnwick in the County of Northumberland; and another Bill being for the safe
keeping of obstinate Recusants Armor was sent back again unto the said House
from their Lordships (who gave it presently three readings) by Sergeant Rodes
and Mr Powle.

The Bill touching Wardships and Liveries was read the third time and dashed
upon the question, there being but seventy five Voices for it and ninety five
against it.

The Bill for the good Government of the City of Westminster with the
Amendments according to the last Additions was sent up to the Lords by Mr
Treasurer and others.

Mr William Stoughton one of the Committees in the Bill against Excessive Fees
and taxations in the Eclesiastical Courts, brought in the Bill again.

On Saturday the 27th day of March, after the Letany was read and the prayers
ended, Mr. Speaker signified unto the House that her Majesty's Commandment was,
that this House do not sit this present day, but do assemble here again on
Monday next in the Forenoon, at which time they shall then know her Majesty's
further pleasure.

On Monday the 29th day of March Mr Sergeant Rodes and Mr. Doctor Barkeley did
bring from the Lords the Bill for the maintenance of the Pier and Cobb of Lime
Regis in the County of Dorset with some Amendments.

The Bill for increase of Pheasants and Partridges was twice read, and the
Amendments thereof thrice, and then it was put to the Question whether or no
the said Bill with the Amendments should pass; And it was found that there were
one hundred and thirteen Voices for the passing of the Bill, and but seventy
five against it.

The Amendments and Schedule in the Bill for the maintenance of the Pier and
Cobb of Lime Regis were thrice read, and so passed accordingly upon the
Question.

The Amendments also in the Bill for the safe keeping of the Armor of
obstinate Recusants were thrice read and passed upon the Question.

Post Meridiem.

Three Bills of no great moment were sent up to the Lords from the House of
Commons by Mr. Treasurer and others; of which the first was the Bill touching
the Armor of obstinate Recusants, and is omitted in the Original Journal Book
of the Upper House; but the other two touching Pheasants and Partridges with
their Amendments, and touching the Pier and Cobb of Lime Regis, are there set
down to have been sent up as aforesaid.

Mr Sergeant Gaudy and Mr Sergeant Rodes did bring down from the Lords to the
House of Commons the Bill of Subsidy (which is omitted in the Original
Journal Book of the Upper House) and the Bill for her Majesty's Gracious,
general and free Pardon; which being once read passed upon the Question
accordingly.

Her Majesty with diverse of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal being set in the
Upper House about..... of the Clock this Afternoon; the Knights, Citizens and
Burgesses of the House of Commons had notice thereof, and thereupon repaired
thither with John Puckering Sergeant at Law their Speaker, who being placed at
the Rail or Bar at the lower end of the said Upper House, did according to the
usual form humbly crave her Majesty's most Royal Assent to such good Laws as
had passed the two Houses. Whereupon her Majesty having by her Assent given
Life to thirty public Acts and nineteen private, the Parliament was Prorogued
unto the 20th day of May next ensuing, and at last after five other
Prorogations it was Dissolved upon Wednesday the 15th day of September Anno 28
Regin. Eliz. Anno Domini 1586.

THE JOURNAL OF THE House of LORDS.
An Exact and perfect Journal of the Passages of the Upper House in the
Parliament holden at Westminster, Anno 28 Reginae Eliz. Anno Domini 1586. which
began there on Saturday the 29th Day of October (after two Several Prorogations
thereof) and then and there continued until it was at length Dissolved on
Thursday the 23th Day of March, Anno 29 Reginae ejusdem.

THE Journal of this Parliament both in respect of the greatness of the matter
handled in it, being the business of Mary Queen of Scots, as also of the many
rare Precedents which happened in the Carriage of it, the Queens Person being
represented and the Lord Chancellors place supplied by others, with the
Adjournment and re-assembling again of the same, somewhat extraordinary, is and
ought to be esteemed most worthy of observation. And it is most plain that this
Parliament was at the first (beyond the Queens own expectation) summoned and
afterward Assembled upon no other cause or ground than the timely and strange
discovery of that bloody and merciless Treason Plotted by Babington and others
for the violent cutting off her Vide de tota ista materia in Annal Eliz. a
Guliel. Camd. script. edit Lugdun. Batav. An. Dom. 1625. a pagin. 432. ad
pagin. 472.
Majesty's life, of which Mary Queen of Scots had been first by a most Just and
Honorable Trial fully Convicted, and afterward Judicially pronounced to have
been in a high nature guilty. But yet her Majesty not satisfied with her so
just a Trial and Attainder, assembled the Parliament on purpose, that so all
those former proceedings how just so ever might be further Committed and
referred to the impartial examination and final Judgment of the whole Realm.
And that this great Council of the Kingdom was merely called together at this
time about this business is most plain, because the last Prorogation of ths
former Parliament holden in Anno 27 Regin. Eliz. Anno Dom. 1584. was from the
26th day of April Anno 28 Regin. Eliz. Anno Dom. 1586. unto the 14th day of
November then next ensuing: But long before the said day the former Conspiracy
being discovered about the latter end of July in Anno eodem, the former
Parliament was dissolved on Wednesday the fourteenth day of September
following, in the 28th year of her Majesty; And this new one Assembled on
Saturday the 29th day of October immediately after ensuing: At which time the
Queen came not to the Upper House in Person, but was represented by three
Commissioners; not as her Majesty afterward professed, Gul. Camd. in Annal.
Eliz. supracitatis page 468. line is 1, 2, 3.
because she feared the Violence of any Assassinte; but because she abhorred to
be an hearer of so foul, and unnatural a conspiracy plotted against her by the
Scottish Queen, a Kinswoman so near to her Highness; Yet by this means her
absence doubtless drew on the greater safety; and her Loving and Loyal Subjects
did the more clearly perceive in how great and unavoidable danger she stood as
long as that Queen lived, and were therefore doubtless stirred up to consult in
this so important a Cause with the greater Zeal and earnestness for the
preservation of Religion, the Security of her Majesty's Life, and the safety of
these Realms. Which matters the Lords of the Upper House did so seriously
intend, as that in this first meeting in this present Parliament, which lasted
from the foresaid 29th day of October being Saturday, unto the second day of
December next following being Friday, it appears not in the Original
Journal Book of the Upper House, that any one Bill public or private was read,
or so much as once treated of.

This Parliament was summoned to have begun on Saturday the 15th day of October
Anno 28 Regin. Eliz. at which said day her Highness for great and weighty
causes and Considerations her thereunto especially moving, did prolong and
adjourn the said Parliament unto Thursday being the 27th day of the said Month
of October, by virtue of a Writ under the Great Seal dated the eighth day of
this present October; whereupon on the said 15th day of October the Archbishop
of Canterbury with diverse other Lords and Counselors repaired to the
Parliament Chamber commonly called the Upper House, and there in presence of
diverse Lords Spiritual and Temporal the Knights, Citizens and Burgesses
summoned to the same Parliament did declare her Highnesses pleasure to Prorogue
the same Parliament from this first summoned day until the 27th of the said
Month, and thereupon the Writ for the said Prorogation was publicly read by
the Clerk of the Upper House.

Upon the said 27th day of October Sir Thomas Bromley Knight Lord Chancellor of
England, and diverse Lords with a good number of the House of Commons met again
in the Parliament Chamber, and did again Prorogue this present Parliament after
the usual and accustomed form unto the Saturday next following, being the 29th
day of this present October.

On which said 29th day of October the Parliament held accordingly, and the
Lords in the Afternoon repaired to the Upper House, and there placed themselves
according to their several Degrees; Upon which the Knights, Citizens and
Burgesses having notice that the Lords expected their presence, repaired to the
said House, and being let in as many as could conveniently, Sir Thomas Bromley
the Lord Chancellor declared unto the whole Assembly, that her Majesty was so
hindered by great and urgent occasions as she could not be present, yet had
notwithstanding given full Authority to Three Members of the Upper House in her
Majesty's name and stead to begin the said Parliament. Whose names are entered
in the Original Journal Book of this Parliament in manner and form following.

Regina representata per Commissionarios, viz.
Archiepiscopum Cantuariensem. Dominum Burleigh Thesaurarium, and Comitem
Darbiae Magnum Seneschallum. All the Lords then present were these following.
Archiepiscopus Cantuarien. Thomas Bromley Miles Dominus Cancellarius.
Archiepiscopus Eboracen. Dominus Burleigh. Dominus Thesaurarius Angliae.
Comites.
Comes Oxon Magnus Camerarius. Comes Kantiae. Comes Darbiae Magnus
Seneschallus. Comes Wigorn. Comes Rutland. Comes Cumberland. Comes Sussex.
Comes Pembrook. Comes Hartford. Comes Lincoln. Vicecomes Mountague.
Episcopi.
Episcopus London. Episcopus Dunelmen. Episcopus Winton. Episcopus Bathon. and
Wellen. Episcopus Sarisburien. Episcopus Roffen. Episcopus Exon. Episcopus
Cestren.
Barons.
Dominus Howard Admirallus. Dominus Aburgavenny. Dominus Zouch. Dominus
Barkley. Dominus Morley. Dominus Dacres. Dominus Cobham. Dominus Stafford.
Dominus Gray de Wilton. Dominus Lumley. Dominus Stourton. Dominus Darcie.
Dominus Sands. Dominus Windsor. Dominus Wentworth. Dominus Borough. Dominus
Cromwell. Dominus Evers. Dominus Rich. Dominus Willoughby de Parham. Dominus
Darcie de Chiche. Dominus Shandois. Dominus St John. Dominus Buckhurst. Dominus
Delaware. Dominus Compton. Dominus Cheney. Dominus Norris.
The Lords being all set in this Order in their Parliament-Robes, and the
Judges placed, with other Attendants and Assistants of the Upper House, being
also before the said Lords Commissioners had taken their places on the right
side of the Chair of State, the Lord Chancellor showed forth the Queens
Majesty's Letters Patents, by which She committed full Power to the Archbishop
of Canterbury, the Lord Burleigh Lord Treasurer of England, and the Earl of
Darby, to supply her place in the said Parliament, which were as follows: viz.

Hodie cum omnes Proceres Robis Parliamentaribus induti in suo Loco quisque
sederent, and Milites, Cives and Burgenses qui ad hoc praesens Parliamentum
summoniti fuerunt, praesso essent, and jam universt tam Proceres quam Communes
Reginae adventum expectarent; Thomas Bromley Miles Dominus Cancellarius exponit
omnibus, Regiam Majestatem maximis and urgentissimis causis adeo esse
impeditam, ut non queat impraesentiarum commode interesse ut decreverat.
Nihilominus inquit, sua Majestas Literis suis Patentibus plenam potestatem
commisit Reverendissimo in Christo Patri Johanni Cantuar. Archiepiscopo totius
Angliae Primati and Metropolitano, ac praedilecto and fideli suo Willielmo
Domino de Burleigh Domino Thesaurario Angliae, ac charissimo Consanguineo suo
Henrico Comiti Darbiae, ad facienda nomine suo omnia and singula quae in dicto
Parliamento gerenda essent; ut per easdem Liter as Patentes (...) apparet, quas
hiis dictis Dominus Cancellarius Clerico Parliamentar. public legendas
tradidit. Earum autem tenor sequitur in haec verba.

ELizabetha Dei graetia Angliae, Franciae and Hiberniae Regina, fidei Defensor,
etc. Omnibus ad quos praesentes Literae pervenerint, Salutem. Sciatis quod cum
de advisamento Concilii nostri pro quibusdam arduis and urgentibus negotiis
nos, statum and defensionem Regni nostri Angliae ae Ecclesiae Anglicanae
concernen. quoddam Parliamentum nostrum apud Civitatem nostram Westmonaster.
29o die instant. mensis Octobris teneri ordinavimus; quia vero propter certas
causas ad Parliamentum praedictum non potuerimus interesse, nos de
circumspectione, sideliate and industria Reverendissimi in Christo Patris
Johannis Cantuar. Archiepiscopi totius Angliae Primat. and Metropolitan. ac
praedilecti and fidelis nostri Willielmi Domini de Burleigh Domini Thesaurarii
Angliae, ac charissimi Consanguinei nostri Henrici Comitis Darbiae, plenam
fiduciam reportand. eisdem Archiepiscopo, Willielmo Domino de Burleigh and
Henrico Comiti Darbiae, and duobus eorum ad Parliamentum praedictum nomine meo
inchoand. and tenend. negotiaque praedict. exponend. and declarand. ac exponi
and declarari faciend. necnon in negotiis illis and Parliamento praedicto, ac
omnibus and sin gulis in eo procedend. and ad faciend. omnia and singula quae
pro nobis and per nos pro bono regimine and gubernatione praedicti Regni nostri
Angliae ac aliorum Dominiorum nostrorum eidem Regno nostro pertinen. ibid.
fuerint faciend. necnon ad Parliamentum illud, si necesse fuerit, continuand.
adjournand. and prorogand. de assensu Concilii nostri praedicti plenam tenore
praesentium committimus prtestatem. Dantes ulterius de assensu ejusdem Concilii
nostri tam universis and singulis Archiepiscopis, Episcopis, Comitibus,
Vicecomitibus, Baronibus and Militibus quam omnibus aliis quorum interest ad
Parliamentum nostrum praedictum conventur. similit. tenore praesentium firmiter
in Mandatis, Quod eisdem Archiepiscopo, Willielmo Domino Burleigh, and Henrico
Comiti Darbiae, and duobus eorum intendant in praemissis in fornia praedicta.
In cujus rei testimonium has Literas nostras sieri fecimus Patentes. Test
meipsa apud Westmonasterium vicesimo octavo die Octobris, Anno Regni nostri
vicesimo octavo.

Per ipsam Reginam, etc.

The Letters Patents foregoing being read, the said three Lords Commissioners
leaving their own places, went to a Seat prepared for them on the right side of
the Chair of State beneath the steps. Then the said Lord Chancellor going first
to the said Lords, and conferring a while with them, went to his accustomed
place, and there made intimation of the Cause of this present Summons of
Parliament; which, as he said, were no usual Causes, not for making of Laws,
whereof her Majesty thought there were more made than were duly executed, nor
for Fifteenths and Subsidies, although there were some cause; yet her Majesty
would not charge her loving Subjects so far at this time: But that the cause
was rare and extraordinary, of great weight, great peril, and dangerous
consequence. Then he declared, what dangerous practices had been contrived of
late, and how miraculously the Providence of God had by discovery thereof,
beyond all humane Policy, preserved her Majesty, the destruction of whose
Sacred Person was most traitorously compassed and imagined. Here he showed what
misery the loss of so Noble a Queen would have brought to all Estates; and
said, That although some of them had suffered according to their demerits, yet
one remained that by due course of Law had received her Sentence, which was the
chief cause of this Assembly, and wherein her Majesty required their faithful
advice; and therefore, said he, you may orderly proceed therein. And you of the
House of Commons are to make present choice of some one amongst you to be your
Speaker. and to present him unto the Lords Lieutenants as soon as conveniently
you may.

As Soon as the Lord Chancellor had ended his Speech, the Clerk of the
Parliament stood up and read the Names of the Receivors and Tryors of Petitions
in French, which were as follows.

Receivors of Petitions for England, Ireland, France and Scotland, Sir
Christopher Wray Knight Lord Chief Justice, Sir Gilbert Gerrard Knight Master
of the Rolls, Sir Thomas Gaudy Knight one of the Justices of..... Doctor
Awberry and Doctor Ford.

Receivors of Petitions for Gascoigne and other Lands and Countries beyond the
Seas, and of the Isles, Sir Edmund Anderson Knight Lord Chief Justice of the
Common Pleas, Sir Roger Manwood Knight Lord Chief Baron, Francis Windham one of
the Justices of..... Doctor Barkeley and Doctor Carry.

Tryors of Petitions for England, Ireland, Wales and Scotland, the Archbishop
of Canterbury, the Earl of Darby Lord High Steward of England, the Earl of
Rutland, the Earl of Essex, the Bishop of London, the Bishop of Winchester, the
Bishop of Salisbury, the Lord Howard of Essingham Lord High Admiral of England,
the Lord Cobham, the Lord Gray of Wilton.

Tryors of Petitions for Gascoigne and other Lands and Countries beyond the
Seas and of the Isles, the Archbishop of York, the Earl of Oxford great
Chamberlain of England, the Earl of Warwick, the Earl of Pembroke, the Bishop
of Durham, the Bishop of Lincoln, the Bishop of Rochester, the Lord Hunsdon
Chamberlain to the Queen, the Lord Lumley, and the Lord Buckhurst.

As Soon as the Clerk of the Parliament had read these Names, and had likewise
ended other things of course belonging unto them, viz. That the first Tryors of
England, etc. or any four of them, calling unto them the Lord Chancellor and
the Lord Treasurer, and also the Queens Sergeants, should at their leisure meet
together in the Chamberlains Chamber: And that the last Tryors of Gascoigne,
etc. or any four of them, calling unto them the Queens Sergeants and the Queens
Attorney and Solicitor, should hold their place when their leisure did serve
them to meet in the Treasurers Chamber. Then the Lords Lieutenants adjourned
the Parliament until Monday next following.

This day were diverse Proxies returned, of which the Extraordinary ones were
these that follow.

29o die Octobris introductae sunt Literae procuratoriae Marmad. Episcopi
Meneven. in quibus Procuratores suos constituit Johannem Archiepiscopum
Cantuar. Johannem Episcopum London, and Thomam Episcopum Wintonien.

Item introductae sunt Literae procuratoriae Willielmi Episcopi Cestren. in
quibus Procuratorem suum constituit Johannem Episcopum Cantuarien.

Item introductae sunt Literae procuratoriae Hugonis Episcopi Bangor. in quibus
Procuratores suos constituit Johannem Episcopum Cantuarien. and Willielmum
Dominum Burleigh Thesaurarium.

Item introductae sunt Literae procuratoriae Johannis Episcopi Carliolen. in
quibus Procuratorem suum constituit Edwinum Archiepiscopum Ebor.

Nota, That these were all the Extraordinary or unsual Proxies that are entered
in the Original Journal Book of the Upper House to have been returned this
Parliament: For whereas the Spiritual Lords do for the most part constitute two
Proctors, and the Temporal Lords but one, and those likewise of their own
Order, here the Bishop of St David's nominated three, the Bishops of Chester and
Carlisle but one apiece, and the Bishop of Bangor did constitute the Lord
Burleigh Lord Treasurer of England his Joint Proctor with John Bishop of
Canterbury, which I take to be the only Precedent with two others in Anno 5
Eliz. during all the Parliaments of Queen Elizabeth's Reign, where a Spiritual
Lord did nominate a Temporal for his Proctor, or a Temporal Lord a Spiritual,
although in the Reign of Queen Mary and other times more ancient it was very
usual and ordinary.

On Monday the 31th of October her Majesty's Person was represented (as it had
been on the first day of this Parliament) by three Commissioners, viz. the
Archbishop of Canterbury, the Lord Burleigh Lord Treasurer of England, and the
Earl of Darby great Steward of England, who were styled the Lords Lieutenants.

These with diverse other Lords, both Spiritual and Temporal, being fet in their
Parliamentary Robes in the Upper House, the Knights, Citizens and Burgesses of
the House of Commons had notice thereof, and thereupon with John Puckering
Sergeant at Law (who had been Speaker also the last Parliament) their now
Prolocutor repaired thither; and being (as many as conveniently could) let in,
the said Mr Speaker was led up by two of the most eminent Personages of the
House of Commons to the Rail or Bar at the lower end of the said Upper House,
who being there placed, and having, according to the usual course, desired
himself to be excused, that so the House of Commons might make choice of some
other more able Member amongst themselves, it was not allowed, but his former
wise and discreet behavior the last Parliament in the Execution of this very
place was alleged and much commended.

Whereupon the said Mr Speaker having made humble reverence and in very
discreet and good manner, submitted himself to the undertaking of the said
Prolocutorship, did in the end of his Speech make diverse petitions of course
for freedom of Speech, freedom of Access to her Majesty, and freedom from
Arrests and Suits in the Name of the House of Commons; and lastly for pardon
for himself, if he should unwittingly err in the report or carriage of any
thing. Whereunto the Lords Commissioners by the Lord Chancellor answered, That
the said House of Commons and himself should enjoy and use such Privileges as
others in the times of the Queen her Noble Progenitors had accustomed to use
and enjoy.

Nota, That it does not appear by the Original Journal Book of the Upper House,
whether the Speaker were presented in the Forenoon or in the Afternoon.

Dominus Cancellarius continuavit praesens Parliamentum usque in diem Veneris
prox. hora octava.

On Friday the 4th day of November the Lords Spiritual and Temporal being
Assembled, the Lord Chancellor continued the Parliament unto the next day at
eight of the Clock.

On Saturday the 5th day of November the Lord Chancellor declared unto the
Lords the foul and indirect dealings practiced by the Queen of Scots against
her Majesty and the whole Realm, notwithstanding so many great benefits and
favors which the said Queen of Scots had received of her Majesty; the which
matter by William Lord Burleigh Lord Treasurer of England, as one unto whom the
said Queen of Scots whole proceedings were better known by reason of his long
Service done unto our most gracious Sovereign Lady since the beginning of her
Reign, were more fully dilated.

Dominus Cancellarius continuavit praesens Parliamentum usque in diem Lunae
hora octava.

On Monday the 7th day of November while the Lords were debating the matter of
the Queen of Scots, the House of Commons came up and desired a Conference with
some of the Lords of this House, what number it should please them to appoint,
about the great matter of the Queen of Scots already opened unto them.
Whereupon the Lords chose out to the number of twenty one, viz. the Archbishops
of Canterbury and York, the Lord Treasurer, the Lord Steward, the Earl of
Northumberland, the Earl of Kent, the Earl of Rutland and the Earl of Sussex:
the Bishop of London, the Bishop of Durham, the Bishop of Winchester and the
Bishop of Worcester; the Lord Admiral, the Lord Chamberlain, the Lord Cobham,
the Lord Gray, the Lord Lumley, the Lord Shandois, the Lord Buckhurst, the Lord
de la Ware and the Lord Norris.

Dominus Cancellarius continuavit praesens Parliamentum usque in diem crastinum
hora nona.

On Tuesday the 8th day of November nothing was done, but the Parliament was by
the Lord Chancellor continued usque in diem crastinum hora nona.

On Wednesday the 9th day of November were read diverse Letters as well of
Anthony Babington to the Queen of Scots, as of the said Queen of Scots to the
said Anthony Babington, Charles Paget and others.

The Sentence also pronounced by the Commissioners against the Queen of Scots
was read.

A form of a Petition agreed upon by the Committees of both Houses was read.

Dominus Cancellarius continuavit praesens Parliamentum usque in diem crastinum
hora nona.

On Thursday the 10th day of November the Lords Committees made report unto the
whole House, that they of the House of Commons upon hearing the Sentence and
diverse of the special Evidences and Proofs whereupon the Sentence was grounded,
openly read unto them, after long deliberation and consultation had betwixt
them both publicly and privately, they all with one assent allowed the same
Sentence to be just, true and honorable, and that they humbly desired their
Lordships to make choice of such number of Lords as their Lordships should
think meet, to join with them in Petition to her Majesty. Whereupon their
Lordships made choice of the said Lords following, viz. the Lord Chancellor,
the Lord Treasurer, the Lord High Chamberlain, the Lord Steward, the Earl of
Northumberland, the Earl of Kent, the Earl of Rutland, the Earl of Sussex, the
Earl of Pembroke and the Earl of Hartford, the Lord Chamberlain, the Lord
Abergavenny, the Lord Zouch, the Lord Morley, the Lord Cobham, the Lord Gray,
the Lord Lumley, the Lord de la Ware and the Lord Norris.

Memorandum, That the Commons House made request to have the Petition assented
unto by both the Houses to be introlled in the Parliament Roll, the which the
Lords thought better to defer until her Majesty's liking or misliking were
first had of the same.

Dominus Cancellarius adjournavit praesens Parliamentum usque in diem Martis
prox. hora nona.

On Tuesday the 15th day of November the Lord Chancellor declared unto the
whole House the order of proceeding of Committees in presenting the Petition
unto her Highness, and that her Majesty's Answer was in so eloquent and goodly
sort, and with words so well placed, that he would not take upon him to report
it as it was uttered by her Majesty, but that the effect was, that her Highness
highly thanked her so dutiful and loving Subjects for their great care and
tender zeal that they showed to have of her safety; and were it not in respect
of them and of the state of the Realm and maintenance of the true Religion, she
would not..... And that her Highness did well know the greatness of the peril
and the dangerous practice attempted against her Person, and that her Majesty
did acknowledge it to be the maintaining and defending hand of him that has
delivered her so often, and from so great perils. Her Highness concluded, it
was a Cause of great moment, and required good deliberation, and that she could
not presently give Answer unto them, but that her Highness would shortly
deliver it to some of her Privy Council, which should declare unto them her
Highnesses mind. And thus her Highness answered.

This day further the Lord Chancellor signified unto the Lords, that on Monday
her Majesty commanded him to require the Lords to advise amongst them, if some
other course might be taken without proceeding to the extremity of Execution,
which her Highness could better like of, if any such might be found, and that
her Highness looked for Answer from their Lordships.

Nota, That the whole entrance of this days business, viz. the Lord Chancellors
Report of the Queens Answer, is crossed in the Original Journal Book, but
remains as legible as any other part, except a few interlined words; but by
the whole course following, that ought to stand which is crossed, for without
that the business following has no coherence with the premises.

Dominus Cancellarius adjournavit praesens Parliamentum usque in diem Sabbati
prox. hora consueta.

Die Sabbati 19 Die Novembris Dominus Cancellarius continuavit praesens
Parliamentum usque in diem Martis prox. hora nona.

On Tuesday the 22d day of November after many Speeches which tended all to one
effect, which was, that their Lordships in their opinions could not find any
other way than was already set down in their Petition: then the Lords agreed
that the matter should be put to the question; and being particularly asked
every one his several voice, answered with one Consent, that they could find no
other way.

The House of Commons came up, and desired the Lords to be content to appoint
some of the Lords to confer with them upon the Answer that was to be made to
her Highness, and to deliver the same to her Majesty. Whereupon the Lords made
choice of these Lords following, viz. the Archbishops of Canterbury and York,
the Lord Treasurer, etc.

And the said Lords upon Conference had with the Committee of the Lower House
made report, that the like question was propounded to them of the House of
Commons, and that they Answered all with one consent, no man gainsaying, that
they could find none other way. Whereupon the said Committees of both Houses
agreed upon this Answer to be made to her Majesty, That having often conferred
and debated of that question according to her Highness Commandment, they could
find none other way than was set down in the Petition. Which Answer for the
Lords was delivered unto her Majesty by the Lord Chancellor, and for the
Commons by their Speaker at Richmond on Thursday the 24th day of November.

Dominus Cancellarius continuavit praesens Parliamentum usque in diem Vcneris
prox. hora nona.

On Friday the 25th day of November the Lord Chancellor delivered her Majesty's
Answer to the Lords to the last resolution; the Effect whereof was as
follows, viz.

If (said her Highness) I should say unto you that I mean not to grant your
Petition, by my faith I should say unto you more than perhaps I mean. And if I
should say unto you that I mean to grant your Petition, I should then tell you
more than is fit for you to know. And thus I must deliver you an Answer
Answerless.

Whereas on the 7th day of this instant Month of November whilst the Lords were
in Consultation about the great matter of the Queen of Scots, the Chief and
only Cause of the Summons of this Parliament, they of the House of Commons came
up and desired Conference with some of the Lords of this House, what number it
should please their Lordships to appoint touching the said great cause, which,
as they affirmed, had been opened and declared unto them: Whereupon the Lords
made choice of diverse Lords (whose names see at large on Monday the 7th day of
this instant Month of November foregoing) And to attend the said Lords were
appointed the Lord Chief Justice of the Common Pleas, the Lord Chief Baron and
Justice Gawdie, the time and place of their meeting being in the very
Parliament Chamber at two of the Clock in the Afternoon; and after often
meeting and long Conferences had, they agreed upon a form of Petition, which by
both the Houses should be presented unto her Majesty. And that Choice should be
made of a certain number of either House to prefer the same unto her Highness.
Which being reported to this House, the Lords liked very well thereof; And
thereupon made Choice of diverse Lords, whose names see at large on Thursday the
10th day of this instant November foregoing.

And they of the House of Commons appointed their Speaker and all the
Privy Council of that House, and so many others as in all with the
Privy Council made up the Number of 42. Persons, to join with the said Lords.

And they altogether understanding first her Majesty's pleasure for the time of
their repair to her Highness presence, (which was signified to be on Saturday
the 12th day of November,) the Lord Chancellor in the name of the Lords, and
the Speaker in the name of the House of Commons declared unto her Majesty, That
both the Lords and Commons after often Conferences and long consultation had,
concluded to be humble Suitors unto her Majesty by way of Petition; the effect
whereof was then at good length opened unto her Majesty by the Lord Chancellor
and Speaker, and the Petition thereupon delivered unto her Majesty in writing.
And where it was before desired by them of the said House of Commons, that
presently upon the Agreement of the Form of the Petition it might be entered
into the Rolls of the Parliament, the Lords thought it better to stay the
entrance thereof until it were presented unto her Highness; which done, the
Lords ordered that this Friday the 25th day of November the said Petition
should be entered into the Parliament Roll in manner and form following, viz.

May it please your most Excellent Majesty, Our must Gracious Sovereign. We
your humble, loving and faithful Subjects, the Lords and Commons in this
present Parliament assembled, having of long time to our intolerable grief seen
by how manifold most dangerous and execrable practices Mary the Daughter and
Heir of James the Fifth late King of Scots Dowager of France and commonly
called Queen of Scots, has compassed the destruction of your Majesty's sacred
and most Royal Person, in whose safety (next under God) our chief and only
felicity does consist, and thereby not only to bereave us of the sincere and
true Religion of Almighty God, bringing us and this Noble Crown back again into
the Thraldom of the Romish Tyranny, but also utterly to ruinate and overthrow
the happy State and Common Weal of this most Noble Realm; which being from time
to time by the great mercy and providence of God, and your Highness singular
wisdom foreseen and prevented, your Majesty of your exceeding great Clemency
and Princely Magnanimity has either most graciously passed over, or with
singular favor tolerated, (although often and instantly moved by your most
loving and faithful Subjects to the contrary in times of your Parliaments, and
at many other times; and has also protected and desended the said Scottish
Queen from those great dangers which her own people for certain detestable
Crimes and offenses to her imputed, had determined against her. All which
notwithstanding, the same Queen was nothing moved with these and many other
your Majesty's most gracious favors toward her; but rather obdurate in
malice, and by hope of continual impunity imboldened to prosecute her cruel and
mischievous determination by some speedy and violent course, and now lately a
very dangerous Plot being conceived and set down by Anthony Babington and
others, That six desperate and wicked persons should undertake that wicked and
most horrible enterprise to take away your Majesty's Life (whom God of his
infinite mercy long preserve) she did not only give her advice and direction
upon every point, and all circumstances concerning the same make earnest
request to have it performed with all diligence, but did also promise assurance
of large reward and recompense to the doers thereof; which being informed to
your Majesty, it pleased your Highness upon the earnest Suit of such as tendered
the safety of your Royal Person, and the good and quiet state of this Realm, to
direct your Commission under the Great Seal of England to the Lords and others
of your Highness Privy Council, and certain other Lords of Parliament of the
greatest and most ancient Degree, with some of your principal Judges, to
examine, hear and determine the same Cause, and thereupon to give Sentence or
Judgment according to a Statute in that behalf made in the twenty seventh year
of your most Gracious Reign: By virtue whereof the more part of the same
Commissioners being in number thirty six, having at sundry times fully heard
what was alleged and proved against the said Scottish Queen in her own
presence touching the said crimes and offenses, and what she could say for her
defense and excuse therein, did after long deliberation give their Sentence and
Judgment with one consent, that the death and destruction of your Royal Person
was imagined and compassed by the said Anthony Babington with the privity of
the same Scottish Queen; And that she her self did also compass and imagine the
death and destruction of your most Royal Person. Now for as much as we your
Majesty's most humble, loyal and dutiful Subjects representing unto your most
Excellent Majesty the universal State of your whole people of all degrees in
this your Realm, do well perceive and are fully satisfied, that the same
Sentence and Judgment is in all things most honorable, just and lawful; And
having carefully and effectually according to our most bounden duties weighed
and considered upon what ground and cause so many Traitorous complots and
dangerous practices against your most Royal Person and Estate, and for the
invading of this Realm have for the space of many years past grown and
proceeded, do certainly find and are undoubtedly persuaded that all the same
have been from time to time attempted and practiced by and from the Scottish
Queen, and by her Confederates, Ministers and Favorers, who conceive an
assured hope to atchieve speedily by your Majesty's untimely death that which
they have long expected, and whereof during your Life (which God long preserve
to our inestimable Comfort) they despair, to wit, to place her the said
Scottish Queen in the Imperial and Kingly Seat of this Realm, and by her to
banish and destroy the Professors and professing of the true Religion of Jesus
Christ, and the ancient Nobility of this Land, and to bring this whole State
and Commonweal to Foreign Subjection and utter ruin and confusion; which their
malicious and traitorous purpose they will never cease to prosecute by all
possible means they can, so long as they may have their Eyes and Imaginations
fixed upon that Lady the only ground of their treasonable hope and conceits,
and the only Seed-plot of all dangerous and traitorous devices and practices
against your Sacred Person. And seeing also what insolent boldness is grown in
the heart of the same Queen through your Majesty's former exceeding favors and
Clemencies toward her, and thereupon weighing with heavy and sorrowful hearts
in what continual peril of such like desperate Conspiracies and practices your
Majesty's most Royal and Sacred Person and Life (more dear unto us than our
own) is and shall be still, without any possible means to prevent it, so long
as the said Scottish Queen shall be suffered to continue, and shall not receive
that due punishment which by Justice and the Laws of this your Realm she has
so often and so many ways for her most wicked and detestable offenses deserved;
Therefore, and for that we find that if the said Lady shall now escape the due
and deserved punishment of Death for these her most execrable Treasons and
offenses, your Highness Royal Person shall be exposed unto many more and those
more secret and dangerous Conspiracies than before, and such as shall not or
cannot be foreseen or discovered as these her late attempts have been, and
shall not hereafter be so well able to remove or take away the ground and
occasion of the same as now by Justice may and ought to be done; We do most
humbly beseech your most Excellent Majesty, that as well in respect of the
continuance of the true Religion now professed amongst us, and of the safety of
your most Royal Person and Estate, as in regard of the preservation and defense
of us your most loving, dutiful and faithful Subjects, and the whole
Commonweal of this Realm, It may please your Highness to take speedy Order,
That Declaration of the same Sentence and Judgment be made and published by
Proclamation, and that thereupon direction be given for further proceedings
against the said Scottish Queen according to the effect and true meaning of the
said Statute: Because upon advised and great consultation we cannot find that
there is any possible means to provide for your Majesty's Safety, but by the
just and speedy Execution of the said Queen, the neglecting whereof may procure
the heavy displeasure and punishment of Almighty God, as by sundry severe
Examples of his great Justice in that behalf left us in the Sacred Scriptures
does appear. And if the same be not put in present Execution, We your most
loving and dutiful Subjects shall thereby (so far as man's reason can reach) be
brought into utter despair of the continuance amongst us of the true Religion
of Almighty God, and of your Majesty's Life, and the Safety of all your
faithful Subjects, and the good Estate of this most flourishing Commonweal.

Dominus Cancellarius continuavit praesens Parliamentum usque in diem Martis
prox.

On Tuesday the 29th day of November, the Lords Spiritual and Temporal being
Assembled, Commissionar' Reginae continuaverunt praesens Parliamentum usque in
diem Veneris hor a nona.

On Friday the second day of December Commissionarii Reginae adjornaverunt
praesens Parliamentum usque in decimum quintum diem Februarii prox.

Nota, That the Parliament was Adjourned without any new Commission from her
Majesty which had been used in the last Parliament, in Anno 27 Regin. Eliz.
Anno Dom. 1584. where the Adjournment was from the 27th day of December unto
the 4th day of February, which was near upon the same intervenient time or
space for which this present Parliament de Anno 28, and 29 Regin. Eliz. was now
Adjourned.

But the reason and cause is very plain why this Parliament was now Adjourned
without any such Commission from her Majesty, although she her self was absent,
and this was only in respect that her Highness Person was represented by
Commissioners, to whom at first she had by Commission under the Great Seal
delegated full and absolute power not only to begin but also to continue,
Adjourn or Prorogue this instant Parliament ( ut vide on Saturday the 29th day
of October foregoing) which said Delegates or Lords Lieutenants did here being
present Adjourn the same accordingly.

Concerning which said Adjournment and these two Meetings of one and the same
Parliament there has been much mistake and difference both in the Original
Journal Book of the Upper House, and in that also of the House of Commons, in
the very Rolls of the Statute of this Parliament transcribed by the Clerk of
the Upper House into the Chancery, and remaining in the Chapel of the Rolls,
and lastly in the very Printed Books of the Statutes thereof.

For in the first place Mr Anthony Mason at this time Clerk of the Upper House,
Enters these two meetings of this one and the same Parliament in two several
Books, as if they had been two several Sessions; to which mistake he was the
rather induced, because diverse Lords did send their new Proxies upon the second
meeting of the two Houses on Wednesday the 15th day of February, and Anno
Regin. Eliz. whereas it does not appear that in the last Parliament de Anno 27
Regin. Eliz. that any new Proxies were then returned upon the second meeting of
the two Houses after a like Adjournment. But the reason of this seems to be,
not only in respect of this Adjournment, that it was somewhat longer than that
former in the twenty seventh year of her Majesty (which lasted not full two
Months, whereas this present Adjournment continued for the space of seventy
five days or two Months and a Fortnight at the least.) But also because diverse
of the Lords both Spiritual and Temporal, who were present at this first
meeting, being desirous (as it should seem) to hear that great business of the
Scottish Queen debated and resolved on, did after this Adjournment and their
recesses into their several Countries get License of her Majesty to be absent
from the second meeting of this Parliament, which ensued on Wednesday the 15th
day of February following in Anno 29 Regin. Eliz. and in which there were none
but ordinary matters likely to be handled (Execution and Justice being done
upon the Scottish Queen the 8th day of February immediately preceding the said
second meeting) and did thereupon send their several Proxies of which such as
were unusual and extraordinary are set down in the Journal ensuing according to
the several days on which they were returned.

In the second place touching the Original Journal Book of the House of Commons
these two meetings of one and the same Parliament are set down as two several
Sessions, the one by Mr Fulk Onslow at this time Clerk of the House of Commons,
and the other by Mr William Onslow his Kinsman, who being a Member of the House
was Licenced by it to supply the place of the said Mr Fulk Onslow, who by
reason of his sickness was not able to attend, who enters this second meeting
of the House of Commons upon Wednesday the 15th day of February in these words,
viz.

This present Session of Parliament holden by Prorogation, etc.

Whereas it had not been Prorogued but Adjourned, and was no new Session but
merely a new meeting.

In the third place the Roll of Statutes transcribed by Mr Anthony Mason into
the Chancery and remaining in the Chapel of the Rolls, is entitled as
follows, Rotulus Parliament de Anno Regni Regin Elizabeth. vicesimo octavo.
Whereas the words should likewise have been added, viz. and vicesimo nono.

In the fourth and last place the Printed Books of Statutes are likewise
mistaken; for Christopher Barker at this time Printer to the Queens Majesty,
who Printed the Statutes of this Parliament at large in Anno 1587. makes no
mention of any Parliament or meeting of Parliament in Anno 28 Regin. Eliz. but
mentions that Book of Statutes in this manner, Anno 29o Regin Eliz. at this
present Session of Parliament holden by Prorogation at Westminster the 15th day
of February in the 29th year of the Reign of our most gracious Sovereign Lady
Elizabeth, etc. Whereas if he had entitled it truly, it should have been thus:
At this present Parliament holden at Westminster the 29th day of October in the
28th and 29th years of the Reign of our most Gracious Sovereign Lady Elizabeth,
etc. Mr Poulton also in his Abridgement of Statutes Printed by the Company of
Stationers, Anno Dom. 1612. sets down a false Title before the Statutes of
this Parliament, viz. Statutes made at the Session of Parliament holden by
Prorogation at Westminster the 29th day of October, Anno 28 Eliz. and Anno Dom.
1587. etc.

In which said Title there are these two notorious and gross mistakes: The
first in that he says this Parliament was holden by Prorogation, whereas the
former Parliament, held in Anno 27o Regin. Eliz. being dissolved upon the 14th
day of September in Anno 28 Regin. ejusdem, this Parliament begun and held in
the said 28th and 29th years of her Majesty was newly Summoned, and not held by
Prorogation.

His second mistake is more gross than this, in that he allots all these
proceedings to the year of our Lord 1587. whereas both meetings did begin and
end during the year 1586. reckoning the year to begin upon the 25th day of
March, as in all the Journal-Books of Parliaments and the Printed Books of
Statutes and all Records and private Instruments it is always observed. All
which may show how great inconvenience it may bring to take up things upon
trust from others without searching out the truth, seeing so many men in that
which they were best skilled in, and had doubtless so industriously traveled
in, yet should be so grossly mistaken; for it is not worth the proof that this
was an Adjournment and not a Prorogation, seeing it is positively entered in the
Original Journal Book of the Upper House on Friday the second day of December
foregoing. And likewise when the two Houses did meet again on Wednesday the
15th day of February following, the foresaid Journal Book begins thus:

Die Mercurii 15o die Februarii Domini tam Spirituales quam Temporales, quorum
nomina subsequntur, praesentes fuerunt.

Whereas if that meeting had been a new Session, the Entrance ought to have
been thus: viz.

Die Mercurii 15o die Februarii, in quem diem hoc praesens Parliamentum
Prorogatum fuerat, Proceres tam Spirituales auam Temporales, etc. Or thus: viz.
In quem diem, etc. Sessio Parliament? Prorogata fuit teneri and inchoari apud
Westminster die and loco praedict. Domini tam Spiritual. quam Temporal. quorum
nomina Subscribuntur, praesentes fuerunt, etc.

To which also may lastly be added, that no Bill passing the two Houses in the
first meeting of this Parliament, nay for ought that can be gathered out of the
Original Journal Book of the Upper House, no one Bill having so much as any
reading there, as has been before observed, and so no Royal Assent putting
life into any one Law, it could not be a Session but a mere meeting, which
continued from Saturday the 29th of October unto Friday the second day of
December in Annis 28, and 29. Regin Eliz. Anno Dom. 1586.

This doubt being thus fully cleared and the mistakings upon which it grew
being likewise discovered, the residue of the Journal of this present
Parliament upon the second meeting of the two Houses next ensues.

On Wednesday the 15th day of February Anno 29o Regin Eliz. Anno Dom. 1586. (to
which day the Parliament had been on Friday the second day of December
foregoing last Adjourned) The two Houses met in their several places without
any presence of the Queen or Solemnity amongst the Lords by coming in their
Robes or any other Pomp whatsoever, because this was neither new Parliament nor
new Session, but a mere new meeting of either House upon an Adjournment of the
former meeting thereof, which began on the 29th day of October being Saturday
in Anno 28 Regin. Eliz. as is aforesaid.

Memorandum that this day Sir Edmund Anderson Knight Lord Chief Justice of the
Common Pleas showed forth to be publicly read a Commission directed unto him
from her Majesty, in which appeared that the Lord Chancellor was so visited at
this time with sickness, that he was not able to travel to the Upper House to
supply his room and place there; her Majesty minding the said room and place to
be supplied in all things during the absence of the said Lord Chancellor, has
appointed and authorized the said Sir Edmund Anderson during the absence of the
said Lord Chancellor to supply his Room, as by the Tenor of the said
Commission here ensuing more fully appears.

ELizabeth by the grace of God Queen of England, France and Ireland, Defender
of the Faith, etc. To our Trusty and right Well-beloved Sir Edmund Anderson
Knight Chief Justice of our Court of Common Pleas, Greeting. Whereas our Right
Trusty and Right Well-beloved Chancellor Sir Thomas Bromley Knight Lord
Chancellor of England, is at this time so visited with Sickness that he is not
able to travel to the Upper-House of this our present Parliament holden at
Westminster, nor there to supply the room and place in the said Upper-House
among the Lords Spiritual and Temporal there Assembled as to the Office of the
said Lord Chancellor or Lord Keeper of the Great Seal of England has been
accustomed: We minding the same place and room to be supplied in all things as
appertains for and during every time of his absence, have named and appointed
you, and by these presents do constitute, name, appoint and Authorize you from
day to day and time to time, when and as often as the said Lord Chancellor
shall happen at any time or times during this present Parliament to be absent
from his accustomed place in the said Upper House, to occupy, use and supply
the room and place of the said Lord Chancellor in the Upper House amongst the
Lords Spiritual and Temporal there Assembled, at every such day and time of his
absence; And then and there at every such time to do and execute all such
things as the said Lord Chancellor of England should or might do if he were
there personally present, using and supplying the same room. Wherefore we Will
and Command you the said Sir Edmund Anderson to supply the doing and Execution
of the Premises with effect, and these our Letters Patents shall be your
sufficient Warrant and discharge for the same in every behalf: In Witness
whereof we have caused these our Letters to be made Patents. Witness our Self
at Westminster the 15th day of February in the twenty ninth year of our Reign,
etc.

As soon as the said Sir Edmund Anderson had caused the foresaid Commission to
be read, he took his place on the Uppermost Woolsack where the Lord Chancellor
uses to sit, and in the Original Journal Book of this Parliament, where the
presence of the Lords is noted, he is always ranked in the first place as the
Lord Chancellor should have been if he had been present; with this Addition
after the setting down of his name and place, Locum tenens Cancellarii, in such
Order as follows, viz.

Archiepiscopus Cantuarien. Edmundus Anderson Miles, Justiciar, de Communibus
Placitis, Locum tenens Cancellarii. Comes Sussex. Comes Hartford. Comes
Lincoln. Vice-Comes Bindon.
Episcopi.
Episcopus Winton. Episcopus Sarisburien. Episcopus Rofsen. Episcopus
Hereforden.
Barons.
Dominus Howard Admirallus. Dominus Hunsdon Camerarius. Dominus Morley. Dominus
Cobham. Dominus Stafford. Dominus Gray de Wilton. Dominus Stourton. Dominus
Sands. Dominus Cromwell. Dominus Windsor. Dominus Sheffield. Dominus North.
Dominus St John de Bletsoe. Dominus Compton. Dominus Norris.
Which are all the Peers the Journal Book notes to have been present.

Nota, That though I do usually observe in all these Jourtials never to have
the presence of the Lords transcribed but at the beginning only of a new
Parliament, or at least a new Session; yet I have observed it here though but
at the beginning of a new meeting: partly because it was after a long
Adjournment, and partly because many Lords did send new Proxies: So that the
presence of the Lords before set down at the beginning of this Parliament on
the 29th day of October being Saturday, could not serve to be any rule for the
presence of those that attended at this new meeting. Which is for the most part
the chiefest reason why the presence of the said Lords is marked on the first
day of the Parliament, or on the next day from the first, on which they be
noted, if through the Clerk of the Upper House his negligence (as it often
happens) it be omitted on the said first day.

A second but less material cause why I have their names transcribed, is to see
the due places and precedencies of the Lords Temporal.

On this 15th day of February lastly (although this were neither new Parliament
nor new Session, but merely a second meeting of one and the same Parliament, as
has been already observed) was one unusual or extraordinary Proxy returned,
which is Entered in the Original Journal Book of the Upper House in manner and
form following, viz.

15 Die Februarii introductae sunt literae Procuratoriae Thomae Episcopi
Bathonien' and Welien', in quibus Procuratores suos constituit Thomam Episcopum
Wintonien', Thomam Episcopum Cicestren', and Willielmum Episcopum Coventrien'
and Litchfield'.

The difference between an usual and an unusual Proxy see before on Saturday
the 29th day of October in the latter end thereof (on which said day this
Parliament began) where also it is set down why those ordinary ones are for the
most part omitted.

Other unusual Proxies returned also at this new meeting of Parliament, vide on
Friday the 17th day, on Sunday the 19th day, and on Saturday the 25th day of
this instant February. All which I have ever caused to be set down upon the
several days on which they were returned, if the said day be particularly
expressed, and not altogether before the beginning of the Parliament, as is
usually observed in the Original Journal-Books of the Upper House.

Nota Lastly, that John Archbishop of Canterbury was Constituted Joint Proctor
with others by five several Bishops this Parliament, of which the first Proxy
was returned on Sunday the 19th day of this instant February from John Bishop
of Exeter; the second on the same Day from Richard Bishop of Durham; the third
on Saturday the 25th day of this instant February from Edmund Bishop of
Worcester; the fourth on Thursday the 9th day of March next ensuing from Hugh
Bishop of Bangor, and the fifth and last on the same day from William Bishop of
St Asaph. Which with many other precedents of a like nature frequent almost in
every Parliament, does plainly prove, that any Lord Spiritual or Temporal being
a Member of the Upper House is capable of as many Proxies as shall be sent unto
him, by the ancient Customs and Usages of that House; although the contrary
has been of late ordered upon the..... day of..... in the Parliaments in Anno
secundo Regis Caroli.

Sir Edmund Anderson Lord Chief Justice of the Common Pleas sitting in and
supplying of the place of Sir Thomas Bromley Lord Chancellor absent (as is
before observed) by reason of sickness, did by the Assent of the Lords
Commissioners Adjourn the Parliament unto Wednesday next at Nine of the Clock
in the Morning being a full se'night after.

Nota, That during this intervenient time of Adjournment, three unusual Proxies
were delivered in unto the Clerk of the Parliament; the first of which is
Entered in the Original Journal Book of the Upper House to have been returned
upon Friday the 17th day of this Instant February in manner and form following,
viz.

17o Die Februarii introductae sunt Literae procuratoriae Anthonii vicecomitis
Mountague, in quibus Procuratores suos constituit Ambrosium Comitem Warwici,
and Robertum Comitem Leicestren.

19o Die Februarii introductae sunt Literae procuratoriae Johannis Episcopi
Exon, in quibus Procuratores suos constituit Johannem Archiepiscopum
Cantuarien', Thomam Episcopum Winton' and Johannem Episcopum Roffen'.

Item introductae sunt Literae procuratoriae Richardi Episcopi Dunelmen in
quibus Procuratores suos constituit Johannem Archiepiscopum Cautuarien',
Johannem Episcopum London, and Thomam Episcopum Wintonien.

Nota, That here a Temporal Lord constituted two Proctors, and two Spiritual
Lords nominated each of them three, which being extraordinary and unusual
Proxies are well worthy the observation. Vide intrationes Literarum consimilium
procurator' die Saturni die 29o Octobris praecedentis in fine dici, and die
Mercurii die 15o Februar. jam instantis antea, and die Saturni die vicesimo
quinto ejusdem Febr' postea.

On Wednesday the 22d day of February the Bill toavoid fraudulent Assurances
made or to be made in certain cases by Traitors was read prima vice.

Edmundus Anderson Capitalis Justiciarius de placito communi continuavit
praesens Parliamentum usque in diem crastinum hora nona.

On Thursday the 23d day of February the Lords met, but it seems nothing was
done, but only the Parliament continued unto a further day, the Entrance
whereof in the Original Journal Book is in manner and form following, viz.

Edmundus Anderson Miles capitalis Justiciarius de placito communi continuavit
praesens Parliamentum usque in diem Sabbati prox. hora nona.

On Saturday the 25th day of February Two Bill of no great Moment had each of
them one reading; of which the second being a Bill to avoid fraudulent
Assurances made or to be made in certain Cases by Traitors was upon the second
reading committed unto the Archbishop of Canterbury, the Lord Steward and
others.

This day was one unusual Proxy returned, which is Entered in the Original
Journal Book of the Upper House in manner and form following, viz.

25o Die Februarii introductae sunt Literae procuratoriae Edmundi Episcopi
Wigorn, in quibus Procuratores suos constituit Johannem Archiepiscopum
Cantuariensem, Johannem Episcopum London, and Johannem Episcopum Roffen.

Nota, That it does not appear whether this Proxy was delivered unto the Clerk
of the Upper House in the said House sitting the Court, or elsewhere; but it is
probable that it might be this Forenoon before the rising of the Lords.

Dominus Capitalis Justiciarius de placito communi continuavit praesens
Parliamentum usque in diem Lunae prox' hora octava.

On Monday the 27th day of February the Bill for Restraint of Horse-stealing
and other Felonies was upon the second reading committed.

Dominus Capitalis Justiciarius de placito communi continuavit praesens
Parliamentum usque in diem Jovis prox'hora nona.

On Thursday the 2d day of March there was brought from the House of Commons
one Bill, which being for explanation of the Law touching certain ambiguous
questions and strifes of late risen about Fines and Recoveries levied before
the Justices of the Common Pleas, where unto they are parties, was read the
first time.

Lect. sunt The Amendments for the Bill to avoid fraudulent Assurances made or
to be made in certain Cases by Traitors; and lect. sunt the Amendments for the
Bill of Horse-stealing and other Felonies.

In the Journal Book is no entrance or mention of any Amendments by the
Committees thought fit to be added to both or either of the said Bills, nor of
the delivery back of the said Bills or either of them by the Committees into
the House, which seems to have been the Error of the Clerk by that which
follows on Thursday the ninth day of March. where it is plain that this was
the first reading of these Amendments.

Dominus Capitalis Justiciarius de placito communi continuavit praesens
Parliamentum usque in diem Sabbati prox. hora consueta.

On Saturday the 4th day of March the Bill for the Explanation of the Law
touching certain ambiguous questions and strifes of late risen about Fines and
Recoveries levied before the Justices of the Common Pleas, whereunto they are
parties, was read secunda vice.

Dominus Capitalis Justiciarius de placito communi continuavit praesens
Parliamentum usque in diem Lunae prox. hora nona.

On Monday the 6th day of March the Bill for the Explanation of the Law
touching certain ambiguous questions and strifes of late risen about Fines and
Recoveries levied before the Justices of the Common Pleas, whereunto they are
parties, was read the third time, and communi omnium Procerum assensu conclusa.

Dominus Capitalis Justiciarius de placito communi continuavit praesens
Parliamentum usque in diem crastinum hora oct ava.

On Tuesday the 7th day of March the Bill for the restraint of Horse-stealing
and other Felonies was read tertia vice, and communi omnium Procerum assensu
conclusa.

There was brought to the Lords from the House of Commons the Bill for one
entire Subsidy and two Fifteenths and Tenths granted by the Temporalty.

On Wednesday the 8th day of March the Bill for one entire Subsidy and two
Fifteenths and Tenths granted by the Temporalty, was read prima vice.

On Thursday the 9th day of March the Bill for the Grant of one entire Subsidy
and two Fifteenths and Tenths granted by the Temporalty was read tertia vice,
and communi omnium Procerum assensu conclusa.

Nota, That in the Journal Book there is no entrance or mention of the second
reading of this Bill, which doubtless happened through the negligence of Mr
Anthony Mason at this time Clerk of the Upper House.

The Amendments in the Bill to avoid fraudulent Assurances made or to be made
in certain cases by Traitors, were read.

On Saturday the 11th day of March three Bills of no great moment were brought
up to the Lords from the House of Commons; of which the first appointing the
wideness of the Mask of Nets for taking Herrings and Smelts in Oxford Haven,
and the Gull was read prima vice.

Introducta est Billa pro Subsidio Cleri, quae prima and secunda vice lect' est
and commiss' ad ingrossandum.

The Bill to avoid fraudulent Assurances made in certain cases by Traitors was
read tertia vice, quae communi omnium Procerum assensu conclusa est, and
tradit' Doctori Ford and servienti Gaudy in Domum Communem deferend'.

A Bill for the better and more speedy execution of certain branches of the
Statute made in the 23d year of the Queens Majesty's Reign, entitled, An Act
to restrain the Queens Majesty's Subjects in their due obedience, was read
prima vice.

The House of Commons made request to the Lords to have Conference with some of
their Lordships what number it should please their Lordships to appoint.
Whereupon the Lords made choice of these following, viz. the Archbishop of
Canterbury, the Archbishop of York, the Lord Steward, the Earl of Kent, the
Earl of Worcester, the Earl of Rutland, the Earl of Hartford, the Earl of
Leicester, the Bishop of London, the Bishop of Winchester, the Bishop of
Salisbury, the Lord Hunsdon Lord Chamberlain, the Lord Morley, the Lord Cobham,
the Lord Gray, the Lord Stafford, the Lord Stourton, the Lord Cromwell, the
Lord North, the Lord Delaware and the Lord Norris.

After Conference had with the Committee of the Lower House, this present day
the said Committee made Report unto the whole House, that the House of Commons
made humble Suit unto their Lordships to have their Lordships to join with them
in a Contribution or Benevolence for the Charges of the Low Countries Wars,
which they of the House of Commons meant to offer unto her Majesty. How they
meant to proceed therein was opened by the Archbishop of Canterbury. Upon which
Report of the Committee the Lords thought good to defer their Answer until
Monday next.

But it appears not by the Original Journal Book of the Upper House or of the
House of Commons, that any such Answer was given by their Lordships upon the
said Monday being the 13th day of this instant March ensuing. Vide die Mercurii
die 15o Martii sequentis in sine diei.

On Monday the 13th day of March six Bills of no great moment had each of them
one reading; of which the first being the Bill for one Subsidy granted by the
Clergy was read tertia vice, and the Bill touching Oxford Haven was read
secunda and tertia vice.

On Tuesday the 14th day of March the Bill for confirmation of the Sale of
Edward Fishers Lands made toward satisfaction of his Debts, Charges and
Encumbrances, was brought from the House of Commons, and read prima vice. Vide
plus concerning this matter on the day following.

The Bill for Confirmation of the Attainder of Thomas late Lord Paget and
others was read tertia vice, and communi omnium Procerum assensu conclusa and
expedita, dissentiente Domino Darcy, who is sometimes called the Lord Darcy of
Meinel.

Two Bills of no great moment had each of them one reading, being the last
reading, and thereupon passed; of which the second being the Bill for the more
speedy and due execution of certain branches of the Statute made in the 23d
year of the Queens Majesty's Reign, entitled, An Act to retain the Queens
Majesty's Subjects in their due obedience, was expedited communi omnium
Procerum assensu, dissentiente solummodo Comite Rutland. Which two Bills
aforesaid were sent down to the House of Commons by the Queens Attorney and
Doctor Carew.

Two Bills were brought up to the Lords from the House of Commons, whereof the
first being an Act of one Subsidy granted by the Clergy was returned expedited;
and the other was the Bill for the payment of the Debts and Legacies of Sir
Gerrard Croker Knight deceased and of John Croker Esquire his Son.

On Wednesday the 15th day of March the Bill for the payment of the Debts and
Legacies of Sir Gerrard Croker Knight, and of the Debts of John Croker Esquire his
Son, was read prima vice.

Two Bills were brought up to the Lords from the House of Commons, whereof the
first being a Bill touching Errors in Records of Attainders of High Treason
was read prima vice and commissa; and the second being a Bill for repealing of
a Statute made in the 23d year of the Queens Majesty's Reign touching the
bringing in Fish into this Realm, was read prima vice and commissa.

The Bill for the confirmation of the Seal of Edward Fishers Lands made toward
the satisfaction of his Debts, Charges and Encumbrances was read secunda vice.
Whereupon the Lords ordered that Edward Fisher now in the Fleet should be
brought before them to morrow at nine of the Clock, and that he should bring
his learned Counsel with him: And that the Parties who follow the said Bill,
should have like warning to be there with their learned Counsel.

Nota, That this very Bill or some other to the same purpose had diverse
readings, and was often debated in the Parliament, both in the Upper House and
in the House of Commons, but passed not. And there it seems, that the same or
a new Bill to the like purpose was now again offered unto the House. Vide the
first reading of it upon Tuesday immediately foregoing.

The Lords Committees made Report unto the whole House, that upon diverse
Conferences had with the Committees of the Lower House touching their Request
made to the Lords to join with them in Petition to her Majesty about a
Benevolence or Contribution, which they of the House of Commons thought good to
offer unto her Majesty; the said Lords Committees thought it not fit, for
diverse reasons, to join with the House of Commons herein. Which reasons when
the whole House had heard and considered, their Lordships did resolve that the
House of Commons should be left to themselves, and their Lordships would take
such order therein for themselves as to them should seem convenient. Vide plus
concerning this matter on Saturday the 11th day of this instant March foregoing.

On Thursday the 16th day of March the Committees in the Bill for the repealing
of a Statute made in the three and twentieth year of the Queens Majesty's Reign
touching the bringing in of Fish into this Realm, according to the Lords
appointment delivered their opinions and reasons by the Lord Chief Baron
touching the said Bill; which when the Lords had heard and considered, they
ordered that the said Bill for the Repeal of the said Statute should be
rejected.

This day was chosen a new Committee to resolve upon somewhat touching the
Contribution, viz. the Archbishop of Canterbury, the Archbishop of York the
Lord Steward, the Earl of Kent, the Earl of Worcester, the Earl of Rutland, the
Earl of Hartford, and the Earl of Leicester; the Bishop of London, the Bishop
of Winton, and the Bishop of Salop; the Lord Chamberlain, the Lord Morley, the
Lord Cobham, the Lord Gray, the Lord Stafford, the Lord Stourton, the Lord
Cromwell, the Lord North, the Lord Delaware and the Lord Norris.

The Lords Committees last named upon Conference had betwixt them in respect of
the great Charges that her Majesty has sustained heretofore, and that her
Highness shall be enforced hereafter to be at for the defense of this Realm and
other her Majesty's Dominions, did resolve amongst themselves freely to give to
her Majesty two shillings in the pound, after the rate of the valuation of the
Subsidy of the Temporality granted in this present Session of Parliament, to be
paid unto such persons and at such time as it shall please her Majesty to
appoint. Which being after openly declared to the whole House, the Temporal
Lords (in as much as the Lords Spiritual had made former offer of Contribution
unto her Majesty) did all together with one consent most willingly ratify the
said resolution, both touching the Sum and the payment thereof; and ordered
that this their free gift should be entered upon Record: And that such of the
Lords of her Majesty's Privy Council as were there present, should signify the
same to her Highness in all their Names.

On Friday the 17th day of March a Bill touching Errors in Records of High
Treason was read secunda and tertia vice and conclusa.

On Saturday the 18th day of March the Bill for the confirmation of the Sale of
Edward Fishers Lands made toward the satisfaction of his Debts, Charges and
Encumbrances, with certain amendments in a Schedule added unto the said Bill,
was read tertia vice and communi omnium Procerum assensu conclusa, and tradita
Doctori Barkley and Doctori Carew in Domum Communem deserend'. Vide concerning
this matter on Tuesday the 14th day, and on Wednesday the 15th day of this
instant March foregoing.

Two Bills were brought up to the Lords from the House of Commons; of which the
first being a Bill touching Exemplifications and Constats of Original
Conveyances made to the Queens Majesty, was read prima vice.

On Monday the 20th day of March two Bills of no great moment had each of them
one reading; whereof the second being a Bill for the limitation of time
touching Writs of Error upon Fines and Recoveries, was read secunda vice.

Six Bills of no great moment were this day, lastly, brought up to the Lords
from the House of Commons; of which the first being for the Sale of Edward
Fishers Lands was returned expedited; and the second was a Bill for the more
speedy and due Execution of certain branches of the Statute made in the twenty
third year of the Queens Majesty's Reign, entitled, An Act to retain the
Queens Majesty's Subjects in their due obedience, with an amendment, and a
provision annexed, quae communi omnium Procerum assensu conclusa and expedit';
and the third being the Bill for continuance of Statutes was read prima vice.

On Tuesday the 21th day of March prima, secunda and tertia vice lect' sunt the
Amendments of the Bill to avoid fraudulent Assurances made in certain cases by
Traitors, quae commumi omnium Procerum assensu conclusa, and tradit' servienti
Gaudy and Doctori Carew in Domum Communem deserend'.

Two Bills also of no great moment had each of them one reading; of which the
first being a Bill for limitation of time touching Writs of Errors upon Fines
and Recoveries, was read tertia vice, and communi omnium Procerum assensu
rejecta est.

Two Bills were sent up to the Lords from the House of Commons, which (as it
seems) were of so little moment, as that they are omitted in the very
Original Journal Book of the Upper House.

On Wednesday the 22th day of March the Bill for the continuance and perfecting
of diverse Statutes was read secunda and tetria vice, and sent to the House of
Commons by Sergeant Gaudy and Doctor Carew, being first passed by the Lords
with an Amendment.

The first reading of this Bill appears not in the Original Journal Book of
the Upper House; and by that which follows on Thursday the 23d day of this
instant March following, it is plain that the Entrance of the several readings
of this Bill with the Amendments thereof, is much mistaken and confounded
through the great negligence of Mr Anthony Mason, at this time Clerk of the
Upper House.

A Bill for the Sale of Thomas Hanford's Lands, was brought up to the Lords
from the House of Commons.

The Lords having before passed a Bill to the same effect, and sent it down to
the House of Commons, and they having rejected it without any Conference first
desired and had with their Lordships; therefore the Lords thought it a
Precedent so strange and so far different from the Orders of this House, that
they of the House of Commons should reject a Bill sent from this House without
Conference, and frame a new Bill to the same effect and send it up, that they
did resolve to put it to the Question, Whether this new Bill should by the
Orders of this House be read here or not. The whole House being particularly
asked their opinions herein with one assent, concluded (not one gainsaying)
that it should not be read.

On Thursday the 23d day of March the Bill for the continuance and perfecting
of diverse Statutes was read secunda and tertia vice, and communi omnium
Procerum assensu conclusa, with the Amendments. Vide concerning this matter in
the beginning of the day immediately foregoing being Wednesday; for it should
seem that the Bill it self was then read prima and secunda vice, and the
Amendments only at this time, although they be both set down very confusedly
through the negligence of the Clerk of the Upper House.

The Bill for the Queens Majesty's most gracious, general and free Pardon
communi omnium Procerum assensu conclusa, and tradit' servienti Gaudy and
Doctori Carew in Domum Communem deferend'. Which said Bill was brought back
again this morning from the said House of Commons unto the Lords, with another
Bill which was for the continuance and perfecting of diverse Statutes.

There is no other or further business of this day set down in the Original
Journal Book of the Upper House, save only her Majesty's Royal Assent given to
diverse Bills which had passed both Houses, although she her self was absent,
which was done by her Majesty's Letters Patents under the Great Seal. Which
because of the rarity of the Precedent, are here verbatim transcribed, together
with the manner and solemnity of this days meeting, out of the said Original
Journal Book in manner and form following, viz. Hodie quum omnes Proceres Robis
Parliament aribus induti in suo quisque loco sederent, and Prolocutor de Domo
Communi una cum omnibus qui ad hoc praesens Parliamentum summoniti suerant, and
Militibus, civibus and Burgensibus accersitis praesto esset Edmundus Anderson
Miles, Capitalis Justiciarius de placito communi, quia Cancellarius nondum
convaluit, exponit omnibus Regiam Majestatem magnis and urgentissimis quibusdam
negotiis adeo esse impeditam, ut non queat impraesentiar' commode interesse:
Tamen, inquit, sua Majestas imperavit mibi, ut suo nomine vobis hic
praesentibus declarem, quibus Legibus seu Statutis a vobis in hoc praesenti
Parliamento pro vestra part stabilitis velit Regium assensum suum adhibere,
sine quo Legum vigorem obtinere non debent, sicuti vos probe nostis. Et hiis
dictis protendit Clerico Parliamentor' quasdam Literas sub magno Sigillo
Angliae Patentes, quos ipse public legit. Literae autem scriptae fuerunt in
haec verba.

ELizabeth by the Grace of God Queen of England, France and Ireland, Defender
of the Faith, etc. To our right Trusty and right well-beloved the Lords
Spiritual and Temporal, and to our Trusty and well-beloved the Knights,
Citizens and Burgesses, the Commons in this present Parliament Assembled,
Greeting. We have seen and perfectly understand diverse and sundry Acts and
Ordinances annexed and affiled to these Presents, agreed and accorded by our
loving Subjects the Lords Spiritual and Temporal and the Commons in this our
present Parliament assembled, and severally indorsed by you as has been
accustomed; The Titles and names of which Acts hereafter do particularly ensue
(that is to say) an Act for the Confirmation of the Attainders of Thomas late
Lord Pagett and others; An Act concerning Errors in Records of Attainders of
High Treason; An Act to avoid frandulent Assurances made in certain Cases by
Traitors; An Act to prevent Extortion in Sheriffs, Under-Sheriffs and Bailiffs
of Franchises or Liberties in Cases of Execution; An Act for the Continuance
and perfecting of diverse Statutes; An Act for the more speedy and due Execution
of certain Branches of the Statute made in the 23d year of the Queens Majesty's
Reign entitled An Act to retain the Queens Majesty's Subjects in their due
obedience; An Act for the Confirmation of the Sale of Edward Fishers Lands made
toward satisfaction of his Debts, Charges and Encumbrances; An Act of one
Subsidy granted by the Clergy; An Act for the Grant of one entire Subsidy and
two Fifteenths and Tenths granted by the Temporalty; An Act for the Queens
Majesty's most gracious, general and free Pardon: And albeit the said several
Acts and Ordinances by you our said Subjects the Lords and Commons in this our
present Parliament Assembled be fully agreed and consented unto, and seem very
necessary and profitable for the Commonwealth, which nevertheless be not of any
force or effect in the Law without our Royal Assent given and put to the same
Acts and Ordinances and every of them; And forasmuch as for diverse great and
urgent Causes and Considerations, We cannot conveniently at this present be
personally in our Royal Person in our Higher House of Parliament, being the
place accustomed to give our Royal Assent unto such Acts and Ordinances as have
been agreed upon by our said Subjects the Lords and Commons; We have therefore
caused these our Letters Patents to have been made, and have signed and caused
the same to be Sealed accordingly, And by the same do declare and notify as
well to you the Lords Spiritual and Temporal and the Commons aforesaid, as to
all and singular other our loving Subjects, That we by these Presents do give
and put our Royal Assent to all and singular the said Acts and Ordinances, and
to all Articles, Clauses and Provisions in them contained, and be fully agreed
and consented to all and every the said Acts, willing that the said Acts and
every Article, Clause, sentence and provision in them contained, from
henceforth shall be of the same strength, force and effect as if we had been
personally present in the said Higher House, and had openly and publicly in
the presence of you all assented to the same; Commanding also by these Presents
as well our Chancellor of England to seal these our Letters Patents with our
great Seal, as our Trusty and well-beloved Sir Edmund Anderson Knight our Chief
Justice of our Common Pleas, to declare and notify this our Royal Assent in our
absence in the said Higher House in the presence of you the said Lords
Spiritual and Temporal and the Commons of our Parliament (...) to be assembled
for that purpose, and the Clerk of our Parliament to Indorse the said Acts with
such Terms and Words in our Name as is requisite and has been accustomed for
the same; And also to Inrol these our Letters in the said Parliament Roll; and
these our Letters Patents shall be to every of them sufficient Warrant in that
behalf: And finally declare and will that after this our Royal Assent given and
passed by these Presents, and declared and notified as is aforesaid, That then
immediately the said Acts and every of them shall be taken, accepted and
admitted good, sufficient and perfect Laws, to all intents, Constructions and
purposes, and to be put in due Execution accordingly, the Continuance or
Dissolution of this our Parliament, or any other Use, Custom, thing or things
to the contrary thereof notwithstanding.

In Witness whereof We have caused those our Letters to be made Patents.
Witness our self at Westminster the 23th day of March in the 29th year of our
Reign.

Per ipsam Reginam.


Nota, That the Clerk of the Parliament having read the said Letters Patents
before set down, Sir Edmund Anderson Knight Lord Chief Justice of the Common
Pleas (still supplying the place of Sir Thomas Bromley Knight Lord Chancellor)
delivered other Letters Patents unto the said Clerk openly to be read, whereby
eight several Commissioners were nominated and authorized to dissolve the
Parliament, viz. The Archbishop of Canterbury, the Archbishop of York, the Earl
of Shrewsbury Earl Marshal of England, the Earl of Darby Lord Steward, the Earl
of Kent, the Earl of Leicester Master of her Majesty's Horse, the Lord Howard
Lord Admiral of England, Lord Hunsdon Lord Chamberlain, and the Lord Cobham
Lord Warden of the Cinque Ports. For doubtless unless a new Commission had come
forth by which these before-named Honorable Personages had been de novo
nominated to this purpose, the three Commissioners at first appointed in the
beginning of this Parliament (which see at large upon Saturday the 29th day of
October foregoing) might without any other new authority though not have
Dissolved the Parliament, yet have Prorogued it to a further day, as they had
formerly Adjourned it upon Friday the second day of December foregoing unto
Wednesday the 15th day of February next ensuing, which was for ten weeks space
at the least: but that former Authority being now at an end by these new
Letters Patents, the manner of their delivery, the removal of the new
Commissioners in them nominated, and the Commission lastly it self are thus
verbatim set down in the Original Journal Book of the Upper House.

Postquam vero Clericus Parliament. has Literas palam perlegisset, Edmundus
Anderson Miles alias etiam Literas Patentes eidem Clerico Parliamenti public
legendas tradidit: atque hic notandum est omnes Dominos Commissionarios in
Literis patentibus nominatos locis suis relictis in medio banco consedisse dum
diclae Literae legerentur: Earum autem tenor hic sequitur.

ELizabetha Dei gratia Angliae, Franciae and Hiberniae Regina, fidei Defensor,
etc. Reverendissimo in Christo Patri ac Consiliario suo Johanni Cantuarien
Archiepiscopo, totius Angliae Primati and Metropolitano, ac Reverendissimo in
Christo Patri Edwino Archiepiscopo Eboracen. Angliae Primati and Metropolitano;
ac etiam chavissimis Consanguineis and Consiliariis suis Georgio Comiti Salop
Comiti Marescallo Angliae, Henrico Comiti Darbiae magno Seneschallo; necnon
charissimo Consanguineo and Consiliario suo Henrico Comiti Kantiae, ac
charissimo Consanguineo and Consiliario suo Roberto Comiti Leicestr. Magistro
Equorum suorum; ac etiam praedilectis and fidelibus Consiliariis suis Carolo
Domino Howard magno Admirallo suo Angliae, Henrico Domino de Hunsdon Domino
Carmerario suo, and Willielmo Domino Cohham Domino Gardiano quinque Portuum
suorum, Salutem. Cum nuper pro quibusdam arduis and urgentibus negotiis, nos,
statum and desensionem Regni nostri Angliae ac Ecclesiae Anglicanae concern
praesens hoc Parliamentum nostrum apud Civitatem nostram Westmonasterii decimo
quinto die Octobris ultimo praeterito inchoari and teneri ordinaverimus, in and
a quo dic idem Parliamentum nostrum usque ad and in vicesimum septimum ejusdem
mensis Octobris prorogat fuerat, eodemque die idem Parliamentum nostrum usque
ad and in vicesimum nonum diem dicti mensis Octobris prorogat' fuerat, ac ibid'
tunc tent' and continuat' fuerat usque ad and in secundum diem Decembris tunc
proximum sequentem; Eodemque die idem Parliamentum nostrum usque ad and in
decimum quintum diem Februarii tunc prox' sequent' adjournat' fuit; Eodemque
die idem Parliamentum nostrum tunc and ibidem tent' and continuat' fuerat usque
ad and in vicesimum tertium diem instantis mensis Martii: Sciatis tamen certis
urgentibus causis and considerationibus nos specialiter moven' idem
Parliamentum nostrum hoc instante vicesimo tertio die Martii duximus
dissolvend'. De fidelitate igitur, prudentia and circumspectione vestris
plurimum confident' de avisamento and assensu Concilii nostri assignavimus vos
and aliquos tres vel plures vestrum Commissionarios nostros, dantes vobis and
aliquibus tribus vel pluribus vestrum, tenore praesentium, plenam potestatem,
facultatem and authoritatem hoc instante vicesimo tertio die Martii ad dictum
Parliamentum nostrum Nomine nostro plenar' dissolvend'. Et ideo vobis Mandamus
quod vos, aliqui tres vel plures vestrum idem Parliamentum nostrum eodem
instante vicesimo tertio die Martii virtute harum Literarum Patentium Nomine
nostro plene dissolvatis and determinetis. Et ideo vobis Mandamus quod circa
praemissa diligenter intendatis, ac ea in forma praedicta effectualiter
expleatis and exequamini. Damus autem universis and singulis Archiepiscopis,
Marchionibus, Comitibus, Vicecomitibus, Episcopis, Baronibus, Militibus,
Civibus and Burgensibus, ac omnibus aliis quorum interest ad dictum
Parliamentum nostrum conventur' tenore praesentium firmiter in mandatis, quod
vobis in praemissis pareant, obediant and intendant in omnibus prout decet. In
cujus rei testimonium has Literas nostras sieri secimus Patentes. Test meipsa
apud Westmonasterium vicesimo tertio die Martii Anno Regni nostri vicesimo nono.

Per ipsam Reginam. Powle.


It should seem that the reading of these Commissions and the Dissolution of
this Parliament were all of them finished this Thursday the 23th day of this
instant March in the Forenoon, for else there must have been some other
continuance of it by the Lord Chief Justice of the Common Pleas supplying the
place of the Lord Chancellor upon the rising of the Lords to dinner unto some
hour in the Afternoon; which may very well be, in respect that although the
Queens Majesty came usually in Person to give her Royal Assent in the
Afternoon, yet that being now performed after an unusual and extraordinary
manner by her Majesty's Letters Patents, or a Commission under the Great Seal,
the time was also altered: So that though this Parliament were not long in
continuance (for both the meetings thereof put together make but ten weeks at
the most) yet it had many weighty matters debated in it, and this Journal of
the Upper House is richly stored with rarer Precedents than any other of all
the Queens time.

Finally, Her Majesty's loving Subjects considering the great Charges she
sustained by the maintenance of the Low Countries Wars, and withal in a manner
foreseeing the stupendous preparations of Spain (at this time most intentive
in providing and furnishing of that mighty Armado styled afterward Invincible)
did not only grant unto her Majesty one entire Subsidy and two Fifteenths and
Tenths (as the Clergy had also granted unto her one other Subsidy) but did
likewise consult in either House severally (for the Lords refused to join with
the House of Commons therein) concerning a Contribution to be bestowed upon her
Majesty in like sort also toward the further and better support of those
foresaid continual and chargeable Wars of the Netherlands.

THE JOURNAL OF THE House of COMMONS.
An Exact, large and very perfect Journal of the Passages of the House of
Commons in the Parliament holden at Westminster, Anno 28 Reginae Eliz. Anno
Domini 1586. which began there on Saturday the 29th Day of October (after two
several Prorogations thereof) and there continued until it was at length
Dissolved on Thursday the 23th Day of March, Anno 29 Reginae ejusdem.

THE Passages of this Journal of the House of Commons are fully replenished
with excellent and rare matter both in respect of the business of Mary Queen of
Scots handled in the first meeting, and of the public dangers threatened
against her Majesty's person and Realms discussed in the second meeting of this
Parliament; in which also there wanted not the passing of diverse good and
wholesome Laws, and the discussing of many emergent disputes touching the
private affairs of the said House: all which are in themselves very useful and
worthy of observation.

Although the Parliament had been summoned to have begun upon Saturday the 15th
day of October in Anno 28 Reginae Eliz. yet it held not, but was on the said
day further Prorogued unto Thursday the 27th day of the same Month, upon which
said day it was lastly Prorogued unto Saturday the 29th day of the same next
ensuing.

On which said 29th day of October the Parliament held accordingly, although
her Majesty came not in person, but appointed by her Letters Patents under the
Great Seal, the Archbishop of Canterbury, the Lord Burleigh Lord Treasurer, and
the Earl of Darby Lord Steward, or any two of them, her Delegates or
Commissioners in her Majesty's name and stead to begin this said Parliament,
and the same further to hold, continue, Adjourn or Prorogue as to them should
seem fitting and needful.

The Lords therefore being set, the Knights, Citizens and Burgesses of the
House of Commons had notice thereof, and thereupon repaired unto the Upper
House, and as many as could conveniently being let in, Sir Thomas Bromley
Knight Lord Chancellor showed that the Queens Majesty was withheld by some
very great and important occasions, so that she could not be there personally
present at this time, but yet had appointed some other Honorable personages
there present to supply her place, and in her name to begin the said
Parliament. And then the same Letters Patents were read. After which the
foresaid three Commissioners leaving their places went to a Seat prepared for
them on the right side of the Chair of State, who being so placed the Lord
Chancellor did Lastly declare, that the mere cause for which this Parliament
had been so suddenly called at this time, was upon the discoveries of the late
most great and horrible Treasons plotted for the taking away of her Majesty's
Life, and the subversion of true Religion, and that one great offender therein
did yet remain, touching whose punishment her Majesty did crave their faithful
advice; and therefore wished those of the House of Commons to make present
choice of some one amongst them to be their Speaker, and to present him unto
the Lords Lieutenants or Lords Commissioners as soon as conveniently they might.

Whereupon the Knights, Citizens, Barons and Burgesses of the House of Commons
repairing to their said House did there elect and choose John Puckering Sergeant
at Law their Prolocutor (who had been Speaker also the last Parliament.)

Nota, That there is not any one word of all this before set down in the
Original Journal Book of the House of Commons de annis istis 28o and 29o
Reginae Eliz. which is very defective not only here but in some other places
thereof: but that which is before set down is for the most part gathered out of
the Original Journal Book of the Upper House, and only perfected in some places
in matter of form, and yet the Titles of the aforesaid three days are set down
in three blank Pages.

On Monday the 31th day of October her Majesty's Person was again represented
by those aforesaid three Lords Commissioners constituted by her Majesty's
Letters Patents on Saturday the 29th day of this instant October foregoing.

These being set in the Upper House with diverse other Lords in their
Parliamentary Robes, the Knights, Citizens and Burgesses of the House of
Commons had notice thereof and repaired thither with John Puckering Sergeant at
Law their Speaker, who was according to the usual course presented unto the
said Lords Commissioners, and by them admitted; who answered to these his three
Petitions of course made in the name of the House of Commons for liberty of
Access, for freedom of Speech, and freedom from Arrests and Suits, and lastly
for Pardon for himself, that the said House of Commons and himself should enjoy
and use all such privileges and freedoms as had in the like case been enjoyed
by any others in the times of her Majesty's most noble Progenitors. Whereupon
the said Knights, Citizens and Burgesses with their Speaker departed to their
own House.

Nota, That there is not any word of all this presentment of the Speaker in the
Original Journal Book of the House of Commons, but only the very Title of the
day is thus set down in a blank Page thereof Lunae xxxj. Octobris 1586. and the
whole matter ensuing by the great negligence of Mr Fulk Onslow at this time
Clerk of the House of Commons is wholly omitted, which also happened in the
setting down of the three foregoing days of this Journal, upon the two first of
which the Parliament had been further Prorogued, and upon the third received
its beginning: in all which the Titles only of the days are set down in the
upper part of three several blank Pages (as is beforesaid) with intention
doutless at first to have inserted the passages of each day; and therefore it
is the more strange that it was never perfected, and argues the greater
neglect, because the said Mr Onslow did live many years in the place of Clerk
of the House of Commons after the Dissolution of this Parliament, by which
means, if these foregoing day had not been supplied out of the Original
Journal Book of the Upper House, this other Journal of the House of Commons had
remained very imperfect and unuseful.

And yet at the end of the aforesaid blank Page or bottom thereof, in which the
Title of this present Monday the 31th day of October is inserted, there
follows the reading of one Bill, which is usually done after the Knights,
Citizens and Burgesses of the House of Commons do return from the Upper House
with their Speaker newly admitted upon their presentment of him; which said
Bill read at this time upon their return is entered in manner and form
following, viz.

The Bill touching Inrollments the first reading.

After the reading of this Bill the House did without all question Adjourn it
self unto Thursday the third day of November ensuing, although there be no
mention thereof in this said Journal Book of the House of Commons, which must
(as all other defects) be imputed to the former neglect. And yet this
Adjournment may be collected, not only by a like Adjournment of the Lords unto
Friday the 4th day of November aforesaid, and by other Adjournments very
frequent in the House of Commons during this first meeting of the present
Parliament; but also out of the very Entrance of the said Thursday following,
which is on the very next Page after the Entrance of the before mentioned Bill,
which is never used to be done if any other days passages should have
intervened between. And therefore it would not be amiss now once for all to
observe the cause and ground why the House of Commons did so often at this
first meeting of this Parliament Adjourn it self contrary to the usual practice
both of former and latter times, which was no other than the handling of that
great and unusual business touching the Scottish Queen, and leaving or
forbearing to treat of other ordinary matters usual in the House.

For by this means it happened that the Original Letters and other proofs
produced against the said Scottish Queen for the discovery of her being guilty
of the Teason plotted by Ballard, Babington and Vide ae tota ista matcria in
Annal. Eliz. a Cambd. script. Edit. Lugd. Bat. 1625. a p. 432. ad p. 472.
others, being all first laid open and urged before the Lords in the Upper
House, and not at large discussed in the House of Commons till they had been
derived unto them from the said Upper House by several Committees; It was the
only means and cause that the said House of Commons did for want of matter and
employment so often Adjourn it self: Whereas usually at other times the passing
of Bills with the matter of Subsidy and public grievances being first debated
in the said House and from them derived to the Lords, their Lordships are often
necessitated in the beginning of each Parliament for want of like employment to
Adjourn themselves.

On Thursday the third day of November, to which day the Parliament had been on
Monday the 31th day of October foregoing last adjourned, Mr Speaker showed unto
the House, that he received Commandment from my Lord Chancellor from her
Majesty to signify unto them, that her Highness was sorry this House was
troubled the last sitting thereof with the matter touching the choosing and
returning of the Knights for the County of Norfolk: a thing in truth
impertinent for this House to deal withal, and only belonging to the Charge and
Office of the Lord Chancellor, from whence the Writs for the same Elections
issued out, and are thither returnable again. And also that her Majesty had
appointed the said Lord Chancellor to confer therein with the Judges. And so
thereupon examining the said Returns, and the Sheriff, touching the matter and
circumstances of his proceedings in the said Elections, to set down such course
for making the true Return as to Justice and Right shall therein appertain.

Two Bills had each of them one reading; of which the first being the Bill for
Orford-Haven, had its first reading; and the second being the Bill touching
Inrollments, had its second reading.

One of the House offering to speak to this Bill, Mr Vice-Chamberlain stood up,
and showed unto this House, that having matter of most great importance to
deliver unto this House from her Majesty, he was so bold with their good
favors for this time to interrupt the Speech intended to the said Bill by the
Gentleman that offered to speak to the said Bill; and so then showed, that her
Majesty thinking that all those of this House which were lately in the higher
House when the Lord Chancellor declared the cause of her Highnesses summoning
of this Parliament, could not hear the same, and also that many of the Members
of this House now here present, were not then come up or returned, commanded
him to deliver unto this House the summary cause of her Majesty's calling and
assembling of this great Council at this time, which was (he said) not to make
any more Laws as being many more already than well executed, nor yet for any
Subsidy, albeit, if need so required, the same were convenient enough to be
done; but (said he) to consult for such matters as the like were never erst
heard of, nor any Parliament called for in former time that can be found or
read of. And so very excellently, plainly and effectually made relation of the
horrible and wicked practices and attempts caused and procured by the Queen of
Scots so called, merely tending to the ruin and overthrow of the true and
sincere Religion established in this Realm, the Invasion of Foreign Forces into
this Realm, Rebellion and Civil Wars and dissension within this Realm: yea and
withal (which his heart quaked and trembled to utter and think on) the death
and destruction of the most Sacred Person of our most Gracious Sovereign Lady
the Queens Majesty, to the utter desolation and conquest of this most Noble
Realm of England. And so discoursing of the matter and great execrable
Treacheries and Conspiracies of the said Queen of Scots even from the first to
the last in particularities very amply and effectually (such of them at the
least as have been hitherto discovered) showing also very manifestly and
evidently the proofs and all other circumstances of the same Treachery and
Conspiracies; and so thinks good for his part that speedy Consultation he had
by this House for the cutting of her off by course of Justice, for that
otherwise our said Sovereign Lady the Queens Majesty's most Royal Person cannot
be continued with safety, concludes with this Sentence, Ne pereat Israel,
pereat Absolon.

Which done, Mr Chancellor of the Exchequer, Mr Chancellor of the Duchy, and
Mr Secretary Woolley using each of them severally very effectual Speeches at
large touching the said horrible Treasons and Conspiracies caused and procured
by the said Queen of Scots, the House did then rise, the time being far spent,
with reservation nevertheless by Mr Speaker remembered for further Speech
therein to be had by others of this House to morrow again, and a saving also
till some other more convenient time for such of this House as shall please to
speak to the said Bill of Inrollments upon the said second reading of the same
accordingly. Vide 7th November, Monday.

On Friday the 4th day of November Mr Recorder of London having made
Declaration unto this House, that diverse of the Members of the same do find
themselves grieved for that their Servants attending upon them, are daily
arrested contrary to the ancient Liberties and Privileges of this House, and
having further moved also that a like Committee of this House may at this time
be appointed, as had been the last Parliament for the examining and reporting
Cases of Privilege; It was resolved and agreed by the House, that the same
shall be exercised and done accordingly: And for the performance thereof the
said Mr Recorder, Sir Henry Gate, Mr Robert Wroth and Mr William Fleetwood were
appointed by the Authority of the House.

Upon the Motion of Mr Speaker putting the House in remembrance of continuing
and further prosecuting of the great Cause they dealt in: yesterday diverse
Speeches were made to that effect by Sir James Croft Comptroller of her
Majesty's Household Sir Francis Knowles Treasurer of the same, Sir William
Herbert, Sir Thomas Scot, Mr Francis Bacon, Mr Alford, Mr Throgmorton, Mr
Barker, Mr Dalton, Mr Biynbrigg, and Mr Solicitor; by all which it was
concluded, That considering the late horrible Treasons and Practices conspired
against the Life of the Queens Majesty, and also for the procuring of Foreign
Invasion in respect of the Attempt; and also for endeavoring to raise
Rebellion within the Realm for and by Mary late Queen of Scots, therefore of
necessity present remedy and provision must be had for preventing the like
attempts and practices hereafter, which could never be, unless the said
Scottish Queen did presently suffer the due Execution of Justice according to
her deserts.

And then upon the further Motion of the said Mr Solicitor for a Committee of
this House to be had to confer of some convenient and fit course to be taken by
Petition and Suit to her Majesty in that behalf, with request also unto the
Lords to join therein with this House to her Highness, if it please them;
thereupon this Committee following was nominated and appointed in that behalf
accordingly, viz. all the Privy Council of the House, Sir William Herbert, Sir
Thomas Scot, Sir Henry Gate, Sir William Moore, Sir Thomas Manners, Sir Thomas
Fairfax, Sir Robert Jermin, Sir John Petre, Sir Henry Cock, Sir Henry Cobham,
Sir Henry Knyvet, Sir John Higham, Sir Thomas Stanhope, Mr Fortescue Master of
the Wardrobe, Mr Randal, Mr Osborne, Mr George Moore, Mr Cromwell, Mr Beale, Mr
Wroth, Mr Burlace, Mr George Carry, Mr Doctor Stanhopp, Mr Dale, Master of
Requests, Mr Francis Hastings, Mr Solicitor, Mr Attorney of the Wards, Mr
Sergeant Snagg, Mr Morris, Mr Sands, Mr Dalton, Mr Bacon, Mr Alford, Mr
Barker, Mr Bainbrigge, Mr Throckmorton, Mr Corbett, Mr Palms, Mr Pate, Mr
Skinner, Mr Amersam, Mr Edward Lukenor, Mr Thynne and Mr Hellyard Recorder of
York, who were all of them appointed by the House to meet in the Exchequer
Chamber at two of the Clock this Afternoon.

On Saturday the 5th day of November Mr George Moore entering into some
discourse touching the great Cause, concludes (after sundry great and weighty
reasons first showed) that only Popery is the chief and principal root of all
the late horrible and wicked treacheries and practices, and the Queen of Scots
a principal branch issuing from the same root, and the most perilous and full
of poison of all the other branches thereof, for that the Papists in very deed
for the most part not knowing the Person of the said Queen of Scots do wish the
Establishing of her in the Crown of this Realm rather in respect of Popery
which she would set up, than for any affection they bear to her Person, and so
likewise for the most part all of them either wish or could easily bear the
death of our Sovereign Lady the Queens Majesty, though perhaps they would not
show themselves to be Actors or Dealers therein. He therefore moves that it
may be joined in the Petition for the great Cause, that her Majesty may be
moved to retain no Servants about her Highnesses Person, but such only as may
be well known both to profess the true and sincere Religion, and also to be
every way true and faithful Subjects. And further, that the Laws already in
force against Papists may be put in due Execution. Which Speeches being ended
Mr Speaker showed that the said Motion or any other tending to the safety of
her Majesty's Person may be very well delivered and remembered to the Committees
in the great Cause by any member of the House.

Mr Dennis Hollis offers a Bill to this House in the behalf of the Curriers
of London. Whereupon Mr Speaker put the House in remembrance of her Majesty's
pleasure before signified unto this house; to forbear the making of new Laws
and to spend the time in the great Causes for which this Parliament was
specially summoned; yet because in the mean time of dealing in the said great
Cause in Committee or otherwise, there should be nothing to occupy the House
withal, it is thought good at such times to have some Bills read in the House
(reserving always due regard and place to the said great Cause. And thereupon
the said Bill was read accordingly.

The Bill touching the Curriers was read the first time.

The Bill also for limitation of time touching Writs of Error growing by fraud,
had its first reading.

Mr Chadley one of the Knights returned for the County of Devon offers a Bill
to this House touching Cloth-making within the said County, out of Cities,
Market Towns and Corporate Towns. Whereupon the said Bill was then read
accordingly.

The Bill touching Clothiers in the County of Devon had its first reading.

Edmund Moore of Shoreditch in the County of Middlesex Tallow-chandler, and
John Turner of the same Butcher, being both of them in the Sergeants Custody
for presuming to come into this House (sitting the House) and being no Members
of the same; it is, upon opinion that they did it of ignorance and mere
simplicity, and not of any pretended purpose, and also upon their humble
submission of themselves unto this House, and like humble request and Petition
of Pardon for the same, Agreed by this House, that they shall be discharged and
set at Liberty, taking first the Oath of Supremacy openly in this House, which
they so then did and afterward departed.

On Monday the 7th day of November, The Bill touching Fines and Recoveries
levied before the Justices of the Common Pleas, whereunto any of the said
Justices are parties, was read the first time.

Sir William Herbert being returned into this House Knight for the County of
Monmouth offers a Bill into this House for the relief of certain Orphans
within the said County of Monmouth, and prays that the same Bill may be read;
which was so then read accordingly.

The Bill for relief of certain Orphans in the County of Monmouth had its first
reading.

Mr Bulkely offers a Bill unto this House touching Clothes made in this Realm
to be shipped and transported over the Seas, and prays the same may be read;
which was thereupon so done accordingly.

The Bill touching Clothes made to be transported over the Seas had its first
reading.

Sir Robert Jermin likewise offers another Bill touching Clothiers and
Cloth-making in the Counties of Suffolk and Essex, and prays the reading
thereof, which in no wise he would have moved, if the House should have been
any ways occupied in the great Cause; the speedy course and proceeding whereof
he most earnestly desires and prays.

The Bill touching Clothiers and Clothes made in the Counties of Suffolk and
Essex was read the first time.

Mr Vice-Chamberlain showed that the Committees in the great Cause did meet
according to the Commission therein of this House unto them, and that then also
they did appoint another Meeting therein to be this Afternoon; and showed
withal, That some of the Committees of this House, being of the Privy Council,
do understand that the Lords will not in this great and weighty Cause any way
deal or meddle amongst themselves, nor in any other matter besides, until they
shall have first heard therein from this House for Conference to be prayed with
them by this House; and therefore moved, That now whilst their Lordships do yet
sit, the Privy Council with some few others of this House be presently sent to
their Lordships to move for Conference, and to know their Lordships pleasure
for the time and place of Meeting. Whereupon for that purpose it was ordered,
That all the Privy Council being of this House, Sir Henry Gate, Mr Solicitor
and Sir William Moore should presently repair to their Lordships to the higher
House; who did so accordingly.

It should seem that in the mean time after the going up of Mr Treasurer and
the rest, and before their return from the Lords, these matters following were
handled; viz.

The Bill touching Orford-Haven was read the second time, and thereupon
committed unto Sir Robert Jermin, Sir John Higham, Sir Henry Cobham, Mr
Cromwell, Mr Layer, and all others that were Committees in the same Cause the
last Parliament, to meet to morrow in the Afternoon in the Middle Temple Hall
at three of the Clock.

After sundry Speeches to the Bill touching Inrollments upon the second reading
thereof, and being then reserved to convenient time, and this present time
falling out to be convenient for that purpose, it is upon the question both for
the committing and engrossing quite dashed and rejected.

The Bill touching Curriers had its second reading.

Mr Treasurer and the residue of the Committees being returned from the Lords
(as it should seem much about the time that the House had finished the
disputing and reading of the foresaid Bills) he showed that he and the residue
have according to the Appointment of this House moved the Lords for Conference
touching the said great Cause, which their Lordships did very well like of, and
have appointed that the former Committees of this House in the said Cause do
meet this Afternoon in the Parliament-Chamber with such Committee of their
Lordships, as their Lordships for that purpose do appoint: which (he says) he
thinks to be twenty or thereabouts. And so thereupon were the Names of the
said Committees of this House read, and they required to give their Attendances
therein at the said time and place accordingly.

On Tuesday the 8th day of November Mr Doctor Turner showed unto this House,
That he is fully persuaded that her Majesty's safety cannot be sufficiently
provided for by the speedy cutting off of the Queen of Scots, unless some good
means withal be had for the rooting out of Papistry, either by making of some
good new Laws for that purpose, or else by the good and due Execution of the
Laws already in force; which, as he greatly wishes and refers to the grave
consideration of this House: so concluding in his own Conscience that no Papist
can be a good Subject, he did offer a Bill to this House containing (as he
thinks) some convenient form of matter tending to the effect of his Motion;
and prays the same may be read. Whereupon Mr Speaker finding the Title of the
said Bill to purport the Safety of her Majesty's Person, puts the House in
remembrance that by their own appointment and direction that matter was
referred to certain Committees of this House who had not only had Conference
thereof amongst themselves, but also with Committees of the Lords yesterday,
and must so have again this day also in the Afternoon: And shows further,
That yesterday upon the like Motion of this made by another Gentleman of this
House, it was agreed, That all such matters as then were or should be offered
unto this House tending to the preservation of her Majesty's Person, should be
delivered and referred to the said Committees to be joined in the Petition to
be exhibited to her Highness on the behalf of this House, and so wished this
might also be, without reading the said Bill, or further proceeding therein by
this House, until the said Committees should first have reported unto this
House their travail with the Lords in the said Cause, which he thought would be
to morrow. And after sundry Speeches to that end uttered by Mr George Moore,
Sir Henry Knyvet, Mr Treasurer and Mr Francis Hastings, it was referred to be
imparted to the said Committees accordingly, and therefore the Bill not to be
read as yet in this House.

Sundry Speeches being had touching the Liberties of this House, and of the
preservation of the same Liberties about the matter of the Examination of the
Returns of the Knights for the County of Norfolk, and some arguing one way, and
some another, the time so passing away, the House did rise, and nothing then
resolved thereof at all. And then also at the rising of the House, it was
moved, That in respect of the meeting of the Committees in the great Cause with
the Committees of the Lords this Afternoon, the meeting of the Committees in
the Bill for Orsord Haven (likewise appointed for this Afternoon) might be
deferred till some other more convenient time.

On Wednesday the 9th day of November after some Motions and Speeches had
touching the Liberties of this House in the examination and Judgment of the
returns for the Knights for the County of Norfolk, It is upon the question
resolved, that Mr Comptroller, Mr Treasurer, Mr Recorder of London, Mr Sergeant
Snagg, Mr Cromwell, Sir William Winter. Sir Henry Knyvett, Mr Thomas Knyvett,
Mr Alford, Mr Drew, Mr Harris, Sir William Moore, Mr Morris, Mr Sands and Mr
Sanders, be appointed Committees by this House to examine the state and
circumstances of the said Returns, and to meet for that purpose to morrow in
the Afternoon at two of the Clock in the Exchequer Chamber. And also that Mr
Watson Clerk of the Crown in the Chancery, and also the Undersheriff of the
County of Norfolk do then and there attend upon the said Committees in the
exercise of the said Examinations accordingly. And further, that thereupon the
said Committees or some of them do signify unto this House upon Friday next in
the Forenoon the state of the said matter as they shall find it upon the said
Examination; to the end this House may then take such further course therein as
in that behalf shall be thought meet and convenient.

This day report was made by Mr Thomas Cromwell that eleven of the Committees
appointed by this House to examine the state and circumstances of the Writs and
Returns made of the Knights for the County of Norfolk had according to their
Commission met yesterday, and that the Clerk of the Crown had brought before
them as well the Writs as their Returns; upon view whereof it appeared that two
several Writs had issued out of the Chancery directed to the Sheriff of Norfolk
for choice of the Knights of the Shire of that County, the first dated the 15th
day of September, the second dated the 11th day of October. The first appeared
by the return to have been executed the 26th day of September, the second
executed the 24th of October which was after the Parliament was to have had its
beginning. By the first Writ Mr Thomas Farmer and Mr Gresham were returned to
be chosen Knights; by the second Mr Christopher Heydon and the said Mr Gresham.
That by the examination of the Clerk of the Crown it appeared unto them, that
the first Writ with the return was brought and offered unto him by the
Undersheriff the 15th day of October, when as the Parliament was to have had
its beginning, and that with that Writ the Burgesses for the Boroughs of the
County were also brought, which then notwithstanding he received not. That
after about the 29th day of October both the said Writs were delivered unto
him. It was further declared that the said Mr Heydon with his Council and the
said Mr. Farmer in person, and also the Undersheriff had been before the
Committees; that Mr. Gresham as being returned by both the Writs had not been
before them; that they had examined Mr. Heydon and his Council what exceptions
they could take to the Execution of the first Writ: who then alleged two
causes, the one that due Summons was not given to the Freeholders of the Shire,
the other that Proclamation was not duly made. That thereupon they examined the
Undersheriff, who in their presence affirmed, that the Writ was delivered to
the High Sheriff on the Saturday, which he received on the Sunday, the County
day being on Monday following; On which day he was bound by Law to execute his
Writs: by which means he had not leisure either to summon many, or any day left
wherein he might by Proclamation notify it in the Country. That on the said
Monday between eight and nine of the Clock three solemn O yes were made, and
the Queens Writ publicly read, and all Circumstances used which the Law
required: wherein he was the more careful, for that it was commonly bruted,
that there would be variance about the Election. That the Election was so
expected in the Country, that by his Estimation there were three Thousand
Persons at the same; And that Mr. Farmer had the Voices without denial; that.
Mr. Justice Windham, Sir Thomas Knyvett, Sir Nicholas Bacon, Sir Henry
Woodhouse and diverse other Justices of the Peace, Esquires and Gentlemen of
great calling, were at the Election, and gave their Assents to the same, and
set their Hands and Seals to the Indenture. Upon consideration of the whole
matter it appeared unto them, that the first Writ and Return were in matter and
form perfect and duly executed; the second Writ they thought could not be
available; besides that the precedent was perilous for the time to come, in
respect that it appointed two others to be Chosen. The effect of the Writ
besides not observed; for that Mr. Gresham one of the same was chosen by the
first Writ. They further declared, that they understood that the Lord
Chancellor and diverse of the Judges having examined the matter, were of the
same opinion. He declared further, that one of the Committees had moved, that
two of the Committees might have been sent to understand of my Lord Chancellor
what he had done in the matter, which the rest of the Committees thought not
convenient, first in respect they were satisfied therein by diverse of their
Committees, and also for that they thought it prejudicial to the privilege of
the House to have the same determined by others than such as were Members
thereof. And though they thought very reverently of the said Lord Chancellor
and Judges, and thought them competent Judges in their places; yet in this case
they took them not for Judges in Parliament in this House. And there upon
required that, if it were so thought good to the House, Mr. Farmer and Mr.
Gresham might take their Oaths and be allowed of by force of the first Writ, as
allowed by the censure of this House, and not as allowed of by the said Lord
Chancellor and Judges. Which was agreed unto by the whole House, and ordered to
be entered accordingly.

This Case before set down touching the Election of the Knights for the County
of Norfolk, contains in it many curious and very useful points. The Case was
singly this:

The Sheriff of Norfolk receives a Writ touching the Election of two Knights
for that County but two days before the next County-day, in which he is bound
by Law to see it executed. By reason of this shortness of time he could neither
summon many Freeholders, nor make due Proclamation in the County any one day
before the said Election. The Sheriff notwithstanding on the said County-day
proceeds to the Execution of the said Writ, and Mr. Farmer and Mr. Gresham are
duly chosen according to all points and circumstances in such like case
required; there being not only a great appearance of Freeholders, but diverse
also of the eminentest Gentlemen of the said County, who after they had given
their Voices to the said Election, did also set their Hands and Seals to the
Indenture of the same in that case usual. After this a second and new Writ is
delivered to the said Sheriff for a new Election to be made, which is in all
points executed without any the least color of misfesance, and by it Mr.
Heydon, and Mr. Gresham (being one of the two first that had been before
Elected) were chosen, and the Indenture of their said Election, together with
the Writ, were delivered in unto the Clerk of the Crown, together with the Writ
and Indenture of the former Election. After which the Lord Chancellor and the
Judges meeting about it do resolve, That the first Writ was well executed, the
first Election good, and the second absolutely void; and of this their
resolution do give the House of Commons notice.

In which case these points following were resolved by the whole Body of the
said House.

First, That the said first Writ was duly executed, and the Election good, and
the second Election absolutely void.

Secondly, That it was a most perilous Precedent, that after two Knights of a
County were duly Elected, any new Writ should issue out for a second Election
without order of the House of Commons it self.

Thirdly, That the discussing and adjudging of this and such like differences,
only belonged to the said House.

Fourthly, That though the Lord Chancellor and Judges were competent Judges in
their proper Courts, yet they were not in Parliament.

Fifthly, That it should be entered in the very Journal Book of the House, that
the said first Election was approved to be good, and the said Knights then
chosen, had been received and allowed as Members of the House, not out of any
respect the said House had or gave to the Resolution of the Lord Chancellor and
Judges therein passed, but merely by reason of the resolution of the House it
self, by which the said Election had been approved.

Sixthly and lastly, That there should no Message be sent to the Lord
Chancellor, not so much as to know what he had done therein, because it was
conceived to be a matter derogatory to the Power and Privilege of the said
House. Concerning all or the most of which particulars see more upon Friday the
11th day of this instant November ensuing.

Sir Christopher Hatton her Majesty's Vicechamberlain (presently as it seems
after the discussing of the former Election) fell upon the debating of the
great Cause touching the Scottish Queen, and showed, That the Committees of the
Lords in the great Cause, and also the Committees of this House in the same
Cause had Conference together yesterday in the Afternoon, and resolved upon a
Petition unto her Majesty in the Name of both Houses to be exhibited, as
afterward it was on Saturday the 12th day of this instant November unto her
Highness, by the Lord Chancellor in the Name of the Lords of the higher House,
and by Mr. Speaker in the Name of this House, as the joint Petition of both
Houses for Proclamation and Execution of the Sentence of the Lords and others
the late Commissions at Fotheringhay in the proceedings there against Mary
called the Queen of Scots. And that because the said Committees of both Houses
thought the said Petition would be too long if it should comprehend the whole
course and manner of the said proceedings; yet they thought it necessary, that
in both Houses the whole course of the same proceedings should be signified and
read this present day, to the end each Member of both the said Houses might
understand the whole matter and manner of the same course of proceedings to
their full satisfactions. And that then afterward also the same uniform
Petition likewise be read in both the said Houses; with reservation
nevertheless and liberty to both the same Houses, and to every Member of the
same House, to show and infer to the said Lord Chancellor for the Lords, and to
Mr. Speaker for this House, any other reasons whatsoever (besides those
contained in the said Petition) which they shall think meet to be remembered to
her Majesty for the better furtherance of obtaining their humble Suit at her
Majesty's hands contained in the said Petition. And showed further, That the
said Committee of the Lords willed the said Committees of this House, that the
Lords now sitting this Forenoon in the higher House might hear from this House
this Forenoon also of the liking or acceptance of this House in the said form
and course of proceeding in the said Petition. Which thing himself after a long
time spent in the reading of part of the said Record of the said proceeding in
the said Commission at Fotheringhay, and foreseeing also that the finisting of
the reading thereof, would require so much more time as was very like could not
well be done before the Lords should rise; moved, That one or two of this House
might in the mean time of reading the residue of the said Record of the said
Course of proceedings, repair to their Lordships, and signify unto them the
same from this House, to know their Lordships pleasure for some other time for
the Committees of this House to intimate unto their Lordships the good liking
of this House conceived of the matter of the said Petition. And thereupon were
appointed Mr Treasurer and Mr Vice-Chamberlain, who going then presently to the
Lords, and returning again afterward, Mr. Vice-Chamberlain showed, that the
Message they brought again from the Lords was very short, to wit, that their
Lordships did appoint for that purpose to morrow in the Forenoon. And
afterward the same Record of the whole course of the said proceeding in the
said Commission being read, and the said Petition then read also, Mr.
Vice-Chamberlain moved that this House would be Suitors to the Lords to have
the said Petition entered and inrol led in the said higher House, there to
remain of Record as an Act. And thereupon it was upon the Question resolved by
the whole House, That the said Request should be made to their Lordships in
that behalf by the said Committees on the morrow, when they deliver unto their
Lordships the full and whole good liking of this House had of the said
Petition. Then Mr. Speaker moved, That for as much as by reason of the
shortness of the said Petition he is appointed by this House to yield reasons
unto her Majesty in such objections as should please her Highness to make
touching the Contents of the said Petition, the House would deliver him in
writing, for his better memory and the righter direction of their Service
imposed upon him in that behalf, such reasons as they should think meet for him
in their Names to remember unto her Majesty. And thereupon it was ordered, That
the said Committees of this House and every other Member of this House that
would, should meet at two of the Clock in the Afternoon of the same day in the
Exchequer-Chamber, and there show and deliver such reasons inferring the
necessity of the said Petition, or other matter tending to the safety and
preservation of her Majesty's most Royal Person, as to every or any Member of
this House should seem meet and convenient. And upon another Motion of Mr.
Speaker, that some of her Majesty's Privy Council being of this House, might be
requested by this House to make humble Suit to her Majesty for Access of some
competent number of this House unto her Highness accordingly, It was prayed and
agreed by the whole House, that Mr. Vice-Chamberlain do the same. And so then
the House did rise, and adjourned the Court until the Friday next following,
upon a former request then a little before made by Mr. Speaker for sparing his
Service till then, in respect he might in the mean time the better bethink and
prepare himself to attend upon her Highness in performance of their said Charge
so as before imposed upon him.

On Friday the 11th day of November the Committees in the Bill for Orford-Haven
(whose Names see before on Monday the 7th day of November) are appointed to
meet this Afternoon at three of the Clock in the Middle Temple Hall.

Mr. Cromwell one of the Committees for the Examination of Writs and the
Returns for the Knights of the County of Norfolk (which said Committees Names
see on Friday the 4th day of November foregoing) makes report, That yesterday
eleven of them met, and upon view of the Dates of the same Writs and Returns,
and upon Conference by them then also had with the Clerk of the Crown and
Undersheriff of Norfolk touching the manner of executing of the same Writs and
Returns, and hearing all such parties grieved, with their learned Council, as
repaired then to them for that purpose; they do find, that the first Writ and
Return both in manner and form was perfect, and also duly executed, and the
second Writ not so; and that besides it might also be a perilous Precedent for
the time to come to the Liberty and Privilege of this House, to admit or pass
over any such Writ or Return in such manner and course as the said second Writ
carries. And further declared, That they understood by the said Clerk of the
Crown, that the Lord Chancellor had then lately commanded him to receive and
accept the said first Writ and Return, by the which Mr. Farmer and Mr. Gresham
were elected and returned, as the Writ rightly and duly executed, and did also
understand by Mr. Recorder one of the said Committees, That Sir Edmund Anderson
Lord Chief Justice of the Court of Common Pleas had also showed him, that the
said Lord Chancellor and the Judges had resolved, That the said first Writ
should be returned as that which was in all parts duly and rightly executed,
and not the second. And showed further, That one of the Committees assenting
with the residue in opinion of validity of the said first Writ and Return, and
of the invalidity of the said second, and also in resolution that the
explanation and ordering of the Case as it stands, appertains only to the
Censure of this House, moved notwithstanding in the Committee, That two of the
Committees might be sent to the said Lord Chancellor to understand what his
Lordship had done in the matter; which the residue thought not convenient,
first, for that they were sufficiently satisfied therein by diverse of
themselves, but principally in respect they thought it very prejudicial and
injurious to the Privilege and Liberties of this House, to have the said Cause
decided or dealt in in any sort by any others than only by such as are Members
of this House: and that albeit they thought very reverently (as becomes them)
of the said Lord Chancellor and Judges, and know them to be competent Judges in
their places; yet in this case they took them not for Judges in Parliament in
this House: and so further required, that (if it were so thought good) Mr.
Farmer and Mr. Gresham might take their Oaths, and be allowed of and received
into this House by force of the said first Writ; as so allowed and admitted
only by the censure of this House, and not as allowed of by the said Lord
Chancellor or Judges. Which was agreed unto accordingly by the whole House, and
so Ordered also to be set down and Entered by the Clerk.

Mr. Treasurer one of the said Committees in the said Examination shows for
his part his privity and assent unto the whole recited course of proceeding in
the said Committee as it has been declared by Mr. Cromwell; and that before
himself, the said Mr. Farmer has already pronounced and taken his Oath.
Showing further withal that in the Committee he moved that some might be sent
to the Lord Chancellor to know what his Lordship had done in the matter, which
he then thought, and yet still does think necessary to have been done, as one
of the circumstances of the said examinations, and not for want of any
satisfaction otherwise, but only in respect of the orderly proceeding in the
Commission unto them by this House, tending to circumstances of the matter, of
which he thinks one to have been to send as aforesaid unto the said Lord
Chancellor, though they were resolved by themselves amongst themselves before.

Mr. Recorder of London making a large and plentiful discourse of the ancient
privileges and liberties of this House, furnished with recital of sundry
Precedents and examples, and lastly coming down to the matter in hand, shows,
that Sir Edmund Anderson Knight Lord Chief Justice of the Commons Pleas told
him this morning, that the said Lord Chancellor and the Judges had resolved,
that the said first Writ ought to be returned, and had so given order to the
Sheriff and Clerk of the Crown; And that he thereupon answered the said Sir
Edmund Anderson again, that the censure thereof belonged unto this House and
not unto them, and that he for his part would take no notice thereof at their
hands of their so doing, but only by way of instructions and not otherwise. And
so concluded with the allowance of the good course and order of this House in
setting down and entering the said Judgment accordingly as before.

Mr. Vice-Chamberlain showed unto the House, that according to their
appointment he has been an humble suitor unto her Majesty on the behalf of
this House for access there to be had unto her Highness, to exhibit their
Petition unto her Majesty; And that her Majesty thereupon has very Graciously
granted to hear them at the Court upon to morrow next between one and two of
the Clock in the Afternoon: signifying also unto them further, that her Majesty
having heard that the Lords do appoint them twenty of themselves of the Higher
House to attend her Majesty also for the same purpose; so her Highness thinks
meet that forty of this House were likewise appointed for this House, which She
thinks to be a sufficient number; but is nevertheless well pleased if the
House shall think good, to send a more or greater Number at their discretions,
but leaves the same to their own considerations.

Which her Majesty's most Gracious Favor, as the whole House did take it in
most joyful and dutiful part; So did they then desire the said Mr.
Vice-Chamberlain, that he would in the name of this whole House present unto
her Majesty their most humble and dutiful thanks for the same her Highnesses
most gracious clemency and great loving kindness toward them. Which so to do,
the said Mr. Vice-Chamberlain told them he purposed (God willing) in the
Afternoon of this present day.

And these were appointed by this House to attend upon her Majesty to morrow at
the Court, as many of the former Committees as would (whose names see at large
on Friday the 4th day of this instant November foregoing) and also Sir Henry
Barkeley, Sir William Mohun, Sir Edward Dymocke, Sir Thomas Jones, Sir Henry
Bagnell, Sir Andrew Nevill, Sir Henry Knyvet, Mr. Farmer, Sir Edward Osborne,
Mr. Henry Bromley, Mr. Ralph Horsey, Mr. James Croft, and Mr. Tasborough then
added unto them; which done, upon a Motion, that for as much as the Knights for
the County of Norsolk, and the Burgesses for all the Boroughs within the same
County (saving only the Citizens for the City of Norwich) were returned and
certified into this House this present day, and not before, the Petition might
therefore be read again in this House in the presence of the same Knights and
Burgesses, to the intent that they being made privy thereof, might also yield
their Assents to the same Petition; whereby, the rather, the same being for a
matter of so great moment, might in very deed be the Action of the whole House
then being possessed and consisting of all the Members thereof; the same
Petition was read by the Clerk, and well liked of, agreed unto and allowed by
the voices of the said Knights and Burgesses upon the question thereof unto
them made in that behalf by Mr. Speaker.

And afterward Mr. Vice-Chamberlain made a motion, that Mr. Speaker be put in
remembrance by this House, besides the residue of his reasons to be showed to
her Majesty for maintenance of the parts of the said Petition, to urge (if need
be) to her Majesty the matter and necessity of the late Instruments of
Association, respecting especially the Consciences of a great number of her
Highnesses good and Loyal subjects, which cannot be dispensed with by Laws;
whereupon request was so made by the House to Mr. Speaker accordingly.

Mr. Treasurer showed, that yesterday he and others of the Committees in the
great Cause presented unto the Lords in the Upper House the Request of this
House unto their Lordships to have the said Petition entered and recorded in the
Upper House, there to remain as an Act. Whereunto their Lordships assented, and
willed that the same might first be engrossed in Parchment, and so delivered to
their Lordships this present Forenoon; showing further, That the Clerk of this
House then had the same already engrossed and exact accordingly, but that the
same could not that day be sent to their Lordships, for that their Lordships
did not sit this Forenoon, and therefore he said it must be delivered at some
other time. And so then the House did rise, and this Court was adjourned till
Monday next following.

Memorandum, That in the Afternoon of this present day the said Petition
engrossed was delivered into the hands of the Lord Chancellor by the
Appointment of Mr. Speaker, and so lest with his Lordship.

On Saturday the 12th day of November (although the House of The Pitition
against the Scottish Queen presented unto her Majesly, Nov. 12.
Commons sat not any part of the day in their proper place) yet in the
Afternoon according to her Majesty's direction sent unto the House yesterday by
Sir Christopher Hatton her Vice-Chamberlain, John Puckering Sergeant at Law
their Speaker, with all the Privy Council and diverse other Members of the said
House (whose Names see before on Friday the 4th day, and on Friday the 11th day
of this instant November last past) repaired to her Majesty unto the Court,
there to join with Sir Thomas Bromiey Lord Chancellor and twenty Temporal Lords
of the Upper House in presenting a certain Petition (which had been agreed upon
by both Houses) unto her Highness for the speedy Execution of Mary late Queen
of Scots, according to that just Sentence which had been pronounced against her.

And to move her Majesty thereunto, the said Speaker of the House of Commons
did use many excellent and solid reasons, which were all found in a certain
Memorial written with his own hand, being as follows.

Unless Execution of this just Sentence be done,

1. Your Majesty's Person cannot any while be safe.

2. The Religion cannot long continue amongst us.

3. The most flourishing present State of this Realm must shortly receive a
woeful Fall.

4. And consequently in sparing her your Majesty shall not only give courage
and hardiness to the Enemies of God, of your Majesty's self, and of your
Kingdom; but shall discomfort and daunt with despair the hearts of your loving
People, and so deservedly provoke the heavy hand and wrath of God.

And that summarily for the reasons ensuing: First, forasmuch as concerns the
danger of your Majesty:

Both she and her Favorers think that she has right, not to succeed, but to
enjoy your Crown in possession; and therefore as she is a most impatient
Competitor (acquainted with blood) so will she not spare any means that may
take you from us, being the only Let that she enjoys not her desire.

She is hardened in malice against your Royal Person, notwithstanding that you
have done her all favor, mercy, and kindness, as well in preserving her
Kingdom, as saving her Life and Honor.

And therefore there is no place for mercy, where there is no hope of
amendment, or that she will desist from most wicked Attempts.

The rather, for that her malice appears such, as that she makes as it were
her Testament of the same to be executed after her death, and appoints her
Executors to perform the same.

She affirms it lawful to move Invasion: therefore as of Invasion Victory may
ensue, and of Victory the death of the vanquished; so does she not obscurely
profess it lawful to destroy you.

She holds it not only lawful, but honorable also and meritorious, to take
your life, etc. being deprived of your Crown by her holy Father; and therefore
she will (as she has continually done) seek it by all means whatsoever.

She is greedy of your death, and prefers it before her own life; for in her
late direction to some of her Accomplices she willed, whatsoever became of her,
the Tragical Execution should be performed on you.

There is by so much the more danger to your Person since the Sentence than
before, by how much it behooves them that would preserve her or advance her, to
hasten your death now or never, before Execution done upon her; as knowing,
that you and none else can give direction for her death: and that by your death
the Sentence has lost the force of Execution, and otherwise they should come
too late, if they take not the present opportunity to help her.

Her Friends hold Invasion unprofitable while you live, and therefore in their
opinion your death is first and principally to be sought, as the most
compendious way to ruin the Realm by Invasion.

Some of the eldest and wisest Papists set it down for a special good drift to
occupy you with conceit, that the preservation of her Life is the safety of
your own; and therefore you may be assured that they verily think that her life
will be your death and destruction.

Secondly, Forasmuch as concerns Religion:

It is most perilous to spare her that has continually breathed the overthrow
and suppression of the same, being poisoned with Popery from her tender Youth,
and at her Age joining in that false termed Holy League, and ever since and now
a professed Enemy of the Truth.

She rests wholly upon Popish hopes to be delivered and advanced, and is so
devoted and doted in that profession, that she will (as well for satisfaction
of others, as feeding her own humor) supplant the Gospel where and whenever
she may. Which evil is so much the greater and the more to be avoided, as that
it slays the Soul, and will spread it self not only over England and
Scotland, but also into all parts beyond the Seas where the Gospel of God is
maintained; the which cannot but be exceedingly weakened if defection should be
in these two most valiant Kingdoms.

Thirdly, For as much as concerns the happy Estate of this Realm: The Lydians
say. Unum Regem agnoscunt Lydii, duos autem tolerare non possunt: So we say,
Unam Reginam Elizabetham agnoscunt Angli, duas autem tolerare non possunt. And
therefore since she says that she is Queen here, and we neither can nor will
acknowledge any other but you to be our Queen: It will follow, if she prevail,
she will rather make us slaves than take us for Children; and therefore the
Realm sigheth and groaneth under fear of such a Stepmother.

She has already provided us a Foster-Father and a Nurse, the Pope and the
King of Spain, into whose hands if it should mis-happen us to fall, what can we
else look for but ruin destruction and utter extirpation of goods, lands,
lives, honor and all?

Whilst she shall live the enemies of the State will hope and gape after your
death. By your death they trust to make Invasion profitable for them, which
cannot be but the same should be most lamentable for us: and therefore it is
meet to cut off the head of that hope.

As she has already by her poisoned baits brought to destruction more Noble
men and their Houses, and a great multitude of Subjects during her being here,
than she would have done if she had been in possession of her own Country and
armed in the field against us; so will she still be continually cause of the
like spoil to the greater loss and peril of this Estate: and therefore this
Realm neither can or may endure her.

Her Sectaries do write and print, that we be at our wits end, worlds end, if
she over-live your Majesty; (meaning thereby that the end of our world is the
beginning of theirs: and therefore take her away, and their world will be at an
end before it begin.

Since the sparing of her in the 14th year of your Reign, Popish Traitors and
Recusants have multiplied exceedingly; And if you spare her now again they will
grow both innumerable and invincible also.

And therefore now in the 4th place:

Mercy in this case would in the end prove cruelty against us all; Nam est
quaedam crudelis misericordia. And therefore to spare her is to spill us.

She is only a Cousin to you in a remote degree, but we be Sons and Children of
this land, whereof you be not only the natural Mother, but also the Wedded
Spouse. And therefore much more is due from you to us all than to her alone.

It would exceedingly grieve and wound the hearts of your loving Subjects if
they should see so horrible Vice not condignly punished; if any be wavering, it
will win them to the worser part, and many will seek to make their own peace.
Wherefore as well for the comfort of the one as stay of the other, and
retaining of all, It is most needful that Justice be done upon her.

Thousands of your loving Subjects of all degrees, which have for special zeal
of your safety made Oath before God to pursue to death by all forcible and
possible means such as she is by just sentence found to be, cannot save their
Oaths if you keep her alive: for then either we must take her life from her
without direction, which will be to our extreme danger by the offense of your
Law; or else we must suffer her to live against our express Oath, which will be
to the uttermost peril of our own Souls, wherewith no Act of Parliament nor
power of man whatsoever can in any wise dispense. And therefore seeing it
rests wholly in you by a most worthy and just execution of this sentence to
keep us upright, and free us in both, we most humbly and earnestly beseech you,
etc. that speedy Justice be done upon her, whereby your self may be safe, the
state of your Realm preserved, and we not only delivered from this trouble of
conscience, but also re-comforted to endeavor our selves and all ours into
whatsover other peril for the preservation and safety of you.

Lastly, Gods vengeance against Saul for sparing Agag, against Ahab for sparing
the life of Benhadad is apparent; for they were both by the just Judgment of
God deprived of their Kingdoms for sparing those wicked Princes whom God had
delivered into their hands of purpose to be slain to death by them, as by the
Ministers of his eternal and divine Justice.

How much those Magistrates were commended that put to death those mischievous
and wicked Queens Jezebel and Athaliah!

How wisely proceeded Solomon to punishment in putting to death his own natural
and elder Brother Adonias for the only intention of a marriage, which gave
suspicion of Treason! whereas there is no more desired of your Majesty, than
the very Pope (now your sworn Enemy,) some of these late Conspirators and this
wicked Lady her self have thought fit to fall on her.

He in like case gave sentence, vita Conradini, mors Carolo; Mors Conradini,
vita Carolo. They in their best minds and remorse of Conscience setting down
the best means of your safety said; He that has no Arms cannot fight, and he
that has no Legs cannot run away, but he that has no head can do no harm.
Pisces primum a Capite foetent. She by her voluntary subscribing to the late
Association etc. gave this sentence against her self.

And after in her Letters of these Treasons to Babington wrote, that if she
were discovered, it would give sufficient cause to you to keep her in continual
close Prison. By which words she could mean nothing else but pains of death.

Therefore we seeing on the one side how you have, to the offense of mighty
Princes, advanced Religion, with what tender care, and more than motherly Piety
you have always cherished us the Children of this Land, with what Honor and
Renown you have restored the ancient Rights of the Crown, with what Peace and
Justice you have governed, and with what store and plenty you have reigned over
us:

On the other side seeing that this Enemy of our Felicity seeks to undermine
the Religion, etc. to supplant us, and plant Strangers in the place, to
transfer the Rights of the Crown to that Italian Priest, and the Crown to her
self, or some other from you, and therefore lies in continual wait to take
your life, etc.

Therefore we pray you, etc. for the Cause of God, his Church, this Realm, our
selves, and your self, That you will no longer be careless of your life, our
Sovereign safety, nor longer suffer Religion to be threatened, the Realm to
stand in danger, nor us to dwell in fear; but as Justice has given rightful
Sentence, etc. so you will grant Execution. That as her life threatens your
death, so her death may by Gods favor prolong your life; and that this evil
being taken away from the Earth, we may praise God for our deliverance, and
pray him for our continuance. And with the Psalmist say, Dominus fecit
Judicium, and the ungodly is trapped in the works of her own hand.

And so pray God to incline her heart to our just desires, etc.

Which short Note seems to be thus impersectly set down by the said Speaker,
only to put him in mind to end and shut up his Speech with some short Prayer to
the said purpose.

Nota, That all the several passages of this Saturday are supplied out of a
very authentic Copy which I had, containing the said reasons delivered by the
said Speaker, and partly out of the Original Journal Book of the Upper House,
being wholly omitted in that of the House of Commons, as is also her Majesty's
Answer, which because it is printed at large by Mr. Cambden (in Annal. Regin.
Eliz. edit. Lugd. Batav. Anno Dom. 1625. page 466, 467, and 468.) and
elsewhere, it would be needless to insert it here or any part thereof; and the
rather, because some heads thereof are shortly remembered on Monday next
following.

On Monday the 14th day of November Mr. Speaker made report to the House of his
Message done from this House to her Majesty, (which see on Saturday last
foregoing) and also of her Majesty's most grateful acceptance of the same, and
of her Highnesses Answer thereunto: but what her Majesty's said Answer was, is
wholly omitted in the Original Journal Book of the House of Commons, although
Mr. Fulk Onslow, at this time Clerk thereof, had left the entire 187. leaf of
the said Journal, a blank for the entering or inserting of it. Yet it will not
be amiss, although the said Answer be extant in print, as is abovesaid, briefly
to touch the heads thereof. Which were, her Majesty's thankful acknowledgment
for her many miraculous preservations; that she was most grieved that so near a
Kinswoman as the Queen of Scots had conspired to take away her life. That the
Law lately made (which seems to have been that for the preservation of her
Majesty's person passed the last Parliament) was not enacted to entrap the said
Queen (as some had pretended) but only to deter her from such wicked practices.
That her Trial had been just and honorable. And lastly, that she thanked them
for their care of her safety, and desired them a while to expect her further
and final Answer.

Mr. Vice-Chamberlain affirming the Report of Mr. Speaker to be very true in
all the parts of the same, and well and faithfully delivered by him to this
House, and very much also commending his delivery of the Message of this House
to her Majesty upon Saturday last at the Court, in such dutiful and due sort as
all this whole House had (he said) very good cause to yield him very hearty
thanks for the same, and therefore required them so to do; which they so then
did in very loving and courteous sort. And he further showed, That he had
something more to add to the said Speech reported by Mr. Speaker, not of any
thing delivered unto him upon Saturday by her Majesty, but of something then
omitted and forgotten by her Majesty, albeit both before purposed by her
Highness, and then and yet still intended to be signified unto this House, and
which he himself that morning was commanded by her Majesty to signify unto
them: which was, That her Highness, moved with some commiseration toward the
Scottish Queen in respect of her former Dignity and great Fortunes in her
younger years, her nearness of Kindred to her Majesty, and also of her Sex,
could be pleased to forbear the taking of her Blood, if by any other means to
be devised by her Highnesses great Council of this Realm, the safety of her
Majesty's own Person and of the State might be preserved and continued without
peril or danger of ruin and destruction, and else not: therein leaving them
all nevertheless to their own free liberty and dispositions of proceeding
otherwise at their choices. For as her Majesty would willingly hearken to the
device and reasons of any particular Member of this House; so Mr.
Vice-Chamberlain showed they may exhibit their conceits in that case either to
any of the Privy Council, being of this House, or else to Mr. Speaker, to be
further signified over to her Highness accordingly.

Nota, That Mr. Cambden has delivered and set down in his Annals of Queen
Elizabeth, page 408. two mistakes: The first, that this Message was sent twelve
days after the access which the two Houses had unto her Majesty on Saturday
foregoing, as is aforesaid; whereas it is plain that this Message was sent to
both the Houses upon the second day after, being this instant Monday, as
appears by the Original Journal Book of both the Houses before mentioned. His
second error is, in respect that he said that the said Message was delivered
by Puckering the Speaker of the said House of Commons, whereas her Majesty sent
it by Sir Christopher Hatton her Vice-Chamberlain, and he accordingly did
relate the same unto the House, as appears in his Speech immediately foregoing.
All which I have the rather observed and set down thus at large, that so the
excellent use of these Journals of Parliament may appear, not only in respect
of the Orders and Privileges of the said Two Houses, but also in respect of
the true discovery of the very History of this Realm.

Mr. Vice-Chamberlain continuing his former Speech at this time, did further
put the House in remembrance, that as at the beginning of this present
Parliament the Lord Chancellor Signified unto this House by her Majesty's
express Commandment, that no Laws at all should be made in this Parliament; so
her Highness purposing not to be present to give her Royal Assent to any Laws,
this House should not need (he said) to be troubled with going about to make or
enact any Laws now at all: and therefore wishes that this Court may be
adjourned till Friday next; at which day (he said) it may be this House will
hear her Majesty's further pleasure in Answer to the said Petition, for that
her Highness had not as yet read or perused the same. And so thereupon this
Court was then adjourned till Friday next accordingly.

On Friday the 18th day of November after sundry grave Speeches, sound
Arguments, and forcible Reasons made by Sir Edward Dymock, Sir Thomas Scot, Mr.
Woodward, Mr. Edward Sanders, Mr. Dalton, Mr. Chancellor of the Exchequer, and
Mr. Vice-Chamberlain concerning the Message delivered by the said Mr.
Vice-Chamberlain upon Monday last from her Majesty, for Consultation to be had
for some other means of course, if it might be, for the establishing and
preservation of the true Religion, of her Majesty's most Royal Person, and the
good and peaceable estate of this Realm, than by the taking away of the Life of
the Queen of Scots. And each of them resolutely concluding, that no other
device, way, or means whatsoever could or can possibly be found or imagined,
that such safety can in any wise at all be had so long as the said Queen of
Scots does or shall live, they do withal very earnestly move and persuade the
prosecution of the said Petition lately delivered jointly by the Lords and this
House to her Majesty for the necessity of the speedy executing of the said
Queen of Scots, as the one and only mean (as far as man's reason can reach) to
provide for the safety of the continuance of true Religion, of her Majesty's
most Royal Person, and of the peaceable estate of this Realm, from the manifest
and imminent danger of utter subversion, destruction and desolation. And Mr.
Vice-Chamberlain gathering partly by some of the said Speeches preceding, that
some of this House seemed to conceive of the said Message by him delivered to
this House from her Majesty on Monday last touching the said Consultation to be
had, as a peremptory Proposition unto them to exclude them from all other
courses of proceeding, showed unto them again, as he did before, that her
Majesty commanded that Message to be propounded unto them for consultation
only, and not for direction, leaving nevertheless every Member of this House to
their own free liberty and dispositions of proceeding touching the said matter;
and so yielding his full opinion and ready consent with the residue for the
continuance of the prosecution of the said Petition unto her Majesty in most
humble and dutiful sort, as the only necessary resolution of this whole House
to rely upon in that behalf.

And showing further, That upon Tuesday last the like Message was done by her
Majesty's like Commandment to the Lords of the higher House, moved, That as in
all the former proceedings of this House in the great matter and business
touching the Scottish Queen, the said House had always been Suitors unto their
Lordships to join with them therein; so now that the same motion might be again
made unto their Lordships to join with them in this part also. And for that it
is very meet and convenient, that Answer be made to her Majesty of the said
Message, this House would, as in the beginning of the said former proceedings,
appoint a convenient Committee of this House to confer of the manner and
substance of the said Answer, and then after the report thereof made to this
House, to make suit unto the Lords for Conference with their Lordships touching
the resolution of this House. Which motion being well liked of by this House,
It was upon the Question resolved, That such a Committee should be had
accordingly. And further ordered, That all the former Committees in the said
great Cause, and also all those others which had spoken this present day, to
wit, Mr. Woodward and Mr. Edmund Sanders, and also Sir George Carry be likewise
added unto them, and that they meet to morrow at nine of the Clock in the
Forenoon in the Exchequer-Chamber, and as many else of this House besides as
please to come thither to them. Which done, this Court was then adjourned till
Monday next, for that the Lords did not sit this present day, and this House
then had nothing to deal with till the said Committees shall first have had
Conference with their Lordships.

Sir John Higham one of the Committees in the Bill for Orford-Haven, does at
the rising of the House make report of the travail of himself and the residue
of the Committees therein, and so delivers in both the old Bill and also a
new Bill.

On Monday the 21th day of November (to which day the Parliament had been on
Friday the 18th day of the said Month foregoing last adjourned) Mr Markham a
Burgess for the Borough of Grantham in the County of Lincoln, showed on the
behalf of the Inhabitants of the said Borough, that Mr Arthur Hall having been
in some former Parliaments returned a Burgess for the said Borough, and in some
of the same Parliaments for certain causes the House then moving, disabled for
ever afterward to be any Member of this House at all, has of late brought a
Writ against the Inhabitants of the said Borough for his wages (amongst other
times) in attendance at the late Session of Parliament holden at Westminster in
the 27th year of her Highnesses Reign; during which time, as also a great part
of some other of the said former Parliaments he did not serve in the said
House, but was for some causes as aforesaid disabled to be any Member of this
House, and was also then committed Prisoner to the Tower of London. And so
prays the advice and order of this Honorable House therein, unto the censure
and order whereof the said Inhabitants do in most humble and dutiful wise
submit themselves. And so showed the said Writ, which was then read by the
Clerk. After the reading whereof, and some speeches had touching the former
proceedings in this House against the said Mr Hall, as well in disabling him to
be any more a Member of this House, as also touching his said imprisonment, the
matter was referred to further consideration after search of the Precedents and
Entries of this House heretofore had and made in the course of the said cause.
Vide diem Veneries 2um diem Decembris, and diem Mercurii 22um diem Martii
postea.

Mr Treasurer showed that the Committees in the Cause for Conference to be had
touching the answer to be made by this House to the Message lately delivered
from her Majesty, did meet according to the Commission of this House, and after
long and much debating, and many great arguments, it appeared very evidently by
most strong reason, that no other way whatsoever can be taken for the safety
and continuance of true Religion, of her Majesty's most Royal Person, and of
the peaceable Estate of this Realm, but only by Justice to be done upon the
Queen of Scots according to her demerits. Which Justice as her Majesty ought of
duty to cause to be done, so they resolved utterly to insist upon the
prosecution of the former Petition unto her Highness, as the one only way and
none other to be performed in the said Cause. And so left to some other of the
said Committees the more particular discourses of their said Conferences.
Whereupon Mr Vice-Chamberlain very excellently, plainly and aptly showed the
manner of their Treaty in the said Conference, and of the Reasons therein both
brought and confuted touching any manner of possible or conjectural course of
the said safety other than only by the death of the said Queen of Scots, as
neither by likelihood of reformation in her Person, hope of strait guarding or
keeping of her, or of any caution of hostages to be taken for her; reciting and
applying most apt and invincible reasons in the several proofs thereof; and so
concluding his own opinion also only to be such and none other, wished that if
any member of the House could conceive or show any other course or device
tending to the purport of the said Message, than has been erst now remembered
or in the said Committee offered, he would show the same. And if not, that then
Mr Speaker would move the question for the consent of the whole House to the
continuance of prosecuting that said Petition together with the said
Committees. Whereupon after some little pause and none offering any speech to
other end, Mr Speaker moving the question to the House, it was resolved by the
whole House, to insist only upon the said Petition accordingly. And also after
sundry other speeches had tending all to the same resolution, and some of them
urging the remembrance, purpose and present consideration of the former
Association, it was ordered that to morrow when the Lords do sit in the Upper
House the former Committees of this House (Mr Robert Cecill being now added
unto them) do repair unto their Lordships for Conference with their Lordships
touching the said resolution of this House in answer to her Majesty's said
Message. And also with request to their Lordships to give License unto this
House to join with their Lordships in the said Answer to her Majesty, if it so
please them.

Mr Comptroller showing his full assent and good liking of the said conclusion
touching the prosecution of the said Petition only, and of none other course at
all, as well in his former delivery thereof upon treaty of the said cause, as
now at this present, declared further, That he thinks himself to have been in
some of his late former speeches in that matter mistaken and misconceived by
some of this House rather of ignorance in them (he thinks) than of any evil
disposition and purpose; and so affirming earnest and devout prayer to God to
incline her Majesty's heart to the Petition of this House as a thing much
importing, he moves that some apt and special course of prayer to that end
might be devised and set down by some of this House, and be not only exercised
here in thus House every day, but also by all the members of this House
elsewhere abroad, and also privately in their Chambers and Lodgings.

Mr Treasurer liking well the motion and good meaning of Mr Comptroller
touching Prayer to be exercised as before, showed that fit Prayers for that
purpose and extant in print are already used in this House, and so may also be
by the Members of the same privately by themselves, and does willingly wish the
same might be so executed accordingly.

Sir John Higham assenting very readily to the continuation of pursuing the
said Petition, urged further very zealously and earnestly the burden of the
Oath of Association; and so thereby amongst other things of great and necessary
consideration and importance, prays her Majesty may be solicited to the
speedy execution of Justice upon the person of the Queen of Scots.

Mr. Recorder bending many Speeches, and reciting many Precedents of Petitions
in former times granted by sundry of her Majesty's most noble Progenitors Kings
of England to the subjects of this Realm at the humble Suits and Petitions of
the Speaker and Commons of the Lower House, which the Lords of the Upper House
in those days could not obtain at their hands; does not only persuade very
earnestly the said insisting of this House upon the said Petition, but also
undoubted assuredness of her Majesty's granting and performing of the same, as
a thing answerable both unto her Highness most merciful, loving and tender care
over her good Subjects, as also to the very necessity of the case.

Mr. Cope moved, that Mr. Speaker might put it to the Question for the
resolution of this House touching the prosecution of the said Petition with all
good and fit speed.

Mr. Chancellor of the Exchequer putting the House in remembrance of their
resolution therein given already even now at this very instant Court upon the
Question then propounded by Mr. Speaker, moved the going forward with the
Committee for Conference, to the end that with better expedition upon report of
the same Conference to be made to morrow to this House, and then the Resolution
thereupon to be signified unto the Lords and their favors prayed for joining
further with this House, the Cause may receive such speedy good course of
further proceeding to end and execution as shall best appertain.

On Tuesday the 22d day of November Mr Treasurer and sundry others of the
Committees returning from the Lords show, they have had Conference with their
Lordships, and that their Lordships wholly and only insisting upon the said
Petition, like as this House also does, do purpose this Afternoon to send two
Lords, to wit the Lord Admiral and the Lord Cobham, to be Suitors for that
House for access unto her Majesty for delivering their Lordships answer to the
said Message; and so moved likewise, that Two of this House of the Privy
Council, or such other as this House shall appoint, may also on the behalf of
this House be Suitors unto her Majesty for like access in the same matter also.
And thereupon were named for that purpose Mr Vice-Chamberlain and Mr Secretary
Wolley.

Mr Vice-Chamberlain showed further, that the Lords did prepare against the
time of their access to be obtained of her Majesty, to be furnished with
sufficient matter to answer unto any reasons happily to be objected unto them
by her Highness at the time of their said answer to be made to her Majesty
touching the said Message, and not to propound any such at all but only by way
of answer, if it fall out that it please her Highness so to object, and else
not. And so moved the like care by consideration to be also had by this House,
and the same reasons to be such also (as near as may be) as were not lately
delivered unto her Majesty by Mr Speaker; for the avoiding of which iterations
on the one side, and readiness of preparation to her Highness objections (if
any happen) on the other side, he thinks good that a Committee of this House
were presently named for that purpose, and that Mr Speaker also be with them at
their meeting; whereby he may advertise them (as occasion shall serve) of such
reasons as he had before inferred to her Majesty at the time of exhibiting the
said Petition. Whereupon it was ordered, that all the former Committees in the
great Cause, with Mr Doctor Lewen now added unto them, do meet at two of the
Clock this Afternoon in the Exchequer Chamber, and that Mr Speaker be then
there also.

Mr Vice-Chamberlain showed that he cannot be with them at the Committee,
neither yet at this House before to Morrow at ten of the Clock at the soonest,
but of necessity must both attend her Majesty's good pleasure for answer, and
also lodge at the Court all night.

On Wednesday the 23d day of November Mr Speaker showed the travail of the
Committees in their meeting yesterday, and also their appointment then of
further meeting again this Forenoon, and of their conference at both times; in
which (he said) were brought very many and sound reasons touching the matter in
consultation to very great depth by sundry there present, delivered by some in
speech, and by some other in writing; which as they were very many and hard to
be all carried in memory, and withal sundry of the most principal and effectual
of them uttered by Mr Solicitor; so had he entreated Mr Solicitor to take
pains to abridge a summary note of the said most principal reasons: which
having been done so by him and also delivered to Mr Speaker, he offered the
same to the House to be read.

Mr. Solicitor taking the said Note into his hand showed, that his meaning was
to make the said Note only for a Memorial unto Mr. Speaker for himself, and not
at all to be read to the House. And because the said Note is not in any part so
fully and plainly set down, as by the reading thereof the House might so well
conceive the effects of the said reasons as were requisite, himself therefore
would, if it pleased them, show unto them the substance of the said Note, as
himself for his own opinion conceived of the said reasons. And so holding the
said Note in his hand, and discoursing the several particularities contained in
the said Note, proves by invincible reasons, that neither by expectation of
reformation in the disposition of the Scottish Lady (if the Queens Majesty
should spare her life) nor yet by safer or stronger guarding of her Person, nor
by her promise upon word or Oath, nor by the Hostages of other Princes her
Allies, nor by her Banishment, nor by the revocation of the Bull of Pope Pius
Quintus, nor yet by the bonds or word of a Prince, or of any or all the Princes
her Allies, nor by any other way or means whatsoever, other than only by the
speedy Execution to death of the said Scottish Queen, the safety or continuance
of the true Religion, of the most Royal Person of the Queens Majesty, and of
the peaceable state of this Realm can in any wise be provided for and
established. And so concluding, relied only upon the humble continuation of the
Suit of this said House unto her Majesty in the said Petition.

Mr. Thomas Knyvet showing, that as Liberty was given to the Members of this
House to deliver their conceits touching the matter presently in Consultation
either in Speech or in Writing at their choices; so he for his part offered the
same in writing, and prays the same may be read.

Mr. Vice-Chamberlain says he thinks Mr. Knyvet did mistake it, for that
such Notes in writing were appointed to have been offered in the Committee, not
in the House; and showed further, That he and Mr. Secretary Wolley having
according to the appointment of this House attended her Majesty's pleasure for
access for answer; and that her Highness is well pleased that for the time of
their access, the same be to morrow next being Thursday, betwixt one and two of
the Clock in the Afternoon at the Court, and for the number to be such, and of
such persons as this House shall think good, the Speaker, if they will, and the
Committees, yea and as many else of the House also as please. And showed
further, That they thought good in duty to make her Majesty acquainted with the
great care and travail of this House in their diligent and dutiful proceeding
to the satisfaction of her Majesty in the matter of the Message delivered unto
them from her Highness. Which their exceeding great and especial care therein
as her Majesty does very well like of, and take and accept in most gracious and
loving part; so did her Highness command him to signify unto this whole House
her Majesty's most hearty thanks for the same, reposing (next under God) her
own safety to be greater in the dutiful love and obedience of so faithful and
loving Subjects (an inestimable blessing of God unto her Majesty) than in their
riches, abilities and forces; rehearsing this Sentence, fide quam ferro tutius
regnant Reges. He also said, that for matter of other affair not of this House,
he had cause even now very lately to be with the Lords, and perceived by some
of them that the Lord Chancellor also to Morrow did repair to the Court with
twenty others of the Lords at the least; And therefore it were very necessary
also that Mr Speaker also did in like sort go with these of this House. And
further moved, that Mr Speaker might be furnished with sufficient reasons to be
by himself propounded unto her Majesty in the name of this House for her
satisfaction in Answer to the said Message, and so not to expect reasons to be
objected unto him by her Highness; for that (he said) he knew very well her
Majesty looked for these reasons of satisfaction at their hands, by way of
propounding and not only by way of Answering. Whereupon the House did then
rise, and this Court was Adjourned till Friday next in the Forenoon.

On Friday the 25th day of November Mr Grice hearing it reported (as he showed)
that the French Ambassador lately arrived, is appointed to have access unto
her Majesty to Morrow at the Court, and fully persuading himself for his part
that the said Ambassador comes not for any good either to her Majesty or to
the Realm; and knowing that their manner is in such Cases to be attended for
the most part with a Company of Rascals and basest sort of People of their
Nation, and all the rabble of them accustomed to thrust into the presence of
the Prince with their Master, moved, That for the better safety of her
Majesty's most Royal Person from peril of any desperate attempt of any of the
said French, it would please those of this House of her Highness Privy Council
to procure that the said Ambassador might both be heard and also receive his
answer at the hands of her Majesty's Council, and in no wise to have access
unto her Highnesses Person.

Mr Vice-Chamberlain showed that at the last conference of the Committees of
this House with the Lords, this matter was remembered and considered of amongst
them; And that the Lord Chamberlain and others at the Court about her Majesty
were already appointed to take order for it accordingly.

Mr Sergeant Gawdie and Mr Attorney General do bring word from the Lords, That
where their Lordships according to some former direction had purposed presently
to have sent for this House to have attended their Lordships for Prorogation of
this present Parliament, their Lordships being set, had sithence received
Letters of her Majesty, by which her Highness signified her pleasure to have
the same Parliament yet continued two or three days longer for certain weighty
considerations moving her Majesty thereunto, whereof their Lordships commanded
them to advertise this House; and further to signify unto this House, that
their Lordships had thereupon Adjourned the said Parliament in their House
until Friday next: and so then the said Mr Sergeant Gawdie and Mr Attorney
departed. Which Message being afterward declared unto this House by Mr
Speaker, this Court was also adjourned until Friday next in like manner.

On Friday the 2d day of December, upon a motion this day renewed on the behalf
of the Inhabitants of the Borough of Grantham in the County of Lincoln,
touching a Writ brought against them by Arthur Hall Esquire, whereby he
demands wages of the said Inhabitants for his service done for them in
attendance at sundry Parliaments, being Elected and returned one of the
Burgesses of the said Borough in the same Parliaments; for as much as it is
alleged that the said Arthur Hall has been heretofore disabled by this House
to be at any time afterward a Member of this House; and also that in some
Sessions of the same Parliaments he has neither been free of the Corporation
of the said Borough, and in some other also has not given any attendance in
Parliament at all; It is ordered that the examination of the state of the Cause
be committed to the Right Honorable Sir Walter Mildmay Knight, one of her
Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council, Chancellor of her Highnesses Court of
Exchequer, Sir Ralph Sadler Knight, one other of her Majesty's most Honorable
Privy Council and Chancellor of her Highnesses Duchy of Lancaster, Thomas
Cromwell, Robart Markham and Robert Wroth, Esquires; to the end that after due
examination thereof by them had, if it shall so seem good to them) they do
thereupon move the Lord Chancellor on the behalf of this House, to stay the
granting out of any attachment or other Process against the said Inhabitants
for the said Wages at the suit of the said Arthur Hall: And the said Committees
also to signify their proceedings therein to this House at the next sitting
thereof accordingly. Vide November 21. antea and. Mar. 22. postea.

Mr Sergeant Gawdie and Mr Attorney General do bring word from the Lords, that
their Lordships do desire that Mr Speaker and this whole House do presently
repair unto their Lordships into the Higher House. Which being then signified
unto the House by Mr Speaker, all the House thereupon repaired thither
presently accordingly.

Prorogued to the 15th day of February.

But this Parliament was not at this time Prorogued, but only adjourned by the
Lords Commissioners appointed upon Saturday the 29th day of October foregoing;
and therefore Mr Fulk Onslow at this time Clerk of the House of Commons is
exceedingly mistaken in this place, and Mr William Onslow his Kinsman who
supplied his place in the next meeting of this Parliament does likewise err in
setting down the beginning or commencement of the said new meeting upon the
foresaid 15th day of February being Wednesday, where he styles it a Session of
Parliament holden by Prorogation; whereas it was neither new Parliament nor new
Session, but a mere new meeting of one and the same Parliament.

And that these were two new meetings and not two Sessions, it is most plain by
the very words touching the Adjournment thereof entered in the original
Journal Book of the Upper House in manner and form following, viz.

On Friday the second of December Commissionarii Reginae adjournaverunt
praesens Parliamentum usque in decimum quintum diem Februarii prox.

Secondly, There was not any one Act that did pass at the end of this first
meeting, which I conceive is an inseparable accident unto every Session of
Parliament.

Thirdly and lastly, It is very plain that this Adjournment was of the like
nature and upon the like occasion with that in the last Parliament in Anno 27.
Reginae Eliz. Anno Domini 1584. viz. because Christmas drawing near, the
Members of either House might have liberty to recede into their several
Countries for the better relief of the Poor and maintenance of Hospitality.

And therefore whereas these two meetings are placed in the Original
Journal Book of the House of Commons very incongruously in two distinct and
several Journals, as if they had been two distinct and several Sessions; they
are here rightly placed together, and so the passages of the said second
meeting do now follow in due course and order.

On Wednesday the 15th day of February, (to which day the Parliament had been
Adjourned by the Lords Commissioners aforesaid on Friday the 2d day of December
foregoing) the two Houses met in their several places without any pomp or
Solemnity, this being (as has been before observed) neither new Parliament nor
new Session, but a mere new meeting of either House upon the said Adjournment
of the former meeting thereof, which began on the 29th day of October being
Saturday in Anno 28 Reginae Eliz. as is aforesaid.

The Knights, Citizens and Burgesses of the House of Commons being set, Mr
Sergeant Puckering then Speaker thereof, informed the House that Mr Fulk Onslow
Clerk of the Parliament was so weakened by Sickness that he could not at this
present exercise his place; Therefore he had appointed Mr William Onslow his
Knisman a Member of this House here present to supply it; and therefore asked
their allowance, which they very willingly granted.

The same time Mr Cromwell moved the House, for that at their Petition her
Majesty had done Justice upon the Scottish Queen to the greater Safeguard of
her Majesty's Person and the whole Realm, he thought it fit that her Majesty
might receive from them their humble thanks; which motion was well liked, but
at this time it proceeded no further.

Two Bills had each of them one reading; whereof the first was touching Fines
and Recoveries before the Justices of the Common Pleas; and the second for
limitation of time touching Writs of Error growing by fraud.

The same day Mr Vice-Chamberlain, commanded as (he said) by her Majesty, moved
the House, for that this Parliament was not expected to hold at this time, many
of the Nobility being Lieutenants in their Countries, and others principal
Members of this House were absent, by occasion whereof those great weighty
causes for which this Parliament is called, cannot have such deep consultation
as is fit; Therefore he thought it convenient to have an Adjournment: and
therefore to move the Lords of the Upper House for the liking thereof. Which
motion being well liked, Mr Vice-Chamberlain and a convenient number of the
House, so many as would without nomination, did attend him to the Lords; who
upon his return from the Lords made report, that they having considered of the
motion, found the same want, and therefore yielded to an Adjournment of the
Parliament until Wednesday next, being the 22d day of this instant Month of
February, if this House would condescend unto it. Unto which Adjournment this
House also yielded; which consent Mr Vice-Chamberlain did there presently
signify to the Lords, and upon his return the House brake up.

On Wednesday the 22th day of February (to which day the Parliament had been
last adjourned upon Wednesday the 15th day of this instant February foregoing)
the House again sitting, the Right Honorable Sir Christopher Hatton Knight
Vice-Chamberlain to her Majesty and one of her Majesty's most Honorable Privy
Council used this Speech in effect to the House, viz. That it was her Majesty's
pleasure to have dangers disclosed, and to have the House know, that she
thanked God for the goodness of the House, that she wished the Session
(mistaken for Meeting) to be short, that men of Government might go home for
matter of Government, hospitality and defense, and to take another time for
making of Laws, saving such as be now of necessity.

The dangers which her Majesty means, proceed of ancient malice, and are to
be prepared for, and God called upon for aid.

The principal heads of the dangers:

The Catholics abroad, the Pope, the King of Spain, the Princes of the League,
the Papists at home and their Ministers.

The principal root hereof:

The Council of Trent which agreed to extirp Christian Religion (which they
term Heresy) whereunto diverse Princes assented, and bound themselves in solemn
manner.

Pope Pius Quint us sent her Excommunication against her Majesty, Dr. Mourton
and Mendoza a Spanish Ambassador bestirred them, a Northern Rebellion was
bred, the Pope and the rest practiced for the Scottish Queen, and she being
acquainted proceeds by her means.

Pope Paulus the Thirteenth proceeds and sends Jesuits and Seminaries to
England and Ireland, and they proceed to inveagle the Subjects, and dissuade
them from obedience. Visko begins a Rebellion in Ireland. James Fitz-Morris
furthereth the Execution thereof. Doctor Sanders and Desmond stir new Rebellion
there, and wrote into England, etc. Parry was moved to kill her Majesty, and
persuaded it was meritorious.

Pope Sixtus the Fifth imitateth the other Popes to execute their former
devices, and writes to the Cardinal of Lorain and Guise, that he will
overthrow the Gospel (which Mr. Vice-Chamberlain honorably termed the glorious
Gospel) and therefore moved them to join with the Princes of the League, and to
practice to win the King of Scots, and to set up the Scottish Queen in England,
and made his reckoning of the Cantons that be Popish, the Switzers, the Duke of
Savoy, the Duke of Ferrara, King of Spain, and King of France. A chief
Instrument to work this, was one Carew, called also Father Henry.

He was sent into Germany and over Italy and France, wrote to the Scottish
Queen that the Powers will join to overthrow England, and make known the effect
of his labor to the Pope. Invasion should have been made into England and
Ireland the last year, and not unlike to be attempted this year.

The Pope excommunicateth the King of Navar. The Pope accounts not of Popish
preaching and persuasions that way; but nevertheless moves all to use the
word, and for maintenance thereof spares his Treasure otherwise, and
withdraws maintenance from Jesuits, Seminaries: and diverse others Letters
were found with the Scottish Queen, which prove all these to be true. If we
serve Almighty God in sincerity of heart, we need not to fear. It is to be
remembered that the King of Spain sought to recover some part of his Fathers
credit by using our Treasure and force to get St Quintines; but he soon made
his advantage of it, and regarded not our Territories in France, but suffered
the loss of Calice and all our Territories; and after the death of Queen Mary
what he could. Her Majesty sought for his good will, sending the Lord
Mountague, the Lord Cobham, Sir Thomas Chamberlain Knight, Mr Maun and others,
and they were but hardly used, some of them were offered great indignity, and
Mr Mauns Son forced by strength to do a kind of Penance. He comforted the
Queens Enemies, he gives color of Wars, he charge the Queen that her
Subjects have aided his Rebels in the Low Countries, with countenancing
Monsieur with Money at Cambray, with sending her Nobility with him into the Low
Countries, with the actions of Sir Francis Drake, with assistance of the Low
Countries.

Of the purpose of the Combined Princes.
Their show is to deal with the King of Navarr to extirp him, but their drift
is to ruinate Religion not only there, but to set upon and to work the ruin of
it here also. Wherein the King of Spain and Guise are now very busy. Their
malice is the more for executing the Scottish Queen, but their hope is the
less. The King of Spain his designments are to invade England and Ireland.

His Preparation.
Three hundred sixty Sail of Spain. Eighty Galleys from Venice and Genoua. One
Galliass with six hundred armed men, from the Duke of Florence. Twelve thousand
men maintained by Italy and the Pope. Six thousand by the Spanish Clergy.
Twelve thousand by his Nobility and Gentlemen of Spain. It is reported that ten
thousand of these be Horsemen, I think it not all true, but something there is.

We must look to the Papists at home and abroad. It has touched us in the
blood of the Nobility and the blood of many Subjects.

They practice to frame Subjects against all duty, and bring in Doctrine of
lawfulness and merit to kill the Queen, and have sent their Instruments abroad
to that purpose.

Two manner of forces are to be handled. Assistance to the Low Countries,
defense by force otherwise. That God may assist us in Justice, in Right, in
Defense against those Princes.

The assistance is acceptable that will be profitable. Her Majesty owes relief
there in Honor, according to the Leagues, especially between us and the House
of Burgundy: which Leagues differ from Leagues growing between Prince and
Prince, for they grew between the people and this State. We are bound to help
them in Honor according to the Leagues. Many Marriages and many Secrecies have
been long between us, and the relieving of the afflictions of that people may
not be omitted.

The heads of their miseries are: The Spanish Inquisition by Placard, using
strange tortures not to be suffered; great impositions without and against Law,
sending some of their people into Spain and there tyrannized over; their
Noblemen done away; taking their Towns and setting Tyrants over them to use
them like Dogs. The purpose was to bring the Low Countries into a Monarchal
seat, and then vae nobis. The Queens dealing there is warranted by God; The
Queen is occasioned of necessity for safety of her Dominions and us, that that
Country may be preserved, that the English Commodities may be vented there with
readiness, with safety and with profit; the recovery thereof will be good for
this Country and Crown; it may not be suffered that a Neighbor should grow too
strong (he uttered that as though it were not meet another Prince should have
it; for examples whereof he commended the Princes of Italy and especially the
Duke of Florence for using that policy, Henry the 7th for aiding the Duke of
Brittany with eight thousand men rather than the King of France, after he had
found great friendship of them both, that the King of France might not grow too
strong.)

The King of Spain seeks to be yet greater, for he has already a Seat in
Council amongst the Princes of Germany by reason of Territories his Father got
there; And if he could, he would frame the Low Countries to his desire.

As to the pretense of Injuries before remembered: As to the first going over,
her Majesty misliked it, and punished some of the Captains (he named Sir
Humfrey Gilbert for one.) Concerning Monsieur, the first time her Majesty drew
him from proceeding for the Low Countries; The second time she consented that
he should only assist the Low Countries, which Monsieur afterward abused
contrary to her Majesty's meaning. Concerning Mr Drakes first Voyage, her
Majesty knew it not; and when he came home, she seized the whole Mass of
Substance brought by him to satisfy the King of Spain (if cause so required)
and thereupon desired Certificate for Invasion into Ireland.

Concerning Mr Drake's last Voyage it was to meet with the restraints and
seisures in Spain, and their purpose of War was thereupon discovered; for there
was found by the Master of Mr Bonds Ship who took the Corrigedore, and others,
a Commission from the King of Spain, whereby he termed us his Rebels, as he
termed the Low Countries.

He then remembered another grievance not touched before, which was the
entertaining of Don Anthony.
Which he answered to be done in Honorable Courtesy, because of his State, who
was a King anointed and crowned, though his seat was not long untroubled, and
coming hither in honorable and courteous manner, though something weakened,
required the entertainment he had.

Then he iterated, that the great grief is Religion, and said that all godly
ones are bound to defend it. He then said, God endue us to fear him, and all
things shall prosper. He said her Majesty protests sincere service to God,
and to leave the Crown in peace, etc. commended her courage against their
malice, esteeming it not less than the stoutest Kings in Europe.

Mr Chancellor of the Exchequer after Mr Vice-Chamberlain his speeches ended,
remembered some of the former, and inferred, and so concluded that the great
preparations of War which was fit speedily to be thought of and provided, would
grow chargeable; and therefore thought it fit with expedition that the House
should appoint a convenient number of the same to set down Articles for a
Subsidy.

Whereupon are appointed Committees for concluding and drawing of Articles for
the Subsidy and other great Causes, all the Privy Council being of this House,
the first Knight for every Shire and others, who were appointed to meet in the
Exchequer Chamber at two of the Clock in the Afternoon.

One Bill lastly, being for the better payment of Debts and Legacies by
Executors and Administrators, was read the first time.

On Thursday the 23d day of February three Bills of no great moment had each of
them one reading; of which the first being the Bill against delay of execution
in Actions of Debt was read the first time.

The Committees appointed for Conference touching a Loan or Benevolence to be
offered to her Majesty are, Mr Francis Bacon, Mr Edward Lewkenor, and others.

On Friday the 24th day of February four Bills of no great moment had each of
them one reading; of which the last being a Bill to avoid many dangers touching
Records of Fines levied in the Court of Common Pleas, was upon the second
reading committed unto Mr Recorder of London, Mr Morris, Mr Drew and others,
and the Bill was delivered to Mr Recorder, who with the rest was appointed to
meet in Serjeants-Inn in Fleetstrect on Saturday next at two of the Clock in
the Afternoon.

Sir Thomas Scot, Sir Henry Knyvet, Mr Thomas Knyvet and Mr Topclyffe are
appointed by this House to search certain Houses in Westminster suspected of
receiving and harboring of Jesuits, Seminaries or of Seditious and Popish
Books and Trumperies of Superstition.

On Saturday the 25th day of February the Bill for the limitation of Time of
Errors growing by Fraud had its second reading, and the Committees appointed
for the Bill of Fines and Recoveries on the day foregoing are also appointed
for this said Bill to meet at Serjeants-Inn in Fleetstreet at two of the Clock
in the Afternoon, and the Bill was delivered to Mr Recorder of London.

Two other Bills also of no great moment had each of them one reading; of which
the last being the Bill for Attainder was upon the second reading committed to
all the Privy Council of this House, Sir Henry Knyvet, Mr Recorder of London,
Mr Francis Bacon, Mr Morris and others, who were appointed to meet upon
Tuesday in the Exchequer Chamber at two of the Clock.

The Bill delivered by Mr Speaker to the Right Honorable Sir Francis Knowles.

On Monday the 27th day of February the House was informed by Mr Harris, that
one William White had arrested Mr Martin a Member of this House: Therefore it
is ordered by the House that the Sergeant should warn White to be here to
morrow sitting the Court. Vide plus de ista materia die Sabbat, die 11o Mar'
prox'.

Two Bills of no great moment had each of them one reading; of which the first
being the Bill for delay of execution of Justice by Writs of Error was
committed unto Mr Solicitor, Sir Henry Knyvet, Mr Recorder, Mr Cromwell, Mr
Dalton and others, and the Bill was delivered to Mr Cromwell, and all these to
meet on Tuesday next at Serjeants-Inn Hall in Chancery Lane at two of the Clock
in the Afternoon.

The same day Mr Cope, first using some Speeches touching the necessity of a
learned Ministry and the amendment of things amiss in the Ecclesiastical
Estate, offered to the House a Bill, and a Book written, the Bill containing a
Petition that it might be Enacted, that all Laws now in force touching
Ecclesiastical Government should be void: And that it might be Enacted that
that Book of Common Prayer now offered and none other might be received into
the Church to be used. The Book contained the form of Prayer and Administration
of Sacraments with diverse Rites and Ceremonies to be used in the Church, and
desired that the Book might be read. Whereupon Mr Speaker in effect used this
Speech: For that her Majesty before this time had commanded the House not to
meddle with this matter, and that her Majesty had promised to take order in
those Causes, he doubted not but to the good satisfaction of all her people; he
desired that it would please them to spare the reading of it. Notwithstanding
the House desired the reading of it. Whereupon Mr Speaker willed the Clerk to
read it. And the Court being ready to read it, Mr Dalton made a motion against
the reading of it, saying, that it was not meet to be read, and that it did
appoint a new form of Administration of the Sacraments and Ceremonies of the
Church, to the discredit of the Book of Common Prayer and of the whole State,
and thought that this dealing would bring her Majesty's indignation against the
House thus to enterprise the dealing with those things which her Majesty
especially had taken into her own charge and direction. Whereupon Mr Lewkenor
spoke, showing the necessity of Preaching and of a learned Ministry, and
thought it very fit that the Petition and Book should he read.

To this purpose spoke Mr Hurleston and Mr Bainbrigg, and so the time being
passed the House brake up, and the Petition nor Book read.

This done her Majesty sent to Mr Speaker as well for this Petition and Book,
as for that other Petition and Book for the like effect, that was delivered the
last Session of Parliament; which Mr Speaker sent to her Majesty. Vide 2d Mar'
and the 4th of Mar.

On Tuesday the 28th day of February her Majesty sent for Mr Speaker, by
occasion whereof the House did not sit.

On Wednesday the first day of March Mr Wentworth delivered unto Mr Speaker
certain Articles, which contained questions touching the Liberties of the
House, and to some of which he was to answer, and desired they might be read.
Mr Speaker required him to spare his motion until her Majesty's pleasure was
further known touching the Petition and Book lately delivered into the House;
but Mr Wentworth would not be so satisfied, but required his Articles might be
read. Then Mr Speaker said he would first peruse them, and then do that were
fit.

This is all that is found in the Original Journal Book of the House of Commons
touching this matter, and therefore in respect of the weight of it, having as I
conceive a very authentic and true Copy both of the Speech and Articles at
large, I thought good to have them fully inserted in manner and form following,
viz.

Mr Speaker, For as much as such Laws as God is to be honored by, and that
also such laws as our Noble Sovereign and this worthy Realm of England are to
be enriched, strengthened and preserved by from all foreign and domestic
Enemies and Traitors, are to be made by this Honorable Council, I as one being
moved and stirred up by all dutiful love, and desirous even for conscience sake
and of a mind to set forwards God's Glory, the wealth, strength and safety of
our natural Queen and Commonweal, do earnestly desire by question to be
satisfied of a few questions to be moved by you Mr Speaker, concerning the
liberty of this Honorable Council; for I do asture you, I praise my God for
it, that I do find in my self a willing mind to deliver unto this Honorable
Assembly some little taste and account of that simple Talent which it has
pleased God of his singular favor and goodness to bestow upon me, to gain to
his Highness honor and Glory, and to show unto my noble Prince and
Commonwealth true, faithful and dutiful service; of the which mind I am sure Mr
Speaker, here are many godly, faithful and true hearted Gentlemen in this
Honorable Assembly; howbeit the want of knowledge and experience of the
liberties of this Honorable Council does hold and stay us back. For as we have
a hearty desire to serve God, her Majesty and this noble Realm; even so are we
fearful and loath to give or offer any offense to her Majesty or unto her Laws;
the which we presume we shall not do if keep our selves within the Circle of
them, and no man can observe that whereof he is ignorant. Wherefore I pray you
Mr Speaker, eftsoons to move these few questions, by question, whereby every
one of this House may know how far he may proceed in this Honorable Council in
matters that concern the glory of God and our true and loyal service to our
Prince and State. For I am fully persuaded, that God cannot be honored,
neither our NoblePrince or Commonweal preserved or maintained without free
speech and consultation of this Honorable Council, both which consist upon the
liberties of this Honorable Council, and the knowledge of them also. So here
are the questions, Mr Speaker; I humbly and heartily beseech you to give them
reading, and God grant us true and faithful hearts in answering of them; for
the true, faithful and hearty service of our merciful God, our lawful Prince
and this whole and worthy Realm of England will much consist hereafter upon the
answer unto these Questions. Wherefore it behooves us to use wise, grave and
godly considerations in answering of them.

Therefore the Lord direct our tongues that we may answer them even with his
spirit, the spirit of wisdom, without the which our wisdom is nothing else but
foolishness.

The Questions follow.
Whether this Council be not a place for any Member of the same here assembled
freely and without controllment of any person or danger of Laws, by Bill or
speech to utter any of the griefs of this Commonwealth whatsoever touching the
service of God, the safety of the Prince and this Noble Realm.

Whether that great honor may be done unto God, and benefit and service unto
the Prince and State without free speech in this Council, which may be done
with it.

Whether there be any Council which can make, add to or diminish from the Laws
of the Realm, but only this Council of Parliament.

Whether it be not against the Orders of this Council to make any secret or
matter of weight, which is here in hand, known to the Prince or any other,
concerning the high service of God, Prince or State, without the consent of the
House.

Whether the Speaker or any other may interrupt any Member of this Council in
his Speech used in this House, tending to any of the forenamed high services.

Whether the Speaker may rise when he will, any matter being propounded,
without consent of the House or not.

Whether the Speaker may overruled the House in any matter or cause there in
question; or whether he is to be ruled or overruled in any matter or not.

Whether the Prince and State can continue, stand and be maintained without
this Council of Parliament, not altering the Government of the State.

At the end lastly, of the said Speech and Questions is set down this short
Note or Memorial ensuing. By which it may be perceived both what Sergeant
Puckering the Speaker did with the said questions after he had received them,
and what became also of this business, viz.

These questions Mr Puckering pocketted up and showed Sir Thomas Heneage, who
so handled the matter, that Mr Wentworth went to the Tower, and the questions
not at all moved. Mr Buckler of Essex herein brake his faith in forsaking the
matter, etc. and no more was done.

After the setting down of the said Business of Mr Wentworth in the Original
Journal Book, there follows only this short Conclusion of the business of the
day it self, viz.

This day Mr Speaker being sent for to the Queens Majesty, the House departed.

On Thursday the 2d day of March Mr Cope, Mr Lewkenor, Mr Hurlston and Mr
Bainbrigg were sent for to my Lord Chancellor, and by diverse of the privy
Council, and from thence were sent to the Tower. Vid. Febr. 27. antea.

The Bill for explanation of the Law touching Fines and Recoveries levied
before the Justices of the Common Pleas, whereunto they or any of them be
parties, was read the third time and passed upon the Question.

It is ordered, That all the Committees appointed before to meet about the Bill
for the delay of execution of Justice, shall meet about the same to morrow in
the Forenoon above in the Room of this House in the time of the reading of the
Subsidy. See these Committees names on Monday the 27th day of February
foregoing.

Three Bills of no great moment had each of them one reading; of which the last
being the Bill for continuance of Statutes was read the first time.

The Bill last past touching Fines and Recoveries, etc. was sent up to the
Lords by Mr Treasurer and others.

A Proviso offered by Mr Recorder of London to be inserted in the Subsidy for
saving the liberties of the Officers of the Mint, had its first reading.

On Friday the third day of March four Bills of no great moment had each of
them one reading; of which the last being the Bill against the abuses of
Purveyors was read the second time, and committed unto all the Privy Council of
this House, Sir John Cutts, Sir William Moore, Sir Thomas Scott and others, and
the Bill was delivered to Mr Chancellor, who with the rest was appointed to
meet to Morrow in the Afternoon at two of the Clock in the Exchequer Chamber.

On Saturday the 4th day of March Sir John Higham made a motion to this House,
for that diverse good and necessary Members thereof were taken from them, that
it would please them to be humble Petitioners to her Majesty for the
restitution of them again to the House.

To which Speeches Mr Vice-Chamberlain answered, That if the Gentlemen were
committed for matter within the compass of the privilege of this House, then
there might be a Petition; but if not, then we should give occasion of her
Majesty's farther displeasure: and therefore advised to stay until they heard
more, which could not be long: and further he said touching the Book and the
Petition, her Majesty had for diverse good causes best known to her self
thought fit to suppress the same, without any further examination thereof; and
yet conceived it very unfit for her Majesty to give any account of her doings.

This Book and Petition touching the Ecclesiastical Government and for
reformation of matters in the Church were delivered to the Clerk of the
Parliament or the Speaker by Mr Cope on Monday the 27th day of February
foregoing, who with Mr Lewkenor, Mr Hurlston and Mr Bainbridgg spoke in the
commendation of them, and desired they might be read.

Whereupon the said Mr Cope with the other three were on Thursday the second
day of this instant March foregoing sent unto the Tower, and for the setting
them at liberty it was that Sir John Higham made the motion foregoing; which Mr
Vice-Chamberlain did answer with this supposition only, that they might perhaps
be committed for somewhat that concerned not the business or privilege of the
House.

But whatsoever he pretended, it is most probable they were committed for
intermedling with matters touching the Church, which her Majesty had so often
inhibited, and which had caused so much disputation and so many meetings
between the two Houses, the last Parliament in Anno 27 Reginae Eliz. Anno
Domini 1584. vide 13 Mar. sequentem.

A motion made by Mr Speaker to the House for giving leave to Mr Dillington a
Member of this House to depart into his Country for his service there, which
was then granted.

The Bill for Regrators of Barley had its second reading, and a Proviso to the
same Bill presently after that was twice read, and the Bill was committed unto
Sir Henry Cock, Mr Salkington, Mr Alford, Mr Aldersey and others; and the Bill
and Proviso was delivered to the said Henry Cock, who with the rest was
appointed to meet upon Monday next in the Afternoon in the Guild Hall.

On Monday the 6th day of March the Bill for continuance of Statutes with the
Proviso was read the second time, and committed unto all the Privy Council of
this House, Mr Solicitor, Sir William Moore, Sir Thomas Brown and others, who
were appointed to meet to morrow in the Afternoon in the Exchequer Chamber.

The Bill for Orford-Haven was upon the second reading committed unto Sir
Robert Jermin and others to meet to Morrow at the Guild Hall.

The Bill for bringing in of Fish into this Realm was upon the second reading
committed unto Mr Recorder, Mr Sands, Mr Grice, Mr Dalton, the Burgesses of
the Cinque Ports and others, who were appointed to meet to Morrow in the
Afternoon at the Guild Hall, and the Committees also for the Bill of Ingrossers
to meet at the same time and place.

Mr. Chancellor of the Exchequer moved, that the Bill for the Purveyors should
be further considered by the Committees this Afternoon in the Exchequer
Chamber; and further he moved, that the Committees would at the same time and
place meet for the further consideration of the benevolence that was offered to
her Majesty, in respect of the great charges her Majesty is to sustain in the
Low Countries.

Mr. Gresham has License to depart into his Country.

This day William White was brought into the House to answer his contempt for
arresting of Mr. Martin a Member of this House; who answered, that he caused
him to be arrested the 22d day of January which was above fourteen days before
the beginning of the Parliament. The House ordered that the Precedents should
be sought, and thereupon proceeding should be had according to the direction of
the House, and referred to the report of Mr. Morris, Mr. Recorder, Mr.
Cromwell and Mr. Alford.

On Tuesday the 7th day of March, the Bill for the Subsidy was read the third
time; and before the rising of the House this morning was sent up to the Lords
by Mr. Treasurer and others.

The Bill for the Attainders was brought in again by the Committees, with a
Proviso for Mr Inglefeild.

Item another Proviso for the Lord Lumley.

The Bill was brought in again by the Commit tees for Purveyors with
Amendments, which Bill with the Amendments was upon the second reading
committed to be engrossed.

The Bill for restraint of Horse-Stealing and other Beasts, sent from the Lords
by Mr Sergeant Gawdie and Mr. Attorney, had its first reading, and was
delivered to Mr. Morris.

It is Ordered, That Edward Fisher now remaining Prisoner in the Fleet, shall
be brought to this House to Morrow, to Answer such things as shall be objected
against him. Vide on Thursday the 9th of March following.

Mr. Stoverd Burgess for Woodstock has leave to depart about his necessary
business.

Sir Thomas Scott and his Son have leave to depart.

On Wednesday the 8th day of March Mr. Stoughton and Mr. Wallop had License
from the House to depart.

Three Bills of no great moment had each of them their first reading; of which
the first was a Bill for the true performance of the last Will of Sir James
Harvey.

The Bill for Confirmation of Attainders brought in again by the Committees,
and now again upon diverse reasons upon the reservations committed to the former
Committees, and all that will may come to the Committees. Vide the said
Committees on Saturday the 25th day of February foregoing. The said Committees
to meet this Afternoon in the Exchequer Chamber.

This day the Bill for Orford-Haven was brought in again by the Committees.

Nota, There was a former Bill for Orford-Haven in the County of Suffolk read
in the first meeting of this Parliament, and committed on Monday the 7th day of
November last past; which it seems being disliked by the said Committees was
rejected, and a new Bill brought in again this second meeting of the same upon
Friday the 24th day of February foregoing, and lastly committed again after the
second reading upon Monday the 6th day of this instant March last past.

Upon a Motion made by Sir John Higham, that it were convenient to have the
Amendment of some things whereunto Ministers are required to be sworn, and that
some good course might be taken to have a learned Ministry; it was thought sit
that some convenient number of this House might be appointed to confer upon
some reasonable Motion to be made unto her Majesty for redress in these things.
Whereupon these persons ensuing were appointed, viz. All the Privy Council of
the House, Sir John Higham, Mr. Solicitor, Mr. Recorder, Mr. Dr. Lluen, Sir
Henry Cock, Sir Robert Jermin, Mr. Doctor Cosins, Sir Thomas Brown, Mr.
Brograve, Mr. Beale, Mr. Fortescue, Mr. Richard Brown, Sir William Moore, the
Master of the Requests, Mr. Wroth, Mr. Morris, Mr. Conisby, Mr. Tasborough,
Mr. Fanshaw, Mr. Hastings, Sir Richard Knightley, Mr. Bronker, Mr. Amersham,
Mr. Hearly, Mr. Francis Baker, Mr. Stanhop, Sir Walter Rawleigh, Mr. Saunders,
Mr. Thomas Farmer and Mr. William Fleetwood.

Thomas Stamp Esquire one of the Burgesses for Wallingford in the County of
Berks, is licensed by Mr. Speaker to be absent for his necessary affairs.

On Thursday the 9th day of March Thomas Hudson Esquire Burgess for the Town of
Barnstable in the County of Devon', is for his necessary affairs licensed to
depart also for the Service of her Majesty, to be employed in causes of Musters
with the Earl of Bath her Majesty's Lieutenant of the said County.

The Bill for Orford-Haven with the Amendments brought in by the Committees,
was by the House Ordered to be engrossed.

Two Bills also had each of them one reading; of which the last being the Bill
for Fines was read the second time and committed with the Bill for Errors in
Fines unto Mr. Sergeant Snagg, Mr Solicitor, Mr. Lewkenor and others, to meet
this Afternoon at two of the Clock at Serjeants-Inn Hall in Chancery Lane.

The Bill for Confirmation of Attainders was brought in again by the
Committees, with the Addition, which being twice read was Ordered by the House
to be engrossed. Vide the said Committees on Saturday the 25th day of February
foregoing.

This day Edward Fisher by virtue of her Majesty's Writ was brought into the
House to Answer diverse his misdemeanors, as well for indirectly taking away as
imbezelling certain Evidences remaining in a Cubbard which was locked and
sealed up by Mr. Recorder and others. Vide on Tuesday the 7th day of this
instant March foregoing.

The Bill for Fish, brought into this House again by the Committees, was twice
read, and committed unto Mr. Sergeant Snagg, Mr. Morris, Mr. Attorney of the
Duchy, Mr. Recorder and others, who were appointed to meet this Afternoon in
Serjeants-Inn in Chancery Lane at two of the Clock.

Here it seems, Mr. William Onslow, who by the License of the House supplied
the place of Mr. Fulk Onslow his Kinsman, Clerk of the same, at this meeting,
is much mistaken in setting down this Commitment; for the Bill it self was
formerly twice read, and according to the usual course committed upon the
second reading to Mr. Recorder of London, Mr. Sands and others on Monday the
7th day of March, and therefore doubtless this was either a new Bill brought in
by the said Committees, or else some new Additions and Amendments inserted into
the old Bill, which had this day their first and second reading, and thereupon
again committed unto some of the old Committees and others. Vide plus die
sequente.

Two Bills had each of them one reading; of which the last being the Bill for
the payment of Sir Gerrard Croker Knight his Debts, was (upon the second
reading) committed unto Mr. Alford, Sir Thomas Brown, Mr. Thomas Harris, Mr.
John Ingleseild, and others.

On Friday the 10th day of March the Bill for Estretford was read the second
time, and committed unto Mr. Markham, Mr. Topclyffe, Mr. Savil and others, who
were appointed to meet to Morrow in the Afternoon in the Middle Temple Hall.

Four Bills of no great moment had each of them one reading; of which the
second being the Bill for stealing of Horses and other Cattle and Beasts was
upon the second reading Committed unto Sir William Moore, Mr. Sands, Mr. Wroth
and others, who were appointed to meet to Morrow in the Committee Chamber.

The Bill for bringing in of Fish was brought in again by the Committees; by
which it is most probable that there was a new Bill brought in yesterday, which
was twice read at one and the same time and then committed.

The Bill for Sir Gerrard Crokers payment of his Debts was brought in again by
the Committees and amended.

On Saturday the 11th day of March the Bill against fraudulent Conveyances by
Fugitives was read the first time.

The Bill for the payment of Sir Gerrard Crokers Debts was brought in again by
the Committees, and committed to be engrossed.

Three Bills being passed the House were sent up to the Lords; whereof the two
last were the Bill for the great abuses of Purveyors, and the Bill for the
confirmation of the Attainders of the late Lord Pagett and others.

A Motion being made by Mr. Treasurer for the matter of benevolence for the
charges to be supplied in the Low Countries, whether that this House should
only deal in it without the Lords, or else that they should make the Lords
privy to it and join with them; It was thought good by the House to join with
the Lords in the same cause, and commit it unto these persons, viz. all the
Privy Council of this House, Sir Thomas Brown, Mr. Solicitor, Sir Robert
Jermin, Sir John Heigham, Master of the Requests, Mr. Francis Hastings, Mr.
Sands, Mr. Topclyffe and others. Vide diem Saturn. 18. diem Mar.

This day a new Bill was brought in again for the payment of Edward Fishers
Debts by the Committees, and therefore the new was twice read, and committed to
be engrossed.

Nota, That a Bill to this purpose was in great agitation the last Parliament
de anno 27 Reginae Eliz. Anno Domini 1584.

The Bill for confirmation of Letters Patents was upon the second reading
committed unto all the Privy Council of this House, Mr. Sands, Mr. Solicitor
and others, and the Bill was delivered to Mr. Vice-Chamberlain.

This day the Committees made report of the privilege of Mr. Martin a Member
of this House Arrested upon mean Process by White above twenty days before the
beginning of this Parliament holden by Prorogation (mistaken for Adjournment)
and in respect that the House was divided about it in opinion, Mr. Speaker with
the consent of the House, the sooner to grow to some certainty of the Judgment
of the House in this cause, moved these questions to the House, viz.

First, Whether they would limit a time certain or a reasonable time to any
Member of the House for his privilege.

The House Answered a convenient time.

Secondly, Whether Mr. Martin was Arrested within this reasonable time.

The House Answered yea.

Thirdly, If White should be punished for arresting Martin.

The House Answered no, because the arrest was twenty days before the beginning
of the Parliament, and unknown to him that would be taken for reasonable time.
But the principal cause why Martin had his privilege was, for that White the
last Session (mistaken for Meeting) of Parliament arrested Mr. Martin, and then
knowing him to be returned a Burgess for this House discharged his Arrest:

And then afterward Mr. Martin again returning out of his Country to London to
serve in this House, Mr. White did again arrest him, and therefore this House
took in evil part against him his second Arrest, and thereupon judged that
Martin should be discharged of his second Arrest out of the Fleet by the said
Mr. White. Vide Febr. 27 Monday.

The Bill to avoid fraudulent assurances made in certain Cases by Traitors, was
sent down from the Lords to the House of Commons by Dr. Ford and Sergeant
Gawdie.

Nota, That this Bill is not mentioned to have been sent down from the Lords to
the House of Commons, which as it should seem happened through the negligence
of Mr. William Onslow, who at this time supplied the place of the Clerk of the
said House. And therefore it is supplied out of the Original Journal Book of
the Upper House.

On Monday the 13th day of March, Two Bills had each of them one reading; of
which the second being the Bill against fraudulent Conveyances by Fugitives was
read the second time, and committed unto Mr. Solicitor, Mr. Recorder of
London, Mr. Sands and others, and the Bill was delivered to Mr. Hughes of
Grayes-Inn, who with the rest was appointed to meet at Lincoln's Inn this
Afternoon.

The Bill for Fish was brought in by the Committees and Ordered to be
ingrosted. Vide concerning this Bill on Thursday the 9th day, and on Friday the
10th day of this instant March foregoing.

The Bills against delay of Execution by suing Writs of Error was read the
second time upon the new bringing in of it by the Committees, and upon the
question was ordered to be engrossed.

The Bill for payment of Edward Fishers debts was read the third time, and
passed upon the Question.

A Motion was made by Mr. Cromwell to have some conference with the Privy
Council of this House and some others of the same, concerning those Gentlemen
Members of this House lately committed to the Tower. Whereupon these were
appointed, viz. all the Privy Council of this House, Sir Robert Jermin, Sir
John Higham, Sir Thomas Brown, Sir William Moore, Mr. Francis Hastings, Mr.
Cromwell, Sir John Harrington, Mr. Recorder, Mr. Beal.

These Members of the House touching whose Commitment Mr. Cromwell moves, were
sent unto the Tower on Thursday the 2d day of this instant March foregoing; for
whose liberty Sir John Higham had also moved before on Saturday the 4th day of
the same Month last past.

The Bill for errors in Records of Attainders was read the second time with the
amendments, and upon the motion was ordered to be engrossed.

On Tuesday the 14th day of March the Bill for confirmation of the Subsidy
granted by the Clergy was thrice read, and passed upon the question.

The Bill against buying of Wares by strangers was upon the second reading
committed unto Mr Aldersey, Mr Saunders, Mr Harris and others, who were
appointed to meet upon Tuesday next in Serjeants-Inn Hall in Chancery Lane.

The Bill for Curriers was read the second time and committed to the Committees
aforesaid, and to Mr. Recorder, Mr. Beale, Mr. Salkingston, and others, and the
Bill was delivered to Mr. Salkingston.

The Bill for fraudulent Conveyances by Traitors was upon the second reading
committed unto Mr. Solicitor, Mr. Harris, Mr. Wroth, Mr. Conisbie, and others,
and the Bill was delivered to Mr. Chancellor of the Exchequer one of the said
Committees, who with the rest was appointed to meet in the Exchequer Chamber
this Afternoon.

The Bill for payment of Sir Gerrard Croker his debts was brought in again by
the Committees being amended, after the same was engrossed and passed upon the
Question.

The Bill for Horse-stealing was read the third time with the amendments and
additions, and dashed upon the question.

Mr. Attorney and Mr. Doctor Carew do bring from the Lords two Bills; of which
the first was for the Sale of Thomas Hanfords lands.

Three Bill of no great moment had each of them one reading; of which the last
being an Act for the more speedy and due execution of certain Branches of the
Statute of 23. of her Majesty, to keep her Majesty's Subjects in due obedience,
was read the first time.

Two Bills were sent up to the Lords from the House of Commons; whereof the
first was the Bill for the Subsidy of the Clergy.

Nota, That there is no mention made of the sending up of these two Bills in
the Journal Book of the House of Commons, which happened through the negligence
of Mr William Onslow at this time supplying the place of the Clerk of that
House, and therefore it is supplied out of the Original Journal Book of the
Upper House.

On Wednesday the 15th day of March two Bills of no great moment had each of
them their first reading; whereof the first was the Bill of Fines for abridging
Proclamations.

The Bill for payment of Hanfords debts was twice read, and committed unto Mr.
Morris, Mr. Cromwell, Mr. Solicitor, Mr. Comptroller and others, and the Bill
was delivered to Mr. Comptroller.

The Bill for delay of Execution in Writs of Errors was thrice read and upon
some arguments upon the Bill again committed unto Mr. Vice-Chamberlain, Mr.
Chancellor, Mr. Wolley, Mr. Cromwell and others, who were appointed to meet
this Afternoon in the Exchequer Chamber.

Nota. That this Bill was committed after the second reading upon Monday the
27th day of February foregoing, and now again (as it seems) upon the third
reading (which is not usual) by reason of some dispute that rose about it.

Two Bills were sent up to the Lords this day; of which the first was touching
errors in records of Attainders of High Treason, and the second for repealing
of a Statute touching Fish made in Anno 13 Reginae Eliz.

The sending up of these two Bills is not at all mentioned in the Journal Book
of the House of Commons, which happened in this place as in diverse others of
this second meeting of this present Parliament, through the inexperience and
negligence of Mr. William Onslow, who supplied the place of Mr. Fulk Onslow
Clerk of the said House, being detained from thence by sickness, and therefore
it is supplied out of the Original Journal Book of the Upper House.

On Thursday the 16th day of March the Bill for Recusants was upon the second
reading committed unto all the Privy Council of this House, Sir Robert Jermin,
Sir John Higham, Sir William Moore and others, who were appointed to meet this
Afternoon in the Exchequer Chamber.

The Bill against delay of Execution by Writs of Error being put to the
question upon the third reading, by the division of the House the same was
dashed.

The Bill for to take away one Proviso made 13o of the Queen for Deeds, Grants,
etc. was dashed upon the question; but after what reading it was dashed, it
does not appear; yet it is probable it was upon the second reading, it having
been read the first time upon the Wednesday immediately foregoing.

The Bill for confirmation of Leters Patents from her Majesty under the great
Seal of England, etc. was twice read and committed to be engrossed.

The Bill for making of Cloths in Suffolk was upon the second reading committed
unto Sir Robert Jermin, Sir John Higham, Sir William Moore, Mr. Cromwell and
others; and the Bill was delivered to Sir Robert Jermin, who with the rest was
appointed to meet to Morrow in the Afternoon in the Guildhall.

Mr Edward Penruddock, Mr Sprynt, Mr Richard Lewkenor, and Mr Gyles Estcourt
have leave to depart; but upon what reasons or grounds the House gave them
leave is very negligently omitted.

On Friday the 17th day of March the Bill for Fines with Proclamation was upon
the second reading committed to be engrossed.

The Bill for Avenon was upon the second reading committed to Mr
Vice-Chamberlain, Mr Chancellor, Mr Woolley, Sir Robert Jermin, and others, who
were appointed to meet to morrow in the Afternoon in the Exchequer-Chamber.

A Proviso added to the Bill of Fines was twice read, and ordered to be
engrossed.

The Bill for Errors in Fines brought in by the Committees with the Amendments
was twice read, and committed to be engrossed.

A Saving to Hanford's Bill was twice read, and committed to the former
Committees.

The Bill brought in again by the Committees against Recusants with a Proviso
and Amendments also twice read.

The Bill for continuance of Statutes was read the third time, and passed not
upon the Question. A Proviso also added to the same Bill, that no person shall
put in Sureties upon any Information was twice read, and committed unto Mr.
Recorder, Mr. Glanvile, Mr. Harris, Mr. Wroth, Mr. Philipps, Mr. Morley, Mr.
Fansham, Mr. Hare, and Mr. Jones, who were appointed to meet at the Middle
Temple Hall this Afternoon at four of the Clock.

Nota, That it is not expressed in the Original Journal Book whether this Bill
passed upon the third reading or not, but it is most probable that the House
did defer to give their assent unto it, until the foresaid Proviso should
likewise have its third reading: and that which further confirms the not
passing of it at this time is, because upon Monday the 20th day of this instant
March following diverse Committees were appointed to go up unto the Lords, and
to confer with them about this said Bill.

Sir George Hastings has pardon of his absence this Parliament.

Two Bills had each of them one reading; of which the last being a Bill against
Extortion of Sheriffs was twice read, and committed unto Mr Philips, Mr.
Harris, Mr. Wroth, Mr. Cromwell and others, who were appointed to meet in the
Afternoon in the Middle Temple Hall.

On Saturday the 18th day of March, Four Bills of no great moment had each of
them one reading; of which the last being the Bill for Recusants with the
Proviso, was read the third time and passed upon the Question.

Mr. Speaker declared to the House from her Majesty, That she thanked God,
understanding of their great love unto her in regard of her charges sustained
in the Low Countries, and that her Majesty was contented this Afternoon that
some convenient number of them should have Audience before her Majesty.
Whereupon these persons were appointed by the House, all the Privy Council of
this House, Sir Robert Jermin, Sir John Higham, Sir Henry Cock, Sir Thomas
Brown, Mr. Fortefoue Master of the Requests, Sir John Peter, Sir William
Moore, Mr. Wroth, Mr. Tasborough, Mr. Markham, Mr. Revel and Mr. George Moore.
Vide concerning this business on Saturday the 11th day of this instant March
foregoing.

The Proviso that persons Arrested by Informers may appear by Attorneys was
read the third time, and passed upon the question.

Mr. Wingfield was brought into this House to Answer his misdemeanor against
Mr. Walton a Member of this House, for that, as Walton informed, Mr. Wingfield
did offer to draw his Weapon upon him and gave evil Language, which Mr.
Wingfield denied, and said, for that his Brother..... was slain by..... of
Walton, and Walton being an Accessory to that Murder, he said he could not
well take it, and knew not what might happen.

Whereupon Mr. Speaker exhorted him to remit all that was past, seeing that he
had taken the course of Law for his Brothers Death; unto which Exhortation Mr.
Wingfield yielded, and so was discharged.

The Bill for payment of Fishers Debts was sent from the Lords with a Proviso
and Amendments, which were thrice read and assented unto by the House upon the
Question.

Two Bills were brought up to the Lords from the House of Commons; the first
touching Exemplifications and Constats of Original Conveyances made to the
Queens Majesty, and the second for limitation of time touching Writs of Error
upon Fines and Recoveries.

The sending up of these two Bills is not at all mentioned in the Journal Book
of the House of Commons, which happened in this place, as in diverse others of
this second meeting of this present Parliament, through the inexperience and
negligence of Mr. William Onslow who supplied the place of Mr. Fulk Onslow
Clerk of the said House, being detained from thence by sickness, and therefore
it is supplied out of the Original Journal Book of the Upper House.

On Monday the 20th day of March, Three Bills of no great moment did each of
them pass upon the Question after the third reading; of which the first was the
Bill to prevent Extortion in Sheriffs and Under-Sheriffs, etc. for Executions.

The House appointed diverse to go up to the Lords to confer with them about the
Bill for continuance of Statutes, who were as follows; Mr. Chancellor of the
Exchequer, Mr. Attorney of the Wards, Mr. Morris, Mr. Saunders, Sir William
Moore, Mr. Cromwell, Mr. Hare, and Mr. Francis Bacon.

Vide concerning this Bill on Friday the 17th day of this instant March
foregoing.

The old Committees (appointed on Wednesday the 15th day of this instant March
foregoing) in the Bill for the payment of Hanfords Debts, were to meet this
Afternoon in the Middle Temple Hall; and the Bill which came from the Lords,
and the new Bill drawn by the said Hanford (which was once read) were both
delivered to Mr Comptroller, being one of the said former Committees.

Six Bills were sent up to the Lords; the first touching the Sale of Edward
Fishers Lands; the second for the more speedy and due Execution of certain
Branches of the Statute made in the twenty third year of the Queens Majesty's
Reign, Entitled an Act to retain the Queens Majesty's Subjects in their due
obedience; the third for continuance of Statutes; the fourth to prevent
Extortion in Sheriffs, Under-Sheriffs, etc. the fifth for abridging of
Proclamations to be made upon Fines levied in the Court of Common Pleas; and
the sixth to avoid fraudulent Assurances made in certain Cases with a Proviso
annexed and Amendments.

Nota, That the sending up of these six Bills is not at all mentioned in the
Journal Book of the House of Commons, and therefore it is supplied out of the
Original Journal Book of the Upper House.

On Tuesday the 21th day of March, the Bill for exemplifying Letters Patents
was read the third time, and passed upon the question.

The Bill new brought in for the payment of Hanfords Debts, he himself being
present assented to it, and did subscribe every leaf with his own hand;
whereupon the Bill was read twice, and Ordered to be engrossed.

The Bill to avoid fraudulent Conveyances made in certain Cases by Traitors,
was sent down from the Lords to the House of Commons. Two Bills also of no
great moment were sent up from the said House to the Lords.

The sending up of these two Bills to the Lords, or the sending down the first
Bill to the Commons is very negligently omitted in the Original Journal Book of
the House of Commons, and are therefore inserted (as the like was done
Yesterday and upon diverse other days) out of the Original Journal Book of the
Upper House.

The Bill for payment of Hanfords Debts was read the third time, and passed
upon the question.

The Bill for breeding of Horses in the wast grounds of Devon and Cornwall, was
read the second time.

A Proviso offered by Mr. Conisbie to be inserted into the same Bill; which
being read, the Bill and the Proviso were dashed upon the Question, whether
they should be engrossed or no.

The Bill for the continuance and perfecting of diverse Statutes was sent from
the Lords to the House of Commons by Sergeant Gawdie and Doctor Carew.

A new Bill also for the sale of Thomas Hanfords Lands was sent up to the Lords
(as it should seem) by Mr. Treasurer and others.

The mutual sending of these two Bills from either House to other, is very
negligently omitted in the Original Journal Book of the House of Commons, and
is therefore inserted out of the Original Journal Book of the Upper House.

An Order delivered by Mr Cromwell Entered by consent of the House.
WHereas upon complaint made to this House (upon Monday the 21th day of
November in the first meeting of this present Parliament) on the behalf of the
Borough of Grantham in the Country of Lincoln, against Arthur Hall Gentleman,
that the said Arthur Hall had Commenced Suits against them for Wages by him
demanded of the said Borough, as one of the Burgesses of the Parliament in the
Sessions of Parliament holden the thirteenth, fourteenth, eighteenth and twenty
third years of the Reign of our Sovereign Lady the Queens Majesty, wherein it
was alleged that the said Borough ought not to be charged as well in respect
of the negligent attendance of the said Mr. Hall at the said Sessions of
Parliament and some other offenses by him committed at some of the said
Sessions, as also in respect that he had made promise not to require any such
Wages; the Examination of the said cause on the second day of December in the
last Session (mistaken for Meeting) of this Parliament by Order of this House
was committed unto Sir Ralph Sadler Knight Chancellor of the Duchy, Sir Walter
Mildmay Knight Chancellor of the Exchequer, Thomas Cromwell, Robert Markham and
Robert Wroth Esquires; This day report was made by the said Committees that not
having time during the last Session of Parliament (mistaken for Meeting) to
examine the circumstances of the cause, they had in the mean Season by their
Letters advertised my Lord Chancellor, that the said cause was committed unto
them, and humbly requested his Lordship to stay the issuing forth of any
further Process against the said Borough until this Session of Parliament
(mistaken for Meeting), which accordingly his Lordship had very honorably
performed. And the said Committees did further declare, that having, during
this Session of Parliament (mistaken for Meeting) sent for Mr. Hall, declared
unto him the effect of the complaint against him, they had desired him to remit
the said wages which he had demanded of the said Borough, whom they found very
conformable to condescend to such their request; and that the said Mr. Hall
then affirmed unto them, that if the said Citizens of the said Borough would
have made suit unto him, he would upon such their own Suit then remitted the
same, so was he very willing to do any thing which might be grateful to this
House, and did freely and frankly remit the same; which being well liked of by
this House, it was by them this day Ordered that the same should be entered
accordingly.

On Thursday the 23th day of March the Bill for the Queens Majesty's most
gracious general and free Pardon was sent down from the Lords by Sergeant
Gawdie and Doctor Carew, which having passed the House was sent back again this
Morning unto their Lordships, with another Bill which was for the continuance
and perfecting of diverse Statutes.

This day finally the Speaker with the rest of the House of Commons being sent
for into the Upper House, and thereupon repairing thither, two Commissions
under the Great Seal were read; by the first of which her Majesty being absent
gave her Royal Assent to ten several Acts or Statutes which passed at this
time, and by the other this Parliament was dissolved.

Nota, That all this days Passages are supplied out of the Upper House Journal.

THE JOURNAL OF THE House of LORDS.
An Exact and perfect Journal of the Passages of the House of Lords, in the
Parliament holden at Westminster, Anno 31 Reginae Eliz. Anno Domini 1588. which
began there (after one Prorogation of the same) on Tuesday the 4th Day of
February, and then and there continued until the Dissolution thereof on
Saturday the 29th Day of March, Anno Domini 1589.

THE Queens Majesty, soon after that her wonderful and glorious Victory which
God Almighty had given her Navy over that vainly styled Invincible Armado sent
against her Realm of England by the Spanish King, summoned this her High Court
of Parliament to begin on Tuesday the 12th day of November that present year
1588. and the 30th year of her Reign, that so by common Advice and Counsel she
might prepare and provide against the inbred malice of that Prince and Nation,
Sir Christopher Hatton Knight her Majesty's late Vice-Chamberlain, being made
Lord Chancellor in the room and stead of Sir Thomas Bromley Knight, who having
been sick a great part of the last Parliament dyed in April Guliel. Cambden, in
Annal. Regin. Eliz. edit. Lugdun. Batav. Anno Them. 1625. p. 511 and 512.
following Anno 29 Regin. Eliz. Anno Domini 1587. But other occasions of some
importance requiring the deferring of the said Assembly, her Majesty Prorogued
the same in manner and form following.

Memorandum, That whereas the Queens Majesty by her Writ summoned her
Parliament to begin and to be holden at Westminster this present Tuesday being
the 12th day of November, her Highness for certain great and weighty Causes and
Considerations her Majesty specially moving, by the advice of her Privy Council
and of her Justices of both her Benches and other of her Council learned, did
Prorogue and adjourn the said Parliament until the 4th day of February next, by
virtue of her Writ Patent sealed with the Great Seal, and bearing date the 15th
day of October last past. Whereupon at this said 12th day of November the
Archbishop of Canterbury, Sir Christopher Hatton Lord Chancellor, William Lord
Burleigh Lord Treasurer, the Earl of Huntingdon, the Bishop of London and three
other Barons repaired to the Parliament-Chamber commonly called the Upper
House, and there in the presence of the Knights, Citizens and Burgesses
summoned to the said Parliament declared, That her Highness for diverse good
causes and considerations her specially moving, by her Highnesses said Writ had
Prorogued the said Parliament from this said first summoned day until the 4th
day of February next. Whereupon the Writ for the said Prorogation in the
presence of all that Assembly was openly read by the Clerk of the Upper House
in haec verba.

ELizabetha Dei gratia Angliae, Franciae and Hiberniae Regina, fidei Defensor,
etc. Praedilectis and fidelibus nostris Praelatis, Magnatibus and Proceribus
Regni nostri Angliae, ac dilectis and fidelibus nostris Militibus, Civibus and
Burgensibus dicti Regni nostri ad praesens Parliamentum nostrum apud Civitatem
nostram Westmonasterii 12 die Novembris proxime futuro inchoand' and tenend'
convocatis and electis, and vestrum cuilibet Salutem. Cum nos pro quibusdam
ardnis and urgentibus negotiis, nos, statum and defensionem dicti Regni nostri
Angliae and Ecclesiae Anglicanae concernentibus dictum Parliamentum nostrum ad
diem and locum praedictos teneri ordinaverimus, ac vobis per separalia Brevia
nostra apud Civitatem and diem praedictum interesse mandaverimus ad tractand.
consentiend. and concludend' super hiis quae in dicto Parliamento nostro tunc
and ibidem proponerentur and tractarentur; Quibusdam tamen certis de causis and
considerationibus nos ad hoc specialiter moventibus dictum Parliamentum nostrum
nsque ad and in quartum diem Februarii prox' futurum duximus Prorogand. Ita
quod nec vos nec aliquis vestruin ad dictum duodecimum diem Novembris apud
Civitatem praedictam comparere teneamini seu arctemini, volumus enim vos and
quemlibet vestrum erga nos penitus exonerari. Mandantes and tenore praesentium
firmiter injungendo praecipientes vobis and cuilibet vestrum and omnibus aliis
quibus in hac part intererit, quod ad dictum quartum diem Februarii apud
praedictam Civitatem Westmonasterii personaliter compareatis and intersitis,
and quilibet vestrum compareat and intersit ad tractand faciend. agend. and
concludend. super hiis quae in dicto Parliamento nostro de communi Concilio
dicti regni nostri favente Domino contigerint, ordinari. In cujus rei
testimonium has Literas nostras fieri fecimus Patentes. Test meipsa apud
Westmonasterium 15. die Octobris Anno Regni nostri 30.

Per ipsam Reginam Ha. Gerrard.


On Tuesday the 4th day of February in the 31. year of her Majesty's Reign, to
which day the Parliament had been last Prorogued upon Tuesday the 12th day of
November foregoing, and accordingly now held, The Queens Majesty was personally
present, accompanied by the Lord Chancellor and diverse of the Lords both
Spiritual and Temporal; but the Original Journal Book of the Upper House does
not at all mention the presence of any Lords, which happened through the great
negligence of Mr Anthony Mason at this time Clerk thereof, yet it may be
collected February 8.

The Queen being set under her Cloth of State, and the Lords placed in their
Parliamentary Robes according to their several ranks and orders, the Knights,
Citizens, Barons and Burgesses of the House of Commons had notice thereof, and
thereupon repaired to the said Upper House, and as many of them as conveniently
could being let in, stood before the Rail or Bar at the nether end thereof.
Then Sir Christoper Hatton Knight Lord Chancellor of England, in a Speech which
he used, did at large declare the Queens gracious disposition to peace, and her
great wisdom in preserving the same and singular government of the Realm. Next
he showed the great benefit which this Kingdom enjoyed by her government, and
remembered her great Conquest over the Spanish late wonderful Army or Fleet on
the Seas, videlicet in Anno 30 Reign. Eliz. Anno Domini 1588. He further
declared how much the King of Spain remained bent against this Kingdom. And
lastly, showed the Cause of calling this Parliament to be, that by the consent
of the most grave and wise Persons now called together out of all parts of the
Realm, preparation may as far forth by the Counsel of man as is possible, be
made and provided, that Arms, Soldiers and Money may be in readiness; and an
Army prepared and furnished against all Events.

The Lord Chancellors Speech being ended, the Clerk of the Parliament read the
names of the Receivors and Triors of Petitions in French, according to the
usual form, which were these.

Receivors of Petitions for England, Ireland, Wales and Scotland, Sir
Christopher Wray Chief Justice, Sir Gilbert Gerrard Knight Master of the Rolls,
Sir Robert Shute one of the Justices of Kings Bench, Dr Aubrey and Dr Ford.

Receivors of Petitions for Gascoigne and other Countries beyond the Seas and
the Isles, Sir Edmond Anderson Chief Justice of the Common Pleas, Sir Roger
Manwood Chief Baron, Francis Windham one of the Justices of the Common Pleas,
Dr Clerk and Dr Carry.

Tryors of Petitions for England, Ireland, Wales and Scotland, The Archbishop
of Canterbury, the Earl of Darby, the Earl of Worcester, the Earl of Sussex,
the Bishop of London, the Bishop of Winchester, the Lord Howard of Effingham
Lord Admiral, Lord Cobham, the Lord Gray of Wilton.

Tryors of Petitions for Gascoigne and for other Countries beyond the Seas and
the Islands.

The Earl of Oxford great Chamberlain of England, the Earl of Warwick, the Earl
of Pembrook, the Bishop of Salisbury, the Bishop of Lincoln, the Bishop of
Rochester, the Lord Hunsdon Lord Chamberlain to the Queen, the Lord Lumley and
the Lord Buckhurst.

As soon as the Clerk of the Parliament had read these names, and had likewise
ended other things of course belonging unto them, viz. That the first Tryors of
England, etc. or any four of them, calling unto them the Lord Chancellor and
the Lord Treasurer and also the Queens Sergeants, should at their leisure meet
together in the Chamberlains Chamber, and that the last Tryors of Gascoigne,
etc. or any four of them, calling unto them the Queens Sergeants, the Queens
Attorney and Solicitor, should hold their place when their leisure did serve
them to meet in the Treasurers Chamber. Then the Queen continued the Parliament
unto a day to come, which is entered in the Original Journal Book of the Upper
House in manner and form following; viz. Ipsa Regina continuavit praesens
Parliamentum usque in diem Jovis prox' hora secunda post Meridiem.

On Wednesday the 5th day of this instant February, although the Upper House
sat not, yet was one extraordinary Proxy returned or brought in unto the Clerk
of the said House, as there had formerly been another of a like nature returned
on Monday the third day of the said Month foregoing, which because it was
returned before the Parliament it self began, and is entered together with that
before mentioned in the beginning of the Original Journal Book of the said
House, it shall not be much amiss to set them down both together in this place,
in such manner and form as they are entered in the said Journal Book, viz.

Vacat. 3. die Februarii introductae sunt Literae procuratoriae Willielmi
Assaphen' Episcopi, in quibus Procuratores suos constituit Johannem
Archiepiscopum Cantuar' and Johannem Episcopum Roffen, and Hugonem Episcopum
Bangoren'.

Nota, That though the word vacat be here placed in the Original Journal Book
of the Upper House in the Margent of this Proxy in such manner and sort as this
is transcribed; yet there does not appear any reason thereof: for as it may be
collected by the presence of the Lords set down on Saturday the 8th day of this
instant February following, neither the said Bishop of St Asaph was present
himself after the said Proxy sent, nor all nor any of his Proctors absent, nor
himself dead, which are only causes of a Vacat.

5to Die Februarii introductae sunt Literae procuratoriae Johannis Carliolen'
Episcopi; in quibus Procuratorem suum constitiuit Johannem Archiepiscopum
Cantuarien'.

Nota, That these Two Proxies are therefore called unusual and extraordinary,
because these two Bishops did constitute (the first of them) three Proctors,
and the last of them but one; whereas for the most part the Spiritual Lords do
nominate two, and the Temporal Lords but one; which may be collected in part
out of the very Returns of this Parliament: for of five Spiritual Lords that
sent their Proxies, three constituted two Proctors a piece, and of seven
Temporal Lords not any nominated more than one.

It is also worth the observation, that the Lord Burleigh the Lord Treasurer
had this Parliament four several Proxies sent unto him (entered in the Original
Journal Book of the Upper House in such order as they be here set down) viz.
from the Lord Dacres, the Earl of Warwick, Viscount Mountacute and the Lord
Lumley.

On Thursday the 6th day of February, to which day the Parliament had been last
continued, the Queens Majesty was personally present, coming unto the said
Parliament in her accustomed State and Order about three of the Clock in the
Afternoon, it being the time appointed for the House of Commons to present
their Speaker or Prolocutor, whom they had been authorized to choose on the last
Tuesday when the Parliament first began. And thereupon accordingly the Queen
and Lords being set, and the said Knights, Citizens and Burgesles of the House
of Commons let into the Upper House, two of the most eminent Personages of the
said House did lead up to the Bar of the Upper House George Snagg Sergeant at
Law who was chosen the Speaker or Prolocutor of the said House of Commons, who
being placed at the said Bar, and silence being made, did in a modest and
discreet Speech disable himself by reason of his many imperfections, and humbly
desired her Majesty to discharge him of that great place, and to nominate some
other more able and sufficient Member of the said House. Whereupon the Lord
Chancellor by commandment from the Queen did let him know, that her Majesty did
very well allow of his choice, and thereupon encouraged him willingly and
cheerfully to undertake and execute that charge and place to which he had been
by the free and unanimous consent of the House of Commons elected and chosen.
Upon which Speech of the Lord Chancellor the said Speaker according to the
usual course and form rendering all humble thankfulness to the Queens Majesty
for her undeserved goodness toward him in conceiving him able and worthy for
the execution of a place of that great charge and trust, and promising his care
and readiness with all diligence to undergo the same, he did offer up unto her
said Majesty diverse petitions in the name and on the behalf of the said House
of Commons; first, That during the continuance of this Session, themselves and
their necessary attendants and servants might be freed from all suits and
arrests; secondly, That they might have free access unto her Majesty upon all
urgent and important occasions; and thirdly, That they might have free liberty
of speech in the said House to debate and dispute of such matters and things as
shall be there purposed: And lastly, He petitioned her Majesty in his own
behalf, that if any thing should be mistaken or unwillingly omitted by himself,
that she would be graciously pleased to pass by and pardon the same. To which
speech the Lord Chancellor by commandment from the Queen shortly replied, That
her Majesty was graciously pleased to grant all his said Petitions, and that he
the said Speaker and the House of Commons should use and enjoy all such
liberties and privileges as others before them had been accustomed to use and
enjoy in the times of her Majesty's most noble Progenitors, and withal
admonishing them not to extend the said privileges to any unreverent and
misbecoming speech, or unnecessary accesses to her Majesty.

Nota, That the presence of the Lords is here omitted, as it was before upon
the first day of this Parliament through the Clerk of the Upper House his great
negligence; where also the foresaid Presentment of the Speaker is but shortly
set down.

Then followed the continuance of the Parliament, which is thus entered in the
Original Journal Book of the Upper House, viz. the Lord Chancellor by the
Queens Commandment continuavit praesens Parliamentum usque in diem Sabbathi
prox' hora octava.

On Saturday the 8th day of February, to which day the Parliament had been last
continued, were present these Lords Spiritual and Temporal following, viz.

Archiepiscopus Cantuarien'. Episcopus London'. Episcopus Winton'. Episcopus
Sarum. Episcopus Roffen'. Episcopus Cestren'. Episcopus Coven'. and Litchf.
Episcopus Gloucestren'. Episcopus Lincoln'. Episcopus Petriburgen'. Episcopus
Hereford. Episcopus Cicestren'. Episcopus Bangor.
Nota, That though the Bishops names are sometimes placed after the Earls and
Viscounts, as they are commonly in all places where they are made Committees;
yet in all the Journals of the Upper House where the presence of the Lords is
marked, they are always thus placed on the dexter side, in respect chiefly of
the Archbishop of Canterburies place, which is before all others next the
Prince.

Christopherus Hatton Miles Cancellarius Angliae. Dominus Burleigh Dominus
Thesaurarius Angliae. Marchio Winton'. Comes Darbiae Magnus Seneschallus. Comes
Kantii. Comes Sussex. Comes Huntingdon. Comes Bathon. Comes Pembroke. Comes
Hartford.
Barons.
Dominus Howard Admirallus Angliae. Dominus Hunsdun Camerarius. Dominus
Audeley. Dominus Strange. Dominus Cobham. Dominus Stafford. Dominus Gray de
Wilton. Dominus Darcie. Dominus Sands. Dominus Windsor. Dominus Cromwell.
Dominus Wharton. Dominus Rich. Dominus Willoughbie. Dominus North. Dominus St
John. Dominus Buckhurst. Dominus Norris.
Nota, That these names of such Lords as were present, are supplied here out of
the Original Journal Book of the Upper House on the third day of the
Parliament, because it is the first on which their presence is noted, it having
been omitted in the two foregoing days by the great negligence of Mr. Anthony
Mason at this time Clerk of the said House.

Two Bills of no great moment had each of them their first reading; of which
the last was the Bill for the maintenance of Husbandry and for increase of
Tillage.

Dominus Cancellarius continuavit praesens Parliamentum usque in diem Lunae
prox' hora nona.

On Monday the 10th day of February, to which day the Parliament had been last
continued, were four Bills read; whereof the last being a Bill concerning
Captains and Soldiers was read secunda vice and commissa Domino Thesaurario,
Marchioni Winton', the Earl of Oxford, the Earl of Shrewsbury, Lord Steward,
the Earl of Kent, the Earl of Cumberland, the Earl of Sussex, the Earl of
Essex, the Bishop of Winchester, the Bishop of Coven' and Litchf. the Bishop of
the Lord Admiral, the Lord Chamberlain, the Lord Audley, the Lord Strange, the
Lord Cobham, the Lord Gray, the Lord Wentworth, the Lord Cromwell, the Lord
North, the Lord Buckhurst and the Lord Norris, Sergeant Puckering and Mr.
Attorney.

Nota, That here were Attendants of the Upper House and no Members of it, are
made joint Committees with the Lords, which is very usually done in the
Parliaments foregoing in the Reign of this Queen; where also the Judges being
but mere Assistants of the said House are often nominated Committees also:
Whereas in the two last Parliaments of her Majesty's Reign, viz. in Anno 39 and
Anno 43. and in these latter times of King James and our present Sovereign his
Son, these are seldom or never nominated as Committees, but only as Assistants
to the Committees to give their advice if they shall be required, and not
otherwise. And though the Clerk of the Parliament might at some time mistake
and err in setting down such for Committees as were only Commanded to be
Attendant upon or Assistant unto the said Committees; yet that he should so
often mistake in so many Parliaments, and the rather because such Committees
are frequently named diverse times in sundry of the several Sessions, it is most
unlikely and improbable.

On Friday the 14th day of February the Bill for the more speedy payment of
Fines and Tenths was read prima vice.

Memorand. The Lords Committees brought in the Bill concerning Captains and
Soldiers with Amendments; and by reason of diverse defects in the same Bill,
they had framed a new Bill, which new Bill by the consent of all the Lords was
received and read prima vice.

Two Bills had each of them one reading; of which the first being a Bill
touching Constats of Original Conveyances made to the Queens Majesty was read
secunda vice; And the second being a Bill to save discontinuance of Writs of
Error upon Errors in the Court of Exchequer, was read secunda vice and commisia
Archiepiscopo Cantuar' and Ebor', Domino Senesechallo, three Earls, three
Bishops, six Barons, Magistro Rotulorum, Servienti Shuttleworth, Magistro
Attornato and Sollicitatori.

Dominus Cobham and Dominus Stafford robis Parliamentariis induti introduxerunt
Dominum Talbot, eumque ad locum suum perduxerunt praeeunte Gartiro principali
Reg. Armorum, qui etiam tunica armorum indutus erat.

On Saturday the 15th day of February, to which day the Parliament had been
last continued, three Bills were read; whereof two of them, the first being a
Bill for maintenance of Houses of Husbandry and Tillage, and the second being a
Bill for Horse-stealing and House-burning were read secunda vice and tunc
commissae Domino Thesaurario, 4 Comitibus, 2 Episcopis, 8 Baronibus, Justiciar'
Gawdie, Servienti Puckering, and Sollicitatori Reginae.

On Monday the 17th day of February, to which day the Parliament had been last
continued four Bills were read; of which the first being a Bill for reformation
in excess of Apparel was read secunda vice and commissa Domino Thesaurario, 3
Comitibus, 2 Episcopis, 6 Baronibus, Servienti Shuttleworth, and Sollicitatori
Reginae. Quod nota.

On Tuesday the 18th day of February, to which day the Parliament had been last
continued, were four Bills read; whereof the first being a Bill providing
remedy against discontinuance in Writs of Error in the Exchequer and Kings
Bench, was read tertia vice and conclusa, and sent to the House of Commons by
Sergeant Shuttleworth and Dr. Aubery with three other Bills.

On Thursday the 20th day of February, to which day the Parliament had been
last continued, were four Bills read; of which the first being a Bill for
having Horse-Armour and Weapons was read prima vice.

On Saturday the 22th day of February, to which day the Parliament had been
last continued, were three Bills read; of which the last being a Bill
concerning Captains and Soldiers was read tertia vice and conclusa, and
together with the two Bills aforesaid sent to the House of Commons by Sergeant
Puckering and Doctor Ford.

Three Bills were also sent from the House of Commons, viz. a Bill concerning
Informers; and two others of no great moment.

On Monday the 24th day of February, to which day the Parliament had been last
continued, were four Bills read; whereof one of them being a Bill for Writs
upon Proclamation upon Exigents to be Current within the County Palatine of
Durham, was read secunda vice and commissa Justiciario Gawdie. Quod nota.

On Tuesday the 25th day of February, to which day the Parliament had been last
continued, were two Bills read; whereof the first being a Bill concerning
Informers was read prima and secunda vice and conclusa, and so expedited.

And the second being a Bill for the abridgment of Proclamations upon Fines to
be levied at the Common Law was read secunda vice, wherein the Lords finding
some imperfections sent down Sergeant Shuttleworth and Dr Clark to the lower
House, to pray a Conference with some of that House; which being yielded, the
Lords Ordered for Committees. the Lord Treasurer, the Lord Steward, the Bishop
of Winton, the Lord Cobham, the Lord Buckhurst, and the Lord Chief Justice of
the Common Pleas to attend the Lords.

Nota, That here one of the Judges is particularly nominated to attend upon the
Lords Committees, which may further prove, that in all those former places
where the Judges or the Queens Learned Council are named as Committees, it is
no Error nor mistake of the Clerk. So that hence the difference may very well
be gathered to be this, That where a Committee of the Lords was formerly used
to be selected out to meet with another Committee of the House of Commons, here
neither the Judges being but Assistants, nor the Queens Learned Council being
but Attendants of and upon that House, were ever nominated or appointed as
Joint Committees with the Lords, because the very Members of either House only
are then admitted to partake of such matters of weight and secrecy as they do
there commonly confer upon: But when the Lords do amongst themselves appoint a
Committee to consider only of some ordinary Bill that is to pass their House,
and especially if the Bill do concern matter of Law, here it anciently has
been used, and may still without any prejudice to the honor of that House be
continued, that the Kings Learned Council but especially the Judges may be
nominated as Committees alone or as Joint Committees with the Lords; for in
regard that nothing can be absolutely concluded at a Committee, all matters
shall still depend upon the resolution of the House, and so no inconvenience
shall ensue thereupon.

After the Committees of both Houses had met, the Lords Committees proceeded to
the Amendment of the Bill, and afterward this present day the Bill and
Amendments received their second reading and passed the House, and was sent
down to the House of Commons to be amended by them, by Dr Carew and Mr
Solicitor.

It appears by the Journal Book, that the House of Commons having yielded to
a Conference, did presently choose Committees, and sent them up to the Upper
House.

Two other Bills had each of them one reading in the House, and one Bill was
sent up to the Lords from the House of Commons, all being of no great moment.

On Thursday the 27th day of February, to which day the Parliament had been
last continued, two Bills of no great moment had each of them one reading; of
which the first being a Bill for reformation of excess in Apparel was read
secunda vice and commissa uni Comiti and 4 Baronibus.

On Saturday the first day of March, to which day the Parliament had been last
continued on Thursday foregoing, two Bills of no great moment had each of them
one reading; of which the first being a Bill for Writs upon Proclamations and
Exigents to be current within the County Palatine of Durham, was read tertia
vice and conclusa.

This Forenoon also the Lords Committees returned the Bill for the having of
Horses, Armor and Weapons, signifying that they could get no meeting but of so
small a number as their Lordships would not deal in; so that the whole House
presently proceeded to the Question whether it should be engrossed or no; upon
which question asked the Lords with one consent agreed that it should be
engrossed.

On Monday the 3d day of March, to which day the Parliament had been last
continued, two Bills of no great moment had each of them one reading; of which
one of them was concerning the Sale of Thomas Hanfords Lands toward the
payment of his Debts, and another had been this Morning sent up to the Lords
from the House of Commons.

These Bills being sent up to the Lords by Sir Francis Knowles Knight Treasurer
of her Majestics Household, and other Members of the House of Commons, they had
also Order to desire of their Lordships in the name of the said House, that Mr.
Solicitor being returned a Member thereof might be suffered to come thither
and give his attendance in the same. To which desire of theirs their Lordships
a little after sent down word by Mr. Sergeant Puckering and Mr. Attorney
General to the said House, that the said Mr. Solicitor was called by her
Majesty's Writ to serve in the Upper House long before he was chosen a Member
of the said House of Commons, and therefore thought it very fitting he should
still continue his attendance in the said Upper House.

Nota, That there is no mention made in the Original Journal Book of the Upper
House of this Question touching the Attendance of the Queens Solicitor, but it
was supplied out of the Original Journal Book of the House of Commons, fol.
242. a.

On Tuesday the 4th day of March, Two Bills of no great moment had each of them
one reading; whereof the latter being a Bill for the sale of Thomas Hanfords
Lands, etc. was read secunda vice. Whereupon the Lords Ordered, that as well
the said Thomas Hanford, as those that followed the Bill, should be warned to
be before them with their learned Council at the next sitting of the Court,
which shall be on Thursday next at nine of the Clock.

Two Bills also of no great moment were this Forenoon sent up to the Lords from
the House of Commons; of which the first was the Bill for the better recovery
of such costs and damages as shall be adjudged to any person against common
Informers.

On Thursday the 6th day of March, to which day the Parliament had been last
continued on Tuesday foregoing, the amendments of the Bill for the maintenance
of Husbandry and Tillage were read prima and secunda vice and commissae ad
ingrossand.

One Bill concerning the preservation of Orford-Haven was brought up to the
Lords from the House of Commons.

Three Bills also of no great moment had each of them one reading; of which the
first being a Bill to avoid abuses in choosing of Fellows and Scholars was read
prima vice.

On Saturday the 8th day of March, to which day the Parliament had been last
continued on Thursday foregoing, Three Bills of no great moment had each of
them one reading; of which the first being a Bill for the maintenance of
Husbandry and Tillage was read tertia vice and conclusa.

Mr Sergeant Shuttleworth and Mr Doctor Awbery were sent down from their
Lordships to the House of Commons with two Bills; of which the first was the
Bill for maintenance of Houses of Husbandry and Tillage, and the second for
reformation of excess in Apparel: both which said Bills had been passed by
their Lordships this Morning upon the third reading.

Nota, That the sending down of these two Bills is wholly omitted in the
Original Journal Book of the Upper House through the great negligence of the
Clerk of the said House, and is therefore supplied out of the Original
Journal Book of the House of Commons, fol. 245. b.

On Monday the 10th day of March, to which day the Parliament had been last
continued on Saturday foregoing, four Bills of no great moment had each of them
one reading; of which the last being a Bill for an assurance to be made of the
Jointure of Anne Wife of Henry Nevill Esquire, was read secunda and tertia vice
and communi omnium Procerum assensu conclusa.

Memorandum. That before the third reading and passing of the Bill for the
Jointure of the Wife of Henry Nevill, by which all former Conveyances made by
the said Henry Nevill of the Manors of Waighfield and Wadhurst, etc. in the
County of Sussex were made frustrate and void: The Lords Ordered that the said
former Conveyances should by the Parties to the same be brought into this House
and delivered to the Clerk of the Parliament sealed up, to the end that if it
shall please her Majesty to give her Royal Assent, That then the said
Indentures and Conveyances should be forthwith cancelled; but if it shall not
please her Majesty to give her Royal Assent, Then the said Indenture and
Conveyances should be safely re-delivered to the said parties unseen of any,
and uncancelled. And to this all the parties agreed, as well before the Lords
the Committees, as before the whole House.

Memorandum, That according to the said Order the Deeds mentioned were
cancelled the 12th day of May Anno Regni Eliz. 31.

The Bill against Pluralities and Non-residence was this day brought up to
their Lordships from the House of Commons.

Nota, That the bringing up of this Bill to their Lordships being omitted in
the Original Journal Book of the Upper House, is supplied out of that of the
House of Commons, fol. 246. a.

On Tuesday the 11th day of March, The Bill against erecting and maintaining of
Cottages was read tertia vice.

Two Bills also of rio great moment were brought up to the Lords from the House
of Commons; of which the first was a Bill of four Fifteens and Tenths, and two
entire Subsidies granted by the Temporalty.

The Bill for the assurance to be made of the Jointure of Ann the wife of Henry
Nevill Esquire (which had been sent up to their Lordships from the House of
Commons, with another Bill against Informers on Tuesday the 4th day of this
instant March foregoing) was this day sent down again to the said House with
some amendments by Doctor Aubery and Doctor Carry.

Nota, That the sending down of this Bill from their Lordships to the House of
Commons is by the negligence of Mr Anthony Mason, at this time Clerk of the
Upper House, wholly omitted in the Original Journal Book of the said House and
is therefore supplied here (as elsewhere also) out of that of the House of
Commons.

On Thursday the 13th day of March, to which day the Parliament had been last
continued on Tuesday foregoing, the amendments of the Bill for having Horses,
Armor and Weapons, was read prima and secunda vice, and commissa ad ingrossand.

The Amendments also and a new Proviso annexed unto the Bill against Informers
was read secunda and tertia vice and communi omnium Procerum assensu conclusae;
and one other Bill of no great moment had its first reading.

The Bill for the better recovery of Costs and Damages against Informers (which
had been sent up to their Lordships on Tuesday the 4th day of this instant
March foregoing) was sent down again this day to the said House by Mr Doctor
Ford and Mr Doctor Carry.

Nota, That the sending down of this Bill from the Lords to the House of
Commons is wholly omitted in the Original Journal Book of the Upper House, and
is therefore supplied out of that of the House of Commons.

On Friday the 14th day of March, The Bill of Subsidy was once read, and the
Provision of the Bill for Orford-Haven was read and concluded; and sent to the
House of Commons by Sergeant Shuttleworth and Mr Powle.

On Saturday the 15th day of March, Six Bills of no great moment had each of
them one reading; of which one being a Bill for the confirmation of the
Subsidies of the Clergy, was read prima and secunda vice, and commissa ad
ingrossand. And another being a Bill against erecting and maintaining of
Cottages was read tertia vice and conclusa, and sent to the House of Commons by
Doctor Clark.

On Monday the 17th day of March, to which day the Parliament had been last
continued on Saturday foregoing, four Bills of no great moment had each of them
one reading; of which the first being the Bill of the Subsidy was read tertia
vice and communi omnium Procerum assensu conclusa.

There were also sent up to the Lords from the House of Commons this Forenoon
six Bills of no great moment; of which the first was the Bill for reviving and
enlarging of a Statute made in the 23d year of her Majesty's Reign for
repairing of Dover Haven, and the second was the Bill for the preservation of
the Haven of Orford in the County of Suffolk.

On Tuesday the 18th day of March, Seven Bills of no great moment had each of
them one reading; of which the first being the Bill against the abuses in
election of Scholars and Presentation of Benefices was read tertia vice and
conclusa; And the scond being a Bill, that the Children of Aliens shall pay
Strangers Customs was read tertia vice and concluded, and was sent down to the
House of Commons with the former Bill by Doctor Clark and Doctor Carry.

There were also this morning brought up to the Lords from the House of Commons
four Bills of no great moment; of which the first was a Bill for the better
execution of the Statute made in the 8th year of her Majesty's Reign touching
Cloth workers and Cloths to be shipped over the Seas, and the second touching
Outlawries.

The Two other Bills touching forcible Entries, and touching pleading at large
in an Ejectione firmae, which were sent up at this time with the two former,
are omitted in the Original Journal Book of the Upper House and are therefore
supplied out of that of the House of Commons.

On Wednesday the 19. day of March. Three Bills of no great moment had each of
them one reading; of which the first being the Bill for avoiding of certain
Conveyances and other Estates supposed to be procured by Thomas Drewry of the
lands of Thomas Hasilrigge with the Amendments was read secunda and tertia vice
and conclusa.

On Thursday the 20th day of March, Two Bills of no great moment had each of
them one reading; of which the first being a Bill concerning Pleadings in
Actions of Trespass for Trespasses under the value of forty shillings was read
tertia vice and conclusae.

An Act providing remedy against Discontinuances in Writs of Error in the
Exchequer and Kings Bench was brought from the House of Commons.

On Friday the 21th day of March, Four Bills of no great moment had each of
them one reading; of which the first being the Bill concerning the Hospital of
Lamborne was read tertia vice and conclusa, and sent to the House of Commons by
Sergeant Puckering.

There were also sent up to the Lords from the House of Commons this Forenoon
three Bills of no great moment; of which the first was a Bill for Writs upon
Proclamations and Exigents to be current within the County Palatine of Durham.

On Saturday the 22th day of March four Bills of no great moment were brought
up to the Lords from the House of Commons, of which the first was a Bill for
avoiding of certain Conveyances, etc. procured by Thomas Drewry of the Lands
and Leases of Thomas Hasilrigg, and the second was the Bill for the better
recovery of such costs and damages as shall be adjudged to any person against
common Informers.

The Lords having this Forenoon given three readings to the Amendments of the
Bill for the better assurance of Lands and Tenements to the maintenance of the
free Grammar School of Tunbridge in the County of Kent, did send the same Bill
with those new Amendments to be passed also in the House of Commons by Doctor
Carew and Mr Powle; the Bill it self having before passed that House, and had
been sent up from them to the Lords on Monday the 17th day of this instant
March foregoing.

On Monday the 14th day of March, to which day the Parliament had been last
continued on Saturday foregoing, the Amendments of the Bill against abuses in
Election of Scholars, etc. were read and concluded.

Three Bills of no great moment had each of them one reading; of which the last
being a Bill for the repeal of certain Statutes was read secunda vice.

Five Bills were also brought up to the Lords from the House of Commons; of
which the first was an Act against the erecting and maintaining of Cottages,
sent up with the Amendments from the House of Commons; which said Amendments
were thrice read, and communi omnium Procerum assensu conclusae.

Memorand. quod Christopherus Wray Miles Capitalis Justic. de Banco Regis secum
adduxit in Parliamento in Camera Parliamenti intra Dominos breve de errore and
billam de Regina indorsat. ac Rotul. in quibus continebantur placit. and
process. in quibus supponebatur error, and ibidem reliquit transcriptum totius
recordi cum Clerico Parliamenti simul cum praedicto breve de errore in
Parliamento.

On Tuesday the 25th day of March, Three Bills of no great moment were brought
up to the Lords from the House of Commons; of which the first was an Act for
confirmation of the Subsidy of the Clergy.

Four Bills also of no great moment had each of them one reading; of which the
first being a Bill for the continuance of diverse Statutes was read secunda vice.

No mention is made in the Journal Book of the continuance or Adjournment of
the Parliament, which seems to have been omitted by the Clerks negligence.

On Wednesday the 26th day of March, Three Bills were read; of which the first
being a Bill to avoid secret Outlawries of her Majesty's Subjects was read
tertia vice, and sent to the House of Commons by Dr Carew. One Bill also of no
great moment was sent up to the Lords from the House of Commons.

On Thursday the 27th day of March, diverse of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal
met, but nothing was done, saving the continuance of the Parliament unto the
day next following.

On Friday the 28th day of March, Three Bills were sent up to the Lords from
the House of Commons; of which the first was a Bill for Explanation or
Declaration of the Statute of the eighth year of H. 6. concerning forcible
Entries, the Inditements thereupon found expedite.

A Bill for the Naturalizing of Joice the Daughter of Ralph Esking Gentleman,
and Wife of Richard Lambert Merchant, born beyond the Seas, was read secunda
and tertia vice, and expedited.

Dominus Cancellarius continuavit praesens Parliamentum usque in Crastinum
dimid. horae ante septimam.

On Saturday the 29th day of March, to which day the Parliament had been last
continued, one Bill for continuance of diverse Statutes was read tertia vice,
and sent to the House of Commons by Dr Stanhope and Mr Powle.

Mr Doctor Carew (in some other places also written Carry) and Mr Doctor
Stanhop do bring from the Lords two Acts, viz. the Act of the Queens most
gracious, general and free Pardon, and also the Act of the two Subsidies and
four Fifteenths granted by the Temporalty, which they carried down to the House
of Commons, from whence the Bill of Pardon having there passed, it was a little
after sent back again unto their Lordships by Mr Fortescue and others.

Nota, That the sending of these two Bills is omitted in the Original
Journal Book of the Upper House, and is therefore supplied out of that of the
House of Commons.

The presence of such Lords as attended her Majesty, who was her self this day
at the Dissolving of the Parliament in Person, is not much differing from that
set down on Saturday the 8th of February foregoing, only the two Earls of
Northumberland and Essex then absent attended this day, as also the Lord
Strange, the Lord Morley, the Lord Talbot, the Lord Wentworth, and the Lord de
la Ware were at this time also present, though not then. Whereas the Lords
Audeley and Cromwell then present were now absent; and for the Spiritual Lords
it appears not at all who were present.

These being thus set, and the House of Commons, with Sergeant Snagg their
Speaker, being let into the Upper House, the said Speaker according to the
usual form presenting her Majesty with the Bill of two Subsidies and four
Fifteenths granted by the Temporalty, desired her Highness graciously to accept
thereof as the free testimony of the faithful and loyal respects of their
Subjects, and withal desiring her Majesty to give her gracious consent to such
Acts as had been prepared and expedited by the two Houses.

After the passing of which Bills the Dissolution of the Parliament is Entered
in the Original Journal Book of the Upper House in manner and form following,
viz.

Dominus Cancellarius ex mandato Dominae Reginae tunc praesentis dissolvit
praesens Parliamentum.

It should seem that her Majesty gave her Royal Assent, and that this
Parliament was Dissolved this present Saturday the 29th day of March in the
Forenoon, contrary to the usual course in such cases accustomed; for it
appears in all other Journals for the most part to have been deferred till
the Afternoon; and that this present Parliament was so Dissolved as aforesaid,
it appears plainly by the last continuance of it on Friday immediately
foregoing to this day in the Forenoon half an hour before seven of the Clock,
to which early and unusual time of the day I suppose it was continued, because
all things might be better expedited against her Majesty's coming.

THE JOURNAL OF THE House of COMMONS.
An Exact and perfect Journal of the Passages of the House of Commons, in the
Parliament holden at Westminster, Anno 31 Reginae Eliz. Anno Domini 1588. which
began there (after one Prorogation of the same) on Tuesday the 4th Day of
February, and then and there continued until the Dissolution thereof on
Saturday the 29th Day of March, Anno Domini 1589.

THIS Parliament was Summoned about three Months after Gods miraculous
preservation of Religion, the Realm and her Majesty's Person, from the
ambitious and bloody Conquest of the Spanish King: and therefore the House did
not only regard their private business, as the passing of Bills, discussing
Elections, preserving their Privileges and the like, with which this Journal
is abundantly stored; but also the public safety of her Majesty and her Realms
by aiding her Highness with the unusual and extraordinary gift of four
Fifteenths and Tenths and two entire Subsidies, the Clergy also adding two
Subsidies of their own, and by desiring her also in the conclusion of this
Parliament to denounce open War against the King of Spain, who had so lately
invaded her, whom they concluded to have been the Root and Fountain of all the
Conspiracies practiced, and of all the Rebellions raised against her Majesty.

Although this Parliament had been summoned to have begun and to have been
holden on Tuesday the 12th day of November last past; yet it held not, but was
upon the said day in the thirtieth year of her Majesty's Reign further
Prorogued by her Majesty's Writ unto Tuesday the 4th day of February in the
thirty first year of the same.

On which said Tuesday the 4th day of February it held accordingly, and her
Majesty came in Person unto the Upper House, where Sir Christopher Hatton,
being now Lord Chancellor, in her Highness presence declared unto the Lords
Spiritual and Temporal, and to the Knights, Citizens and Burgesses of the House
of Commons then and there Assembled, how great happiness they enjoyed under her
Majesty's peaceful and victorious Reign; and that though the Spanish late
Wonderful Fleet had been lately defeated, yet there wanted not still power and
malice in him against this Nation and her Majesty: and so much the more
implacable it may be conjectured he now remains, because of his late defeature
and loss beforementioned. And therefore he showed, that the cause of the
calling of this Parliament was to provide by common Counsel against all his
future attempts. And lastly he gave notice to those of the House of Commons to
make present choice of some one amongst them to be their Speaker. Whereupon the
Knights, Citizens and Burgesses of the said House departing thither, did choose
George Snagg Sergeant at Law for their said Prolocutor; who having modestly
disabled himself, was notwithstanding allowed by the House, and thereupon
placed by two of the most eminent Personages thereof in the Chair.

Concerning the former Prorogation or this latter days Passages upon the
Parliament began, there is not any one word in the Original Journal Book of the
House of Commons, which (as it seems) happened through the great negligence
of Mr Fulk Onslow at this time Clerk of the said House: For in the first page
of the same Journal in the upper part thereof, it is thus written, viz. Martis
4to Februarii, Anno Reginae Eliz. 31o 1588. and after it the whole leaf is left
a blank, with intention doubtless at first that the manner of the beginning of
this Parliament on the said day, together with the choice of the foresaid
Speaker, should have been inserted at large.

It should seem also that according to her Majesty's continuance of the
Parliament on the foresaid Tuesday the 4th day of February unto two of the
Clock in the Afternoon of the Thursday following being the 6th day of the same
Month, the House of Commons sat not this present Wednesday, being the 5th day
thereof; and the rather, because their Speaker was not yet presented: which is
gathered, as the Passages also of the two former days are transcribed, out of
the Original Journal Book of the Upper House; that so by that means this
present Journal might remain perfect.

On Thursday the 6th day of February the Knights, Citizens and Burgesses of the
House of Commons having notice about two of the Clock in the Afternoon, that
her Majesty and the Lords Spiritual and Temporal were already come unto, and
had taken their several places in the Upper House, expecting their attendance,
they repaired thither with George Snagg Sergeant at Law their Speaker or
Prolocutor Elect, and presented him unto her Majesty; who notwithstanding his
humble disablings and excuses of himself, did by the Mouth of the Lord
Chancellor signify her allowance of him: and afterward also did in like
manner Answer to his Petitions of course made in the name of the House of
Commons for freedom of Access, liberty of Speech, and freedom from Arrests and
Suits; and lastly in his own name for Pardon for himself; That the said House
of Commons and himself should enjoy and use all such Privileges and Freedoms
as had in the like case been enjoyed by any others in the times of her
Majesty's most Noble Progenitors. Whereupon the said Knights, Citizens and
Burgesses, with their Speaker, departed to their own House.

Nota, That there is no mention made of the manner of the Presentment of the
Speaker before mentioned in the Original Journal Book of the House of Commons,
but only in the upper part of the second leaf thereof is written in one line,
Mr Sergeant Snagg Mr Speaker presented, and immediately under it in another
line do follow these words, viz. Jovis 6o die Februarii 1588. and after it the
whole page is left a blank, except a few lines in the bottom of it, which
contain the Bill usually read after the Knights, Citizens and Burgesses of the
said House of Commons return to their own House with their Speaker newly
admitted upon their Presentment of him. Which said blank page was doubtless
left (as those others before mentioned) to the intent and end at the first to
have inserted therein the whole form and manner of the said Presentment and
Admission.

The foresaid Bill, finally, read at this time upon the return of the Speaker
and the rest from the Upper House, is Entered in the said Journal Book in manner
and form following, viz.

And then was read a Bill for reformation of deceitful practices used in
reversal of Fines at the Common Law, the first reading.

On Friday the 7th day of February, upon a Motion made unto this House (which
had likewise been made yesterday touching matters of the privilege of this
House, it is Ordered that Mr Comptroller, Sir William Moor, Mr Lieutenant of
the Tower, Sir George Barnes, Mr Recorder of London, Mr Robert Wroth, Mr Thomas
Cromwell, Mr Morris, Mr Humfry Conisbie and Mr Francis Alford and every of
them shall examine such matters of privilege as shall happen in this present
Session of Parliament to come in question, and to make reports thereof unto
this House, for the further order and resolution of this House and every of the
same cases, as shall appertain.

The Bill touching Informers and Informations upon penal Statutes was read the
first time.

Upon report this day made by John Butler Esquire one of the Burgesses for the
Borough of Malden in the County of Essex, that William Vernon Gentleman also
returned the other Burgess for the same, is sick, and not able to give his
attendance in the service of this House, and likewise willing and desirous that
another be chosen to serve in his place; It is Ordered that a Warrant from this
House be made unto the Clerk of the Crown for sending forth a new Writ for
choosing another Burgess in the lieu and stead of the said William Vernon.

Upon the like Motion also by Hugh Hare Gentleman, one of the Burgesses for the
Borough of Halesmeer in the County of Surrie, made on the behalf of Nicholas
Hare Esquire, returned one of the Burgesses for the Borough of Horsham in the
County of Sussex; It is Ordered that a like Warrant be made for the returning
of another Burgess for the said Borough of Horsham, in the lieu and stead of
the said Nicholas Hare.

This day the House was called, and all those that did then sit in the House
and were present at the calling of the same, did thereupon severally Answer to
their names, and departed out of the House as they were called.

Amongst whom one Master Gerrard Esquire being returned into this House one of
the Knights for the County of Lancaster, and also for the County of Stafford,
made his choice to appear and stand for the said County of Stafford; and
thereupon it was Ordered that a Warrant of this House should be directed to the
Clerk of the Crown for her Majesty's Writ to choose a new Knight for the said
County of Lancaster in the lieu and stead of the said Mr Gerrard.

On Saturday the 8th day of February the Bill to avoid the abuses grown by
forestalling, Engrossing and Regrating was read the first time.

Upon a motion this day made by Sir Edward Hobby touching the sundry abuses of
returning the Knights and Burgesses into this House this present Session of
Parliament, as in some not returned at all, some others returned erroneously,
and for some places for which none has been returned heretofore, and some
returned superfluously, as two for one place and one for two places, and other
corrupt courses in sundry of the Returns, to the great prejudice both of the
liberties and also of the service of this House; It is ordered that it be
committed unto Sir William Moore, Sir Edward Hobby, Mr Edward Dyer, Mr
Cromwell, Mr Recorder of London, Mr Alford, Mr Francis Hastings, Sir Edward
Dymock, Mr Robert Markham, Mr Lieutenant of the Tower, Mr Rowland Watson Clerk
of the Crown, and that he do attend as well with the Returns of the Sheriffs as
with his own Book of the same Returns certified by him into this House, and to
meet in the Exchequer Chamber upon Monday next at three of the Clock in the
Afternoon.

And upon a further motion made by Mr Humphrey Conisby for due consideration to
be had that the Members of this House may give their better attendance in this
House hereafter than has been of late accustomed, This matter is also referred
to the said former Committees, and the said Mr Conisby added unto them.

The Bill touching Informers and Informations upon Penal Statutes was read the
second time, and committed unto all the Privy Council of this House, Mr
Recorder, Sir William Moore, Mr Grafton and others who were appointed to meet
in the Exchequer Chamber upon Tuesday next at two of the Clock in the Afternoon.

On Monday the 10th day of February the Bill touching the benefit of Clergy in
some cases of Offenders, was upon the second reading committed unto Mr
Cromwell, Mr Secretary Wolley and others, who were appointed to meet in the
Star Chamber upon Wednesday next at two of the Clock in the Afternoon.

Upon a motion this day made by Mr Treasurer, that Mr Robert Knowles Esquire
being returned into this House both Knight for the County of Brecknock and also
one of the Burgesses for the Town of Reading, and has made his choice to
appear as Knight of the said County of Brecknock; It is ordered that a Warrant
from this House be directed to the Clerk of the Crown for another Writ to
choose another Burgess for the said Town of Reading, in the lieu and stead of
the said Robert Knowles.

Upon motions also made for some Burgesses returned into this Session and which
are sick and desirous to have others to serve in their places to be returned
upon new Writs, partly by Certificate of the same parties under their hands,
and partly by report of some of the Members of this House; It is ordered after
sundry arguments, that this Case be considered of by the foresaid Committees
this Afternoon (whose names see before on Friday the 7th day of this instant
February) and Sir Francis Godolphin, Sir Henry Cobham, Mr Francis Bacon, Mr
Francis Moore and Mr Fane are now added unto them.

A Bill that Lands Intailed and Copyhold Lands may be liable to the payment of
debts was read the first time, and after sundry Arguments rejected upon the
question.

On Tuesday the 11th day of February a Bill touching the pursuit of Hue and Cry
was read the first time.

Mr Treasurer in the name of himself and of the residue of the Committees
(whose names see before on Friday the 7th day of this instant February) for
examination of the Returns and attendance of the Members of this House, does
show, that they met yesterday in the Afternoon, and having conferred together
about those matters, were of opinion that this House is to take notice of all
Returns only in such sort as the same shall be certified unto this House by the
Clerk of the Crown in the Chancery and not otherwise, without any intermedling
at all with any business of the Sheriffs or of any others in making the
Election of any such Member to be Knight, Citizen, Burgess or Baron; but yet
that this House has nevertheless authority in cases where no Return is made at
all, to direct their Warrant under the hand of Mr Speaker unto the said Clerk
of the Crown Office for her Majesty's Writ to go forth for choosing and
returning any Knight, Citizen, Burgess or Baron into this House in every such
Case where any such shall not before happen to be returned at all. And further,
that upon Conference they do find, that no new Knight, Citizen, Burgess or
Baron has been chosen in the place of another being sick, unless the sickness
be irrecoverable in all likelihood, as Frensy or such like. And moreover where
in the Return of the Burgesses for the Borough of Appleby in the County of
Westmerland it appears, that in the Indenture returned being razed in the
sentence of Election, Laurence Lister and Thomas Musgrave are named Burgesses,
and in the sentence for giving them authority being likewise razed, Robert
Warcop and Anthony Felton are named with the former hand, they do think it
convenient upon the insufficiency and uncertainty thereof that a new Writ be
granted for choosing of new Burgesses for the said Borough, and the said former
Return not yet received of Record to be utterly disallowed. Which opinion of
the said Committees in every behalf was well liked of by this House. And that
as concerning better attendance to be given hereafter by the Members of this
House for the service of the same House, they think it meet to be redressed by
way of Fines or Amerciaments to be inflicted upon such the Members of this
House as upon the calling of the House or otherwise shall be found to make such
default, or to be much or long absent from the service of this House without
License or some reasonable cause to be showed for the same. Which course was
also well liked and allowed of by this said House.

And after this report made by Mr. Treasurer, Mr Speaker putting the House in
remembrance of some persons already in this present Session allowed by this
House to be returned into the place of some others sick, and the Warrants
already gone out for the same being repugnant directly to one part of the said
report now allowed and liked of by this House, does desire to know the further
resolution of this House touching those persons so now to be newly returned
upon the said Warrants. And after some Speeches thereof had not thoroughly
digested, Mr. Chancellor of the Exchequer stood up, and offering to speak of
some great matter (but yet without prejudice to the due consideration of the
things then in disputation) as very necessary, but yet to be referred to
another time, puts the House in mind of the prosperous and quiet state of
this Realm under her Majesty's most happy and Blessed Government by the space
now of thirty years.

But what should here follow is very negligently omitted, especially there
being almost three entire blank pages left for the inserting of it: but it may
probably be conjectured that the chief end and scope of his Speech was, as to
set forth the Excellency and Justice of her Majestres Government, so also to
demonstrate the great Malice and Cruelty of the King of Spain, backed and
assisted by so many Potent Allies; and that therefore it would be most
necessary that some timely consultation be had for speedy preparation to be
made, whereby to resist all his future attempts. And that lastly he did
thereupon move the House to think of some supply to be given to her Majesty
both in respect of her late great Charges, and also for the better enabling her
to provide for the future safety of her Highness Dominions. And that the latter
part of the foresaid Speech of Sir Walter Mildmay Chancellor of the Exchequer
was touching some Aid to be given to her Majesty, it is most probable, in
respect that the next business which is set down to have followed at the end of
his said Speech, is the appointing of these Committees following, to consider
of a Bill of Subsidy to be framed for her Majesty's Aid, viz. All the Privy
Council being of the House, the first Knight returned for every Shire, and in
the absence of the first the second, Mr Cromwell, Sir Edward Dyer, Mr Morris,
Mr Beal, Mr Ancon, Mr. Recorder of London, Mr. Skinner, Mr. Doctor Lewin, Mr.
William James, Mr. Fairfax, Mr. Thomas Liefield, Mr. Arthur Throckmorton, Mr.
Fleming, Mr. Thomas Hamman, Mr. Robinson, Mr. Michaell Sands, Mr. Rugg, Mr.
Tasborough, Mr. George Moor, Mr. Richard Brown, Mr. York, Mr. Walter Jones, Mr.
Cope, Mr. Alford, Mr. Grimston, Mr. Finns, Mr. Bacon, Sir Henry Gray. Mr.
Owtred, Mr. Aldersey, Mr. Hutton, Mr. Humphrey Conisbie, Mr. Robert Sackvile,
Mr. John Stubbs, Mr. William Brunker, Mr. Tanfield, Mr. Fanshaw, Mr. Vivian,
Mr. Davers, Mr. Sands and Mr. Weeks, who were appointed to meet this Afternoon
at three of the Clock in the Exchequer Chamber. Vide Febr. 17.

The Committees touching Informers, (whose names see on Saturday the 8th day of
this instant February foregoing) are deferred to Friday next in the Afternoon,
which had been appointed on the foresaid Saturday to have met this Afternoon.

Mr Speaker moved the House in the behalf of (Mr Fulk Onslow) the Clerk of the
same, that having of late been long sick and yet somewhat recovered, albeit but
weak still and sickly, and enjoying his Office by Letters Patents of the Grant
of her Majesty to exercise the same by himself and his sufficient Deputy or
Deputies, it might please this House in his absence (if he shall happen in
regard of his health and necessary ease sometimes to withdraw himself from the
exercise of his Office in this House in his own person) to accept therein the
attendance and service of such of his own Clerks or Servants, as before his
intermedling therein within this House shall first have taken the Oath usually
ministered unto all the Members of this House. And thereupon it was so granted
and assented unto by this whole House accordingly.

On Wednesday the 12th day of February, Two Bills of no great moment had each
of them their first reading; of which the first was the Bill touching
Orford-Haven in the County of Suffolk.

Upon a Motion made unto this House by Mr Puleston Esquire returned into this
House Knight for the County of Flynt, that William Aylmer Esquire did since the
beginning of this Session of Parliament cause a Subpoena to be served upon him
out of the Court of Star Chamber, to the prejudice of the Liberties and
Privilege of this House, to Answer unto a Bill there containing almost forty
sheets of paper, and so praying the Order of this House, offers forth a
Precedent of this House under the hand of the Clerk of this House heretofore in
a like Case between one Mr Alban Stepneth a Member of this House, and Mr
Anthony Kirle Gent. (which said Case was discussed in the Parliament de Anno 27
Reginae Eliz. on Wednesday the 10th day, and on Thursday the 11th day of
February) which Precedent being read by the Clerk, it was after some Speeches
resolved, that the said Mr Aylmer should be called into this House by the
Sergeant to Answer the said matter. Whereupon the said Mr. Aylmer being brought
to the Bar, Mr Speaker in the name of this House charged him with the said
contempt, and required his Answer thereunto; who in all reverent and humble
sort showed, that the said Bill whereupon the said Subpoena was awarded, did
concern a wrong not only unto her Majesty, but also unto this honorable House,
in an indirect course of proceeding in the Election of the Knights for the
County of Denbigh into this present Parliament, procured by the said Mr
Puleston; and so intimating, that the said Bill and serving of the said
Subpoena did tend to the maintenance (he well hoped) of the Liberties and
Privileges of this House, he was sequestered the House, and the said Mr.
Puleston likewise; and then after some further Speeches had, it was, (partly
withal for the good opinion that many Members of this House did conceive of the
said Mr. Aylmer, being oftntimes heretofore a Member of this House, and an
honest and grave Gentleman,) resolved, that the said Cause with the
circumstances thereof comprehended in the said Bill should be considered of by
some Committees of this House, and so afterward report to be made of the same
accordingly: And that the said Mr. Aylmer should then give his attendance upon
the said Committees, and presently withal be left to his own liberty, free from
any Custody or restraint of the Sergeant of this House, and shall also be
charged by Mr Speaker in the name of this whole House to surcease his said Suit
and proceeding against the said Mr. Puleston in the mean time. And thereupon
Mr. Vice-chamberlain, Mr. Recorder of London, Sir William Moor, Sir Edward
Hobby, Mr. Cromwell, Sir Edward Dymock, Mr. Wroth, Mr. Francis Bacon, Mr.
Grymston, Mr. Conisby, Mr. Morgan, Mr. Morris, Mr. Cook and Mr. Harris were
nominated for that purpose, and appointed to meet upon Saturday next at two of
the Clock in the Afternoon. And then the said Mr. Aylmer being brought in again
to the Bar, Mr. Speaker signified unto him the said Order of this House in that
behalf, discharging him from the Custody of the said Sergeant, and requiring
him to give his attendance upon the said Committees at the said time and place
accordingly, and also to forbear any further to proceed in the mean time
against the said Mr. Puleston. Whereunto he willingly assented.

Two Bills of no great moment had each of them one reading; of which the second
being the Bill to avoid the abuses grown in forestalling, regrating and
engrossing, was read the second time; and after many Speeches and Arguments had
upon the same, was committed unto Sir Valentine Dale Master of the Requests,
Mr. Recorder of London, Sir Edward Dymock and others, who were appointed to
meet upon Monday next in the Afternoon at two of the Clock in the Star Chamber.

The Committees in the Bill touching Clergy in some Cases of offenders (whose
names see on Monday the 10th day of this instant February foregoing appointed
to meet that Afternoon) is deferred until Tuesday next in the Afternoon at the
former House and place.

On Thursday the 13th day of February, Three Bills of no great moment had each
of them one reading; of which the last being the Bill to reform disorders of
common inns and other Victualling Houses, was read the second time, and after
many Speeches and Arguments committed unto Sir Valentine Dale Master of the
Requests, Mr. Francis Hastings, Mr. Cook and others, who were appointed to meet
on Wednesday next at two of the Clock in the Afternoon in Serjeants-Inn Hall in
Chancery Lane.

The Bill touching Orford-Haven was read the second time, and after some
Speeches committed unto Mr. Arthur Hopton, Mr. Anthony Wingfeild, Mr. Recorder,
Mr. Grymston, Mr. Robinson and others, who were appointed to meet upon this day
se'night at two of the Clock in the Afternoon in the Exchequer Chamber.

On Friday the 14th day of February, Four Bills of no great moment had each of
them one reading; of which the second being a Bill touching Exactions upon the
Subjects of this Realm by the Officers of the Exchequer was read the first
time; which said Bill was brought into the House by Sir Edward Hobby, who
alleged that the said Exactions did nothing tend to any further profit or
commodity of her Majesty.

The meeting of the Committees in the Bill touching Informers (whose names see
on Saturday the 8th day of this instant February foregoing) is again deferred
(as it had been before on Tuesday the 11th day of the foresaid February last
past) till to Morrow in the Afternoon.

Mr. John Hare makes a Motion unto this House for consideration to be had for
meeting with the disorders of Purveyors, and offers a Bill unto this House
for that purpose.

Two Bills also of no great moment had each of them one reading; of which the
second being the Bill for abridging of Proclamations upon Fines to be levied,
was upon the second reading committed unto Mr. Morice, Mr. Broughton, Sir Henry
Knivet and others, who were appointed to meet at Serjeants-Inn Hall in
Fleetstreet, upon Tuesday next at two of the Clock in the Afternoon.

The Bill touching Orford-Haven (committed yesterday) was this day delivered to
Mr. Arthur Hopton one of the Committees in the same Bill.

On Saturday the 15th day of February, Sir Edward Hobby moved (he said) upon
good cause, that Mr. Speaker do give admonition unto this whole House, that
Speeches used in this House by the Members of the same be not any of them made
or used as Table talk, or in any wise delivered in notes of writing to any
person or persons whatsoever not being Members of this House, as of late (is
thought) has been done in this present Session: And thereupon by consent of
this House admonition was given by Mr. Speaker in that behalf accordingly,
showing unto them that they are the Common Council of the Realm.

A Bill to reform disorders in Purveyers was read the first time. Mr.
Treasurer, Mr. Cradock, Sir William Moor, Mr. Harris, Sir Henry Knyvet, Mr.
Tasborough, Mr. Palmer, Mr. Francis Bacon, Mr. Cromwell, Sir Edward Dymock, Mr.
Vice-Chamberlain and Mr. George Moor did speak to the Bill; and afterward it
was Ordered upon the question, that the said Bill should be read again this
present day for the second reading. Whereupon the same was then presently read
again, and upon the question committed unto all the Privy Council being of this
House, all those that have spoken to the Bill, Mr Edward Dyer, Mr Robert Wroth,
Sir Henry Gray, Mr Hare and others, who were appointed to meet in this House
upon Monday next at two of the Clock in the Afternoon: and the same time and
place is also appointed for the Committees for Informers, and that the Sergeant
of this House do in the mean time repair to the Clerk of the Higher House for
the Bill that passed this House this last Parliament touching Purveyers, and
was then sent up to the Lords or at least for a Copy of the same Bill, to the
end the said Committees may consider of the same in the proceeding of this Bill
as shall be thought convenient. And it is also resolved, that such Officers of
her Majesty's Honorable Household and Court of Green Cloth as shall please to
be at the said Committee, may be heard and conferred with touching the purport
of the said Bill at their good pleasures. Vide. 27. Febr. postea.

On Monday the 17th day of February the Bill touching the multiplicity of Suits
and the excessive number of Attorneys, was upon the second reading committed
unto the Knights for the Counties of Norfolk and Suffolk, Mr Recorder of
London, Mr Cromwell and others, who were appointed to meet on Wednesday next at
two of the Clock in the Afternoon in Serjeants-Inn Hall in Chancery Lane.

Sir Edwad Hobby showed with his great grief that since the last sitting of
this House he has been of some great personage (being no member of this House)
very sharply rebuked for some his Speeches delivered in this House by him upon
Friday last, in the setting forth the Bill for reformation of abuses in some
Officers of the Court of Exchequer, and that the same his Speeches have been by
some (he thinks of this House) delivered unto the said great personage very
untruly, as tending unto all the Officers of the same Court; and so showing
other the particulars as well of his own said former Speeches as of the said
untrue report and sinister construction of the same somewhat at large, does in
the end refer himself therein to the testimony of this whole House: And with
all praying the good consideration of this House toward him in this his honest
and just excuse, as in like former cases has been erst accustomed toward
other Members of this House, and especially in regard of the maintenance and
preservation of the ancient Liberties of the same, desired, that by some of
this House the said great personage may be satisfied of the truth of the case,
and also moved to show the name of the reporter of the said untrue Speech; and
to that end cites unto them two like Precedents of this House, the one in the
time of King Edward the 6th and the other of the Queens Majesty that now is.
And shows further that he thinks his said Speech by him first delivered in
this House was discovered since Mr Speaker his late admonition generally given
to this whole House against the uttering of the secrets of this House either in
Table-talk or Notes in Writing, and not before. And so concluding gives due
commendation to the said Bill, and prays another reading thereof presently,
and also all good and speedy course both in the Commitment and other pastages
of the same. Vide Febr. 27. postea.

Mr Chancellor of the Exchequer shows first, that he offers not to speak to
any prejudice of the said motion, but putting the House in remembrance of their
charge given unto him and others for Conference to be had touching some
convenient supply of Treasure to be had and levied for the necessary defense of
her Majesty and this Realm, now presently in danger of such mighty and great
enemies, as erst of late has been at large delivered unto this House by some
Members of the same, declared unto them, that he and the greater part of the
residue of the Committees therein, though diverse of them did not give that
attendance therein which so great and weighty a cause does require, have met
and had Conference together about the same four several times, and that at the
last and fourth time of their said conference they resolved upon such an
extraordinary proportion of provision as they thought the present extraordinary
occasion of necessity does require, and that they did set the same down in
writing, which he also moved might be read unto them, to the end that if it
might upon the reading thereof stand with their good liking to allow of it and
give their assents unto it, Mr Speaker might then deliver it to her Majesty's
learned Council to have the same framed into the form of a Bill to be proceeded
in and past in this House; and showed further, that as the grant of this
Contribution is greater than has been heretofore for the most part ordinarily
used to be granted (the present necessity so requiring it) so thinking good
amongst them it should not hereafter be an occasion of a Precedent to posterity
for the like (without like cause) diverse of them were of opinion, that some
meet words to such effect might be inserted in the Preamble of the Bill. And
showed further, that one of the Committees, to wit Mr Francis Bacon, had for
that purpose set down a Note in Writing, which he said (if it pleased them)
they might also hear read, and afterward (if they so thought good) might also
be delivered to her Majesty's said learned Council likewise with the said other
note; and that withal the said Mr Bacon might repair to her Majesty's said
learned Council for the further proceeding therein with them, if this House
should so think good. Whereupon the House liking well of this motion, both the
said Notes in writing were read by the Clerk and afterward agreed by the whole
House, that the same Notes should be forthwith delivered by Mr Speaker to her
Majesty's said learned Council accordingly, and the said Mr Bacon also to
repair unto them.

Sir Henry Knyvet enters into Speech of some recital of the said grief of the
said Sir Edward Hobby, and well liking and allowing of due consideration to be
had thereof by this House, recites very briefly the whole substance in effect
both of the said first Speech of the said Sir Edward Hobby, and also of his
said late Motion, and giving due commendation of the same his first Speech and
also of his said protestation of excuse, urges the present reading and
proceeding of the said Bill withal speed. Whereupon after sundry other Speeches
tending likewise to the prosecution of the said Bill to Commitment, it was upon
the question Ordered that the same Bill should be presently read accordingly.

The Bill Quo titulo ingressus est was read the second time, and after sundry
Speeches and Motions deferred to further Argument to be had upon the same Bill
again to Morrow.

The Bill touching Informers and Forestallers were delivered to Mr. Cromwell
one of the Committees.

And also the report of the Committees in the cause between Mr. Puleston and
Mr. Aylmer upon a Motion made by Mr. Nicholas Hare is likewise deferred until
then, for lack of convenient time for the same now. Vide concerning this matter
on Wednesday the 12th day of this instant February foregoing.

On Tuesday the 18th day of February, Four Bills of no great moment had each of
them their first reading; of which the last was the Bill for the relief of
Thomas Haselrigge Esquire.

Sir Edward Dymock, Mr. Clark and Mr. Peter Osburn arguing to the Bill of Quo
titulo (read the second time in the latter part of the day foregoing) do each
of them hold Sir Edward Hobby free and thereby excused of any such Speeches
touching the higher Officers of the Exchequer, as he had been charged with and
rebuked for. And the whole residue of their Arguments show no misliking at all
of his simile's or words used in the setting forth of the said Bill. Whereupon
after sundry other Disputations of other Members of this House had upon the
said Bill, it was at last upon the question committed unto Mr. Chancellor of
the Exchequer, Sir John Parrot, Mr. George Moor, Mr. Sutton, Sir Edward Dymock
and others, who were appointed to meet to Morrow at two of the Clock in the
Afternoon in the Exchequer Chamber.

Mr. Sergeant Shuttleworth and Mr. Doctor Awberry do bring from the Lords a
Bill Entitled An Act providing remedy against discontinuances in Writs of
Error in the Exchequer and Kings Bench.

Mr. Speaker noting the great disorder in this House by some that standing up
and offering to speak sometimes three or four together, and persisting still
without offering to give place one of them to another, knowing well
nevertheless which of themselves did first stand up, and so by the Order of
this House ought to be first heard, but yet expecting by Acclamation of the
residue of the House growing for the most part to a great confused noise and
sound of senceless words, do stand still continuing their offer to speak first,
and do also many times in their Motions and Arguments utter very sharp and
bitter Speeches, sometimes rather particularly offensive than necessarily with
such great vehemence delivered, puts them in remembrance, that every Member
of this House is a Judge of this Court, being the highest Court of all other
Courts, and the great Council also of this Realm, and so moves them in regard
thereof, that as in all other Courts, being each of them inferior to this high
Court, such confused courses either of contention, acclamations, or reciprocal
bitter and sharp Speeches, terms or words are not any way either used or
permitted amongst the Judges of the said Inferior Courts, or the Counselors
admitted in the same Courts, so they would hereafter forbear to attempt the
like disorders, as the honor and gravity of this House justly requires.

Upon a Motion made by Mr. Vice-Chamberlain, that the Committees in the Bill
for Purveyors (appointed on Saturday the 15th day of this instant February
foregoing) do meet again this Afternoon at three of the Clock; And also that
the report to be made by him touching the dealing of the Committees in the
cause between Mr. Puleston and Mr. Aylmer be deferred till to Morrow in the
Afternoon.

On Wednesday the 19th day of February, Mr. Sergeant Walmesly one of the
Committees in the Bill touching the abridging of Proclamations (appointed on
Wednesday the 12th day of this instant February foregoing) upon Fines at the
Common Law, shows, that they have met and conferred upon the said Bill, and
having in some parts amended the same, offer another Bill containing the same
Amendments.

Mr. Vice-Chamberlain one of the Committees in the Cause between Mr. Puleston
and Mr. Aylmer, shows, that he and others of the Committees have had
Conference together and heard both Parties, and the Council also of the said
Mr. Aylmer at large, and so reciting amongst many of the circumstances
delivered unto them touching the said matter, some of the causes moving the
said Mr. Aylmer to cause the said Mr. Puleston to be served with a Subpoena to
appear in the Star Chamber, does in the end show, that he and the residue of
the said Committees were of opinion, that the said Mr. Aylmer had committed a
contempt unto this House in prejudice of the Liberties and Privileges of the
same House, which as for his part he wished should not escape unpunished in
some sort, so giving very good commendations of the said Mr Aylmer for his
humble and dutiful behavior before the said Committees in the whole course of
his dealing with them in the said cause, and showing withal that he had to his
great charge attended now a long time upon the said Committees for their report
to this House in the said matter, and had withal ignorantly and yet not without
the privity and advice of some learned in the Laws proceeded to the causing of
the serving of the said Subpoena, as he was informed, without offense to this
House or Liberties of the same, he might (acknowledging his fault and upon his
humble submission to be made to this House, and craving pardon for his said
contempt) be set at liberty and discharged paying the Sergeants Fees of this
House. And afterward upon sundry other Speeches and Arguments (the whole House
agreeing and resolving directly that the said Mr Aylmer had committed the said
contempt) and some also moving to inflict some other further punishment upon
him (over and besides such his submission to be so made) that he might not only
bear the Charges of the said Mr. Puleston sustained touching the said matter of
contempt, but also surcease any further proceeding at all against the said Mr
Puleston by reason of serving the said Subpoena, but should (if he would) take
out another Subpoena after this Session of Parliament ended against the said
Mr. Puleston the next Term; and some others again being of a contrary opinion,
moved, that the said Mr Aylmer should neither pay the said Mr. Puleston his
Charges, nor yet surcease his proceeding against him upon the said Subpoena
already served, because the said Mr. Puleston had already voluntarily without
the privity of this House, and also since the time of his grief and complaint
unto this House exhibited, put in his Answer to the Bill in the said Court of
Star Chamber against him; and the said Answer also being offered forth unto
this House and read by the Clerk, it appeared manifestly, that the said Mr.
Puleston had voluntarily put in his said Answer to the said Bill, and so was at
Issue, in that he pleaded to the said Bill Not guilty; It was upon the question
resolved and Ordered by this House, that Mr Aylmer should not only be at his
liberty to proceed in his said Suit without offense to this House, but should
also upon his humble submission to be made to this House be discharged of his
said contempt paying his Fees to the Sergeant of this House.

And then it was thought good the said Mr Aylmer might be called in and heard
what he could say for himself in the matter; and (the said Mr Puleston being
sequestered) he was brought presently to the Bar, and charged by Mr Speaker with
the said contempt; who humbly showed, that if it were a contempt, it was done
by him simply and ignorantly and no way arrogantly, and without all peril of
contempt to this House as his Council had informed him, and therefore humbly
submitting himself craved their pardon; and thereupon being sequestered the
House again, it was after sundry other Speeches upon another question resolved,
that the said Mr Aylmer should likewise upon his said humble submission be
discharged of his said contempt, paying only the Sergeants Fees. Which done,
the said Mr Aylmer was brought in again by the Sergeant, and Mr Speaker
pronouncing unto him the said Judgment of this House, both for his License to
prosecute his said Suit in the Star Chamber, and also for his liberty and
discharge of the said contempt, the said Mr Aylmer yielding unto this
honorable House his most humble thanks, departed and went his way. Vide
concerning this business upon Wednesday the 12th day, and on Monday the 17th
day of this instant February foregoing.

Mr Vice Chamberlain showed, that he and others the Committees in the Bill
concerning Purveyors have met, and also have had Conference together with some
of her Majesty's Officers of the Green-Cloth, and according to the Commission
of this House. And surther, that they have in some parts amended the said Bill,
and also added a Proviso thereunto such as they think fit both for her
Majesty's Service, and also for the better passage of the Bill and relief of
the Subject. And prays the same Amendments and Proviso may be read. Which
said Amendments and Proviso were thereupon twice read accordingly. Which done,
there followed sundry Speeches upon the same Amendments and Proviso. And so for
that time it was left at large without any further course or question to
engrossing or any thing else, the time being far spent and the House ready to
rise.

The Bill touching Quo titulo ingressus est was delivered to Sir Edward Hobby
one of the Committees in the same. The Bill concerning common Inns and
Victualling-Houses was delivered to Mr. Prat one of the Committees in the same
Bill. And the Bill touching multiplicity of Suits and the excessive number of
Attorneys was delivered to Mr. Heydon one of the Committees in the same Bill.

On Thursday the 20th day of February, Three Bills of no great moment had each
of them one reading; of which the last being the Bill for relief of Thomas
Haselrigg Esquire, was upon the second reading committed unto Sir Richard
Knightley, Sir Henry Knyvet, Mr. Recorder of London and others, who were
appointed to meet upon Monday next at two of the Clock in the Afternoon in the
Star Chamber.

The Committee in the Bill touching Informers and Informations is deferred unto
Saturday next at two of the Clock in the Afternoon at the former place of
meeting.

Mr. Vice-Chamberlain one of the Committees in the Bill touching Informers and
Informations upon penal Statutes shows, that he and such other of the
Committees as were met together yesterday in the Afternoon, had conferred
together upon the same Bill, and then had amended it in some parts thereof, as
they upon good considerations in their own conceits thought convenient. And so
offering the said Bill in such sort amended, delivered in the same to be
further dealt in by this House as this House should think good. And withal
moved further, for avoiding of confusion hereafter, and for a more orderly and
speedy proceeding of this House in the making of Laws, that they would from
henceforth in their Commitments use to name a fewer number than they have
hitherto in this Session of Parliament for the most part used to do. And that
those so to be named should give better Attendance in the same Commitment than
hitherto they have done this Session. And further, that at each meeting of the
same Committees at the times and places appointed for the same, the names of
all the said such Committees should then be first read, and if the more part of
them, or at least the one half of them shall be present, then the more part or
one half of them to proceed to Conference accordingly or else not. Which Motion
was well liked of and allowed.

Sir John Parrot one of the Committees in the Bill of Quo titulo ingressus est,
shows, that by reason of the great time spent yesterday in the Commitment of
the Bill touching Informers and Informations upon penal Statutes, he and the
residue of the said Committees in this Bill could not end their Conference in
the same; And therefore moved another meeting again about the same this
Afternoon; and that her Majesty's learned Council might also be there with
them. Whereupon for that it was then Answered by Mr. Vice-Chamberlain, that her
Highness said learned Council could not be there this Afternoon, but were (he
well knew) to be elsewhere employed all the same whole Afternoon; It was
resolved that the said Committees should nevertheless then meet together, and
proceed in the said Conference as much as they could in the mean time, until a
further time might be afterward taken for her Majesty's said learned Council
to be with them.

On Friday the 21th day of February, the Bill for the true payment of the Debts
of Thomas Hanford, was upon the second reading committed unto Mr. Comptroller,
Sir Henry Knyvet, Mr. Alford, Mr. Hare, Mr. Graston and Mr. Francis Moor, who
were appointed to meet to Morrow Morning at seven of the Clock in the Committee
Chamber of this House; and then Mr. Hanford to attend the said Committees: and
also the Bill that passed in the last Parliament from this House to the Lords,
to be also delivered to the said Committees; both which Bills were then
delivered to Mr. Comptroller.

Upon a Motion made by Mr. John Stubs it is Ordered, that Thomas Drury may with
his free liberty by the privilege of this House attend the Committees in the
Bill for the relief of Thomas Haselrigg Esquire, exhibited into this House
against him, and also to prosecute in the same cause without any molestation or
arrest during the pleasure of this House. Vide March 7. March 18, and Mar. 19.
following, and Mar. 21.

Upon a Motion made by Mr. Harris, that diverse Members of this House having
Writs of nisi prius brought against them to be tried at the Assizes in sundry
places of this Realm to be holden and kept in the Circuits of this present
Vacation, and that Writs of Supersedeas might be awarded in those Cases in
respect of the privilege of this House due and appertaining to the Members of
the same; It is agreed, that those of this House which shall have occasion to
require such benefit of privilege in that behalf, may repair unto Mr. Speaker
to declare unto him the state of their Cases, and that he upon his discretion
(if the Cases shall so require) may direct the Warrant of this House to the
Lord Chancellor of England for the awarding of such Writs of Supersedeas
accordingly.

Upon a Motion made by this House that..... Saintpole Esquire, one of the
Knights in this present Parliament for the County of Lincoln, being also
Sheriff of the said County of Lincoln at this present time, might have License
by this House to depart into the Country about the attendance of his said
Office of Sheriffwick; It was granted and agreed that he might so do
accordingly.

Nota, That by this it appears to be a thing no ways strange or in it self
incompetible for a Sheriff of any Shire to be a Member of the House of Commons,
and there to perform the service of that House: And that the License given to
such at any time to depart, is no other than is at any time vouchsafed of
course to the Members of that House upon any urgent occasions by them alleged
requiring their absence for some time, be it longer or shorter, of which also
there is a remarkable Precedent in the Journal of the House of Commons de Anno
27 Reginae Eliz. upon Friday the 4th of December, and another Precedent also in
the same Parliament upon Tuesday the 23th day of February de anno isto
praedicto 27 Reginae Eliz. yet was there a Precedent in this very Case
otherwise adjudged by the House after much dispute upon Wednesday the 4th day
of November in the Parliament de anno 43, and 44 Reginae Eliz. Anno Domini
1601. Where Sir Andrew Nowell being Sheriff of the County of Rutland, was
afterward Elected one of the Knights for the same, and so compelled to return
himself; which perhaps also may make the difference in the Case, and that where
any man is first Elected a Member of the House of Commons and afterward made
Sheriff of some County, his first Election stands good. Vide etiam Dec. 2. de
anno isto 43.

The Proviso to the Bill concerning Purveyors was twice read, and in the Bill
these words [or within] were interlined in one place of the said Amendments in
the said Bill, and inserted in the Bill by Order of this House, which were also
twice read, and so the Bill and Proviso Ordered upon the question to be
engrossed.

The Amendments in the Bill touching Informers were twice read, and upon the
question Ordered to be engrossed.

Four Bills also of no great moment had each of them one reading; of which the
last being the Bill for repealing of certain Statutes was read the second time,
and upon the question committed unto Mr. Cromwell, Mr. Broughton, Mr. Edward
Dyer, Mr Grafton and others, who were appointed to meet upon Tuesday next at
Serjeants-Inn Hall in Chancery Lane at two of the Clock in the Afternoon.

The Committee in the Bill touching Orford-Haven (who were appointed on
Thursday the 13th day of this instant February foregoing) is deferred till to
morrow in the Afternoon at two of the Clock in the place formerly appointed.

The Commitment in the Bill against multiplicity of Suits and the excessive
number of Attorneys (who were appointed on Monday the 17th day of this instant
February foregoing) is appointed to be dealt in at one of the Clock in the
Afternoon of this present day.

The Commitment in the Bill touching the benefit of Clergy in some cases of
offenses (who were appointed on Monday the 10th day of this instant February
foregoing) is appointed to be dealt in this present day at two of the Clock in
the Afternoon in the Exchequer Chamber, and the Bill was delivered to Mr Wroth.

The Commitment in the Bill touching Common Inns and other Victualling-Houses
is appointed to be dealt in (who were appointed upon Thursday the 13th day of
this instant February foregoing) on Wednesday next at two of the Clock in the
Afternoon, in the former place (being the 26th day of this instant February
following,) and the Bill was delivered to Mr George Barn.

On Saturday the 22d day of February, Two Bills of no great moment had each of
them one reading; whereof the second being the Bill for the relief of George
Ognell Esquire was upon the second reading, and upon the question committed
unto Mr Henry Brook, Mr Sergeant Walmesley the Knights for the Shire of the
County of warwick and others, who were appointed to meet upon Monday next at
two of the Clock in the Afternoon in the Star Chamber.

The Bill for the assurance of the Jointure of Ann the wife of Henry Nevill
Esquire was read the second time, and upon the question Committed unto Sir
Edward Hobby, Mr Cook, Mr Cradock, Mr Francis Bacon and others, who were
appointed to meet upon Monday next at two of the Clock in the Afternoon in the
Star Chamber.

The Bill for relief of Thomas Haselrigge Esquire (committed on Thursday the 20
day of this instant February foregoing) was delivered this day to Sir Edward
Hobby one of the Committees.

Three Bills which had this day passed the House upon the third reading, were
sent up to the Lords by Mr Vice-Chamberlain, Sir John Parrot and others, with
commendations and request for their Lordships favorable expedition; of which
the two last were one touching Purveyers, and the other touching Proclamations
in Fines.

Mr Comptroller one of the Committees in the Bill for the true payment of the
debts of Thomas Hanford reports their meeting together; and that Hanford
himself was present with his Council, and also the Council of another
Gentleman, and refers the residue of the report to Mr Grafton one other of
the same Committees, who likewise making a further report of the same,
especially touching the allegations made to them by the said Thomas Hanford and
his Council, and afterward upon some further speeches the Bill then rested to
be presently amended in some things before thought fit by the said Committees,
but not as then yet set down in writing.

The Bill touching the free Grammar School of Tunbridge in the County of Kent
was upon the second reading committed unto Mr Cook, Sir Edward Dymock, Sir
Edward Hobby, Sir George Carry and others, who were appointed to meet upon
Tuesday next in the Star Chamber at two of the Clock in the Afternoon.

Two Bills also of no great moment had each of them one reading; whereof the
second being the Bill touching Mortmain, was upon the second reading committed
unto Mr Treasurer, Sir John Parrot, Sir Edward Hobby, Sir William Moore and
others, who were appointed to meet on Thursday next at two of the Clock in the
Afternoon in the Exchequer.

Mr Sergeant Puckering and Mr Doctor Ford did bring from the Lords three Bills;
of which the two last were one for reviving of a Statute made in the 23d year
of her Majesty's Reign for repairing of Dover Haven, and the other for
repairing of the Pier of Hartilpool, with their Lordships like requital of
commendation for the furtherance of this House in the said two Acts for Dover
Haven and Hartilpool, as their Lordships erst this present day received from
this House for their Lordships furtherance in expediting of the Bills
concerning Purveyors and the abridging of Proclamations in Fines, etc. brought
this day unto their Lordships from this House.

On Monday the 24th day of February, The Bill for four Fifteenths and Tenths
and two entire Subsidies had its first reading.

Mr Chancellor of the Exchequer, one of the Committees in the Bill touching Quo
titulo ingressus est, reports the meetings and Conferences of the Committees
at sundry times, and that in the end they thought good for diverse respects to
alter some things in the said Bill, and so to make a new Bill, which he offered
unto this House together with the old Bill, and praying the new Bill might be
read, the same new Bill was thereupon read accordingly: which being then read,
it was after some Speeches upon the same reading then further declared by the
said Mr Chancellor, that Mr Osburn the Treasurer's Remembrancer in the said
Court of Exchequer had been with them in the said Committment, and not only
satisfied the said Committees very truly, that he could not erst use any other
course of dealing in the said Office than hitherto he has done, as having no
warrant to the contrary; so did he also very willingly and honestly for his
part give his assent and good liking to the passing of this Bill, and professed
to be ready and well pleased to follow the rule of the same when it shall be
established for a Law, which then may be good Warrant unto him in that behalf,
like as he would have been contented so to have done before if he might safely
and lawfully avowed the same. And so thereupon moved (for the better expediting
of the said Bill) another reading presently, and that thereupon the said Bill
may be Ordered to be engrossed, which was so then read again, and upon the
question Ordered to be engrossed accordingly.

Mr Cromwell one of the Committees in the Bill for Orford-Haven reports the
meeting of the Committees and their travel in the same, and shows some
Amendments made by them in the said Bill, and their reasons for the same; which
Amendments were then thereupon twice read accordingly, and so the Bill upon the
question Ordered to be engrossed.

The Bill for the true payment of the Debts of Thomas Hanford delivered into
this House on Saturday last by some of the Committees with these words stricken
out viz. [with assent of the said Thomas Hanford] and this word [or] likewise
stricken out and in stead thereof this word [and] put in; the said word [and]
being twice read, the Bill was upon the question Ordered to be engrossed.

The Bill for reviving and enlarging of a Statute made in the twenty third year
of her Majesty's Reign for repairing of Dover-Haven, was read the first time.

Upon a Motion made touching Conference to be had in the Commitment of the Bill
for relief of George Ognell Esquire, and that Trussell the adverse party being
now in Execution in one of the Counters of London, might be heard before the
said Committees without peril of an escape if he should be brought to
Westminster; It is agreed, that the Committees which were appointed to have met
this day in the Afternoon about that matter in the Star Chamber, do meet in the
Guild Hall where the said Trussell may be brought before them with his Keeper
without danger (as it is thought) of an escape in the said Execution.

The Bill for the assurance of the Jointure of Anne the Wife of Henry Nevil
Esquire (which was committed yesterday) was this day delivered to Mr. Henry
Savile one of the said Committees.

The Bill for the relief of George Ognell Esquire (committed also yesterday)
was this day delivered to Mr. George Moor one of the said Committees.

John Cocks one of the Burgesses for the Borough of Bletchingly in the County
of Surrey, is for his especial affairs licensed to depart.

On Tuesday the 25th day of February, Three Bills had each of them one reading;
of which the first Mr. Cradock offers unto this House, being for continuance
and perfecting of diverse Statutes, and praying the same might be read, the same
was thereupon then read accordingly for the first reading.

Mr. Francis Bacon one of the Committees in the Bill for the assurance of the
Jointure of Anne the Wife of Henry Nevill Esquire shows, that diverse of the
said Committees had met together in Conference about the said Bill, and for
certain considerations by him then alleged had amended something in the said
Bill, and also added something to the same. Which Amendments and Additions
being opened to the House and twice read accordingly, the said Bill was
afterward upon the question Ordered to be engrossed.

Mr. Recorder moved touching the want of one of the Barons of New Rumney in the
County of Kent not returned into this House, but yet (he said) duly Elected as
he was informed under the Seal of the Corporation of the said Town of New
Rumney; And further showing, that he thought the Precedent thereof might tend
to the prejudice both to the Liberties and also to the service of this House,
prayed consideration of this House therein. Whereupon after sundry other
Speeches and Argument to the like effect by others, it was at last Ordered,
that the state of the Case should be further examined by the former Committees
of this House appointed for such Cases of Returns as should happen to fall out
during this present Session of Parliament. Whose names then being read by the
Clerk, they were appointed to meet at the Rolls this present day at two of the
Clock in the Afternoon, and a note of the names of the said Committees was then
delivered by the Clerk to Mr. Cromwell one of the said Committees.

Mr. Damport moved neither for making of any new Laws nor for abrogating of any
old Laws, but for a due course of proceeding in Laws already established, but
executed (he thinks) by some Ecclesiastical Governor contrary both to the
purport of the same Laws and also to the minds and meanings of the Lawmakers,
to the great hurts and grievances of sundry her Majesty's good Subjects; and so
offers some particularities in writing to the effect (he said) of his Motion,
praying the same might be read, and committed to be further considered of and
dealt in, as this House should think good.

Mr Secretary Wolley puts the House in remembrance of her Majesty's express
inhibition delivered to this House by the Mouth of the Lord Chancellor at the
beginning of this Session of Parliament touching any dealing with
Ecclesiastical Causes; And showed for his own part, that he thinks this House
should incur contempt to her Highness, if contrary to that inhibition they
should deal in the said matter last moved. Whereupon the said matter in writing
was then received, but not then read at all, and was afterward without any
thing done more therein delivered back again by Mr. Speaker unto the said Mr.
Damport upon Monday the 17th day of March following in the Forenoon of the same
day, before the said Mr. Speaker went to the Parliament House.

Mr Sergeant Shuttleworth and Mr Doctor Clark do bring word from the Lords,
that their Lordships do desire that four or five of this House do confer with
their Lordships touching a Bill for abridging of Proclamations to be had upon
Fines to be levied at the Common Law, lately passed this House and sent up unto
their Lordships from this House; It was Ordered, that Mr Secretary Wolley, Mr.
Recorder, Mr. Cook, Mr. Sergeant Walmesley, Mr. Francis Bacon, Mr. Morris, and
Mr. Harris should presently wait upon their Lordships therein, who so did
thereupon accordingly.

The Bill concerning Process and Pleadings in the Court of Exchequer, passed
this day in this House, was sent up to the Lords by Sir John Parrot and others,
with request to be made unto their Lordships from this House, for their
Lordships good and favorable expediting of the Bill for reformation of certain
abuses by Purveyors lately sent unto their Lordships by this House.

Mr. Wroth moved for better attendance to be continued and used by the Members
of the House in the service of the same House, that none after the House is set
do depart before the rising of the same House, unless he do first ask leave of
Mr. Speaker, upon pain that every one hereafter doing the contrary do pay for
every time six pence to the use of the Poor. And it was thereupon assented unto
by the whole House accordingly.

Two Bills of no great moment had each of them one reading; of which the second
being the Bill touching secret Outlawries was read the first time, and upon
further Motion read again for the second reading, and committed unto Mr.
Sergeant Walmesley, Sir Henry Knyvet, Mr. Cradock, Mr. Cromwell, Mr. Cook and
others, who were appointed to meet at two of the Clock in the Afternoon at
Serjeants-Inn Hall in Fleetstreet.

The Bill touching Writs of Covenant, etc. was upon the second reading
committed unto Mr. Harris, Mr. Drew, Mr. Cook, Mr. Morris, Mr. Wroth and
others, who were appointed to meet at Serjeants-Inn Hall in Chancery Lane, upon
Thursday next at two of the Clock in the Afternoon.

Mr. Solicitor and Mr. Doctor Carry do bring from the Lords the Bill for
abridging of Proclamations to be had upon Fines to be levied at the Common Law
lately passed this House with some Amendments, viz. in the eleventh line
between the word [terms] and the word [next] to put in the word [holden] and to
put out the words following, viz. [unless it be] etc. and all the words
following unto these words [and that] in the fifteenth line; which being opened
unto the House by Mr. Speaker, the said Amendments were accomplished and
perfected with all the due readings and passage of the same Bill so amended
accordingly.

The Committees names in the Bill touching the free Grammar School of Tunbridge
in the County of Kent, appointed on Saturday the 22th day of this instant
February foregoing were read by the Clerk, and the Committees appointed to meet
at the Rolls at two of the Clock in the Afternoon of this present day; and the
Bill with a note of the said names was delivered then to Sir Edward Dymock one
of the said Committees.

The Committees names in the Bill for repeal of certain Statutes (appointed on
Friday the 21th day of this instant February foregoing) were read by the Clerk,
and the Committees appointed to meet at the Rolls at two of the Clock in the
Afternoon of this present day; and the Bill with a note of the said Committees
names was then delivered to Mr. Cromwell one of the said Committees.

The Bill touching Mortmain, with a note of the names of the Committees in the
same, was delivered to Humfrey Waring Servant to Mr. Aldersey, one of the
Committees in the same Bill, to be by him delivered to the said Mr. Aldersey;
but it appears not certainly in what place or upon what occasion the said
Bill was delivered to the Servant of the abovenamed Mr. Aldersey; for although
it be Entered in the Original Journal Book of the House of Commons amongst such
other matters as were debated in the House, yet it is most probable it was
delivered unto him out of the House, either after or upon the very rising
thereof.

On Wednesday the 26th day of February, the Bill concerning Captains and
Soldiers was read the first time, and argued unto by Mr. Outred, Sir Edward
Dymock, Mr. Cromwell, Sir Henry Knyvet, Mr. Treasurer, Mr. North and Mr.
Markham; and afterward Mr. Cromwell, Mr. Outred, Mr. Sergeant Walmesiey, Mr.
North, Mr. Wroth, Sir William Moor, Sir Edward Dymock, Sir Henry Knyvet, Mr.
Markham and Sir Ralph Bourchier, were appointed to Article to the said Bill,
and to meet this Afternoon at two of the Clock in the Exchequer Chamber; and
the Bill was delivered to Mr. Cromwell.

Upon a Speech used by Mr. Alsord purporting, that some that had spoken to the
said Bill had uttered some words of rejecting the same Bill and casting it out
of the House, where in very deed there was no such Speech used at all by any
that had spoken to the said Bill, nor yet any word tending to such effect; It
was upon the Question resolved by the Judgment of the whole House, that there
had been no such Speech used at all by any of them that did speak.

Mr. Francis Bacon one of the Committees in the Bill concerning Forestallers,
Regraters and Ingrossers, showed the meeting and travail of the Committees in
the said Bill, and that they had made a new Bill, and showing the reasons
moving them so to do sufficiently and at large, offers in the end the new
Bill, and prays the good and speedy expediting of the same.

On Thursday the 27th day of February, the Bill for sour Fifteenths and Tenths
and two entire subsidies had its second reading.

Mr Sergeant Puckering and Mr Solicitor do bring word from the Lords, that
their Lordships have this morning received a Message from her Majesty delivered
unto them by two of the Lords of her Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council,
which Message their said Lordships of the Upper House do mind to impart unto
this House, and pray that some convenient number of this House may to that end
be appointed to meet with fourteen of their Lordships in the Room next to the
Higher House of Parliament either this present Forenoon, or else to Morrow in
the Forenoon at the choice of this House; and so requiring the answer of this
House presently, they departed, and stayed without in the mean time. Where the
said Message being opened by Mr Speaker, It was resolved upon the Question,
that twenty eight or thirty of this House should attend upon their Lordships
this present Forenoon accordingly. And then the said Mr Sergeant Puckering and
Mr Solicitor being called in again, and receiving the answer of this House by
the Mouth of Mr Speaker, all the Privy Council being of this House and now
present, viz. four, Sir Henry Cobham, Sir Henry Gray, Sir William Moore, Sir
Edward Dyer, Sir George Bary, Sir Edward Hobby, Sir Edward Dymock, Sir Henry
Knyvet, Sir Thomas Palmer, Sir George Moore, Mr Sergeant Walmesley, Mr Francis
Hastings, Mr Alford, Mr Wroth, Sir Richard Knightly, Sir Robert Jermin, Mr
Heydon, Mr Recorder of London, Mr Beamond, Mr Cook, Mr Beale, Mr Cradock, Mr
Markham Mr Lieutenant of the Tower, Mr Tho. Knivet, Mr Cromwell, Mr Richard
Brown, Mr Conisby, Sir Philip Butler and Mr. Outred were nominated and sent up
to the Higher House to attend the said fourteen Committees of the Lords
touching their imparting unto this House the said Message delivered unto them
from her Majesty, and the paper Bill touching Purveyors was delivered to Mr.
Cromwell one of the said Committees, and the Note of the Committees names to
Mr. Vice-Chamberlain.

Mr Recorder one of the Committees in the Bill for Reformation of disorders of
common Inns and other Victualling Houses, showed the meeting and travail of the
Committees, and some Causes which moved them to deal only with that part
thereof which concerns Casks and the Gaging of Vessels for Beer and Ale, and
so offers a new Bill for that purpose, with request for good expediting
thereof.

Mr. Apsley moved this House touching the great inconveniences grown by the
great number of Pluralities and Non-Residents, and offers a Bill for
Reformation thereof, praying the same might be presently read, which was so
done by the order of the House accordingly.

The Council and the Residue returned from the Lords, and Mr. Treasurer
reported that my Lord Treasurer showed them that the Message from her Majesty
delivered this day unto the Lords of the Upper House, was concerning two Bills
lately passed this House and sent to the Upper House, the one concerning
Purveyors and the other touching Process and Pleadings in the Court of
Exchequer, a thing misliked of her Majesty in both those Cases, the one tending
to the Officers and Ministers of her own Household, and the other to the
Officers and Ministers of her own Court of her own Revenues; in both of which
if any should demean themselves any way unlawfully or untruly, her Majesty was
of her self (he said) both able and willing to see due Reformation, and so
would do to public example of others upon any of the said Officers or
Ministers which at any time should be found to offend in any particularity
either in her said Household or in her said Court. Whereupon after sundry
Motions, Speeches and advices what might best be done for satisfying her
Majesty of the doings of this House concerning their dealings in both the said
Bills either by way of excuse or confession or otherwise howsoever; It was in
the end resolved to make choice of some Committee of this House both to
consider further of the course, and also to search such Precedents as might
best serve for that purpose; And then were named the said former Committees,
and Mr. John Hare, Mr. Morris, Mr. Clark, Mr. Liefield, Sir Francis Gudolphin
and Mr. Augyer were added unto them, and appointed to meet to Morrow in the
Afternoon at two of the Clock in the Star Chamber. Vide concerning this
business on Monday the 17th day of this instant February foregoing, and in
principo hujus diei; and touching the other matter, being the Bill of
Purveyors, see upon Saturday the 15th day of this instant February last past,
and de utrisque materiis vide diem Martis diem 4 Martii sequentem, and diem
Jovis diem 6. ejusdem mensis, and diem Sabbathi diem 8. and diem Lunae diem 17.

On Friday the 28th day of February, Four Bills of no great moment had each of
them one reading; of which the last being the Bill for maintenance of the Pier
of Hartilpool was upon the second reading committed unto Mr George Carry, Mr
Stubbs, Mr Beale, the Burgesses of Newcastle, Lin and Yarmouth and others, who
were appointed to meet to Morrow in the Afternoon in the Exchequer Chamber at
two of the Clock; and the Bill was delivered to Sir Edward Hobby one of the
said Committees.

The Bill also touching Costs to be recovered against common Informers had its
first reading, and upon a further Motion was read again for the second reading,
and upon the question Ordered to be Engrossed.

Upon some Motions had touching a Scruple conceived yesterday by some few of
this House upon putting of the Bill of Subsidy to the question of Engrossing,
it was by diverse and sundry Members of this House at this time delivered in
their Speeches, that it was not any way meant by any Member of the House to
have the said Bill then longer deferred from engrossing upon that question in
any other respect than only to the end that some such as then seemed to offer
some Provisoes or Speeches to the said Bill, might first be further heard; and
partly also that some other necessary Bills for the Commonwealth might the
better be treated of and expedited in the mean time before the said Bill of
Subsidy (if it were so soon engrossed) were prepared so ready to the passing,
upon their conjectural opinions that when the Subsidy Bill were once passed the
House, the end of this Session of Parliament was like to ensue shortly after.
And then afterward the said Bill was upon the question Ordered to be engrossed
accordingly.

On Saturday the first day of March, Two Bills of no great moment had each of
them one reading; of which the second being the Bill concerning Pluralities and
Non-Residents was read the second time; and after sundry Arguments, many with
the Bill and some against it, was in the end committed unto Mr Treasurer, Mr
Morris, Mr Beale, Sir Robert Jermin, Mr Francis Hastings and others, who were
appointed to meet in the Exchequer Chamber at two of the Clock in the Afternoon.

The Bill for Tunbridge-School with Amendments was brought in by Mr Cook one
of the Committees, and the reasons of the same Amendments were showed by him.

Mr Doctor Amberry and Mr Doctor Carry do bring from the Lords two Bills, viz.
An Act to avoid Horse-stealing, and an Act upon Writs of Proclamations and
Exigents to be current within the County Palatine of Durham; with further
signification from their Lordships, that if this House have either Bills ready
to send them, or else any Motions for Conference to be had with them, their
Lordships are presently at good leisure for the same.

The Bill concerning the Pier of Hartipool is deferred to be considered of by
the Committees upon Monday next in the Afternoon, and Mr. Vice-Chamberlain and
Sir John Parrot are added unto the former Committees.

The fitting of the Committee touching the Bill of Mortmain (appointed on
Saturday the 22th day of this instant February foregoing) is likewise deferred
till the same time.

John Luttwich Gentleman, one of the Burgesses for the Borough of Bridge-North
in the County of Salop, Christopher Wike Gent', one of the Burgesses for the
Borough of New Sarum in the County of Wilts, John Bennet Gentleman, one of the
Burgesses for the Borough of Westbury in the said County of Wilts, and Mr John
Shirley, one of the Burgesses for the Borough of Jews in the County of Sussex
are all of them Licensed about their necessary business and occasions to depart.

The Bill for Tunbridge-School, the Bill touching Writs of Covenant, etc. and
the Bill for relief of George Ognell Esquire, were brought in by the Committees
with some Alterations and Amendments, whereof none at all were then read or
expedited.

The Paper-Book of the Bill touching Process and Pleadings in the Court of
Exchequer is delivered to the Sergeant of this House to be by him delivered
over this present Afternoon to the Committees for search and Conference.

On Monday the third day of March upon many Speeches used by Mr Graston
touching a report to be made to this House by the Committees for Examination of
the Return of one of the Barons of the Port of New Rumney in the County of Kent
not yet certified into this House from the Clerk of the Crown, Mr Cromwell one
of the said Committees shows, that the same Committees had met about the same
according to the Commission of this House; and so showing his own opinion, it
was after sundry other Speeches resolved in the end upon the Question, that he
that was chosen by the said Town should be received into this House as a Member
thereof accordingly.

Mr Cromwell one of the Committees appointed for Articling the Bill concerning
Captains and Soldiers shows, that they have Articled the same Bill, and so
delivered in both the Bill and the Articles.

Mr Morris one of the Committees in the Bill touching the benefit of the Clergy
in some Cases of offenses, shows, that the Committees have altered the old
Bill and framed a new Bill, and yields the reasons of the same their doings,
and delivers in both the old Bill and the new, and prays the new Bill may
be read.

The Bill for the true payment of the Debts of Thomas Hanford was read the
third time and passed upon the Question.

The Bill for the maintenance of Orford-Haven was read the third time, and
after many Arguments both with the Bill and against it, is in the end passed
upon the Question.

The Bill this day passed for the true payment of the Debts of Thomas Hanford,
and the Bill also for abridging of Proclamations upon Fines were sent down
before unto this House by the Lords with some Amendments, and being amended
accordingly are sent to the Lords by Mr. Treasurer and others; which Mr
Treasurer moved before he went, that the Lords might be desired by this House,
that Mr Solicitor being returned a Member of this House might come hither into
this House and give his attendance in the same, which was assented unto, and
required that he would move the Lords and the said Mr Solicitor also to that
end accordingly.

Mr Sergeant Puckering and Mr Attorney General do bring word from the Lords
touching the Motion made of this House in that behalf for Mr Solicitor his
Attendance to be given in the service of this House being a Member of the same,
That their Lordships having had consideration of the said Motion of this House
in that behalf, are of opinion, that the said Mr Solicitor is to continue his
Attendance in the Upper House of Parliament and not in this House, for that he
was called by her Majesty's Writ to serve and attend in the said Upper House of
Parliament long before he was Elected or Returned a Member into this; and also
that the said Mr Solicitor by force of her Majesty's said Writ had served in
the said Upper House since the beginning of this said Session now already
almost by the space of one whole Month.

On Tuesday the 4th day of March, the Amendments in the Bill touching Writs of
Covenant, etc. and a Proviso added were both twice read, and upon the question
Ordered to be engrossed.

Mr Grafion one of the Committees in the Bill for repealing of certain Statutes
delivered in the Bill with some Additions, and showed the reasons, and also
delivered in both the Bill and the Additions.

Two Bills did each of them pass upon the third reading; of which the first was
against Common Informers, and the second for the assurance of the Jointure of
Anne the Wife of Henry Nevill Esquire, in which there were several Amendments
inserted. All which Amendments being thrice read, in the end after some
Speeches had the Bill was palled upon the question; which said Bill with
another were sent up to the Lords by Mr. Vice-Chamberlain and others.

The Master of the Wardrobe, one of the Committees touching Conference and
search of Precedents for resolution to be had upon the Message of her Majesty
delivered unto this House by a Committee of the Lords concerning the passing of
the Bills against the abuses of Purveyors and Process and Pleadings in the
Exchequer, shows, that they have met and travailed in the said Commitment,
and so reciting some particularities of their proceedings does refer the
residue of the report thereof unto Mr. Cook one other of the said Committees,
who likewise setting down at large the whole travail of their search and
Conference, concludes their resolution to be (if the House shall so think
good) that in most humble and dutiful wise this House by their own Mouth Mr.
Speaker do exhibit unto her Majesty the causes and reasons moving this House
to proceed in the two said Bills in such sort as they had done; which course
after sundry other Speeches was thought fittest by this House to be prosecuted,
and best to stand with the Liberties and the honor of this House; and resolved
further, that this their resolution might be imparted unto the Lords, that with
their Lordships good favors this House meant so to do. And it was thereupon
then also further thought good and prayed by this House, that Mr.
Vice-Chamberlain being a Member of this House would be pleased at the humble
Petition of this House unto her Majesty, to know her Majesty's most gracious
pleasure what number of this House her Majesty would vouchsafe to attend upon
her Highness with Mr. Speaker, and at what time. Which resolution of the House
touching their said course in proceeding, in showing unto her Majesty the
causes and reasons of their dealings in the said Bills against the abuses of
Purveyors and Process and Pleadings in the Exchequer in such sort as they have
done, was committed unto Mr. Vice-Chamberlain and such others of the House as
were sent up with the two last mentioned Bills to the Upper House, to signisie
their said resolution at the same time unto their Lordships.

After which (the Bill touching the gaging of Casks and other Vessels, etc.
having been read the second time, and committed unto Mr. Treasurer, Mr. Wroth,
Mr. Alford and others) Mr. Vice-Chamberlain and the rest returning from the
Lords, he showed, that according to the Commission of this House they had
delivered the Message of this House unto those of the Committees of the Lords,
from whom the Committees of this House had before received this Message from
her Majesty; showing them, that this House by their Lordships good favors had
determined to become Suitors to her Majesty, to render unto her Highness the
causes and reasons of their Proceedings in the said two Bills by the Mouth of
Mr. Speaker. And that thereupon (he said) they were then to hear, but not to
Answer. And that afterward this House should hear further from their
Lordships. Vide concerning these matters on Saturday the 15th day, on Monday
the 17th day, and on Thursday the 27th day of February foregoing; as also on
Thursday the 6th day, Saturday the 8th day, Monday the 17th day of this instant
March.

On Wednesday the 5th day of March, the Bill concerning Richard Southwell had
its first reading.

Mr. Treasurer one of the Committees in the Bill against Pluralities and
Non-Residents (appointed on Saturday the first day of this instant March
foregoing) showed the meeting and proceeding of the said Committees, brought in
the old Bill and also a new Bill, showing the reasons of making the same new
Bill; and does in the names of all the said Committees pray a present reading
of the same new Bill. Whereupon the same was then read accordingly for the
first reading. Which done, upon a Motion by sundry of this House for a second
reading presently, Mr. Treasurer showed unto the House, that all the residue of
the said Committees likewise willed him in the name of them all to move this
House for a second reading of the same Bill. Whereupon the said Bill was read
the second time and Ordered to be engrossed.

The Bill for the maintenance of the Pier of Dover was read the second time,
and after sundry Speeches committed unto all the Privy Council being of this
House, Mr. Mills, Mr. Alford, Sir Edward Hobby and others, who were appointed
to meet to Morrow at two of the Clock in the Afternoon in the Exchequer Chamber.

The Bill against Forestallers, Regrators and Ingrossers was read the first
time, and upon further Motion read again for the second reading, and upon the
division of the House after the question, it was upon another question after
the same division with the yielding of the negative Voices Ordered to be
committed unto all the Privy Council being of this House, Mr. John Hare, Mr.
George Moor, Sir William Moor, Mr. Grimston, Mr. Cromwell and others, who were
appointed to meet on Friday next in the Exchequer Chamber at two of the Clock
in the Afternoon.

Sir Thomas Throckmorton Knight, one of the Knights returned into this present
Parliament for the County of Gloucester, having lain sick here in London, is
licensed to repair into the Country to his own House for recovery of his health.

On Thursday the 6th day of March, Three Bills of no great moment had each of
them one reading; of which the second being the Bill touching Cordwayners, and
the third concerning Curriors were both of them upon the second reading
committed unto Mr. Alford, Sir William Moor, Mr. Grafton, Mr. Thomas Knyvet and
others, who were appointed to meet upon Saturday next at two of the Clock in
the Afternoon in the Guildhall.

Mr Treasurer one of the Committees in the Bill touching Mortmain brings in
the Bill with Amendments, and in the name of himself and the residue of the
Committees prays the present two readings of the same Amendments, and
thereupon the same Amendments were twice read accordingly.

Mr Doctor Awberry and Mr Doctor Carry do bring word from the Lords, that their
Lordships desire that the Committee of this House which was with their
Lordships the last day, might now be sent to their Lordships, for that now
their Lordships have charge from her Majesty to make them Answer. And thereupon
the names of the Committees being read, they were then presently sent to the
Lords, and the Bill for maintenance of the Haven of Orford was then also sent
up to their Lordships by Mr Vice-Chamberlain and the residue of the said
Committees.

Whereupon Mr Treasurer, one of the Committees in the Bill touching the gaging
of Casks, etc. having showed their meeting about the same yesterday, and moved
for another time of Conference about the same, and that being appointed upon
Saturday next being the 8th day of this present March in the Guildhall at two
of the Clock in the Afternoon; It was Ordered, that the Brewers and such others
as shall think good may then and there be heard before the said Committees what
they can say.

After which Mr Vice-Chamberlain with the residue of the Committees being
returned from the Lords do show, that her Majesty's gracious pleasure is, that
this House according to their Suits and Petitions have access to her Majesty at
the Court between two and three of the Clock in the Afternoon of this present
day by their Speaker, accompanied only with ten more of this House besides
himself, and two of the same ten to be of her Majesty's Privy Council being
Members of the same House. And thereupon were appointed for that purpose Mr
Vice-Chamberlain, Sir John Parrot, Sir William Moor, Sir George Carry, Sir Henry
Cobham, Mr. Morris, Mr. Cook, Mr. Francis Hastings, Sir Richard Knightley, Sir
Henry Gray, with further Order of this House, that Mr. Speaker do in his Speech
to her Majesty make most humble Petition and Suit to her Highness in the name
of the whole House, that her Majesty would vouchsafe her most gracious favor
to the allowanee of the said Bills touching the abuses of Purveyors and the
Process and long Pleading in the Exchequer lately passed this House and sent up
to the Lords; and that this House would willingly and most gladly have taken in
the passing of the same Bills any such other course whatsoever, as they might
have any way known to have stood with her Highness good liking and pleasure.
Vide concerning these matters on Saturday the 15th day, on Monday the 17th day,
and on Thursday the 27th day of February foregoing; as also on Tuesday the 4th
day of this instant March last past; and on Saturday the 8th day, and on Monday
the 17th day, Tuesday the 18th day, Thursday the 20th day.

On Friday the 7th day of March, Four Bills of no great moment had each of them
one reading; of which the third being the Bill for relief of Thomas Haselrigg
Esquire was read the first time. And thereupon it was Ordered upon a Motion,
that Mr. Thomas Drury Gentleman should come into this House and be heard. Who
thereupon was brought in and heard accordingly. Vide concerning this matter on
Friday the 21th day of February foregoing, and on Tuesday the 18th day, and on
Wednesday the 19th day of this instant March ensuing; as also on Friday the
21th of the same Month.

The Amendments in the Bill touching the Free Grammar School of Tunbridge in
the County of Kent were twice read. And Andrew Fisher Gentleman after the
reading of the said Amendments being brought into the House, did presently give
his assent unto the said Bill. And then the Bill upon the Question was Ordered
to be engrossed.

Mr Vice-Chamberlain after many and long Arguments made to the said Bill both
with and also against the same, not only wishes a deferring of further
Argument therein at large until to Morrow, but also shows that Mr. Speaker
and those others that were appointed by this House to have access unto her
Majesty yesterday in the Afternoon, are to attend and wait upon her Highness
this present day in the Afternoon at the Court after the Sermon, for that her
Majesty having been abroad yesterday in the Air had taken a little cold, and
therefore could not yesterday give them audience. Which done Mr Morris
offering to speak to the said Bill, is referred therein till to Morrow.

The Bill against Forestalling Regrating and Engrossing (committed on Wednesday
the 5th day of this instant March foregoing) is this day delivered unto Sir
George Barn one of the Committees in the said Bill.

On Saturday the 8th day of March Mr. Speaker showed unto this House, that he
and those others of this House who were appointed to attend upon her Majesty
had access unto her Highness yesterday in the Afternoon; And that they received
from her Majesty most comfortable and gracious Speeches in far better sort and
measure than he was any way able to repeat or open unto them, of her Highness
great and inestimable loving care toward her loving Subjects, yea more than of
her own self, or than any of them have of themselves. And as to the parts of
the present humble Petition of this House unto her Highness in the grievances
by the Purveyers and in the Court of Exchequer, It pleased her Majesty to tell
them, that for the one, to wit the abuses of Purveyers, her Highness of her own
Princely care toward her Subjects had given order unto the late Lord Steward
to address his Letters unto all the Shires of this Realm for the due inquiry
and Certificate of the misdemeanors of Purveyors in all places, for some
courses thereupon to be had for convenient redress in the same: And that before
any Order could well be taken for accomplishing that good intended effect, the
Spaniards upon a sudden attempted the invasion of this Realm; by reason
whereof (her Majesty said) the said purpose was not performed. And so showing
further, that her Majesty having as much skill, will and power to rule and
govern her own Household as any Subject howsoever to rule and govern them
without the help or aid of their Neighbors; so her Majesty minding very
carefully of her own more great love and affection toward her dutiful and
loving Subjects (whose most faithful and approved good love and fidelity
toward her she more esteems than all the Treasures of the world besides)
very shortly to cause a Collection to be made of all the Laws already in force
touching Purveyors, and also all the constitutions of her Highnesses Household
in that case, and thereupon by the advice of her Judges and her Learned Council
to set down such a Form and Plot for the said Redresses yea and that before the
end of this present Session, as shall be as good and better for the ease of the
Subjects than that which this House had attempted without her Privity, and in
which they would have bereaved her Majesty the Honor, Glory and Commendation
of the same. And touching the Exchequer she said, it was her Chamber, and so
more near unto her than the Household: And that in the tenth year of her Reign
her Majesty had caused certain Orders and Constitutions to be set down for the
due and fit course of such things in the said Court as her Subjects seem to be
grieved for. Vide concerning this matter on Saturday the 15th day, on Monday
the 17th day, and on Tuesday the 27th day of February foregoing; as also on
Tuesday the 4th day, and on Thursday the 6th day of this present March.

The Committees in the Bill for the Pier of Dover and Hartilpool (appointed to
meet this day on Friday the 28th day of February foregoing) are defered till
Monday next in the Afternoon at two of the Clock in the former place.

Mr Sergeant Shuttleworth and Mr Doctor Awberry do bring from the Lords two
Bills; of which the first was an Act for the maintenance of Houses of Husbandry
and Tillage, with commendation of the same Bills to the good consideration of
this House to be dealt in by the House with all convenient speed that may be.

Mr Morris and diverse other Members of this House arguing to the Bill last
read yesterday, it afterward in the end passed upon the question.

Mr Edward Cook Esquire one of the Burgesses returned into this House for the
Borough of Alborow in the County of Suffolk is for his necessary affairs
licensed to depart.

On Monday the 10th day of March, Two Bills of no great moment had each of them
one reading; of which the second being the Bill touching Writs of Covenant,
etc. was read the third time, and a Proviso for the Lord Powes and Sir Edward
Herbert and their Heirs, was thrice read, and after many Speeches both with the
Bill and against the Bill, the said Bill was dashed upon the question.

The Bill against Pluralities and Non-Residents lately passed this House was
sent up to the Lords by Mr Treasurer and others, who returning again from
thence with the said Bill showed, that their Lordships would be ready for them
half an hour hence, and willed them then to come again. Upon which report it
was thought good to attend their said Lordships leisure therein half an hour
hence accordingly. And afterward the said Bill was sent up by the said Mr
Treasurer and others.

The Bill for the maintenance of the Pier of Dover with a Note of the
Committees names are delivered to Mr Wroth one of the Committees in the same,
who were appointed on Friday the 28th day of February foregoing.

The Bill for granting of four Fifteenths and Tenths and two entire Subsidies
to her Majesty, being ordered upon the question to be read, was then read for
the third reading, and passed upon the question accordingly.

On Tuesday the 11th day of March the Bill for relief of the City of Lincoln
was upon the second reading committed unto Mr John Stubbs, the Burgesses of
Norwich, the Burgesses of York and others, who were appointed to meet to Morrow
at two of the Clock in the Afternoon in the Exchequer Chamber.

Mr Treasurer one of the Committees in the Bill for repairing of Dover-Haven
(appointed on Friday the 28th day of February foregoing) showed, that the said
Committees have met and travailed in the said Bill, and do think good that
concerning some things in the same there be a Conference prayed with the Lords;
and thereupon it was assented, that the Bills last passed in this House should
presently be sent up, and withal to make that request also unto their Lordships
accordingly.

After which the Bill touching Pleadings in Actions of Trespass under the value
of forty shillings, having had its last reading this Morning and passed the
House, was with the Subsidy Bill sent up to the Lords by Mr Treasurer and
others, with Commission to pray Conference with the Lords touching the
Amendments desired by this House to be made in the said Bill for Dover-Haven.

Three Bills of no great moment had each of them one reading; of which the last
being the Bill concerning the bringing in of salted Fish and salted Herrings,
was upon the second reading committed unto Mr. Treasurer, Mr. Comptroller, Sir
John Parrot, Mr. Vice-Chamberlain, the Burgesses of Orford, Alborow, York,
Norwich, Lincoln, Lin and Barwick and others, who were appointed to meet to
Morrow at two of the Clock in the Exchequer Chamber.

Mr Doctor Awberry and Mr Doctor Carry do bring from the Lords the Bill lately
passed this House for assurance to be made of the Jointure of Anne the Wife of
Henry Nevill Esquire with some Amendments, which their Lordships pray to be
considered of by this House.

Mr Treasurer and the residue returning from the Lords, he showed, that they
have had Conference with the Lords touching some parts of the said Bill for
Dover-Haven, and reciting some particularities of the same showed, that the
Lords can like of such course of Amendment as by the said Committees of this
House was moved unto them, if the House shall think good to set down and
require those Amendments. And thereupon this form of amendment was assented
unto by this House, viz. linea 18. after the word [And] put out all that
follows unto these words [be it] in the 20th line put out all from the end of
the 20th line unto this word [that] in the 30th line.

Sir Edward Hobby, Mr Markham, Mr Buckley and Mr. Peter Evers were added to the
Committees in the Bill for the City of Lincoln; and the Bill with the names was
delivered to Sir Edward Dymock one of the Committees.

On Wednesday the 12th day of March, Five Bills of no great moment had each of
them one reading; of which the last being the Bill against Aliens and Strangers
retailing of Foreign Wares, was upon the second reading committed unto Mr.
Vice-Chamberlain, Mr. Comptroller, Sir Robert Jermin, Sir William Moor and
others, who were appointed to meet upon Friday next at two of the Clock in the
Afternoon in the Exchequer Chamber.

Sir John Parrot one of the Committees for the Pier of Hartilpool brought in
the Bill in the name of himself and the residue of the said Committees.

The Bill for the Pier of Hartilpool aforesaid was read the third time, and
after many Arguments both with the Bill and likewise against the Bill, it was
deferred to be further disputed and argued unto to Morrow.

On Thursday the 13th day of March, Three Bills of no great moment had each of
them one reading; of which the last being the Bill touching Richard Southwell
was upon the second reading committed unto Mr. Secretary Wolley, Mr. John
Stanhope, Mr. Haydon, Mr. Recorder of London and others, who were appointed to
meet in the Exchequer Chamber upon Saturday next at two of the Clock in the
Afternoon.

The Bill concerning Leases made of Lands parcel of the Possessions of the
Bishopric of Oxford, was upon the second reading committed unto Mr. Treasurer,
the Master of the Wardrobe, Mr. Cromwell, the Knights for the County of Oxford,
Mr. Oglethorp and others, who were appointed to meet upon Saturday next in the
Afternoon at two of the Clock in the Exchequer Chamber.

The Bill for repealing of certain Statutes with some Amendments was read, and
afterward referred to be further considered of by Mr. Grafton, Mr. Harris and
Mr. Cromwell, and the Bill was then delivered to Mr. Cromwell.

The Amendments in the Bill for the maintenance of Dover-Haven being opened to
the House, and the Bill read in such sort amended, was passed upon the question
after a Proviso offered for the Cinque Ports first refused upon another former
question.

Mr. Doctor Ford and Mr. Doctor Carry do bring from the Lords the Bill lately
passed this House and sent up to their Lordships for the better recovery of
costs and damages against Informers, and passed since by their Lordships with a
Proviso and some Amendments annexed to the same Bill.

After diverse Arguments both with the Bill and against the Bill (but whether it
were the Bill last) beforementioned to have been sent down from the Lords it
appears not, although it seems to have been the same) and after a Proviso
received upon the question and some Amendment also of one word in the Bill,
viz. Sunderland to be put in the 14th line, and the word Soulderland to be put
out of the Bill; And the said Bill with the Proviso and Amendment aforesaid
being put to the question was dashed upon the question, and also upon the
division of the House by the advantage of three persons, viz. with the Yea a
hundred twenty six, and with the No a hundred twenty nine.

The Bill touching the bringing in of salted Fish and Herrings into this Realm
was delivered to Mr. Wroth one of the Committees in the same.

On Friday the 14th day of March, Three Bills had each of them one reading; of
which the second being the Bill for the Town of Barwick was read the second
time, and thereupon committed unto Mr. Cromwell, Mr. Grimston, the Burgesses of
Barwick, Mr. Robert Bows and others, and the Bill was delivered to Mr.
Cromwell, who with the rest was appointed to meet this Afternoon at two of the
Clock in the Exchequer Chamber.

The Bill touching the Children of Aliens and Denizens was upon the second
reading committed unto the Committees in the Bill for Retailers (appointed on
Thursday the 12th day of this instant March foregoing) and for both to meet to
Morrow in the Afternoon in the Exchequer Chamber.

Two Bills lastly had each of them one reading; of which the first being the
Bill touching Mortmain was read the third time, and some Amendments then made
being thrice read also, was after many Arguments both with the Bill and against
the Bill, passed upon the question.

Mr. Sergeant Shuttleworth and Mr. Powle do bring from the Lords the Bill for
the preservation of the Haven of Orford in the County of Suffolk lately passed
this House, and since passed with their Lordships with a Proviso by them added
in their passing of the same, which Proviso being thereupon presently thrice
read, the same Proviso then passed also upon the question.

On Saturday the 15th day of March, Three Bills had each of them one reading;
of which the third being the Bill to avoid Horse-stealing had its first reading.

The Amendments in the Bill for relief of the City of Lincoln being twice read,
and the Bill also read in such sort amended, the Bill was upon the question
committed to the former Committees, and unto Mr Vice-Chamberlain, Sir John
Parrot, Mr Alford, the Master of the Wardrobe, Sir Robert Jermin and others,
who were appointed to meet this present day at two of the Clock in the
Afternoon in the Exchequer Chamber.

Mr. Doctor Clark and Mr. Doctor Stanhop did bring from the Lords a Bill
against the Erecting and maintenance of Cottages. The former Committees were
appointed on Mar. 11. Tuesday.

The Bill and Committees names concerning Leases made of the Lands parcel of
the possession of the Bishopric of Oxford, was delivered to Mr. Treasurer one
of the Committees; And so likewise the Bill and Committees names touching
Aliens and Strangers retailing of Foreign Wares, and also touching the Children
of Aliens and Denizens.

The Bill and Committees names concerning Richard Southwell Esquire was
delivered unto Mr. George Moor one of the Committees in the same.

The Amendments in the Bill for relief of the Curriers being twice read, the
Bill was Ordered upon the question to be engrossed.

On Monday the 17th day of March, Four Bills of no great moment had each of
them one reading; of which the last being the Bill for pursuit of Hue and Cry,
was upon the second reading committed unto Mr. Vice-Chamberlain, Mr. Shirley,
Mr. Harris, Mr. Wroth, Sir William Moor, Mr. William Fleetwood and others, who
were appointed to meet to Morrow at two of the Clock in the Afternoon in the
Exchequer Chamber.

The Bill for Pleading at large in an Ejectione firmae had its first and second
reading, and an Amendment twice read, and upon the question Ordered to be
engrossed.

The Bill touching Forestallers, Regrators and Ingrossers was brought in by Mr.
Treasurer one of the Committees without any thing done, and further report
made; and so likewise the Bill for Denizens Children.

Mr. Speaker signified unto the House, that her Majesty's gracious pleasure
was, that it be signified unto them, that four of this House be specially
chosen to have Conference with some of the Lords of her Highness most
Honorable Privy Council and other Officers of her Household for convenient
Orders and Constitutions to be made for.....

But what should here follow is by the great negligence of Mr. Fulk Onslow at
this time Clerk of the House of Commons wholly omitted; yet it should seem that
her Majesty did now by Mr. Speaker send word to the said House, that upon the
abovementioned Conference so had and passed according to her Majesty's
Prescription, the said House might proceed in the two Bills so often before
agitated on Saturday the 15th day, on Monday the 17th, and on Thursday the 27th
day of February foregoing, and on Tuesday the 4th day, Thursday the 6th day,
Saturday the 8th day of this instant March preceding touching Purveyors and
some exacted Fees in the Exchequer: which the rather may be gathered, because
(it should seem) the House did presently upon this Message appoint the
Committees in either Bill a time for their meeting to consider of them
accordingly. And yet this also is set down in the said Journal Book very
imperfectly in these words only following, viz. for the Purveyors this
Afternoon, and for the Exchequer to Morrow in the Afternoon.

After many Speeches touching the present state of the Paper-Book of the Bill
for relief of Thomas Haselrigg Esquire being altered in some parts differing
from the engrossed Bill in Parchment since the engrossing of the same Bill; It
is upon the question Ordered, that the said Paper-Book shall be by the Clerk of
this House reformed again in all parts of the same agreeably to the said
engrossed Bill; And that thereupon the said engrossed Bill should be then read
accordingly, which was so thereupon read for the third reading. And upon the
question in the 4th line these words [one well experimented in slights and
deceits as is supposed] were put out and these words were put in the 5th line
after the word [further] and these words [or his Heirs] in the six and
twentieth line after this word [ Haselrigg] in the same line; which amendments
being three times read, and the Bill passed upon the question, the same Bill
was thereupon delivered to Sir Edward Hobby to be by him carried to Mr
Treasurer and those others who were but lately before gone up to the Lords with
five other Bills: To the end they might then also deliver that Bill likewise to
the Lords with those others; of which one, being the principal, was for the
assurance of certain Lands and Tenements to the maintenance of the free Grammar
School of Tunbridge in the County of Kent.

Mr Sergeant Puckering and Mr Attorney General coming from the Lords, the said
Mr. Sergeant brought a Bill from the Lords for Confirmation of a Subsidy
granted by the Clergy, with an Instrument of the same under Seal, and a Bill
touching Horses, Armor and weapons, with very special commendation of the same
Bills as things of very great importance. And the said Mr. Attorney brought
again from the Lords the Bill for the relief of Thomas Haselrigg Esquire, this
present day passed in this House, and afterward sent up to their Lordships,
but (as he said) brought up but with four or five Members of this House in sort
not erst accustomed; whereof as their Lordships did much marvel, so did they
return the same Bill back unto this House again, not any way misliking of the
Bill at all, but that it might by further consideration of this House be sent
up again when this House should think good, with a greater number of the
Members of this House after their accustomed manner whereby their Lordships
might think the Bill had passed this House with good and full liking of the
same: And said further, that their Lordships commanded him to desire Mr.
Speaker to put this House in remembrance, for the speedy proceeding of this
House in the Bills sent from their Lordships unto this House, and some of them
specially recommended from their Lordships to this House, whereof the said
Lords did name five, viz. one concerning Captains and Soldiers, another
touching excess of Apparel, a third touching Houses of Husbandry and Tillage, a
fourth against Horse-stealing, and the fifth against the erecting and
maintenance of Cottages, as very necessary Laws for the Commonwealth: And that
therefore their Lordships do eftsoons desire the said Bills may with all
convenient speed be considered of and expedited, especially for that it is very
like that this Parliament draws near unto an end. Which being reported unto
the House by Mr. Speaker, the said Bill for Haselrigg was presently sent to the
Lords by the Master of the Wardrobe and a convenient number of others.

Two Bills lastly of no great moment had each of them one reading; of which the
second being the Bill to avoid Horse-stealing was read the second time.

On Tuesday the 18th day of March the Bill for Repeal of certain Statutes was
brought in again without any report by Mr Harris one of the Committees.

Four Bills upon the third reading having passed this House were sent up to the
Lords by Mr Treasurer and others; of which two of them were, one touching
forcible Entries, and the other concerning pleading at large in an Ejectione
firmae.

Two Bills also had each of them their third reading; of which the second was
the Bill for the relief of the Curriours; and after some amendments added unto
it being likewise read three times, the Bill was upon the question and the
division of the House dashed by the difference of thirty voices, viz. with the
Yea ninety, and with the No one hundred and twenty.

Mr. Treasurer one of the Committees in the Bill against strangers Retaylers of
foreign Wares (appointed on Wednesday the 12th day of this instant March
foregoing) brought in the Bill again with some amendments, which were not then
read.

After diverse Motions it is ordered upon the question, That the Sergeant of
this House do bring in Thomas Drury Gentleman into this House to Morrow at ten
of the Clock in the Forenoon, to answer unto those things which he shall be
charged with, as well on the behalf of this whole House, as of some particular
Member of the same. Vide concerning this business on Friday the 21th day of
February foregoing, and on Friday the 7th day of this instant March last past,
as also upon Wednesday the 19th day of the same March ensuing.

Mr. Doctor Clark and Mr. Doctor Carry do bring from the Lords two Bills; of
which the last was that Children of Aliens shall pay strangers Customs. And a
little after the foresaid Doctors did bring word from the Lords, that their
Lordships do desire Conference to Morrow at eight of the Clock in the morning
with those of this House, which were committed in the Bill that lately passed
in this House for the true payment of the Debts of Thomas Hanford; for that
their Lordships having sent for the said Hanford to his House, and not finding
him there, left peremptory Order for his repair to their Lordships at a day
already past, and wherein he has failed of his appearance before them; and
show further, that their Lordships have appointed six of themselves for that
Conference, to wit, two Earls, two Barons and two Bishops; and thereupon Mr
Cromwell, Mr Markham, Mr Recorder of London, Mr Faunsham, Mr Osborn, and Mr
Francis Hastings were added to the former Committees, and to attend upon the
said Committees of the Lords to Morrow at eight of the Clock in the Forenoon
according to the said appointment of their Lordships.

The Bill against Erecting and Maintenance of Cottages was upon the second
reading committed unto Mr. Vice-Chamberlain, Sir Henry Knyvet, Mr. Wroth and
others, and the Bill was delivered to Mr. Vice-Chamberlain, who with the rest
was appointed to meet to Morrow in the Afternoon at two of the Clock in the
Exchequer Chamber.

The Bill for relief of the City of Lincoln was brought in by Mr.
Vice-Chamberlain one of the Committees in the same, who showed, that they have
met and conferred upon the same Bill, and have amended it in four parts
thereof, and shows wherein, leaving the same to the further proceeding of
this House in the expediting thereof.

Mr. Vice-Chamberlain showed that he and diverse others of the Committees of
this House met yesterday in Conference about the matter touching abuses of
Purveyors, and received all such Informations as were then delivered unto them,
which (he said) were very many and foul and some of them offered to be proved
true in such sort as the same had been reported unto them; and so moving this
House to make choice of four of the Members of the same to be specially
selected to attend upon the Lords in the said matter according to her Majesty's
said pleasure formerly signified unto them by Mr. Speaker, Sir Henry Kuyvet,
Mr. Thomas Cromwell, Mr. John Hare and Mr. Robert Wroth were thereupon
nominated for that purpose and Ordered and assented that all the Members of
this House might at their pleasure (in the mean time of the said Conference so
to be had with the Lords) repair unto the said Sir Henry Knyvet, Mr. Thomas
Cromwell, Mr. John Hare and Mr. Robert Wroth and to every or any one of them,
with such instructions either in writing or by information otherwise as they
shall think fit, for the better furnishing of the same Sir Henry Knyvet, Mr.
Cromwell, Mr. Hare and Mr. Wroth, with matter against the time of the said
conference to be had with the Lords.

Nota, That this House having formerly dealt in this matter, and in reforming
some exactions of the Exchequer, had been forbidden by her Majesty to deal any
further therein; and yet afterward upon some new considerations had leave for
their further proceeding in the said matter, as see before on Saturday the 15th
day and on Thursday the 17th day and on Monday the 27th day of February
foregoing, and on Tuesday the 4th day, Thursday the 6th day, Saturday the 8th
day and on Monday the 17th day of this instant March last past.

Mr. Vice-Chamberlain one of the Committees in the Bill of Hue and Cry
(appointed on Saturday the 15th day of this instant March foregoing) showed,
that in respect of other particular attendance committed unto him in her
Majesty's service elsewhere, he could not be at the said Commitment this
Afternoon; and therefore prayed he may be excused and some other appointed in
his stead. Whereupon presently Sir John Parrot and the Master of the Wardrobe
were added to the former Committees; and the said Mr. Vice-Camberlain
withdrawn: And the Bill together with the names of the Committees was then
delivered to the said Sir John Parrot.

On Wednesday the 19th day of March the Bill concerning Glass-houses and
Glass-Furnaces was upon the second reading committed unto Sir William Moore,
Mr. George Moore, Mr. Markham and others, and the Bill was delivered to Sir
William Moore, who with the rest was appointed to meet in the Exchequer Chamber
at two of the Clock this Afternoon.

The Bill for the Lady Gressam was upon the second reading committed unto Mr.
Cromwell, Mr. Grafton, Mr. Grimston, Mr. Recorder of London and others, who
were appointed to meet in the Exchequer Chamber to Morrow in the Afternoon at
two of the Clock.

The Bill against discontinuances in Writs of Error in the Courts of Exchequer
and the Kings Bench, was read the second time, and upon further Motion was read
again for the third reading thereof, and so passed upon the question.

The Master of the Wardrobe one of the Committees in the Bill touching Leases
of the Lands Parcel of the Possession of the Bishopric of Oxford, brought in
the same Bill, with report that the said Committees do think the same Bill not
meet to be further dealt in by this House.

The Bill concerning Captains and Soldiers was read the second time, and after
the doubtfulness of the voices upon two several questions for the commitment
thereof, was upon the division of the House by the difference of thirty five
Persons Ordered to be committed, ( viz. with the Yea one hundred thirty one,
and with the No ninety six) unto all the Privy Council being of this House, Sir
Henry Knyvet, Mr Wroth, Mr Lieutenant of the Tower, Mr North and others, who
were appointed to meet upon Friday next in the Exchequer Chamber at two of the
Clock in the Afternoon.

Sir John Parrot one of the Committees in the Bill touching Hue and Cry brought
in the Bill again with report, that the Committees have met and conferred upon
the same Bill, and finding good Laws in force already touching that matter are
of opinion, that in respect also partly of the shortness of this Parliament
likely to ensue, the said Bill may be reserved to be further considered of in
another Session.

Thomas Drurie Gent. being brought to the Bar was charged by Mr Speaker in the
name of this whole House with great and deep offenses committed by him against
the whole State of this House in general, in having untruly reported and given
out both to some of the Lords in the Upper House, and also to diverse others
Persons elsewhere, that he could have no justice in this House, nor could
himself be heard, nor have his Witnesses in his Cause heard, neither in the
House nor before the Committees, and also against diverse Members of this House
in particular, in offering unto some of them great threats, and to some others
of them great sums of Money to speak in this House for him and not against him,
and likewise in using of hard Speeches both to some of them and of some of
them, to the great discredit, wrong and prejudice both of the whole State of
this said House in general, and also of diverse Members of the same in
particular; for that in very deed he had been heard at large both in this House
and also before the Committees: and for that likewise sundry of his
misbehaviours toward diverse Members of this House were directly proved in this
House against him, to the full satisfaction of this House in the same. And so
was required by Mr Speaker to answer therein for himself. Whereupon the said
Thomas Drurie in very humble sort and good terms sought to excuse himself, not
directly acknowledging any the said offenses, but humbly craving pardon of this
House, if he had committed any such. And then being sequestered the House till
his said pretended Speeches of excuse and conditional form of craving pardon
were considered of, it was by diverse of the Members of this House, grieved and
touched with his said misbehaviours, delivered in their Motions and Speeches,
that as for their own particular they could be pleased upon his consession of
his said offenses and his due submission thereupon to remit the same, so in
regard of the public injury by him done to the whole House, they referred the
further consideration thereof to the same House.

It should seem that these speeches and misdemeanors of Thomas Drurie
Gentleman were accasioned by a certain Bill (which passed the House against him
upon Monday the 17th day of this instant March foregoing) for the relief of
Thomas Haselrigg Esquire; of which matter see on Friday the 21. day of February
preceding, and upon Friday the 7th day and on Tuesday the 18th day of this
instant March last past, and upon Friday the 21. day of this said Month.

Which very Bill also having been this day read secunda and tertia vice in the
Upper House, (and having had also its first reading before with the Lords) was
by them concluded and sent down to the House of Commons, and now brought to
them (whilst it should seem they were in agitation of these misdemeanors of
the said Thomas Drurie) by Mr Doctor Ford and Mr Doctor Stanhop, with some
amendments; but the sending down of the said Bill is omitted in the original
Journal Book of the said House.

On Thursday the 20th day of March two Bills had each of them one reading; of
which the second being the Bill for continuance and perfecting of diverse
Statutes was upon the second reading committed unto Mr Morris, Mr Hare, Mr
Wroth and others; and the Bill was delivered to Mr Wroth, who with the rest was
appointed to meet in Serjeants-Inn Hall in Fleetstreet this present day at two
of the Clock this Afternoon.

The amendments in the Bill for the relief of the City of Lincoln being twice
read, the Bill was upon the question ordered to be engrossed.

The amendments in the Bill for the relief of George Ognell Esquire were twice
read, and after many arguments was deferred from the question of engrossing,
till my Lord of Warwick's Council be further heard; which was first apponited
to have been done to Morrow at two of the Clock, but upon a further Motion of
Mr Sutton, alleging my Lord of Warwick not to be in Town, is deferred till
Monday next at 10. of the Clock.

Mr Doctor Stanhop and Mr Powle do bring word from the Lords, that touching the
Bill lately passed this House against secret Outlawries, and sent up unto their
Lordships, they have considered thereof with some advice of the Judges, and do
pray that some six of this House do meet this Afternoon at two of the Clock in
the Chamber of the Lord Chief Justice of the Common Pleas at Serjeants-Inn in
Fleetstreet, that thereupon some such good course may be taken, as the same
Bill may be made to become a Law. And thereupon were then nominated for that
purpose Mr Alford, Mr John Hare, Mr Harris, Mr White, Mr Shirley, Mr Grafton,
Mr Cromwell, and appointed to meet at two of the Clock this Afternoon at the
said Serjeants-Inn in the Chamber there of the said Lord Chief Justice of the
Common Pleas.

Mr Vice-Chamberlain one of the Committees in the Bill against the erecting and
maintenance of Cottages showed, that the Committees have met together and
considered of the same Bill, and in their own opinions have thought good, that
some things in the same Bill were very meet to be put out of the same, and some
other things to be put in; And also a proviso fit to be added to the same, and
showed how and wherein. And moved further, that some of this House may be sent
to the Lords to pray conference which their Lordships touching the said
amendments and Proviso for the passage of the said Bill. Whereupon Mr
Vice-Chamberlain and sundry other of the former Committees were presently sent
to their Lordships to move for Conference, and the Bill lately expedited and
passed in this House against discontinuances in Writs of Error in the Court of
Exchequer and the Kings Bench was then sent up by them unto their Lordships.
Vide de ista materia in fine hujus diei.

Four Bills of no great moment had each of them one reading; of which the last
being the Bill against abuses in election of Scholars and Presentations to
Benefices had its first reading, and then read also again for the second
reading of the same, and was committed unto Mr Treasurer, Mr Vice-Chamberlain,
Mr Secretary Wolley, the Master of the Wardrobe, Sir Philip Butler and others,
and the Bill was delivered to Mr Treasurer, who with the rest was appointed to
meet at two of the Clock this Afternoon in the Exchequer Chamber.

Sir Edward Hobby, Mr Shirley, Mr Francis Moor and Mr Morris for the Exchequer
matter.

It should seem that these were appointed to consider of the Bill referred
before upon Friday the 14th day of February, touching certain Exactions imposed
upon the Subject by certain Officers of the Exchequer; which is the more plain,
because Sir Edward Hobby, who then preferred it and obtained the first reading
thereof, is here named in the first place now again to consider of it; which it
seems was occasioned by the stopping of this Bill, and another touching
Purveyors by reason of her Majesty's dislike, and the entering of the House
again upon the treating of them after her Highness had been fully satisfied
with their clear and honest intentions therein. Concerning which matters see
more on Saturday the 15th day, on Monday the 17th day, and on Thursday the 27th
day of February foregoing; as also on Tuesday the 4th day, Thursday the 6th
day, Saturday the 8th day, Monday the 17th day, and on Tuesday the 18th day of
this instant March last past.

Mr Vice-Chamberlain and the residue returning from the Lords he showed, that
they have had Conference together with a Committee of the Lords, and that their
Lordships after some long and effectual Arguments used by them for maintenance
of all the parts of the said Bill in sort as the same Bill now is, without any
great cause or necessity of such amendments as this House does require in the
same; Their Lordships yet nevertheless were pleased to gratify the House in
yielding to assent unto their request of the same amendments; wishing withal
that this House in the same their amendments would have consideration of such
Cottages as might happen to be erected for the burning of Lime or making of
Brick, during the time only of such burning of Lime or making of Tyles and
Bricks.

On Friday the 21th day of March, Four Bills of no great moment had each of
them one reading; of which the third being the Bill for the repeal of certain
Statutes was read the third time and passed upon the question.

Mr Vice-Chamberlain, Mr De-la-Bar, Mr Palmer and others are appointed to meet
this day in the Afternoon in the Exchequer Chamber at two of the Clock for the
Glass-Houses.

The Bill against excess in apparel was upon the second reading committed unto
Mr Comptroller, Mr Lieutenant of the Tower, Mr Cromwell, Mr Jones, Mr Morris
and others, who were appointed to meet to Morrow at two of the Clock in the
Afternoon in the Exchequer Chamber.

The Amendments made by the Lords in the Bill for the relief of Thomas
Haselrigg Esquire, and in the Bill for the better recovery of Costs and damages
against common Informers, before passed this House and sent up unto their
Lordships, and the Proviso added by the Lords to the said last recited Bill,
were three times read, and the same Proviso and Amendments were thereupon
passed upon the question accordingly.

Mr Vice-Chamberlain one of the Committees in the Bill against the erecting and
maintenance of Cottages showed, that since their Conference with the Lords
yesterday he and the residue of the same Committees have met together and
agreed upon the setting down of such further Amendments in the said Bill as
were liked of both by the Committees of the Lords and also by the Committees of
this House: And thereupon the said Amendments and the Proviso also being twice
read, the said Proviso was Ordered to be engrossed.

Mr Treasurer one of the Committees in the Bill against Abuses in Elections of
Scholars and Presentations to Benefices showed, that the Committees have met
together and considered of the said Bill, and have devised some Amendments to
be made of the same; which Amendments being then opened to the House and read
and liked well of, and also an Addition to the same Bill offered by Mr Wroth
being likewise open and read to the House and liked well of, he moved that
Congerence might be prayed of the Lords touching the same Amendments and
Addition for the better passing of the said Bill: Whereunto this House assented
accordingly.

Mr Sergeant Puckering and Mr Doctor Awberry do bring from the Lords a Bill
concerning the Almeshouse of Lamborn in the County of Berks, with further
Message from the Lords, That their Lordships desire that Mr Speaker would put
this House in remembrance to have care of speedy expediting the Bills they have
in hand, the rather for that this Parliament draws near unto an end; and to
show them withal that her Majesty is very desirous that this Parliament should
end before Easter if it might be without let or hindrance to the passing of
those good Laws that they are in hand with for the good of the Commonwealth,
and wishes very earnestly it might end upon Wednesday next. And their
Lordships do likewise desire that this House would have care of the good Laws
passed with their Lordships and sent down to this House, and especially that
concerning Horses, Armor and Weapons; which as they did recommend unto this
House from themselves, so do they now in like sort recommend the same from her
Majesty by her Highness special direction. And that their Lordships do further
pray, that if this House have any Bills ready, they would send them unto their
Lordships, who will deal in the same very willingly having now leisure.

Three Bills which passed this House this present day, two of which were, one
for repeal of certain Statutes, and the other for the Naturalizing of Joice
Lambert, were sent up to the Lords by Mr Treasurer and others, with Commission
further to pray Conference with their Lordships touching the said Amendments
and Addition to the said Bill against Abuses of Elections of Scholars and
Presentations to Benefices.

The Bill for relief of the City of Lincoln was read the third time, and after
many Arguments both with the Bill and against the Bill, passed upon the
question, with the difference of fifty three persons, upon the division of the
House, viz. with the Bill a hundred and eighteen, and against the Bill sixty
five persons. Which difference being reported to the House, the Bill was
afterward according to the ancient Orders of this House in such Cases, carried
out and brought in again by Mr Vice-Chamberlain with the Bill in his hand,
followed and attended on by all the Members of this House then present, as well
those that had first before given their Voices against the passing of the said
Bill, as those that had given their Voices with the passing of the same.

Mr Treasurer and the residue returning from the Lords he showed, that they had
conferred with their Lordships touching the said Amendments and Addition to the
said Bill against the Abuses in Election of Scholars and Presentations to
Benefices; And that their Lordships do like very well of the same: And do
further wish that this House in their said Amendments would have a further
Consideration also for notice to be given in some Cases to the Patrons of
Benefices which may happen to become void in some sort by reason of some part
of the Law intended in the said Bill, and referred them therein further for the
better Explanation thereof unto Mr. Morris one other of the said Committees,
unto whom then the said Bill was thereupon delivered to be provided for
likewise in that point accord ingly.

Upon a Motion made by Mr. Francis Hastings for the setting at liberty of
Thomas Drury Gentleman, lately Committed by this House to the Sergeants
Custody, the said Thomas Drury was presently brought to the Bar and discharged
by Mr. Speaker in the name of the whole House, paying his Fees. Vide concerning
this business upon Friday the 21th day of February preceding, and upon Friday
the 7th day, Tuesday the 18th day, and on Wednesday the 19th day of March last
past.

Upon a Motion made by Mr. Markham on the behalf of Mr. Aylmer, that with the
good favor and liking of this..... But what should here follow is wholly
omitted by the negligence of Mr. Fulk Onslow Clerk of the House of Commons;
although it should seem, that this Motion made by Mr. Markham was in the behalf
of Mr. Aylmer against Mr. Puleston touching the invalidity of his Election for
Knight of the County of Denbigh in Wales. Of all which matters see on Wednesday
the 12th day, Monday the 17th day, and on Wednesday the 19th day of February
foregoing.

On Saturday the 22th day of March Mr. Palmer one of the Committees in the Bill
touching the gaging of Casks and other Foreign Vessels, brings in the Bill
with some Amendments and Provisoes. The same Amendments and Provisoes being
twice read, the Bill was upon the question Ordered to be engrossed.

Two Bills of no great moment had each of them their first reading; of which
the first was, that Children of Aliens shall pay Strangers Customs.

Mr. Cromwell one of the Committees in the Bill for Continuation and perfecting
of diverse Statutes, brings in the Bill with some Additions, and showing the
same prays the reading thereof, which were afterward twice read, and the
said Bill and Additions upon the Question were Ordered to be engrossed.

Mr. Treasurer one of the Committees in the Bill against Election of Scholars
and Presentations to Benefices, brings in the Amendments in all parts
reformed according to the Assent of this House therein Yesterday, referring the
residue of the report thereof to be made unto this House by Mr. Morris, who
showing all the parts of the same, the said Amendments and Proviso were twice
read, and then the same Proviso being ready engrossed in Parchment and Examined
by the Paper-Book, was offered to the House for the more speedy expediting of
the said Bill, which with the Amendments and Proviso aforesaid were read, and
the said Bill in such sort being put to the question, passed accordingly.

Four Bills were sent up to the Lords by Mr. Treasurer and others; of which the
two first were, one for relief of the City of Lincoln, and the other against
Abuses in Elections of Scholars and Presentations of Benefices with the
Amendments and a Proviso.

The Bill concerning the Almeshouse of Lamborn in the County of Berks, was upon
the second reading committed unto Mr. Vice-Chamberlain, Mr. Alford, Mr. Hill,
Mr. Morris, Mr. Graston, Mr. Francis Moore and others who were appointed to
confer presently in the Committees Chamber.

Four Bills of no great moment had each of them one reading; of which the
second being against the false packing of Hops was read the third time, with
the words [Authority Royal] inserted in the Bill twice read, and these words
also [this Act to continue to the end of the next Session of Parliament] thrice
read, but this Bill was upon the question dashed.

Mr. Doctor Carew and Mr. Poole did bring from the Lords the Bill for the
better assurance of certain Lands and Tenements to the maintenance of the free
Grammar School of Tunbridge in the County of Kent, before passed this House and
sent up to their Lordships, and now passed also by their Lordships with some
Amendments therein offered by them to this House.

The Bill against the Erecting and maintenance of Cottages in former sort
amended, together with the Proviso to the same Bill, being all the third time
read passed upon the question accordingly.

On Monday the 24th day of March Mr Anderson was licensed to depart about her
Majesty's Service.

Two Bills had each of them one reading; of which the first being the Bill
concerning Glass-Houses was brought in by Mr De-la-bar one of the Committees,
in sort as it was delivered unto them, and thereupon being twice read was after
sundry Speeches and division of the House Ordered to be engrossed, viz. with
the Yea one thirty five hundred and with the No forty three.

Mr Vice-Chamberlain one of the Committees in the Bill touching Captains and
Soldiers showed, that the Committees have met and conferred the Bill with the
old Laws already in force, and finding many imperfections both in the old Laws
and also in the new Law offered by the said Bill, showed forth a Note collected
of the same imperfections, and also of sundry sharp and dangerous Points in
both the same Laws, and especially in the said later Law, which was thereupon
then read accordingly.

Mr Comptroller one of the Committees in the Bill against excess of Apparel
showed likewise the meeting and travail of the Committees in the same Bill,
with some amendments thought fit by them to be added to the said Bill, which
amendments were also then read in the House and refered to be further
considered of afterward, and more fully and advisedly compared with those Laws
which are already in force.

The Bill for continuation and perfecting of diverse Statutes had its third
reading, and after some Speeches and Motions for some Reformations and
Additions was passed upon the question without any such Reformation or Addition
at all.

Five Bills were sent up to the Lords at two several times this day, the first
four being of no great moment by Mr Treasurer and others, of which the last was
the Bill for the continuance and perfecting of certain Statutes; and the fifth
touching the Gaging of Casks and other Foreign Vessels was sent up by Mr
Comptroller and others, which said Bill had passed the House this very Morning
a little before it was sent up.

Mr Tasborough one of the Committees in the Bills concerning Jurors and
Freeholders showed, that the Committees have met and had conference together
about the same Bill, and having used also therein the privity and advices of
the Judges, and also of some of her Majesty's Learned Council, have thought
good to make a new Bill for that purpose, and so offered the same new Bill, and
prayed the present reading of the same, which was thereupon then read
accordingly. And afterward upon a further Motion the same was read again for
the second reading, and Ordered upon the question to be engrossed.

Mr Doctor Clark and Mr. Doctor Awberry do bring word from the Lords, that
their Lordships do pray Conference with some of this House in the Bill
concerning Captains and Soldiers, and in the Bill against Excess of Apparel,
this present day at two of the Clock this Afternoon in the Council Chamber at
the Court. Which being signified unto this House by Mr. Speaker, It was Ordered
thereupon that the former Committees in both the said Bills should attend their
Lordships at the said time and place. And the names of the Committees in both
the said Bills were read by the Clerk. And that Mr. Morris one of the said
Committees in the said Bill concerning Captains and Soldiers should show unto
their Lordships the great imperfections conceived by this House in the same
Bill, and also the reasons (if their Lordships should require it, and else not)
without any further Conference or reply unto any answer to be made by their
Lordships unto the said Reasons of this House so as before to be rendered.

After which the aforesaid Doctors did bring from the Lords the Bill touching
forcible Entries with amendments, which lately passed this House, and was sent
up to their Lordships; and thereupon the same Bill was referred over to be
further considered of touching the same amendments, unto Mr. Morris, Mr.
Harries, Mr. Atkins, and others; and the Bill was delivered to Mr. Harries, who
with the rest was appointed to meet this Afternoon at four of the Clock in the
Middle Temple Hall.

Thomas Shuter and Humfrey Wall returned into this House Burgesses for the
Borough of Lemster in the County of Hereford, are for their special and
necessary businesses licensed to depart.

On Tuesday the 25th day of March it was Ordered upon the question, that both
the Learned Council of the Lord of Warwick, and of George Ognell do attend this
House to Morrow in the Morning, and that the Sergeant of this House do make the
said Earl of Warwick privy unto the same.

Mr. Treasurer reported, that he and the residue appointed by this House to
attend the Lords yesterday at Court touching the Bill of Captains and
Soldiers, were there accordingly, and showed unto their Lordships the opinion
of this House touching the same Bill; and that their Lordships did make answer
unto the same: But what their answers were, is wholly omitted through the
negligence of the Clerk.

Mr. Doctor Carry and Mr. Powle do bring word from the Lords, that their
Lordships do desire present Conference with some of this House in a Bill for
continuation and perfecting of certain Statutes; and thereupon it was, upon
relation thereof made to the House by Mr Speaker, ordered, that the former
Committees in the same Bill and diverse others now added unto them, be presently
sent to their Lordships accordingly, and withal the Bill for confirmation of
two Subsidies granted by the Clergy, and the Bill touching Jurors (both which
passed the House this Morning) and the Bill touching the Free School of
Tunbridge in Kent were sent up to their Lordships by Mr. Vice-Chamberlain and
others, with request of this House for special Commendation to be made to their
Lordships for their favorable considerations of the said Bill touching the
said Jurors.

The Bill for maintenance of Houses of Husbandry and Tillage was upon the
second reading committed unto all the Privy Council, Mr. Cromwell, Mr. Wroth
and others, to meet this Afternoon at two of the Clock in the Exchequer Chamber.

The Bill that the Children of Aliens shall pay Strangers Customs was read the
second time, and after many Speeches both ways it was committed to the former
Committees to meet at the said former time and place, and both the same Bills
were delivered to Mr. Vice-Chamberlain.

On Wednesday the 26th day of March the Bill concerning Denizens Children was
read the second time; the Bill also against Strangers retailing of Foreign
Wares was amended by the Committee (appointed on Wednesday the 12th day of this
instant March foregoing) which said Amendments being brought in by them with
the Bill were now twice read, although it be mistaken in the Original
Journal Book, that the Bill it self had its second reading.

Mr. Doctor Carry and Mr. Powle did bring from the Lords the Bill against privy
and secret Outlawries, which had its first reading.

Sir John Parrott showed that her Majesty told him, that she thought it
requisite that provision were had for her Majesty as well as for her Subjects
against the imbozelling and purloining of her Armor, Weapons and other
Habiliments of War; and offers a Bill to the House to that end, and prays a
present reading of the same.

The Bill against imbezelling of Armor, Munition and other Habiliments of War
was twice read and Ordered to be engrossed, and read the third time and passed
upon the question, and presently sent up to the Lords by Sir John Parrot and
others.

The House was this day called, and the defaults noted (upon a former Motion
this day made by Sir John Parrot) by her Majesty's Pleasure, upon some
intelligence given to her Highness of the small number of the Members of this
House presently attending the service of the same, the one half at the least
supposed to be absent.

Mr. Vice-Chamberlain and the residue of the Committees returning from the
Lords, he showed, that according to the Commission of this House they prayed
Conference with their Lordships touching such parts in the Bill concerning
Houses of Husbandry and Tillage, as this House had thought meet to be
considered of; and that thereupon their Lordships asked them, if they then were
ready for Conference. Whereunto he and the residue Answered, they were. And
thereupon (the Committees of this House being sequestered) their Lordships did
send unto them a Committee of themselves, unto whom he and the residue of the
Committees of this House did impart the opinion of this House touching the said
Bill, together with such Amendments of the same as this House prayed their
Lordships Assent and good-liking unto. And that thereupon the Committees of the
Lords willing the Committees of this House to stay a while for Answer went in
again to the Lords, and some of them shortly after returning brought from their
Lordships this Answer, That we of this House were possessed of the said Bill
and might do therewith as should seem good unto us; and that when it should
come back again to them, their Lordships would then likewise do therewith as
they should think good.

On Thursday the 27th day of March the Bill against secret Outlawries had its
second and third reading, and passed upon the Question.

The Council learned both of the Earl of Warwick and also of George Ognell were
brought into this House to the Bar and heard at large, and then sequestered
again; and afterward being called in again received their Answer of this House
by the Mouth of Mr. Speaker. Vide principium dici Martis diei 25 Martii
instantis.

The Bill against Forestalling, regrating and engrossing had its first reading,
and upon another Motion was read again, and upon the question Ordered to be
engrossed.

The Amendments and a Proviso in the Bill for maintenance of Houses of
Husbandry and Tillage being thrice read, and the Bill read the third time, the
said Bill, Amendments and Proviso passed upon the question.

Mr. Doctor Carry and Mr. Doctor Stanhop do bring from the Lords the Bill for
the relief of the City of Lincoln, with some Amendments of their Lordships unto
the same, with further Advertisement from the Lords, that their Lordships do
suspend their proceeding in the Bill for continuance and perfecting of certain
Statutes (lately sent from this House to their Lordships) until their Lordships
do hear from this House of the Proceedings of this House in the Bill for
maintenance of Houses of Husbandry and Tillage.

The Bill against privy and secret Outlawries, and the Bill with Amendments and
Proviso lately passed in this House are sent up to the Lords by Mr.
Vice-Chamberlain and others.

Nota, That both the sending down of the former Bill from the Lords and the
sending up of this latter to their Lordships, are omitted in the Original
Journal Book of the Upper House; where it should seem there being no Bill read,
the Clerk of that House, being then Anthony Mason, did very negligently omit
the Entrance of any thing else besides the continuance of the Parliament to a
further day.

The Bill to avoid Horse-stealing had its third reading, and passed upon the
question.

On Friday the 28th day of March the Amendments of the Lords in the Bill
touching forcible Entries, and also the Amendments of this House being all
thrice read, are agreed by this House upon the question to be passed
accordingly.

The Bill against Forestalling, Regrating and Engrossing was upon the question
and division of the House Ordered to be presently read for the third reading
thereof, viz. with the Yea fifty six, and with the No thirty. A Proviso to the
same Bill was offered to the House and twice read and engrossed, and also once
read for the engrossing thereof, and so the Bill upon the question and division
of the House was passed by the yielding of the negative Voices without going
through with telling of the whole numbers on both sides, and was sent presently
up to the Lords by Sir John Parrot; and a little after two other Bills, the one
to avoid Horse-stealing, and the other touching forcible Entries, were likewise
sent up to the Lords by Mr. Treasurer and others.

The Bill against such as steal and imbezel the Goods, Chattels or Treasure of
her Majesty being put in trust with the same, was read the first time.

The Bill that Aliens Children shall pay Strangers Customs was read the third
time, and a Proviso added unto it thrice read; the Bill and Proviso upon the
question and division of the House dashed, with the Yea sixty four, and with
the No seventy four.

Mr. Doctor Carry and Mr. Powle do bring from the Lords the Bill for relief of
the City of Lincoln, with an Addition of this word [yearly] added to their
former Amendments, for the explaining of the same Amendments. All which
Amendments being thrice read, were upon the question assented unto by this
House.

Nota, That this Bill was brought down from the Lords to the House yesterday,
and therefore it should seem upon some doubts the House made touching their
Lordships Amendments, it was carried back again, and those Amendments explained
by the word abovementioned, and so being brought down again this day, the said
Amendments were thrice read and passed the House.

On Saturday the 29th day of March Mr. Doctor Stanhop and Mr. Powle do bring
from the Lords the Bill lately passed this House for continuation and
perfecting of certain Statutes, with a Schedule unto the same added and annexed
by their Lordships, and the same Schedule being thrice read, passed upon the
Question.

The Bill for the relief of the City of Lincoln being perfected according to
the Amendments of the Lords, and the Bill also for continuance of Statutes with
the Schedule to the same, were sent up to the Lords by the Master of the
Wardrobe and others.

The Amendments of the Committees of this House to the Bill against excess of
Apparel was denied upon the Question to be opened unto the House.

The Bill against such as steal or imbezel the Goods, Chattels or Treasure of
her Majesty, was brought in again by Mr. Harris one of the Committees in the
same, as not to be sufficiently considered of for lack of time, the same Bill
consisting of many parts.

Mr. Sergeant Puckering and Mr. Sergeant Shuttleworth did bring word from the
Lords, that their Lordships do pray present Conference with some twenty or more
of this House to meet with their Lordships in the nether room of the Upper
House, and the rest not to depart until the return of the same Committees.
Whereupon were appointed for that purpose all the Privy Council of this House,
Sir William Hatton, Mr. Wroth, Mr. North, Mr. Lieutenant of the Tower, Mr.
Wade, Mr. Mills, Mr. Juers, Mr. Henry Gray, Sir Edward Dymock, Mr. Robert
Bows, Mr. Harris, Mr. Heydon, Mr. Francis Moore, Sir George Barn, Mr. Robert
Cecill, Mr. Shirley, Mr. Dyer, Mr. Hare, Mr. Ralph Bows, Sir Francis Hind,
Mr. Preston, Mr. White, Mr. Hill, Mr. Henry Brook and the Master of the
Jewel-House.

Mr. Treasurer in the name of the rest of the Committees did bring word from
the Lords, that their Lordships have had Conference amongst themselves of the
great practices and Treasons heretofore intended against her Majesty's Person,
State and Kingdom; And therefore..... What should here follow is wholly omitted
by the great negligence of Mr. Fulk Onslow at this time Clerk of the House of
Commons; as also the Speeches of Mr. Vice-Chamberlain, of Mr. Secretary Wolley,
of Sir John Parrot, Mr. Comptroller, and of Mr. Fortescue; for the inserting of
which said Speeches there is left a blank of near upon two whole Pages; and yet
it may be probably gathered what the scope and end of all the said several and
respective Speeches were, out of a question following, which Mr. Speaker
propounded at the end of them, viz. That seeing most of all those Treasons
which had been practiced against her Majesty, had been either Plotted in Spain
or procured by Spain, and all the Rebellions during her Highness Reign, raised
either in England or Ireland had been countenanced from thence; to which as the
upshot of all, that his late intended, ambitious and blood-thirsty Conquest,
yet fresh in memory, may be added; That therefore her Majesty would be pleased
to denounce open War against him the said King of Spain as against a most
dangerous Enemy of her Majesty and her Realms.

Upon the said Speeches Mr. Speaker makes the question; and thereupon it was
resolved by the whole House for joining with their Lordships in request to her
Majesty, to be delivered by the Mouth of Mr. Speaker, for concurring with their
Lordships for denouncing of War against the King of Spain at the time of his
going up with the Subsidy, and after the offer and delivery of the same Subsidy.

Mr. Doctor Carry and Mr. Doctor Stanhop did bring from the Lords two Bills,
viz. The Act of the Queens Majesty's most gracious and free Pardon, and also
the Act of four Fifteenths and Tenths, and two Subsidies which had before
passed this House.

The Bill of the Queens Majesty's most general and free Pardon being once read,
passed thereupon. Which said Bill so passed was presently sent up to the Lords
by Mr Fortescue and others.

Nota, That this is all which is found in the Original Journal Book of the
House of Commons, and therefore the Conclusion and Dissolution of this
Parliament next ensuing are supplied out of that of the Upper House.

Her Majesty being (as it should seem) this very Forenoon come unto the Upper
House and there set, the House of Commons having notice thereof, with Sergeant
Snagg their Speaker, repaired thither, who after his delivery of the Bill of
Subsidy did move her Majesty (as may be very probably conjectured) according to
the former resolution had this day in the said House as aforesaid, that her
Majesty would be pleased to denounce open War against the Spanish King, who had
so lately threatened destruction to her Majesty and her Realms by that his not
long since open and Hostile Invasion.

After which her Majesty having given her Royal Assent unto the passing of
sixteen public Acts and eight private Acts, being all the Statutes that passed
this Parliament, Sir Christopher Hatton Knight Lord Chancellor, by her
Majesty's Commandment, Dissolved the same.

THE JOURNAL OF THE House of LORDS.
An Exact and perfect Journal of the Passages of the House of Lords, in the
Parliament holden at Westminster, Anno 35 Reginae Eliz. Anno Domini 1592. which
began there on Monday the 19th Day of February, and then and there continued
until the Dissolution thereof on Tuesday the 10th Day of April Anno Domini 1593.

THERE is little extraordinary in this Journal of the Upper House, save only
the return of diverse unusual Proxies, and a Speech used by her Majesty her self
at the conclusion of the Parliament, which also is supplied out of a certain
Journal of the House of Commons, very claborately taken by an Anonymus. And Sir
Christopher Haton the late Lord Chancellor being Vide Gulicl. Camd. Annal.
Regin. Eliz. edit Lugd. Batavorum An. Dom. 1625. page 589.
dead since the last Parliament (whose death was occasioned from the grief he
conceived at some harsh Speeches of her Majesty used unto him touching diverse
great sums due unto her from him) Sir John Puckering her Highness Sergeant,
(who had been twice before Speaker or Prolocutor of the House of Commons)
succeeded him in the full power and privileges of his place, though not in his
title, he having only the Style of Lord Keeper of the Great Seal of England.

The Summons for this Parliament being Returnable, upon this Monday the 19th
day of February, it held accordingly, the Queen coming privately by water,
accompanied with Sir John Puckering Lord Keeper of the Great Seal, and many of
the Lords Spiritual and Temporal. There being present this day these Peers and
others ensuing.

Archiepiscopus Cantuarien. Johannes Puckering Miles Dominus Custos magni
Sigilli. Dominus Burleigh Dominus Thesaurarius Angliae. Marchio Wintoniae.
Comites.
Comes Oxon. Magnus Camerarius Angliae. Comes Darby Magnus Seneschallus Comes
Northumbriae. Comes Salopiae. Comes Cantiae. Comes Wigorn. Comes Cumberland.
Comes Sussex. Comes Huntingdon. Comes Bathon. Comes Pembroke. Comes Hartford.
Comes Essex. Comes Lincoln. Vice-Comes Bindon.
Episcopi.
Episcopus London. Episcopus Dunelmen. Episcopus Assaphen. Episcopus Cestren.
Episcopus Covent' and Lich. Episcopus Lincoln. Episcopus Petriburgen. Episcopus
Hertf. Episcopus Cicestren. Episcopus Bangor. Episcopus Wigorn. Episcopus
Landaven. Episcopus Salopiae. Episcopus Bathon and Wellen.
Barons.
Dominus Howard mag. Maresc' and Adm. Angliae. Dominus Hunsdon Camerarius
Reginae. Dominus Strange. Dominus Morley. Dominus Stafford. Dominus Gray.
Dominus Scroope. Dominus Montjoy. Dominus Sands. Dominus Windsor. Dominus
Cromwell. Dominus Wharton. Dominus Rich. Dominus Willoughby. Dominus Sheffield.
Dominus North. Dominus Shandois. Dominus St. John. Dominus Buckhurst. Dominus
De la Ware. Dominus Crompton. Dominus Norris.
And the Queen and the Lords Spiritual and Temporal having on their
Parliamentary Robes, and having seated themselves in their several places, The
Knights Citizens and Burgesses of the House of Commons had notice thereof and
repaired to the Upper House: Where contrary to the Ancient use and Custom they
found the door shut upon them; which happened by reason that diverse of the
House and others having gotten in privately before and filled up the place at
the Bar or Rayl at the lower end of the said House, Sir John Puckering Lord
Keeper of the Great Seal by Commandment from her Majesty had already made some
entrance into his Speech before the said Knights Citizens and Burgesses had
any Notice of it, who sat in their own House expecting to be called up to the
said Upper House upon her Majesty's coming. But the door at length being opened
by her Majesty's Commandment about two of the Clock in the Afternoon, as many
as conveniently could were let in: Where the Lord Keepers Speech was directly
in these words following, or not much differing from them.

He showed in the first place (as matter of Preface and Ornament not much
material) somewhat touching the Antiquity, Nature and use of Parliaments. Then
he came to set forth as the principal matter (which her Majesty did desire to
have made known and manifest to all her loving Subjects, the great Malice of
the King of Spain which he had toward this Realm. And that he showed by sundry
instances as his last Invasion intended, his Forces then addressed out of the
Low Countries for that purpose, to have been conducted by the Duke of Parma.
And then he proceeded in the rest of his Oration verbatim, or much, to the
intent and purpose sollowing.

The high and mighty Ships that then he prepared and sent for that purpose,
because he found them not fit for our Seas and such a purpose, he is building
of Ships of a less Bulk after another Fashion; some like French Ships, some
like the Shipping of England; and many has he gotten out of the Low Countries.
He is now, for the better invading of England, planting him in Britanie, a
Country of more facility to offend us than the Low Countries; there he has
fortified himself in the most strong Holds of that Country.

In Scotland he has of late wrought most of the Nobility to conspire against
their King, to give Landing to his Forces there, and to assist him in his
Invasion thither. A greater part of the Nobility in Scotland be combined in
this Conspiracy, and they have received great Sums of Money for their service
therein. And to assure the King of Spain of their assistance, they have Signed
and sent their promises sealed to the King.

This Conspiracy the King of Scots was hardly brought to believe, but that her
Majesty advertised him thereof, having entertained Intelligence thereof as she
has of all things done, and intended in those parts. And that the King might
better advise thereupon, her Majesty has sent one of her Noblemen now into
Scotland, and the King has assured her Majesty with all his Ability and
endeavor to prevent the Spaniard, whose purpose is on the North parts to
assault us by Land, and on the South side to invade us by Sea, which is the
most dangerous practice that could be devised against us. And now the rage of
this Enemy being such, his Forces joined with other Princes his Adherents,
greater, the charge of her Majesty for defense of her Realm both with Forces by
Sea and Armies by Land has been such, as has both spent the Contribution of
her Subjects by Subsidies and what otherwise they have offered her, and also
consumed her Treasure; yea caused her to sell part of her Highness's Crown. And
it is not to be marvelled how all this is consumed but rather to be thought how
her Majesty could be able to maintain and defend this her Realm against so many
Realms conspired against us.

Wherefore we her Majesty's Subjects must with all dutiful consideration think
what is fit for us to do; and with all willingness yield part of our own, for
the defense of others and assistance of her Majesty in such an insupportable
Charge. Were the cause between Friend and Friend, how much would we do for the
relief one of another? But the Cause is now between our Sovereign and our
selves: seeing there is so much difference in the Parties, how much more
forward ought we to be? The Aid that formerly has been granted unto her
Majesty in these like Cases, is with such slackness performed, as that the
third of that which has been granted comes not to her Majesty. A great show,
a rich grant and a long sum seems to be made, but it is hard to be gotten,
and the sum not great which is paid. Her Majesty thinks this to be, for that
the wealthier sort of men turn this charge upon the weaker, and upon those of
worst ability, for that one discharges himself, and the other is not able to
satisfy what he is charged withal.

These things would be reformed by such as are Commissioners in this present
service.

Her Majesty further has willed me to signify unto you, that the calling of
this Parliament now is not for the making of any more new Laws and Statutes,
for there are already a sufficient number both of Ecclesiastical and Temporal;
and so many there be, that rather than to burden the Subject with more to
their grievance, it were fitting an Abridgment were made of those there are
already.

Wherefore it is her Majesty's Pleasure, that the time be not spent therein:
But the principal Cause of this Parliament is, that her Majesty might consult
with her Subjects for the better withstanding of those intended Invasions which
are now greater than were ever heretofore heard of. And whereas heretofore it
has been used that many have delighted themselves in long Orations, full of
verbosity and of vain ostentations, more than in speaking things of substance;
The time that is precious would not be thus spent. The Sessions cannot be long,
by reason the Spring time it is fit that Gentlemen should repair to their
Countries, the Justices of Assize also to go their Circuits; So the good hours
should not be lost in idle Speeches, but the little time we have should be
bestowed wholly on such businesses as are needful to be considered of. And so
willed them to Elect a Speaker.

As soon as the Lord Keepers Speech was ended, the Clerk of the Parliament read
the names of the Receivors and Triors of Petitions in French according to the
ancient use and form, which were as follows, viz.

Receivors of Petitions for England, Ireland, Wales and Scotland, Sir John
Popham Lord Chief Justice of the King's Bench, John Clynch one of the Justices
of the King's Bench, Francis Gaudy another of the Justices of the said Bench,
Doctor Awberry and Doctor Ford. They which will deliver Petitions are to
deliver the same within six days next ensuing.

Receivors of Petitions for Gascoign and other parts beyond the Seas and the
Isles, Sir Edmond Anderson Lord Chief Justice of the Common Pleas, Sir William
Perrian Lord Chief Baron, and Thomas Walmsley one of the Justices of the
Common Pleas, Doctor Carry and Doctor Stanhop. And they which will deliver
Petitions, are to deliver the same within six days next ensuing.

Tryors of Petitions for England, Ireland, Wales and Scotland, the Archbishop
of Canterbury, the Marquess of Winchester, the Earl of Darby Lord Steward of
the Queens Household, the Earl of Sussex, the Earl of Pembroke, the Earl of
Essex, the Bishop of London, the Bishop of Durham, the Lord Howard of Effingham
Earl Marshal and Lord Admiral of England, the Lord Cobham, the Lord Gray of
Wilton. All these or any four of them calling to them the Lord Keeper of the
Great Seal of England, and the Treasurer, and the Queens Sergeants when need
shall require, shall hold their places in the Chamberlains Chamber.

Tryors of Petitions for Gascoign, and other parts beyond the Seas and the
Isles, the Earl of Oxford Great Chamberlain of England, the Earl of Shrewsbury,
the Earl of Huntington, the Bishop of Rochester, the Bishop of Lincoln, the
Lord Hunsdon Lord Chamberlain to the Queen, the Lord Lumley and the Lord
Buckhurst. These or any four of them calling unto them the Queens Sergeants
when need shall require, shall hold their places in the Treasurers Chamber.

Nota, That all that which is set down touching the coming up of those of the
House of Commons into the Higher House, and the Lord Keepers Speech, being
before placed after the names of such Lords Spiritual and Temporal as were this
day present, is not found in the Original Journal Book of the Upper House, but
is here inserted partly out of the Original Journal Book of the House of
Commons, and partly out of another very exact Journal of that House which was
in my Custody, being very diligently observed and set down by some Anonymus,
who was a Member of the said House during this Parliament. And, I have always
thought it most fitting in all these several Journals, ever to refer the
aforesaid Speeches, the Presentiments of the Speakers, and such other Passages
as are wholly handled and agitated in the Upper House, to be set down as
largely as by any good Authority they may, in the Journal of the same, to which
they do most truly and properly belong, and only for Orders sake to give a
short touch or remembrance of them in the Journal of the House of Commons.

Finally at the Conclusion of this days business, the Continuance of the
Parliament is Entered in the Original Journal Book of the Upper House in manner
and form following, viz.

Dominus Custos magni Sigilli ex Mandato Dominae Reginae continuavit praesens
Parliamentum usque in diem Jovis prox' futurum.

On Thursday the 22th day of February, to which day the Parliament had been
last continued, the Queens Majesty her self came about three of the Clock in
the Afternoon, accompanied by the Archbishop of Canterbury, Sir John Puckering
Knight Lord Keeper of the Great Seal, William Lord Burleigh Lord Treasurer of
England, the Marquess of Winchester and diverse others of the Lords Spiritual
and Temporal, being for the most part the very same that are by name set down
to have been present on Monday foregoing, the first day of this Parliament.

The Queen and the Lords being thus set, the House of Commons had notice
thereof, who immediately thereupon came up with Edward Cook Esquire the Queens
Solicitor, into the Upper House, whom they had Chosen for their Speaker or
Prolocutor. Which said Speaker being led up to the Bar at the nether end of the
said House, between two of the most Eminent Personages of the House of Commons,
who, as soon as silence was made, and the rest of the said House, as many as
could conveniently get in, had placed themselves in the space below the said
Bar, spoke as follows.

YOur Majesty's most loving Subjects, the Knights Citizens and Burgesses of the
House of Commons have nominated me, your Graces poor Servant and Subject, to be
their Speaker. This their nomination has hitherto proceeded, that they present
me to speak before your Majesty; Yet this their nomination is only as yet a
Nomination and no Election, until your Majesty gives Allowance and
Approbation. For as in the Heavens a Star is but opacum Corpus until it have
received light from the Sun, so stand I Corpus opacum, a Mute Body, until your
Highness bright shining Wisdom has looked upon me and allowed me. How great a
Charge this is, to be the Mouth of such a Body as your whole Commons represent,
to utter what is spoken, Grandia Regni, My small Experience, being a poor
Professor of the Law, can tell. But how unable I am to do this Office, my
present Speech does tell, that of a number in this House I am most unfit. For
amongst them are many grave, many learned, many deep wise men, and those of
ripe Judgments: But I am untimely Fruit, not yet ripe, but a Bud, scarcely
blossomed: So as I fear me, your Majesty will say, Neglecta frugi eliguntur
folia: Amongst so many fair Fruit ye have plucked a shaking Leaf. If I may be
so bold as to remember a Speech (which I cannot forget) used the last
Parliament in your Majesty's own Mouth, Many come hither ad consulendum qui
nesciunt quid sit consulendum, a just reprehension to many as to my self also,
an untimely Fruit, my years and judgment ill besitting the gravity of this
place. But howsoever I know my self the meanest, and inferior unto all that
ever were before me in this place, yet in faithfulness of service and
dutifulness of love, I think not my self inferior to any that ever were before
me. And amidst my many imperfections, yet this is my comfort, I never knew any
in this place, but if your Majesty gave them favor; God who called them to the
place, gave them also the blessing to discharge it.

The Lord Keeper having received Instructions from the Queen, Answered him.

Mr Solicitor, Her Graces most Excellent Majesty has willed me to signify
unto you, that she has ever well conceived of you since she first heard of
you, which will appear, when her Highness Elected you from others to serve her
self. But by this your modest, wise and well composed Speech, you give her
Majesty further occasion to conceive of you, above that which ever she thought
was in you; by endeavoring to deject and abase your self and your desert, you
have discovered and made known your worthiness and sufficiency to discharge the
place you are called to. And whereas you account your self Corpus opacum, her
Majesty by the Influence of her Virtue and Wisdom does enlighten you, and not
only allows and approves you, but much thanketh the Lower House, and
commends their discretion in making so good a Choice, and Electing so fit a
Man. Wherefore now Mr. Speaker proceed in your Office, and go forward to your
Commendation as you have begun.

The Lord Keepers Speech being ended, the Speaker began a new Speech.

COnsidering the great and wonderful Blessings, besides the long Peace we have
enjoyed under your Graces most Happy and Victorious Reign, and remembering with
what Wisdom and Justice your Grace has Reigned over us, we have Cause daily to
praise God that ever you were given us; and the hazard that your Majesty has
adventured, and the Charge that you have born for us and our safety, ought to
make us ready to lay down our selves and all our living at your Feet to do you
service, etc.

After this he related the great Attempts of her Majesty's Enemies against us,
especially the Pope, and the King of Spain who adhered unto him. How
wonderfully we were delivered in Eighty eight, and what a favor God therein
manifested unto her Majesty.

His Speech after this tended wholly to show out of the History of England, and
the old State, how the Kings of England ever since Henry the Thirds time have
maintained themselves to be Supreme Head over all Causes within their own
Dominions. And then reciting the Laws that every one made in his time, for
maintaining their own Supremacy, and excluding the Pope, he drew down this
proof by a Statute of every King since Henry the Third to Edward the Sixth.

This ended, he came to speak of Laws, that were so great and so many already,
that they were fit to be termed Elephantinae Leges. Therefore to make more Laws
it might seem superfluous. And to him that might ask, Quid causa ut crescant
tot magna volumina Legis? It may be Answered, In promptu causa est, crescit in
orb malum.

The malice of our Arch-Enemy the Devil, though it were always great, yet never
greater than now; and that Dolus and Malum being crept in so far amongst men,
it was requisite that sharp Ordinances should be provided to prevent them, and
all care to be used for her Majesty's Preservation.

Now am I to make unto your Majesty three Petitions in the name of the Commons;
First, That liberty of Speech and freedom from Arrests, according to the
Ancient Custom of Parliament, be granted to your Subjects; Secondly, That we
may have access unto your Royal Person to present those things that shall be
considered amongst us; Lastly, That your Majesty will give us your Royal Assent
to the things that are agreed upon.

But this said last Petition seems to have been mistaken by that Anonymus, out
of whom this said Speech is transcribed as aforesaid: for this Petition is
proper and usual at the end of a Sessions upon a Prorogation, or of a
Parliament upon a Dissolution, when the two Houses have passed diverse Acts,
which only want the Royal Assent to put life into them. And doubtless the third
Petition which should have ensued here, was for freedom from Arrests for
themselves and their necessary Attendants, which being wholly omitted, I have
before caused to be inserted (though more briefly) in its proper place. And
thus this mistake being cleared, the residue of the said Speakers Speech
ensues. And for my self I humbly beseech your Majesty, if any Speech shall
fall from me, or behavior found in me not decent and fit, that it may not be
imputed blame upon the House, but laid upon me and pardoned in me.

To this Speech the Lord Keeper having received new Instructions from the
Queen, made his Reply; in which he first commended the Speaker greatly for it;
And then he added some Examples of History for the Kings Supremacy in Henr. 2.
and Kings before the Conquest. As to the deliverance we received from our
Enemies, and the Peace we enjoyed, the Queen would have the praise of all those
attributed to God only.

And touching the Commendations given to her self, she said, Well might we have
a wiser Prince, but never should they have one that more regarded them, and in
Justice would carry an evener stroke without exception of persons, and such a
Prince she wished they might always have.

To your three demands the Queen Answers: Liberty of Speech is granted you;
but how far this is to be thought on, there be two things of most necessity,
and those two do most harm, which are Wit and Speech: The one exercised in
Invention, and the other in uttering things invented. Privilege of Speech is
granted, but you must know what privilege you have, not to speak every one
what he lists, or what comes in his brain to utter that; but your privilege
is I or No. Wherefore, Mr Speaker, her Majesty's Pleasure is, that if you
perceive any idle Heads which will not stick to hazard their own Estates, which
will meddle with reforming the Church and transforming the Commonwealth, and
do exhibit any Bills to such purpose, that you receive them not, until they be
viewed and considered by those, who it is fitter should consider of such
things, and can better judge of them.

To the persons all privilege is granted, with this Caveat, That under color
of this privilege, no man's ill doings, or not performing of Duties, be covered
and protected.

To the last, free access is granted to her Majesty's Person, so that it be
upon urgent and weighty Causes, and at times convenient, and when her Majesty
may be at leisure from other important Causes of the Realm.

Nota, That these several interlocutory Speeches of the Speaker and the Lord
Keeper, are not found in the Original Journal-Books of the Upper House, or the
House of Commons, but are supplied out of a very Elaborate Journal of the
Passages of the said Commons House, taken by some Anonymous Member thereof this
Parliament, and are here inserted; as was also the Lord Keepers Speech upon the
first day of the same, upon the reasons there alleged: which see at large set
down upon Monday the 19th day of this instant February foregoing in fine diei.

Although the usual Custom in the Original Journal Book of the Upper House is
to place all Proxies upon what days soever returnable, before the beginning of
the Journal it self; yet I have conceived it much more methodical to place all
such returns in those days upon which they were delivered to the Clerk of the
Parliament, and always upon that day on which the first Return was, to make
some short observation of that, if it be unusual and extraordinary, and so to
refer the view of the residue to their proper days. On this instant Thursday
therefore being the 22th day of February, and the second day on which the Upper
House sat, was returned only this one unusual Proxy.

22o Die Febr. introductae sunt Literae procuratoriae Johannis Episcopi
Carliolen' in quibus Procuratores suos constituit Johannem Archi-episcopum
Cantuarien. Johannem Episcopum London, and Matthaeum Episcopum Dunelmen'.

Nota, That this is one of those Proxies which I call unusual and
extraordinary, in respect that this Bishop of Carlisle did make or constitute
three several Proctors, whereas usually a Spiritual Lord nominateth but two
conjunctim and divisim, and a Temporal Lord but one, and that also of their own
Order: whence it is plain that these Proxies may not unfitly be styled unusual,
whereby the Spiritual Lords do appoint Temporal Lords for their Proctors, or
but one Proctor a piece, or more than two, or when any Temporal Lord nominateth
a Spiritual for his Proctor, or constituteth more Proctors than one. And
therefore it is worth the observation, that at this very time, of nine Temporal
Lords that sent their Proxies this Parliament by her Majesty's License, but one
of them nominated two Proctors. Which see upon Monday the first day of March
ensuing, all the rest constituting but one. Yet the Proxies of the Spiritual
Lords, being six in number, were all of them unusual and extraordinary; which I
conceive is not easily to be patterned in any other Parliaments except the
first, which was sent by Edmond Bishop of Norwich, in which he constituted only
John Bishop of London and Richard Bishop of Peterburgh his Proctors, and
returned on Monday the 19th day of this instant February foregoing, although it
be there omitted as a thing usual and not worth the setting down at large. But
the other four extraordinary Proxies sent by so many several Bishops see
afterward according to their several Returns upon Saturday the 24th day, and
on Tuesday the 27th day of this instant February ensuing; as also on Wednesday
the 7th day and on Wednesday the 28th day of March next following.

Where also it may be noted, that John Archbishop of Canterbury had this
Parliament five Proxies, viz. From John Bishop of Carliste, John Archbishop of
York, Thomas Bishop of Winchester, Matthew Bishop of Durham and Thomas Bishop
of Chichester, all which being extraordinary are at large set down in this
present Journal in those several days upon which they were returned; so that
from this and many other Precedents of former and later Parliaments it is most
plain that by the ancient Usages and Customs of the Upper House, any Lord
Spiritual or Temporal being a Member thereof, is capable of as many single or
Joint Proxies as shall be sent unto him.

Dominus Custos magni Sigilli ex mandato Dominae Reginae continuavit praesens
Parliamentum usque in diem Sabbati prox' futur'.

On Saturday the 29th day of February the Bill for restraining and punishing
Vagrant and seditious Persons, who under feigned pretenses of Conscience and
Religion, corrupt and seduce the Queens Subjects, was read prima vice.

Eodem die retornatum est breve quo Richardus Wigorn' Episcopus praesenti
Parliamento interesse summonebatur, and idem Episcopus ad suum praeheminentiae
sedendi in Parliament' locum admissus est, salvo cuiquam jure suo.

This day also was one extraordinary or unusual Proxy returned from a
Spiritual Lord, who constituted but one Proctor; whereas usually no such Lord
constituteth fewer than two: which said Proxy is thus entered in the Original
Journal Book of this Parliament in the beginning thereof in manner and form
following, viz.

24. Febr. Introductae sunt Literae procuratoriae Johannis Eboracensis
Archi-episcopi, in quibus Procuratorem suum constituit Johannem Archi-episcopum
Catuarien'.

On Monday the 26th day of February, retornatum est breve quo Edwardus Dominus
Cromwell praesenti Parliamento summonebatur interesse, and idem Dominus ad suum
praeheminentiae sedendi in Parliamento locum admissus est salvo jure alieno.

The Writ was returned whereby Gilbert Earl of Shrewsbury was summoned, etc.

The several Writs were also returned whereby George Bishop of Landaff, William
Lord Crompton, and Edward Earl of Worcester were summoned.

It seemed by the Journal Book, that nothing else was done, but the Parliament
continued according to the usual form which is entered in the Original
Journal Book of the Upper House in these words following, viz.

Dominus Custos magni Sigilli continuavit praesens Parliamentum usque in diem
Mercurii proxime futurum.

On Tuesday the 27th day of February, although the Upper House sat not, yet was
there one unusual and extraordinary Proxy returned from a Spiritual Lord, who
constituted but one Proctor; which said Proxy was privately delivered in unto
the Clerk of the said House, and is entered by him in the Original Journal Book
of the same House in manner and form following, viz.

27. Februarii Introductae sunt Literae procuratoriae Thomae Wintonien'
Episcopi, in quibus Procuratorem suum constituit Johannem Archi-episcopum
Cantuarien'.

On Wednesday the 28th day of February (to which day the Parliament had been
last continued) two several Writs were returned, whereby John Bishop of Bath
and Wells, and Matthew Bishop of Durham were summoned to come to this present
Parliament, who accordingly were admitted to their several places.

Two Bills also this Morning of no great moment had each of them one reading;
of which the first was the Bill for the better Assurance and Confirmation of
the Jointure of the Lady Margaret Countess of Cumberland, which was read prima
vice.

On Thursday the first day of March, to which day the Parliament had been last
continued, two Bills of no great moment had each of them one reading; of which
the first being the Bill for the Assurance of certain Lands sold to List Cave
and others, was read prima vice.

On Saturday the third day of March, to which day the Parliament had been
continued on Thursday foregoing, Four Bills of no great moment had each of them
one reading; of which the first being against Counterfeiting of Counselors and
principal Officers hands, was read prima vice.

On Monday the 5th day of March, to which day the Parliament had been last
continued on Saturday foregoing, Three Bills of no great moment had each of
them one reading; of which the second being against Counterfeiting of
Counselors and principal Officers hands, was read secunda vice, and commissa
ad ingrossand.

5 Martii introductae sunt literae procuratoriae Henrici Comitis Huntingdon, in
quibus Procuratores suos constituit Gulielmum Dominum Burleigh The saurarium
Angliae, and Robertum Comitem Essex. Vicecomitem Hereford' and Dominum Ferrers
de Chartly: Quod nota.

On Tuesday the 6th day of March, the Bill for the Assurance of Land sold to
Lisle Cave was read tertia vice.

On Wednesday the 7th day of March, to which day the Parliament had been last
continued, Retornatum est breve quo Johannes Salisburien' Episcopus praesenti
Parliamento interesse summonebatur, qui admissus est ad suum praeheminentiae
sedendi in Parliamento locum, salvo jure alieno.

There was also brought up to the Lords from the House of Commons a Bill for
the Naturalizing and making free of William Sidney Son of Sir Robert Sidney
Knight, Governor of Flushing, and Dame Barbara his Wife, and of Peregrine
Wingfield Son and Heir of Sir John Wingfield Knight, and Dame Susan Countess of
Kent his Wife.

And this day also was one extraordinary or unusual Proxy returned from a
spiritual Lord, who constituted but one Proctor, whereas usually no such Lord
constituteth fewer than two; which said Proxy is thus Entered in the beginning of
the Original Journal Book of this Parliament.

7 Martii introductae sunt literae procuratoriae Matthaei Dunelmensis Episcopi,
in quibus Procuratorem suum constituit Johannem Cantuariensem Episcopum.

On Thursday the 8th day of March, to which day the Parliament had been last
continued, three Bills of no great moment had each of them one reading; of
which the first was the Bill for Explanation and Confirmation of the Queens
Majesty's Title to the Lands and Tenements, late Sir Francis Englefield's
Knight, Attainted of High Treason. Not long after this Bill upon the second
reading had been committed to engrossing, according to a certainOrder formerly
made by the Lords, Francis Englefield Esquire appeared before them with one of
the Learned Council, who were commanded to declare why an Act for Explanation
and Confirmation of the Queens Majesty's Title to the Lands and Tenements late
Sir Francis Englefield's Knight, Attainted of High Treason, should not pass:
And upon Allegations made by the said Learned Council, the Lords Commanded that
they should set them down in writing, and deliver them to the Attorney General;
and that on Friday they should attend on the Judges and the Queens Learned
Council at Serjeants-Inn, and show such Deeds of Conveyance as they made
mention of before the Lords: That the said Lords upon Answer of the Judges and
Learned Council might proceed in the said Bill as it should seem best to their
Lordships.

On Saturday the 10th day of March, to which day the Parliament had been last
continued, the Bill for Naturalizing and making free of William Sidney the
eldest Son of Sir Robert Sidney Knight, etc. being read prima vice, the Lords gave
in Commandment to Mr Attorney General to bring on Monday certain Depositions
remaining in the Exchequer concerning the Cause of Sir Francis Englefield,
after they had first heard the Opinion of the Judges, which was delivered to
the Lord Chief Justice of England.

On Monday the 12th day of March, to which day the Parliament had been last
continued, two Bills of no great moment had each of them one reading; of which
the second being the Bill for restraining of Popish Recusants to some certain
places of abode was read tertia vice and conclusa.

On Tuesday the 13th day of March, Two Bills of no great moment had each of
them one reading; of which the first being the Bill concerning the Lands of
Henry Lord Abergavenny deceased, was read tertia vice and conclusa.

The Lords at the Bishop of Worcesters Motion condescended to a Contribution
for relief of such poor Soldiers as went begging in the Streets of London,
viz. That every Earl should give forty shillings, every Bishop thirty
shillings, and every Baron twenty shillings. And appointed the said Bishop and
Lord Norris Collectors thereof, and committed the bestowing thereof to the Earl
of Essex and the Lord Willoughby of Eresby.

On Thursday the 15th day of March, to which day the Parliament had been last
continued, Four Bills of no great moment had each of them one reading; of which
the first being the Bill touching the Lord Harowden was read prima vice.

On Friday the 16th day of March, Two Bills of no great moment, of which the
first being against persons Outlawed and such as will not pay their Debts and
Duties, was read tertia vice and conclusa.

And then the Lord Keeper continued the Parliament in the usual form to Monday
following.

On Monday the 19th day of March, the Bill touching the Lord Harowden was read
secunda vice and commissa ad ingrossandum.

On Tuesday the 20th day of March, the Bill touching Sir Francis Englefield's
Lands had its third reading and was concluded.

Four Bills were also this Forenoon sent up to the Lords from the House of
Commons; of which the second touching the sale of certain Manors, Lands and
Tenements from Valentine Knightley Esquire etc. was read prima vice.

On Thursday the 22th day of March, Two Bills of no great moment had each of
them one reading; of which the second concerning the Assurance of certain Lands
and Tenements to Read Stafford Esquire and Mabell his Wife, and to the Heirs of
the said Read was read secunda vice.

On Saturday the 24th day of March the Bill touching the Lord Harowden was upon
the third reading concluded.

Four Bills were brought up to the Lords from the House of Commons; of which
the second was concerning the lawful deprivation of Edmond Bonner late Bishop
of London.

On Monday the 26th day of March, to which day the Parliament had been last
continued, Three Bills of no great moment had each of them one reading; of
which the first being the Bill for the grant of three entire Subsidies and fix
Fifteenths and Tenths granted by the Temporalty was read prima vice; which said
Bill had already passed the House of Commons and had been sent up from them to
the Lords on Saturday last.

This Morning also two Bills of no great moment were sent up to the Lords from
the House of Commons; of which the second was the Bill concerning the
restraining of Popish Recusants to certain places of abode, etc.

On Tuesday the 27th day of March, Three Bills of no great moment had each of
them one reading; of which the first being for the Assurance of certain Lands
and Tenements to Read Stafford and Mabell his Wife was read tertia vice and
expedit.

On Wednesday the 28th day of March, Three Bills of no great moment had each of
them one reading; of which the second being for the grant of three entire
Subsidies and Fifteenths, etc. was read secunda vice.

Five Bills also were sent up to the Lords from the House of Commons; of which
the first was for restitution in blood of Sir Thomas Parrot Knight, and was read
prima vice.

This day finally was one unusual or extraordinary Proxy returned from one of
the Bishops absent at this time from the Parliament (as diverse other Peers) by
the License of her Majesty; in which said Proxy he constituted but one Proctor,
whereas the Ordinary Custom is for every Spiritual Lord to nominate two
Proctors at the least, and every Temporal Lord but one. This Proxy is thus
Entered in the beginning of the Original Journal Book of the Upper House, viz.

28 Martii introductae sunt Literae Procuratoriae Thomae Cicestrensis Episcopi,
in quibus Procuratorem suum constituit Johannem Cantuariensem Episcopum.

On Thursday the 29th day of March, Three Bills of no great moment had each of
them one reading; of which the first being the Bill for restitution in blood of
Sir Thomas Parrot Knight, was read secunda and tertia vice, and expedit.

On Friday the 30th day of March, Five Bills had each of them one reading; of
which the first was the Bill for the grant of three entire Subsidies, etc.
granted by the Temporalty; And the last was the Bill of Subsidy granted by the
Clergy: Both which Bills at this time, upon their several third readings passed
the House.

On Saturday the 31th day of March, Six Bills had each of them one reading; of
which the last being the Bill prohibiting Strangers born to sell by way of
retail Foreign Wares brought into this Realm, was read secunda and tertia vice,
and rejected.

On Monday the second day of April, to which day the Parliament had been last
continued, the Bill for Explanation of a Statute made in the thirty third year
of Henry the Eighth, touching Grants made to his Majesty and Confirmation of
Letters Patents, was read secunda vice.

Six Bills were brought up to the Lords from the House of Commons; of which the
second was for bringing in of fresh Water into the Town of Stonehouse in the
County of Devon.

On Tuesday the third day of April, Five Bills of no great moment had each of
them one reading; of which the fourth being the Bill for the maintenance of the
Navigation of England, was read secunda vice.

On Wednesday the 4th day of April, the Bill for Explanation of the Statute
made in the thirty fourth year of Henry the Eighth, for confirmation of Letters
Patents made by his Highness to others, was read prima and secunda vice.

On Thursday the 5th day of April, Three Bills of no great moment had each of
them one reading; of which the second being the Bill for Confirmation of
Letters Patents to the Mayors, Sheriffs, Citizens and Commonalty of the City of
Lincoln was read tertia vice and conclusa.

This Morning also this Order following was agreed on amongst the Lords, viz.

WHereas the Lords of Parliament both Spiritual and Temporal assembled in the
Parliament Chamber here at Westminster have with one uniform consent, both in
their own names and the rest of the Lords now absent, Ordered, that there shall
be a charitable relief and contribution made toward the Aid and help of a
number of Soldiers that are seen in the time of this Parliament maimed and
sore hurt in the Wars of France and Low Countries and on the Seas, for the
service of the Queens Majesty and the Realm, and for that purpose have allowed
that every Archbishop, Marquess, Earl and Viscount should pay toward their
Contribution the sum of forty shilings, every Bishop thirty shillings, and
every Baron twenty shillings; for Collection whereof there has been appointed
the Queens Majesty's Almoner and the Bishop of Worcester to collect the sums of
Bishops; and the Lord Norris to collect the sums payable by the Lords Temporal;
which has been diligently done and received by them from all the Lords
Spiritual and Temporal that have been present, and that have attended to their
great charge on the service of the Realm in this Parliament: And considering
the number of the Soldiers to be relieved therewith, being very many,
notwithstanding the Knights, Citizens and Burgesses of the House of Commons
have yielded very good and large Contributions according to their Degrees; Yet
for the better relief of the said maimed Soldiers, It is by the Lords
Spiritual and Temporal that have given their Attendance here, and have
charitably and honorably yielded to this Contribution, thought meet, and so it
is Ordered and Decreed by them with common and free consent, that all the Lords
of Parliament that have been altogether absent in this Sessions, and that shall
not have Contributed to this charitable use of relief before the end of this
Sessions, shall be required by Letters to be sent to them by the Lords that had
their Procuration for their absence, or by Letters from the Lord Keeper of the
Great Seal required and charged, to Cause payments to be made according to
their Degrees and Vocations the double of the sums of money paid by the Lords
that have been here present and continued their Attendance: That is to say,
that every Earl that has been absent, shall pay four pound, the Archbishop of
York to pay as much. And every Bishop also absent to pay three pound, and every
Baron forty shillings. And for such as have been here present and continued
their Attendance at some times though very seldom, having been absent for the
more part, it is thought meet, that every such Lord Spiritual and Temporal
shall according to their Degrees pay a third part more than the Lords that have
been constantly present. All which sums of money they shall cause to be
delivered to the hands of the Lord Keeper of the Great Seal, to be afterward
by such Spiritual Lords of Parliament as are chosen for that purpose;
distributed to the maimed Soldiers as shall be found to have most need
thereof. The like whereof the Commons Assembled in this Parliament have
Ordered. For all the Members of that House that are absent and have not paid,
are to contribute in double manner. Which Order is thought very just,
considering the Lords and others who have been absent and have been at no
charge to come up and give their Attendance, may very reasonably and with a
great saving to their Charges contribute to this Order. And if any Lord
Spiritual or Temporal shall refuse or forbear thus to do, (which is hoped in
Honor none will do) there shall be ordinary means used to levy the same.

On Friday the 6th day of April, to which day the Parliament had been last
continued, four Bills of no great moment had each of them one reading; of which
the second being the Bill for avoiding deceits used in sale of twice laid
Cordage for the better preservation of the Navy of this Realm, was read tertia
vice and conclusa.

Eight Bills were sent up to the Lords from the House of Commons; of which the
last was the Bill to make void the Spiritual Livings of those that have
forsaken the Realm and do cleave to the Pope and his Religion.

On Saturday the 7th day of April, Two Bills of no great moment had each of
them one reading; of which the first being the Bill for rating of the Wages of
Spinners and Weavers, and to reform the falsities of Regrators of Woollen Yarn,
was read prima vice.

On Monday the 9th day of April, to which day the Parliament had been last
continued, three Bills were each of them read secunda and tertia vice, and so
expedited; of which the second was the Bill for the bringing of fresh Water to
the Town of Stonehouse in the County of Devon.

Eight Bills also this Morning were sent up to the Lords from the House of
Commons; of which the first being the Bill for the Naturalizing of Justice
Dormer and George Sheppy being born beyond the Seas, of English Parents, and to
put them in the nature of mere English, was read prima and secunda vice.

But it does not appear whether this Bill were committed or no, which did not
only happen in this place by the negligence of Mr Anthony Mason at this time
Clerk of the Upper House, but also through the whole Original Journal Book of
the said House this Parliament; in all which although diverse Bills are said to
be read the second time, yet it is not at all expressed whether they were
thereupon Ordered to be engrossed, or further to be considered of by some
select Committees of the House; one of which of necessity must be put in
Execution upon the said second reading of a Bill, both in the Upper House and
that of the House of Commons, unless the Bill have its third reading also at
the same time and pass the House, or else be dashed upon the question, and so
cast out of it.

This Morning finally, Whereas a Bill Entitled An Act touching Power and
Liberty to repeal certain uses of a Deed Tripartite herein mentioned of and in
certain Lands, Manors and Tenements of Anthony Cook of Romford in the County
of Essex Esquire, has been heretofore three times read and assented unto by
the Lords, in the which Bill there is no Saving to the Queens Majesty or any
other person or persons, of their lawful Estates or Titles; This day there was
a Saving drawn for her Majesty and all others, which was offered to this House;
and some question and ambiguity did grow, whether the Saving should be now
added to the Bill. And in the end it was resolved, that the Saving should be
added to the Bill; for that it is usual and requisite to have some Saving in
every Bill, and for that there was nothing in the Saving contrary to any matter
in the Bill, and that her Majesty's Right and all other be saved thereby.
Nevertheless upon weighty considerations the Lords have Ordered, that this
shall not hereafter be drawn to make any Precedent.

On Tuesday the 10th day of April in the Morning were two Bills read, of which
the second being the Bill for the Queens most gracious and general free Pardon,
was read prima vice, and so passed upon the question.

Nota, That the Bill or Act for the Queens general Pardon passes each House
upon the first reading; Whereas other Bills cannot be expedited without being
read three times both by the Lords and the Commons.

The Queens Majesty came not till the Afternoon, and therefore in this place
through the negligence of the Clerk, the continuing of the Parliament until
some hour in the Afternoon is omitted, which should have been inserted in these
words, viz.

Dominus Custos magni Sigilli continnavit praesens Parliamentum usque in horam,
etc. a Meridie.

Between five and six of the Clock in the Afternoon this present Tuesday, being
the tenth day of April, the Queens Majesty, accompanied with her Officers and
daily Attendants, came to the Upper House, and as soon as her Majesty with the
Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and the rest that have place there, were set, the
Knights, Citizens and Burgesses of the House of Commons having notice thereof
came up with their Speaker, bringing with them the Bill of Subsidy. The said
Speaker being placed at the Bar at the lower end of the Upper House, and as
many of the House of Commons as could conveniently being let in, after Humble
Reverence done to her Majesty spoke as follows:

THE High Court of Parliament, most High and Mighty Prince, is the greatest and
most ancient Court within this your Realm. For before the Conquest in the High
places of the West Saxons, we read of a Parliament holden; and since the
Conquest they have been holden by all your Noble Predecessors Kings of England.

In the time of the West Saxons a Parliament was holden by the Noble King Ina,
by these words: I Ina King of the West Saxons have caused all my Fatherhood,
Aldermen and wisest Commons, with the Godly men of my Kingdom to consult of
weighty matters, etc. Which words do plainly show all the parts of this High
Court still observed to this day. For by King Ina is your Majesty's most Royal
Person represented. The Fatherhood in Ancient time were these which we call
Bishops, and still we call them Reverend Fathers, an Ancient and chief part of
our State.

By Aldermen were meant your Noblemen. For so honorable was the word Alderman
in Ancient time, that the Nobility only were called Aldermen.

By Wisest Commons is meant and signified Knights and Burgesses, and so is your
Majesty's Writ de discretioribus and magis sufficientibus.

By Godliest men is meant your Convocation-House. It consists of such as are
devoted to Religion. And as Godliest men do consult of weightest matters, so is
your Highness Writ at this day pro quibusdam arduis and urgentibus negotiis
nos, Statum and defensionem Regni nostri and Ecclesiae tangentibus.

Your Highness Wisdom and exceeding Judgment withal careful Providence needed
not your Councils: But yet so urgent Causes there were of this Parliament, so
important Considerations, as that we may say (for that we cannot judge) never
Parliament was so needful as now, nor any so Honorable as this.

If I may be bold to say it, I must presume to say that which has been often
said, (but what is well said cannot be too often spoken) this sweet Council of
ours I would compare to that sweet Commonwealth of the little Bees. Sic enim
parvis componere magna solebam. The little Bees have but one Governor whom
they all serve, he is their King, quia later a habet latiora; he is placed in
the midst of their habitations ut in tutissima turri. They forage abroad,
sucking Honey from ever Flower to bring to their King. Ignavnm fuces pccus a
praesepibus arcent, The drones they drive away out of their Hives, non habentes
aculeos. And who so assails their King, in him immittunt aculeos, and tamen Rex
ipse est sine Aculeo.

Your Majesty is that Princely Governor and Noble Queen, whom we all serve;
being protected under the shadow of your Wings we live, and wish you may ever
sit upon your Throne over us. And whosoever shall not say Amen, for them we
pray ut convertantur ne percant, and ut consundantur ne noccant. Under your
happy government we live upon Honey, we suck upon every sweet Flower: But where
the Be sucketh Honey, there also the Spider draws Poison. Some such venoms
there be. But such Drones and Door Bees we will expel the Hive and serve your
Majesty, and withstand any enemy that shall assault you. Our Lands, our Goods,
our Lives are prostrate at your feet to be commanded. Yea and (thanked be God,
and Honor be to your Majesty for it) such is the power and force of your
Subjects, that of their own strength they are able to encounter your greatest
enemies. And though we be such, yet have we a Prince that is sine Aculeo, so
full of that Clemency is your Majesty. I fear I have been too long, and
therefore to come now to your Laws.

The Laws we have conferred upon this Sessions of so Honorable a Parliament
are of two natures; the one such as have life but are ready to die, except your
Majesty breathe life into them again; the other are Laws that never had life,
but being void of life do come to your Majesty to seek Life.

The first sort are those Laws that had continuances until this Parliament, and
are now to receive new Life or are to die for ever. The other that I term
capable of life are those which are newly made, but have no essence until your
Majesty gives them life.

Two Laws there are, but I must give the Honor where it is due; for they come
from the Noble wise Lords of the Upper House; the most Honorable and
beneficial Laws that could be desired: the one a confirmation of all Letters
Patents from your Majesty's most Noble Father of all Ecclesiastical Livings;
which that King of most renowned memory your Father took from those
Superstitious Monasteries and Priories, and translated them to the erecting and
setting up of many Foundations of Cathedral Churches and Colleges, greatly
furthering the maintenance of Learning and true Religion.

The other Law to suppress the obstinate Recusant and the dangerous Sectary,
both very pernicious to your Government.

Lastly, Your loving and obedient Subjects the Commons of the Lower House
humbly and with all dutiful thanks stand bound unto your gracious goodness for
your general and large Pardon granted unto them, wherein many great offenses
are pardoned.

But it extends only to offenses done before the Parliament.

I have many ways since the beginning of this Parliament by ignorance and
insufficiency to perform that which I should have done, offended your Majesty,
I most humbly crave to be partaker of your Majesty's most gracious Pardon.

The Lord Keeper received Instructions from the Queen, and afterward replied
unto the Speaker.

The former part of this Speech was an Answer almost verbatim to the Speakers
Oration, very excellently and exactly done: And those things which follow are
to this or the like purpose, viz. That her Majesty did most graciously accept
of these Services and Devotions of this Parliament, commending them that they
had employed the time so well and spent it in so necessary affairs, save only
that in some things they had spent more time than needed. But she perceived
that some men did it more for their satisfaction than the necessity of the
thing deserved. She misliketh also that such irreverence was showed toward
Privy Counselors, who were not to be accounted as common Knights and Burgesses
of the House, that are Counselors but during the Parliament; whereas the other
are standing Counselors, and for their wisdom and great service are called to
the Council of the State.

That the Queens Majesty had heard that some men in the Cause of great
necessity and grant of Aid, had seemed to regard their Country, and made their
necessity more than it was, forgetting the urgent necessity of the time and
dangers that were now imminent.

That her Majesty would not have the people seared with a report of great
dangers, but rather to be encouraged with boldness against the Enemies of the
State. And that therefore she straightly charged and commanded that the Mustered
Companies in every Shire should be supplied, if they were decayed: And that
their Provisions of Armor and Munition should be better than heretofore it has
been used.

That for this offer of three Subsidies, her Majesty most graciously in all
kindness thanketh her Subjects: But except it were freely and willingly given,
she did not accept of it; for her Majesty never accepts any thing that is not
freely given.

That if the Coffers of her Majesty's Treasures were not empty, or if the
Revenues of the Crown and other Princely Ornaments could suffice to supply her
wants and the Charges of the Realm, in the word of a Prince she does pronounce
it, she would not have charged her Subjects, nor have accepted of this they
give her.

The Lord Keeper's Speech being ended, after some time of Intermission, the
Queen being set in her Chair of State, used a Princely Speech unto the House;
of which the greatest part was to the effect and purpose following, viz.

THis Kingdom has had many Wise, Noble and Victorious Princes, I will not
compare with any of them in Wisdom, Fortitude and other Virtues; but saving the
Duty of a Child, that is not to compare with his Father, in Love, Care,
Sincerity and Justice, I will compare with any Prince that ever you had, or
shall have. It may be thought simplicity in me, that all this time of my Reign
I have not sought to advance my Territories, and enlarge my Dominions; for
opportunity has served me to do it. I acknowledge that my Womanhood and
weakness in that respect. But it has not been the hardness to obtain, or doubt
how to keep the things so obtained, that only has withheld me from these
attempts: My Mind was never to Invade my Neighbors, or to Usurp over any. I am
contented to Reign over mine own, and to Rule as a Just Prince. Yet the King of
Spain does challenge me to be the Quarreller, and the Beginner of all these
Wars. He does me the greatest wrong that can be; for my Conscience does not
accuse my thoughts, wherein I have done him the least Injury; so that I am
persuaded in my Conscience, if he knew what I know, he would be sorry himself
for the wrong he has done me. I fear not all his Threatenings, his great
Preparations and mighty Forces do not stir me: For though he come against me
with a greater Power than ever was his Invincible Navy, I doubt not but (God
assisting me, upon whom I always trust) I shall be able to defeat him and
overthrow him. For my Cause is Just. I heard say when he attempted his last
Invasion, some upon the Seacoasts forsook their Towns and fled up higher into
the Country, and left all naked and exposed to his Entrance: But I swear unto
you, By God, if I knew those persons, or may know of any that shall do so
hereafter, I will make them know and feel what it is to be so fearful in so
urgent a Cause.

The Subsidy you give me I accept thankfully, if you give me your good will
with it; but if the necessity of the time and your Preservations did not
require it, I would refuse it. But let me tell you, the sum is not so much,
but that it is needful for a Prince to have so much always lying in her Coffers
for your defense in time of need, and not be driven to get it when she should
use it.

You that are Lieutenants and Gentlemen of Command in your Countries, I require
you to take care and special Order, that the people be well Armed and in
readiness upon all occasions.

You that be Judges and Justices of Peace, I Command and straightly Charge you,
that you see the Law to be duly executed, and that you make them living Laws
when we have put life into them.

Thus with most gracious thanks to the House her Princely Speech ended.

Note, That the several Interlocutory Speeches of the Speaker and the Lord
Keeper immediately foregoing, with the coming up of the said Speaker and the
rest of the House of Commons into the Upper House, are not found in the
Original Journal Book of the same House, but are here inserted partly out of
the Original Journal Book of the House of Commons, and partly out of another
very exact Journal of that House which was in my Custody, being very diligently
observed and set down by some Anonymus, who was a Member of the said House
during this Parliament, out of which the said Speeches were written almost
verbatim. And I have always thought it most fitting in all those several
Journals, ever to refer such like Speeches and other Passages as are wholly
handled and agitated in the said Upper House, to be set down as largely as by
any good Authority they may in the Journal of the same, to which they do most
truly and properly belong, and only for order sake to give a short touch or
remembrance of them in the Journal of the House of Commons.

After the before-recited Speeches were ended as aforesaid, then were the
Titles of all the Acts read in their due order. Which manner of the Clerk of
the Upper House his reading, and of her Majesty's Answering to the said Acts,
is not thus exactly set down in the Original Journal of this Parliament, but is
supplied out of another of the Queens time, and does alike serve in all places,
because the same form is still continued.

And first the Bill of Subsidies, to which the Clerk of the Parliament standing
up did read the Queens Answer in manner and form following, viz.

La Roigne remercie ses loyaulx subjectes, accept leur benevolence, and ainsi
le venlt.

The Clerk of the Parliament having read the Queens Acceptance; and thanks for
the Subsidies given as aforesaid, did then upon reading of the Pardon pronounce
in these French words following, the thanks of the Lords and Commons for the
same.

Les Prelates, Seigneurs and Communes en ce present Parliament assembles, au nom
de tous vostres autres subjects remercient tres humblement vostre Majeste and
prient a dieu, que il vous done en sancte bonne vie and longue.

Nota, That here to the Bill of Subsidy, because it is the mere gift of the
Subject, the Queens Consent is not required for the passing of it, but as it is
joined with her thankful acceptance; nor to the Bill of Pardon, because it is
originally her free gift, is other circumstance required than that the thankful
acceptance thereof to the Lords and Commons be likewise expressed, it being but
once read in either House before it come thus (at last) to be expedited. Now to
all other Bills either private or public the Queens express consent, though in
differing words, is always requisite, as follows, viz.

The public Acts were read, to every one of which allowed by the Queen the
Clerk of the Parliament read in French these words following, viz.

La Roigne le veult.

To every private Act that passes, the said Clerk of the Parliament reads the
Queens words in these French words following, viz.

Soit fait come il est desire.

These two last Answers to the public and private Acts that past, are to be
written by the Clerk of the Parliament at the end of every Act.

To such Acts as her Majesty does forbear to allow, the Clerk of the Parliament
reads in French these words following, viz.

La Roigne s'advisera.

After which ended, the Dissolution of the Parliament followed in these words,
viz.

Dominus Custos magni Sigilli ex mandato Dominae Reginae tunc praesentis,
dissolvit praesens Parliamentum.

THE JOURNAL OF THE House of COMMONS.
A Journal of the daily Passages of the House of Commons in the Parliament
holden at Westminster, Anno 35 Reginae Eliz. Anno Domini 1592. which began
there on Monday the 19th Day of February, and then and there continued until
the Dissolution thereof on Tuesday the 10th Day of April, Anno Domini 1593.

THIS Journal of the House of Commons is fully replenished with many Excellent
Passages; both touching the public State of the Realm, and also concerning
Privileges, Elections, Returns and such like private Affairs of the House it
self: So that not only the dangers of the Realm were discussed and the
Ecclesiastical Government touched, but also consultation was had for a
seasonable and timely preparation to be made against the ambitious and proud
designs of the Spanish King. Neither is it unworthy the Observation, that some
unusual distaste was occasioned from her Majesty toward some Members of the
House by reason of their intermedling with the Succession of the Crown, which
she had expressly forbidden. Which Passage, as also diverse other particular
Speeches, being not found in the Original Journal Book of the House of Commons,
are supplied out of another Journal of the same House very exactly and
elaborately taken by an Anonymus, being a Member of the same at this
Parliament: but yet with this Caution, to avoid confusion, that whatsoever is
inserted out of the saidAnonymous Journal has a particular Animadversion
annexed unto it for discovery thereof.

The eighth Parliament of our Sovereign Lady Elizabeth by the Grace of God
Queen of England, France and Ireland, Defender of the Faith, begun at
Westminster upon Monday being the 19th day of February in the thirty fifth year
of her Majesty's Reign. And thereupon many of the Knights, Citizens, Burgesses
and Barons returned into the same Parliament, then made their Appearances at
Westminster before the Right Honorable the Earl of Darby, Lord Steward of her
Majesty's most Honorable Household, and did take the Oath before the said Lord
Steward or his Deputies, according to the Statute in that behalf lately made
and provided.

The manner of the administering of the said Oath to the said Knights, Citizens
and Burgesses, was as follows. The said Lord Steward removed into the Court
of Requests, and having called over the said Knights and others that were
returned by their names, Mr Vice-Chamberlain and others of her Majesty's
Privy Council took the said Oath before his Honor; and then having appointed
them his Deputies to swear the residue of the House of Commons who had then
appeared according to their several returns, he departed. And thereupon, his
Lordships said Deputies proceeded to the further administrating of the
aforesaid Oath to other Members of the said House; who after they had taken the
same, entered into it and placed themselves. The Fee for entering the name into
the Sergeants Book, is two shillings. The reward to the Doorkeeper three
shillings eight pence. The Fee for returning the Indenture two shillings.

About two of the Clock in the Afternoon this present Monday her Highness with
diverse of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and such others as had place there,
being let into the Upper House, and the Knights, Citizens and Burgesses of the
House of Commons, as many as conveniently could, being (at length) let in; The
Right Honorable Sir John Puckering Knight, Lord Keeper of the Great Seal of
England, declared the said Parliament to be called by her Highness only for
Consultation and Preparation of Aid to be had and made against the mighty and
great Forces of the King of Spain, bent and intended against this Realm, as
well by some practices attempted by him in the Realm of France, and with some
of the Nobility of Scotland, as by many other ways and means to that end and
purpose. And did in the end advise the said Commons to employ the time of this
present Session of Parliament in the aforesaid Consultation; and not to go
about the making of any new Laws for the Commonwealth at this time, as well
for that there are very many good Laws already in force; more (he said) than
are well executed; as for that also such new Laws (if they be needful) may be
treated of and dealt in at some other time hereafter. And so willed them to
repair to their accustomed place, and make Choice of their Speaker. Which done,
the said Parliament was Adjourned until Thursday next following.

After which the said Knights, Citizens and Burgesses of the House of Commons
being Assembled in the same House, the Right Honorable Sir Francis Knowles
Knight, one of her Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council, and Treasurer of
her Highness most Honorable Household, stood up, and putting the House in
remembrance of the said Charge of the said Lord Keeper given unto them for
choosing of their Speaker; and very gravely and amply setting out sundry the
good parts and commendable qualities and abilities of the Right Worshipful Mr
Edward Cook Esquire Learned in the Laws of this Realm, Solicitor General to
her Majesty, and being a Member of this House returned into the same one of the
Knights for the County of Norfolk does in the end for his part and opinion
nominate the said Mr Edward Cook to be chosen for their Speaker in this
present Parliament, if the residue of this House shall so think good. Unto
which Motion as many of the said House assented with their Voices, so the said
Mr Edward Cook thereupon stood up, and very gravely and discreetly behaving
himself as well in all due thankfulness unto this House for their said good
opinion conceived of him, as also in disabling himself in diverse respects for
the discharge due and requisite for that place, humbly prays them to proceed
to a new Election. Which done, the Right Honorable Sir Thomas Heneage Knight,
Vice-Chamberlain to her Majesty, and one other of her Highness's most
Honorable Privy Council, stood up, and not only approving but also very much
amplifying the said former sundry commendable gifts and abilities of the said
Mr Edward Cook exceeding many others, and comparable in his opinion and
judgment with any others for that place and charge, (gathering also the same
partly from his own late former Speech of excuses) does in the end resolutely
deliver his opinion to make choice of the said Mr Cook to be their Speaker.
And also thereupon moving the question to the House, the said Mr Cook was with
one full consent and voice of the whole House, nominated and chosen to be their
Speaker for this present Parliament. And so was thereupon presently brought by
the said Mr Treasurer and Mr Vice-Chamberlain, and set in the Chair. And
immediately after the House did rise and were appointed to repair thither again
upon Thursday next following.

On Thursday the 22th day of February, to which day the Parliament that begun
on Monday foregoing, being the 19th day of the same Month, had been continued
by Sir John Puckering Knight Lord Keeper of the Great Seal, by her Majesty's
Commandment, the Queens Majesty and diverse of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal
being set in the Upper House, the Knights, Citizens and Burgesses of the House
of Commons had notice thereof, and thereupon they repaired thither with Edward
Cook Esquire, her Majesty's Solicitor, their lately Elected Speaker; who
being led up to the Rail or Bar at the lower end of the said House by two of
the most-eminent Personages of the aforesaid House of Commons, after humble
reverence made, declared unto her Majesty his Election to the said place of
Prolocutor; and then alleging (according to the usual course) his own
insufficiency did desire her Majesty to enable him to that Charge; and to
consider that howsoever he were the meanest that ever went before him in that
place in respect of Experience, yet in respect of his faithfulness he thought
himself inferlour to none.

After which Speech her Majesty by the Mouth of the Lord Keeper, having allowed
and approved his Election, the said Speaker having in a second Speech shortly
touched her Highness happy and victorious Reign, and somewhat largely proved
the antientSupremacy of the Kings of England in Ecclesiastical matters, did in
the end of his said Speech make certain Petitions of course in the name of the
House of Commons; First, For liberty of Speech; Secondly, For freedom from
Arrests; And thirdly, For Access unto her Majesty. And lastly, For Pardon for
himself if he should in any thing unwittingly be mistaken.

To which Speech the Lord Keeper, having received new Instructions from her
Majesty, made a reply in particular to the several branches of the said
Speakers Speech. And to his three demands he Answered, that liberty of Speech
was granted in respect of the I and No, but not that every one should speak
what he listed. And touching freedom from Arrests, and Access to her Majesty,
he advised, that they might be cautiously made use of.

Nota, That none of these Particulars touching the Presentment of the Speaker,
are set down in the Original Journal Book of the House of Commons, but are
abstracted out of another Journal of the same House taken by an Anonymous
Member of the same during the Parliament, mentioned at the beginning of this
present Journal, yet it appears plainly by the very Original Journal Book it
self, Fol. 262. l. that the Prosocutor was this day presented to her Majesty,
where the words are as follows, viz.

Jovis xxiido Febr. 92. This Day Mr Speaker was presented unto her Majesty.

Which said words (being only here a little otherwise placed for Order sake
than there) have a large Blank left at the end of them of somewhat above half a
page, with intention no doubt at the first to have inserted the whole manner of
the proceeding both of this presentment and admission.

After the Return also of the Speaker (now completely invested in that place)
with the rest of the House of Commons, one Bill was read according to the usual
form in that Case accustomed, which is set down in the said Journal Book in
these words following, viz.

The Bill, that a Bar at large may be pleaded in any Action of Ejectione firmae
was read the first time.

Mr Speaker immediately after the reading of this Bill, and his opening of the
contents of the same to this House, showed unto them from her Majesty, that her
Highness had Adjourned (mistaken for continued) the Higher House till Saturday
next; And also that her Majesty's pleasure likewise was, that this House should
therefore be Adjourned till the same time; which being so done accordingly,
this House did then rise, and every man went away.

On Saturday the 24th day of February the House being set, and a great number
of the Members of the same assembled; Mr Speaker not then as yet being come to
the House, some of the House said one to another, they heard he was sick: And
one affirmed it to be so indeed, showing that he had been with him this Morning
himself; and left him sick in his Bed, and his Physician and his Wife with him;
and some others supposing that he would shortly signify unto this House, the
Cause of that his absence, moved that the Clerk might in the mean time proceed
to saying of the Litany and Prayers. Which being so done accordingly, the
Sergeant of this House presently after the said Prayers finished, brought word
from Mr Speaker unto the Right Honorable Sir John Woolley Knight one of her
Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council, and a Member of this House and then
present in the same House, that he had been this last Night and also was this
present Forenoon so extremely pained with a wind in his Stomach and Looseness of
Body, that he could not as yet without his further great peril and danger
adventure into the Air at this time, which otherwise most willingly he would
have done. And willed that the Clerk of this House might signify unto the House
the said estate of his Case, and in his name to desire their good favorable
considerations of the same, not doubting their gentle and courteous acceptance
of that his so reasonable excuse, as by this House has also been in former
time used in like Case toward some other his Predecessors in the place he now
serves; And to show them, he trusts in God he shall be able to attend them
in this House upon the next day of sitting, which will be Monday next. The
Effect of which Message being then signified unto this House by the said Clerk
of the House, all the said Members of this House being very sorry for Mr
Speaker his sickness, rested well satisfied. And so the House did rise, and
every man departed away.

Nota, That this is all which is found in the Original Journal Book of the
House of Commons touching this days business, and therefore that which
follows is supplied out of that Anonymous Journal mentioned at the beginning
of this present Journal, touching the residue of this days passages.

This day Mr Peter Wentworth and Sir Henry Bromley delivered a Petition unto
the Lord Keeper, therein desiring the Lords of the Upper House to be suppliants
with them of the lower House unto her Majesty for Entailing the Succession of
the Crown, whereof a Bill was readily drawn by them.

Her Majesty was highly displeased therewith after she knew thereof, as a matter
contrary to her former strait Commandment; and charged the Council to call the
parties before them. Sir Thomas Heneage presently sent for them, and after
Speeches had with them, commanded them to forbear the Parliament, and not to go
out from their several Lodgings.

The day after being Sunday and the 25th of Febr. though the House sat not,
yet they were called before the Lord Treasurer, the Lord Buckhurst and Sir
Thomas Heneage. The Lords entreated them favorably and with good Speeches; But
so highly was her Majesty offended that they must needs commit them, and so
they told them. Whereupon Mr Peter Wentworth was sent Prisoner unto the Tower;
Sir Henry Bromley and one Mr Richard Stevens, to whom Sir Henry Bromley had
imparted the matter, were sent to the Fleet, as also Mr Welsh the other Knight
for Worcestershire. Vide Mar. 10.

About this matter in the beginning of the Parliament was appointed a Committee
to be had of many grave, wise and ancient Parliament men, which were of the
House, but at this time few met at the place appointed, at least not such as
were expected.

It was appointed also at this time to Mr Stevens to peruse the penning of the
Petition that should have been delivered to that House, and to have provided a
Speech upon the delivery of it: But this Office by reason of other occasions he
could not attend. What other things were done or spoken in that Conference,
were, as I heard, confessed to some of the Privy Council by some of those
Parties that were present at that Conference. All that were there, except those
beforenamed, went free and were never called in question that I heard of. And
thus far it is inserted out of the aforesaid Anonymous Journal.

On Monday the 26th day of February, the Bill for reducing disloyal Subjects to
their due Obedience, had its first reading.

Upon a Motion made by Mr George Moore touching some questions for the manner
of Election of one Richard Hutton returned into this House one of the Burgesses
for the Borough of Southwark in the County of Surrey, and supposed to have been
indirectly made; and so prayed to be further Examined by some Committee of this
House, and then to be reported over to this House for the further Order of this
House in the same: And upon another Motion thereupon also made by Mr Wroth for
a Committee for the Liberties and Privileges of the Members of this House and
their Servants, it is upon the question Ordered, that all the Members of this
House being of her Majesty's Privy Council, Sir William Moore, Mr Sergeant
Yelverton, Mr Robert Wroth, Mr Recorder of London, Mr Heyle, Mr Conisby, Mr
Miles Sands, Mr Attorney of the Wards, Mr Attorney of the Duchy, Mr William
Howard, Sir Henry Cook, Sir Francis Godolphin, Sir George Moore, Sir Walter
Raleigh, Sir Francis Drake, Mr Tanfield, Mr Francis Bacon, Mr Lewkenor, Sir
John Harrington, Mr Emersam, Sir Edward Hobby, Mr Lawrence Stourton, Mr Beale,
Mr Doctor James, Sir Henry Duton, Mr Doctor Caesar, Mr Tasborough, Sir Moyle
Finch, Sir Thomas Cecill and Sir Francis Hastings shall, during all this
present Sessions of Parliament, examine and make report of all such Cases
touching the Elections and Returns of any the Knights, Citizens, Burgesses and
Barons of this House, and also all such Cases for privilege as in any wise may
occur or fall out during all the same Sessions of Parliament; to the end this
House upon the Reports of the same Examinations may proceed to such further
course in every the same Cases as to this House shall be thought meet. And it
is further Ordered, that the said Committees do meet upon Wednesday next in the
Exchequer Chamber at three of the Clock in the Afternoon to examine the manner
of the said Election of the said Richard Hutton, and also any other case of
Elections, Returns or Privileges whatsoever in question, which shall be moved
unto them by any Member of this House at their Pleasure. And notice was then
also given in the House to all the Members of the same, that in all these Cases
they might from time to time repair to the said Committees as occasion shall
serve accordingly.

The Bill touching salted Fish and salted Herrings had its first reading.

Sir Robert Cecill, Sir John Wolley, Sir John Fortescue, Sir Edward Stafford
and Mr Francis Bacon, having severally delivered most manifest and apparent
reasons of the inevitable necessity both of present consultation and also of
present Provision of Treasure to prevent and withstand the great imminent
perils and dangers of this Realm, intended against the same by the King of
Spain, the Pope and other Confederates of the Holy League; The said Sir Robert
Cecill, Sir John Fortescue, Sir John Wolley, and Mr Francis Bacon, laying open
the sundry particular practices of the King of Spain against the State of this
Realm; attempted both in Ireland, the Low Countries, France and Scotland, do
each of them in the end conclude and move, That a grave Committee of this House
be presently selected to have Conference touching some fit course to be taken
for the said consultation and provision of Treasure. And thereupon it was upon
the Question Ordered and Assented to by the whole House.

Nota, That this is all that is found in the Original Journal Book of the House
of Commons touching these Speeches; which because they contain many Excellent
Passages concerning the History of these times of her Majesty, I have therefore
supplied at large, Sir Edward Staffords Speech only excepted (which was wanting
there also) out of a very Elaborate Journal of the same House, taken by some
Anonymous Member thereof at this Parliament, which is mentioned more at large
in the beginning of this present Journal. Sir Robert Cecill spoke first and
said.

As I remember, I have been of this House these five Parliaments, and I have
not determined to say any thing in these Assemblies further than my Cogitations
should concur with my Conscience in saying bare I, or No. Give me leave, I pray
you, to rehearse an old saying, and it is in Latin, Nec te collaudes, nec te
vituperes ipse; for me to do the one were exceeding arrogance, and to do the
other, I do confess, I hope, you will pardon me.

The occasion of this Parliament, as I take it by that which we received from
the Honorable, and Learned Speech of the Lord Keeper of and from her Majesty
to us in the Higher House, is for the cause of Religion and maintenance thereof
amongst us, the preservation of her Majesty's most Royal Person, and the good
of this Realm of our Country. All which because they be things of most dear and
greatest price, and at this present in exceeding great and imminent danger, it
is most behoofful to consult of speedy remedies, which should proceed from the
wisest Heads. The Enemy to these is the King of Spain, whose malice and
ambition is such, as together with the Pope, that Antichrist of Rome, (for I
may well couple them together, the one being always accompanied with envy at
our Prosperity, the other with unsatiable desire) makes them by all means to
seek the Subversion of the State. But concerning the first the cause of God and
his Religion, which her Majesty professed before she came to sit in this Royal
Seat, which she has defended and maintained, and for which cause God has so
blessed her Government since her coming to the Crown: Yea while the Crown was
scarce warm on her Head, she abolished the Authority of Rome, and did set up
Gods truth amongst us; and to her great renown made this little Land to be a
Sanctuary for all the persecuted Saints of God: whereby the people perceived
her Magnanimity, Zeal and Judgment; Magnanimity in undertaking so great an
Enterprise; Zeal in professing the same not for the show, but of sincerity;
Judgment in defending it and preventing all his designs. He sent forth his
Bulls and Missives against her Majesty, thereby most unnaturally depriving her
of her most natural right, the Duty and Loyalty which her Subjects should owe
unto her, etc. He touched the many dangers her Majesty had been in, which as it
caused him to fear to think, so did he tremble to speak concerning the danger
of her Country, and so the loss of our Lives, Liberties, Wives, Children, and
all other Privileges. Let me not trouble you with things past so long and
perhaps beyond my reach, but with things past of late years and since Eighty
eight. When we were so secure and never thought that the King of Spain would
have set up his Rest for England; Then sent he his Navy termed Invincible, and
was almost upon the Banks of us before we were aware. Yea we were so slack in
provision, that it was too late to make resistance, had not God preserved us.
His attempt against us by seeking to win the Low Countries and to obtain
Ireland, being but trifles and partly devices, which I mean not to trouble you
with; he has now of late gone about to win France, wherein he has greatly
prevailed, as in Lorrain and in other parts, as you have heard, but specially
in Britany, having most part of the Port Towns in his Possession, whither he
still sends supply daily, and reinforces them every four or five Months,
which part is always open and his men and forces never wanting. This Province
he especially desires, for it lies most fitly to annoy us, whither he may
send forces continually, and there have his Navy in a readiness; the which he
could not so easily, unless he had the wind in a bag. Besides having this
Province, he might keep us from Traffic to Rochell and Bordeaux, as he does in
the Straights from Tripoly and St Jean de Lucc: And so hinder us from carrying
forth and bringing into this Land any Commodities from those parts, whereby the
Realm might be enriched and her Majesty's Impost ever eased, being one of the
greatest Revenues of her Crown. He has also gone about with them of Stade and
the King of Poland, one of his own Faction, and who by reason he cannot do in
that Kingdom what he lists, he may not so easily command him to impeach, or
hinder our Traffic in those Eastern parts, which if he could bring to pass,
you see how hurtful it would be to this Land.

But to descend yet lower into these latter Actions. He has seen it is but a
folly to make Wooden Bridges to pass into Ireland, therefore he has found out
a safer way and stronger passage into it by Land, and that by Scotland, which
though it be not talked of on the Exchange, nor Preached at Paul's Cross; yet
it is most true, and in Scotland as common as the highway, That he has
procured unto him many of the Nobility. It may be he has sent thither no great
Navy, and that her Majesty would not suffer him to do; yet do what she can,
some one Paltry Fly-Boat may escape her Majesty's Ships, and carry gold enough
in her to make them Traitors, and stir them to Sedition. These things her
Majesty understood before, and Advertized the King thereof; which the effect
has proved to be true. For unless I be deceived, the last Letter that came
from thence might show that the King is gone to make a Rode into the North, and
to bring back the Lord Bothwell and the Lord Huntley. The King of Spain's
malice thus daily increases against us, and seeks also to stir up Sedition
amongst us by his Instruments. The number also of Papists daily increases, or
at least wise becomes more manifest. My advice is, that you would consult how
to withstand such imminent dangers, which the greater they be, the sooner they
would be looked into and remembered. Wherefore I would desire Mr Speaker that he
would appoint some Committees of the sufficientest and wisest men in the House
to consider thereon.

Sir John Wolley spoke to the like Effect, saying, that upon the Cause of the
danger the Realm was now in, and of the remedy, his Speech should consist;
which he likened to a natural Body, in which the more danger the principal
Member was in, the greater means there should be used for the preservation
thereof. Roan being made now Admiral of France by the League, should say, that
he was a poor Admiral now, but yet he doubted not 'but that shortly he should
be able to bring such a Navy as should terrify the Queen of England. Also he
showed how the Princes of the Holy League had conspired the overthrow of the
Realm, the extirpation of Religion, and the confusion of her Majesty and her
Loyal Subjects. And exhorted the House, now because the season of the year
grows on, which calls many of the Knights and Burgesses to be in their
Countries, besides the Sickness being in the Town, so that many of that House
he thought knew not whether they lodged in Houses infected or not, that they
would seek to dispatch and end the Parliament so soon as might be. He also
showed how the Dunkirkers trouled our Fishermen in small Barks upon the
Seacoasts. And so that this matter might be Committed to some of the
sufficientest in the House. He also exhorted the House to a speedy agreeing of
a Subsidy: which considering the dangers we were in, and that it was for our
own good, as also for her Majesty's, he hoped that no good Subject but would
willingly agree to it. Also he showed that the Wars with the King of Spain had
cost her Majesty a Million of Money: but this he avouched, that where it cost
her Majesty one, it cost the King of Spain three.

Then Sir John Fortescue spoke and said: They that spoke before me, spoke
sufficiently of the Authors of our trouble, of the great danger which is now
imminent, insomuch that as it is come to that point now, Non utrum imperare,
sed utrum vivere. I will speak of nothing but that which concerns my Calling.
Her Majesty not being only careful for the preservation of Her own Realm, but
of her Neighbors also; she has not only defended her own Subjects from being
invaded, but also has aided Strangers which wanted Money, with whom otherwise
it would have gone ill by this time both with them and ourselves. Insomuch that
the burden of four Kingdoms has rested upon her Majesty, which she has
maintained with her Purse, England, France, Ireland, and Scotland. For how
could the French King at his first coming to the Crown have held out against
those Leaguers, had not her Majesty assisted him with her Men and Money, which
has cost her Majesty about a hundred thonsand pound? For it is well known that
the French King had not been able to withstand the Duke of Parma's coming into
France, had it not been for our Englishmen and Money. As for the Low Countries,
they have stood her Majesty in yearly, since she undertook the defense of them,
one hundred and fifty thousand pound. All which her Majesty bestowed for the
good of the Realm, to free us from War at home. Besides, when her Majesty came
to the Crown, she found it four Millions indebted; her Navy when she came to
view it, she found greatly decayed: Yet all this has discharged, and (thanks
be to God) is nothing indebted; and now she is able to match any Prince in
Europe, which the Spaniards found when they came to invade as. Yea she has
with her Ships compassed the whole world, whereby this Land is made famous
throughout all places. She did find in her Navy all Iron Pieces, but she has
furnished it with Artillery of Brass, so that one of her Ships is not a
Subject's, but a petty King's wealth. As for her own private Expenses, they
have been little in building; she has consumed little or nothing in her
pleasures. As for her Apparel, it is Royal and Princely, beseeming her Calling,
but not sumptuous nor excessive. The Charges of her House small, yea never less
in any Kings time. And shortly (by Gods grace) she will free her Subjects from
that trouble which has come by the means of Purveyors. Wherefore she trusts,
that every good subject will assist her Majesty with his Purse, seeing it
concerns his own good and the preservation of his estate. For before that any
of us would lose the least member of his body, we would bestow a great deal,
and stick for no Cost nor Charges: How much more ought we in this political
Body, whereof not only a member but the whole is in jeopardy, if we do not once
have to the preservation thereof? And for these Subsidies which are granted now
adays to her Majesty, they are less by half than they were in King Henry the
8th^'s time. Now although her Majesty had borrowed some Money of her Subjests
besides her Subsidies, yet she had truly repaid and answered every one fully.
He desired the matter might be put to a Committee.

Sir Edward Stafford spoke next to the like effect; but what his said Speech
was, is not at all set down in the aforesaid Anonymous Journal mentioned more
fully at the beginning of this Journal present.

Mr Francis Bacon spoke last, whose Speech was to the effect following, viz.

Mr Speaker, That which these Honorable Personages have spoken of their
Experiences, May it please you to give me leave likewise to deliver of my
common knowledge. The Cause of Assembling all Parliaments has been hitherto
for Laws or Moneys: The one being the Sinews of Peace, the other of War. To the
one I am not privy, but the other I should know. I did take great contentment
in her Majesty's Speeches the other day delivered by the Lord Keeper, how that
it was a thing not to be done suddenly nor at one Parliament, nor scarce a
whole year would suffice to purge the Statute-Book and lessen the Volume of
Laws, being so many in number, that neither Common People can practice them,
nor the Lawyer sufficiently understand them: Than the which nothing should tend
more to the praise of her Majesty.

The Romans appointed ten men, who were to correct and recall all former Laws,
and to set forth those Twelve Tables so much of all men to be commended. The
Athenians likewise appointed six for that purpose. And Jews the 9th King of
France did the like in reforming his Laws..... But what should here follow is
wholly omitted in that Anonymous Journal mentioned in the beginning of these
Speeches, out of which they are all taken; yet it should seem that the main end
and scope of the ensuing particulars of this Speech, which are omitted, were
for the appointing of a select and grave Committee, both to consider of the
dangers of the Realm, and of speedy supply and aid to be given to her Majesty.

And thereupon after the Conclusion of this Speech of Mr Francis Bacon's, the
House did accordingly nominate the said Committee, to deliberate and consult in
what proportion they might now to relieve her Majesty with Subsidies, in
respect of those many and great Enemies against whose power and malice she was
to provide and prepare for necessary defense and preservation of her Realms and
Dominions. The names of which said Committees are set down in the Original
Journal Book of the House of Commons (though omitted in that other
beforementioned taken by the said Anonymus) in manner and form following, viz.

All those of this House which are of her Majesty's Privy Council, all the
Members of this House which are returned Knights for the Counties, Sir Walter
Raleigh, Sir Thomas Cecill, Mr George Moore, Sir Henry Unton, Mr Wroth, Sir
Thomas Wilkes, Mr Francis Bacon, Mr Nathanael Bacon, Mr George Carry, Mr Beale,
Mr Fulk Grevill, Mr Attorney of the Wards, Mr Attorney of the Duchy, Sir John
Paton, Mr Robert Sackvill; Sir Francis Hastings, all the Sergeants at Law which
were Members of this House, Sir John Hare, Mr Doctor Caesar, Mr Doctor James,
Mr William Haward, Mr Sands, Sir Robert Sidney, Mr Fanshaw, Sir Thomas West,
Sir John Warrington, Sir Thomas Read, Sir Francis Drake, Mr Thomas Fane, Mr
Vincent Skinner, Sir William Moor, Mr Fuller, Mr Heyle, Mr John Hare, Mr
Shinne, Mr Christopher Blount, Mr Edward Lewkenor, Sir William Bows, Sir John
Wingfield, Mr Tasborough, Sir Edward Stafford, Mr Lawrence Fanshaw, Mr Nicholas
Saunders, Mr Doctor Lewen, Sir Thomas Flodd, Sir Francis Gudolphin, Sir Francis
Vere, Mr Edward Dyer, Mr Conisby, Mr Boyse, Mr Apselie and Mr Emersam should be
nominated and appointed to have Conference in the said Cause; and to meet for
that purpose in this House to Morrow next at two of the Clock in the Afternoon.

On Tuesday the 27th day of February, Two Bills of no great moment had each of
them one reading; of which the first being the Bill touching Woollen Clothes
called Vesses, Rays, etc. was read the first time.

Mr Morris Attorney of the Court of Wards, moves the House touching the hard
Courses of the Bishops and Ordinaries and other Ecclesiastical Judges in their
Courts, used toward sundry learned and godly Ministers and Preachers of this
Realm by way of Inquisition, subscription and binding absolution, contrary (he
said) to the honor of God, the Regality of her Majesty, the Laws of this
Realm, and the liberty of the Subjects of the same; compelling them upon their
own Oaths to accuse themselves in their own private actions, words and
thoughts, if they shall take such Oaths, because they know not to what
questions they shall answer till after the time they be sworn; And also after
such Examination proceed against them by deprivation, degradation or
suppression, upon such their own Accusations of themselves. And if they refuse
to take such Oath, then they commit them to Prison, and there keep and detain
them at their own pleasure, not absolving or releasing them until they shall
first have taken a Corporal Oath of their Canonical Obedience to their
Ordinaries. And showing further at large the great inconvenience thereby grown
unto the free Subjects of this Realm, does in the end pray a Consultation to be
had therein by this House for redress of the said Enormities; and offers unto
Mr Speaker two Bills, the one concerning the said Inquisitions, subscriptions
and offering of Oaths, and the other concerning the Imprisonments upon their
refusal to the said Oaths, praying that the said latter Bill which concerns
the said Imprisonments might be read, and the other to be offered to this House
at some other more convenient time.

Nota, That there is no other Speech touching this business particularly and
fully set down in the Original Journal Book of the House of Commons, and
therefore those Speeches which follow are supplied out of that Anonymous
Journal of the same House, of which there is more particular mention made in
the very beginning of this present Journal.

Mr Dalton stood up and spoke with much earnestness against it, saying, It is
hard upon a sudden for me to Answer a long premeditated Speech, but as I am
able I will say and show what I think of the Bill Exhibited. It pretends great
things in show, tending to the hindrance of Gods service and the derogation of
her Majesty's Prerogative, to the overthrow of our Laws and violating of our
Liberties; Things I say great in show, but no such things to be found in the
matter spoke against. It is easy to make of a Molehill a Mountain in words, so
by a well compiled Speech to make a great and dangerous thing of nothing; nay a
thing indeed needless; for that the State has hitherto always stood upon this
Government. And so showed how Ecclesiastical Government was distinct from the
Temporal. The Reasons he gave were few or none; only his great dislike was,
that having received strait Commandment from her Majesty not to meddle with
things concerning the Reformation of the Church and State of this Realm,
therefore in his opinion the Bill ought to be suppressed.

Sir John Woolley spoke also against the Bill disallowing the matters in it:
And taking it as too busy a meddling in such a thing so forbidden by her
Majesty, so he thought it not fit that it should be read.

Then spoke Sir Francis Knowles, allowing the Bill, and Answered, That whereas
it was condemned as seeking the overthrow of a Member of the State, and so
against the Law, it tended in his opinion but to the reforming of abuses and
restraining of the Prelates: That if they meddle against the Laws, they shall
incur a praemunire. So that he thought the Bill to be good and fit to be read.

Then spoke Doctor Lewen, driving his Speech to a full Answer of Mr Morris his
Speech. And first he showed, that as the natural Body was delighted in Change,
so was it also in the politic Body, greedy of alteration. That this Eversion
of Bishops had long been sought for; and in shooting at their Jurisdiction
their aim was at their places; as being no more able to stand the one without
the other, than a House without a Foundation. Then he entered into a Discourse
of Government, as Monarchies, Aristocracies and Democracies. He allowed the
Monarchies; and in the most famous Monarchies in the World showed this
Government now exercised by the Bishops to have been used. He endeavored to
prove the Bishops to be such a part of the Body politic, as without them it
could be no Body. And in comparing it with the state of the Natural Body, he
termed the Prince and the Counselors of State to be as the Senses, and as the
Head; The Bishops and Ministers as the Shoulders and Arms; the common people
the Legs. Now to take away the Shoulders from the Body were as great a blemish
and prejudice as to have the Fingers tied unto the Shoulders. Then came he to
three parts of Mr Morris his Speech, Inquisition, Subscription and binding
absolution. Inquisition he proved lawful; First because it had been so long
used, and in the greatest Monarchies allowed. For before Inquisition came in,
the manner of Trial was by Accusation, and then the party accusing was to
suffer the penalty that the Law inflicted upon the party accused, if he failed
in his accusation. Then it might be that the party accused, if the Accuser
failed in his accusation, might solicit two Witnesses to Answer for him,
which was sufficient to acquit him: So the guilty escaped and the guiltless
accuser was punished. This seeming grievous, they changed their Trials into
Inquisitions. And whosoever reads Demosthenes and Tully, shall see how
unwillingly they were hired to accuse. And if we look into the Laws of this
Realm, it is altogether by Inquisitions in Courts Baron, Leets, and in the
Kings Courts, and in the Star Chamber. So that this course is as lawful in the
Ecclesiastical as in the Temporal Law. Subscription was a thing we were bound
unto by Statute. The like was used in our Churches as at Geneva, so as
allowable here. Absolution, termed binding, is no other than in the Common Law;
for in the Writ de Excommunicato capiendo, the party absolved is to be sworn ad
servandum jus, and his Oath to perform the Law in this absolution is not
grievous: Whereas otherwise the party accused was to find pledges for the same.
Nay it is a liberty to him, when upon his Oath he may be freed. And so as to
the Bill, he thought it fittest that it should be first considered of by the
Bishops and Judges of the Realm before it were read.

After this Mr. Henry Finch (as may be conjectured out of the Original
Journal Book of the House of Commons, where though his Speech be omitted, yet
he is set down and nominated to have spoken next after Doctor Lewen) spoke also
against the Bill much to that effect which the said Doctor Lewen had spoken:
But neither was his name expressed in the aforesaid Anonymous Journal, out of
which these several Speeches are transcribed, nor yet any more particulars of
that which he spoke.

Then stood up Mr. Oliver St John, as may be collected out of the aforesaid
Original Journal Book of the House of Commons, where he is said to have spoken
next after Mr. Henry Finch, although his Speech be wholly omitted (as is his
name in the said Anonymous Journal, out of which the said Speech and the rest
are inserted) and speaking for the Bill said; it is and has been the manner of
this House to allow a mixture in speaking, and after the Grave, Honorable and
Wisest, then to hear the meanest also. For my self, I am but young, yet will I
show unto you matter which is old. In Answer to them that spoke last, the
Ancient Charter of this Realm says, Nullus liber homo, etc. which is flatly
violated by Bishops Jurisdiction. You know what things Thomas Becket stood upon
against the King, which things are now also crept in. And for more full Answer
of one that spoke before, his Antiquity and prescription cannot be allowed in
this Government for any reason; for so were the Official prestitute to take and
exact Fees, because time out of mind they had done so; And set it down that it
was Answered in the Parliament House, That Thieves may prescribe to take Purses
on Shooters-Hill, because time out of mind they had done so.

For that of Inquisition, it seems to him (specially) that spoke last, to be
allowed before that trial by accusation; First by reason of the Antiquity of
the trial. But it cannot be proved so ancient as the manner of trials by
accusations. For in John, the Adulterous Woman being brought to Christ, he
asked who were her Accusers? And for that manner of Accusation, the Lawyers
themselves speak against it; for one says of it, Ut libere fatear quod
sentiam, nunquam mihi placebat. For Subscription, the Statute alleged is meant
but a Subscription to certain Articles in Religion, and not a Subscription in
this form. And because it is allowed in Geneva, so to allow it here, that is no
reason. For in Geneva there be many things allowed, which the party speaking
would (I dare say) be loath to have used here. As to Absolution, there is no
such Oath to be required therein in our Writ de Excommunicato capiendo, as was
said. So I think the Bill very worthy and fit to be read.

Then Sir Robert Cecill Spoke and said: I am unwilling to speak, yea I speak
against my Will; and to answer Speeches well studied and premeditated upon the
sudden, it is hard for me. What the Bill contains, I am ignorant of; and
whether to allow of it or not, I will suspend my opinion. To say the truth, the
man that offered it was learned and wise, and one whom I love; yet a Bill to be
offered and enforced in this sort, being of such effect, I know not how to
allow of it. For her Majesty had straightly forbidden to meddle in such Cases;
yet not forgetting the Cause, she had in her Excellent wisdom cared and
pretended that a redress should be had of things that are amiss. To which end
her Majesty before the Parliament summoned, had directed her Letters to the
Archbishops to certify her.

Now her Highness Care for our good shall be prevented by our hasty speaking of
these things before our time. Sure it is not fit, and her Majesty cannot but be
offended at it. For the Bill I protest I know it not; but it seemed to contain
things needful. Wherefore it were fittest it should be commended to her
Majesty, and so recommended unto us. And if I may do this Office and Service
for the House, I will in all dutiful Loves and Service do it. But if the other
course be taken, I fear the things sought will be denied for the violence used
in it.

Then Mr Speaker said, In favor and free love, above my merits or desert, you
have Elected me, which should bind me to do all my best Service, and to be
faithful toward you. This Bill delivered me is long and contains important
matters of great weight, and such matters as cannot be expressed in four words.
It has many parts, and if you put me presently to open it, I cannot so readily
understand it, and do it as I should; For indeed it is a matter far above my
ordinary practice: and to deliver a thing before I conceive it, I could not.
Wherefore if it would please you to give me leave to consider of it, I protest
I will be faithful and keep it with all Secrecy.

Hereupon the House was in question, whether it should be committed to the
Speaker only, or to the Privy Council and him: but it was holden to be against
the Order of the House that any Bill should be committed before it was read.
Therefore upon a Motion made by Mr Wroth, it was agreed, that Mr Speaker should
have it.

This Afternoon at two of the Clock Mr Speaker was sent for to the Court, where
the Queen her self gave him Commandment to deliver unto the House..... and so
the matter abruptly breaks off in the said Anonymous Journal, mentioned more
particularly in the beginning of this present Journal, out of which all these
aforesaid Speeches are inserted: But that which should here follow can be no
more but only, that her Majesty did Command him to deliver a certain Message to
the House the day following, which he did then perform accordingly: Vt vide
postea in fine diei sequentis.

Finally, the last business of this Forenoon was the reading and committing of
an ordinary Bill, which is inserted out of the Original Journal Book it self.

The Bill lastly, that a Bar at large may be pleaded in an Ejectione firmae,
was upon the second reading committed unto Mr Edgecombe, Sir Henry Knivet, and
the Sergeants at Law that are Members of the House, Mr. Attorney of the Wards
and others, who were appointed to meet upon Thursday next at two of the Clock
in the Afternoon at Serjeants-Inn in Flectstreet.

On Wednesday the 28th day of February, the Bill for reducing of disloyal
Subjects to their due Obedience, was read the second time.

Nota, That before this Bill was committed, diverse spoke unto it, which being
omitted in the Original Journal Book after the mentioning of the second reading
thereof, I thought good to supply the said Speeches out of that Anonymous
Journal so often beforementioned; and the rather, because this Bill being
against Popish Recusants, the said Speeches do contain matter of much weight in
them.

Mr. Cradock (after the said Bill against Recusants had been opened by Mr.
Speaker upon the second reading thereof) spoke as follows.

There is no man as I think so irreligious toward God, so unloyal toward her
Majesty, so careless of the common Statutes, but thinks the Bill to be good,
and the Law very necessary before it be Enacted: Yet it were fit every part of
it were considered of and reformed. The thing to be reformed is this: The words
of the Act being Every person that shall receive a Recusant, etc. And thus the
Purvey being General, the good Subject may be grieved by this Law; and he that
shall have but a Recusant in his Custody, shall be within the letter of the Law
for receiving a Recusant into his House. Things to be considered are first,
Whether it be good to deprive them of all their goods, for so we shall leave
them no means of living. Secondly, Whether the Parties that be now Recusants
being reconciled, if they fall into relapse and afterward be newly reconciled
again, shall be enabled to take benefit of their Lands and goods: for'tis hard,
if after their repenting they be not restored.

Then Mr. Philips Answering all Objections against the Bill, affirmed it
sufficient in all points, and that neither the sense nor the letter could be
prejudicial to the good Subject. Only he could have wished it were provided that
the Recusant should not use this Law to his benefit, by procuring Commons to be
their Friends, and take Leases of their own Lands answering the Queens Title.

Mr. Finch made this Question, Whether those that came not to Church by reason
of the mislike they had of the Church Government, shall be in like Case as a
Recusant Papist.

Mr. Tichburn said he could have provided that the Father should not disinherit
the Son, nor have power so to do for being made conformable by him that should
have the bringing of him up.

Then Mr. Nathanael Bacon spoke and said, The Children might not be committed
to the Bishop of the Diocese, because their Chancellors are so much affected to
the Canon Law, that some are infected with Popish Religion. Besides, the office
of Bishops is to preach, and this duty in the one calling would not be hindered
by other affairs committed to their care. Wherefore fitter it is, that the
Justices of Assize should have the appointment of them.

Then said Sir Edward Stafford, it may be the Party is Enemy to him to whom the
Child is committed, therefore the Commitment is to be by two or three.

Then Mr. Wroth spoke as follows. The Law has no Proviso for Leases, no
remedy is appointed, as by the distress or otherwise, how the Guardian is to
come by the money appointed to him for the Custody of the Child of a Recusant.
And it were fit to make a Proviso that no Party being next Heir to the Child
should be his Guardian. And the Recusant not to forfeit ten pound a Month for
the keeping of his Wife; otherwise for keeping of Servants Recusants.

After all these Speeches they agreed to have the Bill committed. But the
Committees names are all omitted in the said Anonymous Journal, out of which
these foresaid Speeches are inserted, and are therefore to be supplied out of
the Original Journal Book of the House of Commons, where they are set down in
manner and form following, viz.

All the Privy Council, Sir Thomas Cecil, Sir Walter Raleigh, Sir William
Moore, Mr Feel, Mr Finch, Mr Wroth, Mr Greenfield, Mr Fulke Grevill, Mr Sands,
Mr Cradock, Sir Francis Hastings, Sir Edward Stafford, Mr Morris, Mr George
Carry, Mr Peejam, Mr Tasborough, Sir Henry Unton, Sir William Bows, Sir Moyle
Finch, Mr Attorney of the Duchy, Mr Alice, Sir Francis Vere, Sir Edward
Dimock, Mr. Warren, Mr Jews, Mr. Tanseild, Mr. Edw. Barker, Mr. Beale, Mr.
Philips, Mr. Stephenson, Mr Lewkenor Mr Not. Bacon, Mr Grimston, Mr. Fuller,
all the Sergeants at Law, Mr. George Moore, Sir Thomas Wast, Mr. Doctor Caesar,
Mr. Doctor Lewen, Sir Henry Cock, Sir Edward Cock, Sir Edward Hobby, Mr. Dier,
Mr. John Carry, Mr. Emerson, Sir Thomas Shirley, Mr. Fanshaw, Sir John
Harrington, Sir Henry Knivett, Sir Charles Candish, and Sir Francis Drake. And
the Bill was delivered to Mr. Sergeant Telverton, who with the rest was
appointed to meet upon to Morrow next at two of the Clock in the Afternoon at
Serjeants-Inn in Fleetstreet.

Mr. Chancellor of the Exchequer, one of the Committees in the great Cause for
Consultation and provision of Treasure (appointed on Monday the 26th day of
this instant February foregoing) showed, that he and the residue of the
Committees in that Case met yesterday in the Afternoon according to the
Commission of this House, and upon Conference had amongst them for some
convenient proportion of Treasure to be provided, did in the end agree, that
two entire Subsidies and four Fifteenths and Tenths should be granted unto her
Majesty, if this present House shall so think good. Upon which Report by him
made, it was upon the question agreed unto by the whole House, that the same
two entire Subsidies and four Fifteenths and Tenths should be granted unto her
said Highness accordingly. Which done Mr. Nathanael Bacon, one also of the said
Committees, put the House in remembrance, that at their said Conference in the
said Committee it was moved by some of them, that the present necessity of the
Causes now moving them to offer the said double Subsidy and double Fifteenths
and Tenths, should be set down and inserted in the Bill for the granting
thereof.

After this Speech of Mr. Bacons there is no particular mention of any other
Speech which was spoken at this time touching this business in the Original
Journal Book of the House of Commons, and therefore these Speeches which follow
are supplied out of another Anonymous Journal of the passages of this
Parliament more particularly mentioned at the beginning of this present Journal.

Sir Henry Knivett spoke, allowing the Subsidies, but withal desired these
things: First, that it might be lawful for every Subject to annoy the King of
Spain that would, that weak Forces might not be spent against him, but a Royal
Army. That we should not wrestle with him on our own ground but abroad.
Further, that all her Majesty's debtors might be called in, and her Majesty to
have power to sell all the Debtors Lands, of what State soever they were seized
of. No Steward or Commissioner but to answer her Majesty the Royal Fines and
Sums they received. All her Woods to be viewed, and the great Timber to be for
sale, the Copy wood to be sold to increase the Revenues. Licenses granted to
any to have benefit of penal Statutes, to be taken in; and the whole benefit of
Inns and Alehouses to come to the Queen. A great benefit to come to the Queen
by this new Statute against Recusants. Their Children to be committed to
persons of sound Religion. The whole benefit of their relief and living to come
to the Queen, deducting only charges for Education of Children.

Sergeant Harris agreed on the Subsidy because Parliaments were seldom, whereas
by the Statute of 4 Edw. 3. they may be called every year. The Subsidies to be
granted to maintain Wars; but whether it be War or no War, as yet we know not:
And the things which we take from the Spaniard, is doubted by many not to be
lawful prize. Therefore desires in the Subsidies to have it set down, that
those Subsidies be to maintain a War impulsive and defensive against the
Spaniard.

Sir Walter Raleigh seconded his Speech, agreeing in all things with the
Sergeant, and said, he knew many that held it not lawful in Conscience, as the
time is, to take from the Spaniards: And he knew, that if it might be lawful
and open War, there would be more voluntary hands to fight against the
Spaniard, than the Queen should stand in need of to send to Sea.

Nota, That these aforesaid Speeches are all that are found in the
forementioned Anonymous Journal, and therefore that which follows is made
perfect out of the Original Journal Book it self, in manner and form following,
viz.

After the former and other like Speeches, in which also some had moved, that
to make the Wars against the King of Spain and his Subjects lawful and
warrantable, it should be inserted into the preamble of the said Bill [that so
great and extraordinary supply was at this time given for the resisting of his
power and preventing of his malice] it was Ordered by the House upon the
question, that all the Sergeants at Law which are Members of this House, Mr.
Heile, Mr. Philips, Sir Walter Raleigh, Sir Francis Drake, Sir George Carey,
Mr. Doctor Caesar, Mr. Doctor Awberry, Mr. Francis Bacon, Sir Francis
Gudolphin, Mr. John Hare, Sir Thomas Conisby, Mr. Attorney of the Wards, Mr.
Attorney of the Duchy, Mr. John Trevor; Mr. Sands, Mr. Doctor Lewen, Mr.
Beale, Sir Henry Unton and Mr. Ridisden should meet upon Saturday next at two
of the Clock in the Afternoon in the Exchequer; for drawing the Articles and
Preamble of the said Bill accordingly; to the end the same Articles and
Preamble being considered of afterward by this House, the same may be
delivered by Mr. Speaker to her Majesty's Learned Council for the framing and
drawing of the said Bill.

Now in the next place there ensues the Relation of her Majesty's sending for
the Speaker yesterday, and of the Message which she gave him in Command to
deliver to the House; all which he declared at large this day, as it is very
elaborately and fully set down in the Anonymous Journal mentioned more
particularly at the beginning of this present Journal, and therefore it is
wholly inserted out of it; and the rather, because it is almost wholly wanting
in the Original Journal Book it self, there being one whole blank Page and a
good part of another Page left unwritten, with intention doubtless at first to
have inserted it, although it was afterward very negligently omitted by Mr.
Fulk Onslow Clerk of the said House of Commons. It is therefore (as is
aforesaid) very fitly supplied out of the Anonymous Journal in manner and form
following, viz.

After these Speeches (before set down) touching the Subsidy, Mr Speaker stood
up and said, That he had a Message to deliver from her Majesty to the said
House.

Yesterday a great number of this House (after many Speeches used) delivered
two Bills to me. Which Bills though not read, yet were diversely spoken of. They
being long, the matters grave and of great importance, and the day being almost
spent, I desired further time to consider of the parts of the Bills. I humbly
thank this Honorable House, time was freely granted me. It being almost twelve
of the Clock, I had perused and read both the Bills; I have them about me, and
they have been continually with me ever since they were delivered unto me.
Never any man's eye more than my own ever saw one word of them.

A little after I had perused the Bills, I was sent for by a special Messenger
from her Majesty. Coming in her Royal presence, I was commanded to deliver
these words from her most Excellent Majesty unto the Body of the Realm, for so
she termed this House. The matter I have to speak is great, yea it is the
greatest matter that ever I had to deal in. Wherefore I pray God to direct
mentem and linguam hanc. I must be short, for her Majesty's words were not
many: And I may perhaps fail in the delivery of them. For though my Auditors be
great, yet who is so impudent whom the presence of such a Majesty could not
appal? And it did greatly fear me when I saw none of these honorable persons
in her presence, who were present at the holding of the matter in this House.
Yet God in his Providence had appointed it, That even in this while came in
some of the persons here present, who if I fail in delivering what is given me
in Charge, can report it unto you. And I am glad there are Witnesses with me in
this Action, what was my faithful service for this House. I protest, a greater
comfort never befell me, than that this my integrity and faithful promise to
this House is not violated. For her Majesty in her most gracious Wisdom before
my coming determined not to press me in this, neither indeed did she require
the Bill of me; for this only she required of me, what were the things in the
Bill spoken of by the House; which points I only delivered, as they that heard
me can tell.

The Message delivered me from her Majesty consists in three things; First,
The end for which the Parliament was called; Secondly, The Speech which the
Lord Keeper used from her Majesty; Thirdly, What her Pleasure and Commandment
now is. For the first, it is in me and my Power (I speak now in her Majesty's
Person) to call Parliaments, it is in my power to end and determine the same,
it is in my power to assent or dissent to any thing done in Parliaments. The
calling of this Parliament was only, that the Majesty of God might be more
religiously served, and those that neglect this service might be compelled by
some sharp means to a more due Obedience, and more true service of God, than
there has been hitherto used. And further, that the Safety of her Majesty's
Person and of this Realm might be by all means possible provided for, against
our great Enemies the Pope and the King of Spain. Her Majesty's Pleasure being
then delivered unto us by the Lord Keeper, it was not meant we should meddle
with matters of State, or Causes Ecclesiastical; for so her Majesty termed
them. She wondered, that any could be of so high commandment to attempt (I use
her own words) a thing so expressly contrary to that which she had forbidden.
Wherefore with this she was highly offended. And because the words then spoken
by my Lord Keeper are not now perhaps well remembered, or some be now here that
were not then present, her Majesty's present charge and express Commandment is,
that no Bill touching the said matters of State or reformation in Causes
Ecclesiastical be exhibited. And upon my Allegiance I am Commanded, if any such
Bill be exhibited, not to read it, etc.

Thus far out of the said Anonymous Journal.

On Thursday the first day of March, Four Bills of no great moment had each of
them one reading; of which the first being the Bill against Strangers born to
sell by way of retail Foreign Wares brought into this Realm, was read the first
time.

Mr. Sergeant Yelverton, one of the Committees for the examination of the
Election and Return of the Members of this House, and also of the Cases for
Privilege, appointed on Monday the 26th day of February last past, happening
to fall out during this present Sessions of Parliament showed, that he and the
residue of the Committees for those Causes did meet yesterday in the Afternoon
(according to the Commission of this House to them in that behalf) and that
having then some Cases brought unto them both touching Elections and Returns in
sundry sorts, and also one Case of Privilege touching one Mr. Fitzherbert,
Elected a Member into this House, and alleged to be Outlawed upon Judgment,
showed, that the greater number of the said Committees having traveled in
these Cases, did impose upon him the Charge of making the Report thereof unto
this House. Which because he would gladly do in such wise, as the more part of
the said Committees had assented unto, he had set down the same (he said) in a
Note for his better remembrance in writing. And so particularly recited
theState of the saidCases treated of amongst the said Committees, and to be so
reported over unto this House for the further resolution and order of this
House to be had in the same. After which words, although there follow some four
lines more in the Original Journal Book of the House of Commons, (in which it
is generally related, that the rest of this Forenoon was spent in the agitation
of this and such like business;) yet because neither any particular relation of
the Speeches in this business of Mr Fitzherbert, or of those other aforesaid
Passages handled in the said Committee touching Elections is there set down
(although all the said matter be of very great weight and consequence) I have
therefore supplied a great part of the same out of the aforesaid Anonymous
Journal, more particularly mentioned at the beginning of this present Journal.

Where although all that part of Mr. Sergeant Yelvertons Speech touching Mr.
Fitzherberts Election be omitted (and which is before very happily supplied out
of the Original Journal Book it self) yet the rest or at least the greater part
of his Relations before mentioned is set down, and is here inserted out of the
same, with diverse other Speeches used and uttered chiefly touching that
Question. All which, (some alterations only excepted for order and explanation
sake) are herein inserted out of the said Anonymous Journal in manner and form
following, viz.

Sergeant Yelverton spoke further also, (after he had finished the Relation of
the Committees proceeding touching Mr Fitzherberts Election) concerning the
privileges of the House. In which he declared the Case of the Burgess of
Miscread in Cornwall, after whose Election the Town refused to deliver up their
Indenture to the Sheriff: But the party Elected made his Indenture and
delivered it to the Clerk of the Crown, who filed it with the rest of the
Indentures returned by the Sheriffs, the Sheriff having Indorsed it upon the
Writ. But this Indenture was never executed by the Sheriff, and yet the Return
was holden (by the Committees as it should seem) to be good.

Mr. Heile, who had been another also of the Committees spoke next, and showed
the state of this and some other questions handled in that said Committee,
which were as follows, viz.

John, etc. is returned in the Indenture by the name of Richard, and whether
this may not be amended by the House.

Mr. Audeley is returned Burgess for two Towns, he having elected for which he
will be, a New Writ is to be directed to the other Town to choose another.

Two Burgesses are returned for one Town: One of the Burgesses being mistaken
is willing to resign unto the other. Whether by the assent of the Sheriff and
party this is to be done.

The Bailiff of Southwark electeth himself by the name of Richard Hutton
Gentleman, and the Indenture returned by the Sheriff is Richard Hutton Bailiff,
if this be good.

Thomas Fitzherbert of Staffordshire being Outlawed upon Vide Holinghs. page
955. and 956. An excellent Case, of one George Finers a Burgess of Plymouth in
Devonshire in the Parliament An. 33 H. 8. Anno Dom. 1541. arrested and taken in
Execution by the means of one White, and afterward had his privilege; as also
of the Temple-Cook, who was Servant to Sir Thomas Audley once Speaker of
Parliament and after Lord Chancellor, who being arrested was freed. Which case
was cited by King H. 8. himself.
a Capias utlagatum after Judgment, is Elected Burgess of this Parliament. Two
hours after his Election, before the Indenture returned, The Sheriff arrested
him upon this Capias utlagatum. The party is in Execution. Now he sends this
Supplication to this House to have a Writ from the same to be enlarged to have
the Privilege in this Case to be grantable.

He argued thus. That he was not Electable, because in the calling, and in the
electing of parties called, there must be chosen Viri idonci Statute de 23 H.
6. Cap. 15. and 1 H. 5. Cap. 1. enact it.
. But a man Outlawed is not idoneus, therefore not Electable. Considering this
disability holds in all other Causes of Law, therefore in this that is the
greatest. He urged the Authority of 19 H. 7. four parties attainted moved to
have their Attainders redressed before they can sit. There it is said a man
Outlawed for sorging false Deeds is not eligible to be of the Parliament.

Then Sir Edward Hobby spoke as follows. The party Outlawed is not out of his
wits, therefore capable; and then is a man able to be chosen and idoneus to be
a Burgess. Only a differrence may be made where the Outlawry is for a Cause
Criminal and for a Case personal, as in this Cause. Is this disability greater?
that a man Outlawed may not be a Burgess, as well as an Attorney to a man, or
an Executor? I think it will stand with the privilege of this House to deliver
him, though he were Outlawed.

Mr. Jews said, that a man Outlawed cannot have privilege, being an Execution
upon a Capias, Quia frustra Legis auxilium implorat, qui in Legem peccat.
Cardinal Pool would not come into the Parliament House, till the Attainder
against him was reversed.

Ignotus quidam. Multa sunt quae fieri non debent, quae tamen facta, tenentur
bona. It had been a good exception against his Election to say he was Outlawed,
but it is no disability to him being Elected.

Sergeant Yelverton said, he could not have the privilege being in Execution
upon a Capias utlagatum after Judgment. The Book of 2 Edw. 4. 8. cited to be
expressly so. And that a Judge reported unto him, that in 34 Hen. 8. a Burgess
being arrested and in Execution upon a Statute, could not have privilege of
the House.

Whereupon Mr. Finch said, he could not tell which to hold or which side to
take. The Book of 20 Hen. 7. does prove that there were Elected such as were
Attainted, and that disability was taken against them. The Writ to choose a
Burgess is not Legalem hominem, but Idoneum: Therefore we ought not to be so
strict as if he were to be challenged upon a Jury.

At the Common Law, Outlawry was only for Causes Criminal, as for Treason or
Felony; but this Outlawry in Personal Causes is only by the Statute of 11 Hen.
4. which makes not so great a disability as that at the Common Law.

On the other side Utlagatus ne Villein cannot be a Champion, which is as a
Judge to decide: then a fortiori, he can be no Judge in this House.

Outlawry is as an Attainder, therefore the party so stained is no competent
Judge.

The great Charter is, all Trials ought to be per legales homines and parium
sitorum. The Outlawed man is not of the number of Parium, so not to be a Judge.
Vide 8 Edw. 3. Utlagatus ne poiet estre.

Mr. Broughton held, that a man Outlawed may be a Burgess. For in no case is
Outlawry disability where a man is en auter droit, as to be Executor or
Attorney, it is no Exception to the party. The Case in 38 Hen. 8 Dyer. 62. was
cited.

Mr. Hall's man was delivered out of Execution the last Parliament by a
Mittimus from the House.

And though the party be in Execution, if not at the Queens suit, he is to have
the privilege; and yet the party not to lose his debt, nor the Sheriff to be
charged. Vide postea April 5th Thursday.

Nota, That these Speeches are all transcribed out of the said Anonymous
Journal, more particularly mentioned at the beginning of this present Journal.
After which, by occasion of a Message sent down from the Lords, it should seem
this business brake off abruptly at this time. And therefore see more
concerning it on Friday the 2d day, and on Saturday the 17th day of this
Instant March ensuing; and on Monday the 19th day of the same.

The said Message is set down very exactly as it was sent from their Lordships
(some things only being added for Order and Explanation in the transcribing of
it) in the Original Journal Book of the House of Commons in Manner and Form
following.

Mr. Egerton, Attorney General, and Mr. Doctor Carey coming to the House with a
Message from the Lords, were sent for in, and were brought up by the Sergeant
making three low courtesies before they approached to the Speaker, and delivered
their Message to him, which he afterward propounded to the House. The Message
which they brought from their Lordships unto the House was, that their
Lordships did desire to put this House in remembrance of the Speeches delivered
by the Lord Keeper upon the first day of this Parliament, for Consultation and
provision of Treasure to be had against the great and eminent dangers and
perils of this Realm, by the mighty adversaries and enemies of the same. And
thereupon their Lordships did look to have heard something from this House
touching those Causes before this time. And therefore had to that end hitherto
omitted to do any thing therein themselves. And thereupon their said Lordships
do desire, that according to the former laudable usages between both Houses, to
wit, the Lords House and this House in such Cases, a Committee of some grave
and settled Members of this House may be appointed to have Conference with a
Committee of their Lordships touching the Causes aforesaid. Which done, the
said Mr. Attorney and Mr. Doctor Carey being sequestered the House, Mr. Speaker
making Report of the said Message to this House, it was presently resolved by
the whole House, that such a Committee of this House should be selected
thereupon for that purpose accordingly; with this request also from the House,
That the said Mr Attorney General and Mr. Carey might both signify unto their
Lordships the willing and ready assent of this House unto their Lordships said
request, and also move their Lordships touching their pleasure for the number
of the Committees to be appointed for their Lordships, and for the times and
place of meeting, to be signified from their Lordships to this House; to the
end thereupon this House may proceed to the selecting of a convenient number of
this House for the said Conference accordingly. And then the said Mr. Attorney
General and the said Mr. Doctor Carey being returned into this House again, Mr.
Speaker delivered unto them their Answer and the request of this House unto
their Lordships in manner aforesaid accordingly.

Mr. Attorney General and Mr. Doctor Carey do bring word from the Lords, that
their Lordships do make choice of the number of twenty for their Committee, and
that their Lordships do appoint two of the Clock this Afternoon for the time,
and the Chamber next unto the Upper House of Parliament for the place. Which
done, the said Master Attorney General and the said Mr. Doctor Carey being
sequestered, and the said Message delivered unto this House by Mr. Speaker, it
was agreed, that a convenient number of this House should be appointed to meet
with the Committees of their Lordships at the said time and place accordingly.
And then immediately the said Mr. Attorney General and Mr. Doctor Carey being
called into this House again, the said Answer was delivered unto them by Mr.
Speaker accordingly. Whereupon these Committees following were appointed to
attend upon the Committees of the Lords in the said Conference at two of the
Clock in the Afternoon of this present day in the Chamber next to the Upper
House of Parliament, viz.

All the Privy Council of this House being in number four, Sergeant Yelverton,
Mr Dyer, Mr Sands, Sir Henry Unton, Mr Wroth; Sir Henry Cock, Sir Francis
Hastings, Mr Fulk Grevill, Sir Henry Knivet, Sir William Moore, Mr Recorder of
London, Mr Heyle, Mr Doctor Awbery, Mr Jews, Mr Anthony Cook, Sir Moyle
Finch, Mr George Moore, Sir Francis Gudolphin, Mr Francis Bacon, Mr Doctor
Awbery, Sir Thomas Shirley, Sir Thomas Stafford, Sir Thomas Conisby, Sir Edward
Dymock, Mr John Hare, Mr Barker, Mr Trevor, Sir George Carey, Sir Thomas
Cecill, Sir Walter Raleigh, Sir Francis Drake, Sir William Knowles, Sir Thomas
Dennys, Sir Henry Poole, Sir Thomas West, Sir Robert Sidney, Mr Tasborough, Mr
Flower, Sir John Payton, Mr William Haymond, Sir Edward Hobby, Sir John
Harrington, Sir Thomas Read, Sir William Brunker, Mr Doctor Caesar, Mr
Lewkenor, Mr. Atty, Mr. Robert Sackvile, Sir Charles Candish, Mr. Nathanael
Bacon, Mr. Doctor Herbert, Mr. Sergeant Harvey, Mr. Sergeant Haman, Sir George
Savil, Mr. Henry Finch, Mr. Philips, Sir Thomas Flemming, Sir Nicholas
Saunders, Mr. Humphrey Conisby, Sir Edward Grevill, Sir Christopher Blunt, Mr.
Cradock and Mr. Grimston.

The Committees in the Bill for reducing of disloyal Subjects to their due
Obedience, whose names see before on Wednesday the 28th day of February last
past, which should have met this present day in the Afternoon in this House,
are appointed over to meet to Morrow next in the Afternoon at the said place.

On Friday the second day of March there was no other business entered upon but
that of Mr. Fitzherberts, which being but shortly and imperfectly set down in
the Original Journal Book of the House of Commons, I thought good to transcribe
the relation of the dispute therein had out of that often beforementioned
Anonymous Journal of the same House, in which some small things only being
altered (for order sake) it is set down on this present Friday being the second
day of March in manner and form following, viz.

After Prayers there was no Bill read, but presently Mr. George Moore spoke to
the question of Mr Fitzherberts Election being an Outlawed Person, and of his
Arrest upon the Capias utlagatum, after he had been so Elected a Burgess of the
House, and before the Indenture in that Case made had been returned unto the
Sheriff. Upon all which matters considered of, his opinion was, that he ought
not to have privilege, nor to serve as a Member of this House.

Sir Henry Knivet spoke next, and as it should seem spoke for Mr. Fitzherbert,
that he ought to have the privilege of the House: But had never a new reason,
only he took Exceptions that the privileges of the House and the ancient
Customs thereof were not observed; and that men gave not Audience to them that
spoke, and pleased them not, but were ready to interrupt them.

Mr. Tasborough, Mr. Stephenson, Mr. Bronker, and Mr. Sands spoke severally
also touching the same matter, disputing and arguing it pro and con, as well
for his being as not being a Member of this House, as also for his having and
not having the privilege of this House; but they gave no other new reasons
touching the said Case more than had been already delivered in a former dispute
of the same, the day last immediately foregoing.

Mr. Tanfeild speaking next held, that a person Outlawed might be a Burgess of
the House. Wherein he made a difference, where exception to the Burgess grew
upon matter before the Election, and where after. If the exception grew after,
then a Burgess Elected must not be one of the House. If exception be taken to
this Election, and this Outlawry alleged to disable him, the Statute of 23
Hen. 6. cap. 15. will disable most of this House; for they ought not to be
Burgesses now, if this be not a good Election. Thence it follows, that the
party Elected is to have his privilege. And though the Common Law does disable
the party, yet the privilege of the House being urged, that prevails over
the Law.

Then said Mr. Speaker, I desire that I may be heard a word, not that I have
any Voice or assent to give, though I am of the House, but because I am a
Servant to the House, and have somewhat to speak. It appertains to my duty
and place, which I desire to have leave to utter, for my Speech shall not tend
to meddle to decide the Question, but only to inform the House of my knowledge,
and to do that duty which I think belongs to my self.

The Questions delivered by the Committees were these two. First, Whether Mr.
Fitzherbert were any Member of the House; And, secondly, If he were, whether to
have the privilege? It has been my manner ever since my first practice to
observe strange learning, especially such as appertains to the Law, as in
this of the privilege of this House, therefore I will inform what I have
learned. First this Writ of privilege must go from the Body of this House,
made by me, and I to send it into the Chancery, and the Lord Keeper is to
direct it. Now before we make such a Writ, let us know whether by Law we may
make it, or whether it will be good for the Cause or no. For my own part my
hand shall not sign it, unless my heart may assent unto it. And though we make
such a Writ, if it be not warrantable by Law and the proceeding of this House,
the Lord Keeper will and must refuse it. No man shall stand more for the
privilege of this House than I will, and what is the privilege of this House
is meet should be observed. To the matter, first there has been enforced her
Majesty's Commandment. I obey any Commandment of her Majesty's, knowing them to
be Great and Reverend, as far as any body. But I do not take it, that we have
received any such Commandment; for her Majesty's Commandment by the Lord
Steward was to every man that stood Outlawed. We have no such Command.

Now whether a Man Outlawed may be a Burgess, I hold it no question, but that a
Man Outlawed, Attainted or Excommunicated, or not lawfully Elected, if he be
returned, out of all doubt is a lawful Burgess.

This is proved by Book Authority, and express Statutes, as that of 11 H. 4.
Cap. 1. a. a Knight untryed returned shall lose his Wages, therefore allowed by
the Statute to be a Knight, though untruly returned, and the penalty is only to
lose his Wages. Another Authority is in 8 H. 8. Cap. 10. And if we go to
examine persons Elected to Parliament, we shall then dissolve all Parliaments,
and call in question all former Laws made, by reason there were not lawful and
able Lawmakers. If it appears once unto us by Record, that such a Man is
Burgess, we must believe the Record and make no question of it. For if such
matters shall be examinable by us, then must we try it by witness from the
place where the fact was, and so shall those a great way hence be driven by
witness to prove whether we be lawful Burgesses or no; which will be very
inconvenient. But matters of Record, such as appear unto us to be recorded,
these are to be examined by us, for the Record is to be seen. So that for
privilege I would grant it, if it were Sedente Parliamento, and eundo,
redeundo, or manendo, to every Member of this House. But the Cause with Mr.
Fitzherbert being, that after his Election and before his Return he is Arrested
and in Execution by a Capias after Judgment, whether this Man be to be
privileged or no. I will but speak what I think, and what I have learned, and
I have good precedents for. In this Cause he is not to have privilege. For the
question is, whether the Sheriff be to take notice of this Nomination, or not
before he is returned unto him Elected: And I think not, for it appears not
unto the Sheriff before he is returned, whether he be Elected or not. So this
Nomination is not a thing whereof he is tied to take notice.

In Ferris and Tenures Case, in 38 H. 8. fol. 60. You may see this Case. Thomas
Thorp 31 H. 6. was chosen Speaker of the Parliament, and after his Election and
before the Parliament, upon a Suit betwixt the Duke of York and him, Thorp was
taken in Arrest and put in Execution. Hereupon he put up his Petition to the
House of Parliament to have the privilege. Upon the resolution of both Houses
it was yielded he could not have the privilege of the House.

This was also in H. 6. time, and in 2 Ed. 4. fol. 8. I think; the opinion
there of Danby is referred to this Cause. And because Mr. Fitzherbert stood
Outlawed upon Judgment, a matter that is recorded, it were meet the whole cause
were brought before us, that we might the better judge upon it. And I think
this course best standing with the gravity of this House, before that we made
out any Writ, to grant a Habeas Corpus cum causa returnable in Chancery, and
the Sheriff to appear, the whole matter being transmitted out of the Chancery
hither, we to judge upon the whole Record as it shall appear. And upon this
Writ granted, the Sheriff bringing up the party, it shall be no escape in the
Sheriff, nor the party shall not lose his Action of Debt though he be delivered.

This Course was well liked and the Motion agreed unto by the greater part of
the House. Vide Mar. 1. antea and Mar. 17. post, and Apr. 5.

Thus far out of the beforementioned Anonymous Journal touching the aforesaid
Question, how far an Outlawed Man might be a Member of the House. The which and
the further proceeding therein being by the Speaker interposing himself for
this time reconciled, and upon the matter agreed upon, there followed the
agitation of the great business touching the danger of the Realm, and supply to
be given to her Majesty, which had been before treated of by two select
Committees of either House, as may fully appear by the Report of that which was
done at the said Committee made this day unto the House by Sir Robert Cecill
who had been one of them. Which being very exactly set down in the Original
Journal Book it self of the said House; is inserted out of it in manner and
form following, viz.

Sir Robert Cecill one of the Committees appointed by this House for Conference
with the Committees of the Lords showed, that he and the residue of the
Committees of this House did yesterday in the Afternoon repair unto the said
Committees of the Lords at the place appointed, where the Lord Treasurer of
England in the name of the residue of the said Committees of the Lords showed
unto the Committees of this House the great and present need of provision of
Treasure to be employed for the defense of the Realm against the Invasion of
the great and mighty Enemies unto this Realm and State; and showing further,
that the double Subsidy and Fifteenths and Tenths lastly granted unto her
Majesty, amounting but unto two hundred and fourscore thousand pounds, her
Majesty has nevertheless in these defensive Wars expended of her own Treasure
alone ten hundred and thirty thousand pounds since the time of the granting of
the said double Subsidy and of the said Fifteenths and Tenths. And that
therefore their Lordships weighing the great present necessity of greater and
more speedy supply of Treasure to be had than two entire Subsidies and four
Fifteenths, do negatively affirm, That their Lordships will not give in any
wise their assents to pass any Act in their House of less than three entire
Subsidies to be paid in the three next years at two payments in every of the
same years, the first to begin soon after the next Easter, and the second soon
after the next Michaelmas, and so yearly after Easter and Michaelmas during the
said three years. And that to what proportion of benevolence or unto how much
their Lordships would give their assents in that behalf, they would not as then
show unto the said Committees of this House. But insisting for Conference again
to be had he further urged, that this House might be moved to yield a greater
supply. To which end he alleged, that the usual late Subsidies were very
small, and were also imposed for the most part upon the meaner sort of her
Majesty's Subjects; declaring, that he knew one Shire of this Realm wherein
there were many men of good living and countenance, but none of them in the
said last Subsidies assessed at above four-score pound Lands per Annum. And
that in the City of London also, where the greatest part of the riches of the
Realm are, there was no one assessed at above two hundred pound goods a man,
and that not yet past above four or five such. Which Speech in effect being
ended, and in far better sort delivered than he had reported it, he in
Conclusion referred the further consideration thereof to the gravity of the
House.

Nota, That that which follows touching the Conclusion of this Forenoons
business, as also touching the agitation of the aforesaid great matters, of the
danger of the Realm, and of a proportionable supply to be given, which ensued
in the House at the Committee in the Afternoon, are either very imperfectly set
down or wholly omitted in the Original Journal Book it self, and are therefore
supplied out of the said Anonymous Journal more particularly mentioned at the
beginning of this present Journal.

Mr Francis Bacon as soon as Sir Robert Cecill had made an end of the former
report of the business handled at the said Committee, of which himself also had
been one, spoke next, and yielded to the Subsidy, but misliked that this House
should join with the Upper House in the granting of it. For the Custom and
Privilege of this House has always been, first to make offer of the Subsidies
from hence, then to the Upper House, except it were that they present a Bill
unto this House, with desire of our assent thereto, and then to send it up
again. And reason it is, that we should stand upon our privilege, seeing the
burden rests upon us as the greatest number; nor is it reason the thanks
should be theirs. And in joining with them in this Motion, we shall derogate
from ours; for the thanks will be theirs and the blame ours, they being the
first movers.

Wherefore I wish that in this Action we should proceed, as heretofore we have
done, apart by our selves, and not join with their Lordships. And to satisfy
them who expect an Answer from us to Morrow, some Answer would be made in some
obsequious and dutiful manner.

And out of his Bosom he drew an Answer framed by himself to this effect: That
they had considered of their Lordships Motion, and thought upon it as was fit,
and in all willingness would address themselves to do as so great a Cause
deserved. To join with them he said he could not, but with prejudice to the
privilege of the said House. Wherefore he desired as they were wont, so that
now they might proceed here in by themselves a part from their Lordships, and
that they might do it without discontent. To this purpose he cited a precedent
in H. 8. time, where four of the Lords came down into the House of Commons, and
informed them what necessity there was of a Subsidy: And that thereupon the
House took it to consideration a part by themselves, and at large granted it.
By which it should seem that he did infer, that the Lords might indeed give
notice unto the said House of Commons, what need or danger there was, but ought
not to prescribe them what to give, as at the meeting of the former Committee
the Lord Treasurer had done.

Whereupon the House well approving the said Mr Bacon's Opinion, it was upon
the Question Ordered, That the former Committees of this House in the same
Cause (whose names see on Thursday the first day of this instant March
foregoing) should meet here in this House at two of the Clock in the Afternoon
of this present day, for framing of an Answer of this House to be made unto the
said Motion of the said Committees of the Lords, and to make Report to Morrow
in the Morning to this House of such their Answer so to be framed; to the end
the same being agreed on and allowed by this whole House, may presently
thereupon be signified unto the said Committee of the said Lords accordingly:
for that the said Committees of this House did yesterday show unto their
Lordships, that their Lordships should then receive an Answer of this House
unto their Lordships said Motion.

In the Afternoon of this present Friday aforesaid the Committees met in the
House according as it had been Ordered in the Forenoon by the said House, and
spent all the time in many good Discourses and Disputations for the Subsidy:
But a great part thereof was spent in arguing what the matter was which was
referred unto them by the House; whether a Subsidy should be yielded and that
signified for an Answer from them to the Lords; Or whether the Committees were
only to consider of an Answer according to Mr Bacons Motion, That this House
would alone by themselves consider of the Subsidy without joining.

These following spoke for the Subsidy, especially enforcing the necessity of
it.

Sir William Moore showed, first, That her Majesty had more Cause to have the
Subsidy than had H. 8. E. 6. or Queen Mary; for H. 8. his Wars continued not,
though they were violent for the time. His Wars were impulsive and not
defensive. He had the suppression of all the Abbeys, a matter of great riches
unto him. He had a Benevolence and then a Subsidy paid within three Months.
Edw. 6. had Chantries and all the Church Plate for relief paid him. Queen Mary
had a relief paid her, which she never repaid. But her Majesty that now is,
has been a continual defense of her own Realm and her Neighbors Kingdoms,
England, Ireland, France and the Low Countries; yet has she repaid the Loans,
and had not such helps.

Sir George Carey said, I speak for the Subsidy, (first answering one that had
said, we must regard them and their Estates for whom we be here) saying, he
regarded and came for them as was meet; and they will more thank us for taking
somewhat from them, than if we should abandon them and leave them and all that
they have to the spoil of the Enemy; which will be, if with Forces we provide
not to withstand them. For eminent dangers hang over our heads, and are
intended to us this Summer. The Spaniard already has sent seven thousand
Pistolets of Gold into Scotland to corrupt the Nobility, and to the King twenty
thousand Crowns now lately were dispatched out of France into Scotland for the
Levying of three thousand, which the Scottish Lords have promised; and the King
of Spain will Levy thirty thousand more, and give them all Pay. Her Majesty is
determined to send Sir Francis Drake to Sea to encounter them with a great
Navy. Wherefore this our danger is to be prevented, and those her Majesty's
infinite Charges by us to be supplied.

Sir Walter Raleigh spoke for the Subsidy, not only (as he protested) to please
the Queen, to whom he was infinitely bound above his deserts, but for the
necessity he both saw and knew. He very well discovered the great strength of
the King of Spain. And to show his Mightiness, he told how he possessed all the
World. As also that his malice and ill purpose was evident to this Realm, he
showed how on every side he had beleaguered us.

In Denmark the King being young he had corrupted the Council and Nobility so
as he was very like to speed himself of shipping from thence. In the Marine
Towns of the Low Countries, and in Norway he laid in great store of shipping.
In France he had the Parliament Towns at his Command. In Brittany he had all
the best Havens. And in Scotland he had so corrupted the Nobility, that he had
promised them Forces to re-establish Papistry. That they were ready to join
with any Foreign Forces that would make them strong, to be by themselves and to
resist others. For as he thought there were not six Gentlemen of that Country
of one Religion. In his own Country there is all possible repairing, and he is
coming with sixty Galleys besides other Shipping with purpose to annoy us. We
must then have no Ships (if he invade us) riding at Anchor, all will be little
enough to withstand him. At his coming he fully determines to get Plymouth, or
at least to possess some of the Havens this Summer within our Land. And
Plymouth is a place of most danger, for no Ordnance can be carried thither to
remove him, the passages will not give leave. Now the way to defeat him is
this, to send a Royal Army to supplant him in Brittany, and to possess our
selves there: And to send a strong Navy to Sea, and to lie with it upon the
Cape and such places as his Ships bring his Riches to, that they may set upon
all that come. This we are able to do, and undoubtedly with fortunate success
if we undertake it.

Thus far out of the aforesaid Anonymous Journal. That which next follows is
out of the Original Journal Book it self.

On Saturday the third day of March, Sir Henry Knivett entered into a discourse
touching the privilege of this House, of ancient time used and accustomed, for
the conventing of any person into this Court; thinking for his Opinion, that Mr
Fitzherbert is rather to be called to appear in this House by the Sergeants
Mace of this House, than by any Writ of the Chancery. And so entering into a
recital of George Ferrers his Case, was put in remembrance by Mr Speaker, that
the manner for the bringing in of the said Mr Fitzherbert had received the
Order of this House yesterday, and was therefore now neither to be recalled nor
further treated of by this House, till the appearance of the said Mr
Fitzherbert be first here made in this House according to the said former Order
for the same.

Sir Robert Cecill, one of the Committees for the framing of an Answer of this
House to be made to the motion of the Lords concerning the Subsidy did meet
yesterday in the Afternoon, and having had much speech and many Arguments, did
not as then conclude or resolve of any form of Answer at all; for that sundry
of the same Committees then seemed diversely to conceive of the substance of the
matter delivered to them in Charge by this House, some conceiving it to tend
only to the Consideration of the said Note read by the said Mr Francis Bacon
and no further; and some again, that their Commission was to treat generally of
such a form of Answer unto the said Motion, as the more part of the same
Committees should think fittest, and the same afterward to be reported to this
House, and referred further to the consideration of this House, to be liked of
or not liked of at their pleasure. And showed further, that he and the residue
of the said Committees, had met together again this Morning, and that the most
part of the said Committees had for their parts yielded to grant Conference
with the Lords, if this House should so think good, and had appointed him to
signify the same unto this House in the name of the said most part of the said
Committees, which he said he had now done according to their charge which they
had imposed upon him. And so referring his said report to the censure of the
residue of the more part of the said Committees he ended his Speech.

Mr Wroth one other of the said Committees, not any way excepting to any part
of the said Report made by the said Sir Robert Cecill so as before resolved by
the more part of the said Committees for yielding of Conference unto the Lords,
showed, that he for his own part being also one of the said Committees, did not
at that time give his assent, neither yet now does, that any Conference should
be had with the Lords in the said Case, for that in his opinion the same would
be much prejudicial to the Ancient Liberties and Privileges of this House, and
to the Authority of the same.

Mr Beale likewise showing himself to be of the same mind with Mr Wroth, and
insisting upon the preservation and maintenance, of the former usual and
ancient Liberties and Privileges of this House in treating of Subsidies,
Contributions and other like benevolences amongst themselves, without any
Conference therein at all had or used with the Lords of the Higher House, does
give an instance of a former precedent in the like Case; and offered to show
forth the same precedent to this House, which (being omitted in the Original
Journal Book it self, is here inserted out of the aforesaid Anonymous Journal
more particularly mentioned at the beginning of this present Journal, and) was
as follows. In Anno nono H. 4. the two Houses being divided about the
Subsidy, and the Higher House desiring a greater Subsidy than was granted by
the Lower House; hereupon twelve that were sent as Committees to the Lords came
down, and informed what was desired by the Upper House; namely a greater
Subsidy, and to that end Conference to be had with them of the House of
Commons. The Commons thought themselves grieved therewith, and so returned
their Answer that they would consider what was meet to be done in so general a
matter, but thought the Conference a Derogation to the privilege of the House.
Hereupon the King Answered, that he could not, neither was it fit to violate
the privilege of his Commons, but in all things thought it just to prefer
them. Which said precedent being thus inserted out of the Anonymous Journal,
the rest that follows is continued out of the Original Journal Book it self
taken in the House and committed to writing by Mr Fulk Ouslow at this time
Clerk of the House of Commons. For it should seem, the Speaker and the greater
part of the House very well approving, and being satisfied fully with the
aforesaid precedent cited by Mr Beale, yet those of her Majesty's Privy Council
and the Courtiers also at this time of the House were still earnest for
admitting of a Conference with the Lords. And thereupon

Sir Robert Cecill spoke again, and did put the House in remembrance of the
great and urgent necessity for the speedy prevention and avoiding of the great
and eminent perils and dangers of this Realm and State, to be effected both by
Consultation and also by provision of Treasure; and thinks good that
Conference of this House were had with the Lords as a matter very behoofful:
Especially for that their Lordships some of them being of her Majesty's
Privy Council do know both the purposes and strength of the Enemies on the one
side, and also her Majesty's present store of Treasure more or less, on the
other side; much better than those of this House do. Resolves for his own
Opinion still to give his consent that Conference be had therein with the
Lords, by the Committees of this House; according to their Lordships said
former Motion and request for the same.

Sir William Brunker stood up, and reciting the said great present necessity of
consultation and provision, and that it cannot be otherwise, but that the
proportion of convenient supply of Treasure answerable to the greatness of the
dangers which are imminent, must needs require a greater Mass of Treasure to be
had, than has been as yet treated of in any resolution by this House. And then
the Question being urged and by the Order of the House propounded, whether
Conference should be had with the Lords, upon the Motion of the Committees of
the Lords to the Committees of this House in this Case or no, it was upon the
doubtfulness of the Voices, twice given upon the Question thereof twice
propounded, resolved upon the division of the House; That no such Conference
should be had with the said Committees of the Lords, by the said Committees of
this House; for the number of them which were for the said Conference, and said
I, went out of the said House, and were found to be in number but a hundred
twenty eight, whereas those that were against the said Conference and said No,
sat still in the House being in number two hundred and seventeen. So that the
matter was overruled by eighty nine Voices; with which the Order and Judgment
of the whole House went thereupon accordingly.

Mr Sergeant Fleetwood and Mr Doctor Ford do bring from the Lords a Bill
Entitled an Act for the better assurance and confirmation of the Jointure of
the Lady Margaret Countess of Cumberland.

After the delivery of this Bill thus sent from the Lords the House proceeded
in the further agitation of the foregoing great business which by the bringing
down of the last mentioned Bill from their Lordships had been a while
interrupted. For it having been already overruled by the House, that there
should be no Conference admitted with the Lords touching the matter of the
Subsidy, which their Lordships had desired, it was therefore Ordered upon a
Motion made in the House, that some Answer might presently be sent from thence
to their Lordships to satisfy them touching their said Motion for Conference;
for that in respect the said Conference had been already denied and had been
voted to be prejudicial to the Liberties of the House by the Judgment of the
same, that a convenient number of this House should be appointed presently in
the name of this whole House to give unto their Lordships most humble and
dutiful thanks with all due reverence for their said Lordships good, favorable
and courteous offer of Conference with this House in the said Cause; and to
signify unto their Lordships, that this House cannot in those Cases of
Benevolence or Contribution join in Conference with their Lordships without
prejudice to the Liberties and Privileges of this House, and of the infringing
of the same: and therefore do in most humble wise request and desire their good
Lordships to hold the Members of this House excused in their not assenting unto
their Lordships said Motion for Conference; for that so to have assented
without a Bill, had been contrary to the Liberties and Privileges of this
House, and contrary also to the former precedents of the same House in like
Case had. Which done, all the former Committees of this House were presently
appointed to declare the said Answer of this House unto their Lordships, and Mr
Chancellor of the Exchequer appointed to declare the same. And for this purpose
were nominated and chosen.

All the Privy Council now in this House being four, Sir Henry Unton, Mr Wroth,
Mr Beale, Sir William Brunker, Sir Walter Raleigh, Sir Charles Cavendish, Sir
Edward Hobby, Sir Thomas Cecill, Sir George Carey, Sir Robert Sidney, Sir
Thomas West, Mr Anthony Cook, Mr Tasborough, Sir William Moore, Mr George
Moore, Mr Sergeant Yelverton, Sir Francis Drake, Sir Francis Hastings, Sir
William Knowles, Sir Fulk Griffin, Mr William Haward, Sir Charles Blunt, Sir
John Harrington, Mr Herbert Master of Requests, Mr Arthur George, Sir Thomas
Conisby, Mr Dyer, Mr Doctor Awbery, Mr Edward Barker, Mr Robert Sackvile, Sir
Henry Poole, Sir Edward Stafford, Sir Thomas Read, Sir Henry Cock, Mr Lewkenor,
Sir John Points and Sir Edward Carey, who forthwith went up to the Lords of the
Upper House with the Message of the said Answer accordingly. And shortly after
returning again from thence to this House the said Mr Chancellor of the
Exchequer made report of their delivery of the said Answer to the Lords; and
showed, that their Lordships well hoped to have had Conference with this House,
according to their former request. And so wished this House to have due care
and great consideration touching the speedy provision of a convenient supply of
treasure to be had according to the present great necessity of the said Cause.
And showed, that their Lordships desired to see those precedents of this House,
by which this House seems to refuse the said Conference. And so gave end to
his Speech for that time.

One being no Member of this House, and yet found to have sitten in this House,
during the greater part of this Forenoon, was brought to the Bar, and being
there examined by Mr Speaker of his name and place of abode; answered his name
to be John Leg, and that he was Servant to the Earl of Northumberland; and
pleading simplicity and ignorance for his excuse, and alleging that he had
some business to do with Mr Doctor Herbert Master of the Requests from the said
Earl his Master, and that therefore he entered into the said House, not thinking
any harm nor knowing the danger thereof. And so humbly praying pardon, was in
the end committed to the Custody of the Sergeant of this House, till this House
shall upon further Examination of the matter take other Order.

The Bill for Naturalizing of William Sidney and Peregrine Wingfield was twice
read, and upon the Question was Ordered to be engrossed.

Four Bills also had each of them one reading; of which the second being the
Bill touching George Ognell Esquire had its first reading. The substance
whereof is taken out of the aforesaid Anonymous Journal (more particularly
mentioned at the beginning of this present Journal) in manner and form
following, viz.

One Trussell having sold the Manor of Binsley to Ognell for good
consideration, and afterward of purpose to defeat this Purchase, caused
himself to be Indicted of Felony done in Kent before the Seal to Ognell, and
was thereof Attainted, and with relation of the Felony defeated Ognells
purchase; It was Enacted, that this Attainder should be void only as in respect
of this Purchase, and to that end to be as if Trussell had never been
Attainted, nor no Lords to have any Escheats or other by reason of this
Attainder. Her Majesty understanding this, was pleased to remit her Interest.

Mr Speaker perceiving some men to whisper together, said, that it was not the
manner of the House, that any should whisper or talk secretly, for here only
public Speeches are to be used.

Nota, that these two particulars are only supplied out of the aforesaid
Anonymous Journal, and that which follows and also that which went before, is
inserted out of the Original Journal Book it self.

Sir Edward Dymock moved, that a Commit tee of this House may be appointed for
a speedy Conference to be had touching the present necessary provision and
Supply of Treasure to be had for the defense of this Realm and State. And
thereupon the former Committees for the Subsidy (whose names see before on
Monday the 26th day of February last past) were ordered to meet upon Monday
next at two of the Clock in the Afternoon in this House, to confer in this Case.

On Monday the 5th day of March, Two Bills of no great moment had each of them
one reading; of which the second being the Bill against the stealing of Oxen,
Kine, Sheep and Lambs, was upon the second reading committed unto Mr Wroth, Mr
Sands, Mr Recorder of London and others; and the Bill was delivered to Mr
Wroth, who with the rest was appointed to meet in this House to Morrow at two
of the Clock in the Afternoon.

The Bill concerning salted Fish and salted Herrings was read the second time,
and thereupon committed unto Sir Francis Drake, Sir Thomas Sherley, the
Burgesses of Yarmouth, Plymouth, Hall and Saltash, the Burgesses of all the
Port Towns, Mr. Robert Wroth, Sir Henry Knivet and others; and the Bill was
delivered to Mr. Wroth, who with the rest was appointed to meet upon Wednesday
next at two of the Clock in the Afternoon in the Exchequer Chamber.

Nota, That after the Commitment of these Bills ensued diverse Speeches touching
that great business of Conserence, with the Lords which had been very largely
debated on Saturday last in the House. All which said Speeches being either
very shortly and imperfectly set down in the Original Journal Book of the House
of Commons, or wholly omitted, and for which three entire pages and more are
there left Blank to have inserted them (in which are set down the names only of
some of those that spoke them) therefore they are supplied out of the aforesaid
Anonymous Journal very elaborately taken by some Member of the said House
during this Parliament, and do here next ensue in manner and form following.

Mr. Beale desired to satisfy the House, by reason it was conceived by the
Lords the other day, that upon his Motion, and by his precedent showed, the
House was led to deny a Conference with the Lords, he acknowledged he had
mistaken the question propounded. For there being but a Conference desired by
the Lords, and no confirming of any thing they had done, he thought we might,
and it was sit we should confer. And to this end only he showed the Precedent,
That in the 9th year of H. 4. the Commons having granted a Subsidy, which the
Lords thought too little, and they agreed to a greater and would have the
Commons to confirm that which they had done; this the Commons thought they
could not do without prejudice to this House. Wherefore he acknowledged himself
mistaken in the Question and desired if any were led by him, to be satisfied,
for that he would have been of another opinion if he had conceived the matter
as it was meant.

Sir Thomas Heneage propounded the Question anew, and thought that with the
privilege of the House, and by precedents to be showed, there had been
Conference with the Lords used upon the like Motion.

Sir John Wolley thought that the former denial grew upon mistaking of the
Question, and upon better consideration would have the matter reversed, and now
to assent to that which was denied before.

Sir Henry Knivett moved, that for the freedom of the House it might be
concluded amongst them a matter answerable at the Bar, for any man to report
any thing of any Speech used, or matters done in this House.

Sir Henry Upton spoke in defense of the former proceedings of the House, and
showed how it had proceeded; first agreeing to a double Subsidy and four
Fifteenths, this being offered, and the Lords thinking it seemed little, and
considering the present necessity, the lack of payment of Subsidies, and the
true rating of Subsidies, over that they were wont to be, they desired a
Conference with the Lower House, giving reasons of great Importance for a
greater aid; and they gave us a taste of what was needful, as three Subsidies
at the least; and upon those great Causes desired a Conference the next day.
This being delivered unto the House by one of the Committees sent to the Lords,
the House upon Consideration thought it not to stand with their Privilege to
confer with their Lordships in matter of Subsidies, because it was the liberty
of the House to make Offer themselves to her Majestv. And in regard it stood
not with the Privilege of this House to confer with the Lords, hereupon they
advise upon an Answer to be made unto the Lords, wherein they should give them
thanks that they had vouchsafed to confer with them of this House; but showed,
that with the Privilege of the House they could not have Conference with them
in matter of Subsidy.

Further he thought the House much injured, that they should be reported to be
against the Subsidy; and the Parties injured who speaking the last day against
the Subsidy, their names were given up, and were noted for it to the Queen.

And now my Motion is that we must confer with the Lords upon the Subsidy, but
not in any fort to be conformed therein unto them. And for that occasion past,
he desired that Mr Speaker might be sent and report the truth of the whole
matter and manner of our proceedings.

Sir Robert Cecill spoke next and said, I desire now I may be somewhat long,
because I must include an Answer to three Speeches. Those two Honorable
Persons that sit above, the one of them declared the true state of the
Question, the other what was fit we should do. But my Answer shall tend only to
those Tales that followed. The first was a kind of satisfaction for a former
mistaking; but in the same satisfaction a new mistaking was also; which was by
way of information, casting it into the House, that the Queen should seem to
demand three Subsidies. Now the Queen never demanded three, nor one. So there
is a new mistaking added to the former satisfaction.

The second Man's Motion thus far I allow, That the Counsel of this House be
secretly kept, and that nothing be reported in malam partem: But if his meaning
be, that we may not impart any thing that is done here unto the Queen, but that
all things must be secret from her, I am altogether against it. This only I
should desire, what ought to be observed, That nothing ought to be reported
unto her in malam partem.

The third Man's Motion consisted of three points. The first was News, the
second was History, and the third and last a Motion. His News was, that Men's
names were given up to the Queen. This was News. For I heard it not before. The
History was a large Report of the Progress of this matter. His Motion was, that
we should confer with the Lords about a Subsidy with them, but not conclude a
Subsidy with them. His matter seems contrary to his meaning, or else is more
than ever was meant; for it was never desired of us by the Lords, that we
should confer with them about a Subsidy.

Sir Walter Raleigh spoke next and moved, that seeing the division of the House
the last day grew as he conceived upon the mistaking of the question, and that
since some had reported unto him, that had the question been propounded whether
they should only yield to a Conference in general with the Lords, they would
not have been against it; and therefore he desired Mr Speaker to put it to the
Question, whether they should confer with the Lords generally or not, without
naming a Subsidy. This Motion being well liked, Sir Walter Raleigh was desired
by the House to repeat it again, that so it might be the better heard of them
all. And thereupon he said, that touching the aforesaid question which had
received a No upon Saturday last foregoing, he would not make it a Question
again, for by the Order of the House he could not; but propounded this for a
new Question in these or the like words, Whether the House would be pleased to
have general Conference with the Lords touching the great imminent dangers of
the Realm and State, and the present necessary supply of Treasure to be
provided speedily for the same according to the proportion of the necessity.
Which said Question being propounded unto the House, it was assented unto
accordingly by them all without any negative Voice.

And thereupon the former Committees appointed for Conference with their
Lordships (whose names see before on Thursday the first day of this Instant
March) were presently sent up from this House unto their Lordships to signify
the resolution of this House in yielding to the said general Conference with
their Lordships according to their former desire. And that Sir Thomas Heneage
her Majesty's Vice-Chamberlain should make report thereof from this House unto
their said Lordships.

Thus far out of the aforesaid Anonymous Journal; that which follows is
inserted out of the Original Journal Book it self.

Upon a Motion made by Mr Sergeant Harris for the Order of this House for
setting at liberty of John Leg Servant to the Earl of Northumberland, who was
found sitting in this House upon Saturday last and is no Member of the same,
and was thereupon committed to the Sergeants Ward till further Order should be
taken with him by this House; the Sergeant of this House is appointed to have
the said John Leg here to Morrow Morning.

The Bill touching the true assizing of Bread had the second reading, and was
committed to the former Committees in the Bill concerning salted Fish, and
salted Herrings (appointed in the beginning of this present day) and to meet at
the same time and place, as for the said Bill touching salted Fish and salted
Herrings is appointed; And the Bill was delivered to Mr Wroth one of the said
Committees.

The Bill for Naturalizing of Samuel Saltingstall and others born beyond the
Seas was upon the second reading committed to Mr Treasurer, Sir Thomas West, Mr
Recorder of London, Sir Henry Knivet and others, and the Bill was delivered to
Sir Thomas West, who with the rest was appointed to meet upon Wednesday next at
two of the Clock in the Afternoon in the Exchequer Chamber.

Mr Vice-Chamberlain and the residue of the Committees making their return from
the Lords, he showed their Lordships ready good will in accepting the offer of
Conference of this House with their Lordships. And their Lordships have
appointed for that purpose a Committee of two and twenty of themselves to join
in Conference with the Committee of this House, and have appointed the place to
be in the Chamber next to the Upper House of Parliament, and the time to be to
Morrow at two of the Clock in the Afternoon. And thereupon the Committee of
this House appointed to have conferred amongst themselves for the matter of the
Subsidy this present Afternoon in this House, are appointed to defer their
further consultation therein, until the said other Committees of this House
appointed for the said general Conference with the Lords shall have further
acquainted this House of their travail and treaty to be first had with the said
Committees of the Lords. And also the meeting of the Committees in the Bill for
reducing of disloyal Subjects to their due obedience is now signified to the
same Committees to be held in the Afternoon of this present day in this place.

On Tuesday the 6th day of March, Two Bills of no great moment had each of them
one reading; of which the second being the Bill for Confirmation of Letters
Patents granted to the Mayor, Sheriffs, Citizens and Commonalty of the City of
Lincoln was read the second time.

Sir Edward Hobby one of the Committees for Returns and Privileges showed,
that for the Borough of Camelford in the County of Cornwall, one Richard Leech
was returned to the Sheriff for a Burgess by a false Return: And that
afterward Sir George Carew Knight, was returned Burgess by the true Return.
And alleging that the said Richard Leech offered to yield the place to Sir
George Carew, moved the Order of this House therein. And thereupon Mr Speaker
was appointed to move the Lord Keeper in the said Case for this Order, either
in the allowance of the said Sir George Carew in the place of the said Richard
Leech, or else in awarding a new Writ for the choosing another at his Lordships
pleasure. And so for his Lordships Order in the Case of the Burgess returned
for the Borough of Southwark, in the allowance of Richard Hutton already
returned, or else in awarding of a new Writ for choosing of another at his
Lordships pleasure. And so also for his Lordships Order in altering the name of
John Dudley to the name of Thomas Dudley in the Return of one of the Burgesses
of Newtown in the County of Southampton, or else to award a new Writ at his
Lordships pleasure.

The Bill against Aliens born to sell by way of retail Foreign Wares brought
into this Realm, was upon the second reading committed unto Sir John Wolley,
Sir Edward Stafford, Sir Robert Sidney, Mr Recorder of London and others, who
were appointed to meet upon Thursday next at two of the Clock in the Afternoon
in the Exchequer Chamber.

The Bill touching Mr Read Stafford, etc. was upon the second reading committed
unto Mr Heyle, Sir Edward Stafford, Sir Henry Umpton, Sir Thomas West and
others, who were appointed to meet upon Monday next at two of the Clock in the
Afternoon in the Star Chamber.

Mr Vice-Chamberlain putting the House in remembrance of their resolution
yesterday for praying Conference with their Lordships touching the great
dangers and necessary remedies to be considered of, and which was then so
signified unto their Lordships by the House, which return from their Lordships
of the time and place appointed by them for that Conference, being at two of
the Clock in the Afternoon this present day, in the Chamber next to the Upper
House of Parliament, moved that it may be presently resolved in this House,
wherein and how far the said Committees of this House shall have Warrant to
treat with the Committees of the Lords. It was after many Speeches of sundry
Members of this House very well delivered to diverse effects and purposes
resolved and agreed by the whole House upon the Question, that the said
Committees of the House should have Authority to confer with the said
Committees of the Lords generally concerning the said dangers and remedies as
occasion should serve: But not in any manner of wise to conclude or resolve of
any thing in the said Conference particularly, without the further privity or
assent of this whole House to be had in that behalf, upon the report of the
said Committees to be first made unto this House of their Proceedings in the
said Conference to be had this present day as aforesaid.

Nota, That there is no more found of this days Passages in the Original
Journal Book of the House of Commons, although there be almost two pages left
blank by Mr Fulk Onslow at this time Clerk of the said House, with intention
doubtless at the first to have inserted them, and therefore they are very
largely and fully supplied out of the aforesaid Anonymous Journal very
elaborately taken by some Member of the same House during this Parliament,
where it appears that after the aforesaid Speech of Sir Thomas Heneage her
Majesty's Vice-Chamberlain, Mr Oliver St John spoke next in the manner and form
following.

Mr Oliver St John said, he thought that Mr Vice-Chamberlain did mistake the
thing we agreed upon, that we went not to confer with their Lordships in any
thing that we had to deliver, but to understand of things from them, the
Conference being offered from them and not from us.

Sir Walter Raleigh Answered Mr St John, that he mistook Mr Vice-Chamberlain,
and the thing agreed by the House; for we agreed all to a general Conference,
but not in particular for the Subsidy, for this we refused. If we confer
generally, it must be of our dangers, and of the remedies, which must be by
means; if of means, it must be of Money and Aid. So our Conference must needs
be of Subsidy, or rather Aid; but to agree upon this with any resolution either
in the matter or substance, it is not our meaning.

Sir Robert Cecill answered Mr St John, that he mistaking Mr Vice-Chamberlain,
did wrong him in saying he delivered the Message insufficiently or untruly, and
so would have the privilege of the House; and that it should be delivered by
the Committees whether Mr Vice-Chamberlain did report truly; and if truly, then
Mr St John to answer it: and so said Sir John Woolley.

The House having cleared Sir Thomas Heneage Vice-Chamberlain, he said he would
have no other satisfaction than to be cleared by the House. And protested, he
thought no ill of the Gentleman, but allowed him for speaking as he thought.

Sir Henry Umpton agreed to the Conference, and was glad the last days No and
this were so well concluded; and moved, that we might not be deprived of
thanks, to agree unto a treble Subsidy before we went to confer.

Mr Frowick Grevill said: There are two scruples in the House, which I would
gladly satisfy; the one the privilege of the House, the other the poverty of
the people. For Precedents they are but Examples of things past. Now every
Example ought to be stronger than the thing we fear: for if the thing be
otherwise and our necessity greater, the former doings are no Rules to us. And
so Precedents as they are not to be rejected, so they ought not to be Eternal.
For the poverty of our Country, we have no reason to think it poor, our
sumptuousess in Apparel, in Plate and in all things, argues our riches. And
our dearth of every thing amongst us, shows plenty of Money. But it is said,
our Countries are poor, and we must respect them that sent us hither. Why, so
we must also remember who sent for us hither. This Cause is hard; for there is
necessity against necessity, danger against danger, and inward discontent
against outward Forces. The poor are grieved by being overcharged; this must be
helped by increasing our own Burden; for otherwise the weak feet will complain
of too heavy a body; that is to be feared. If the feet knew their strength as
we know their oppression, they would not bear as they do. But to answer them,
it suffices that the time requires it. And in a Prince power will command. To
satisfy them, they cannot think we overcharge them, when we charge our selves
with them and above them: But if nothing will satisfy them, our doings are
sufficient to bind them. If the multitudes of Parliaments be remembered
heretofore, many Subsidies now in one Parliament cannot seem burdensome. The
more Laws we make, the less liberty we have to our selves. And now one word for
my self, if my Speech has offended, excuse me, I will not often trouble you
hereafter.

Mr Speaker said, I do not desire to be thought arrogant, for the thing which I
will speak shall be out of duty belonging to my place. Because I see many
Speeches grow upon mistaking, and one Speech mistaken to cause another
mistaking, and sic undam gignere undam, and so a great deal of time lost in
words; hereafter I will be bold, if any man mistake in the point of a Bill, to
tell him of it before his Speech proceed; for this Question of conferring with
the Lords has taken up so much time only by mistaking; for it is granted by the
House to have a General Conference.

They that should confer had need be authorized and instructed what to confer
upon; for he that has but delegatam Potestatem, will think nothing Promissum
that is not Commissum; and it is certain non utile est, ubi nulla est curatio
morbi. Therefore understand what is needful to confer upon.

The question upon the Return of the Burgess of Southwark and for mending a
Return in an Indenture, were referred unto Mr Speaker to inform the Lord Keeper
thereof.

No Return can be amended in this House. For the Writ and Return are in
Chancery and must be amended there. And in the Chancery this is the Rule, if
the Surname or the proper name of a party be mistaken in the Return, the Lord
Keeper will not amend it; for such tender consideration is had of the free
Election by the Corporations, as no Information shall be credited against the
Return, but the Lord Keeper will first make out a Writ reciting the mistaking
in the former Return, and then they by the same Writ shall have Authority to
make a new Election. Thus far out of the aforesaid Anonymous Journal.

On Wednesday the 7th day of March, Sir Edward Hobby moving the Cause of Mr
Fitzherbert his bringing up unto this House by a Writ of Habeas Corpus cum
Causa from the Lord Keeper, shows, That he has moved the Lord Keeper
touching the said Writ, and that his Lordship thinks best in regard of the
Ancient Liberties and Privileges of this House, that a Sergeant at Arms be
sent by Order of this House for the said Mr Fitzherbert at his own Charge, by
reason whereof he may be brought hither to this House, without peril of further
being Arrested by the way, and the state of this Cause to be considered of and
examined when he shall be come hither: Which was thereupon well liked and
allowed by this House.

Three Bills had each of them one reading; of which the second concerning the
lawful deprivation of Edward Bonner late Bishop of London, was read the second
time.

John Leg Prisoner at the Bar Servant to the Earl of Northumberland (as he
says) after a good Exhortation given him by Mr Speaker, and the Oath of
Supremacy pronounced by him at the Bar, is upon his humble Submission and
craving of Pardon set at liberty of his Imprisonment by the Order of this
House, paying his Fees. Vide on Saturday March the third foregoing.

The Bill for Confirmation of the Jointure of the Lady Margaret Countess of
Cumberland had its third reading; and thereupon it was moved by some, that it
might now pass the House, and be sent up also to their Lordships: but others
took Exceptions thereat, because the Bill had not been as yet spoken unto.
Whereupon because it could not now be committed after the third reading, it was
by the Order of the House agreed, that it should be spoken unto to Morrow, and
afterward pass the House, or be dashed as the Case it self should require.

The Bill for Naturalizing of William Sidney and Peregrine Wingfield, was sent
up to the Lords by Mr Treasurer and others.

Mr Sergeant Snagg and Mr Sergeant Fleetwood do bring the Lords two Bills; the
one Entitled an Act against Counterfeiting of Counselors or principal
Officers hands; and the other Entitled an Act to confirm the sale of the Lands
of Mr Raven Gentleman, made unto Lisse Cave, Thomas Andrews and Edward
Hisserigg Esquires, toward the payment of a Debt due unto her Majesty.

Mr Vice-Chamberlain showed, that he and the rest of the Committees for
Conference with the Lords did attend their Lordships yesterday in the Afternoon
at the time and place appointed according to the Commission of this House, and
having there received from their Lordships further Advertizement of the
imminent great dangers of this Realm and State more than their Lordships had
imparted unto them in the last former Conference of this House with their said
Lordships before, they did thereupon move their Lordships for their good favor
in giving time to this House to consult upon the said dangers and the remedies
for the same until to Morrow in the Afternoon. Their Lordships thereupon were
so pleased to do; albeit they rather desired the same might have been done
sooner. And so reciting at large the particularities of the said Advertizement,
and whereof some happened since the last former Conference, Moved this House to
grow to some resolution of matter to be prepared ready to be offered unto their
Lordships to Morrow in the Afternoon, according unto the promise of himself and
the residue of the said Committees of this House unto their Lordships
yesterday. It was in the end after sundry Speeches of diverse grave Members of
this House, tending to diverse forms of provision of Treasure, some by way of
treble Subsidies and like proportionable Fifteenths and (...), and some by
other sorts of benevolences, resolved upon the question, that the former
Committees of this House for consultation to be had for necessary supply of
Treasures to be had for the repelling of the said dangers, should meet in this
House in the Afternoon of this present day to confer and consult generally
touching the said great dangers, as also touching the remedies, that the same
being digested may be reported over unto this House into such form as to the
same shall be thought good; to the end that afterward it may in the Afternoon
be imparted unto the Lords accordingly.

Nota, That there is no more of this days Passages found in the Original
Journal Book of the House of Commons, although there followed diverse Speeches
upon the foregoing Motion of Sir Thomas Heneage her Majesty's Vice-Chamberlain
concerning the great business of supply to be given to her Majesty; all which
are therefore inserted out of that foresaid Anonymous Journal taken by some
Member of the said House during this Parliament, which are there set down (with
very little alteration added to them) in manner and form following.

Sir Thomas Cerill speaking next after Sir Thomas Heneage had ended his former
Speech, said, that three Subsidies might be set down to be paid in four years,
and to be charged upon men of ten pound and upwards to spare them that were
under.

Sir Henry Knivet affirmed the poverty of our Country against the reasons used.
The principal reason of our poverty he said was because we brought in more
Foreign Wares than we vented Commodities, and so by this means our money was
carried out of our Country. Alleging it to be like a Pond fed with a Spring,
but having a breach through which more passes than comes in, so etc.

He made these two Motions; First, that the Queen should be helped by a survey
taken of all men's Lands and Goods in England, and so much to be yearly levied
as to serve the Queen to maintain Wars, the proportion being set a hundred
thousand pound yearly; And secondly, if this were misliked, every man upon his
word and power to deliver what were the profits of his Lands and worth of his
goods, and so a proportion to be had accordingly.

Sir Francis Hastings said, The preparations of the Enemies Forces are both
ready and great, and intus they conspire; therefore a great Aid must be
yielded: And I could wish three Subsidies to be levied in this matter; in the
first of them those to be charged of five pound Lands and five Marks Goods; in
the second those of twelve pound Lands and eight pound Goods, and in the third
all to be charged as these have been.

Sir Walter Raleigh Answered them that spoke of the Poverty of the Land, which
they argued by the multitude of Beggars, he gave these reasons: That the broken
Companies in Normandy and the Low Countries who returned maimed hither, never
went back again to the Towns from whence they came. For a multitude of
Clothiers take their Looms into their own hands, spinning their Wool
themselves, and except we would work unto them better cheap than they can make
themselves, they will set none on work. This grossing of so many Trades into
their own hands, beggereth so many as usually lived by the Trade. He thought it
inconvenient to have so many men's livings surveyed: For many are now esteemed
richer than they are, and if their Land and Wealth were surveyed, they would be
found Beggars, and so their credit which is now their Wealth, would be found
nothing worth.

He reported of his own knowledge, that the West Country since the Parliament
begun, had taken from them the worth of four hundred and forty thousand pound.
They of Newcastle lie still for fear, because Bordeaux Fleet was taken this
year by the Enemy. For the Enemy approaching us, and being our Neighbor as he
is gotten to be, our Trades will decay every day, and so our poverty increases
every day more and more. And this is most certain, the longer we defer Aid, the
less able shall we be to yield Aid; And in the end the greater Aid will be
required of us. And so sparing them now we shall charge them when they shall be
less able to bear it. For this is most true, one hundred thousand pound would
have done the last year that which three will not now do; and three will do
this year that which six will not do hereafter. So in conclusion he agreed to
three Subsidies; in them the three pound men to be spared, and the sum which
came from them to be levied upon those of ten pound and upwards, and the
payment to be speedy.

Sir Henry Umpton agreed that there should be three Subsidies granted,
according to the old payment; only that a care should be had of assessing it on
them that were best able. And his conclusion was, that it might be soon agreed
upon, for so it would be more acceptable, because Tarde velle nolle instar est.

Sir Edward Stafford thought Subsidies were not so fit a remedy for the dangers
we were in, but advised rather, there being ten thousand Parishes in England,
that it should be imposed on every Parish to find so many men for the Wars; and
the richer Parishes to help the poorer. And the allowance for every man yearly
to be twelve pound. After this he moved to have the Parliament Prorogued.

Sir Francis Drake described the King of Spains strength and cruelty where he
came, and wished a frank Aid to be yielded to withstand him; and he agreed to
three Subsidies.

Sergeant Harris moved for three Subsidies, but the ancient custom of payment
to be retained; besides, no three pound men to be excused, for then every man
will labor by his Friend to be set three pound. And that it was not needful to
find men for the Field. For by the Tenures, of which there are three in
England, this is provided for. The first Chivalry, that is to do service in the
Field; the second Socage, that is to find us victum and vestitum by the Plough;
the last Frankal moign, who are to pray for us to God. Now every one by whom
fealty is to be done by his Tenure, he is to be forty days in the Field with
his Lord.

Sir Robert Cevill said, I am glad to see the willingness of the House and
readiness to yield Aid; and having a feeling of the necessity requiring it, my
desire is, that the Sentence which had had so many Parentheses, might now be
brought to a Period, and the Bears Whelp that has so many times been licked
over, might now be made somewhat. For that is always the most Honorable
Conclusion, which having received many Contradictions, is in the end concluded.
So he desired this matter of Subsidying might be committed to some special
Committees in the Afternoon.

Sir John Fortescue thought it liberal to grant three Subsidies, but did assure
of his proper knowledge, that three Subsidies would not defray her Majesty's
Charges, though all other Customs and Revenues were added unto them; And
motioned what should be delivered by the House, and what should be delivered to
the Lords by the Committees.

Sir Thomas Heneage her Majesty's Vice-Chamberlain affirmed, he never saw the
House so willing to yield to needful Aids. And that he was one who had now
served her Majesty a long time, and knew something her disposition. Wherefore
he advised that the wonted course should be followed. For he heard her Majesty
speak of it, that she loved not such fineness of device and novel inventions,
but liked rather to have the ancient usages offered. It is best so to have it
paid as it has been heretofore. Only a greater discretion to be used in the
charging of it. To charge the poor men more deeply he thought it not fit; yet
they to be grateful to her Majesty he thought it would be accepted. And that
the best able men should offer somewhat to her Majesty of their ability. And
for the Order of our Proceedings, he thought it fit that we first agree to
three Subsidies, and six Fifteenths: this to be considered upon by Committees
this Afternoon, and to Morrow to be propounded to the House. And then if it
were allowed, we might at our going to the Lords tell them what we have agreed
upon.

Hereupon a murmur was in the House whether we should have a Committee for
three Subsidies, or a general Committee to confer of all matters of remedies.

The question being propounded it was Answered, that it should be by a general
Committee.

In the Afternoon at the General Committee the Committees met, and it was
debated how the Subsidy could be levied in shorter time than heretofore. The
poverty of the people and hard Collections of other Subsidies, and the double
charge which this would be unto them, with many other reasons were alleged
against the Parliaments so speedy Collection. On the other side it was
vehemently pressed, that the necessity of the time was such, as it could not
carry the accustomed time for payment, her Majesty's Purse and Coffers being
empty, the danger would be over before the usual payment would come in.
Wherefore if the help were not timely, it would be no service. There was much
division about this. Some of the Committees would have this propounded, whether
the three Subsidies should be paid in four years or three; others dissented
from it.

Mr Heal amongst the Committees argued the wealth of the Country to be greater
than ever it was, affirming that of his own knowledge from the Mount to London
the Country was richer many thousand pounds than heretofore. He also urged the
necessity, which being so great, and her Majesty having expended as was said
since Eighty eight above ten hundred and thirty four thousand pounds and that
only in Normandy, Brittany and in the Low Countries, and upon her Navy and
Artillery; besides all her Pensions to Foreign Princes, her Officers Fees, the
charges of her Garrison of Barwick, standing her yearly in seventeen thousand
pounds; and all this is besides the Expenses in her House. These things being
considered, he thought more than Subsidies would be yielded; and if Subsidies
only, the richer Men must be the more deeply charged, and the Commission so
penned, as the Commissioners may have Authority to force men.

Mr Francis Bacon assented to three Subsidies, but not to the payments under
six years. And to this propounded three questions, which he desired might be
answered. The first, Impossibility or difficulty; the second Danger or
coffeehouse; and thirdly, a better manner of supply than Subsidy.

For Impossibility; the poor men's Rent is such, as they are not able to yield
it, nor to pay so much for the present. The Gentlemen must sell their Plate,
and Farmers their Brass Pots, ere this will be paid. And for us we are here to
search the wounds of the Realm and not to skin them over; therefore not to
persuade our selves of their wealth more than it is.

The dangers are these. We shall first breed coffeehouse in paying these
Subsidies, and in the Cause endanger her Majesty's safety, which must consist
more in the love of the people than in their wealth; and therefore not to give
them coffeehouse in paying these Subsidies: thus we run into a double peril.
In putting two payments into one, we make a double Subsidy. For it makes four
shillings in the pound a double payment. The second is this, that this being
granted in this sort, other Princes hereafter will look for the like; So we
shall put an evil precedent upon our selves, and our Posterity. And in
Histories it is to be observed, that of all Nations the English are not to be
subject, base or Taxable.

The manner of supply may be by Levy or Imposition, when need shall most
require; so when her Majesty's Coffers are empty, they may be filled by this
means.

Sir Thomas Heneage her Majesty's Vice-Chamberlain said, my Opinion shall not
prejudice any man's Judgment, but this my answer to the Gentleman's two reasons
that spoke last, which were difficulty and coffeehouse. For the first, it is
strange to count that impossible which has been proved, or that difficulty,
which has been used. For coffeehouse, a people sound in Religion and
faithful to the Queen and State, were never found to love their Prince so
little, as to be discontented, etc. The necessity of the time is to be
considered, and shall be informed unto them, which is such as has not been at
any time these sixty years, nor at any time the like was ever heard of; Yea
such dangers, as are not to be read that ever the like was intended to any
State. Therefore for this extraordinary time some accustomed help must be had;
and from these Subsidies do but take away the benefit of time, and then the
payments will yield no help to our necessity; for in two years the dangers will
be over. So he desired that in this Case Examples might not lead us, but that
the present dangers should move us.

Sir Thomas Cecill moved also, that the Cinque Ports might be also brought into
the Taxes of the Subsidies at this time; for that it has been the use of men
having any Lands in the Cinque Ports, to take sanctuary there before the
Sessing of the Subsidy, by removing themselves, and keeping their Houses there.

Sir Walter Raleigh said, I can see no reason that the suspicion of
coffeehouse should cross the provision for the present danger. The time is
now more dangerous than it was in Eighty eight; for then the Spaniard which
came from Spain was to pass dangerous Seas, and had no place of retreat or
relief if he failed: But now he has in Brittany great store of Shipping, a
Landing place in Scotland, and Men and Horses there as good as we have any. But
for the difficulty in getting this Subsidy, I think it seems more difficult by
speaking than it would be in gathering.

Now stood up two or three to have spoken, striving who might speak first. Then
the Speaker propounds it as an Order in the House in such a Case, for him to
ask the parties that would speak, On which side they would speak, whether with
him that spoke next before, or against him; and the party that speaks against
the last speaker is to be heard first. And so it was ruled. Where it may seem,
that the Speaker did give admonishment sitting in the House as a Member
thereof, and not sitting in his Chair as Speaker, which he never does at any
Committee although it be of the whole House.

After which some able Member of the House, whose name is not set down, spoke
next and said, I could very well agree to the Subsidies, if they were not
prejudicial to the Subject in other services. For Subsidies be in the valuation
of every man's Lands and Goods by Records called the Queens Books, and according
to men's valuation of Subsidies, are they at all other charges, as to the Wars
and in time of Muster with Horse and Armor; and this charge makes men so
unwilling to be raised in the Subsidy; but if these Subsidies brought in no
other charge with them, they would be yielded willingly. But the tail and
appendage of it being so great, and higher than the Subsidy it self, is the
reason that men are so unwilling to yield it. Wherefore if a greater Tax or
Assessment than heretofore be desired, I would wish a Proviso to be added in
the Statute. That by this Subsidy no man should be raised as to the defray of
other charges above the rate they were put to before.

Sir Francis Godolphin wished the first payment might be at Midsummer, for
after that time the Receivors had the benefit of the money. The next to be at
Michaelmas, for at that time men would have it in the benefit of their Corn and
Commodities. And so in four years and a quarter the Subsidy would be paid with
more ease.

Mr Jews agreed to the Subsidies, and desired that two things might be
granted, whereby the Subject should be enriched and the better enabled to pay
the Subsidy: That is, that one liberty may be granted, which is transporting of
Corn; and the other is for somewhat to be restrained, viz. bringing in of Wines
so abundantly; for the vent of our Cloth amounts not to the sum of our
Vintage, and srugem patrem-familias vendacem non emacem est oportet. And thinks
it good that the Statutes made heretofore against excess in Apparel might be
put in Execution.

Mr George Moore said, I am grieved to see it, and I speak it with grief, how
perilous our Estate is, and how dangerous a cause we be in. We are not sick of
one Disease but we labor with a plurality of Diseases. To meet therefore with
our threefold Diseases we ought like good Physicians to apply a threefold
remedy, a treble Subsidy. And as the Physic is lost which is not taken in
time, so we must seek to minister the Medicine in good time. And our Disease
being a Pleurisy, it is fit we did so. For a skilful Physician though he see
in a Pleurisy there is no remedy without letting Blood, yet he will then choose
the time of letting Blood, when the sign is furthest from the heart. Let us let
the people Blood, and so prevent the danger.

Mr Heyle said, If we take care for our Posterity, we had best to settle our
Posterity, which will not be, except we prevent dangers now imminent. For
precedents of Subsidies they are not to be feared, because before-time greater
were required than ever since were granted. Therefore this is no Rule, that
what we grant now will hereafter be required...... In the sixth year of King
John every one holding by a Knights Fee, was bound to find a Knight in the
Wars. And for this present Law, it may be Enacted, that this shall be no
precedent for Subsidies hereafter, like as it was in the fourteenth of Edward
the Third.

Sir Robert Cecill assented to those that had spoken for the Subsidies, but to
them that had spoken to the contrary he said, they speak out of time; And to
speak to the particular parts, as that our Poverty is not to be skinned over
but thoroughly healed; that coffeehouse is to be feared; and lastly, that
precedents for hereafter would be avoided. For the first, if we be poor, yet at
this time it is to be considered we are in great danger, and of two mischiefs
we must choose the lesser. And therefore I would have this question after so
much discussing banished the House.

For Precedents, they have never been perpetual, but begun and ended with the
Causes; and as the Causes grew, so grew the Precedent. In her Majesty's time it
is not to be feared that this Precedent will ever do us harm, for her Majesty
will never accept any thing that is given her unwillingly of her Subjects: Nay
in the Parliament the twenty seventh of her Reign she refused a benevolence
offered her, because she had no need of it, and would not charge her people.
This being out of fear, we have no reason to give prejudice to the best Queen
or King that ever came, for fear of a worse King than ever was. After her Reign
I never had so much as one Idea in my Head what would be our Estate then.

Now to end the matter long debated, my desire is, that the question might be
made for three Subsidies payable in four years.

This question was made in the House, and at the first they gave an I.

Thus far out of the aforesaid Anonymous Journal, that which follows is out of
the Original Journal Book it self.

On Thursday the 8th day of March, Mr Speaker showed unto the House, that
according to the appointment of this House he has attended the Lord Keeper
touching his Lordships pleasure for the directing of a new Writ for the choosing
of another Burgess for the Borough of Southwark in the County of Surrey,
instead of Richard Hutton supposed to have been unduly and undirectly Elected;
and also for the allowing of Sir George Carew Knight to be Burgess for the
Borough of Camelford in the County of Cornwall, as truly returned Burgess of
the said Borough of Camelford to the Sheriff of the said County, in the stead
of Richard Leech alleged to have been returned to the said Sheriff by a false
Return; And also for changing of the name of John Dudley Esquire returned a Burgess
for the Borough of Newtown in the County of Southampton, into the House by the
name of Thomas Dudley Esquire, alleged to be the same person in very deed that
should have been returned; and that his name was mistaken, and none living
known by that name of John Dudley. His Lordships Answer and Resolution in the
said Cases was, that the said Returns of the said Burgesses of Southwark and
Camelford should stand and continue according to the Returns of the same,
without taking notice of any matter of fact therein, or in the Election at all.
And that his Lordship would direct a Writ for choosing of another Burgess for
the said Borough of Newtown in the stead of the said John Dudley; And that his
Lordship would in the said Writ insert the said Cause of misbehaviour so as
before alleged.

Four Bills of no great moment had each of them one reading; of which the last
being the Bill for Confirmation of the assurance unto certain Purchasers of
Lands sold by Sir Richard Knightley Knight, Mr Valentine Knightley, and Mr
Edward Knightley Esquires, was upon the second reading committed unto Mr
Sergeant Yelverton, Sir Henry Umpton, Mr Cradock and others, who were appointed
to meet to Morrow at two of the Clock in the Afternoon in the Exchequer Chamber.

The Bill to take away the benefit of Clergy in some Cases was twice read, and
committed unto the former Committees in the last former Bill, and Mr Richard
Brown Gentleman was added unto them; who with the rest was appointed to meet at
the same time and place, as in the said last former Bill, viz. to Morrow at two
of the Clock in the Afternoon in the Exchequer Chamber.

Two other Bills also had each of them one reading; of which the second being
the Bill for confirmation of the sale of the Lands of William Raven Gentleman
made unto Lisle Cave and others, was twice read, and committed unto Mr Heal,
Mr Sergeant Yelverton, Sir Henry Knivet, Mr Recorder of London and others, who
were appointed to meet upon Saturday next at two of the Clock in the Afternoon
in the Middle Temple Hall.

Mr Vice-Chamberlain showed, that he and the residue of the Committees of this
House for Conference with the Lords did meet together yesterday in the
Afternoon according to the appointment of this House, and that after many
Speeches and Arguments gravely 'delivered by sundry of the said Committees, the
greater part of them did assent and agree unto the granting of a triple Subsidy
and of six Fifteenths and Tenths, to be yielded to her Majesty toward the
provision against the great and imminent perils and dangers of this Realm. The
same triple Subsidy and six Fifteenths and Tenths to be levied and paid in four
years in a certain form, which they had set down in Articles, that is to say,
one entire Subsidy and two Fifteenths and Tenths at one payment in the first
year, and one other entire Subsidy and two Fifteenths and Tenths at one other
payment in the second year, and one entire Subsidy and two Fifteenths and
Tenths at two payments in the third and fourth years. Which done, he moved
further to know the resolution of the House, Whether it would please them to
give liking to the said travel of the said Committees in the said Cause; or
that it might be their pleasures to resolve of any such other course therein,
as they may have Warrant to impart unto the Lords this Afternoon according to
the promise of this House to the Lords. Whereupon after many long and grave
Speeches and Arguments by diverse of the said Members of this House, it was
agreed by them all without any contradiction, that the proportion should be a
treble Subsidy and six Fifteenths and Tenths. And the said Articles for the
manner of payment being read by the Clerk of the House, seemed for the most
part to be well liked of. Whereupon after some Motions to the Question, Mr
Speaker dividing it into two several parts, the one for the number of the said
three entire Subsidies and six Fifteenths and Tenths, and the other for the
manner and time of levying and payment of the same three entire Subsidies and
six Fifteenths and Tenths, it was upon the same several questions severally
resolved by the whole House, the proportion to be a treble Subsidy and six
Fifteenths and Tenths, and the manner of paying and levying the same to be made
in four years according to the said Articles thereof read.

And then were the said Committees appointed and authorized by this House to
signify the said resolution of this House unto their Lordships in the Afternoon
of this present day accordingly, and to be reported unto their said Lordships
by Sir Robert Cecill, for that Mr Vice-Chamberlain was then at that very
instant very sharply grieved and pained with his infirmity of the Gout.

On Friday the 9th day of March the Bill concerning Woollen-Cloths called
Vesses, etc. was upon the second reading committed unto Sir William Knolles,
Sir John Heart, Mr Recorder of London, Mr Wroth and others, who were appointed
to meet upon Tuesday next at two of the Clock in the Afternoon in the Exchequer
Chamber.

Sir John Harrington and Sir Thomas Wilkes are added to the former Committees
in the Bill for Confirmation of Assurances unto certain Purchasors of Lands
sold by Sir Richard Knightley Kr, Mr Valentine Knightley and Mr Edward
Knightley Esquires, appointed yesterday.

The Committees in the Bill touching Recusants nominated on Wednesday the 28th
day of February foregoing, are appointed to meet in this House at two of the
Clock this Afternoon.

The Committees in the Bill also for Naturalizing of Samuel Saltingstall and
others nominated on Monday the sixth day of this instant March soregoing, are
appointed to meet to Morrow at two of the Clock in the Afternoon in the
Middle Temple Hall. The Bill concerning Spinners and Weavers was read the first
time.

The Bill for the Confirmation of the Jointure of the Lady Margaret Countess of
Cumberland is deferred till to Morrow, to be further dealt in.

Sir Robert Cecill reports at large the Message of this House yesterday by
him and the residue of the Committees of this House delivered unto their
Lordships, and their Lordships good acceptance of the same. Which done, after
sundry other speeches of diverse Members of this House, it was resolved upon the
Question, that the former Committees of this House for the Subsidy (their names
being then read by the Clerk of this House) should meet in this House at two of
the Clock in the Afternoon of this present day, for the setting down of
Articles for the drawing of the Bill for the granting of the Subsidies and six
Fifteenths and Tenths to be paid in four years according to the former
resolution of this House therein.

The Bill against springing Uses and Perpetuities was upon the second reading
committed unto all the Privy Council being of this House, all the Knights of
the Shires returned unto this House, Mr Cradock and others, who were appointed
to meet in this House, upon Tuesday, at two of the Clock in the Afternoon.

Richard Hutton Gentleman, one of the Burgesses returned for the Borough of
Southwark in the County of Surrey, is upon a Motion made by Mr Recorder of
London, and also after some Report made by Mr Speaker of the opinion and
pleasure of the Lord Keeper in that Case, adjudged upon the question to be a
Member of the House; and thereupon the Oath being taken by him before Mr
Chancellor of the Exchequer, the said Richard Hutton came into this House, and
took his place in the same accordingly.

Sir John Heart; one of the Knights returned for the City of London, putting the
House in remembrance once of a Report lately made by some of the Committees of
this House touching a Speech lately delivered by some of the Committees of the
Lords touching the late Assessment of the late double Subsidy (amongst others)
in the City of London, alleging that in London there was none Assessed at
above two hundred pounds, and not past four such, nor yet past eight at one
hundred pounds, showed, that the Honorable person that delivered the said
Speech to the said Committees of this House had not been rightly informed in
that matter. And showed further, that in very deed at the last Assessment of
the Subsidy within the said City of London there were two and thirty persons
taxed at two hundred pounds and upwards, whereof some at two hundred and
twenty, and some at two hundred and fifty pounds. And one hundred forty and
eight persons at one hundred pounds and upward, whereof some at one hundred and
ten, some at one hundred and twenty, some at one hundred and forty, some at one
hundred and fifty, some at one hundred and sixty, and some at one hundred and
eighty pounds. And eighty persons at three hundred pounds, and some at three
hundred and fifty pounds, and four persons at four hundred pounds. Besides sive
hundred forty and four persons at fifty pounds and upwards, whereof some at
sixty, some at seventy, some at eighty, and some at ninety pounds.

The Bill concerning the lawful deprivation of Edward Bonner late Bishop of
London, was upon the second reading committed unto Mr Hubbert, Mr Heal, Sir
Henry Knivet, Mr Wroth and others, who were appointed to meet in this House
upon Monday next at two of the Clock in the Afternoon.

On Saturday the 10th day of March, Mr Wroth one of the Committees in the Bill
against the stealing of Oxen, Sheep and Lambs, showed, that he and the residue
of the Committees in the same Bill have met together, and added some amendments
to the same Bill; and offers both the Bill and amendments to the House. Which
amendments being inserted into the Bill by the Clerk of this House, and the
same amendments then also twice read, the Bill upon the question was ordered to
be Engrossed.

The Bill for relief of Jurors upon Trials between party and party was upon the
second reading committed unto Mr Tasborough, Mr Recorder of London, Mr Wroth
and others, and the Bill was delivered to Mr Tasborough, who with the rest was
appointed to meet this day at two of the Clock in the Afternoon in the
Middle Temple Hall.

Three Bills of no great moment had each of them one reading; of which the last
being the Bill for Confirmation of Letters Patents unto the Mayor, Sheriff,
Citizens and Commonalty of the City of Lincoln, was upon the second reading
committed unto Sir Francis Hastings, Mr Recorder of London and others, who were
appointed to meet upon Monday next at two of the Clock in the Afternoon in the
Exchequer-Chamber.

Mr. Chancellor of the Exchequer reports the travel of himself and the
residue of the Committees for setting down of Articles for the Subsidy, and
showed, that they have drawn the said Articles, and offers the same to the
House to be read. Which being then read by the Clerk of the House, and in some
part thereof reformed by the assent of the whole House, (to wit in that Article
which concerned the privilege of the Cinque Ports, and that Article also which
concerned such persons as in regard of having several habitations should be
Assessed in the said Subsidies in several places) upon the doubtfulness of the
voices to the question twice propounded, Whether the strangers resident in the
Cinque Ports shall be charged with the payment of the said Subsidies or not, it
was upon the division of the House adjudged, that they shall not be charged
with the said payments, by the difference of thirty persons, viz. with the Yea
a hundred and eighteen, and with the No a hundred forty eight, in all two
hundred sixty six.

And afterward it was Ordered, that the said Articles should be delivered to
the former Committees for the Preamble to prepare the same: And also the said
Rates according to the said Articles to be set down in the Bill.

Nota, That after this business touching the Cinque Ports there follows a
Motion made by Mr Wroth touching some Members of the House who had been
Imprisoned in the beginning of this Parliament, of which see on Sunday the 25th
day of February foregoing, which remains very legible in the Original
Journal Book of the House of Commons, although it be crossed out. The reason of
which said crossing out is very hard to conjecture, in regard that the said
Motion was doubtless made this Morning, as does plainly appear also by the
often before-cited Anonymous Journal more particularly mentioned at the
beginning of this present Journal, out of which it is supplied in manner and
form following.

Mr Wroth made a Motion, that in respect that some Countries might complain of
the Tax of these many Subsidies, their Knights and Burgesses never consenting
unto them nor being present at the grant: And because an Instrument, taking
away some of its strings, cannot give its pleasant sound: Therefore desired
that we might be humble and earnest Suitors to her Majesty, that she would be
pleased to set at liberty those Members of the House that were restrained.

To this was Answered by all the Privy Counselors, that her Majesty had
Committed them for Causes best known to her self, and for us to press her
Majesty with this Suit, we should but hinder them whose good we seek. And it is
not to be doubted but her Majesty of her gracious disposition will shortly of
her self yield to them that which we would ask for them, and it will like her
better to have it left unto her self than sought by us.

Thus far out of the said Anonymous Journal, and the residue of this days
Passages do follow out of the Original Journal Book it self.

Three Bills of no great moment had each of them one reading; of which the last
being against Counterfeiting of Counselors or Principal Officers hands was
upon the second reading committed unto Sir John Wolley, Sir Walter Raleigh, Mr
George Moore and others, who were appointed to meet upon Tuesday next at two of
the Clock in the Afternoon in the Middle Temple Hall.

Sir Walter Harecourt Knight, one of the Knights for the County of Suffolk, in
regard of the present extremity of his Wifes Sickness is licensed by Mr Speaker
to depart home into his Country.

James Goodwyn Gent', one of the Burgesses returned for the City of Wells in
the County of Somerset is for his necessary businesses licensed by Mr. Speaker
to depart home.

It should seem by these two words, viz. Non sol. set in the Margent over
against the names of these two last mentioned members of the House, that the
said Members did not leave any money with the Sergeant of the House to be
distributed amongst the poor, at their departure. Which I conceive is here
noted, because two others that departed at this time also into the Country upon
like occasions, did either of them leave money with the said Sergeant to be so
distributed, as now immediately follows.

Giles Hutchins Gent' returned a Citizen into this present Parliament for the
City of New Sar. is licensed by Mr. Speaker to depart upon his necessary
occasion by reason of the extreme Sickness of Mr. William Blaker; and the said
Mr. Hutchins left with the Sergeant of this House two shillings and four pence
to be distributed amongst the poor.

John Cotton Esquire, one of the Knights returned into this present Parliament
for the County of Cambridge, is in respect of the present Sickness of Sir John
Cotton Knight, Father of the said John Cotton Esquire, licensed to depart into
his Country for this time. And the said Mr. Cotton left with the said Sergeant
twelve pence to be given to the poor.

On Monday the 12th day of March, Mr. Jews, one of the Committees in the Bill
concerning salted Fish and salted Herrings showed, that he and the residue of
the Committees have taken pains in consideration of the said Bill, and have
added a Proviso to the said Bill, and prays the twice reading of the same
Proviso, and that then the same Proviso and Bill may be Ordered to be
engrossed. Whereupon the same Proviso being twice read, the said Bill and
Proviso after some Speeches both against and with them, were upon the question
referred to the former Committees, who were appointed on Monday the 5th day of
this instant March foregoing, to be considered of in the Afternoon of this
present day in the Exchequer Chamber.

The Bills committed for confirmation of Letters Patents to the Mayors,
Sheriffs, Citizens and Commonalty of Lincoln, and concerning the lawful
deprivation of Edward Bonner late Bishop of London, are delivered to Sir Edward
Dymock one of the Committees in the same.

The Bill for reducing of disloyal Subjects to their due Obedience was brought
in by the Committees, and also a new Bill made for that purpose; with prayer
that the same Bill may be read.

But what those alterations were upon which the old Bill was rejected and a new
Bill framed, are not set down in the Original Journal Book it self; and
therefore because it is a matter of no small consequence, and may also be of
some use, I have inserted the particulars thereof out of the aforesaid
Anonymous Journal, more particularly mentioned at the beginning of this present
Journal, which are there set down in manner and form following.

The particulars of the first Bill exhibited against Recusants.
1. THE party so Indicted and Convicted shall forfeit all his Goods and
Chattles, which he has in his own right, or in the right of his Wife.

2. Item, He shall forfeit two parts of his Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments,
if he be born under her Highness Allegiance, of the Age of sixteen years.

3. Item, A Feme Covert shall lose her Dower or Jointure, which she might have
by her Baron.

4. Item, If a Man match with an Inheritrix being a Recusant, he shall lose two
parts of those Lands to the Queen. Neither of them shall Administrate to any
Man.

5. Item, Such a party being a Recusant shall be disabled to make any purchase
or sale of Lands.

6. Item, He shall be disinabled either to take or make any Lease to the use of
himself, or to the use of his Wife.

7. Item, A Recusant shall forfeit for keeping any such Recusant Person in his
House either Servant or Stranger ten pound every Month, being at one time so
long in his House, or at several times in the year.

8. Item, He shall be barred to bear any Office in the Land, or to practice as
Councellor, Doctor, Solicitor, Proctor, Attorney or Advocate to the Law.

9. Item, He shall have his Children taken from him if they be above the Age of
seven years, which are to be disposed of by the Lords of the Council, or the
Ordinary, or the Judges of Assizes for the time being, and their maintenance to
be raised out of a third part of such a Recusants Living.

10. Item, He shall be disinabled to make any bargain or sale of any of his
Goods or Chattles.

11. Item, If he be a Copyholder, he shall forfeit his Copyhold during his
Life, whereof two parts is to go to the Queen, and the third to the Lord.

12. Item, If any person be Indicted for Recusancy of Malice, he shall have his
remedy against the party at the Common Law.

13. Item, If any person having been a Recusant shall at any time recant, he
shall make his submission in the Parish Church where he dwells, acknowledging
the Queens Proceedings to be just, and detesting the Church of Rome: which he
shall also do in open Court before the Judges of Assize.

14. Item, If any such person after such Recantation fall into relapse, he
shall lose the benefit of the former Recantation for ever.

Lastly, There is a Proviso, that those that have already bought Lands of any
that are or shall be Indicted for a Recusant, the Bargain shall be as good and
stand in effect, as if this had never been made.

This Bill by the aforesaid Committees received all these alterations
following, whereupon it came in as a new Bill again.
THE two first Articles altogether omitted being thought too hard.

The third that the Woman is to lose but two parts of her Jointure or Dower
after her Husbands Death.

The fourth, That the Husband not being Recusant, is to forfeit no part of his
Land for his Wives Recusancy.

The fifth, All Sales made by Recusants since 2 Eliz. of Lands whereof he
takes the profits, or which Conveyance is upon any trust and confidence, to be
void as to the Queen, as for two parts of the profits to be answered her; and
so all Sales hereafter to be made by any Recusant Convicted, the Sale being
bona fide, etc.

The sixth, They shall be disinabled to be Justices of Peace, Mayors, Sheriffs,
etc.

The ninth, Children being ten years old, until they be sixteen years, to be
disposed of at the appointment of four Privy-Councellors, the Justices of
Assize, the Bishop of the Diocese, Justices of Peace. If the third part of the
Lands suffice not for maintenance, the rest to be levied of the Parents goods.

The eleventh, Recusants that be Copyholders, to forfeit two parts to the Lord
of the Manor, if the Lord be no Recusant, and if he be, then to the Queen.

The thirteenth, Protesting that he does not come under color of any
dispensation or other allowance from the Pope, but for Conscience and Religion.

Thus far out of the aforesaid Anonymous Journal, the rest of the Passages of
this day follow out of the Original Journal Book it self, amongst which is
Entered the first reading of the aforesaid new Bill touching Recusants brought
in this Morning by the said Committees in these words, viz.

The Bill for reducing disloyal Subjects to their due Obedience had its first
reading.

Mr. Richard Lewkenor, one of the Committees in the Bill for confirmation of
the Lands of William Raven made unto Lisle Cave, Thomas Andrews and Edward
Haselrigg Esquires, showing, that he and the residue of the Committees in the
same Bill did meet together upon Saturday last in the Afternoon, and have upon
their said Conference therein thought good to add certain words to the same
Bill, viz. in the second line of the Proviso after the word [Conveyance] to add
this word [Judgment] and in the same line after this word [made] to add these
words [or had] and in the same line also after the word [by] to add these words
[or against]; It was thereupon Ordered by this House upon the question, that
the said words should be so added accordingly. And thereupon also were the same
added words twice read for the two readings of the same.

Mr. Sergeant Fleetwood and Mr. Thomas Powle do bring from the Lords a Bill
Entitled An Act for the restraining of Popish Recusants to some certain place
of abode.

The Bill for the better assurance and confirmation of the Jointure of the Lady
Margaret Countess of Cumberland, after some Speeches had toward the
furtherance of passing the said Bill, is passed upon the Question.

The Bill concerning the Exemplifications of Fines and Recoveries was upon the
second reading committed unto all the Sergeants at Law being Members of this
House, Mr. Francis Bacon, Sir Edward Dymock and others, who were appointed to
meet to Morrow at two of the Clock in the Afternoon in the Exchequer Chamber.

Sir Robert Cecill moved for some course of necessary relief to be had and
devised, for the great number of poor people pressing every where in the
streets to beg: And dividing them into three parts and sorts, all of them, he
said, in Christian Charity ought to be relieved though in sundry degrees,
sorting the maimed and lame Soldiers for the first and best kind of those
people and meetest to be relieved; The poor Aged and Diseased honest people are
in Charity to be helped for the second; And the stout, idle Rogues for the last
and worst fit to be punished and set to work.

It was thereupon moved by Master Sands, for consideration also in that behalf
to be had, that the Statutes already in force for relief of the poor and
punishment of the Rogues might be perused by a Committee of this House.
Whereupon it was Ordered by the House upon the Question, That all the
Privy Council being Members of this House, Sir George Carew, all the Sergeants
at Law, Mr. Francis Bacon, Mr. Nathanael Bacon, Mr. Edward Dier, Sir Thomas
Ingram, Sir Thomas Baskervile, Mr. Recorder of London, Mr Skinner, Mr Andrew
Palmer, Mr. Wroth, Sir William Moore, Mr. George Moore, Sir William Bruncker,
Sir Thomas Shirley, Sir Moyle Finch, Mr. Henry Finch, Sir Edward Dymock, Sir
Francis Drake, Mr. Edgecombe, Mr. Thomas Fane, Sir Walter Covert, Sir Walter
Raleigh, Mr. Auton, Mr. Nicholas Sanders, Sir Francis Vere, Mr. Sands, Mr.
Chuite, Mr. Hackford, Sir John Points, Sir Henry Cock, Sir Edward Hobby, Mr.
Charles Dymock, Sir Robert Sidney, Mr. Arthur George, Sir Anthony Cope, Sir
John Wingfield, Sir Henry Knivet, Sir Ferdinando George, Sir William Read, Sir
Coniard Clifford, Sir Humphrey Foster, Sir Edward Stafford, Sir Robert
Sackvile, Sir Henry Poole, Mr. John Thynne, Sir Thomas Dennyes, Sir William
Bevile, Mr. Lawrence Stoughton, Mr. Edward Lewkenor, Sir John Harrington, Mr.
Warren, Sir Francis Hastings, Mr. Boys, Mr. Amersham, Mr. Perriam, Sir Thomas
West, Mr. George Wray, Sir Thomas Read, Mr. Richard Lewkenor and Mr. Horsey
should meet to Morrow at two of the Clock in the Afternoon in the Exchequer
Chamber, to confer about the said matters so moved; and also to confer touching
the continuation of such other Laws and Statutes as are fit to be considered of
in this present Sessions to be further continued.

On Tuesday the 13th day of March, the Bill for reducing disloyal Subjects to
their due obedience had its second reading.

Mr. Chancellor of the Exchequer brought in a Preamble agreed by the more part
of the Committees to be set down in the Bill for the Subsidies, if this House
shall like of it; which Preamble being read by the Clerk of this House, the
same was after some Speeches had committed upon the Question unto Mr.
Vice-Chamberlain, Mr. Chancellor of the Exchequer, Mr. Broughton, Mr. Brown and
others, to be presently further considered of in the Committee Chamber of this
House.

Mr. Attorney General and Mr. Doctor Ford do bring from the Lords a Bill
concerning the Lands of Henry late Lord of Burgavenny deceased, with a Message
also from their Lordships, to desire that a Committee of selected Members of
this House may be appointed to have Conference with a Committee of the Lords
touching the continuance of Statutes; It was resolved by the House to assent
unto such a Committee accordingly, and that assent was also delivered in Answer
to the said Mr. Attorney and Mr. Doctor Ford, and offer to be ready to attend
their Lordships therein at such time and place as their Lordships shall please
to signify unto this House and appoint for that purpose.

After which Mr. Attorney General and Mr. Doctor Ford do bring word from the
Lords, that their Lordships have nominated sixteen of themselves to confer with
a convenient number of this House touching the said consideration for
continuance of Statutes, and have appointed the time to be on Thursday next at
two of the Clock in the Afternoon in the Exchequer Chamber next the Upper House
of Parliament, if the House shall so think good. Which being showed to the
House by Mr. Speaker, it was Ordered by this House, that the former Committees
of this House, yesterday selected for that purpose, should attend their
Lordships to Morrow at the said time and place. Which was afterward so
signified over by Mr. Speaker unto the said Mr. Attorney General and Mr. Doctor
Ford accordingly.

The said Preamble in the Bill of Subsidy being brought in again amended by the
said Committees and read to the House by the Clerk, was agreed on by the whole
House and appointed to be delivered to her Majesty's Learned Council, for the
more speedy drawing of the Bill.

Nota, That this Bill touching the Subsidy after many days agitation did at
length very difficultly pass the House by reason of the greatness thereof, on
Thursday the twenty second of this instant March ensuing, this present day
being the first in which the very Preamble was brought into the House and
agreed upon, for which many in the House desired a longer time for it to be
considered of by a Committee, and not to have been so suddenly assented to, as
is noted in the foresaid Anonymous Journal more particularly mentioned at the
beginning of this present Journal: But that the Speaker perceiving the Privy
Counselors of the House desirous to have the Bill expedited, did overreach
the House in the subtle putting of the Question; by which means it had been
only considered of in the Committee-Chamber by those eighteen Members of the
House appointed in the beginning of this Forenoon, and by them brought back
again into the House, before the ending thereof, and so was agreed on by the
said House as is aforesaid.

The Bill for Vesses which was committed on Friday the 9th day of this instant
March foregoing, was delivered to Sir Francis Hastings one of the Committees.

The Bill for Perpetuities committed on Friday the 9th day of this instant
March foregoing, was delivered to Sir Edward Hobby one of the Committees.

The Bill against Counterfeiting of Counselors Hands, etc. committed on
Saturday the 10th day of this instant March foregoing, was delivered to Sir
William Knolls one of the Committees.

Nota, That the Bill against Recusants, which had been newly brought in by the
Committees on Monday the 12th day of this instant March immediately foregoing,
and the old Bill rejected, and had in the beginning of this Forenoon been read
the second time, was now in the end of the same spoken unto by diverse Members
of the House. Which speeches containing in them matter of good consequence are
wholly omitted in the Original Journal Book it self, and are therefore supplied
out of the aforefaid Anonymous Journal more particularly mentioned in the
beginning of this present Journal, in manner and form following.

Mr Sands spoke to the Bill for Recusants, that it might be as it went first
for Recusants generally, and not restrained to Popish Recusants only: So that
under this Bill there might be included Brownists and Barrowists.

Mr Jews showed, that it was not fit that the Bill should include any other
than Popish Recusants.

Mr Speaker said, that the Preamble of this Bill being conferred with the body
of this Bill, other Recusants than Popish Recusants could not be comprised
therein. For the Title of the Bill and the Preamble run only in this manner,
Against such as are enemies opposed to our State, and adherents to the Pope. So
another Bill might be framed against those persons, but these cannot be
comprised therein.

Mr Dalton would have Recusants that be Brownists comprised in the Bill as well
as Popish Recusants, and to that end would have the Preamble altered, and be to
repress disloyal Subjects and to impose upon them more due obedience; and so to
go directly to the Act, Be it Enacted, leaving out all the Preamble; for he
cited some Bills overthrown, as he said, only by reason of superfluous words in
the Preamble.

Doctor Lewin made a long Speech. His end was only to have the Brownists and
Barrowists as well provided against as Papists; but whether in this Bill or in
some other, he left that to the Wisdom of the House.

After which Speeches the said Bill was committed again to the former
Committees which were appointed on Wednesday the 28th day of Febr. last past.

Thus far out of the aforesaid Anonymous Journal, that which follows is out of
the Original Journal Book it self.

On Wednesday the 14th day of March Sir Edward Hobby, one of the Committees in
the Bill touching Mr Read Stafford, brought in the Bill with some amendments,
and opening the effects of the said Amendments to the House, the same
Amendments then also being read by the Clerk, It was Ordered by this House,
that the same Amendments should be inserted accordingly into the same Bill.

The Bill for Mr Anthony Cook had it first reading.

Mr Richard Lewkenor, one of the Committees in the Bill concerning the lawful
deprivation of Edward Bonner late Bishop of London, brought in the Bill with
some Amendments, and opening the Contents of the same Amendments to the House,
the same Amendments also being then read to the House by the Clerk, it was
Ordered by this House that the same Amendments should be inserted in the said
Bill accordingly.

Mr John Hare, one of the Committees in the Bill concerning Mr Valentine
Knightley brought in the Bill with some Amendments, and opening the Contents of
the said Amendments to the House, the same Amendments being then also read to
the House by the Clerk, It was Ordered by this House that the same Amendments
should be also inserted into the said Bill accordingly.

The Bill for reducing of her Majesty's Subjects to their due obedience
committed Yesterday to the former Committees who were appointed on Wednesday
the 28th day of February (last past) was this day delivered to Mr Treasurer one
of the Committees.

Mr Jews one of the Committees in the Bill touching salted Fish and salted
Herrings, brought in the Bill with some amendments, and showing the Contents of
the said Amendments, and the same being read by the Clerk of the House, it was
Ordered bythis House, that the said Amendments should be inserted in the said
Bill accordingly.

Mr Sergeant Yelverton one of the Committees in the Bill concerning the
Exemplifications of Fines and Recoveries, brought in the Bill with some
Amendments, which Amendments being twice read, the Bill after many Speeches
both with and against the same Bill was dashed upon the question for engrossing.

Three Bills also had each of them one reading; of which the last being the
Bill touching the over-lengths of broad Cloth, was upon the second reading
committed unto Mr. Chancellor of the Exchequer, the Burgesses of Worcester and
Coventry, the Knights and Citizens of Yorkshire and the City of York, and
others, who were appointed to meet upon Friday next at two of the Clock in the
Afternoon in this House.

Richard Goodwin, returned one of the Citizens for the City of Wells in the
County of Somerset, is for his better recovery of health, licenced by Mr.
Speaker to depart home into his Country; and the said Mr. Goodwyn left two
shillings and six pence with the Sergeant of the House to be distributed
amongst the Poor.

The Bill to avoid stealing of Oxen, Kine, Sheep and other Cattle was upon the
third reading dashed upon the Question.

On Thursday the 15th day of March, Sir Edward Dymock, one of the Committees in
the Bill for Confirmation of Letters Patents to the Mayor, Sheriff, Citizens
and Commonalty of the City of Lincoln, (appointed on Saturday the 10th day of
this instant March foregoing) brought in the Bill with some Amendments, and
opening the Contents of the same Amendments, the said Amendments were
afterward read by the Clerk, and then upon the question agreed by the House to
be inserted in the said Bill accordingly.

Two Bills of no great moment had each of them one reading; of which the second
being the Bill touching Execution of Process, was upon the second reading
committed unto Mr Jews, Sir Edward Dimock, the Recorder and Citizens of York,
Mr Recorder of London and others, who were appointed to meet to Morrow at two
of the Clock in the Afternoon in this House.

The Amendments in the Bill touching the late Deprivation of Edward Bonner late
Bishop of London being twice read by the Clerk, the Bill was upon the question
Ordered to be engrossed.

The Amendments in the Bill touching salted Fish and salted Herrings being
twice read, the Bill was upon the question Ordered to be engrossed.

The Amendments in the Bill for confirmation of assurances of certain Lands and
Tenements from Richard Knightley, Valentine Knightley and Edward Knightley
Esquires, unto Charles Hales Esquire, Thomas Bricket and John Lamberd Gent.
being twice read, the Bill was upon the question Ordered to be engrossed.

Mr Sergeant Harris, one of the Committees in the Bill for the Naturalizing of
Samuel Saltingstall and others, appointed on Monday the fifth day of this
instant March foregoing, brought in the Bill with some Additions, which being
first read to the House, were by the Order of the House agreed to be inserted
into the Bill, and then afterward the same Additions being twice read, the
said Bill was Ordered to be engrossed.

The Amendments in the Bill concerning Mr Read Stafford being twice read, the
Bill was upon the question Ordered to be engrossed.

Mr Wroth, one of the Committees in the Bill for the true assizing of Bread
(appointed on Monday the 5th day of this instant March foregoing) showed the
meeting and travel of the said Committees at sundry times about the said Bill,
and that they thought good to make a new Bill for that matter. And so delivered
in both the old Bill and also the new Bill.

The Bill for restraining Popith Recusants to some certain places of abode, was
read the second time, and committed to the former Committees (which said
Committees were appointed on Wednesday the 28th day of February last past) to
meet to Morrow at two of the Clock in the Afternoon in this House, and the Bill
was delivered to Mr Treasurer.

Mr Winch, one of the Committees in the Bill for the relief of Jurors upon
Trials between party and party, appointed on Saturday the 10th day of this
instant March foregoing, showed, That the Committees have met and conferred on
the said Bill, and did think good to make a new Bill. And so delivered in both
the old Bill, and also the new Bill.

To Morrow in the Afternoon is appointed to have Conference and meeting
touching provision to be treated of for relief of poor Soldiers. The Committee
for which business was appointed on Monday the 12th day of this instant March
foregoing. mitted unto Sir William Moore, Mr. Hubbard, Mr. Sands and others;
and the Bill was delivered to Mr. Hubbard, who with the rest were appointed to
meet upon Tuesday next in the Afternoon at two of the Clock in the Exchequer
Chamber.

Mr. Thomas Posthumus Hobby is Ordered by this House to move Sir Edward Hobby
Brother of the said Thomas, that the Bills in his Custody touching springing
uses and perpetuities, and touching the Execution of Process, and against
Recusants, may be brought into this House to Morrow sitting the Court.

The Committees in the Bill against Counterfeiting of Counselors hands, etc.
(appointed on Saturday the 10th day of this instant March foregoing) are
deferred until Monday next in the Afternoon.

The Bill concerning Mr. Ognall was upon the second reading committed unto Mr.
Chancellor of the Exchequer, Sir John Wolley, Mr. Wroth and others, who were
appointed to meet upon Tuesday next at two of the Clock in the Afternoon in the
Exchequer Chamber.

Mr. Sergeant Owen and Mr. Doctor Carey do bring from the Lords a Bill
Entitled An Act against persons Outlawed, and such as will not pay their Debts
and Duties.

The Bill for granting of three entire Subsidies and six Fifteenths and Tenths
granted to the Queens Majesty had its first reading. Vide more concerning this
Bill on Thursday the 22th day of this instant March next ensuing.

On Saturday the 17th day of March, Mr. Richard Toptliffe and Mr. William
Basset Esquires, Sheriffs of the County of Darby, and Mr. Moore being of
Council with Mr. Basset were heard at large at the Bar of this House touching
the Case of Thomas Fitzherbert Esquire, returned a Member into this House, and
now Prisoner in the Custody and Charge of the said Sheriffs; and after long
hearing of the said Parties, it was in the end resolved by this House, that
this House being a Court of Record would take no notice of any matter of fact
at all in the said Case, but only of matter of Record. And that Mr Speaker on
the behalf of this House shall move the Lord Keeper of the Great Seal of
England for return to be made by the said Sheriff into the Chancery of the Writ
of habeas corpus cum causa, in that Case lately awarded by his Lordship unto
the said Sheriff, upon Motion to his Lordship from this House in that behalf,
according to the purport of the same Writ, which being not done with such due
Expedition as it ought, (the same being indilate) his Lordship will then at the
request of this House assess a good round Fine upon the said Sheriff for the
same his Contempt. Vide concerning this matter on Thursday the first day, and
on Friday the second day of this instant March foregoing; as also on March 30th
Friday, Apr. 3d Tuesday, and Apr. 5. Thursday postea.

Mr Thomas Posthumus Hobby showed, that according to the appointment of this
House he has moved his Brother Sir Edward Hobby for the two Bills which were
in his hands, viz. the Bill for Perpetuities and the Bill touching the
Execution of Process, etc. And that the said Sir Edward Hobby says, he is a
Committee amongst others in both the same Bills by appointment of this House,
and that the same Bills were in that respect delivered to him by the Clerk of
this House: And that albeit he thinks it reasonable he should be acquainted
with the proceedings in the said Bills in the Committee, as one of the same
Committees; yet in regard of the dutiful good will he bears to the Members of
this House, and loath to offend any of the same, he delivered the said Bills to
the said Mr. Posthumus Hobby to be brought into this House accordingly. And so
the said Mr Thomas Posthumus Hobby delivered the said Bills.

Three Bills had each of them one reading; of which the last being the Bill to
confirm the sale of certain Lands and Tenements made by Sir Richard Knightley
Knight, Valentine Knightley and Edward Knightley Esquires, unto Charles Hales
Esquire, Thomas Bruncket and John Lambert Gent. and others, was read the third
time and passed upon the question.

The Sergeant of the House received of Mr Miles Sands six shillings, and of Mr
Jews two shillings to be given amongst the poor. Which it should seem they
left with the said Sergeant upon License given them by Mr Speaker to depart
into the Country upon some necessary Occasions.

Mr Finch, one of the Committees in the two Bills touching Popish Recusants,
brings in both the same Bills with some Amendments; which said Amendments
being opened by him unto the House, and afterward read by the Clerk of the
said House, the same Amendments were Ordered by the House to be put into the
same Bills accordingly.

The Bill concerning springing uses and perpetuities was delivered to Mr
Sergeant Harris one of the Committees appointed on Friday the 9th day of this
instant March foregoing.

And the Bill for the speedy Execution of Process (appointed to be considered
of on Thursday the 15th day of this instant March foregoing) was delivered to
Mr. Dalton one of the said Committees.

On Monday the 19th day of March, Two Bills of no great moment had each of them
one reading; of which the first being the Bill concerning Iron Wier and Iron
Wier-Works was read the first time.

Sir Francis Hastings, one of the Committees in the Bill concerning the breadth
of Plunkets, Azures, Blues and other Colored Clothes, etc. appointed on Friday
the 16th day of this instant March foregoing showed, that he and the residue of
the Committees in the same Bill have met together, and thought good to make
some Addition to the said Bill; and opening the contents thereof to the House,
and afterward praying the same to be read, it was after the reading Ordered to
be inserted into the said Bill.

Mr. Speaker showed unto the House, that according to their late direction he
has moved the Lord Keeper for the speedy bringing up of one Mr. Tho.
Fitzherbert, and also for a Fine to be assessed by his Lordship upon Mr. Basset
the Sheriff of Darbyshire, according to the request of this House for his
contempt in not returning the Body and Cause of Mr. Fitzherbet heretofore
according to the Writ: all which Mr. Speaker said, his Lordship would willingly
do. Vide concerning this matter on Thursday the first day, Friday the second
day, and on Saturday the seventeenth day of this instant March foregoing.

The Bill concerning the lawful Deprivation of Edward Bonner late Bishop of
London had its third reading, and after sundry Speeches some words were added
to the end of the Bill, and a Proviso also after those words so added were
likewise read, and presently inserted into the said Bill, and three times read.
The said Bill in such sort amended was passed upon the Question.

Mr. Vice-Chamberlain one of the Committees touching the relief of the poor
(appointed on Monday the 12th day of this instant March foregoing) and for
continuance of Statutes, moved that for some present relief for poor Maimed and
sick Soldiers, a Collection might be had amongst the Members of this House, at
the rate of thirty shillings a piece for every one of this House being of her
Majesty's Privy Council, ten shillings a piece for every one returned a Knight
for any Shire into this Parliament, and every other being a Knight in Degree,
though returned but as a Burgess; and every other of meaner degree that is
returned for a Burgess at five shillings a piece: And that all such as are
departed without License pay double after the said rates. Which was immediately
upon the Question assented unto by the whole House accordingly.

Sir Robert Cecill, one other of the same Committees, liking well of the said
course taken upon the said Motion made by the said Mr. Vice-Chamberlain, moved
further for some future continual contribution of relief for maimed sick
Soldiers and Mariners, and offered a Plot in Articles for a Bill to be framed
to that purpose, and prays the reading of the said Articles. Which being
thereupon read by the Clerk accordingly and well liked of by the House, the
said Articles were by Order of the House referred to the said former
Committees, (whose names see before on Monday the 12th day of this instant
March foregoing) to draw a Bill thereupon to that purpose accordingly.

Mr. Francis Bacon, one other of the said Committees, very well liking and much
commending the said endeavors and Reports of the said Mr. Vice-Chamberlain and
Sir Robert Cecill, makes a Report at large of the Conference of the Committees
of this House had with the Committees of the Lords concerning the continuance
of Statutes, to about the number of twenty five or twenty six he said. And so
entering into the particularities thereof, in sundry degrees, whereof some were
doubtful and some disputable; amongst the said Committees on both sides it was
thought sit for this time it should be left to further Conference amongst the
said Committees accordingly.

The Bill concerning the assurance of certain Lands and Tenements to Read
Stafford Esquire and Mabil his Wife, and to the Heirs of the said Read, was
read the third time, and passed upon the Question.

Mr Calfeild, Mr Lewkenor, Sir Humphrey Foster, Mr. Valentine Knightley, Mr.
Finch, Mr. Reynold, Mr. Fulk Grevill and Mr. Broughton were added to the
Committees for George Ognell appointed on Friday the 16th day of this instant
March foregoing.

The Bill and Committees names concerning Petite Larceny appointed on Friday
the 16th day of this instant March foregoing, was delivered to Mr. Hubbert one
of the said Committees.

And the Bill against Counterfeiting of Counselors hands, etc. committed on
Saturday the 10th day of this instant March foregoing, was delivered to Sir
John Wolley one of the said Committees.

In the Afternoon.

The Bill for granting of three entire Subsidies and six Fifteenths and Tenths
to her Majesty was read the second time, and the Proviso for the five Ports was
then altered, and also twice read. The said Bill upon the question was Ordered
to be engrossed.

Nicholas Curwen and Wilford Rawson Esquires, returned into this present
Parliament Knights for the County of Cumberland, are for their necessary
Service in the affairs of her Majesty licensed to depart.

On Tuesday the 20th day of March, Three Bills had each of them one reading; of
which the last being the Bill touching the Sale of the Gray-Fryers in the Town
of Cambridge was twice read and Ordered to be engrossed. By virtue of which
said Bill, upon the Sale of the said Friery, the College now called Sidney
Sussex College was built in the said University.

Mr. Cradock, one of the Committees in the Bill for the better Execution of the
Process and against Recusants, (committed on Thursday the 15th day of this
instant March foregoing) showed, that he and the residue of the Committees have
met together, and upon good considerations have thought good to amend sundry
things in the said Bill. And opening unto the House the effects of some
Amendments, the same Amendments being thereupon read to the House, it was
Ordered upon the question that they should be inserted into the said Bill
accordingly.

Sir John Wolley, one of the Committees in the Bill against counterfeiting of
Counselors and principal Officers hands, (appointed on Saturday the 10th day
of this instant March foregoing) showed, that he and the residue of the
Committees have met together, and upon the end of their Travel therein do all
of them think it a very dangerous Bill, and not fit in their opinions to pass
this House. And did further think good to leave the same to the good
consideration of this House. And because it is a Bill which came from the
Lords, they thought good with (...) said report first made to deliver the said
Bill again into this House, and so there to leave it in such sort as it is and
not otherwise.

The Bill concerning the Lands late of Henry late Lord Burgavenny was upon the
second reading committed unto Mr Thomas Fane, Sir Henry Knivett, Mr Recorder of
London and others. And the Bill was delivered to Sir William Haward, one of the
said Committees, who with the rest was appointed to meet to Morrow at two of
the Clock in the Afternoon in the Exchequer Chamber.

Four Bills of no great moment were sent up to the Lords by Mr Vice-Chamberlain
and others; of which the first was touching the sale of Raven's Lands, and
another touching salted Fish.

It is Ordered, that touching the Bill against Alien Strangers selling by way
of Retail, whereof report was now made by Mr Recorder of London, one of the
Committees in the same Bill, of that which was done yesterday by such of the
Committees as then did meet, or at the least by the more part of them, viz. by
five, there being in very deed but nine in all, both parts should be heard to
Morrow in this House with their Council.

The Bill for Confirmation of Letters Patents to the Mayor, Sheriff, Citizens
and Commonalty of the City of Lincoln was read the third time, and passed upon
the question.

Mr Sergeant Owen and Mr Powle did bring word from the Lords, that their
Lordships desire Conference with the Committees of this House upon Thursday
next at two of the Clock in the Afternoon in the Chamber next the Upper House,
touching the Continuance of Statutes and relief of poor maimed Soldiers, if
this House shall so like. Which Message being opened to the House by Mr
Speaker, it was Ordered by this whole House, that the former Committees of this
House (whose names see before on Monday the 12th day of this instant March
foregoing) should attend their Lordships at the said time and place
accordingly. Which resolution of this House was also thereupon signified from
this House to their Lordships by the said Mr Sergeant Owen and Mr Powle.

The Bill for the better expedition of Justice in the Court of Star Chamber was
read the second time. After the reading of which Bill Mr Francis Bacon stood up
and and spoke very earnestly against it, by means whereof, as it should
afterward seem, the Bill was Dashed. Which said Speech containing diverse
matters of good moment in it, although it be omitted in the Original
Journal Book it self, yet I have thought good to supply it out of the aforesaid
Anonymous Journal more particularly mentioned at the beginning of this present
Journal, being in manner and form following.

Mr Francis Bacon after silence made, spoke as follows: Neither Profit nor
Peril shall move me to speak against my Consciene in this place. Yet because I
am a party interessed in this Office which the Bill aims at, so may I seem to
speak with feeling; my self also not thinking it fit, that being here a Judge,
I should speak also as a party: yet I beseech you as the manner is in places
Judicial, if the Judge be a party, though he sit not there as Judge, yet may he
defend and speak at the Bar as a party in his own Case. So I beseech you,
because I may hap to yield reason to the satisfying of any that yet may stand
for the Bill, let me be heard to speak at the Bar. And then he offered to go to
the Bar, but the House in favor would needs have him speak in the place where
he sat. First there is cunning showed in the Bill, and for that my Lord Keeper
might be affected, it seems to give him the bestowing of the Clerks places.
Secondly, to insinuate with practicing Lawyers, it gives them a Fee; For no
Interrogatories should be administered whereto their hand was not under.
Thirdly, it offered also some kindness to me, for it gave a present Forfeiture
of the Office upon sundry defaults. Fifthly, to the subject in general it
pretended a very great relief. So that it carried a plausible show, but indeed
the Bill was in it self prejudicial to her Majesty, inconvenient to the Judges
of that Court, and burdensome to the Subject. Prejudicial to her Majesty, for
it makes a diminution of her Inheritance; Inconvenient, for the Clerks place
has always been in her Gift, and this Bill would carry it to the Lord Keeper,
who never before had it.

It is an Indignity offered unto the Court, for that the Clerk must be Ordered
by an Act of Parliament, as if their wisdom and Care were not sufficent to
relieve any abuses they should find in their Officers to the grief of the
Subject.

Great Injury is offered to the parties interessed; for first, an Office which
is incident unto the Clerk is given from him, he shall not have the appointing
of his own Examiner. And again the Ancient Fee has always been twelve pence
the sheet, and as much in other Courts; therefore this is not tolerable. And
considering the place of his Attendance, his place is in the highest Court,
wherefore in reason his Fee is to have proportion with his Attendance.

Now where relief and Ease were pretended to the Subjects, no such thing will
come by the Bill, but rather a greater Charge; for it gives a Fee for Judicial
Acts, as for making Reports, for which no such Fee is due. It appoints that a
Counselors hand must be to all Interrogatories; so their Clyents must pay a
Fee more than usually. Also whereas he used upon Commission (the parties
talking with their Deponents) to have Cause presently to draw Interrogatories
they thought not..... before; now they cannot minister any such
Interrogatories; nay to every Commission sitting they must bring their Council,
which will be an exceeding great charge.

Besides, the Commissioners are bound under a pain not to accept
Interrogatories that are not signed under a Counselors hand; so the
Commissioners must take notice at their peril who be Counselors admitted to
the parties, who not. These with many other reasons.

There was much division thereupon. Wherefore the Speaker propounded the
question, that as many as will not have the Bill rejected say I, and the other
to say No. The voice was so indifferent that it could not be discerned which
were greater. Then the question grew whether part should go out, those that
said I, or those that said No,

Mr Speaker said, the Order of the House is, that the I being for the Bill must
go out, and the No against the Bill does always sit. The reason is, that the
Inventor that will have a new Law, is to go out and bring it in; and they that
are for the Law in possession must keep the House, for they sit to continue it.

Thus far out of the aforesaid Anonymous Journal. The further Passages of this
day and part of the next do follow out of the Original Journal Book it self.

Mr Attorney General and Mr Doctor Stanhop do bring from the Lords a Bill
Entitled An Act for Explanation and Confirmation of her Majesty's Title to the
Lands and Tenements late of Sir Francis Englefield Knight, Attainted of High
Treason.

On Wednesday the 21th day of March, Three Bills of no great moment had each of
them one reading; of which the last being the Bill for the maintenance of the
Haven in the Town of Colchester, and for the paving of the same Town, had its
first reading.

The Amendments in the Bill touching the breadth of Plunkets, Azures and Blues
being twice read, the Bill was upon the question Ordered to be engrossed.

The Amendments in the Bill for the more speedy and due Execution of Process
against Recusants being twice read, the Bill was upon the Question Ordered to
be engrossed.

The Council on both sides were this day heard at large in this House in the
Bill against Aliens selling by way of retail any Foreign Commodities, and
afterward sequestered. Which done, the Amendments intended by the Committees in
the said Bill were read unto the House, and after the reading Ordered upon the
question to be inserted into the same Bill accordingly. After which there
followed diverse long Speeches and Arguments on both sides both with the Bill
and against the Bill, which said Speeches being omitted in the Original
Journal Book of the House of Commons, are in respect of the great weight of
this matter touching Aliens now controverted, supplied out of the aforesaid
Anonymous Journal (more particularly mentioned at the beginning of this present
Journal) in manner and form following, viz.

Mr Francis Moore (of the Middle Temple) being as it should seem at the Bar, of
Council with the City of London, and in their behalf to speak for the making of
a new Law, by the Order of the House spoke first, and did at large set forth
the inconveniences that grew to our Nation and Tradesmen by suffering I
Tradesmen to retail. First because that Strangers Wares are better than ours,
which causes that our Retaylors have no sale of their Wares. They sell
cheaper, though their Wares be as good as ours. And this is by reason they have
Factors beyond the Seas that are their Friends and Kinsfolks, and so they save
that Charge. A thing to be noted. And wheresoever they are, our own native
Retaylors are Beggars. They receive Gentlemen and Yeomens Sons to be their
Apprentices, themselves being Retaylors, and this is no Trade afterward for
them to live on; So many Beggars be made consuming their time under them. Their
retailing Beggering our Retaylors makes a diminution of the Queens Subsidies.
Their riches and multitude makes our Estate poorer and weaker, for they stick
upon our wealth, and carry it into Foreign Countries.

In the Statute Richard 3. Cap. 9. there appears the like Complaint that now
is, which being then made unto the King was then remedied, as appears by the
Statute. And for the Objections made, First that it were against Charity, that
Strangers sleeing hither for Religion and relief should be restrained from the
means of getting their livings; Secondly, that their retailing (...) seneth the
prices of our Wares, and increases the number of Buyers; and Thirdly, that it
were violating of their privilege, if we have them by their diminution. The
privilege of St Martins has always been allowed, and now not to be denied. To
Answer to these in Order.

First, Charity must be mixed with Policy; for to give of Charity to our own
Beggering, were but Prodigality; and such Charity we use; for we allow them all
Trades that they have been brought up in; but retailing is a thing that they
were never brought up unto in their own Countries, so no reason to allow it
them here.

To the second, they buy of us, and sell as brought from beyond Seas; and upon
this opinion sell our own Wares dearer than we can do.

Their privilege of Denization is not to be allowed above the privilege of
Birth, and our Natives are not allowed to Retail and Merchandise as they do.
And it may appear by a former Statute, that notwithstanding their Denization
they have been bound under the Statute 34 H. 8.

And though the Stranger Merchants pay double Subsidies, yet Strangers
Retaylors do not, but are taxed by the place, and that under value, because
their goods and wealth is secret: but bar retailing, and they will all of them
be Merchants, and so the Subsidy shall be doubled.

St Martins was first allowed for a Sanctuary, and for that Cause had his
privilege, and not to be so ill a Neighbor to the City as to rob it as it
does; and by former Statutes St. Martins has been barred, as by the Statute 21
H. 8. appears, only the Statute of 1. H. 8. exempted it.

Mr Proud of Lincoln's Inn (being as it should seem at the Bar, of Council with
the Strangers, and in their behalf to speak) made particular Answer to Mr Moore
for Strangers in resisting his Answers to the five Objections. Then he offered,
if the Liberties of the Natives born might be granted to Strangers, they would
seek no more, for they desired but to trade in all parts of the Realm.

Mr Hill of Lincoln's Inn (of Council also with the Strangers, spoke next and
said, Make it Law that they shall not retail, and the Merchants hereafter will
require a Law that they may not use Merchandise; and so the Shoo-maker, Tailor,
and others, that they may not use their Trades, and in denying them one, you
take away all. (Upon this instant Mr Speaker delivered a Bill which desired
they might be barred of such Trades as to be Shoo-makers and such like. But
this Bill was thought to be put in by the Strangers themselves of Policy. This
I thought.) And besides these Retaylors themselves be not Aliens, but far
Foreigners, such as have forsaken their own Countries and Liberties to live
here in ours, and home they dare not resort.

Further, of the things they retail we have no Company or Trade here in
England, and therefore it were unreasonable to bar them of their said Retailing.

It should seem that these three last before-named were all of the Council of
either part that spoke at the Bar, and that the Speeches following were all of
them uttered by several Members of the House.

Sir John Wolley spoke next, as it should seem, after the Council of either
part had been heard at the Bar, and said: This Bill should be ill for London,
for the Riches and Renown of the City comes by entertaining of Strangers, and
giving liberty unto them. Antwerp and Venice could never have been so rich and
famous but by entertaining of Strangers, and by that means have gained all the
intercourse of the World.

Mr Fuller spoke next against Alien Retaylors, and said: The Exclamations of
the City are exceeding pitiful and great against these Strangers; nay had not
these latter quiet times in their own Countries, and our troubles made many of
them retire home, the Citizens would have been in uproar against them: The
which if the Government of the City repress not, they will be apt enough to it.
It is no Charity to have this pity on them to our own utter undoing; for of
them there ought none to be sworn a Denizen, but he should first swear he is
not worth five pound. This is to be noted in these Strangers, they will not
converse with us, they will not marry with us, they will not buy any thing of
our Countrymen. Their retailing is the cause that all things be at that price
with us. For they make Lawns Velvets, Rashes, Taffaraes, Linen Cloth, and all
this they sell to us also. Now whosoever makes a thing and sells a thing,
raises the price of it. The Retailing Stranger buyeth nothing of our Country
Commodities, but all he lays out he buyeth from beyond the Seas. The
Searchers have sometimes taken seven thousand pound of theirs at a time.

Sir Edward Dymock speaking for the Strangers, said: The Beggary of our home
Retaylors comes not by the Strangers Retailing, but by our home ingrossers; so
that if our Retaylors might be at the first hand, they might sell as good cheap
as the Strangers. But this Bill is thrust into the House by our home
Ingrossers, of Policy, that their beggering of our Retaylors might be imputed
to the Strangers Retailing. The Strangers here purchase dear. And beyond the
Seas it is lawful for the Strangers, in the places of the best Traffic, to
trade in any thing. In Venice any Stranger may buy, sell, or purchase House or
Lands, and dispose thereof by his Will, or otherwise at his pleasure, as freely
as any Citizen. And this may we do then in some sort. The Strangers are not
they that transport our Coin, but it is our Merchants. For it is to be seen in
all the Low Countries, where her Majesty utters much Treasure, there is not
so much English Coin to be had, as in the same Towns where the Merchants trade.
And of my own Experience I know a Town in the Low Countries, where a Contract
of twenty pound was made by an English Merchant, and he agreed to pay it all in
English Angels.

Mr Dalton against the Strangers said, That engrossing ought to be suffered
amongst Merchants, because otherwise the Commodities lying to be sold in
parcels, would be consumed in Expenses before the Ship were discharged.
Therefore for Merchandise sake this is to be suffered. He imputed the Beggary
of the City to Strangers, and said, that in some one Parish there were a
thousand lived by Begging.

Mr Finch spoke for the Strangers, and said: We ought not to be uncharitable,
but this must be the Rule, None must so relieve Strangers, as by it to beggar
themselves. But for their riches, it grows chiefly by Parsimony, and where
they dwell I see not that the Nation is so much grieved at them as here in
London, for they contribute to all Scots and Lots as we do. Though they be a
Church by themselves, their Example is profitable amongst us, for their
Children are no sooner able to go, but they are taught to serve God, and to
flee idleness; for the least of them earneth his meat by his labor. Our Nation
is sure more blessed for their sakes. Wherefore as the Scripture says Let us
not grieve the Soul of the stranger.

If this Stranger be both a Merchant and a Retaylor, there is a Law against him
15 Eliz. c. 2. But as I am for the Strangers of the Church, so not against any
Law that should be made against such Strangers as be not of the Church, but
here only for Merchandise; and those who have for Conscience sake only, may
again (the fire being quenched) safely return into their own Countries. In 6 R.
2. An Act was made what Wares strangers should retayle and what not; but what
is understood by this word retailing, or how far it is stretched, I know not.
If Retayling stretch to sell that which they make here, as well as that which
is brought from beyond Seas, this is too hard a Construction. In the days of
Queen Mary, when our Cause was as theirs is now, those Countries did allow us
that liberty, which now we seek to deuy them. They are strangers now, we may be
strangers hereafter. So let us do as we would be done unto.

Sergeant Drew said: There is no reason we should be without respect to
Strangers, yet our Charity must be done with a feeling of our Countrymens
grief: And although I think it not fit, that the Law should look back; to have
old men, long inhabiting here, now to become Apprentices; yet that all things
should be at liberty to all strangers, as it is, that were not convenient.
Wherefore I could wish there might be a Law for those that should come
hereafter only, and the strangers that be now might be restrained to their
Retayling of some Wares especially. My Motion therefore is, That the House
would continue the Committee of the Bill until a further day, that it may
receive Motion from their deliberation.

Thus far out of the aforesaid Anonymous Journal, the residue of this days
passages that follow, and part of the next, are transcribed out of the Original
Journal Book it self.

After the aforesaid Speeches and Arguments the said Bill against Aliens
selling by Retail was upon the question recommitted unto the former Committees
(who had been appointed on Tuesday the 6th day of this Instant March foregoing)
to meet again about the same Bill in the Afternoon of this present day; and the
Bill was also delivered to Mr Dalton one of the same Committees.

Sir William Bevel Knight, one of the Knights returned for the County of
Cornwall in respect of his Wises extreme sickness is by Mr Speaker licensed to
depart.

Thomas Maylard, one of the Burgesses for Hertford, is for his necessary
business at the Assizes licensed by Mr Speaker to depart.

On Thursday the 22d day of March the Bill for the Grant of three entire
Subsidies, and six Fifteenths and Tenths was read the third time, and passed
upon the question.

Nota, That this Bill of the Subsidy, in respect of the greatness of the sum,
passed the House of Commons with very great difficulty, as may appear by those
several days upon which it was agitated, (...), on Monday the 25th day of
February, and on Friday the second day, Saturday the third day, Tuesday the 6th
day, Wednesday the 7th day, Friday the 9th day, and Saturday the 10th day,
Tuesday the 13th day, Friday the 16th day and Monday the 19th day of this
instant March foregoing.

This day the House was called, and those Members of this House which were then
present and did appear, did pay into the hands of Mr Robert Wroth and Mr Warren
Esquires, their Charitable Contributions to the Relief of the poor in such
proportion as had been agreed upon on Monday the 19th day of this instant March
foregoing, viz. every Privy Councellor of the House 30. shillings; every Knight
in degree, and every one returned a Knight of a Shire, though not of that
degree, and every Sergeant at Law or Doctor of Law (because I suppose they are
in some respects accounted equal to Knights) twenty shillings; and every
Borough of the Cinque Ports and every Burgess of the House five shillings.

There was also gven by every Member of the House twelve pence a piece to the
Sergeant of the said House, for his Attendance, and for the Charges of a Clock
set up by him for the use of the House.

There is also one passage of this day more set down in the aforesaid Anonymous
Journal, more particularly mentioned in the beginning of this present Journal,
which is omitted in the Original Journal Book it self, being as follweth.

A poor Burgess of the House refused to pay his said Contribution of five
shillings, would only pay two shillings six pence: whereupon the Speaker would
have Committed him for disobeying the Order of the said House, but most of the
Members of the same were against it, and so he escaped.

Thus far out of the aforesaid Anonymous Journal. The passages of the next day
following are in part inserted out of the Original Journal Book it self.

On Friday the 23th day of March, Two Bills of no great moment had each of them
one reading; of which the last being the Bill concerning Woollen Clothes and
Kerseyes made in the County of Devon, out of Cities, Towns Corporate and Market
Towns, was upon the second reading committed unto Sir William Moore, all the
Knights and Burgesses of Norfolk, York, Surrey. Kent, Somerset, Devon. and
Cornwall, Mr Sergeant Harris and others; And the Bill was delivered to Sir
William Moore, who with the rest was appointed to meet to Morrow at two of the
Clock in the Afternoon in this House.

Mr Attorney of the Duchy, one of the Committees in the Bill for Mr Anthony
Cook, showed that he and the residue of the Committees in that Bill (appointed
on Friday 16th day of this instant March foregoing) have met and had Conference
together, and that for sundry respects then opened by him to the House, they
thought good to frame a new Bill: And so offered the same new Bill, praying it
might be read.

Mr Tasborough, one of the Committees in the Bill for relief of Jurors
appearing upon Trials, brings in the old Bill with some Amendments, and
prays that the same Amendments may be allowed of by the House; hereupon they
were twice read, and Ordered to be engrossed; but the Bill remained without any
further course or question at that time.

Mr Sergeant Harris, one of the Committees in the Bill for Mr Ognall (which had
been appointed on Friday the 16th day of this instant March foregoing) offers
a Report of the travel of some of the Committees; but it was upon a
Counter-Motion made by..... And so it leaves imperfectly, but it should seem
upon the said Counter-Motion made by some other Member of the House, the said
Report offered to be made by Sergeant Harris was for this time put by.

The Bill for Explanation and Confirmation of her Majesty's Title to the Lands
late Sir Francis Englefield's Knight, Attainted of High Treason, was upon the
second reading committed unto all the Privy Council, Mr Attorney of the Duchy,
Mr Nathanael Bacon and others, who were appointed to meet to Morrow at two of
the Clock in the Afternoon in the Exchequer Chamber.

Mr Finch, one of the Committees in the Bill for the Lord Burgavenny (which had
been appointed on Thursday the 20th day of this instant March foregoing)
showed, that he and the residue of the Committees have met and considered of
the parts of the said Bill, and find some defects in the same, chiefly in
matter of form, and offered such Amendments unto the House as they thought fit;
and prayed the same to be read: which being read by the Clerk, it was Ordered
by the House that those Amendments should be added to the said Bill in a
Schedule.

After which Report made by Mr Finch, it should seem that there followed
further dispute this day touching that weighty business of Aliens retailing of
Foreign Wares; which being wholly omitted in the Original Journal Book it self,
is therefore inserted out of the aforesaid Anonymous Journal, more particularly
mentioned in the beginning of this present Journal, in manner and form
following, viz.

Mr Palmer, Burgess for London, delivered the Bill for retailing, and signfied,
that the Committees could not agree upon it; so desired that it would be
considered by the House what is fit in their opinions to be done. But the said
Mr Palmer was none of the said Committees.

The Speaker was thereupon ready to put it unto the Question, whether the Bill
should be engrossed; but the House would not have it so suddenly put to the
Question. Mr Palmer proceeded and said, That the Strangers of late are grown to
so great a number, that they being but forty open Retaylors, have undone since
the last Parliament sixty at least of our English Retaylors, for so many are
now Beggars that were forty pound Subsidy in the Queens Book. Their retailing
has inhanced the price of all Wares, such as they retail: for when they
retailed not, but our English used the sale of fine Lawnes, Hollands and
Cambricks, they were better cheap by fifteen pound in an hundred.

The Retailors here are but Factors to such as are Merchants beyond the Seas,
so they are both Merchants and Factors; a thing which if we should use beyond
the Seas, the Law would be fiery to us, or fire should be our Law if we
withstood. And those places where we trade with our Cloth, should we retail it
also, we should so inhaunce the price, that they would not be very glad of our
Traffic. But this mischief is suffered amongst us by the Dutch.

It is to be proved that there were twenty Retaylors in London that passed ten
or twelve thousand pound a piece in a year; and this twenty thousand pound a
year at the least the Strangers carry out of the Realm, for of our Commodities
they esteem nothing.

Where it was said the other day, our Merchants did carry our Coin out of the
Realm, there is a restraint now that none shall do it. And it is to be showed
that the Merchants do Weekly bring in twelve or fifteen hundred pound, and
sometimes two thousand weight of strange Coin.

Now whereas it is so much urged to be against that Charity which is commended
to us by Moses toward the Stranger, let Moses tell us who is that Stranger;
even the Fatherless and Widow. Wherefore from them we must not reap too clean,
but cast out some handfuls for them to gather up: when we gather our Vintage,
or when we gather our Corn, we must not gather too clean. But shall we be put
out to gleaning and give our Fields to them? That were beyond Charity.
Wherefore let Moses be expounded by the same Spirit. The Apostle says, That he
that provideth not for his Family is worse than an Infidel. Let us then have an
Eye to our Country and our poor Countrymen. You be here as Patres Patriae, you
be here as amongst the Romans the Patres conscripti: I beseech you have respect
unto this City, upon whose flourishing Estate the whole Realm depends.

Sir Walter Raleigh spoke next and said: Whereas it is pretended, That for
Strangers it is against Charity, against Honor, against profit to expel them;
in my opinion it is no matter of Charity to relieve them. For first, such as
fly hither have forsaken their own King; and Religion is no pretext for them,
for we have no Dutchmen here, but such as came from those Princes where the
Gospel is Preached, and here they live disliking our Church. For Honor, It is
Honor to use Strangers as we be used amongst Strangers; And it is a lightness
in a Commonwealth, yea a baseness in a Nation to give a liberty to another Na-
which we cannot receive again. In Antwerp where our intercourse was most, we
were never suffered to have a Tailor or a Shoemaker to dwell there. Nay at
Millain where there are three hundred pound English men, they cannot have so
much as a Barber amongst them. And for Profit, they are all of the House of
Almoigne, who pay nothing, yet eat out our profits, and supplant our own
Nation. Custom indeed they pay, paying fifteen pence where we pay twelve pence,
but they are discharged of Subsidies. The nature of the Dutchman is to fly to
no man but for his profit, and they will obey no man long, now under Spain, now
under Mounfort, now under the Prince of Orange, but under no Governor long.
The Dutchman by his Policy has gotten Trading with all the World into his
hands, yea he is now entering into the Trade of Scarborough Fishing, and the
Fishing of the Newfound. Lands, which is the stay of the West-Countries. They
are the people that maintain the King of Spain in his Greatness. Were it not
for them, he were never able to make out such Armies and Navies by Sea; it cost
her Majesty sixteen thousand pound a year the maintaining of these Countries,
and yet for all this they Arm her Enemies against her. Therefore I see no
reason that so much respect should be given unto them. And so to conclude, in
the whole cause I see no matter of Honor, no matter of Charity, no Profit in
relieving them.

Sir Robert Cecill spoke next and said: When I first heard this Bill read, I
promised my self silence for it speaks of Trades, wherein I have no skill: But
upon so great dispute as it has received on both sides, and that very
thoroughly and wisely, my understanding is cleared, and I see that now which I
saw not before. What the word Retailing meant, I understood not before, but now
it is brought to a matter of Charity to relieve Strangers, and especially such
as do not grieve our Eyes. This has brought great Honor to our Kingdom, for
it is accounted the refuge of distressed Nations, for our Arms have been open
unto them to cast themselves into our Bosoms: But yet our Charity unto them
must not hinder or injure our selves. Now as the Bill is, it is not sufficient
for this purpose: And if it be put to a Question, it must either be dashed or
put to engrossing. And for my own Conscience, if the Question be now made, I am
not resolved to give my Voice. It were not for the gravity of the House nor the
credit of the Committees to have it rejected upon the sudden, and as it is now,
it is not fit to pass in my conceit. I see the Citizens themselves will be well
assenting unto the reforming of the same; for Mr Recorder yesterday speaking
with Zeal for the City, yet with good regard thought the Bill might receive
great moderation. And thereupon the House was well pleased to stay the Bill and
commit it again to the former Committees, to whom were further added Sir Robert
Cecill, Sir Walter Raleigh, Sir Henry Knivet, Mr Wroth and others, who were
appointed to meet with the former Committees (who had been nominated on Tuesday
the 6th day of this instant March foregoing) this Afternoon at two of the Clock
in this House.

Now follows the next days Passages and some others ensuing out of the
Original Journal Book.

On Saturday the 24th day of March, the Bill touching Clapboards and Casks was
twice read and committed unto the Committees that follow, viz. Mr Treasurer, Mr
Wroth, Mr Francis Bacon, Mr Finch and others, and the Bill was delivered to Mr
Treasurer, who with the rest was appointed to meet at two of the Clock this
Afternoon in the Exchequer Chamber.

The Bill and Committees names touching the Lands late Sir Francis Englefields
Knight, Attainted of High Treason, (who had been nominated on Thursday the 22th
day of this instant March foregoing) were delivered to Mr Vice-Chamberlain.

The Bill for relief of maimed Soldiers and Mariners was upon the second
reading committed unto the former Committees (whose names see before on Monday
the 12th day of this instant March foregoing) and Sir Robert Cecill, Mr Richard
Brown, Mr Hubberd and others were added unto them, and appointed to meet on
Monday next at two of the Clock in the Afternoon in the Exchequer Chamber, and
the Bill and Committees names were delivered to Sir Robert Cecill, Vicle plus
March 28.

Mr Speaker being moved by Mr Edgecombe to read the private Bill for the Town
of Stonchouse, and offering to have the Bill read first which came from the
Lords touching Popish Recusants, being a public Bill and remembered from her
Majesty; It was upon the further arguing of Sir Edward Dymock put to the
question of the House whether the same Bill for the Town of Stonchouse should
be read or no, and upon the Question made was Ordered no.

Four Bills were sent up to the Lords by Mr Vice-Chamberlain and others; of
which one was the Bill for Subsidy, and the other touching the Sale of the
Gray-Fryers in Cambridge.

Mr Sergeant Owen and Mr Doctor Stamhop do bring from the Lords a Bill
entitled, An Act to give liberty to the Lord Harrowden to sell certain Lands
for the payment of his debts.

The Bill for restraining of Popish Recusants to some certain places of abode,
with the Amendments, were first twice read, and the Bill and Proviso upon the
third reading passed upon the Question.

Sir Walter Raleigh, one of the Committees in the Bill against Aliens retailing
of Foreign Wares, showed the travels of the Committees, and offers unto the
House the Bill with a Proviso; And the Proviso being twice read, the Bill and
Proviso upon the Question were Committed again to the former Comittees, and the
Bill was delivered to Mr Dalton one of the said Committees, who were appointed
to meet at two of the Clock in the Afternoon of this present day in the
Exchequer Chamber.

On Monday the 26th day of March, Two Bills of no great moment had each of them
one reading; of which the last concerning Spinners and Weavers was upon the
second reading committed unto Mr Chancellor of the Exchequer, Sir William
Knowles, Sir Moyle Finch, Sir Francis Hastings and others, and the Bill was
delivered to Sir William Knowles, who with the rest was appointed to meet to
Morrow in the Afternoon in the Exchequer.

Mr Speaker showed, that he had received a Bill Signed by her Majesty for the
Restitution in Blood of Sir Thomas Parrot Knight Son and Heir of Sir John
Parrot Knight deceased lately attainted of High Treason. Whereupon

The Bill for Restitution in Blood of Sir Thomas Parrot Son and Heir of Sir
John Parrot Knight deceased Attainted of High Treason, was twice read.

Mr Vice-Chamberlain, one of the Committees in the Bill concerning Lands late
Sir Francis Englefields Knight attainted of High Treason (who had been
appointed on Thursday the 22th day of this instant March foregoing) showed,
that he and the residue of the Committees in the same Bill have met together,
and for certain things considered therein by them touching some Misprisions and
imperfections both in sense and in writing, have thought good, that the said
Committees of this House might upon a Motion to be made unto the Lords for
Conference touching the said Misprisions and Imperfections have Conference with
their Lordships therein, for that the same Bill came from their Lordships.
Which upon that motion was assented unto by the whole House accordingly.

And immediately after, the Bill for restraining Popish Recusants to some
certain places of abode lately passed with some amendments in this House, which
before came from the Lords; and the Bill also for Confirmation of the Jointure
of the Lady Margaret Countess of cumberland, which likewise lately passed in
this House; and did also before come from the Lords, were sent up to the Lords
by Mr Vice-Chamberlain and others, with Order furthermore of this House to move
their Lordships for the said Conference touching the said Misprisions and
Imperfections, in the Bill touching the said Lands, lately the said Sir Francis
Englefields.

The Bill for the bringing of fresh water to the Town of Stonehouse was upon
the second reading committed unto Sir Francis Drake, Mr Edgecombe, Sir Thomas
Conisby, Mr Dalton and others, who were appointed to meet to Morrow at two of
the Clock in the Afternoon in the Exchequer Chamber.

The Bill for the Haven of Plymouth, and the Bill for the Inning of Plimpton
Marsh were each of them read the second time, and committed to the former
Committees in the Bill for the Town of Stonehouse, to meet at the same time and
place, and the Bills were both of them delivered to Sir Francis Drake one of
the said Committees.

The Bill concerning the Lands of Henry late Lord Burgavenny had its third
reading, and the amendments were also read the third time, and the Bill with
the Amendments passed upon the Question.

The Bill touching the Assize of Fuel was upon the second reading committed
unto Mr Humphrey Conisbie, Mr Fanshaw, Mr Wroth, and others, and the Bill was
delivered to Mr Fanshaw, who with the rest was appointed to meet this present
day at two of the Clock in the Afternoon in the Exchequer Chamber.

Mr Sergeant Owen and Mr Doctor Ford do bring word from the Lords, that their
Lordships according to the request of this House have assented unto the
Conference demanded touching the said Bill, concerning the Lands late Sir
Francis Englefields lately Attainted of High Treason; and that their Lordships
have appointed the time to be to Morrow Morning at eight of the Clock at the
accustomed place.

The Bill to give liberty to the Lord Harowden to sell certain Lands for the
payment of his debts, had its first reading.

Mr Sergeant Owen and Mr Doctor Ford do bring word from the Lords, that
touching the amendments of this House in the Bill which first passed in the
Upper House, and was afterward sent down unto this House; for restraining of
Popish Recusants, to some certain places of abode, and then passed in the House
with some Amendments, and sent unto their Lordships this present day, their
Lordships do desire that these Committees of this House which are appointed to
have Conference with their Lordships to Morrow touching the said Bill
concerning the Lands late Sir Francis Englefields, may also have Authority from
this House at the same time and place to have Conference likewise with their
Lordships touching the said Amendments of this House in the said Bill for
restraining Popish Recusants to some certain places of abode. Which afterward
upon the Return of that Message made unto that House by Mr Speaker was assented
unto by the whole House accordingly, and so signified also unto the said Mr.
Sergeant Owen and Mr. Doctor Ford.

On Tuesday the 27th day of March Mr. Fuller, one of the Committees in the Bill
for repealing of a branch of a Statute made in quarto and quinto Phil. and Mar.
entitled An Act touching the making of Woollen Cloth, showed the Travel of
the Committees in the same. Whereupon after some other speeches then moving the
House, the said Bill was recommitted to the former Committees (who had been
appointed on Wednesday the 14th day of this Instant March foregoing) to meet
again this Afternoon.

The Bill touching the true and lawful Assizing of Bread was read the second
time, and upon the doubtfulness of the Voices whether it should be Engrossed or
no, was upon the Question by the division of the House rejected, with the
difference of twenty seven Voices, viz. with the Yea sixty five, and with the
No ninety two.

The Bill to make void the Spiritual Living of those that have forsaken the
Realm, and do cleave unto the Pope and his Religion, was twice read, and
Ordered to be engrossed.

The Bill against Strangers retailing of Foreign Wares was read the third time,
and after many long Speeches both with the Bill and against the Bill, passed
upon the Question by the division of the House, with the difference of
fourscore Voices, viz. with the Yea a hundred sixty two, and with the No eighty
two. Vide concerning this business on Tuesday the 6th day. on Tuesday the 20th
day, Wednesday the 21th day, and on Friday the 23th day of this instant March
foregoing.

Matthew Jones Gentleman, being found sitting in this House, and no Member of
the same, was brought to the Bar, and there being charged by Mr Speaker for his
said offense, humbly excused himself by Ignorance; and appearing unto the House
to be a simple ignorant old man, was upon his humble submission pardoned to be
discharged to Morrow, paying his Fees, and Ordered in the mean time to remain
in the Sergeants Ward of this House.

Mr Sergeant Owen and Mr Doctor Stanhop do bring word from the Lords, That upon
Thursday next at two of the Clock in the Afternoon in the accustomed place,
Three Earls, three Barons and three Bishops of the Upper House, are appointed
to have Conference with some of the Members of this House, if this House should
so like, touching a Proviso to be devised for (...) Coverts mentioned in the
Amendments of this House to the Bill which passed with their Lordships for
restraining of Popish Recusants to certain places of abode: And showed, that
their Lordships did like very well of the residue of the said Amendments. Which
passage being opened unto the House by Mr Speaker, it was Ordered that a
competent number of Committees in the said Bill (who had been appointed on
Wednesday the 28th day of February foregoing should attend their Lordships,
which was so signified unto the said Mr Sergeant Owen and Mr Doctor Stanhop.

After which the said Mr Sergeant Owen and Mr. Doctor Stanhop do again bring
word from the Lords, that touching the date of the beginning or of a
Prorogation of a Parliament mentioned in the Bill touching Sir Francis
Englefield's Lands, their Lordships do desire, that at the Conference about
Recusants, already appointed on Thursday next, a Committee of this House may
then also confer with their Lordships in that matter also. Which was then
granted.

The Bill for Mr. Anthony Cook was read the third time, and passed upon the
Question.

On Wednesday the 28th day of March, the Bill for reviving, continuing,
explanation and perfecting of certain Statutes was twice read, and committed to
the former Committees (whose names see before on Monday the 12th day of this
instant March foregoing) and unto Mr. Heiman, Mr. Dewhty, Mr. Rotheram, Mr.
Finch, Mr. Attorney of the Duchy, the Burgesses of the Cinque Ports, Mr.
Broughton, Mr. John Hare, Mr. Penruddock and Mr. Doctor Caesar, and the Bill
was delivered to Mr. Wroth one of the former Committees, who with the rest was
appointed to meet in this place at two of the Clock in the Afternoon of this
present day.

Sir Robert Cecill, one of the Committees in the Bill for the relief of poor
maimed Soldiers, (who had been appointed on Monday the 12th day of this
instant March foregoing) showed, that the Committees have met together, but in
effect upon sundry reasons showed amongst them by diverse of the said Committees
to contrary effects, they could come to no Conclusion, but rather to a mere
confusion upon the points of the matter; for his own private part said in the
end, That as this House had committed the said Bill unto him and the residue of
the said Committees, so had he thought good to commit the same Bill to Prison
rather than to return it to this House again in the same or no better state
than they did before receive it.

Mr Treasurer, one of the Committees touching Clapboards and Casks (appointed
on Saturday the 24th day of this instant March foregoing) showed the meetings
of the Committees and their Amendments to the Bill. Whereupon the said
Amendments being read, the Bill and Amendments after some Speeches had to the
same were recommitted to the former Committees, and Mr Bucking now added unto
them, to meet this Afternoon.

The Bill for Naturalizing of certain Englishmens Children born beyond the
Seas, was read the third time and passed upon the Question.

Mr Boucher, one of the Committees in the Bill for the Town of Stonehouse
(which had been appointed on Monday the 26th day of this instant March
foregoing) showed the meeting of the Committees, and their Amendments to the
Bill; which Amendments being twice read, the Bill with the Amendments were
Ordered by the House to be engrossed.

The Bill for restitution in blood of Sir Thomas Parrot Knight, had its third
reading and passed upon the question.

The five Bills which last passed this House, viz. the Bill for restitution in
blood of Sir Thomas Parrot Knight, the Bill concerning the Lands of Henry late
Lord Burgavenny, the Bill against Strangers retailing of Foreign Wares, the
Bill for Mr. Anthony Cook, and the Bill for Naturalizing of certain English
Men's Children born beyond the Seas, were sent up to the Lords by Mr. Treasurer
and others.

The Bill for the Lord Harowden had the second reading, and thereupon was
committed to Sir John Harrington, Mr. Wroth, Mr. Hare and others; and the Bill
was delivered to Sir John Harrington, who with the rest was appointed to meet
this Afternoon in this House.

Matthew Jones Gentleman, Prisoner in the Sergeants Ward, being brought to the
Bar and charged by Mr. Speaker with the greatness of his misbehaviour, in
presuming to intrude himself yesterday into this High Court of Council being no
Member of the same, and giving him grave admonition for his future dutiful
behavior, showed him in the end, that in regard of his humble submission this
House does discharge him paying his Fees.

The Bill for the maintaining of Wier-Works was upon the second reading
committed unto Sir Edward Dymock, Mr. Doctor Caesar, the Knights and Burgesses
for York and Yorkshire, Mr. Wroth and others, and the Bill was delivered to Mr.
Doctor Caesar, who were appointed to meet to Morrow at two of the Clock in the
Afternoon in the Exchequer Chamber.

On Thursday the 29th day of March, Mr. Broughton, Mr. Attorney of the Duchy,
Sir Thomas Dennis, and Sir Francis Gudolphen were added to the former
Committees in the Bill for the Haven of Plymouth (who had been appointed on
Monday the 26th day of this instant March foregoing) and appointed to meet at
two of the Clock in the Afternoon of this present day.

The Bill concerning the Haven of Colchester, and the paving of the said Town,
was upon the second reading committed unto Mr. Vice-Chamberlain, the Burgesses
of Colchester, Mr. Grimston and others; And the Bill was delivered to Mr.
Wroth, one of the said Committees, who with the rest were appointed to meet at
two of the Clock this Afternoon in the Exchequer Chamber.

Mr. Treasurer, one of the Committees in the Bill touching Clapboards and Casks
(appointed on Saturday the 24th day of this instant March foregoing) brought in
the Bill with some Amendments, which being twice read the Bill was Ordered to
be engrossed.

Mr. Sergeant Harris, one of the Committees for the Lord Harrowden (appointed
on Wednesday the 28th day of this instant March immediately foregoing) bringing
in the Bill, and after Report made by him of the Travel of the Committees
therein, the Bill was read for the third reading and passed upon the Question.

Mr. Finch, one of the Committees in the Bill for Continuation, Explanation and
perfecting of certain Statutes (who had been appointed on Wednesday the 28th
day of this instant March foregoing) reports the meeting and Travel of the
Committees, and also the Amendments of the Bill in sundry things; which
Amendments after many long Arguments and sundry questions, with the division of
the House were in the end Ordered to be inserted into the said Bill.

On Friday the 30th day of (...) (...). Broughton and Sir Edward Dyer were
appointed to attend my Lord Keeper touching the Return of the Habeas Corpus cum
Causa, for the bringing up of the Body of Mr. Fitzherbert Esquire. Vide
concerning this matter on Thursday the first day, Friday the second day, and on
Saturday the 17th day of this instant March foregoing; as also on Tuesday April
the 3d, and on Thursday April the 5th postea.

The Amendments in the Bill for Continuation, Explanation and Confirmation of
the Queens Majesty's Title to the Lands and Tenements late of Sir Francis
Englefield Knight, being twice read to the House, and the Bill it self and the
same Amendments read the third time also, passed upon the Question.

The Amendments in the Bill for Continuation, Explanation and perfecting of
certain Statutes being twice read, were upon the Question after many and sundry
Arguments to diverse particular points in the same, Ordered upon the question in
the end to be engrossed.

Mr Vice-Chamberlain, one of the Committees in the Bill for maintenance of the
Haven of Colchester, and the paving of the Town, appointed on Thursday the 29th
day of this instant March foregoing) showed, that he and the residue of the
Committees have met together, and upon their Conference thought good to
suppress the said Bill, for that they could not conveniently agree to such
conclusion in the same as might satisfy the Inhabitants of the said Town: And
showed further the imparting of himself and the other Committees unto the Lords
touching the Collection and distribution of the money to poor maimed Soldiers;
And that thereupon their Lordships had appointed four of themselves for that
purpose, which in that Case should join with such of this House as by this
House shall be appointed. Whereupon Mr Vice-Chamberlain was Ordered to give
their Lordships most humble thanks, and to show them that after their Lordships
shall have sent the Bill again to this House in such sort passed as their
Lordships shall think meet, this House will thereupon then do therein what
shall appertain.

Doctor Carew and Mr Powle do bring from the Lords a Bill Entitled, An Act for
Confirmation of the Subsidies granted by the Clergy, together with the
instrument for the same; with request also from their Lordships to this House
for speedy Expedition of the same.

A Proviso to the Bill concerning the overlength of broad Cloth, was offered to
the House, and after the twice reading thereof was Ordered to be engrossed.

Mr Treasurer, Mr. Warren, Sir Francis Drake, Mr. Wroth, Mr. Doctor Herbert,
Sir Henry Unton, Sir Thomas Cecill, Sir Thomas Morgan, Mr. Oliver St John, Sir
Thomas Baskervile, Sir Thomas Shirley, Mr. John Heart, Mr. Flower, Sir Robert
Sidney, Sir Thomas Conisby, are appointed to join with the Lords in the joint
disposing of the Contribution of both Houses collected toward the relief of
poor maimed Soldiers.

Nota, That this is all which is found in the Original Journal Book of the
House of Commons of this days Passages, and therefore there being an excellent
Vote or Resolution of the House touching the Addition and Amendments of Bills
after their passing of either House, set down in the often before-recited
Anonymous Journal, more particularly mentioned at the beginning of this present
Journal, I have thought good to have it inserted in manner and form following.

If a Bill having passed the Upper House be sent down to the House of Commons,
and be likewise upon the third reading allowed and expedited in that House, and
from them sent back again to their Lordships with Alterations and Amendments
thereunto added here, the Lords may either reject the said Bill or must pass it
with the said Additions, and that nothing more can be inserted into the said
Bill by their Lordships; but they must frame either a new Bill in the same
matter or business, or send down the former old Bill with other Additions or
Provisoes as a new Bill: Or if a Bill being sent from the Lords to the House of
Commons, do pass the said House also, as it had their Lordships before the
sending down, it can never be again dealt in further by them.

Thus far out of the aforesaid Anonymous Journal: The next days Passages follow
out of the Original Journal Book it self.

On Saturday the 31th day of March, the Bill for Confirmation of the Subsidies
granted by the Clergy and read the first Time passed upon the Question.

The Bill touching Casks brought in with more Amendments by Mr. Wroth one of
the Committees, and the same Amendments being twice read, the Bill was upon the
Question Ordered to be engrossed.

The Bill for reviving, continuing, explanation and perfecting of certain
Statutes was read the third time; And after sundry Arguments the two Provisoes
touching the dealing with the reputed Fathers of Bastards being withdrawn upon
the Question, the Bill upon the Question was passed afterward accordingly.

Mr. Attorney General and Mr. Doctor Ford do bring from the Lords two Bills;
the one Entitled an Act for the restraint of new Buildings, converting of
great Houses into several Tenements, and for restraint of Inmates and
Enclosures in and near unto the City of London and Westminster; and the other
for the Explanation of a branch of a Statute made in the twenty third year of
the Queens Majesty's Reign, Entitled An Act to retain the Queens Majesty's
Subjects in their due Obedience, with some Additions to the same, with a
Message also from their Lordships, to know the pleasure of this House touching
their Lordships request, for the further Explanation by their Lordships to be
made of some part of the Amendments of this House in the Bill lately passed
their Lordships and sent hither unto this House, and afterward by this House
returned again unto their Lordships with some Amendments of this House,
Entitled An Act for restraint of Popish Recusants to some certain places of
abode. And the said Mr. Doctor Ford also showed, that their Lordships prayed
Expedition of the said Bills now brought down, for that the time of Parliament
is like now to grow very short.

Mr. Speaker remembered unto the House the effect of the said Message from the
Lords; whereupon it was resolved by the House, that Answer should be made unto
the said Mr. Attorney and Mr. Doctor Ford, That if their Lordships should add
any declaratory Proviso to the said Bill and sent it down to this House, this
House would thereupon then further do as shall appertain.

Mr. Robert Penruddock, one of the Burgesses returned for the Borough of
Milton, for her Majesty's Affairs, and also for his own business is licensed by
Mr. Speaker to depart home.

Three Bills lastly had each of them one reading; of which the last concerning
the over-length of broad-Cloth was read the third time, and passed upon the
Question.

On Monday the second day of April, the Bill concerning Woollen-Cloths called
Devonshire Kersies or Dozens, was upon the second reading committed unto the
Knights and Burgesses of Devon, Mr. Sergeant Harris, Mr. George Moore and
others, and the Bill was delivered unto Sir Thomas Dennis one of the same
Committees, who with the rest were appointed to meet at two of the Clock this
Afternoon in the Exchequer Chamber.

Six Bills were sent up to the Lords by Mr. Treasurer and others; of which the
first was the Act for Confirmation of the Subsidies granted by the Clergy; and
another touching the Lands of Sir Francis Englefield Knight, Attainted of High
Treason; the residue being of no great moment.

Sir William Brunker, one of the Committees in the Bill concerning Spinnersand
Weavers (who had been appointed on Monday the 26th day of March last past)
showed, that the Committees had met, and upon Conference amongst them thought
good to make a new Bill: And so bringing in both the old Bill and the new,
prayed the reading of the said new Bill.

The Bill for Explanation of a branch of a Statute made in the twenty third
year of the Queens Majesty's Reign, Entitled An Act to retain the Queens
Majesty's Subjects in their due obedience, with some Amendments to the same,
had its first reading.

Three Bills of no great moment had each of them one reading; of which the
second being the Bill against counterfeiting of Counselors hands, etc. was
read the third time, and dashed upon the Question.

The Bill for relief of maimed Soldiers and Mariners was twice read, and
committed unto all the Privy Council, the Knights and Burgesses of London, the
Burgesses of York and others, who were appointed to meet this Afternoon at two
of the Clock in this House.

Nota, That certain Members of the House were appointed to draw a Bill for the
relief of maimed Soldiers and Mariners on Monday the 12th day of March
foregoing, which Bill being so drawn, was upon Saturday the 24th day of the
said March upon the second reading referred to certain Committees, and was
lately upon Wednesday the 28th day of the same Month upon the Motion of Sir
Robert Cecil one of the said Committees withdrawn out of the House and no
further proceeded in, and thereupon the aforesaid new Bill preferred this day
and twice read.

Mr Sergeant Owen and Mr. Doctor Carey do bring from the Lords the Bill for
restraining of Popish Recusants to some certain places of a boad, lately passed
this House with some Amendments; showing, that the Lords liking very well of
the said Amendments have inserted those Amendments into the said Bill
accordingly. And that their Lorships have further thought good to add unto the
said Bill a Proviso, for Explanation of the Branch of the said Bill which
concerns the matter only of abjuration, have passed the said Proviso, and
affiled the same to the said Bill, and sent it down to this House, to be also
passed here if this House shall so think meet.

On Tuesday the third day of April the Bill concerning Spinners and Weavers was
twice read, and committed to the former Committees (who had been appointed on
Monday the 26th day of March foregoing) and Mr. Wroth and the Burgesses of York
and Norwich were added unto them.

Sir Thomas Denis, one of the Committees in the Bill concerning Devonshire
Kerseys and Dozens (appointed yesterday) showed the meeting of the Committees,
and that they have in some few things amended the Bill, praying the reading of
the said Amendments; which being thereupon twice read, the Bill upon the
question was ordered to be engrossed.

The Bill concerning Brewers was upon the second reading committed unto Sir
Edward Dymock, Mr Stevenson, the Knights and Burgesses for London, Mr Wroth, Mr
Peak, and the Burgesses for Oxon, Cambridge, Sandwich, and Newcastle
Under-line, who were appointed to meet at two of the Clock this Afternoon in
the Exchequer Chamber.

The Return of the Habeas Corpus cum Causa made by the Sheriff of the County of
Darby for Mr Thomas Fitzherbert.

Which short remembrance of this excellent Precedent (how far on Outlawed man
may be a Burgess of the Parliament) is all that is found in the Original
Journal Book it self of the House of Commons. And therefore because there was
much debate concerning it this day, as had been on diverse other days foregoing
( viz. on Thursday the first day, Friday the 2d day, Saturday the 17th day, and
on Friday the 30th day of March last past) have caused it to be transcribed at
large out of the often before-recited Anonymous Journal, in manner and form
following.

The House was informed that the Lord Keeper had sent the Record of
Fitzherbert's Execution hither to the House. The Chancery men who brought it
were called into the House to the Bar and were appointed to read it ut Clerici.
And the House appointed the Writ sent out of Chancery to be annexed unto the
Record. The words of the Writ were Tibi praecipimus quod capias corpus Tho.
Fitzherbert, quocunque, etc. Dat. apud. Westminster. 7o die Martii. 35 Eliz.

The Sheriffs Return, Deliberatum fuit hoc Breve 15. die Martii super, etc. sed
ante adventum istius Brevis (scilicet) 3o Februarii 35 Eliz. captus fuit Thomas
Fitzherbert, etc.

Mr Dalton said, The Return of the Writ being made unto another Court, and the
Record it self being in another Court, we cannot be Judges of the matter, nor
enlarge the party. And as for the Return, methinks it therefore insufficient,
because it was not returned into this Court: And I see not how we can be Judges
of the Return. For the number of voices in this Cause is not to be judged for
Law, whether it be a good Return or not; for that which is Law, will
notwithstanding rest for Law for all our Voices. Therefore I think that
privilege quae est privatio Legis in this Case could not be granted.

Mr Brograve said, As to the matter of privilege, the Cause to me is very
doubtful, because privileges in these Causes are very rare, and so the matter
rests in doubt. This Court for its Dignity and highness has privilege, as
all other Courts have; And as it is above all other Courts, so it has
privilege above all other Courts; and as it has privilege and Jurisdiction
too, so has it also Coercion and Compulsion; otherwise the Jurisdiction is
nothing in a Court, if it has no Coercion. Therefore it seems unto me, that
the Return of the Writ ought to have been returnned into the Court of
Parliament; but whether the Return be to be made into the Upper House or Lower
House, I know not.

For in many Cases we have divided Jurisdictions, and the Upper House has
Jurisdiction by it self, therefore if a Nobleman has a Servant that were
arrested, they might make their Writ of Privilege returnable before themselves
and give him Privilege. And here in this House, if one that is a Member of
this House and have sat here, be arrested sedente Parliamento, we are to give
him Privilege. But if he be taken before his coming hither, it is not in our
power to deliver him, but we must have the assistance of other Courts in such
Causes. The use is such in other Causes: If the Action be a Mahime, whether
this be a Mahime or no the Court will not judge, until those that have Science
in those things affirm it to be so. And so when a matter Ecclesiastical or
Grammatical is in question the opinion of Civilians or Grammarians is known,
before the Judgment is given. So in this Court, we ought to desire Instructions
from the Judges of the Realm, whether in this Cause by the Law we can grant
privilege or no.

For Privilege there be two Writs issuing out of this House; the one is a
general Corpus cum Causa, and this is granted upon apparent cause of
Privilege: as if a Member of the House be taken sedente Parliamento. The other
Writ is called a Writ of Parliament; this is granted when the Cause is to be
judged by the Parliament. But whether Privilege be to be granted to this party
or no, it is not apparent. And in the Cause the Lord Keeper is not to be Judge;
But here the whole Record is to remain, and we with the advice and opinion of
the Judges are to consult if the party be to have privilege.

Therefore seeing the Court has Coercion in it self, let us with the advice of
the Judges proceed as we have power: For if we give away our Coercion, we give
away our Jurisdiction.

Mr Sergeant Harris said, the Record remaining in Chancery, this House is
sufficiently possessed of it, even as in Case of all the Returns of Knights and
Burgesses.

Mr Francis Bacon said, The Return is well, for the Return is an ensuing of the
Writ that must be made under Seal.

As for taking the assistance of the Judges, it is a good course; for though we
sit here to make Laws, yet until the new Law is made, the old Law is of force,
and our Conference with them gives away no resolution from us, but takes
advice only from them.

Mr Finch said, in my opinion the Return should have been into this House. For
a Writ of Error sued here, the Writ Vide 38 H. 8. fol. 60. a. Dyer.
used to be returned hither, as it appears in 3 E. 3. and 17 Edw. 3. and 1 H.
7.

It would seem by Trewinnards Case 38 H. 8. that a Writ of privilege is never
returned, but the party appearing the Court proceeds.

Mr Speaker desired to know of the House if for their better Information, they
would give him leave to speak; which the House willingly granted.

Whereupon he said: For the discharge of my own duty, and informing of your
Judgments, who I know will judge wisely and justly, I will deliver unto you
what I have learned, and what I have observed; for ever since the lodging of
this Parliament, I have thought upon and searched after this Question, not
particularly for this Cause, but this point, the privilege of the House; for I
judged it, would come in question for many occasions.

The Question is drawn to two Heads, the one about the Writ, the other about
the Return.

First, Whether the Writ might have gone out of this House. I will tell you
plainly my opinion, I beseech you let me not be ill thought of, if I be rude in
what I say, for it is my fault, I cannot speak so mildly as some; but my manner
is, that which I speak, I speak sharply and somewhat roundly, but always with
this tacit Condition, submitting my self to any better reason that shall be
shown me.

Though any Court of Record has this Jurisdiction to make out Processes, yet
this Court cannot. Why? this may seem strange, that every Court in Westminster,
every Court that has Causes of Plea, every Lords Leet, and every Court Baron
has his power, that they may make out Process; yet this Court being the
highest of all Courts cannot; how can this be? The nature of this House must be
considered; for this Court is not a Court alone; and yet there are some things
wherein this Court is a Court by it self, and other things wherein it is no
Court of it self.

To know then how we are one House, and how we can be divided Houses, this
would give great light to the Question.

At the first we were all one House and sat together, by a precedent which I
have of a Parliament holden before the Conquest by Edward the Son of Etheldred.
For there were Parliaments before the Conquest. This appears in a Book which
a grave Member of this House delivered unto me, which is Entitled Modus
tenendi Parliamentum; out of that Book I learn this, and if any man desire to
see it, I will show it him. And this Book declares how we all sat together,
but the Commons sitting in presence of the King and amongst the Nobles disliked
it, and found fault that they had not free liberty to speak. And upon this
reason that they might speak more freely, being out of the Royal sight of the
King, and not amongst the great Lords so far their betters, the House was
divided and came to sit asunder.

A bold and worthy Knight at the time when this was sought, (the King desiring
a reason of this their request, and why they would remove themselves from their
Betters) Answered shortly, That his Majesty and the Nobles being every one a
great person, represented but themselves; but his Commons though they were but
inferior men, yet every one of them represented a thousand of men. And this
Answer was well allowed of.

But now though we be divided in Seat, be we therefore divided Houses? No; for
if any Writ of Error be brought, as you shall see a notable Case in 22 E. 3.
this Writ must be returned in Parliament, that is, to the whole House, and
chiefly then to the Upper House, for we are but a limb of the House. Now where
a Record is removed upon a Writ of Error given to another Court, the manner is,
that the chief of that Court bring the Writ in his hand to the House: But
humbly shows unto the House, that the Record being remitted out of the Court,
no Execution can go forth though the Judgment be affirmed. The Court of
Parliament thereupon makes Transcript of the whole Record, and returns the
Record again to the Court; but if the Judgment be reversed, then the Record it
self is Cancelled and rased. This I read in my Book.

For in this Case, whatsoever a man tells me (...) believe it not unless I see
it written, Non lego non credo, in these Cases. In the twenty third of the
Queen, I was of Council with one in a Cause where we tried all means to reverse
a Judgment, and brought a Writ of Error in the Parliament, and the Writ was
issuing out of the Parliament, and upon the fieri facias was set Domina Regina,
and it was under the Great Seal of England, and the Writ was returned in
Parliament.

So this is plain the Writ is always returnable in Parliament; but if in
Parliament, then of the Upper House, for of that House we are but a Limb. This
Writ I have seen then thus returned, but never any man saw a Writ returnable in
the Lower House; so for this I hold the Writ cannot be returnable into this
House.

But now for the Authority we have, for though this be true, I say, yet I speak
not to take any privilege from this House; for some things there are wherein
we have Authority all of us. But this is certain whatsoever we do sedente
Parliamento, it is the Act of the whole Court; for the Lords without the
Commons, and the Commons without the Lords, can do nothing: Now then at the
first before the division of the House, all Writs were returned proximo
Parliamento; but since the division of the House it has been always used, and
plainly it must be returned into Chancery.

And to say we cannot have notice of it, nor cannot judge upon the Record being
in Chancery plainly, we may as well as we do upon the Return of every Burgess
which is made into the Chancery, and the Cause is all one.

And the Chancery in making the Writ will not alter from that their Warrant
made from this House, which must be according unto ancient form: for waiting
the other day upon my Lord Keeper by your Commandments for the making of this
Writ, I desired to have a recital added in these words, Quod cum existente
Parliamento captus fuit, etc. with the recital of the Cause of privilege. My
Lord Keeper conferring with the Judges upon it, would not allow it, but thought
better the usual form of Habeas Corpus should be kept without any suspicion of
privilege, until there appeared a Cause of privilege for the party.

As for the Book of 38 H. 8. Trewinnards Case recited in my Lord Diers, I have
heard great learned men say, that that Cause is no good Law, and that the House
did more than was warrantable.

Now for the Motion of Conference with the Judges, the Case of Thorpe 31 H. 6.
is not able for this point: I have the Record. Thorpe was Speaker in that
Parliament, The Parliament being Summoned to be in June, it was Prorogued until
September; in the mean time, Thorpe was taken in Execution by the Duke of York;
he notwithstanding this thought to have had the privilege of the Parliament.
At the next Sessions, the matter being greatly considered, whether he could
have a privilege or no, a Conference was had in the Cause with the Judges; the
Judges being required in humble sort refused, except it were so that the House
did command them (for in the House of Parliament the chief Judges and their
Judgments are controulable by the Court) but if the House did command them,
they would be willing to inform them what in their opinions they knew and
thought.

This they did in the great Cause of Thorpe, and I think we should do well in
doing the like.

Now another thing is to be considered, for Judicis Officium est ut res it a
temperari, etc. The consideration of Time must accompany a Judges Office, the
Parliament draws to an end, and this would be done with expedition; so the
party was appointed to have his Council the next Morning in the Parliament, and
they to be heard and have the advice of the Judges. Vide the Resolution and
Conclusion of this business upon Thursday the 5th day of this instant April
ensuing.

Thus far out of the aforesaid Anonymous Journal; the residue of this days
Passages and part of the next are inserted out of the Original Journal Book it
self.

Mr Francis Bacon one of the Committees in this Bill for relief of Maimed
Soldiers and Mariners (appointed on Monday the 2d day of this instant April
foregoing) showed the meeting and travel of the said Committees and sundry
Amendments thought good to be offered by them to this House; and showing the
same Amendments with the reasons of them to the House, the same Amendments were
well liked of by this House, and assented to be inserted into this said Bill;
and after the twice reading of the said Amendments, the said Bill so being
amended was upon the question Ordered to be engrossed.

Post Meridiem.

Four Bills of no great moment had each of them one reading; of which the first
being the Bill for Naturalizing of Justin Dormer and George Sheppy born beyond
the Seas, had its first reading.

On Wednesday the fourth day of April, Mr Barker one of the Committees in the
Bill concerning Spinners and Weavers (who had been appointed on Monday the 26th
day of March foregoing) showed the meeting and travel of the Committees and
their Amendments to the Bill, praying the reading of the same Amendments; which
being read and ordered by the House to be inserted into the Bill, the same
Amendments were afterward twice read, and the Bill was upon the Question
Ordered to be Engrossed.

Mr Wroth, one of the Committees in the Bill concerning Brewers, showed the
meeting and travel of the Committees, and their Amendments to the said Bill,
and prays the reading of the same Amendments; which being read, and Ordered
by the House to be inserted in the said Bill, and also twice read afterward,
was upon the Question Ordered to be engrossed.

The Bill for Explanation of a Branch of a Statute made in the twenty third
year of her Majesty's Reign, Entitled an Act to retain the Queens Majesty's
Subjects in their due obedience, with some Amendments to the same, was read the
second time. Upon which diverse Speeches passed in the House before the said
Bill was committed, some of them being of very good moment. Which because they
are omitted in the Original Journal Book it self, are therefore supplied out of
the often before recited Anonymous Journal in manner and form following.

Sir Thomas Cecill, Doctor Lewen, Mr Sands, Sir Thomas Heneage, Sir Edward
Dimock and some others spoke diversely to this Bill touching the Explanation of
a Branch of the Statute made in Anno 23 Regin. Eliz. for reducing disloyal
Subjects to their due obedience, as is aforesaid.

Sir Walter Raleigh said, In my conceit the Brownists are worthy to be rooted
out of a Commonwealth: But what danger may grow to our selves if this Law pass,
it were fit to be considered. For it is to be feared, that men not guilty, will
be included in it. And that Law is hard that takes life and sends into
banishment, where men's intentions shall be judged by a Jury, and they shall be
Judges what another means. But that Law that is against a Fact, is but just;
and punish the fact as severeley as you will.

If two or three thousand Brownists meet at the Sea, at whose charge shall they
be transported, or whither will you send them? I am forry for it, I am afraid
there is near twenty thousand of them in England, and when they be gone, who
shall maintain their Wives and Children.

Mr Finch said, There be great faults in the Preamble and in the Body of this
Bill. It pretends a punishment only to the Brownists and Sectaries, but
throughout the whole Bill, not one thing that concerns a Brownist; and if we
make a Law against Barrowists and Brownists, let us set down a Note of them,
who they are. But as the Bill is, not to come to Church, or to speak against
the government established, this is not the opinion of the Brownists.

The Law that is entitled An Explanation, is nothing else, save that it has a
name of it. For Laws Explanatory are no New Laws of themselves, but part of the
old; for there ought to be nothing in the declaratory Law that was not in the
former, as appears in the Cause of Surnand and Stowell, the Statute of 32
Hen. 8. being but an Explanation of 4. H. 7.

This Law being allowed to be an Explanation of 25. makes all the offenders in
that Statute to be Traitors. This Law excepts no Person; So all are in the
former penalties of that Law: for 23 of Eliz. is only for such as are of the
Romish Religion; and now to make it include all the opinions, is to make
additions to that but no Explanations.

The Clause of speaking against the Law is very dangerous; For who can be safe
from this? Non Hospes ab hospite tutus. For if a man speak against
Non-Residents, Excommunication as it is used, or any other abuse in the Church,
he incurs the danger of the Law.

The Clause against Conventicles is very dangerous. For the Conference of any
Persons together being of any number, the Prayers of Holy Exercise, being not
allowable in any place by the Law, is an assembling against the Laws: for the
words be very strict, howsoever not contrary to the Law, the offense is all one.

Now in the body of the Law the words Ecclesiastical are not such as be meant
in primo of the Queen, but such as are intended in this Statute. And the
annexing of the words, He must be an obstinate Recusant, and also write and
speak, etc. This is very suspicious, for Obscuris vera is never good.

Whosoever repaireth not to his own Parish Church is a Recusant within this
Law. Vide Apr. 6. die Veneris sequent.

Thus far out of the aforesaid Anonymous, Journal; the residue of this days
passages and part of the next are transcribed out of the Original Journal Book
it self.

After which said Speeches touching the Bill of Explanation of the Branch of a
Statute made in the twenty third year of the Queen for reducing of disloyal
Subjects to their due obedience, the said Bill in the end was committed unto
all the Privy Council, Sir Walter Raleigh, Sir Henry Unton, Sir Francis
Hastings, Doctor Jo. James, Doctor Lewen, Mr Doctor Caesar, Sir William Moore,
Mr Francis Bacon, Mr Sergeant Harris, Mr Wroth, Sir Thomas Cecill, Mr Finch, Mr
Skinner, Mr Mainard, Mr George Moore, Sir Henry Cock, Mr Fuller, Mr. Robert
Knowls, Sir William Knowls, Sir Edward Dymock, Sir Edward Stafford, Mr. Edward
Lewkenor, Mr. Henry Brett, Mr. Periam, Sir Thomas Dennies, Sir Robert Sydney,
Mr. Wroth, Sir. William Bows, Mr. Atie, Mr. Helcroft, Sir Thomas West, Sir
Matthew Morgan, Mr Berkeley, Mr. Sands, Mr. Boucher, Mr. John Payton, Sir
Richard Molineux, Mr. Tasborough, Mr. Horsey, Mr. Attorney of the Duchy, Mr.
Finch, Mr. Fuller, Mr. Amersam, Sir George Carry, and Sir George St Poole, and
the Bill was delivered to Mr. Treasurer, who with the rest was appointed to
meet in this House, to Morrow at two of the Clock in the Afternoon.

Mr. Sergeant Owen and Mr. Attorney General do bring word from the Lords, that
their Lordships do pray Conference with some selected Members of this House to
be held this Afternoon, touching the Bill for the reviving, continuance,
explanation and perfecting of certain Statutes lately passed this House, and
sent up to their Lordships, and do show that their Lordships for that purpose
have made choice of twenty of themselves whereupon the said Mr. Attorney and
Mr. Sergeant Owen being sequestered, and the Message declared to the House by
Mr. Speaker, it was required by the House, that forasmuch as the Bill last read
was then, and long before had been in dispute and Argument, Answer thereof
might be returned unto their Lordships, that this House prays that a
Committee of this House may rather wait upon their Lordships in the Afternoon
(for that the House is now occupied in Speeches and Arguments to a Bill which
came into this House from their Lordships) Which being so signified to the said
Mr Sergeant Owen and Mr Attorney General accordingly, shortly after Mr Doctor
Carey and Mr Powle brought word from the Lords, that their Lordships would be
ready this Afternoon to confer with the Committees of this House, in the
Chamber next to the Upper House. Which done, it was Ordered that the former
Committees of this House, (who had been nominated on Monday the 28th day of
March foregoing) be appointed to attend their Lordships at the said time and
place, and a note of the Committees names were delivered to Mr Treasurer.

On Thursday the 5th day of April, the Bill for true Assizing and marking of
Timber was read the second time, and committed unto Mr George Moore, Mr Dalton,
Mr Wroth, Mr Brown, Sir John Heart and others, and the Bill was delivered to
the said Sir John Heart, who with the rest was appointed to meet to Morrow at
two of the Clock in the Afternoon in the Exchequer Chamber.

Mr Sergeant Owen and Mr Doctor Powle do bring from the Lords a Bill Entitled
An Act for Explanation of the Statute made in the thirty fourth year of King
Henry the Eighth, as well touching Grants made to his Majesty, as for
Confirmation of the Letters Patents made by his Highness to others, and do pray
from their Lordships the speedy Execution of the same.

Mr Vice-Chamberlain, one of the Committees with the Committees of the Lords in
the Bill for reviving, continuing, explanation and perfecting of certain
statutes, shows the meeting and Conference with the Committees of the Lords,
and that their Lordships have thought good to add some small Amendments to the
said Bill; and a Proviso also for her Majesty's Prerogative in the point of
Transportation of Corn, as the like whereof was in the Statute of 13o of her
Majesty's Reign.

Nota, That the business so much before agitated touching Mr Fitzherbert
received this day the final resolution of the House, as is plainly set down in
the often before-cited Anonymous Journal, although it be wholly omitted in the
Original Journal Book it self, which said Case was singly this. Thomas
Fitzherberts being elected a Burgess of the Parliament, two hours after his
Election and before the return of the Writ to the Sheriff with the Indenture of
his Election, the said Sheriff Arresteth him upon a Capias utlagatum in an
Outlawry after Judgment at the Queens Suit (as may be collected out of the
reasons given of their said Resolution) and then his Indenture was returned to
the Sheriff. Upon all which matters there grew two Questions; First, whether
the said Mr Fitzherbert were a Member of the House; And secondly admitting he
were, yet whether he ought to have privilege. Which said matters having been
formerly much debated on Thursday the first day, Friday the second, Saturday
the 17th day, and on Friday the 30th day of March last past, as also on Tuesday
the third day of this instant April foregoing, received now at last the
Judgment of the House, which is inserted out of the aforesaid Anonymous Journal
in manner and form following.

The Judgment of the House was, That Thomas Fitzherbert was by his Election a
Member thereof; yet that he ought not to have privilege in three respects.
First, Because he was taken in Execution before the return of the Indenture of
his Election; Secondly, Because he had been Outlawed at the Queens Suit, and
was now taken in Execution for her Majesty's debt; Thirdly and lastly, in
regard that he was so taken by the Sheriff, neither Sedente Parliamento, nor
eundo nor redeundo.

Thus far out of the aforesaid Anonymous Journal; the rest of this present
Journal that ensues to the very end and dissolution thereof is wholly supplied
out of the Original Journal Book it self.

The Bill concerning Clapboards and Casks (which as it seems was read
presently after the foresaid resolution of the House given in the said Case of
Mr Fitzherbert) had the third reading and passed upon the Question.

Mr Attorney General and Mr Doctor Carey do bring from the Lords the Bill for
renewing, continuing, explanation and perfecting of certain Statutes, lately
passed this House with some Amendments, and a Proviso; which Bill was sent up
to their Lordships from this House.

The Bill for necessary relief of Soldiers and Mariners was read the third
time, and passed upon the Question.

Upon a Motion made by Francis Neale Esquire, one of the Burgesses for the Borough
of Grantham in the County of Lincoln, That he was upon Sunday last in the
Afternoon Arrested upon an Execution by a Sergeant called John Lightburn, at
the Suit of one Wessellen Weblen a Beer-Brewer; and showing further, that he
had satisfied the money due upon the said Execution; but yet nevertheless in
regard of the preservation of the Liberties and privileges of this House
thought it his duty to make this House acquainted with the matter, and so refer
and leave it to their grave Wisdoms. Whereupon it was upon the Question
Ordered, that the Sergeant of this House should in the name of this House give
warning unto the said Weblen and Lightborn to give their attendance upon this
House to Morrow, to answer their contempt accordingly. Vide diem sequentem.

On Friday the 6th day of March, Two Bills of no great moment had each of them
one reading; of which the second being the Bill for restraint of new building,
converting of great Houses into several Tenements, and for restraint of Inmates
and Enclosures in and near unto the City of London and Westminster, was upon
the second reading committed unto all the Privy Council, the Knights and
Burgesses of London, Mr Francis Bacon and others; and the Bill was delivered to
Mr Wroth, one of the said Committees, who with the rest was appointed to meet
this Afternoon in the Exchequer Chamber.

The Bill concerning Devonshire Kerseys was read the third time and passed upon
the Question.

The Proviso in the Bill for reviving, continuing, Explanation and perfecting
of certain Statutes (the Amendments being first read and Ordered afterward to
be inserted) was three times read, and they were all passed upon the question
accordingly.

The Proviso of the Lords to explain the Amendments of this House in the Bill
which passed their Lordships and was sent down to this House for the
restraining of Popish Recusants to some certain places of abode, was three
times read and passed upon the Question.

The Bill to make void the Spiritual Livings of those that have forsaken the
Realm, and do cleave to the Pope and his Religion, was read the third time and
passed upon the Question.

Eight Bills which lately passed this House, viz. the Bill to give liberty to
the Lord Harrowden to sell certain Lands for the payment of his debts, The Bill
concerning Spinners and Weavers, The Bill touching Clap-boards and Casks, The
Bill for relief of Soldiers and Mariners, The Bill concerning Devonshire
Kerseys, The Bill for reviving and perfecting diverse Statutes, with a new
Proviso, The Bill for restraining of Popish Recusants to some certain places of
abode, And the Bill to make void the Spiritual Livings of those that have
forsaken the Realm, and do cleave to the Pope and his Religion, were sent up to
the Lords by Mr Treasurer and others.

Mr Doctor Carey and Mr Powle do bring from the Lords a Bill Entitled An Act
for the avoiding of deceit used in making and selling of twice laid Cordage,
and for the better preserving of the Navy of this Realm; and prayed from their
Lordships the speedy expediting of the same Bill, for that this Parliament
draws near unto an end. Whereupon the same Bill was twice read and committed
unto Sir Walter Raleigh, Sir Francis Drake, Mr Lewkenor, Mr Wroth, Mr Finch and
Mr Flower; and the Bill was delivered to Sir Francis Drake, who were appointed
to meet in the Afternoon of this present day.

The Bill against persons Outlawed and such as will not pay their debts was
read the second and third time, and dashed upon the question.

Mr Vice-Chamberlain, one of the Committees in the Bill for Explanation of a
branch made in the twenty third year of her Majesty's Reign Entitled An Act to
retain the Queens Majesty's Subjects in their due obedience, with some Addition
to the same, showed the meeting of the said Committees yesterday, their long
tarrying together, in the end their desisting without any determinable
resolutions, occasioned by reason of many and sundry Arguments and opinions,
and afterward somewhat intimating the unkindness of the Lords in neglecting
the said Bill in this House; advises, that a Conference be prayed with their
Lordships for the better effecting of a convenient Law to be provided for
meeting with the disordered Barrowists and Brownists, without peril of
intrapping honest and loyal Subjects. Which in the end after sundry Speeches
both with the Motion and against it, it was presently upon the Question
assented unto, and Ordered, that Mr Vice-Chamberlain, accompanied with a
convenient number of the Members of this House, should presently repair to the
Lords to move the said Conference accordingly. Which so being done, the said Mr
Vice-Chamberlain showed, that their Lordships had willingly assented unto the
said Conference, and did appoint for that purpose the time to be at two of the
Clock this Afternoon in the accustomed place. Which done, it was Ordered that
the former Committees (who were appointed on Wednesday the 4th day of this
instant April foregoing) should then and there attend their Lordships. And the
Bill was delivered to Mr Vice-Chamberlain.

Wesselen Weblen Beer-Brewer and John Lightburn Sergeant at Mace, being present
at the Bar, and charged by Mr Speaker very deeply and amply with their great
contempt against the Authority and Jurisdiction of this most High Court of
Parliament, in Arresting of Mr Francis Neale, one of the Members of this
Honorable Assembly, to the great prejudice and derogation of the ancient and
usual Liberties and Privileges of this House; They the said Weblen and
Lightburn humbly submitted themselves, and pretended by Ignorance to extenuate
their faults. Which done, and they being sequestered, after some Speeches and
debates touching the punishment of the said Weblen and Lightburn, some one way
and some another; it was in the end resolved upon the Question, that they
should be committed Prisoners to the Tower by Order of this House, there to
remain during the pleasure of this House. And then afterward the said Weblen
and Lightburn being brought in again to the Bar, Mr Speaker remembering again
unto them the hainousness of their offense, pronounced unto them the said
Judgment of this House; and gave charge unto the Sergeant of this House to
deliver the said Weblen and Lightburn unto Mr Lieutenant of the Tower according
to the said Order and Judgment of this House against them. Vide in principio
diei praecedentis.

On Saturday the 7th day of April, the Bill concerning Coopers was upon the
second reading committed unto Mr Sergeant Harris, Mr Dalton, Mr Wroth and
others, and the Bill was delivered to Sir John Heart one of the same Committees,
who with the rest was appointed to meet at two of the Clock this Afternoon in
the Exchequer Chamber.

The Bill for Naturalizing of Justin Dormer and George Sheppy, was upon the
second reading Ordered to be engrossed.

Mr Finch, one of the Committees in the Bill for the avoiding of deceit used in
making and selling of twice laid Cordage, and for the better preserving of the
Navy of this Realm, showed the meeting of the Committees and some few
Amendments to the Bill, praying the reading of the same Amendments; which being
read and allowed by the House, the said Amendments were twice read, and the
Bill and the said Amendments also read the third time and passed upon the
Question accordingly.

Sir John Heart, one of the Committees in the Bill for the true assizing and
marking of Timber (appointed on Thursday the 5th day of this instant April
foregoing) showed the meeting of the Committees, and their opinion of nothing
fit to be done without much inconvenience in the said Bill at all, and so
delivers in the said Bill again to the House.

The Bill for the Explanation of the Statute made in the thirty fourth year of
King Henry the Eighth, as well touching Grants made to his Majesty, as for
Confirmation of Letters Patents made by his Highness to others, was upon the
second reading committed unto all the Privy Council, Mr Amersham, Mr Attorney
of the Duchy, Sir Francis Drake, Sir Walter Raleigh and others; and the Bill
was delivered to Mr. Chancellor of the Exchequer, together with the Committees
Names, who with the rest was appointed to meet at two of the Clock this
Afternoon in the Exchequer Chamber.

Mr. Tasborough moves the reading of the Amendments of the Bill for the ease
of Jurors returned upon Trial, which Amendments being twice read, the Bill was
upon the Question Ordered to be engrossed.

Mr. Vice-Chamberlain, one of the Committees in the Bill for Explanation of a
branch of a Statute made in the twenty third year of her Majesty's Reign
Entitled An Act to retain the Queens Majesty's Subjects in their due
Obedience, with some Additions to the same (who had been appointed on Wednesday
the 4th day of this instant April foregoing) showed the meeting with the Lords
in Conference, and withal the very honorable and grateful acception and
allowance of their Lordships unto all the reasons of this House offered unto
their Lordships by the said Committees of this House; and so concluding showed
that such Additions, Substractions and Alterations have been made, as by the
good liking as well of the said Committees of the Lords. as by the more part of
the said Committees of this House was thought fit; and so moved that the same
Additions, Substractions and Alterations might be read to the House for the
further liking of this House in the same, at their pleasures. Which being so
read accordingly, it was after sundry contrary Arguments Ordered, that some of
the former Committees of this House should presently have further consideration
thereof in the Committee Chamber of this House, which was thereupon so done
accordingly. Vide concerning this matter on Wednesday the 4th day of this
instant April foregoing.

Mr Sergeant Owen and Mr Doctor Ford do bring from the Lords the Bill lately
passed this House for Mr Anthony Cook, with a saving now added by their
Lordships; And the Bill also for the Relief of Soldiers and Mariners, likewise
lately passed this House, with some Additions now also added to the same by
their Lordships.

The saving in the Bill for Mr Anthony Cook lately sent down to this House
from the Lords, was three times read, and so passed upon the Question.

The additions in the Bill for the relief of Soldiers and Mariners lately sent
down to this House by the Lords were three times read, and upon the Question
passed, and were ordered to be inserted into the same Bill.

The Bill concerning Brewers and the Brewing of Beer and Ale was read the third
time, and passed upon the Qestion.

The Bill for maintenance of Cloth-making in the Town of Crambrook in the
County of Kent was read the second time, and Ordered not to be committed.

The Bill for naturalizing of Justin Dormer and George Sheppy had its third
reading, and passed upon the Question.

The Bill for Explanation of a Branch of a Statute made the 23th of her
Majesty's Reign, entitled An Act to retain the Queens Majesty's Subjects in
their due obedience, with some Additions to the same, was read the third time;
And all the Additions and Amendments of this House to the same Bill being also
three times read, the said Bill with some Additions and Amendments passed upon
the Question.

On Monday the 9th day of April, Wesselen Weblen Bear-Brewer and John Lightburn
Sergeant at Mace Prisoners at the Bar, are after admonition given them by Mr
Speaker discharged by the Order of this House of their Imprisonment, paying
their Fees. Vide concerning this matter on Thursday the 5th day and on Friday
the 6th day of this instant April immediately foregoing.

Mr Chancellor of the Exchequer, one of the Committees in the Bill for
Explanation of a Statute made in the thirty fourth year of King Hen. 8. as well
touching Grants made to his Majesty, as for Confirmation of Letters Patents
made by his Highness to others, showed the meeting of the Committees, and that
they have considered of some small amendments; and showed further, that four
several Provisoes were offered to them touching the said Bill, one by Mr Adams
and one by Mr..... Tipper, and one by Mr Daws; and so offers both the Bill
and the Amendments, and the said former Provisoes also, leaving all the same to
the further consideration of this House.

Six Bills which last passed this House; of which the first was the Bill for
avoiding of deceit used in making and selling of twice laid Cordage, and for
the better preserving of the Navy of this Realm, and the second for Mr. Anthony
Cook, were sent up to the Lords by Sir Robert Cecil and others.

Upon sundry arguments touching the Proviso offered by Sir Thomas Shirley to
the Bill for Explanation of the Statute of 34 Hen. 8. etc. it was upon the
Question denied to be received, and the Proviso for Mr. Stanhop was upon the
Question and division of the House denied to be received, with the difference
of forty Persons, viz. with the No one hundred twenty nine, and with the Yea
eighty nine.

Mr. Sergeant Owen and Doctor Carey do bring word from their Lordships that
their Lordships do desire to know whether this House have any Bills ready to
send up unto them, showing that their Lordships are now at good leisure: And
willed them to put this House in remembrance of the expediting of two Bills
which were sent from their Lordships to this House, viz. the Bill for
Explanation of the Statute made in the thirty fourth year of King Hen. 8. a
Bill touching Grants made to his Majesty, as also for Confirmation of Letters
Patents made by his Highness to others; and the Bill for restraint of new
Buildings, etc. Which Message being opened to the House, Answer was made that
one of the said Bills being presently in debate in the House, should by and by
be returned unto their Lordships.

The Bill for Explanation of the Statute made in the thirty fourth year of King
Hen. 8 as well touching Grants made to his Majesty as for Confirmation of
Letters Patents made by his Highness to others, was read the third time, and
passed upon the Question, and was presently sent up to the Lords by Mr.
Vice-Chamberlain and others.

Mr. Fuller, one of the Committees in the Bill for restraint of new Buildings
and converting of great Houses into several Tenements and restraint of Inmates,
and Enclosures in and near the Cities of London and Westminster (who had been
appointed on Friday the 6th day of this instant April foregoing) showed the
meeting and Travel of the Committees and their Opinions for leaving out of one
Clause in the Bill, and gave the Reasons; which being liked of and allowed by
the House, the Bill was read the third time, and after many Arguments both for
the Bill and against the Bill, it passed upon the Question.

On Tuesday the 10th day of April Sir John Heart, one of the Committees in the
Bill concerning Coopers (appointed on Saturday the 24th day of March foregoing)
brought in the Bill again, as not dealt in by the Committees for lack of
convenient time.

The Bill for restraint of new building, converting of great Houses into
several Tenements, and for restraint of Inmates and Enclosures in and near unto
the Cities of London and Westminster, with one amendment to the same Bill, was
sent up to the Lords by Mr Treasurer, Sir John Wolley and others, with a
remembrance to move their Lordships for sending down the Bill for the Grant of
three entire Subsidies and six Fifteenths and Tenths granted by the Temporalty,
to the end Mr Speaker may this Afternoon present the same unto her Majesty
according to the former accustomed usage of this House.

Mr Sergeant Owen, Mr Attorney General and Mr Powle do bring from the Lords an
Act entitled An Act for the Queens Majesty's most Gracious general and free
Pardon.

The Bill entitled an Act for the Queens Majesty's most gracious general and
free Pardon was read, and then passed upon the Question, and was presently sent
up to the Lords by Mr. Chancellor of the Exchequer and others.

Post Meridiem.

This day in the Afternoon the Queens Majesty came into the Upper House of
Parliament, and there sitting in her Royal Throne, Mr Speaker accompanied with
the Knights, Citizens and Burgesses of the House of Commons, repaired unto the
said Upper House, where making an Excellent Oration unto her Highness, and
giving unto her Majesty most humble thanks on the behalf of this House for her
Highness most gracious and favorable acceptance of their dutiful service, and
offering unto her Majesty in their names the Act for three entire Subsidies and
six Fifteenths and Tenths, her Highness gave the Royal assent to fourteen
public Bills and thirteen private Bills, and so dissolved this Parliament.

THE JOURNAL OF THE House of LORDS.
An exact and perfect Journal of the House of Lords in the Parliament holden at
Westminster, Anno 39 Reginae Eliz. Anno Domini 1597. which began there on
Monday the 24th Day of October, and then and there continued until the
Dissolution thereof on Thursday the 9th Day of February Anno 40. Reginae
ejusdem.

THIS Journal of the House of Lords and all the rest that have since followed
both the Queens Reign and in the Reigns of King James and King Charles her
Successors, unto this present year 1629. have been more exactly and largely
taken than before. For Thomas Smith Esquire now succeeding unto Anthony Mason
Esquire, formerly Clerk of the said House of Lords, was much more careful in
observing and setting down the daily passages thereof this Parliament than the
said Mr Mason had been. In which, the said Sir Thomas Smith's successors (for
he was afterward Knighted) have much exceeded him also, by the large and
diligent digesting of the particular agitations of every day upon which the
said House did sit. Only the Return of the Vide Gul. Camd. Anno Regin. Eliz.
edit. Lugdun Batavorum An. Dom. 1625. page 682.
Proxies (as is presently more fully declared) was more distinctly entered by
the abovenamed Mr Anthony Mason, than has been since accustomed. At this
Parliament also there succeeded a new Lord Keeper: For Sir John Puckering
deceasing in A. D. 1596. the Custody of the Great Seal was committed unto Sir
Tho. Egerton, then her Majesty's Attorney General, who at this present and many
years after supplied that place. Neither finally does this ensuing Journal want
either matter of rarity in respect of the Lord La Ware's right settling in his
former place, which had been for a while discontinued, or matter of very good
Precedent in respect of some Questions that arose betwixt the two Houses
touching the manner and form of the Lord Keeper's delivering the Answer of the
Lords to such Members of the House of Commons as should at any time be sent up
unto their Lordships with any Message or Bill.

Before the particular Relation of each days passages in this present
Parliament be inserted out of the Original Journal Book of the Upper House, the
extraordinary and unusual Proxies (entered also at the beginning thereof) which
had been returned and delivered in unto the Clerk of the said House during the
continuance of the same, are here in the next place to be transcribed and set
down all of them together, and cannot be so orderly digested, and referred to
each day on which they were returned, as formerly they have been. For whereas
before this Parliament Henry Spilman and Anthony Mason Esquires, who had been
successively Clerks of the said Upper House, did usually enter the said Proxies
at the beginning of each Journal, upon the days on which they were introducted
or returned; Now Thomas Smith Esquire succeeding the said Anthony Mason, did
only generally enter them at the beginning of this present Journal, as had been
formerly accustomed, without any distinct setting down the several days on
which they had been introducted and delivered unto him. Which course having
been also since followed unto this present year 1629. the said Proxies can be
no more referred to their proper days, but must be once for all generally set
down in this present Journal and in diverse others ensuing before the beginning
of the said Journal, in manner and form following.

Literae procuratoriae in hoc Parliamento sunt allatae
Archiepiscopi Eboracen' Matthaei, etc. qui Procuratores suos constituit
Johannem Archiepiscopum Cantuarien', Richardum Episcopum London', Tobiam
Episcopum Dunelmen', and Richardum Episcopum Cestren' conjunctim and divisim.

Nota, That whereas there is an, etc. after the word Matthaei in the Proxy
foregoing, it seems that these words are left out, viz. absentis ex licentia
Dominae Reginae; and so if nothing had been omitted, the said Proxy, as may
very probably be conjectured, should have been thus inserted, Archiepiscopi
Eboracen' Matthaei absentis ex licentia Dominae Reginae, qui Procuratores, etc.
as is before set down.

Nota also, That these Proxies are all entered in the Genitive Case, and must
therefore be severally referred to those foregoing words, viz. Literae
Procuratoriae in hoc Parliamento sunt allatae

Tobiae Episcopi Dunelmen', qui Procuratores suos constituit Richardum
Episcopum London', Johannem Episcopum Wintonien' and Herbertum Episcopum
Hereforden' conjunctim and divisim.

Johannis Episcopi Carliolen', qui Procuratorem suum constituit Johannem
Archiepiscopum Cantuarien'.

Willielmi Episcopi Asaphen', qui Procuratores suos constituit Johannem
Archiepiscopum Cantuarien', Richardum Episcopum London', and Johannem Episcopum
Bathon' and Wellen', conjunctim and divisim.

Willielmi Episcopi Lincoln', qui Procuratorem suum constituit Johannem
Archiepiscopum Cantuarien'.

Herberti Episcopi Hereforden', qui suos Procuratores constituit Episcopos
Roffen', Coventr' and Litchfield', and Norwicen'.

Antonii Episcopi Meneven', qui Procuratores suos constituit Episcopos Wigorn',
Bathon' and Wellen', and Norwicen'.

Note that the Bishops Proxies are set before the Proxies of the Temporal
Lords, not because (as I suppose) they were all returned first, but because of
their Ecclesiastical Dignity, and in respect that the Archbishop of Canterbury,
one of their Order, is the first Peer of the Realm. Whence also their names are
usually first set down in the Journal Book, where the presence of the Lords is
noted each day when they sit, as long as the Parliament continues.

There were also nine Temporal Lords which this Parliament sent their Proxies,
but in respect that according to the common use, each of them constituted but
one Proctor apiece, they are omitted as not worthy the observation. Only the
last of them, being the Lord Willoughbies Proxy of Eresby, I thought good to
have inserted, because some exotic Titles are given him it it, viz.

Peregrini Domini Willoughby Beak and Eresby, qui suum Procuratorem constituit
Edwardum Dominum Zouch.

Nota, That all the foregoing Proxies, which were sent from the Bishops, were
extraordinary or unusual Proxies, in which a Spiritual Lord did constitute but
one Proctor or more than two; whereas usually the Bishops do constitute two
Proctors apiece, and the Temporal Lords but one.

And now the aforesaid Proxies being thus inserted, the particular relation of
some Passages of each day during the continuance of this Parliament are in the
next place transcribed out of the Original Journal Book of the Upper House, and
some part also now at the very beginning out of a certain fragmentary and
imperfect Journal of the House of Commons taken at this Parliament by a Member
of the same.

On Monday the 24th day of October the Parliament began, and her Majesty with
the greatest part of the Nobility, and others, in great state and comely
manner, came from her Palace of Whitehall toward Westminster Church about one
of the Clock in the Afternoon, riding in a Chariot open, all covered over head
Canopy-wise with Cloth of Tissue or Cloth of Silver. Where after she had heard
a Sermon, she went on foot to the Parliament House.

The Lords Spiritual and Temporal present this day in the Upper House with her
Majesty are set down in the Journal Book to be these.

Johannes Archiepiscopus Cantuarien'. Thomas Egerton Miles, Dominus Custos
magni Sigilli. Dominus Burleigh Dominus Thesaurarius Angliae. Marchio Winton'.
Comites.
Comes Sussex, Magnus Marescallus. Comes Nottingham, Magnus Senescallus. Comes
Northumbr'. Comes Salop'. Comes Kantiae. Comes Wigorn'. Comes Cumberland. Comes
Bedford. Comes Hartford. Comes Lincolniae. Vice-Comes Bindon.
Episcopi.
Episcopus London'. Episcopus Winton'. Episcopus Roffen'. Episcopus Covent'.
and Litchf. Episcopus Gloucestren'. Episcopus Peterburgen'. Episcopus Hereford.
Episcopus Wigorn'. Episcopus Bathon'. and Wellen'. Episcopus Meneven'.
Episcopus Norwicen'. Episcopus Lincoln'. Episcopus Landaven'. Episcopus
Cestren'. Episcopus Cicestren'.
Barons.
Dominus Hunsdon Camerar'. Dominus Zouch. Dominus Berkley. Dominus Morley.
Dominus Cobham. Dominus Stafford. Dominus Scroope. Dominus Dudley. Dominus
Lumley. Dominus Darcy de Menell. Dominus Sands. Dominus Windsor. Dominus
Cromwell. Dominus Wharton. Dominus Rich. Dominus Willoughby de Parham. Dominus
Sheffield. Dominus Darcy de Chiche. Dominus North. Dominus Shandois. Dominus St
John de Bletso. Dominus Buckhurst. Dominus Compton.
These Lords Spiritual and Temporal being sat and her Majesty placed in her
Chair of Estate, the Knights, Citizens and Burgesses of the House of Commons
upon notice thereof repaired thither; and being (as many as conveniently could)
let in, Sir Thomas Egerton by her Majesty's Commandment spoke as follows, viz.

THE Queens most Excellent Majesty, my most Gracious and Dread Sovereign, has
commanded me to declare unto you my Lords, and others here present, the Causes
which have moved her Highness to summon this High Court of Parliament at this
time. Which before I can express, I must confess truly, That the Royal presence
of her Majesty, the view of your Lordships and this honorable Assembly,
together with the consideration of the weightiness of the service and my own
weakness, do much appal me, and cause me to fear. Wherefore if either through
fear I forget, or through the many wants and imperfections, which I have, I
fail to perform that duty which is required, I do most humbly crave pardon of
her Majesty, and beseech your Lordships to bear with me.

The great and Princely Care which her Highness now has, as heretofore she
has ever had, to preserve her Kingdoms in Peace and Safety from all Foreign
Attempts, has caused her at this present to assemble this honorable and great
Council of her Realm, to advise of the best and most needful means whereby to
continue this her peaceable happy Government, and to withstand the malice of
her weighty and implacable Enemies, which hitherto by the space of many years,
through her provident and Princely Wisdom has been performed, to the great and
inestimable benefit of her Subjects, as that the simplest amongst them could
not but see, and the wisest but admire their happiness therein, the whole Realm
enjoying Peace in all Security wherein our Neighbor Countries have been torn
in pieces and tormented continually with cruel and bloody Wars. This her
Majesty is pleased to ascribe to the mighty Power and Infinite Mercy of the
Almighty. And therefore it shall well become us all of all sorts most
thankfully upon the Knees of our Hearts to acknowledge no less unto his holy
name, who of his infinite goodness still preserves her Highness and send her
many years over us all in Happiness to Reign.

In this her blessed Government her Highness chief care and regard above all
has been of the Honor and Service of Almighty God, that true Religion might
be planted and maintained in the hearts of her people through all the parts of
her Realms; and as well in that behalf, as for the peace and benefits of her
Subjects she has from time to time established many good Laws to meet with the
disorders and to punish the offenses of wicked and ungodly men, that continuing
in their bad ways they might not be hardened and go forward in their wickedness.
For, Mora in peccato dat incrementum sceleri.

And whereas the number of Laws already made is very great, some of them being
obsolete and worn out of use, others idle and vain, serving to no purpose; some
again over-heavy and too severe for the offense, others too loose and slack for
the faults they are to punish; and many so full of difficulty to be understood,
that they cause many Controversies and much trouble to arise amongst the
Subjects. You are to enter into a due consideration of the Laws, and where you
find superfluity, to prune and cut off, where defect, to supply, and where
ambiguity, to explain, that they be not burdensome but profitable to the
Commonwealth. Which being a Service of importance and very needful to be
required; yet as nothing is to be regarded if due mean be not had to withstand
the malice and the force of those professed Enemies which seek the destruction
of the whole State, this before and above all is to be thought of, and with
most endeavor and care to be provided for. For in vain are Laws made, and to
little purpose will they serve, be they never so good, if such prevail as go
about to make a Conquest of the Kingdom. Wars heretofore were wont to be made
either of Ambition to enlarge Dominions, or of revenge to quit injuries: But
this against us is not so; in this the Holy Religion of God is sought to be
rooted out, the whole Realm to be subdued, and the precious life of her
Excellent Majesty to be taken away. Which hitherto, by the powerful hand and
great goodness of the Almighty, has been preserved, mauger the Devil, the Pope
and the Spanish Tyrant, and all the mischievous designs of all her Enemies.
Wherefore it is high time that this be looked unto, and that no way be left
unsought, nor means unused, which may serve for defense thereof. Her Majesty
has not spared to disburse a Mass of Treasure, and to sell her Land for
maintenance of her Armies by Sea and Land, whereby with such small helps as
from her Subjects have been yielded, she has defended and kept safe her
Dominions from all such forcible attempts as have been made. Which being still
to be performed by infinite charge, her Majesty does notwithstanding hear of
nothing more unwillingly than of Aids and Subsidies to be returned from her
people, though what she does receive, she does carefully bestow and infinitely
more of her own. The Taxations at this day, howsoever they seem, are nothing so
great as heretofore in the Reign of former Kings they have been. In the time of
Edward the third, the two next before him and those three which succeeded after
him, the payments of the Commons did far exceed any that have been since her
Majesty's Reign, which is of Record in Histories to be seen: but never cause so
great to employ great sums of Money as now. Now therefore you are to consider
how to provide needful and convenient Aid in some measure to maintain and
support her Majesty's exceeding charge, which at this present she is at, and is
to continue for the defense of the Realm. He cannot be well advised, who in
this case will not be forward to contribute and bestow whatsoever he has. For
if with the Commonwealth it go not well, well it cannot be with any private or
particular person, that being in danger. He that would seek to lay up Treasure,
and so enrich himself, should be like to him that would busy himself to
beautify his House when the City where he dwells, were on fire; or to deck up
his Cabin when the Ship wherein he saileth, were ready to drown, so as perish
he must of necessity either with it or for it. To spare in that Case is to
spare for those which seek to devour all; and to give, is to give to our
selves, her Majesty's part only being carefully to bestow what is delivered
into her hands. Wherein men performing their Duties, there is no Cause at all
to fear; for this War is just, it is in defense of the Religion of God, of our
most gracious Sovereign, and of our natural Country, of our Wives, our
Children, our Liberties, Lands, Lives, and whatsoever we have.

Wherefore not mistrusting your forwardness, that I may not offend in too much
enlarging of this point as a poor remembrance of her Majesty, I shortly say to
your Lordships, quod justum est, necessarium est; nothing can be more just than
this War; nothing ought to seem more necessary than carefully to provide due
maintenance for the same.

And to you of the House of Commons, to the end you may orderly proceed and
wisely consult of these weighty Causes delivered unto you, her Majesty's
pleasure is, you should according to your accustomed manner, go down to the
Lower House, and there make choice of some grave, wise, and Learned man among
you to be your Speaker, who shall be for an understanding sufficient, and for
discretion fit, as your Mouth to signify your minds, and to make your Petitions
known to her Highness, and him on Thursday next to present in this place.

Nota, that this foregoing Speech of the Lord Keeper is not found in the
Original Journal Book, of the Upper House, but is supplied by me out of a Copy
thereof lying by me, which I conceive to have been very truly transcribed out
of the Original; and I have always conceived it most proper to refer this and
such like other Speeches (if warranted by any good authority) to the Journal of
the said Upper House, because they are delivered in it, and only for Order sake
to have some short Memorial thereof in the Journal of the House of Commons.

As soon as the Lord Keeper had ended his Speech, and the Knights, Citizens and
Burgesses were departed down to their own House, the Clerk of the Upper House
read the Names of the Receivers and Triers of Petitions in French, which were
as follows, viz.

Receivers of Petitions for England, Ireland, France and Scotland.

Sir John Popham Lord Chief Justice, John Clinch one of the Justices of the
Kings Bench, Francis Gaudy one of the Justices of the said Bench, Dr. Carew and
Dr. Stanhop.

Receivers of Petitions for Gascoigne and other Lands and Countries beyond the
Seas, and the Isles.

Sir Edmund Anderson Knight Lord Chief Justice of the Common Pleas, Sir Willam
Perriam Knight Lord Chief Baron, Thomas Walmesley one of the Justices of the
said Common Pleas, Dr. Lewen and Dr. Cousins; and they who will deliver
Petitions, to deliver them within six days.

Tryers of Petitions for England, Ireland, Wales and Scotland.

The Archbishop of Canterbury, the Marquess of Winchester, the Earl of Sussex
great Marshal, the Earl of Nottingham Lord Steward of the Queens Household and
Lord Admiral of England, the Bishop of London, the Bishop of Winchester, the
Lord Cobham and the Lord North.

All these Lords and Prelates or any four of them calling unto them the Keeper
of the Great Seal and the Lord Treasurer, and also the Queens Sergeants, shall
hold their place, when their leisure serves, in the Chamberlains Chamber.

Tryers of Petitions for Gascoigne and other Lands and Countries beyond the
Seas, and the Isles.

The Earl of Oxford Great Chamberlain of England, the Earl of Shrewsbury, the
Earl of Huntington, the Bishop of Rochester, the Bishop of Worcester, the Lord
Hunsdon Lord Chamberlain to the Queen, the Lord Lumley and the Lord Buckhurst.

All these Lords and Prelates or any four of them, calling unto them the Queens
Sergeants, and also the Queens Attorney and Solicitor, when their leisure
serves, shall hold their place in the Treasurers Chamber.

The Lord Burgh absent, being at this time Lord Deputy of Ireland.

The Lord De la Ware absent, because he made question of his place, intending
to make Suit to the Parliament concerning the same.

Dicto 24o die Octobris, viz. Primo die hujus Parliamenti, Introductum est
breve quo Archiepiscopus Eboracen' praesenti Parliamento interesse
summonebatur, and admissas est ad suum praeheminentiae sedendi in Parliamento
locum, salvo jure alieno.

(...) brevia introduct. sunt 4. Comitibus, 10. Episcopis, and 5. Baronibus.

Dominus Custos magni Sigilli ex mandato Dominae Reginae continuavit praesens
Parliamentum usque in diem Jovis proximum futurum, viz. 27 diem Octobris.

On Thursday the 27th day of October the Queens Majesty repaired in
the-Afternoon to the Upper House of Parliament, accompanied with diverse Lords
Spiritual and Temporal, who attended her Majesty this said day in the House,
being for the most part the same that are mentioned to have been present there
on Monday the 24th day of this instant October foregoing. Of which the Knights,
Citizens and Burgesses of the House of Commons having notice, Mr Sergeant
Yelverton being chosen Prolocutor or Speaker of the said House, was by them
brought into the Upper House, and by the hands of Sir William Knolles
Controller of her Majesty's Household, and Sir John Fortescue Chancellor of the
Exchequer presented.

Who by a Speech full of Gravity and Modesty signifying the accomplishment of
the Duty of the House of Commons in making an Election, but excusing himself by
pretense of many disabilities and imperfections, and wishing earnestly he were
of sufficiency to perform the Duty of that place, made humble Suit to her
Majesty that he might be discharged, and that the said House of Commons might
proceed to a new Election. Which excuse was not allowed by her Majesty (as the
Lord Keeper delivered by Answer) but the choice of the said Mr Yelverton was by
her Majesty very well approved and his sufficiency much commended.

He then proceeded in another Speech (according to the manner) to undertake
that charge and to present to her Majesty in the behalf of the said House of
Commons certain humble Petitions, for access unto her Majesty in the behalf of
the said House upon needful occasions, and for the using and enjoying such
Liberties and Privileges as in former times had been granted and allowed by
her Majesty's Progenitors and her self. Whereunto her Majesty (making Answer by
the Mouth of the Lord Keeper) did yield her Gracious Assent, with admonition
that the said Liberties and Privileges should be discreetly and wisely used,
as was meet.

Dominus Custos magni Sigilli ex mandato Dominae Reginae continuavit praesens
Parliamentum usque in diem quintum Mensis Octobris.

On Saturday the 5th day of November, the Bill for the speedy satisfaction of
her Majesty against Accomptants was read prima vice.

Introductum est breve Thomae Domini Gray de Wilton, quo praesenti Parliamento
interesse summonebatur, and admissus est ad suum praeheminentiae sedendi in
Parliamento locum, salvo jure alieno.

The Earl of Lincoln's excuse by reason of sickness presented by the Lord
Treasurer.

Thomas Lord de la Ware having petitioned the Queens Majesty for his Ancient
and right Place of Precedence in and amongst the Peers in Parliament, and her
Majesty well allowing his said Petition, by her Commandment and direction it
was sent unto the Lords, into the Upper House, by Sir Robert Cecill then her
Majesty's Secretary, and endorsed on the back side thus in his own hand,

Her Majesty has commanded me to signify unto your Lordships, that upon the
humble Suit of the Lord de la Ware she is pleased this Petition be considered
and determined in the House.

Robert Cecill.

Which Petition being this 5th day of November sent unto the House, was there
read as follows.

To the Queens most Excellent Majesty.
Beseeches your most Excellent Majesty your most humble Subject Thomas le Ware
Kr: That whereas Thomas sometimes Lord Le Ware, Ancestor and great Grandfather
of your said Subject, whose Heir Male he is, That is to say, your Subject is
Son and Heir to William, who was Son and Heir to George, who was Brother and
Heir to Thomas, who was Son and Heir to the said Thomas your Subject's great
Grandfather in the third year of the Reign of King Henry the Eighth your Noble
Father, by Writ of Summons of Parliament of the said King Henry the Eighth,
came to the Parliament then holden at Westminster in the said third year, and
so continually the said Thomas the great Grandfather and his Heirs Males
Ancestors of your Suppliant in many other Parliaments holden as well in the
time of the said King Henry the Eighth, as in the time of your Noble Brother
King Edward the Sixth, and in the time of your Dear Sister Queen Mary, have
come in their proper persons by their Writs and Commandment, until the
Parliament holden at Westminster in the first and second years of King Philip
and Queen Mary, which was after the Death of the said Thomas your Suppliants
great Grandfather, and of Thomas his Son, that had not any Issue of his Body,
and of the said George who died in the Life of his Brother Thomas, the said
William Father of your Suppliant being the Son and Heir of the said George, and
Heir Male to his said great Grandfather; to which Parliament he was not
summoned, for that he stood by Act of Parliament holden before at Westminster
in the third year of the said Edward the Sixth, disabled to claim and enjoy the
dignity of the Seigniory of the Lord La Ware during his Life; and the said
William being now dead, your said Suppliant is come to this present Parliament
in his proper person by your Writ and Commandment; May it please your most
gracious Majesty to consider the Premisles, and thereupon to Grant and Ordain
by advice of your most wise Council in this present Parliament Assembled, That
your said Suppliant may have his place in this present Parliament in your
presence as his Ancestors Lords La Ware have had in the said Parliament before
this time.

This Petition being read, it was referred to these Committees following viz.
The Lord Treasurer, the Earl of Nottingham Lord Admiral, the Earl of
Shrewsbury, the Lord Bishop of London, the Lord Bishop of Winton, the Lord
Zouch, the Lord Stafford, the Lord Windsor, the Lord Shefsield, the Lord North,
the Lord St John of Bletso, the Lord Buckhurst, Sir Edmund Anderson Knight Lord
Chief Justice of the Common Pleas, Sir William Perriam Lord Chief Baron, and
Edward Coke the Queens Attorney, who were appointed to meet at the
Council Chamger in Whitehall on Sunday the 6th day of November at two of the
Clock in the Afternoon. Where what they did and what Judgment the Lords and the
whole House gave in this Case, follows afterward on Thursday the 10th of
this instant November, and on Monday the 14th day of the same.

On Monday the 7th day of November, to which day the Parliament had been last
continued, the Bill for the speedy satisfaction of her Majesty against
Accomptants was read secunda vice, and committed unto the Lord Archbishop of
Canterbury, the Lord Treasurer, the Lord Admiral, the Earl of Northumberland,
the Earl of Shrewsbury, and the Earl of Worcester, the Bishop of London, the
Bishop of Winchester, and the Bishop of Norwich, the Lord Zouch, the Lord
North, and the Lord Buckhurst, the Lord Chief Justice of England, Mr Baron
Evans and Mr Attorney General, to attend the Lords appointed to meet at the
Little Council Chamger at Whitehall to Morrow being the 8th day of November, at
four of the Clock in the Afternoon. See more of this on Monday the 14th of
November following.

Nota, That here upon the Commitment of an ordinary Bill the Judges are said to
be appointed to attend the Committee of the Lords, and are not nominated as
Joint-Committees with them, which is usually to be seen in every former
Parliament almost of her Majesty's Reign; and therefore it should seem that
either the Lords of the Upper House themselves did alter and abolish the said
ancient Privileges which the Judges had of being constituted Joint-Committees
with them, in respect that they were no Members of, but only Assistants unto
the said Upper House; or else that Thomas Smith Esquire now Clerk of, the said
House was more careful and diligent in the distinct and exact setting down,
that the said Judges were not nominated as Joint-Committees, but only to attend
such Lords Committees as were appointed by the said House, which Anthony Mason
Esquire his Predecessor in the said place had for the most part neglected to
distinguish. And yet the said Mr Mason may in some sort be justly excused of
any universal or continual carelessness in this kind, in respect that where the
Lords Committees were appointed either to treat with the Committees of the
House of Commons, or by themselves about any matter of weight, there the Judges
and her Majesty's Learned Council are always set down as appointed to attend
the said Lords Committees: But when an ordinary Bill only was committed upon
the second reading, and especially if it concerned matter of Law, there the
Judges for the most part, and sometimes also the Queens Learned Council, were
nominated as Joint-Committees with them. But whatsoever the usage has been in
former times, most certain it is, that not only in this present Parliament, but
in all that have been since unto this present year 1629. the said Judges being
Assistants unto, and the King's Learned Council being Attendants upon the said
Upper House, have never been nominated as Joint-Committees with their
Lordships, but have always been appointed to attend them. And which may make it
seem the more strange: Whereas the Judges have liberty in the said Upper House
it self, upon leave given them by the Lord Keeper, or the Lord Chancellor for
the time being, to cover their heads, at a Committee they are now always
accustomed to sit bare and uncovered; which said course finally was constantly
observed during all the continuance of this present Parliament, as may appear
not only by the instance foregoing, but by those many other Committees which
followed on Thursday the 24th day of this instant November, on Thursday the 8th
day of December, on Wednesday the 11th day of January, on Saturday the 4th day
of February, and all other the days (which were very many) in which any
Committees were nominated.

On Thursday the 10th day of November, to which day the Parliament had been
last continued, the Bill for the taking away Clergy from Offenders against a
Statute made in the third year of the Reign of King Henry the Seventh, against
the taking away of Women against their wills unlawfully, was sent up to the
Lords from the House of Commons, and thereupon read prima vice.

The Lord Treasurer made Report to the House what had been done by the
Committees upon the Petition of the Lord La Ware, and how it was resolved by
them upon hearing and debating of the matter, with certain Learned Counselors
in the Law brought before the Committees of the said Lords, that the place
which he claimed in the Order and Rank of the Barons, was due unto him, viz.
next after the Lord Willoughby of Eresby. Which Report being made to the House,
and the voices of all the Lords being demanded, the opinion of the Committees
was allowed by the consent of all (the Lord Windsor only excepted) And the Lord
Keeper was required to acquaint her Majesty with the determination of the same
House, and to know her pleasure concerning the same. Vide concerning this
Business of the Lord La Ware on Saturday the 5th day of this instant November
foregoing, and on Monday the 14th day of the same November ensuing.

The Lord Treasurer made a motion to the House, that for as much as the
Journal-Books kept heretofore by the Clerks of the Parliament, seemed to have
some error in them in misplacing the Lords, so as it was doubted how the same
might be of true Record, That it would please the Lords to take Order, that the
said Books that from thenceforth should be kept by the Clerk of the Parliament,
may be viewed and perused every Parliament by certain Lords of the House to be
appointed for that purpose, and the List of the Lords in their Order to be
subscribed by them, taking unto them for their better information the King at
Arms. And that this Order might begin this present Parliament.

On Saturday the 12th day of November, to which day the Parliament had been
last continued, the Bill for the taking away of Clergy from Offenders against a
Statute made Anno 3 Hen. 7. concerning the taking away of Women against their
wills unlawfully, was read secunda vice and committed.

Nota, That because the Committees during all this Parliament were only Peers
and Members of the House, and that the Judges with her Majesty's Learned
Council, (as see more on Monday the 7th of this instant November foregoing)
were always appointed to attend upon them, and never nominated as joint
Committees with them, therefore the names of them are for the most part omitted
as not worth the inserting or observation.

On Monday the 14th day of November. (to which day the Parliament had been last
continued on Saturday foregoing) the Bill for the better explanation and
execution of the Act made in the 13th year of the Queens Majesty's Reign
concerning Tellors, Receivors, etc. was read prima vice.

This Bill was brought into the House instead of the former Bill concerning her
Majesty's speedy satisfaction against Accountants, etc. which was on the 7th
day of November foregoing read secunda vice and referred to Committees; by whom
the said Bill having been thought upon the debating thereof too full of doubts
and difficulties, Order was given by them to her Majesty's Attorney General to
draw a new Bill, viz. the Bill aforesaid; which Bill was presented by the Lord
Archbishop of Canterbury, first of the said Committees, in the behalf of the
said Committees.

A Proviso was thought fit to be added to the Bill concerning the taking away
of Women unlawfully, and was also twice read.

The Earl of Shrewsbury excuses the Lord Marquess his absence for want of
health.

The Lord Treasurer moved the House, that such Lords as were absent from the
Parliament and had not sent their Proxies, and such others as had made their
appearance in the beginning of the Parliament and have sithence neglected their
Attendance, may be admonished to reform the same.

On this said 14th day of November 1597. upon the Petition of the said Lord La
Ware, exhibited unto her Majesty concerning his place in the Order of the
Barons of Parliament, and with her Majesty's commandment and direction
presented unto the Lords Spiritual and Temporal in this present Parliament the
5th day of this present Month of November, and referred the same day (upon the
reading) unto the Committees, as is before recorded in the Session of the same
day; the said Committees having at the time and place appointed assembled
themselves, and advisedly considered of the said Petition and of all arguments
that were brought and alleged both for the Petition and against it, did
resolve and determine that in their opinions the said Petition of the Lord La
Ware was just; and that the place which he sought was due unto him, viz. to
have his place betwixt the Lord Willoughby of Eresby and the Lord Berkeley,
being the same place which his great Grandfather held heretofore, as appears
by Record. Of which resolution and determination Report having been made by the
Lord Burleigh Lord Treasurer, the first of the Committees, the 10th day of this
instant November foregoing in the Session of the same day (as before is
recorded) and the same being allowed and approved by the consent of the Lords
Temporal and Spiritual then present in the House, it was thought meet and
ordered that her Majesty should be made acquainted by the Lord Keeper with the
opinion and resolution of the House. Which having been performed by his
Lordship and her Majesty having allowed of the proceedings of the House and of
the determination of the question touching the place of the Lord De la Ware (as
has been declared unto the House by the Lord Keeper;) It was and is agreed and
Ordered by her Majesty and the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, that the Lord De
la Ware should be brought into the House and placed in the room and order
beforementioned, to have his place and Voice betwixt the Lord Willoughby and
Lord Berkeley. Which was accordingly done on this said 14th day of November,
The said Lord De la Ware being brought in his Parliament Robes unto the place
aforesaid by the Lord Zouch (supplying the place of the Lord Willoughby) and by
the said Lord Berkeley in their Robes, Garter the King of Arms attending them,
and doing his Service according to his Office.

On Tuesday the 15th day of November, Two Bills had each of them one reading;
of which the first being the Bill for taking away of Clergy from Offenders
against a certain Statute made Anno 3 Hen. 7. concerning the taking away of
Women against their Wills unlawfully, together with the Proviso annexed unto it
by the consent of the House, was read tertia vice, and afterward sent down to
the House of Commons, that the Proviso there might be considered of. And so the
Parliament continued till Saturday the 19th day of November at nine of the
Clock.

On which day the Bill touching the School of Sevenoake was read prima vice.

Report was made to the House by the Lord Treasurer what had been done by the
Committees upon the Bill concerning Tellors and Receivors (which said Bill had
been yesterday committed upon the second reading, although the mention of the
said reading and Commitment be purposely omitted) and the same Committees
appointed to meet again at the former place to Morrow at four of the Clock in
the Afternoon to make perfect the said Bill to be presented again to the House.

The absence of the Lord Marquess and the Earl of Huntingdon were severally
excused for want of health by two of the Temporal Lords, and the like excuse
was delivered by the Bishop of Norwich for the Bishop of Chichester's absence.

Report was made by the Lord Keeper that the Earl of Essex received not his
Writ of Summons until yesterday the 17th day of this Month (through the
negligence of the Messenger unto whom the same was delivered) and now his
Lordship wanting health to give his Attendance, desires to be excused of his
absence, the Earl of Worcester and the Earl of Southampton testifying his
sickness.

Introductum est breve Radulphi Domini Evers, quo praesenti Parliamento
interesse summonebatur, and admissus est ad suum praeheminentiae sedendi in
Parliamento locum, salvo jure alieno.

On Monday the 21th day of November, to which day the Parliament had been last
continued on Saturday foregoing, Two Bills of no great moment had each of them
one reading; of which the first being the Bill concerning the confirmation and
establishment of the deprivation of diverse Bishops in the beginning of her
Majesty's Reign was read prima vice.

Several Writs of Summons of the Earl of Huntingdon and Rutland were brought in.

Relation was made by the Lord Treasurer upon the Bill concerning Tellors and
Receivors, etc. of the doubts and questions that had been moved and debated
among the Committees touching certain Provisoes and Causes thought on for the
Amendment of the said Bill; And the said Committees appointed by the House to
meet again for further Conference to Morrow at the little Chamber near the
Chamber of Parliament presence. Vide concerning this Bill on Saturday the 19th
day of this instant November foregoing.

On Tuesday the 22th day of November, Two Bills of no great moment had each of
them one reading; of which the first being the Bill for the establishment of
the new College of the Poor of Cobham in the County of Kent, was read prima
vice.

Three Bills also of no great moment were each of them sent up to the Lords
from the House of Commons; of which the first was an Act formerly sent to them;
with a Proviso from this House thereunto added, concerning taking away of
Clergy from Offenders that take away Women against their Wills unlawfully.

The Committees upon the Bill of Tellors, Receivors, etc. meeting at the little
Chamber near the Chamber of the Parliament presence, and conferring on the Bill
and the Provisoes that were thought on and came in question among them by
reason of sundry doubts that were moved, did refer the Bill to her Majesty's
Attorney General to be reviewed. Vide more of this on Saturday the 19th day,
and on Monday the 21th day of this instant November foregoing.

On Thursday the 24th day of November, to which day the Parliament had been
last continued on Monday foregoing, Five Bills had each of them one reading; of
which the third being the Bill for the better Explanation and confirmation of
the Act made in the thirteenth year of her Majesty's Reign, was read prima vice.

This Bill was reviewed by Mr Attorney by the appointment of the Committees (on
Tuesday the 22th day of this instant November foregoing) who then referred it
unto him, and was now brought in instead of the former Bill, touching which see
before on Saturday the 19th day, and on Monday the 21th day of November
aforesaid.

And the fifth being the Bill for the repeal of a Statute made in the twenty
third year of her Majesty's Reign, Entitled An Act for the increase of
Mariners and maintenance of Navigation, was read tertia vice and committed unto
the Earl of Nottingham Lord Admiral, the Earl of Worcester, the Earl of
Southampton, the Bishop of London, the Bishop of Winchester, the Bishop of
Norwich, the Lord Hunsdon Lord Chamberlain, the Lord Cobham, the Lord Mountjoy;
and Mr Justice Walmesley, Mr Sergeant Drew and Mr Attorney were appointed to
attend the Lords. Vide November 7th antea.

On Saturday the 26th day of November, to which day the Parliament had been
last continued on Thursday foregoing, Three Bills had each of them one reading;
of which the last being the Bill for the better explanation and execution of
the Act made in the thirteenth year of the Queens Majesty's Reign touching
Tellors and Receivors, was read the third time and commanded to be: engrossed.

A Sergeant at Arms was appointed to be sent for William Wood and one
Stephenson a Sergeant in London, who Arrested Edward Barston the Lord Chandois
Servant contrary to the privilege of this House.

The Bill for the repeal of a Statute made in the twenty third year of her
Majesty's Reign, Entitled An Act for the increase of Mariners and maintenance
of Navigation, was brought into the House by the Committees (whose names see
before on Thursday the 24th day of this instant November foregoing) with an
Amendment thought sit to be put into the Bill; And the Amendment being thrice
read, the Bill was appointed to be fixed in a Schedule to the Bill.

On Monday the 28th day of November, to which day the Parliament had been last
continued on Saturday foregoing, The Bill for the better explanation and
execution of the Act made in the thirteenth year of the Queens Majesty's Reign
concerning Tellors and Receivors, was read tertia vice, and sent to the House
of Commons by Mr Attorney General and Dr Stanhop.

The Bill that was sent from the House of Commons with this Title, viz. An Act
for the Repeal of a Statute made in the twenty third year of her Majesty's
Reign, Entitled An Act for the increase of Mariners and maintenance of
Navigation, was after the third reading returned again to the said House for
their consideration and allowance as well of another Title thought more fit by
the Committees to be given thereunto, viz. An Act for increase of Mariners and
for maintenance of the Navigation, repealing a former Act made in the twenty
third year of her Majesty's Reign bearing the same title, as also of some
Amendments in the Body of the Bill added by the Committees (whose names see on
Thursday the 24th day of this instant November foregoing) by Mr Attorney
General and Dr Carew.

The Bill touching the School of Seavenoake was brought in by the Committees
(who were appointed to meet on Monday the 21th day of this instant November
foregoing, although their names and the Commitment of the said Bill upon the
second reading be there purposely omitted as matter of small consequence)
without alteration, and commanded to be engrossed.

On Thursday the first day of December, to which day the Parliament had been
last continued on Saturday foregoing, The Bill concerning the School of
Seavenoake was read tertia vice, and sent to the House of Commons by Mr
Sergeant Drew and Mr Dr Stanhop.

The Bill for the establishing the Town Lands of Wanting, etc. was brought in
by the Committees (who were appointed on Saturday the 26th day of this instant
November foregoing, although their names and the Commitment of the said Bill
upon the second reading be there purposely omitted as matter of small
consequence) with a Proviso by them thought fit to be added thereunto, which
Proviso was twice read.

The Parties that Arrested the Lord Chandois Servant, Edward Barston, viz.
William Wood and one Stephenson a Sergeant with two others, were brought into
the House by the Sergeant at Arms, and upon some notice taken of the matter, Mr
Justice Owen and Mr Sergeant Drew were appointed to examine the same, and to
make report thereof to the Lords. Vide concerning this matter on Saturday the
26th day of this instant November foregoing.

The Lord Hunsdon Lord Chamberlain took his place this day as Baron of Hunsdon
betwixt the Lord Chandois and the Lord Sr John of Bletso.

On Saturday the third day of December, to which day the Parliament had been
last continued on Thursday foregoing, the Bill for the establishing of the Town
Lands of Wanting in the County of Berks, was read tertia vice, and sent to the
House of Commons by Mr Sergeant Drew and Mr Attorney, for their consideration
of a Proviso thought fit to be added by the Committees.

Five Bills were sent up to the Lords from the House of Commons; of which the
first was the Bill for the increase of Mariners and for maintenance of the
Navigation, repealing a former Act made in the twenty third year of her
Majesty's Reign bearing the same title, which said Bill was sent from the Lords
to the House of Commons for their consideration and allowance of the title and
some Amendments in the Body of the Bill.

A second being the Bill for erecting of Hospitals or abiding and working
Houses for the Poor, was read prima vice.

Two Bills also of no great moment had each of them one reading; of which the
first being the Bill for the better and safer Recording of Fines to be levied
in the Court of Common Pleas was read prima vice.

Upon the Report of Mr Justice Owen and Mr Sergeant Drew, unto whom the
Examination of the matter was committed concerning the Arresting of Edward
Barston Servant to the Lord Chandois by one Stephenson a Sergeant of London, at
the Suit of one William Wood, these two being found and judged to have
wilfully offended therein against the privilege of the House, were committed
and sent to the Prison of the Fleet, there to be kept close Prisoners until
further direction should be given by the Lords of Parliament.

And whereas the two others were this day brought into the House before the
Lords and supposed to be partakers of the same offense, they upon Examination
being found not to have wilfully committed any fault therein were dismissed,
and Order given accordingly by the Lords for their discharge in that behalf;
And also for the discharge of Edward Barston out of the Prison of the Counter.
Vide concerning this matter on Saturday the 25th day of November foregoing, and
on Thursday the first day of this instant December last past, as also on Monday
the 5th day of this said December following, as also on Wednesday the 14th day
of the same Month.

On Monday the 5th day of December, to which day the Parliament had been last
continued on Saturday foregoing, Six Bills of no great moment were brought up
to the Lords from the House of Commons; of which the first was the Bill for
erecting Houses of Correction, and Punishment of Rogues and Sturdy Beggars; And
the second being the Bill to restrain Brewers to keep two Coopers and no more,
was read prima vice.

The Bill for the Confirmation of the Jointure of Christian Lady Sands, was
read prima vice.

Four other Bills also of no great moment were read secunda vice, and thereupon
Committed.

The absence of the
Earl of Essex Lord Viscount Bindon Earl of Cumberland Lord Scroope Lord
Willoughby of Eresby Bishop of Rochester
excused by the
Lord Rich. Lord Chandois. Lord Wharton. Lord Zouch. Bishop of Bath and Wells.
This day Order was given for the Release of Stephenson the Sergeant that
arrested the Lord Chandois his Servant. Vide concerning this matter on Saturday
the 26th day of November last past, as also on Thursday the 1. day and on
Saturday the 3. day of this instant December foregoing.

On Tuesday the 6th day of December, Two Bills of no great moment had each of
them one Reading; of which the first being the Bill for erecting of Houses of
Correction for punishment of Rogues, Vagabonds and sturdy Beggars was read
secunda vice.

The Committees in the Bill Entitled An Act for the better and safe Recording
of Fines to be levied in the Court of Common Pleas (who were appointed
yesterday, although their names and the Commitment of the said Bill upon the
second reading be there purposely omitted as a matter of small consequence)
returned the same to the House with some Amendments, which Amendments were
twice read and the Bill commanded to be engrossed.

On Wednesday the 7th day of December, Seven Bills of no great moment had each
of them one reading; of which the first being the Bill for Confirmation of the
Jointure of Christian Lady Sands, was read secunda vice, and commanded to be
engrossed; and the second being the Bill for the better and safer Recording of
Fines to be levied in the Court of Common Pleas was read tertia vice, and sent
down to the House of Commons by Mr Attorney and Dr Stanhop.

Hodie retornatum fuit breve Thomae Domini Howard de Walden.

On Thursday the 8th day of December, Two Bills of no great moment had each of
them one reading; of which the first being the Bill for the enabling of Edmund
Mollineux Esquire, to sell Lands for the payment of his Debts and Legacies, was
read prima vice; And the second being the Bill for confirmation of the Jointure
of Christian Lady Sands, was read tertia vice, and sent to the House of
Commons by Mr Attorney and Mr, Dr Carew.

The Bill for the relief of the poor in times of extreme dearth of Corn was
read secunda vice, and referred to these Committees following, viz. The Lord
Archbishop of Canterbury, the Lord Burleigh Lord Treasurer, the Earl of
Nottingham Lord Admiral of England, the Earl of Northumberland, the Earl of
Shrewsbury, the Earl of Worcester, the Earl of Southampton, the Bishop of
Winchester, the Bishop of Coventry and Litchfield, the Bishop of Hereford, the
Bishop of Bath and Wells, the Bishop of Norwich, the Bishop of Chester, the
Lord Hunsdon Lord Chamberlain, the Lord Zouch, the Lord De la Ware, the Lord
Cobham, the Lord Mountjoy, the Lord Darcy, the Lord Windsor, the Lord North,
the Lord Chandois, the Lord St John, the Lord Buckhurst; The two Chief
Justices, the Lord Chief Baron, Mr Justice Gaudy, Mr Sergeant Drew and Mr
Attorney General, to attend the Lords. ( Vide plus antea November 7th Monday.)

These Committees to meet at the little Council Chamber at the Court of
Whitehall, on Saturday next being the 10th day of this instant December, at two
of the Clock in the Afternoon.

The Bill for erecting of Houses of Correction and for punishment of Rogues,
Vagabonds, and Sturdy Beggars, was read secunda vice, and referred to the
Committees for the former Bill, and the same time and place appointed for
meeting; And also Authority was given to the said Committees to call such of
the House of Commons unto them at this meeting as they should find cause to
confer withal for the better perfecting of the Bill.

Three Bills also of no great moment had each of them one reading; of which the
last being the Bill for Arthur Hatch her Majesty's Ward for the enjoying the
Rectory or Parsonage of South Molton according to an Agreement thereof had,
etc. was read secunda vice. Upon which reading it was Ordered, that all parties
whom this Bill may concern, either on the part of Mr Hatch or against him,
shall be heard openly in the House upon Monday next the 12th day of this
instant December by their Council Learned, and all specialties concerning the
same to be then produced, to the end it may be considered whether it shall be
convenient to pass this Bill or no; Mr Sergeant Drew and Mr Attorney being
appointed by the Lords to inform themselves against that time whether any thing
be contained in the Bill that may prejudice the poor Knights of Windsor, and to
make Report thereof accordingly on the part of the said poor Knights. Vide
December 12th postea.

The Bill lastly for the establishing of the Possession of Sir Henry Unton
Knight lately deceased, and for payment of his Debts, was read secunda vice.

A Motion was made by some of the Lords and approved by the House, that there
should be respite of some days taken before the third reading for any such
Party or Parties as the Bill concerns, and namely any of the Wentworths to
come to the House, and allege if they find cause why the Bill should not
proceed. And the next Tuesday was assigned for this purpose.

(...) the Knight Marshal's Man that arrested John York the Lord Archbishops
Servant, was brought before the Lords this day by the Sergeant at Arms; and
being found upon his Examination before the Lords to have wilfully offended
therein against the privilege of the House, was committed to the Prison of the
Fleet, there to remain till their Lordships should give direction for his
enlargement. Vide concerning this matter on Wednesday the 14th day of this
instant December following.

On Friday the 9th day of December, Four Bills of no great moment had each of
them one reading; of which the first being the Bill for establishing of the
Hospital of Queen Elizabeth in Bristol, and for relief of the Orphans and Poor
there, was read secunda vice; upon the reading whereof some Amendments were
thought sit by the House to be added, which were presently drawn and agreed
upon by the same House, which being twice read, the Bill with the said
Amendments were Ordered to be engrossed.

Seven Bills were brought up to the Lords from the House of Commons; of which
the first being the Bill that the Lord Mountjoy may dispose of his Lands
whereof he is Tenant in Tail by the Laws and Statutes of this Realm, as other
Tenants in Tail may do, a private Statute made 27 Hen. 8. to the contrary
notwithstanding, was (with three other of the said Bills being of no great
moment) read prima vice.

The fifth was the Bill for repairing the Bridges of Newport and Carlioll in
the County of Monmouth. The sixth was for the establishing the Town Lands of
Wanting in the County of Berks, which Bill was returned with allowance of the
Proviso so added by their Lordships after the same was presented by the House
of Commons; And the seventh and last was the Bill for the establishment of the
new College of the poor at Cobham in the County of Kent, which was returned
into the House without any Alteration.

On Saturday the 10th day of December, Three Bills of no great moment were each
of them read tertia vice; of which the first being the Bill for the erecting of
Hospitals or abiding and working Houses for the Poor, with another Bill of no
great consequence which had been formerly sent up from the House of Commons to
their Lordships, were now with some Amendments sent down again from them to the
said Commons by Sergeant Drew and Doctor Stanhop.

The Bill Entitled An Act against Forestallers, Regraters and Engrossers was
returned into the House by the Committees (who were appointed on Monday the
15th day of this instant December foregoing, although their names and the
Commitment of the said Bill upon the second reading be there omitted as a
matter of small consequence) with some Amendments which were twice read and
Ordered to be engrossed.

Three Bills of no great moment had each of them one reading; of which the
first being the Bill that the Lord Mountjoy may dispose of his Lands as other
Tenants in Tail by the Laws and Statutes of this Realm may do, a private
Statute made An. 27 H. 8. to the contrary notwithstanding, was secunda vice
lect.

Upon the Motion of the Lord Marquess of Winchester, It was Ordered that the
Cause should be heard openly in the House upon Monday Morning next by the
Learned Council on both sides. Vide December. 12. sequen.

Three Bills also of no great moment were sent up to the Lords from the House
of Commons; of which the first was the Bill for the better and safer recording
of Fines to be levied in the Court of Common Pleas, and was returned and
allowed by the said House of Commons without any Alteration.

On Monday the 12th day of December, to which day the Parliament had been last
continued on Saturday foregoing, a Motion and request was had by the House of
Commons and delivered by Mr Secretary accompanied with many others, for a
Conference to be had concerning the Bill entitled An Act concerning Tellors,
Receivors, etc. Whereupon the House nominated the Lord Burleigh Lord Treasurer,
the Earl of Nottingham Lord Admiral, and diverse other Lords, both Earls,
Bishops and Barons, as Committees to confer with such a number of the House of
Commons as should confer with the Lords touching the said Bill; The Lord Chief
Justice of England, the Lord Chief Justice of the Common Pleas, the Lord Chief
Baron, Mr Sergeant Drew and Mr Attorney being appointed to attend the Lords,
and the meeting to be at the great Council Table at the Court at Whitehal to
Morrow being the 13th day of this instant December, at two of the Clock in the
Afternoon.

Two Bills of no great moment had each of them one reading; of which the first
concerning Stains Bridge was read tertia vice and expedit.

The Council on both parties, viz. for Arthur Hatch on the one part, and of the
Dean and Chapter of Windsor of the other, were admitted to public hearing in
the House. And thereupon the Bill of Arthur Hatch was referred to Committees
(being Peers and Members of the House) and the Lord Chief Justice of England
and Mr Attorney to attend their Lordships. Vide concerning this matter on
Thursday the 8th day of this instant December foregoing.

The Council on both parts, for the Lord Marquess of Minchester on the one part
and the Lord Wountjoy of the other, were admitted to public hearing in the
House. And thereupon no just cause to hinder or stay the proceeding of the Bill
appearing, the same was commanded to be read the third time, and so was
expedited. Vide touching this business on Saturday the 10th day of this instant
December foregoing.

The Committees upon the Bill to enable the owners of Gavelkind Lands in the
County of Kent to alter the said Custom (who were appointed on Saturday the
10th day of this instant December foregoing, although their names and the
Commitment of the said Bill upon the second reading be there purposely omitted
as matter of small consequence) returned the same to the House without
alteration.

On Tuesday the 13th day of December, Three Bills of no great moment had each
of them one reading; of which the first being the Bill for enabling of Edmund
Mollineux Esquire to sell Lands for the payment of his Debts and Legacies, was
read secunda vice, and committed unto the Earl of Shrewsbury and others, and Mr
Justice Gaudie and Mr Sergeant Crew to attend their Lordships. Which Committees
were Ordered to meet at the Earl of Lincolns House in Cannon Row on Thursday
next by two of the Clock in the Afternoon.

Two Bills were sent up to the Lords from the House of Commons; of which the
second being the Bill for relief of the poor was read prima vice.

Four Bills also of no great moment had each of them one reading; of which the
first being the Bill against Forestallers, Regraters and Ingrossers was read
tertia vice, and sent down to the House of Commons by Mr Sergeant Drew and Mr
Doctor Stanhop for their consideration of some Amendments.

The Bill giving power and liberty to Sir John Spencer Knight, Mary his Wife
and Robert Spencer Esquire their Son, to alienate certain Manors and Lands in
the County of Dorset and Bedford, was read secunda vice. And thereupon two
Letters from the Lady Spencer to the Lord Chamberlain were read in the House,
signifying her pleasure and consent to the Bill.

The Bill for explanation of the Statute made in the 5th year of her Majesty's
Reign concerning Laborers was read secunda vice; And a motion being made in
the House for some Amendent of the Bill, the Amendment was presently agreed on
in the said House.

On Wednesday the 14th day of December, Three Bills of no great moment had each
of them one reading; of which the first being the Bill for explanation of the
Statute made in the 5th year of her Majesty's Reign concerning Laborers was
read tertia vice, and thereupon was sent down to the House of Commons (from
whence it had been formerly brought up to their Lordships) with some Amendments
added thereunto by Mr Attorney and Dr Stanhop.

The Bill for the grant of three Subsidies and six Fifteenths and Tenths was
brought up to the Lords from the House of Commons by Mr Comptroller and others.

This day Order was given for the release of Mr Wood out of the prison of the
Fleet, at whose Suit the Lord Chandois his Servant called Edward Barston was
arrested, so as he make satisfaction unto the said Barston of such charges as
he was at by means of that Arrest. Vide concerning this matter on Saturday the
26th day of November foregoing; as also on Thursday the first day, Saturday the
third day, and on Monday the 5th day of this instant December last past.

The like Order taken for the enlargement of William Cole that arrested John
York the Lord Archbishops Servant, paying only the Fees of the Fleet. Vide
touching this business on Thursday the eighth day of this instant December
foregoing.

Certain Amendments were thought fit by the Committees to be added to the Bill
entitled An Act for erecting of Houses of Correction and punishment of Rogues,
Vagabonds and Sturdy Beggars; which Amendments were twice read and upon
consideration of the same, direction was given to some of the said Committees,
viz. the Lord North, the Lord St John and the Lord Buckhurst, to review the
said Amendments for reformation of some defects found therein by the House; and
the Lord Chief Justice of England appointed to attend them.

On Thursday the 15th day of December, Three Bills of no great moment had each
of them one reading; of which the first being the Bill for grant of three
Subsidies and six Fiftenths and Tenths was read prima vice.

Six Bills were brought up to the Lords from the House of Commons; of which the
first was the Bill for establishing the Hospital of Queen Elizabeth in Bristol
for relief of the Orphans and Poor there, and was returned with allowance of
the Amendments.

Certain Articles were presented in writing by the House of Commons touching
their opinions and objections concerning the Bill of Tellors and Receivors,
which were delivered to Mr Attorney, to the end he might confer with the Judges
upon the same, and make Report to the Lords.

The Bill for Arthur Hatch, her Majesty's Ward, was returned into the House by
the Lord Treasurer, first of the Committees, who said that there were in the
Bill certain Points, that could not be well reformed; whereupon motion was made
to the House (upon agreement amongst the Committees) that the proceeding in
this Bill might cease, and that another course might be taken by way of
Composition betwixt the Dean and Chapter of Windsor and Arthur Hatch; for which
purpose a Bill was ready drawn and brought by Mr Attorney General, containing a
form of composition betwixt them to be ratified (if it shall be thought good)
by Parliament.

Dominus Custos magni Sigilli continuavit praesens Parliamentum usque in
postmeridianum tempus hodierni diei hora tertia, at which time the Bill only
for the grant of three Subsidies and six Fifteenths and Tenths was read secunda
vice.

On Friday the 16th day of December, Two Bills had each of them one reading; of
which the first being the Bill for the grant of three Subsidies and six
Fifteenths and Tenths, was read tertia vice and expedit.

Five Bills were brought up to the Lords from the House of Commons by Sir
William Knolles and others; of which the first being the Bill touching the
School at Seavenoake, was returned from the House of Commons with their
allowance thereof.

The Bill for Arthur Hatch her Majesty's Ward for the enjoying of the Rectory
and Parsonage of South-Molton in the County of Devon. for certain years,
reserving the usual rent, was read prima vice.

On Saturday the 17th day of December, Eight Bills of no great moment had each
of them one reading; of which the last being the Bill for Arthur Hatch her
Majesty's Ward for the enjoying of the Rectory and Parsonage of South-Molton,
etc. was read secunda vice, and referred to the same Committees that were
formerly appointed (on Monday the 12th day of this instant December foregoing)
and the Earl of Worcester and Bishop of London were added to them.

Two Bills were brought up to the Lords from the House of Commons; of which the
first was the Bill for increase of people for the service and defense of the
Realm.

The Bill Entitled An Act for the enabling of Edmund Mollineux Esquire for the
payment of his Debts and Legacies, was returned into the House by the Earl of
Shrewsbury the first of the Committees, who said, the Committees had heard the
Council Learned on both parts, as well on the part of Mr Mollineux as against
him, and finding some matter of difficulty in the Bill, the Council desired to
be heard openly in the House.

On Monday the 19th day of December, to which day the Parliament had been last
continued, the Bill for confirmation of the Subsidy granted by the Clergy was
read tertia vice, and sent to the House of Commons by Mr Attorney and Dr
Stanhop.

Certain Amendments were offered to the House by the Committees upon the second
Bill concerning Arthur Hatch her Majesty's Ward, etc. And the same Amendments
were twice read. Whereupon both the Bill and the said Amendments were commanded
forthwith to be engrossed, which was accordingly done, and presently read the
third time, and sent to the House of Commons by Mr Attorney and Mr Dr Stanhop.
Vide concerning this matter on Thursday the 15th day of this instant December
foregoing.

The Committees upon the Bill Entitled An Act for erecting of Houses of
Correction, and punishment of Rogues, Vagabonds and Sturdy Beggars, and An Act
for the relief of the Poor, returned the same to the House with some
Amendments, which were presently twice read and commanded to be engrossed.

The Amendments in the Bill concerning Laborers formerly engrossed in
Parchment (at which exception was taken by the House of Commons, and for that
cause returned without their allowance, because the Amendments were engrossed
in Parchment, which according to the Custom and use of the House should have
been Paper, and thereupon) the Lords now commanded them to be written in Paper.

Four Bills were brought up to the Lords from the House of Commons by Sir
William Knolles and others; of which the first was the Bill for the
confirmation and establishment of the deprivation of diverse Bishops in the
beginning of her Majesty's Reign, returned into the Upper House with some
Amendments; which said Amendments were thrice read: And the second being for
the establishment of the Bishopric of Norwich, and the Possessions of the
same, against a certain pretended concealed title made thereunto, was read
prima vice. Vide concerning this matter on Thursday the 12th day, Saturday the
14th day, on Monday the 16th day, and on Thursday the 17th day of January next
ensuing.

Two Bills also of no great moment had each of them one reading; of which the
first being the Bill for the increase of people for the service and defense of
the Realm, was read prima vice.

On Tuesday the 20th day of December, Two Bills had each of them one reading;
of which the first being the Bill for erecting of Houses of Correction, and
punishment of Rogues, Vagabonds and Sturdy Beggars, was read tertia vice.

The Amendments of the Bill concerning Laborers was presented to the House
written in paper. Vide concerning this Bill on the day immediately foregoing.

The three Bills aforesaid were sent down to the House of Commons for their
consideration of the several Amendments and Provisoes added unto them, by Mr
Attorney General and Mr Dr Stanhop.

Two Bills of no great moment were sent up to the Lords from the House of
Commons; of which the last concerning Laborers was returned with the allowance
of the Amendments.

The Bill lastly for the increase of people for the service and defense of the
Realm was read secunda vice, and committed unto the Archbishop of Canterbury
and others; and the two Lords Chief Justices, the Lord Chief Baron and Mr.
Attorney General to attend their Lordships: who were appointed to meet at the
great Council Chamber at the Court at Whitehall on Wednesday the 11th day of
January next following, at two of the Clock in the Afternoon.

Dominus Custos magni Sigilli ex mandato Dominae Reginae adjornavit praesens
Parliamentum usque in 11. diem Januarii proae' sequentem hora octava.

Nota, That this Adjournment, although but for the space of twenty one days,
was by her Majesty's Commandment, being personally present, as may be directly
gathered out of those words ex mandato Dominae Reginae, notwithstanding the
word praesentis be omitted here as in diverse other places also of these
Journals of the Queens time upon the like occasion; for otherwise if her said
Majesty had not been personally present in the Upper House, this Adjournment
ought to have been by Commission under the Great Seal, as a like Adjournment
had been from Monday the 21th day of December unto Thursday the 4th day of
February then next ensuing, in the Parliament in Anno 27 Reginae Eliz. Anno
Domini 1584.

Nota also, That at the end of this Adjournment the two Houses met in their
several places without any pomp or state, and also fell to the reading of such
Bills and perfecting of such ordinary businesses as they had left unperfected
at the time of the aforesaid Adjournment. Which said new meeting of the Lords
in the Upper House is Entered as follows in the Journal Book of the Upper
House, viz.

Die Mercurii, viz. undecimo die Januarii (to which day the Parliament had been
last Adjourned on Tuesday the 20th day of December foregoing) Domini tam
Spirituales quam Temporales, quorum nomina subsequuntur, praesentes fuerunt.

Archiepiscopus Cantuarien'. Thomas Egerton Miles, Custos magni Sigilli.
Dominus Burleigh Dominus Thesaurar. Angliae.
Comites.
Comes Essex Magnus Marescallus Angliae. Comes Nottingham Magnus Seneschallus.
Comes Northumbr'. Comes Salopiae. Comes Darbiae. Vice-Comes Bindon.
Episcopi.
Episcopus London. Episcopus Roffen'. Episcopus Peterburgen'. Episcopus Bathon'
and Wellen'. Episcopus Landaven'. Episcopus Cestren'. Episcopus Cicestren'.
Barons.
Dominus Hunsdon Camerarius. Dominus Zouch. Dominus La Ware. Dominus Cobham.
Dominus Stafford. Dominus Gray de Wilton. Dominus Scroope. Dominus Stourton.
Dominus Sands. Dominus Wharton. Dominus Rich. Dominus Darcy de Chich. Dominus
North. Dominus Buckhurst. Dominus Compton.
Nota, That though I do usually observe in all these Journals never to have the
presence of the Lords transcribed, but at the beginning only of a new
Parliament, or at least a new Session; yet I have observed it here though but
at the beginning of a new meeting, in respect that the presence of the Lords
before set down at the beginning of this Parliament on Monday the 24th day of
October being much greater than that of this day, could not serve to be any
rule for the presence of those that attended at this new meeting; which is for
the most part the chiefest reason why the presence of the Lords is marked on
the first day of the Parliament, or on the next day from the first, on which
they be noted, if through the Clerk of the Upper House his negligence (as it
often happens) it be (...) the said day.

A second but less material cause why I have their names transcribed, is to see
the due places and precedences of the Lords Temporal.

This Wednesday as soon as the Lords were set, it should seem that the Earl of
Essex having been created Earl Marshall the 28th day of December last before
this instant, took his place according to his said Office, viz. next after the
Earl of Oxon Chamberlain of England, and before the Earl of Nottingham Lord
Steward and Lord Admiral.

The said Earl Marshal having taken his (...) as aforesaid, was added to the
Committees in the Bill entitled An Act for increase of people for the service
and defense of the Realm, who were appointed on Tuesday the 20th day of
December foregoing. His Lordship also was added to the Committees upon the Bill
for the relief of the Poor in times of extreme dearth, who were appointed to
meet at the great Council Chamber at Whitehall upon Friday the 13th day of this
instant January following, by two of the Clock in the Afternoon.

The Committees upon the Bill concerning Broakers and Pawntakers were appointed
to meet at the great Council Chamber, etc. upon Friday the 13th day of this
instant January following, by two of the Clock in the Afternoon.

The Bill for maintenance of Husbandry and Tillage was read secunda vice, and
referred to the same Committees which are for the Bill for increase of people,
etc. who were appointed to meet at the great Council Chamber, etc. on Tuesday
the 20th day of December foregoing, and to meet at the same time and place.

Three Bills had each of them one reading; of which the first being the Bill
for recovery of three hundred thousand Acres of waste Marish and watery grounds
in the Isle of Ely, and the Counties of Cambridge, Huntington, Northampton,
Lincoln, Norfolk and Suffolk, was read secunda vice and committed unto the Lord
Treasurer, the Earl of Essex Lord Marshal, the Earl of Nottingham Lord Admiral,
the Bishop of Peterborough, the Bishop of Bath and Wells, the Bishop of Norwich
and the Bishop of Chichester, the Lord Hunsdon Lord Chamberlain, the Lord De la
Ware, the Lord Cobham, the Lord Rich, the Lord Darcie of Chich, the Lord North
and the Lord Buckhurst; and Mr Justice Gaudie and Mr Sergeant Drew to attend
their Lordships: All which were appointed to meet at the little Chamber near
the Chamber of Parliament presence on Saturday the 14th day of January
following in the Morning before the House sit.

On Thursday the 12th day of January the Bill entitled An Act for increase of
People for the service and defense of the Realm was returned unto the House by
the Committees (who were appointed on Tuesday the 20th day of December
foregoing) and a Motion was made by the Lord Archbishop of Canterbury, the
first of the Committees, that a Conference might be had with a competent number
of chosen persons of the House of Commons for the better perfecting of the
Bill. Whereupon Mr Attorney and Mr Doctor Stanhop were addressed to the House
of Commons with a Message to that effect; and the time and place of meeting
desired to be at the great Council Chamber at the Court at Whitehall to Morrow,
being the 13th day of this instant January ensuing, by two of the Clock in the
Afternoon.

Certain Select Committees who were chosen by the House of Commons concerning
the said Bill for increase of People, etc. were sent to the Lords signifying
their allowance of the time and place appointed for meeting about that Bill;
and desired in the mean time to have delivered unto them in writing such
Objections as their Lordships do make unto the said Bill, to the end they might
be the more ready to deliver their Opinions and resolutions at the said
meeting. The Lords having considered of this Motion thought it unfit and not
agreeable to the Order of this House to deliver the same in writing; And
therefore agreed that answer should be made, that if upon verbal Conference
they should remain unsatisfied touching the said Objections, then they should
have the same delivered unto them in writing for their further consideration
thereof. Which answer was presently notified to the said select Committees. And
in the mean season the Judges were required to set down the said Objections in
writing, that it might be in readiness for the said Committees of the House of
Commons, if upon the verbal Conference they should not be satisfied. Vide
concerning this matter on Saturday the 14th day of this instant January
following.

Three Bills of no great moment had each of them one reading; of which the last
being the Bill for the making of Bays in the Counties of Essex and Suffolk,
was read secunda vice and committed unto the Lord Treasurer, the Earl of Essex
Lord Marshal, the Bishop of Norwich, the Lord Hunsdon Lord Chamberlain, the
Lord Rich, the Lord North and the Lord Buckhurst; and the Lord Chief Baron and
Mr Attorney General to attend their Lordships. Vide concerning this Attendance
of the Judges on Monday the 7th day of November foregoing.

The Bill for the establishing of the Bishopric of Norwich and the Possessions
of the same, against a certain concealed title made thereunto, was read secunda
vice. Upon this reading it was Ordered by the Lords that all parties whom this
Bill may concern should be openly heard in the House upon Saturday next in the
Morning, being the 14th day of this instant January, to the end it might be
considered whether the same may justly pass without prejudice to the said
parties, and George Lester then to be warned to attend. Vide concerning this
matter on Monday the 14th day of December foregoing; as also on Saturday the
14th day, Monday the 16th day, and Tuesday the 17th day of this instant January
following.

Another Bill also of no great moment touching Clothiers was read secunda vice,
and referred to Committees. Vide plus de ista materia die sequente.

Certain Amendments were offered unto the House by the Committees upon the Bill
Entitled An Act for the Naturalizing of certain Englishmens Children and
others born beyond the Seas. Which Amendments were presently twice read; And
thereupon both the Bill and the Amendments were read the third time, and
returned unto the House of Commons by Mr Sergeant Drew, and Mr Dr Carew.

On Friday the 13th day of January, the Bill concerning a Lease of great yearly
value procured to be passed from her Majesty by William Kirkham, was read prima
vice.

The said Kirkham and Ambrose Willoughby Esquire are to be warned to attend the
Lords on Monday Morning next, being the 16th day of this instant February, at
which time it is appointed that the said Bill shall be read the second time.
Vide touching this matter on Monday the 16th day, and Tuesday the 17th day of
this instant January following.

The Bill against deceitful stretching and tentering of Northern Cloth was read
secunda vice, and committed to the Earl of Shrewsbury, Viscount Bindon, the
Bishop of London, the Bishop of Bath and Wells, and the Bishop of Norwich, the
Lord Zouch, and the Lord Buckhurst; and the Lord Chief Baron, Mr Justice Owen
and Mr Baron Evers, to attend their Lordships. Vide concerning this attendance
of the Judges on Monday the 7th day of November foregoing.

The same Committees, time and place appointed upon the Bill for the relieving
of Clothiers, concerning the weight of short broad and colored Cloths, etc.
the former Committees being part of this number, having not had time to perfect
the same, who had been appointed yesterday.

Three Bills of no great moment had each of them one reading; of which the last
being the Bill to preserve the property of stolen Horses in the true Owners, of
Vouchers in sale of Horses in Fairs and Markets, was read tertia vice and
refused.

The Bill concerning the recovery and draining from the water certain overflown
grounds in the County of Norfolk was read secunda vice, and referred to the
same Committees upon the Bill formerly read of that kind concerning three
hundred thousand Acres, etc. (whose names see before on Wednesday the 11th day
of this instant January foregoing) with Addition of the Lord St John; and Mr
Attorney to attend; appointed to meet at the same time and place, etc. And such
parties as the same may concern to be warned to attend also.

On Saturday the 14th day of January certain Objections unto the Bill Entitled
An Act for the increase of people, etc. were set down in writing by Mr Attorney
General, and brought into the House by the Archbishop of Canterbury, the first
of the Committees. And the same was sent to the House of Commons for their
consideration thereof, according to a Proviso made by their Lordships to the
Select Committees of the House of Commons at the meeting yesterday about that
Bill, by Mr. Attorney General and Dr. Stanhop. Vide concerning this matter on
Thursday the 12th day of this instant January foregoing, as also on Friday the
20th day of the same Month following.

Upon Motion made by the Lord Archbishop that the Committees for the Bill of
Tillage had not time to perfect the same at the meeting formerly Assigned, It
was Ordered by the House that the said Committees should meet again about it at
the great Council Chamber, etc.

The like Motion was made touching the Bill of Broakers and Pawn takers, and
the like Order.

Certain Knights and Burgesses of the House of Commons sent to the Lords to
desire a Conference with a competent number of that House concerning the
Amendments and Provisoes added to the Bill Entitled An Act for erecting of
Houses of Corrections and punishment of Bogues, Vagabonds and Sturdy Beggars.
Whereupon choice was made of the Lord Archbishop, the Lord Admiral, the Earl of
Shrewsbury and the Bishop of Winchester, being part of the number formerly
appointed upon that Bill; the three Chief Justices, Mr. Sergeant Drew and Mr.
Attorney to attend. And the same presently signified to the said Knights and
Burgesses, but with this caution, That whatsoever had been amended or added by
their Lordships could not now be altered by the Orders of the House. Howbeit to
yield the House of Commons satisfaction of the reasons that moved their
Lordships to make those Amendments, they assented to the Conference, and the
meeting was appointed to be in the outward Chamber of the Upper House of
Parliament on Monday the sixteenth day of this instant January following, by
eight of the Clock in the Morning. On which said Monday see more of this matter.

The Bill for reforming of sundry abuses committed by Soldiers and others used
in her Majesty's services concerning the Wars, was read prima vice.

The Council Learned as well on the part of the Bishop of Norwich and his
Tenants, as on the part and behalf of George Lester were heard openly in the
House; but for the present no further Order or proceeding therein. Vide
touching this business on Tuesday the 20th day of December last past, and on
Thursday the 12th day of this instant January foregoing; as also on Monday the
16th day, and Tuesday the 17th day of the same Month next ensuing.

The Earl of Essex not able to attend for want of health was certified by the
Lord North.

The Bishop of Landaff absent by reason of sickness signified by the Bishop of
Chester.

On Monday the 16th day of January, to which day the Parliament had been last
continued on Saturday foregoing, Two Bills had each of them one reading; of
which the second being the Bill for confirmation of Statutes Merchant
acknowledged in the City of Lincoln and the Town corporate of Nottingham, was
read secunda vice, and committed unto the Lord Treasurer of England, the Earl
of Essex Earl Marshal, the Earl of Nottingham Lord Admiral, the Earl of
Northumberland, the Earl of Shrewsbury, the Bishop of Winchester, the Bishop of
Bath and Wells, the Bishop of Chester, the Lord Evers, the Lord North, the Lord
St. John and the Lord Buckhurst; the Lord Chief Justice of the Common Pleas, Mr
Justice Clench, Mr Sergeant Drew and Mr Attorney General to attend their
Lordships. Vide concerning this attendance of the Judges on Monday the 7th day
of November foregoing.

Report was made to the House by the Lord Archbishop of Canterbury, that upon
the meeting of such of the Lords of the Upper House as were appointed this day
to confer with certain select Knights and Burgesses of the House of Commons
concerning the Amendments and Provisoes added by their Lordships to the Bill
entitled An Act for erecting of Houses of Correction, etc. The said Knights
and Burgesses do hold themselves satisfied upon the reason alleged by their
Lordships in some part of the said Amendments, but not in all. Vide concerning
this matter on Saturday the 14th day of this instant January foregoing.

Kirkham was called into the House before their Lordships, and after he had
been heard what he was able to say in his own behalf concerning the Bill, the
same was read the second time, viz. The Bill concerning a Lease of great yearly
value procured to be passed from her Majesty by William Kirkham was read
secunda vice, and Ordered to be engrossed. Vide concerning this Bill on Friday
the 13th day of this instant January foregoing, as also on Tuesday the 17th day
of the same Month immediately ensuing.

Two Bills also had each of them one reading; of which the first being the Bill
for repressing of offenses that are of the nature of stealth, etc. was returned
unto the House by the Earl of Essex, the first of the Committees, with certain
Amendments; which Amendments were presently thrice read, and sent by Mr
Sergeant Drew and Mr Dr Stanhop to the House of Commons for their consideration.

A Motion was made, that a Proviso should be added to the Bill concerning the
Bishopric of Norwich; which Proviso was presently drawn in the House by Mr
Attorney, and thereupon read. And for the more expedition in the proceeding of
the Bill, it was thought meet, that the Lord Archbishop of Canterbury, the Earl
of Essex Lord Marshal, the Earl of Nottingham Lord Admiral, the Bishop of
London, the Lord Hunsdon Lord Chamberlain, and the Lord Cobham should confer
with a competent number of the House of Commons about the said Proviso.
Whereupon Mr Sergeant Drew and Mr Attorney were sent to the said House of
Commons to signify the same. Who presently assented to a meeting, and made
their repair to their Lordships forthwith accordingly. Vide concerning this
matter on Tuesday the 20th day of December foregoing, and on Thursday the 12th
day, and on Saturday the 14th day of this instant January last past; as also on
Tuesday the 17th day of the same Month immediately ensuing.

Four Bills were brought up to the Lords from the House of Commons; of which
the last was the Bill for confirmation and better assurance and conveyance of
certain Manors, Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments given and intended to an
Hospital or Meason de Dieu in Warwick, founded and established by the Earl of
Leicester. Vide postea concerning this Bill on to Morrow following.

On Tuesday the 17th day of January it was agreed upon in the House, that the
Committees upon the Bill for maintenance of Husbandry and Tillage (who were
appointed on Wednesday the 11th day of this instant January foregoing) should
meet for perfecting of the same at the great Council Chamber at the Court at
Whitehall this present day, by two of the Clock in the Afternoon.

The Bill concerning a Lease of great yearly value procured to be passed from
her Majesty by William Kirkham, was read tertia vice, and sent to the House of
Commons by Mr Sergeant Drew and Mr Dr Stanhop. Vide touching this business on
Friday the 13th day, and on Monday the 16th day of this instant January
foregoing.

Two Bills had each of them one reading; of which the second being the Bill for
confirmation and better assurance and Conveyance of certain Manors, Lands,
Tenements and Hereditaments given and intended to an Hospital or Meason de Dieu
in Warwick, founded and established by the late Earl of Leicester, was read
prima vice.

George Ognell and the parties that follow the Bill for the Hospital, to be
heard openly in the House by their Council Learned to Morrow the 18. day of
this instant January in the Morning. Vide concerning this business on Monday
the 16. day of this instant January foregoing, in fine Diei.

A Proviso drawn by Mr Attorney by Commandment of the House and appointed to be
added to the Bill for establishing the Bishopric of Norwich, etc. was twice
read and commanded to be engrossed; And then both the Bill and the Proviso
being read the third time, were returned to the House of Commons for their
consideration of the Proviso. Vide touching this matter on Tuesday the 20th day
of December foregoing, and on Thursday the 12. day, Saturday the 14. and on
Monday the 16. day of this instant January foregoing.

The Earl Marshal was added to the Bill concerning Accomptants.

Three Bills lastly had each of them one reading; of which the last being the
Bill for some better staying of Corn within the Land, to give liberty to
English Subjects sometimes to buy Wheat, etc. and to sell the same again in the
same kind, for the better relief of the Commonwealth. was read tertia vice and
rejected.

On Wednesday the 18th day of January, the Lord Keeper signified to the House,
that the parties that follow the Bill for the Hospital of Warwick are not
provided of their Council Learned. Whereupon the House assigned them a new day,
viz. Friday Morning the 20. day of this instant January following. Vide
concerning this matter on Monday the 16. day, and on Tuesday the 17. day of
this instant Month foregoing.

Four Bills of no great moment had each of them one reading; of which the two
last, the one for the avoiding of bringing in of Pins, and the other for the
better furnishing and supplying of skilful Surgeons in and to the Land and
Sea services for her Majesty and the Realm, were each of them upon the second
reading rejected.

The Earl Marshal was added to the Bill for Broakers and Pawn-takers.

The Committees upon the Bill for confirmation of Statute Merchants in the
Cities of Lincoln and Town of Nottingham, and the Committees upon the Bill
concerning Tellors and Receivors were appointed to meet this present day.

The Council learned on both sides upon the Bill concerning Mr Mollineux were
appointed to be heard openly in the House on Saturday next, being the 21th day
of this instant January, and warning to be given in the mean while thereof to
the parties.

The Amendments agreed upon by the Council upon the Bill of Tillage (who were
appointed on Wednesday the 11th day of this instant January foregoing) were
appointed to be brought into the House to Morrow Morning by the Lord Chief
Justice of England.

The Lord Buckhurst signified, That upon a Letter written unto him by the Lord
Marquess of Winchester, notifying his present sickness whereby he was not able
to give his Attendance as yet, the said Lord Buckhurst having moved her Majesty
therein according to the request of the said Lord Marquess, it pleased her
Majesty to hold him excused for the present until his recovery, and commanded
that he should then give his Attendance.

On Thursday the 19th day of January the Bill for reforming of certain abuses
touching Wine Casks was read secunda vice, and committed unto the Lord Burleigh
Lord Treasurer, the Earl Marshal, the Earl of Nottingham Lord Admiral, the
Bishop of Rochester, the Bishop of Chichester, the Lord North, the Lord
Buckhurst, the Lord Howard of Walden; and Mr Justice Owen and Mr Sergeant Drew
to attend their Lordships. Vide concerning this attendance of the Judges on
Monday the 7th day of November foregoing) which said Committees were appointed
to meet at the little Council Chamber at the Court at Whitehall at three of the
Clock in the Afternoon.

Certain Amendments and a Proviso was brought into the House and delivered, by
the Archbishop of Canterbury, the first of the Committees upon the Bill of
Maintenance of Husbandry, etc. and the same being twice read were commanded to
be engrossed.

Answer was returned in writing from the House of Commons, and delivered by
certain Knights and Burgesses sent for that purpose, unto the Objections taken
by their Lordships to some Points of the Bill entitled An Act for the increase
of People for the service and defense of the Realm; which objections were also
formerly delivered unto them in writing upon their request made unto their
Lordships.

Certain selected Persons of the House of Commons, viz. Sir William Knolls and
Sir Edward Hobby Knights, with diverse others coming from the said House of
Commons, in delivered a Message signifying that the said Knights and Burgesses
desired to receive satisfaction, from the Lords concerning an Innovation (as
the said Knights and Burgesses supposed) very lately begun in the Upper House
in delivering of an Answer from the Lords by the Mouth of the Lord Keeper, in
other form and manner than was pretended by the Knights and Burgesses to have
been in former times used, and, as they did interpret it, to the prejudice and
derogation of the liberty of the House of Commons. For whereas on the
fourteenth day of this instant January foregoing, Sir Walter Raleigh Knight
with diverse others of the said House of Commons were sent up to the Lords to
deliver a certain Message to the House, after Consultation had thereon by the
Lords, and after signification given to the said Sir Walter Raleigh and the
rest (staying in the outward Room for Answer) that they might come in to
receive the same; it was thought meet that the Lord Keeper should deliver the
said Answer sitting in his place, and all and every of the Lords keeping their
places, and not going down to the Bar as the use and form is, when the Lords
either receive Bills or Message from the House of Commons, and as the Lord
Keeper had done once or twice before by Error, or not attending the Formality
and Order of the House in that Point. This was the Exception taken by the
Message delivered this day from the Knights and Burgesses of the same House of
Commons, wherein they desire to receive satisfaction as is before mentioned.

Upon which Message the Lords having consulted and delivered their Opinions
touching the said Order and Custom of the House, as it had been observed and
particularly noted and remembered by some of them that were the most ancient and
of longest continuance in Parliaments, and especially by the Lord Burleigh Lord
Treasurer, the most ancient Parliament man of any that were at that time
present either of the Upper House or House of Commons, and likewise by the Lord
Archbishop of Canterbury, and by the Lord Admiral, the Lord North, the Lord
Buckhurst and others, that had been present in many Parliaments; It was
resolved that the Order and usage of the House was and is, That when any Bills
or Messages be brought from the House of Commons to be preferred to the Upper
House, the Lord Keeper and the rest of the Lords are to arise from their
places, and to go down to the Bar, there to meet such as come from the said
House of Commons, and from them to receive in that place their Messages or
Bills: But contrariwise when any Answer is to be delivered by the Lord Keeper,
in the name and behalf of the House, to such Knights and Burgesses as came from
the House of Commons, the said Knights and Burgesses are to receive the same
standing toward the lower end of the said Upper House without the Bar, and the
Lord Keeper is to deliver the same sitting in his place with his head covered,
and all the Lords keeping their places; and that whenever it had been
otherwise done, it had been by error and mistaking, and therefore not to be
drawn into an Example or Precedent as it was acknowledged by the Lord Keeper
this day and the rest of the Lords, that the going of the said Lord Keeper and
the rest of the Lords from their places to the Bar some few days before, once
or twice, to give Answer to some of the House of Commons (whereof the said
House of Commons seemed to take some advantage) was only by miscognizance or
rather for want of due remembrance at that present of the Order and Custom of
the House, whereunto their Lordships (having regard rather to dispatch of
matters of importance in the House, than to formalities) were not greatly
intentive. This to have been the ancient usage of the House, and that the same
ought still to be, was concluded by common and general consent, both upon
particular remembrances and observations of the like course and Order holden
aforetime by other Lords that held the place in the House of Lord Chancellor or
Lord Keeper, and also by diverse reasons produced and alleged to prove and
show, that the said Order does best stand with the dignity and gravity of the
House, and with the convenience and aptness for dispatch of affairs
appertaining to the Parliament; and that the contrary course is both undecent
and inconvenient.

This being so resolved and concluded, it was agreed that Mr Attorney General
and Mr. Sergeant Drew should go down to the House of Commons, and signify from
the Lords to the Knights and Burgesses, That if they would send any of that
House up to the Lords to receive Answer unto their aforesaid Demands, Answer
should be given them. Whereunto the said Knights and Burgesses returned
signification of their assent by the said Mr Attorney General and Mr Sergeant
Drew. And in very little time after sent up accordingly the same persons who
before had been sent to demand satisfaction. But being come into the House, and
having placed themselves at the lower end of the said room, (as at other times
they accustomed, except the Lord Keeper and the rest of the Lords would come
from their places and meet them at the Bar to deliver them Answer) the Lord
Keeper moved them to come nearer to receive Answer. And when they perceived
that the Lords were resolved not to come from their places to the Bar, they
protested by the Mouth of Sir William Knolles, that they had no Commission to
receive Answer in that form. And so refusing to receive any Answer, departed.
The question and difference thus remaining betwixt the Houses, it was
afterward upon a Motion sent down from the Lords to the House of Commons
agreed on both parts, that a Conference should be had, and that the aforesaid
selected persons of the said House of Commons, or so many of them as should be
needful should meet with diverse of the Lords of the Upper House (being
nominated by the House for that purpose) in the outward great Chamber before
the Chamber of Parliament presence, to debate the matter and bring it to a
conclusion. Which Meeting and Conference being assented unto, and afterward
accordingly there performed on the.... of January, and the Questions debated
and the reasons and observation of former time for the aforesaid Order and
Custom of the House being alleged by the Lord Archbishop of Canterbury, the
Lord Burleigh Lord Treasurer, the Earl of Nottingham Lord Admiral, the Lord
North and the Lord Buckhurst, that had been present in many Parliaments, (and
especially by the Lord Treasurer the most ancient Parliament Man) it was found
and observed that the Order and Custom of the House was as is before written;
videlicet, that when any Bills or Messages are brought from the House of
Commons to be presented to the Upper House, the Lord Keeper and the rest of the
Lords are to arise from their places and to go down to the Bar, there to meet
such as come from the House of Commons, and from them to receive in that place
their Messages or Bills: But contrariwise when any Answer is to be delivered by
the Lord Keeper in the name and behalf of the House to such Knights and
Burgesses as come from the House of Commons, the said Knights and Burgesses are
to receive the same standing toward the lower end of the said Upper house
without the Bar, and the Lord Keeper is to deliver the same sitting in his
place with his Head covered, and all the Lords keeping their places. And
thereupon the House of Commons was satisfied, and the same form was afterward
kept accordingly.

On Friday the 20th day of January, the Answer that came yesterday from the
House of Commons to the Objections taken by their Lordships to some points of
the Bill Entitled An Act for the increase of people for the service and
defense of the Realm, was by the Order of the House referred and delivered to
the Lords Committees formerly appointed upon that Bill, on Tuesday the 20th day
of December foregoing, who were required to consider thereof and to make their
Report of their Opinions concerning the same.

The Bill for punishment of Rogues, Vagabonds and Sturdy Beggars was read prima
vice, A former Bill of that nature having been rejected in the House of Commons.

The Bill for the maintenance of Husbandry and Tillage was read tertia vice;
and the Amendments and Proviso were thrice read, together with the Bill, and
were sent down to the House of Commons for their consideration of the
Amendments and Proviso by Mr Attorney General and Mr Dr Stanhop.

The Bill for reforming of sundry abuses committed by Soldiers and others in
her Majesty's Services concerning the Wars was read prima vice. A former Bill
of this nature having been considered of by the Committees was by them refused
for many defects found therein, and this preferred to the House instead thereof.

The House having not time to hear the Council Learned on the behalf of George
Ognell and those that follow the Bill for the Hospital of Warwick, as was
formerly appointed, a new time was appointed for the hearing of the same, viz.
on Monday Morning next, being the 23th day of this instant January.

Four Bills were brought up to the Lords from the House of Commons by Sir
William Knolles and others; of which the first being the Bill to reform deceit
and breaches of Trust touching Lands given to Charitable uses, was read prima
vice.

On Saturday the 21th day of January, Four Bills of no great moment had each of
them one reading; of which the second being the Bill for repealing of a branch
of a Statute made in the thirty fourth year of Hen. 8. Entitled the Ordinance
of Wales, was read secunda vice, and committed unto the Archbishop of
Canterbury, the Lord Marshall, the Earl of Shrewsbury, the Earl of Worcester,
the Bishop of Worcester, the Bishop of Landaff, the Bishop of Chester, the Lord
La Ware, the Lord Rich, the Lord Chandois and the Lord Compton; and the Lord
Chief Baron and Mr Baron Evers to attend their Lordships. Vide concerning this
Attendance of the Judges upon the Lords Committees on Monday the 7th day of
November foregoing.

The parties on both sides concerning the Bill of Edward Mollineux were openly
heard by their Council; and thereupon the said Bill was referred to Committees,
etc. Vide touching this Bill on Tuesday the 13th day, and on Saturday the 17th
day of December foregoing.

On Monday the 23th day of January, to which day the Parliament had been last
continued on Saturday foregoing, Three Bills of no great moment had each of
them one reading; of which the first being the Bill for establishing a Jointure
to Anne Lady Wentworth was read prima vice.

Five Bills were brought up to the Lords from the House of Commons; of which
the first being the Bill for Naturalizing of certain Englishmens Children and
others born beyond the Seas, was returned with the allowance of the Amendments
expedited. And the third for repressing of offenses that are of the nature of
stealth, and are not Felonies by the Laws of the Realm, was likewise returned
with allowance of the Amendments expedited.

Committees were appointed to confer with a competent number of the House of
Commons concerning the Bill Entitled An Act for the increase of people for the
service and defense of the Realm, and the meeting desired to be to Morrow
Morning the 24th day of this instant January before the House sit, which the
House of Commons Assented unto, viz. the Earl of Shrewsbury, the Lord Viscount
Bindon and others.

The Committees that were appointed for Conference the 12th day of December
foregoing upon the Bill concerning Tellors, Receivors, etc. were now appointed
to meet (adding unto them the Earl Marshal) to Morrow, etc. the meeting also
assented unto by the House of Commons with a competent number of them.

The Council Learned on part of George Ognell, and on the behalf of the
Hospital of Warwick, etc. were openly heard in the House. Vide concerning this
business on Monday the 16th day, Tuesday the 17th day, and Friday the 20th day
of this instant January foregoing.

Excuse was made by the Bishop of London for the Bishop of Norwich in regard of
his unhealthiness.

The Committees in the Bill for punishment of Rogues, Vagabonds, etc. (who were
appointed on Saturday the 21th day of this instant January foregoing) returned
the same to the House with some Amendments by the Lord Archbishop of
Canterbury, and the Lord Chief Justice required to consider of the Amendments.

Two Bills were brought up to the Lords from the House of Commons; of which the
first being that Lessees may enjoy their Leases against all Patentees, their
Heirs and Assigns, notwithstanding any default of payment of their Rents during
the time that the Reversion or Inheritance remained in the Crown, was presented
by Sir Robert Cecill and others.

On Tuesday the 24th day of January, Three Bills of no great moment had each of
them their first reading; of which the first was, that no person robbing any
House in the day, although no person be therein, shall be admitted to have
benefit of Clergy.

The Bill Entitled An Act for reforming of sundry abuses committed by
Soldiers and others used in her Majesty's Services concerning the Wars, was
returned by the Lord Marshal second of the Committees, with sundry Amendments
thought meet to be added; which Amendments were presently twice read, and after
consideration thereof had, and much debate whether the Bill should so pass or
no, it was thought necessary to be recommitted to the said Committees (who were
appointed on Monday the 16. day of this instant January foregoing) and the time
and place appointed presently at the little Chamber near the Parliaments
presence. The Bill was brought in again with the same Amendments and no
Alteration, and thereupon commanded to be engrossed.

The Bill entitled An Act for the relieving of Clothiers concerning the weight
of short, broad and colored Cloths to be made within the Counties of Suffolk
and Essex, was returned to the House by the Earl of shrewsbury the first of the
Committees, who made Report that upon hearing of both Parties, and upon due
consideration of the reasons and allegations by them alleged, the Committees
thought there could not be any further proceedings in the same. Whereupon a new
Bill was presented bearing this Title, viz. An Act touching the making of
short, broad, course colored Cloths in the Counties of Suffolk and Essex,
which was presently read prima vice.

The Bill for punishment of Rogues, Vagabonds, etc. was brought into the House
by the Lord Chief Justice with certain Amendments.

It was debated in the House whether Amendments upon a Bill being brought into
the House by the Committees, may afterward be contradicted or spoken against
by any of the Committees: but the doubt was left for the present unresolved.
Vide on Thursday the 12th day of November in the Parliament. de Anno 43 Regin.
Eliz. where this doubt was cleared and ruled affirmatively.

On Wednesday the 25th day of January, Three Bills had each of them one
reading; of which the last was the Bill, that Lessees may enjoy their Leases
against all Patentees their Heirs and Assigns, notwithstanding any default of
payment of their Rents during the time that the Reversion or Inheritance
remained in the Crown.

Sir Moile Finch to be heard by his Council Learned to Morrow openly in the
House concerning this Bill.

Four Bills of no great moment were brought up to the Lords from the House of
Commons; of which the first was the Bill for maintenance of Husbandry and
Tillage.

Two Bills had each of them one reading; of which the first being the Bill for
reforming of sundry abuses by Soldiers and others used in her Majesty's
Services concerning the Wars, was read tertia vice.

The Earl Marshal informing that the Committees upon the Bill for the lawful
making of Bays, etc. (who had been appointed on Thursday the 12th day of this
instant January foregoing) had not time at the day formerly assigned; and
moving for a new day to be appointed for their meeting, the House appointed
that the said Committees should meet for that purpose this Afternoon at the
said Earl Marshals Chamber.

Notice was given to the House by the Lord Treasurer, that the Committees upon
the Bill concerning Tellors, Receivors, etc. had a meeting with a select number
of the House of Commons to confer upon the Objections and Answers touching that
Bill Yesterday in the Afternoon, according to the Order taken the 23th day of
January: But for as much as the said number of the House of Commons at the
meeting affirmed that they had no Authority to undertake the debating of the
said Objections and Answers (otherwise than to speak as they should see cause
as private men) and desired that the Answer might be communicated to the said
Commons in writing; the Lords therefore sent down the said Answers to the House
of Commons by the hands of Mr Attorney General, and Mr Doctor Stanhop.

The Committees upon the Bill concerning the draining of Waste and Marish
grounds, and (who had been appointed on Wednesday the 11th day of this instant
January foregoing) were appointed to meet at the Earl Marshals Chamber this day
by two of the Clock in the Afternoon.

The Amendments upon the Bill for punishment of Rogues, Vagabonds, etc. were
twice read; And thereupon the Bill with the said Amendments was commanded to be
engrossed.

On Thursday the 26th day of January, the Bill to enable Edward Mollineux to
sell his Lands for the payment of his debts, etc. was returned by the Earl
Marshal the second of the Committees, by reason of some of the Kindred of the
said Edward Mollineux who opposed themselves against the Bill. A Motion was
therefore made that the Cause might be ended by some Arbitrary Course.
Whereupon the Parties on both sides were called into the House and moved to
that purpose; unto which they assented, and made choice of the Earl of Rutland,
the Lord Bishop of London, and the Lord Mountjoy, who were appointed to meet
this Afternoon ( Vide concerning this matter on Tuesday the 17th day of
December foregoing.)

Six Bills of no great moment had each of them one reading; of which the fifth
being the Bill for punishment of Rogues, Vagabonds and Sturdy Beggars was read
tertia vice, and sent down to the House of Commons by Mr Sergeant Drew and Mr
Attorney General.

The Bill for the lawful making of Bays, etc. was returned by the Earl Marshal
the second of the Committees, with a Proviso thought meet to be added; which
Proviso was twice read, and commanded to be engrossed.

The Bill to reform deceits and breaches of Trust touching Lands given to
Charitable uses, was returned to the House by the Archbishop of Canterbury, the
first of the Committees, with some Amendments, and a Proviso thought meet to be
added, which were twice read, and thereupon Commandment given that the said
Amendments should be written in Paper, and the Proviso engrossed in Parchment
ready for a third reading.

Upon a Motion by the Earl Marshal that the Committees in the Bill against lewd
and wandering persons (who were appointed Yesterday) had not convenient time
this Morning to perfect the said Bill according to the Order of the House
agreed upon Yesterday; their Lordships appointed the said Committees to meet
again about the same to Morrow Morning before the House sit.

The Bill entitled An Act for the increase of people for the service and
defense of the Realm, was returned to the House by the Earl of Shrewsbury, the
first of the Committees. And because it seemed to all the Committees appointed
for this Bill (together with the Judges) that notwithstanding the Conference
with diverse selected persons of the House of Commons, this Bill could not
proceed; Order was given to the Judges, and especially to the Lord Chief
Justice, to draw a new Bill. Whereupon this new Bill following was brought into
the House.

The Bill against decaying of Towns and Houses of Husbandry was read prima vice.

The Bill against carrying of Pelts, etc. was returned into the House by the
Earl Marshal.

Excuse was made by the Lord Admiral for the Earl of Hereford's absence for
want of health.

The like excuse by the Lord Chandois for the Lord La Ware.

The Earl Marshal signified unto the House that the Lord Mordant and the Lord
Sheffeild have leave of her Majesty for their absence.

On Friday the 27th day of January, Two Bills of no great moment had each of
them one reading; of which the first being the Bill to prohibit the carrying of
Herrings beyond the Seas was read secunda vice: but no mention that it was
committed.

The Bill against decaying of Towns and Houses of Husbandry was read secunda
vice.

Certain Amendments upon this Bill were drawn by the Lord Chief Justice, and
being allowed by the House were also twice read; and thereupon the Bill with
the said Amendments was commanded presently to be engrossed.

The Bill touching the making of short broad, course colored Cloths in the
Counties of Suffolk and Essex was upon the second reading committed unto the
Earl of Shrewsbury, Lord Viscount Bindon, the Lord Bishop of London, the Bishop
of Bath and Wells, the Bishop of Norwich, the Lord Hunsdon Lord Chamberlain,
the Lord Zouch, the Lord Wharton, the Lord Darcie of Chich, and the Lord
Buckhurst; and the Lord Chief Justice of England, the Lord Chief Baron, Mr
Justice Owen and Mr Baron Evers to attend their Lordships.

Two Bills lastly had each of them their third reading; of which the first
being the Bill to reform deceits and breaches of Trust touching Lands given to
charitable uses with some Amendments, was returned to the House of Commons by
Mr Sergeant Drew and Mr Doctor Stanhop for their consideration of the said
Amendments.

The Lord Treasurer took his place this day as Baron of Burleigh, between the
Lord Buckhurst and the Lord Compton.

The Lord Admiral took his place as Earl of Nottingham, between the Earl of
Lincoln and the Lord Viscount Bindon.

And the Lord Chamberlain his place as Baron of Hunsdon, between the Lord
Chandois and the Lord St John of Bletso.

On Saturday the 28th day of January, the Bill for the lawful making of Bays,
etc. The Bill to restrain the excessive making of Malt, and one other of no
great moment were each of them read tertia vice, and sent down to the House of
Commons by Mr Sergeant Drew and Doctor Carew.

The Bill for establishing a Jointure to Anne Lady Wentworth was read secunda
vice, and committed unto the Earl of Essex Lord Marshal, the Earl of
Northumberland, the Earl of Shrewsbury, the Bishop of Winchester, the Bishop of
Bath and Wells, the Bishop of Norwich, the Lord Chamberlain, the Lord Zouch,
the Lord Cobham, the Lord Sands, the Lord Chandois and the Lord Compton; and
Mr Baron Clerk and Mr Baron Evers or either of them to attend their Lordships.

The Bill lastly for confirmation of Statutes Merchants acknowledged in the
Town Corporate of Newcastle upon Tine, was read secunda vice. But no mention is
made in the Original Journal Book that this Bill was committed; for at the next
sitting, viz. Die Lunae 30o die Januarii, the same Bill was read tertia vice,
and sent to the House of Commons by Doctor Carew and Doctor Stanhop.

On Monday the 30th day of January, to which day the Parliament had been last
continued on Saturday foregoing, the Bill for retailing Broakers and other
Pawn-takers was returned to the House by the Lord Archbishop of Canterbury, the
first of the Committees. And because the Committees found many defects therein,
so that they thought the same unfit to proceed, they therefore together with
the said Bill presented a new Bill entitled as the former, which was read
prima vice.

The Bill touching the making of short broad course colored Cloths (which was
committed on Friday the 27th day of this instant January foregoing) was
returned to the House by the first of the Committees; and therewithal, because
the same was by the said Committees thought defective, a new Bill of the same
title was likewise presented.

Two Bills of no great moment had each of them one reading; of which the second
being the Bill for confirmation of Statutes Merchant acknowledged in the Town
Corporate of Newcastle upon Tine, was read tertia vice, and sent down to the
House of Commons by Dr Carew and Dr Stanhop.

Seven Bills were sent up to the Lords from the House of Commons; of which the
fourth being the Bill against lewd and wandering persons pretending themselves
to be Soldiers or Mariners, was returned with the allowance of an Amendment
which was added by the Lords.

Sir Robert Cecill and other Knights and Burgesses that brought the seven Bills
last mentioned, and moved the House for a Conference concerning the Bill sent
from their Lordships Entitled An Act for reforming of sundry abuses committed
by Soldiers and others used in her Majesty's Services concerning the Wars, to
which Conference the Lords assented, and the time and place appointed to Morrow
in the Afternoon at the Great Council Chamber at the Court at Whitehall, and
the same Committees that were formerly appointed on Monday the 16th day of this
instant January foregoing, and the Earl of Sussex, the Earl of Shrewsbury, the
Earl of Rutland, the Lord Zouch and the Lord Cobham were added unto them.

The Bill Entitled An Act for the enabling of Edmund Mollineux Esquire to sell the
Lands, etc. was returned to the House by the Earl of Rutland, the first of the
Committees or Arbitrators, with Amendments, which were twice read, and agreed,
that the Bill should be engrossed. ( Vide touching this matter on Tuesday the
13th day, and on Wednesday the 14th day of December foregoing, as also on
Thursday the 26th day of this instant January last past.)

A new meeting was appointed for the Committees upon the Bill Entitled. An Act
for reformation of certain abuses touching Wine-Casks, (who were appointed on
Thursday the 19th day of this instant January foregoing) and the time and place
appointed to Morrow Morning in the little Chamber near the Parliament presence.

On Tuesday the 31th day of January, the Committees in the Bill concerning
Lessees and Patentees (who had been appointed on Wednesday the 25th day of this
instant January foregoing) were this day appointed to meet to Morrow the first
day of February following in the Afternoon in the little Chamber near the
Parliament presence, and the Judges there required to attend.

The Bill for retailing Broakers and other Pawntakers was read secunda vice,
and was referred to the Committees formerly appointed for that Bill (on
Saturday the 14th day of this instant January foregoing) with Addition of some
Lords, who met presently about the same, and returned the Bill with some
Amendments; which being presently twice read, the Bill was commanded to be
engrossed.

The Bill for reformation of certain abuses touching Wine-Casks was returned by
the Earl of Nottingham, the second of the Committees, with some Amendments;
which were presently twice read, and the Bill commanded to be engrossed.

Three Bills of no great moment had each of them one reading; of which the last
being the Bill concerning Garret de Malynes and John Hunger Merchant Strangers
was read prima vice.

The Bill for establishing a Jointure to Anne Lady Wentworth was returned unto
the House with some Amendments, and a Proviso thought meet to be added; which
Amendments and Proviso were twice read, and the Bill commanded to be engrossed.

A Motion was made from the House of Commons by Sir John Fortescue and others,
that some new time might be appointed for Conference about the Bill Entitled
An Act to reform sundry abuses committed by Soldiers, etc. in regard they had
appointed some other meeting this Afternoon for preparing of a Bill of
Accomptants in readiness to proceed, their Lordships having considered of the
Motion, made Answer by the Lord Keeper, That they wished (for some good
consideration) that the appointed time, viz. this Afternoon might hold for this
Conference, supposing that if it pleased the Committees of the House of Commons
to come somewhat the sooner this Afternoon for this purpose, they might well
enough perform both the one and the other. Vide diem praecedentem.

Two Bills lastly had each of them one reading; of which the first being the
Bill for enabling of Edmund Mollineux Esquire to sell Lands for payment of his
Debts and Legacies, was read tertia vice, and sent down to the House of Commons
by Sergeant Drew and Dr Carew. Vide concerning this matter on Tuesday the 13th
day, and on Saturday the 17th day of December foregoing; as also on Thursday
the 20th day, and on Monday the 30th day of this instant January last past.

On Wednesday the first day of February, the Bill Entitled An Act for the
reviving, continuance, Explanation, perfecting and repealing of diverse Statutes
was returned to the House by the Lord Chief Justice with some Amendments, which
were presently twice read, and thereupon commandment given to be prepared ready
in written Paper for a third reading. It was agreed that a Conference should be
had with some of the House of Commons about this Bill upon Friday Morning next.

The Bill for establishing of the Lands given by John Bedford's Will was read
secunda vice, and committed; which said Committees were appointed to meet
presently in the little Chamber near the Parliament presence, who returning
with some Amendments and a Proviso thought meet to be added to the said Bill,
the said Amendments and Proviso were forthwith twice read, and the Bill
thereupon commanded to be engrossed.

Two Bills had each of them one reading; of which the second being the Bill for
Confirmation of the Jointure of the Lady Varney Wife of Sir Edmund Varney, was
returned to the House by the Earl of Shrewsbury, the second of the Committees,
with some Amendments, which were presently twice read, and thereupon commanded
to be engrossed.

The Bill lastly concerning Garret de Malynes and John Hunger, Merchants
Strangers, was read secunda vice; and the parties on both sides are to be heard
openly in the House by their Council Learned on Friday Morning next.

On Friday the third day of February, to which day the Parliament had been last
continued on Wednesday foregoing, Three Bills had each of them one reading; of
which the first being the Bill for the establishing the Lands given by John
Bedford's Will etc. was read tertia vice, and sent to the House of Commons by
Sergeant Drew and Doctor Stanhop, for their consideration of the Amendments and
a Proviso added.

The Amendments and a Proviso in the Bill for recovering of three hundred
thousand Acres more or less of Waste Marish and Watery grounds, etc. were this
day twice read, and thereupon Commandment given that the said Amendments should
be written in Paper, and the Proviso engrossed in Parchment, ready for a third
reading.

Four Bills were brought up to the Lords from the House of Commons; of which
the first was the Bill concerning a Lease of great yearly value procured to be
passed from her Majesty by William Kirkham the younger.

The Bill against deceitful stretching and tentering of Northern Cloths was
returned to the House by the Earl of Shrewsbury, the first of the Committees,
with some Amendments, and a Proviso thought meet to be added; which Amendments
and Proviso were twice read, and Commandment given that the said Amendments
should be written in Paper and the Proviso engrossed in Parchment ready for a
third reading.

The Council Learned as well on the part of Garrett de Malynes, as of John
Hunger, etc. was openly this day heard in the House. I i would concerning this Bill
in fine diei praecedentis.

Report was made by the Lord Treasurer, what the substance of the Conference
was between their Lordships and certain select Members of the House of Commons
concerning the Bill for reviving, continuing and repealing of diverse Statutes:
And the same was referred to the Lord Chief Justice and others for their
further consideration.

On Saturday the 4th day of February the Bill concerning Broakers and
Pawn-takers, the Bill against the deceitful tentering of Northern Cloths, and
the Bill for reviving, continuance and perfecting of diverse Statutes were each
of them read tertia vice, and passed the House, and were sent down to the House
of Commons (of which the two latter were returned) for their consideration of
certain Amendments and Provisoes added by their Lordships.

Two Bills had each of them one reading; of which the second being the Bill for
Confirmation of Letters Patents granted by the Queens Majesty to the Mayor,
etc. of the City of Lincoln in the thirty ninth year of her Reign for the
taking the acknowledgment of Statutes Merchants, was upon the second reading
committed unto the Earl of Shrewsbury, the Earl of Rutland, the Bishop of Bath
and Wells, the Bishop of Chester, the Lord Zouch, the Lord Windsor, the Lord
Wharton, the Lord Rich; and Mr Justice Clinch to attend their Lordships.

The Bill concerning Garret de Malynes and John Hunger, Merchants Strangers,
was read tertia vice. Vide concerning this matter on Wednesday the first day
and on Friday the third day of this Instant February foregoing.

The Proviso added in the House of Commons concerning the Jointure of Christian
Lady Sands was this day twice read.

The Proviso thought meet by the Committees in the Bill concerning the draining
and recovery from the Water of certain overflowen grounds in the County of
Norfolk, was twice read and Ordered to be engrossed.

A Motion was made by the Lord Buckhurst, that the County of Sussex might be
added to the general Bill of surrounded Grounds.

The like motion was made by the Lord North and others for the Counties of
Somerset and Essex: whereunto the House assented. And the said three Counties
were accordingly added to the rest.

On Monday the 6th day of February, the Bill for the confirmation of Letters
Patents granted by the Queens Majesty to the Mayor, etc. of the City of
Lincoln, etc. was returned to the House by the Earl of Shrewsbury, the first of
the Committees, with some Amendments, and a Proviso thought meet to be added.

The Bill that Lessees may enjoy their Leases against all Patentees their Heirs
and Assigns was returned to the House by the Lord Archbishop of Canterbury, the
first of the Committees, with a Proviso thought necessary to be added.

Excuse was made by the Earl Marshal for the absence of the Earl of Sussex, in
regard of his unhealthiness. The like excuse was made by the Bishop of
Rochester for the Bishop of Coventry and Litchfield.

Four Bills were brought up to the Lords from the House of Commons; of which
the first was for the more speedy payment of the Queens Majesty's debts, etc.
and the second against the Excess of Apparel.

The Bill for the explanation of an Act for the necessary relief of Soldiers
and Mariners, etc. The Bill for the recovering of three hundred thousand Acres
of Marsh-grounds more or less, with one other of no great moment, were each of
them read tertia vice and passed the House, and were sent down to the House of
Commons by Dr Carew and Dr Stanhop.

Dominus Custos magni Sigilli continuavit praesens Parliamentum usque in
secundam horam postmeridian. At which time the Amendments and Proviso added by
the Committees to the Bill for Confirmation of Letters Patents granted to the
Mayor, etc. of the City of Lincoln, etc. were twice read.

The Proviso also added by the House of Commons to the Bill for Confirmation of
the Jointure of Christian Lady Sands, was read the third time, and thereupon
the Bill was expedited.

Three Bills also had each of them one reading; of which the first being the
Bill for the more speedy paying of the Queens Majesty's debts, and for the
better explanation of the Act made Anno 13o of the Queen, entitled An Act to
make the Lands, Tenements, Goods and Chattels of Tellors, Receivors, etc.
liable to the payment of their Debts, was read secunda vice.

Dominus Custos magni Sigilli continuavit praesens Parliamentum usque in diem
crastinum hora nona.

On Tuesday the 7th day of February, Three Bills had each of them one reading;
of which the last being the Bill against the Excess of Apparel, was upon the
second reading committed unto the Earl Marshal, the Lord Admiral, the Earl of
Northumberland and others.

Three Bills were brought up to the Lords from the House of Commons by Sir
William Knolles, Sir John Forteseue and others; of which the second being the
Bill against decaying of Towns and Houses of Husbandry was sent back with some
Amendments, which were presently twice read.

The Bill that Lessees may enjoy their Leases against all Patentees their Heirs
and Assigns, notwithstanding any default of payment of their Rent during the
time that the Reversion or Inheritance remained in the Crown, was returned with
some Amendments by the Lord Chief Justice, with a Proviso thought meet to be
added. Which Proviso and Amendments were once read.

A Message was sent to the House of Commons from their Lordships by Mr Sergeant
Drew and Mr Doctor Carew for a Conference concerning the Bill against excess of
Apparel, with a competent number of the said House, and the time and place was
desired to be this Afternoon by two of the Clock in the great Chamber of the
Upper House of Parliament.

Dominus Custos magni Sigilli continuavit praesens Parliamentum usque in horam
secundam postmeridianam.

At which time the Amendments in the Bill against decaying of Towns and Houses
of Husbandry were read secunda vice.

The Amendments and Provisoes thought meet to be added to the Bill concerning
Patentees were read the second time, and thereupon commandment was given, that
the said Proviso should be engrossed in Parchment, and the Amendments written
in Paper ready for the third reading.

The Bill for Amendments of Highways in the Counties of Sussex, Surrey and
Kent was read secunda vice.

The Bill for reviving, continuance, Explanation and perfecting of diverse
Statutes was returned with their allowance of the Amendments and Proviso added
by their Lordships.

Dominus Custos magni Sigilli continuavit praesens Parliamentum usque in diem
crastinum.

On Wednesday the 8th day of February, the Amendments in the Bill against
decaying of Towns and Houses of Husbandry were read the third time as they were
engrossed in the Bill; And thereupon the same Bill with the Amendments were
expedited.

The Bill also for Amendments of Highways in the Counties of Sussex, Surrey
and Kent, was read tertia vice and expedited.

The Bill that Lessees may enjoy their Leases against all Patentees, etc.
notwithstanding any default of payment of their Rents during the time that the
Reversion or Inheritance remained in the Crown, was returned to the House of
Commons by Doctor Carew and Doctor Stanhop for their considerations of the said
Amendments and Provisoes.

No continuance of the Parliament is Entered in the Original Book of the Upper
House, which seems to have happened by the Error of Thomas Smith Esquire, at
this time Clerk of the same.

On Thursday the 9th day of February, Seven Bills were brought up to the Lords
from the House of Commons; of which the first being the Bill for the further
continuance and Explanation of an Act made in the thirty fifth year of the
Queens Majesty's Reign that now is, was returned with the allowance of the
Amendments expedited.

And the second Bill for establishing a Jointure to Anne Lady Wentworth, now
Wife of William Pope Esquire, and for the better enabling of the said William
Pope to sell certain of his Lands for the payment of his Debts, was returned
with some Amendments, which were presently thrice read, and the Bill was
thereupon expedited, and five others of no great moment.

Dominus Custos magni Sigilli continuavit praesens Parliamentum usque in horam
tertiam postmeridianam.

Her Majesty somewhat after the said hour of three this Afternoon came unto the
Upper House, and being there sat with diverse Lords Spiritual and Temporal, the
Knights, Citizens and Burgesses of the House of Commons, with Christopher
Yelverton Sergeant at Law their Speaker, having waited a good while at the said
Upper House Door, were at length admitted into the said Upper House, viz. as
many of them as could conveniently get in; And the said Speaker having made his
three Reverences unto her Majesty spoke in effect as follows.

First he showed the happiness of a Commonwealth governed by Laws, by which
Subjects are held in due obedience; which her Majesty observing, had now called
a Parliament for the preservation of some Laws, amending of others, cutting off
of unnecessary Statutes, and the making of new, never before Enacted; And that
her Majesty's Subjects in this Parliament, considering the strength of the
Realm to consist in the strength of the Prince and Subjects, and their strength
to stand first in the hands of God, and next in Provision of Treasure; And
therefore (said he) your Majesty's most humble, dutiful and obedient Subjects
have by me their Mouth and Speaker presented here a free gift of their free and
loving hearts (And so with that he kneeled down and delivered the Bill of
Subsidy, which the Clerk of the Crown received, and laid it on a little Table
standing before the Speaker, betwixt two great Wax-Candles on a plain Green
Carpet) the which I hope and think was granted without a thought of No, sure I
am without the word of a No.

The second part showed a Commandment imposed on him by the House of Commons
which was touching Monopolies or Patents of privilege, the which was a set and
penned Speech made at a Committee. The third showed a thankfulness of the House
of Commons for the Pardon. The fourth and last contained the said Speaker's own
Petition, that if any fault had been committed in the House, they might not be
now again revived; And if either he had spoken too much or not so much as in
duty he ought to have done, he besought her Majesty's Pardon; And that as it
had pleased her Majesty to grant Pardon to all her Loving Subjects, so that she
would not exempt him alone, etc.

After which Speech ended the Queen called Sir Thomas Egerton Lord Keeper, to
whom (kneeling down before her) she spoke in private. And so after he went unto
a place like a Desk, made even with the Cloth of Estate on the right side, and
there made Answer to the Speakers Speech, which in effect was thus much.

OUR Most Dread Sovereign her Excellent Majesty has given me in Charge to say
unto you and the rest of her Loving Subjects, that she does thankfully accept
of their free gift of Subsidy granted by the Commons, which she would not have
required, had not the puissance of the Enemy constrained her thereunto.
Secondly touching the Monopolies, her Majesty hoped that her dutiful and loving
Subjects would not take away her Prerogative, which is the chiefest Flower in
her Garden, and the principal and head Pearl in her Crown and Diadem; but that
they will rather leave that to her disposition. And as her Majesty has
proceeded to trial of them already, so she promises to continue that they
shall all be examined to abide the trial and true Touchstone of the Law.
Thirdly, touching her Pardon, her Majesty's Pleasure is that I show unto you,
that you do not so willingly accept it, as she gives it, etc.

Fourthly for your Pardon (Mr Speaker) her Majesty says, that you have so
learnedly, and so eloquently defended your self now, and painfully behaved your
self heretofore, as that your labor deserves double her thanks: But in your
Petition I must also join with you in beseeching her most Excellent Majesty,
that if any thing through want of Experience, or through mine imperfections and
ignorance have over-slipped me, it may be pardoned and remitted. And so the
Lord Keeper ended his Speech.

Nota, That the several and interlocutory Speeches of the Speaker and of Sir
Thomas Egerton Lord Keeper, etc. immediately foregoing, with the coming of the
said Speaker and the rest of the House of Commons into the Upper House. are not
found in the Original Journal Book of the same House, but are here inserted out
of a certain fragmentary Journal of the House of Commons.

After the before-recited Speeches were ended as abovesaid, then were the
Titles of all the Acts read in their due Order.

After the passing the Acts, followed the Dissolution of the Parliament in
these words, viz.

Dominus Custos magni Sigilli ex mandato Dominae Reginae tune (...) it praesens
Parliamentum.

Nota, That although after these words ex mandato Dominae sometime the word
praesentis does follow at the end of diverse of these Journals during the Queens
Reign, where the Dissolution of the Parliament is usually entered; yet elsewhere
the said word praesentis is diverse times omitted, as well as in this place, as
being in it self superfluous, in respect that the aforesaid words Ex mandato
Dominae Reginae, etc. do necessarily imply the Royal Presence; for otherwise in
her absence there could be no such Dissolution by her Highness Command only,
without an express Commission or Letters Patents under the great Seal to that
purpose: and howsoever the said words be here omitted, yet it is most certain,
that her Majesty was both personally present at that time in the Upper House,
and gave her Royal Assent also to such Laws as passed, as does appear most
plainly by that fragmentary Journal of the House of Commons taken by a Member
of the same at this Parliament, as is before more particularly mentioned at the
end of the Lord Keepers Speech delivered this very Afternoon in Answer to the
Commons Speaker or Prolocutor.

Nota also, that whereas in the last Parliament in an. 35 Regin, Eliz. Anno
Domini 1592. the Knights, Citizens and Burgesses of the House of Commons had,
not without long and great debate both with the Lords of the Upper House, and
by themselves, at length yielded unto the grant of three entire Subsidies and
six Fifteenths and Tenths, and had then also given with that Caution, that it
might not hereafter be drawn into a Precedent for future times: yet now at this
present Parliament de an. 39, and 40 Regin. Eliz. A. D. 1597. the same
proportion. and in the Parliament ensuing, which was held in an. 43 Regin.
ejusdem Anno Dom. 1601. (which was the last Parliament of her Majesty's Reign)
a greater, viz. of four Subsidies and eight Fifteenths and Tenths was again
yielded unto: whence it is plain, that whatsoever is once granted by the
Subject may often be raised, but seldom falls.

THE JOURNAL OF THE House of COMMONS.
A Journal of the House of Commons in the Parliament holden at Westminster,
Anno 39 Reginae Eliz. Anno Domini 1597. which began there on Monday the 24th
Day of October, and then and there continued until the Dissolution thereof, on
Thursday the 9th Day of February Anno 40 Reginae ejusdem.

THIS present Journal of the House of Commons is not only abundantly stored
with many and sundry Passages touching the Orders, Use and Privilege of the
House it self; but contains in it excellent matter touching the public
affairs of Church and State: in which also her Majesty was most graciously
pleased to give the said House free Liberty to reform some abuses of the first,
and to search into the dangers of the latter. And that this said Journal might
be the more exact and copious, in some few places the defects thereof are
supplied out of the Original Journal Book of the Upper House, and out of a
certain imperfect and fragmentary Journal of the House of Commons.

The ninth Parliament of our Sovereign Lady Elizabeth, by the Grace of God of
England, France and Ireland Queen, Defender of the Faith, etc. begun at
Westminster upon Monday being the 24th day of October in the thirty ninth year
of her Majesty's Reign. Upon which day many of the Knights of the Shires,
Citizens of Cities, Burgesses of Boroughs and Barons of Ports did make their
appearance at Westminster, being returned into the same Parliament for the same
Shires, Cities, Boroughs and Ports, before the Right Honorable the Earl of
Nottingham, Lord Steward of her Majesty's most honorable Household: And did
then and there in the Room commonly called the Court of Requests, take the Oath
of Supremacy, seven or eight at a time (being Enacted by and contained in the
Statute de an. 1 Reginae Eliz. Cap. 1.) before the said Lord Steward, and
before Sir William Knolles Knight Comptroller of her Majesty's Household, Sir
John Fortescue Chancellor of the Exchequer, and Sir Robert Cecill Principal
Secretary, his Lordships Deputies. And thereupon the said Knights, Citizens,
Burgesses and Barons entering into their own House, and expecting her Majesty's
further Pleasure, her Highness then being in her Royal Seat in the Higher House
of Parliament, the said Commons were commanded to come before her Highness, and
being there Assembled, the Right Honorable Sir Thomas Egerton Knight, Lord
Keeper of the Great Seal of England, delivered unto the said Commons the Causes
of her Majesty's Calling of this Parliament; and so in the end willed them to
repair again into the said House of Commons, and there to make choice of their
Speaker according to the former laudable usage and custom of the same House in
that Case accustomed; and willed them to present him unto her Majesty upon the
Thursday next following. Which done, the said Commons presently repaired unto
their own House, and there being Assembled and sitting some space of time very
silent, at last the Right Honorable Sir William Knolls one of her Highness
most Honorable Privy Council and Comptroller of her Majesty's Household, stood
up and spoke to the effect following.

Necessity constrains me to break off this silence, and to give others cause
for speech. According to the usual Custom we are to choose our Speaker, and
though I am least able and therefore unfit to speak in this place, yet better I
deem it to discover my own Imperfections, than that her most sacred Majesty's
Commandment to me delivered should not be fulfilled, or your Expectation of
this first days work by all our silences to be in any sort frustrate. First
therefore I think it very expedient to remember the Excellent and Learned
Speech of that good man my Lord Keeper, (at which all of us, or the most part
of us at the least, were present) who very wisely showed the Cause of calling
this Honorable Assembly, showing unto us that it is partly for the reforming
those Laws which be amiss, partly quite to repeal others, partly to augment
those that be good, and partly to Enact new Laws, both for the Honor and
profit of her Majesty and for the benefit of the Commonwealth. And in
conclusion wished us to depart from whence we came and there to choose our
Speaker, who ought to be the Mouth of us all, and to whom we might commit such
weighty affairs as in this place should be debated amongst us. For unfit it is
if we have occasion to go unto the Sacred presence of her Majesty, to go either
confusedly without order, or unorderly without Judgment. Now because that
knowledge does rest in certainty, I will with the more speed set afoot this
motion, deliver my opinion unto you, who is most fit for this place, being a
member of this House, and those good abilities which I know to be in him (here
he made a little pause, and the House hawked, and spat, and after silence made
he proceeded) unto this place of dignity and calling in my opinion (here he
stayed a little) Mr Sergeant Yelverton (looking upon him) is the fittest man to
be preferred (after which words Mr Yelverton blushed, and put off his Hat and
after sat bare-headed) for I am assured that he is yea, (and I dare avow it) I
know him to be a man wise and learned, secret and circumspect, Religious and
faithful, no way disable but every way able to supply this place. Wherefore in
my Judgment I deem him (though I will not say, best worthy amongst us, yet)
sufficient enough to supply this place; and herein if any man think I err, I
wish him to deliver his mind as freely as I have done; if not, that we all join
together in giving general consent and approbation to this motion.

So that the whole House cried I, I, I, let him be. And then Master Comptroller
made a low reverence, and sat down; and after a little pause and silence, Mr
Sergeant Yelverton rose up, and after a very humble reverence made spoke in
effect thus much.

WHence your unexpected choice of me to be your Mouth or Speaker should
proceed, I am utterly ignorant. If from my merits, strange it were that so few
deserts should purchase suddenly so great an Honor. Nor from my ability does
this your choice proceed; for well known it is to a great number in this place
now assembled, that my Estate is nothing correspondent for the maintenance of
this dignity: For my Father dying left me a younger Brother, and nothing to me
but my bare Annuity. Then growing to man's estate and some small practice of the
Law, I took a Wise by whom I have had many Children, the keeping of us all
being a great impoverishing to my Estate, and the daily living of us all
nothing but my daily Industry. Neither from my Person or Nature does this
choice arise; for he that supplieth this place ought to be a man bigg and
comely, stately and well spoken, his voice great, his carriage Majestical, his
Nature haughty and his Purse plentiful and heavy: but contrarily, the stature
of my body is small, my self not so well spoken, my voice low, my carriage
Lawyer-like and of the common fashion, my Nature soft and bashful, my Purse
thin, light and never yet plentiful. Wherefore I now see the only cause of this
choice is a gracious and favorable censure of your good and undeserved
Opinions of me. But I most humbly beseech you recall this your sudden Election;
And therefore because the more sudden, the sooner to be recalled. But if this
cannot move your sudden choice, yet let this one thing persuade you, that my
self not being gracious in the Eye of her Majesty, neither ever yet in account
with any great Personages, shall deceive your expectation in those weighty
matters and great affairs which should be committed unto me. For if Demosthenes
being so learned and eloquent as he was one whom none surpassed, trembled to
speak before Phocion at Athens, how much more shall I being unlearned and
unskillful, supply this place of dignity, charge and trouble to speak before so
many Phocions as here be? yea, which is the greatest, before the unspeakable
Majesty and Sacred Personage of our dread and dear Sovereign; The terror of
whose countenance will appall and abase even the stoutest heart; yea whose very
name will pull down the greatest courage. For how mightily does the estate and
name of a Prince deject the haughtiest Stomach even of their greatest Subjects?
I beseech you therefore again and again to proceed unto a new Election, here
being many better able, more sufficient and far more worthy than my self, both
for the Honor of this Assembly and general good to the public State.

Thus far out of the aforesaid fragmentary and imperfect Journal, the rest that
follows is out of the Original Journal Book it self.

After which Speech of Sergeant Yelverton's, the Right Honorable Sir John
Forteseue Knight, one other of her Highness said most Honorable Privy Council
and Chancellor of her Majesty's Exchequer, stood up and affirming all the said
former Speech of the said Mr Comptroller in the Commendation and good parts of
the said Mr Sergeant Yelverton; and inferring further that he the said Mr
Chancellor had well perceived by the said Mr Sergeants own Speech, tending to
the disabling of himself to the said place, that he was thereby so much the
more sufficient and meet for the same. And so for his part likewise nominating
the said Mr Sergeant Yelverton to be their Speaker, moved the House further for
their liking and resolution therein, who all with one accord and consent
yielded unto the said Election. Whereupon the said Mr Comptroller and Mr
Chancellor did rise up and place the said Mr Sergeant Yelverton in the Chair.
Which done, the said Mr Sergeant after some small pause stood up, and giving
unto the whole House most hearty thanks for their good opinions and conceit of
him, signified unto them nevertheless, that by their good favors he would
endeavor when he should come before her Majesty, to be an humble Suitor unto
her Highness to be discharged of the said place, if he so could. And
immediately the House did rise, and were to meet there again upon the Thursday
next following.

On Thursday the 27th day of October, the House being set, and before Mr
Speaker went up to her Majesty in the Upper House, Mr Chancellor of the
Exchequer moved and admonished that none of this House should after this
present day enter into the same House with their Spurs on, for offending of
others, and withal that none do come into this House before they have paid the
Sergeants Fees of this House due unto him according to the accustomed usage of
this House in that case.

Mr Speaker with the greatest number of the Members of this House after their
abiding along time silent, and attending her Majesty's Pleasure, from the Upper
House to be sent for thither, did go out of this House toward the said Upper
House, there to be the more near and ready to come before her Highness in the
said Upper House, at such time as her Majesty should please to send for them.
And afterward being admitted, and the said Speaker presented and allowed by
her Majesty according to the usual form in that case accustomed, and returning
back again from the said Upper House, attended by the Sergeant of this House,
bearing the Mace before him, upon his aforesaid allowance in the Upper House in
the said place of Prolocutor he took his place in the Chair, and being there
set signified unto the House, that whereas in former times the Order was to
have a Bill read before the House did rise, the same could not be so done at
this time, because her Majesty had in the Upper House Adjourned this Parliament
till Saturday next come seven-night, being the 5th of November next coming, at
eight of the Clock in the Forenoon of the same day, till which time he and all
the Members of this House might depart and take their ease. And so then every
man went his way.

Nota, That this was a mistake of Mr Sergeant Yelverton now Speaker of the
House of Commons, for the Adjournment in the Upper House did not nor could not
hinder the reading of a Bill in the House of Commons, upon the allowance of
their Speaker in the said Upper House, and their return from it, according to
the ancient use and custom, although the Adjournment of the Parliament by her
Majesty being present in the said House is for the most part accounted an
Adjournment of both the Houses. To make which truth more clear, there shall
need no other Precedent to be cited than that in the last Parliament de An. 35
Regin. Eliz. where Edward Cook Esquire the Queens Solicitor being chosen
Speaker of the beforementioned Commons House was presented unto her Majesty
upon Thursday the 22th day of February, and the words there were, Dominus
Custos magni Sigilli ex mandato Dominae Reginae continuavit praesens
Parliamentum, etc. to the next Saturday following; (by which very words the
Parliament was also continued at this time unto the Saturday seven-night
after.) And then upon the return of the said Mr Cook their Speaker to the
House of Commons in the said thirty fifth year of her Majesty, an ordinary Bill
touching the pleading of a Bar at large in an Ejectione firmae, had its first
reading; although after the reading he there declared, that it was her
Majesty's pleasure that the said House should be Adjourned and not meet again
until the said Saturday, on which the Upper House met again also. And therefore
it is plain, that Mr Sergeant Yelverton did at this time not only commit a
great error in omitting to read some one Bill or other according to the usual
Custom, but was also much mistaken in informing the House that it had been
Adjourned and so now stood Adjourned by those words which the Lord Keeper had
spoken in the Upper House; for his Lordship at this time, as appears plainly by
the Original Journal Book of that House, did only continue the Parliament and
not Adjourn it; which words although spoken by the Queens Commandment being
personally present, do only concern the said Upper House, and reach not at all
unto the House of Commons, as was directly declared by the Lord Keeper himself
in the next Parliament ensuing, in An. 43 Regin. Eliz. after that Mr John
Crook, Mr Recorder of London, their Speaker, upon his allowance in and return
from the said Upper House, on Friday the 30th day of October in An. eodem, had
by a like mistake misinformed the House that it was Adjourned, and so caused it
to rise without the reading of any Bill.

And therefore here once for all I have caused the true differences as I
conceive in this kind to be here inserted, viz. If the Lord Keeper by the
Queens Commandment being personally present, had either prolonged or Adjourned
the Parliament, or that her Majesty with her own Mouth had pronounced the said
words, or had caused the same to have been done by a Commission under the Great
Seal in her absence; in all these Cases it had reached alike both unto the
Upper House; and unto the House of Commons.

But if the Queens Majesty had with her own Mouth continued the Parliament, as
she did here command the Lord Keeper to do it; yet this had only concerned the
Upper House, so that the Lords could not have met again until the day to which
the said Parliament had been continued; but the said House of Commons, whom the
said continuance concerned not, might have met each day without intermission,
and have agitated such businesses, and have given reading to such Bills, as
offered themselves.

And lastly, If the Lord Keeper or Lord Chancellor for the time being do at any
time Adjourn or continue the Parliament to a further day, as of course he does
one of them for longer or shorter time, every day the Upper House rises, and
that he does it not by Command or Commission from the Sovereign for the time
being, but do it of course as is aforesaid, this concerns only the Upper House,
and the House of Commons are neither bound to take notice of it nor to surcease
any of their daily Proceedings upon it.

On Saturday the 5th day of November the House met about eight of the Clock in
the Morning, having through a mere mistake and error of the Speaker and
themselves conceived their House to have been Adjourned by the Lord Keeper, the
first day of the Parliament, unto this present Saturday, as is more largely
declared in fine diei praecedentis.

Nota also, that some part of the Passages of this present Saturday following
are transcribed out of the before-recited fragmentary and imperfect Journal.

Mr Speaker this Morning, according to the usual course, brought in a Prayer to
be used in the House during this Parliament, which was as follows.

OEternal God, Lord of Heaven and Earth, the great and mighty Councellor, We
thy poor Servants Assembled before thee in this Honorable Senate, humbly
acknowledge our great and manifold sins and imperfections, and thereby our
unworthiness to receive any grace and assistance from thee; Yet most merciful
Father since by thy providence we are called from all parts of the Land to this
famous Council of Parliament to advise of those things which concern thy Glory,
the good of thy Church, the prosperity of our Prince, and the Weal of her
people, we most entirely beseech thee, that pardoning all our sins in the Blood
of thy Son Jesus Christ, it would please thee by the brightness of thy Spirit
to expel darkness and vanity from our minds, and partiality from our Speeches;
and grant unto us such wisdom and integrity of heart as becomes the Servants
of Jesus Christ, the Subjects of a gracious Prince, and Members of this
Honorable House. Let not us, O Lord, who are met together for the public good
of the whole Land, be more careless and remiss than we use to be in our own
private Causes. Give Grace (we beseech thee) that every one of us may labor to
show a good Conscience to thy Majesty, a good Zeal to thy word, and a loyal
heart to our Prince, and a Christian Love to our Country and Commonwealth. O
Lord, so unite and conjoin the hearts of her Excellent Majesty and this whole
Assembly, as they may be a threefold Cord not easily broken, giving strength to
such godly I aws as be already Enacted, that they may be the better Executed,
and Enacting such as are further requisite for the bridling of the wicked and
the encouragement unto the godly and well affected Subjects: That so thy great
blessing may be continued toward us, and thy grievous Judgments turned from
us. And that only for Christ Jesus sake, our most glorious and only Mediator
and Advocate, to whom with thy blessed Majesty and the Holy Ghost be given all
Honor and Praise, Power and Dominion from this time forth for evermore. Amen.

Mr Francis Bacon spoke first, after that one Bill mentioned in the Original
Journal Book of the House of Commons had been read the first time, viz. the
Bill against Forestallers, Regrators and Ingrossers, and made a Motion against
Enclosures and Depopulation of Towns and Houses of Husbandry and Tillage. And
to this purpose he brought in, as he termed it, two Bills not drawn with a
polished pen, but with a polished heart, free from affection and affectation.
And because former Laws are Medicines of our understanding, he said, that he
had perused the Preambles of former Statutes, and by them did see the
inconveniences of this matter, being then scarce out of the shell, to be now
full ripened. And he said, that the overflowing of the people here, makes a
shrinking and abate elsewhere; And that these two mischiefs, though they be
exceeding great, yet they seem the less, because Qui mala cum multis patimur,
leviora videntur. And though it may be thought ill and very prejudicial to
Lords that have enclosed great grounds, and pulled down even whole Towns, and
converted them to Sheep-Pastures; yet considering the increase of people and
the benefit of the Commonwealth, I doubt not but every man will deem the
revival of former Moth-eaten Laws in this point a praiseworthy thing. For in
matters of Policy ill is not to be thought ill; which brings forth good. For
Enclosure of grounds brings depopulation, which brings first Idleness, secondly
decay of Tillage, thirdly subversion of Houses, and decay of Charity, and
charges to the Poor, fourthly impoverishing the state of the Realm. A Law for
the taking away of such inconveniences is not to be thought ill or hurtful unto
the general State. And I would be sorry to see within this Kingdom, that piece
of Ovids Verse prove true, jam seges ubi Troja fuit, so in England, instead of
a whole Town full of people, naught but green Fields, but a Shepherd and a Dog.
The Eye of Experience is the sure Eye, but the Eye of Wisdom is the
quicksighted Eye; and by Experience we daily see, Nemo putat illud videri
turpe, quod sibi sit quaestuosum. And therefore there is almost no Conscience
made in destroying the savor of the life, Bread I mean, for Panis sapor vitae.
And therefore a strict and rigorous Law had need to be made against those
Viperous natures who fulfill the Proverb, Si non posse quod vult, velle tamen
quod potest; which if it be made by us, and life given unto it by Execution in
our several Counties, no doubt but they will prove Laws tending to Gods Honor,
the renown of her Majesty, the same of this Parliament, and the everlasting
good of this Kingdom. And therefore I think them worthy to be read and received.

Thus far out of the aforesaid fragmentary and imperfect Journal: that which
follows is out of the Original Journal Book it self.

In the end of which said Speech, as it should seem, the said Mr Bacon did move
the House that a Committee might be appointed to consider of the said matter
touching Enclosures.

Which done, Sir John Fortescue Chancellor of the Exchequer in like manner
showed his opinion in this Case, much answerable to the said Speech of the said
Mr Bacon; and so moving for a Committee to that end, the House did nominate all
the Privy Council being Members of this House, all the Knights of the Counties
and all the Citizens of the Cities returned into this present Parliament, Sir
Edward Hobby, Mr Francis Bacon, Mr Nathaniel Bacon, Sir Wiliam Moore, Mr
Solicitor, Mr Finch and diverse others, who were appointed to meet in the
Exchequer Chamber at two of the Clock in the Afternoon of this present day.

Mr Finch showing sundry great and horrible abuses of idle and vagrant Persons
greatly offensive both to God and the world; And further showing the extreme
and miserable estate of the Godly and honest sort of the poor Subjects of this
Realm, moved for a Committee of this House to be selected for consideration to
be had for redress thereof. Whereupon the same was referred to the former
Committees in the Bill touching Enclosures and converting of Tillage into
Pasture.

Mr Speaker puts the House in remembrance for a Committee to be nominated to
deal and travel in the examination of such Causes as shall occur in this House
touching Privilege and Returns during this present Sessions of Parliament, and
from time to time to make Report to this House of their travel and proceedings
therein, as occasion shall serve. Whereupon were nominated all the Privy
Council being Members of the House, Sir William Moore, Mr Recorder of London,
Sir Thomas Knivet, Mr Attorney of the Duchy, Mr Attorney of the Court of
Wards, Mr Doctor Heyward Master of the Requests, Mr Luke, Mr Edward Lukenour,
Mr William Cecill, Mr Robert Wroth, Sir William Air, Sir Francis Hastings, Mr
Miles Sands, Mr Michael Stanhop, Mr Francis Bacon, Sir Edward Hobbie, Mr
Solicitor, Mr Tasbrough, Mr Conisby, Mr George Moore, Sir Edward Hastings, Mr
Finch, Mr Crew Mr Peak, Mr Sergeant Hayle, Mr Lyel, Mr Jeram Horsey, Mr
Hubbard, Mr Amersam, Mr Edward Boer, Mr Litten Mr Nathaniel Bacon, Mr Angeire,
Mr Combs and Mr Robert Knolls, who were appointed to meet upon Monday next at
two of the Clock in the Afternoon in the Star Chamber.

Sir Thomas Knivet, being a Member of this House returned one of the Citizens
of the City of Westminster showed unto this House, that being a Member of this
House, he was since the beginning of this Parliament served with a Subpoena to
appear in the Chancery, which he takes to be done to the infringing of the
privilege and liberties of this House. Wherein praying the consideration of
this House in that behalf, he is referred to attend the Committees formerly
nominated at the said time and place, before appointed. Vide November 9.

The Bill for taking away of Clergy from Offenders against a Statute made in 3
Hen. 7. concerning the taking away of Women against their wills unlawfully, was
read the first time.

On Monday the 7th day of November, Four Bills of no great moment had each of
them one reading; of which the last being the Bill against Forestallers,
Regrators and Ingrossers was upon the second reading committed unto Mr
Chancellor of the Exchequer, Mr Francis Bacon, the Citizens for London, York,
Coventry, Bristol and Gloucester, Mr Nathaniel Bacon and others, who were
appointed to meet upon Wednesday next in the Exchequer Chamber at two of the
Clock in the Afternoon; and the Bill and Committees names were delivered upon
Tuesday next following to Mr Chancellor of the Exchequer one of the Committees.

The Bill for taking, away of Clergy from Offenders against a Statute made in
the third year of H. 7th concerning the taking away of Women against their
wills unlawfully, was upon the second reading committed unto Mr Solicitor, Mr
Peutridge, Mr Recorder of London, Mr Bays, Mr. Finch, Mr. Bourcher and Mr.
Duport, to go presently together into the Committee Chamber of this House; who
taking the Bill with them and returning again very soon after, they had
inserted into the Bill these words, viz. [hereafter to be committed.] Which
words being read unto the House, and not well liked of, were stricken out, and
these words were set down therein by the consent of the House, viz. [to be
committed after the end of this present Session of Parliament] and were then
twice read. And so the Bill upon the question was Ordered to be engrossed.

On Tuesday the 8th day of Nov. Two Bills of no great moment had each of them
one reading; of which the second being the Bill touching the transporting of
Sheepskins and Pelts, was read the first time.

Mr. George Moore showed the great and burdensome charge of the Subjects of
this Realm, being compelled upon great penalties with the keeping and having of
sundry sorts of Armor and Weapons which are altogether unprofitable for any
use or service, and are charged nevertheless with the finding and providing of
such other Armor and Weapons besides from time to time, as the Captains which
were appointed to take charge, upon any occasion of service will call for and
appoint at their own pleasure. And so for redress thereof, and for some
certainty to be set down by Law touching the having and keeping of such Armor
and Weapons, moved that a selected number of this House may be appointed to
have Conference and consideration about the same. Whereupon were named for that
purpose Mr Comptroller, Sir George Carey, Sir George Gifford, Sir Thomas
Conisby, Sir Thomas Cecill, Sir Henry Bromley, Sir Francis Hastings, Sir Edward
Hastings, Mr Thomas Knivet, Mr George Moore, Sir Edward Hobby, Sir William
Brereton, Mr. Leonard, Sir John Stacy, Sir Henry Norris, Mr. Francis Bacon, Sir
Edmund Carey, Sir William Moore, Mr. Recorder, Mr. Francis Moore, Mr. Edmond
Boyer, Sir Richard Knightley, Sir Gervase Clifton, the Knights for all Shires,
Sir Anthony Cope, all Deputy Lieutenants of Shires being Members of this House,
Sir Henry Bamfield, Mr. Oglethorp, Mr. Miles Sands, Mr. Warwick Heyle, Sir
Henry Nevill, Mr. Francis Foscue, Sir William Woolgrave, Sir William Air, Sir
Henry Gawdie, Sir Robert Southwell, Mr. Lieutenant of the Tower, Mr. Henry
Finch, Mr. Bourchier, Mr. Boys, Mr. Attorney of the Duchy, Mr. Attorney of
the Wards, Mr. John Boyer, Mr. Edward Lewkenor, Mr. Robert Sackvile, Mr.
Tasbrough, Mr. Francis Goodwyn, Mr. Angier, Mr. Emersam, Mr. John Lees and Mr.
Adrian Gilbert, and appointed to meet in this House upon Saturday next at two
of the Clock in the Afternoon; and the Committees names were delivered to Mr.
Comptroller.

Two Bills had each of them one reading; of which the second being the Bill for
the due performance of the last Will and Testament of George Durant, was upon
the second reading committed unto Sir Edward Hobbie, Mr. Francis Bacon, Mr.
Francis Moore, Mr. Wimarke, Sir Robert Wingfeild, Mr. John Wingfeild, Mr.
Oglethorpe, Sir Thomas Cecill and Mr. James Harrington, who were appointed to
meet to Morrow in the Afternoon in the Exchequer Court at two of the Clock; and
the Bill was delivered to Sir Thomas Cecill one of the said Committees.

Sir Francis Hastings moved for the abridging and reforming the excessive
number of superfluous and burthensom penal Laws. Which Motion being seconded by
Mr. Francis Bacon and others, the consideration of the managing thereof was
committed unto all the Privy Council being Members of this House, all the
Sergeants at Law being likewise Members of this House, all the Lawyers of this
House, Mr. Miles Sands, Mr. Tasbrough, Mr. George Moore, Mr. Lewkenor, Mr.
Nathaniel Bacon, Mr. George Rotheram, Mr. Stephenson, Mr. Conisbie, Mr. Dykes,
Mr. Crompton and others, and all the Knights for the Counties and for the City
of London returned into this House, Sir William Moore, Sir Edward Hobbie, Mr.
Heyle, Sir Thomas Hobbie and Mr. Hubbard, who were appointed to meet in this
House upon Thursday next at two of the Clock in the Afternoon.

Mr. Brograve Attorney of the Duchy, one of the Committees for the Examination
of matters of privilege and of Returns, (whose names see on Saturday the 5th
day of this instant November foregoing) showed, that he and sundry others of
the Committees had met together about those businesses, according to the charge
of this House in that behalf imposed upon them; and that the other Committees
did appoint him to make report unto this House of their travels in this said
business: And showed, that as concerning the Liberties and Privileges of the
Members of this House, they are of opinion, that the serving of the Subpoena
upon Mr. Thomas Knivet, one of the Members of this House, signified by himself
unto this House on Saturday immediately foregoing, is a manifest contempt
committed against this whole House, to the apparent prejudice of the Liberties
and Privileges of this House, as by some Precedents under the Clerk of this
House his hand, in like former Cases accustomed, and showed further unto the
said Committees, it did appear; in that by reason of such Process served upon
any Member of this House, the same Member so served with such Process must
needs of force be withdrawn from his Service in this House, both in his mind
and in his person, by the mere necessity of following his own private business
occasioned by the said Process so served upon him: And therefore do resolve,
that the said Mr. Thomas Knivet ought to be freed from the serving of the said
Subpoena. And because the said Mr. Knivet affirmed unto the said Committees,
that the Parties that served the said Subpoena upon him did execute the same in
very dutiful and lowly manner; and that also the said party being examined by
the said Committees did affirm and protest unto them, that he did not know the
said Mr. Knivet to be a Member of this House, when he served him with the said
Subpoena, the Committees were of Opinion to have the said party remitted
without any further punishment to be inflicted upon him for the same, if this
House should so think good, and else not. And where one Precedent in Quinto of
Queen Mary was showed unto the said Committees, whereby it appeared that a
Member of this place at that time being served with a Subpoena out of the
Chancery in Parliament time, was upon Declaration thereof made unto this House
allowed to have the benefit and privilege of this House; and for the due
accomplishment thereof, this House did then send two Members of the same to the
then Lord Chancellor of England, requiring his Lordship in the name of this
whole House to revoke the said Subpoena, as by the same Precedent may appear;
he showed that the resolution of the said Committees in this Case, for the said
Mr. Knivet, is, that in like manner two of the Members of this House may be
sent by the Order of this House in the name of the whole House, to the now Lord
Keeper, to require his Lordship to revoke the said Subpoena served upon thesai
d Mr. Knivet, if this House shall so think good. And further, as concerning
Returns, that he and the residue of the Committees had seen the Return of the
Sheriff of the County of Dorset for the electing into this Parliament the
Burgesses of the Borough of Weymouth and Melcomb Regis, heretofore two distinct
Boroughs, but of late years united and incorporated into one by her Majesty's
Letters Patents, with ability and privilege nevertheless to elect four
Burgesses into the Parliament as in former times they had used to do, when they
were distinct Boroughs. And that the Mayor, Bailiffs, Commonalty and Burgesses
of Weymouth and Melcomb Regis had upon the Sheriffs Precept directed unto them
elected four Burgesses, and returned them under the Seal of their Corporation,
and that the Bailiffs have elected two others besides, which four Burgesses are
certified into this House from the Clerk of the Crown, and are sworn into the
same House accordingly; but the said other two Burgesses are neither certified
nor sworn into this House, neither elected by Precept from the said Sheriffs
for any thing the said Committees could perceive. And that therefore their
Opinion was, that the said four Burgesses so as aforesaid duly and orderly
elected and returned, should still continue Members of this House, and not the
other two so indirectly returned, if it shall be so thought good unto this
House; for that the said two Burgesses, if they find themselves aggrieved or
injured in the said Election, may take their remedy against the Sheriffs. All
which being recited unto the House by Mr. Speaker, it was Ordered thereupon,
that Sir Edward Hobby, and the said Mr. Attorney of the Duchy should be sent
by this House unto the said Lord Keeper with the said Message touching the said
Subpoena, and the party that served the same Subpoena should be discharged, and
the said four Burgesses for Weymouth and Melcomb Regis continued accordingly.

Mr. Wingfield renews in some parts a Motion of Mr. Francis Moore delivered
yesterday in this House touching sundry enormities growing by Patents of
Privilege and Monopolies, and the abuses of them, together with some Speeches
therein then had by Mr. Secretary; and Mr. Solicitor making some reply, Mr.
Nathaniel Bacon seconded the said Mr. Wingfield: which done, Sir Francis
Hastings moved for a Committee to take particular Informations of the abuses of
the said Patents of privilege, the better to be instructed in the courses of
the same, for the more ready preparation to further means for redress to be had
therein; but it was then no further proceeded in by reason the day was far
spent. Vide concerning this business on Wednesday the 9th day, Thursday the
10th day, and Wednesday the 16th day of this instant November ensuing, as also
on Wednesday the 14th day of December following, where it was agitated by the
House, but nothing concluded in it; only the Speaker moving her Majesty about
it the last day of this Parliament, she promised Reformation therein.

On Wednesday the 9th day of November, Two Bills had each of them one reading;
of which the second being the Bill to suppress multitude of Maulsters, was upon
the second reading committed unto Sir Robert Wroth, Mr. Hubberd, the Burgesses
of York, Hull, Worcester and Gloucester, and Mr Nathaniel Bacon and others, and
the Bill was delivered to Sir Robert Wroth, who with the rest was appointed to
meet at two of the Clock in the Middle Temple Hall. Vide Jan. 12.

Two Bills of no great moment had each of them one reading; of which the second
being the Bill for Amendment of Weavers and Spinners Wages was read the first
time.

Sir Edward Hobbie showed, that himself and Mr. Brograve Attorney of the
Duchy, have according to the direction of this House unto them, been with the
Lord Keeper of the Great Seal, and in the name of this whole House did require
his Lordship to revoke two Writs of Subpoena which were served upon Mr. Thomas
Knivett a Member of this House since the beginning of this Sessions of
Parliament; and that his Lordship thereupon demanded of them whether they were
appointed by any advised consideration of this House to deliver their Message
unto him with the word Require in such manner as they had done or no; and that
they Answered his Lordship, Yea. And that his Lordship then said, that as he
thought very reverently and honorably of this House, and of the Liberties and
Privileges of the same, so to revoke the said Subpoena in that sort, was to
restrain her Majesty in her greatest Power, which is Justice, in the place
wherein he serves under her: And that he said he would be further advised
before his giving Answer to this House, as the House was advised to send unto
him the said Message. Vide concerning this business on Saturday the 5th day,
and on Thursday the 8th day of this instant November foregoing. But what
further proceeding ensued touching the serving of the said Subpoena is not
found in the Original Journal Book of the House of Commons; but it is likely the
Lord Keeper did further satisfy the House.

After this Report made, the House (but upon what occasion is not set down)
began to name Committees touching Monopolies and Patents of privilege; of
which Sir John Fortescue Chancellor of the Exchequer, Mr. Barker, Mr. Lawrence
Hide, and some nine others being appointed, Mr. Secretary Cecill moved the
House, that the day being now far spent and the business in agitation of great
weight, the nominating of the said Committees might be deferred till the day
following, and that then also it might be discussed and set down touching what
matters the said Committee should treat. Whereupon upon the Question it was
deferred accordingly. Vide plus concerning this matter on Tuesday the 8th day
of this instant November foregoing.

On Thursday the 10th day of November, the Bill for the establishing of the
Town Lands of Wanting in the County of Berks to the relief of the Poor,
amendments of Highways, and maintaining of a Schoolmaster within the Town of
Wanting aforesaid, was upon the second reading committed unto Mr. Comptroller,
the Knights for the County of Berks, Mr. Henry Nevill, Sir Humphrey Foster, Mr
Solicitor, Mr. Francis Moore, Mr. Oglethorpe, Mr. Lawrence Hide, Mr. (...),
Mr. Tasbrough, and Mr. Oldsworth; and the Bill was delivered unto Mr Francis
Moore, who with the rest was appointed to meet upon Saturday next at two of the
Clock this Afternoon in this House.

Three Bills also of no great moment had each of them one reading; of which the
last being the Bill for re-edifying the Town of Langsord Estover in the County
of Somerset, was upon the second reading committed unto the Knights for the
County of Somerset, Sir Francis Hastings and others; and the Bill was delivered
to Sir Francis Hastings, who with the rest was appointed to meet upon Monday
next at two of the Clock in the Afternoon in the Middle Temple Hall.

The Bill for taking away Clergy from certain Offenders, was sent up to the
Lords by Mr Comptroller, Mr Chancellor and others; in the mean time whereof,
and before they were gone into the Upper House, they met Mr Doctor Stanhop by
the way with a Message to this House, and so returned back to this House till
the said Message was delivered by the said Mr. Doctor Stanhop, who coming from
the Lords said he had a private Message from their Lordships to Mr. Speaker,
and so speaking unto the Speaker and departing, again, Mr. Speaker did
thereupon tell this House, that the Lord Keeper did send privately unto him
from the Lords to know whether this House had expedited any Bill to send unto
their Lordships.

The Bill for Amendment of Weavers and Spinners Wages was read the second time,
and upon the question committed unto Mr. Chancellor of the Exchequer, Sir
William Moore, Mr. Martin, the Burgesses of Nottingham and Derby, Mr. Nathaniel
Bacon and others; and the Bill with a Note of the Committees names was
delivered to Sir William Moore, who with the rest was appointed to meet to
Morrow at two of the Clock in the Afternoon at the Guild Hall.

Mr. Walgrave moved touching the abuses of Licenses for Marriages granted by
Ecclesiastical persons, and prays consideration may be had for reformation
thereof by this House.

Mr. Davies renews the motion touching Monopolies and the abuses of Patents
of Privilege. Whereupon after sundry other Speeches of other Members of this
House, some of them tending to urge the nomination of Committees in regard it
was Yesterday Ordered upon the question that there should be a Committee for
that purpose, these Committees following were nominated, all the Privy Council
being Members of this House, Sir Francis Hastings, Sir Edward Hastings, Sir
Henry Bromley, Mr. Foulke Grevil, Sir William Cornwallis, all the Knights of
all Shires, Mr. Francis Moore, Mr. Oldsworth, Mr. Lawrence Hide, the Burgestes
of Rochester, Mr. Robert Wingfield, Sir Robert Wroth, Mr. Francis Bacon, Mr.
Henry Yelverton, the Burgesses of all Port Towns, Sir Thomas Egerton, Mr.
Nathaniel Bacon, Mr. Henry Nevil, Mr. John Bowyer, Sir William Moore, the
Knights and Citizens for London, the Citizens for York, Mr. Tasbrough, Mr.
Jerome Horsey, Mr. Davies, Mr. Hubberd, Mr. Doctor Crompton, Mr. Finch, Mr.
Edmund Boyer, Mr. Hext, Mr. Jackman, Mr. Hicks, Mr. John Harper, Mr. Angier,
Sir William Howard, Sir John Lewson, Mr. Bourcher, Mr. Pembridge, Mr. Henry
Lewsey, Mr. Conisbie, Mr. Jackson, Mr. Portington, Burgesses of Derbie, who
were appointed to meet upon Tuesday next in this House at two of the Clock in
the Afternoon. Vide concerning this business on Tuesday the 8th day of this
instant November foregoing.

On Friday the 11th day of November, Four Bills of no great moment had each of
them one reading; of which the first was the Bill concerning the Hospital of
Warwick.

Mr. Robert Wing field, Mr. Doctor James and Mr. Simnell do show sundry great
abuses by Licenses for Marriages without Banes, granted by Registers and other
inferior Officers: Whereupon Sir Thomas Cecill moved for a Committee for
drawing of a Bill for Reformation thereof. Whereupon were nominated Sir Thomas
Cecill, Mr. Simnell, Mr. Finch, Mr. Doctor James, Mr. Nathaniel Bacon, Mr.
Robert Wingfield and others, who were appointed to meet to Morrow at two of the
Clock in the Afternoon in Grayes-Inn.

Mr. Hext moved touching the abuses of Probates of Wills.

Sir Francis Hastings showed, that the Committees in the motion touching
Enclosures and Tillage, and in the motion touching the punishment of Rogues and
relief of the Poor (who were appointed on Saturday the 5th day of this instant
November foregoing) had spent all their travel hitherto only about the said
Enclosures and Tillage, and nothing about the said Rogues and Poor, and
signifying that some Members of this House have traveled for framing of two or
three Bills for that purpose of Rogues and Poor, moved that those Bills might
be received into the House to be further considered of; and so it was thereupon
yielded unto by the House accordingly.

Sir Edward Hobbie moved for a Committee for continuance of Statutes. Whereupon
were nominated Mr. Attorney of the Duchy, and Mr. Attorney of the Court of
Wards, Sir Robert Wroth, Mr. Solicitor, Sir Edward Hobbie, Mr. Francis Moore,
Mr. Bourcher, Mr. Francis Bacon, all the Sergeants at Law being of this House,
Sir William Moore and others, and a Note of the Committees names delivered to
Sir Robert Wroth, who with the rest was appointed to meet upon Thursday next at
the Inner Temple Hall at two of the Clock in the Afternoon.

On Saturday the 12th day of November, Four Bills of no great moment had each
of them one reading; of which the last being the Bill for the repeal of the
Statute of the twenty third of the Queens Majesty, Entitled, An Act for the
increase of Mariners and maintenance of the Navigation, was upon the second
reading committed unto all the Burgesses of the Port Towns, all the Citizens
for London, York, Hull and Norwich, the Burgesses of Caernarvon, Mr. Miles
Sands and others; and the Bill was delivered to the said Mr. Sands, who with
the rest was appointed to meet on Monday next at two of the Clock in the
Afternoon in the Middle Temple Hall.

Mr George Moore, one of the Committees for privileges and Returns (whose
names see before on Saturday the 5th day of this instant November) showed the
differences for the Returns of Ludlow, before the Committees, which grew from
the Sheriffs directing of his Precept to the Bailiff of the Borough of Ludlow
in the singular number, whereas it should have been to the Bailiffs thereof in
the plural; and thereupon the House was divided, whether the Sheriff who might
through have or want of Experience run into that Error, ought to be punished,
or the Town of Ludlow, which had, as might well be concluded, wilfully made use
of that his Error. Mr. Francis Moore, Mr. Nathaniel Bacon, Mr. Edward Lewkenor
and others urging, that the Town ought to be amerced; and Mr. Bourchier, Mr.
Recorder of London, Mr. Pelham, and others urging, that the Sheriff ought to be
amerced: It was upon the Question referred to the former Committees, and if it
cannot be divided by them, then they are to learn the Opinion of some of the
Judges.

The Bill against the Counterfeiting of the Hands of the Lords was read the
second time, and upon the Question was committed unto all the Privy Council
being Members of this House, all the Sergeants at Law which are of this House,
Mr. Brograve Attorney of the Duchy, Sir Tho. Hobbie and others, who were
appointed to meet upon Monday next at two of the Clock in the Afternoon in the
Exchequer Chamber.

The Bill for the better Answering of her Majesty's Tenths and Subsidies from
the Clergy was upon the second reading committed to Mr Chancellor of the
Exchequer, Mr. Solicitor, Mr. Recorder, Mr Nathaniel Bacon, Mr Wingfield, Sir
Edward Hobbie and others, who were appointed to meet on Wednesday at two of the
Clock in the Afternoon in the Exchequer Chamber; and the Bill was delivered to
Mr Solicitor.

Sir Robert Wroth, one of the Committees in the Bill to suppress the multitude
of Maulsters, (who had been appointed on Wednesday the 9th day of this instant
November foregoing) showed that the Committees have met and have travailed
therein, and thought good to draw a new Bill; and so brought in both the old
Bill, and also the new Bill.

On Monday the 14th day of November, Mr Lawrence Hide, one of the Committees in
the Bill concerning the Town of Wanting (whose names see on Thursday the 10th
day of this instant November foregoing showed the meeting of the said
Committees and some Amendments made by them in some parts of the said Bill;
which Amendments being twice read unto the House, the Bill was upon the
question Ordered to be engrossed.

Mr George Moore, one of the Committees in the Motion touching Armor and
Weapons, who were appointed on Tuesday the 8th day of this instant November
foregoing, showed their meeting upon Saturday last, and required to have a new
day of meeting, and that some of the Lawyers which are of this House being in
this Committee may then attend in the same. Whereupon day was given to meet
again in this House upon Wednesday next at two of the Clock in the Afternoon;
and the Committees names being then read by the Clerk, Mr Sergeant Williams,
Sergeant Harris and Sergeant Heyle were added unto them.

Mr Simnell, one of the Committees in the Committee touching the abuses for
Licenses for Marriages without Banes (appointed on Friday the 11. day of this
instant November foregoing) showed, that the Committees have met together, but
did not conclude of any thing, by reason that it was doubtful whether they were
to treat of that matter only, or else both of the same, and also touching the
stealing away of Men's Children without assent of their Parents, and touching
the abuses in the Probates of Testaments and Processes ex Officio by
Ecclesiastical Officers in matters of the same, being before several propounded
at the Motion of sundry Members of this House.

Sir John Fortescue Chancellor of the Exchequer showed, that her Majesty did
yesterday last call Mr. Secretary and himself unto her, and telling them that
her Highness had been informed of the horrible and great incestuous Marriages
discovered in this House, and minding due punishment and redress of the same,
commanded them to take information of the grievances in particular of the
Members of this House, that her Highness having certain notice thereof, may
thereupon give order for the due punishment and redress accordingly. Whereupon
after sundry other Speeches tending to sundry courses, but yet most of them
very well liking and approving the said Message delivered to this House therein
from her Majesty by the said Mr. Chancellor, it was in the end resolved, that
the former Committees (who were appointed on Friday the 11th day of this
instant November foregoing, to draw a Bill for reformation of abuses occasioned
by Licenses granted for Marriages without Banes asking) should meet this
Afternoon in the Exchequer Court at two of the Clock for that purpose, and that
Sir Thomas Cecill, Sir Francis Hastings, Sir Robert Wroth, Sir Edward Hobby,
Mr. Robert Wingfield, Mr. Fulk Grevill, Mr. Nathaniel Bacon, Mr. Symnell, Mr.
George Moore, Mr. Francis Bacon, Mr. Francis Goodwyn, Sir Edward Hastings, Sir
Henry Worth, Sir Anthony Cope, Sir William Moore, Mr. Hexte, Sir John Sudmore,
Mr. Finch and Mr. Francis Moore, should receive Informations of the grievances
touching Ecclesiastical Causes, this day moved in the House, and should meet to
that purpose upon Friday next at two of the Clock in the Afternoon in the
Exchequer Chamber. Vide Nov. 16.

Mr Francis Bacon, one of the selected Committees concerning Enclosures and
Tillage, moved for a time to be appointed for the same selected Committees to
impart their travels therein to the general Committees, (who were appointed in
the same Cause upon Saturday the 5th day of this instant November foregoing) to
the end that thereupon the same may afterward be reported unto this House
accordingly. Whereupon it was Ordered, that they should for that purpose meet
in this House to Morrow next at two of the Clock in the Afternoon.

Mr Francis Moore, one of the Committees in the Bill against Forestallers,
Regrators and Ingrossers, etc. showed the meeting of the Committees in that
Bill, and some Amendments by them made in the same; and so delivers in the
same Bill so amended.

The Bill for repressing of Robberies, and touching Huy and Cry, was read the
second time, and upon the question for Commitment was denied to be committed,
and upon another question for the engrossing, was denied to be engrossed, and
so rejected.

On Tuesday the 15th day of November, Five Bills of no great moment had each of
them one reading; of which the first being the Bill for extirpation of Beggars,
was read the first time.

Sir Robert Wroth, one of the Committees in the Bill for Repeal of the Statute
of the 23d year of the Queen. Entitled An Act for increase of Mariners and for
maintenance of Navigation (who were appointed on Thursday the 10th day of this
instant November foregoing) brought in the Bill with some Amendments made by
the Committees; which Amendments being twice read in the House, the Bill was
afterward and after some Speeches against the Bill, Ordered to be engrossed
upon the question.

Mr Sergeant Drew and Mr Dr Stanhop do bring from the Lords the Bill lately
passed in this House for the taking away of Clergy from Offenders against the
Statute made 3 Henr. 7. concerning the taking away of Women against their Wills
unlawfully, which Bill their Lordships have also passed with a Proviso
thereunto annexed.

The Bill concerning the establishing of the Town-Lands of Wanting in the
County of Berks was read the third time, and passed upon the question.

Mr Chancellor of the Exchequer, putting the House in remembrance of the Speech
delivered unto this House by the Lord Keeper upon the first day of this present
Parliament by her Majesty's direction touching the Causes of her Highnesses
calling of this Parliament, and showing at large her Majesty's great and
excessive Charges sustained for the defense of her Highnesses Realms and
Dominions against the force of the King of Spain, amounting to more than a
treble value of the last three Subsidies and six Fifteenths and Tenths granted
unto her in the last Parliament; and declaring further the great necessity of
some Mass of Treasure, to be provided toward the supply of her Highness
Charges in the continuation of the maintenance of her Majesty's Forces in
defense of her Highness Realms, Dominions and Subjects against the Forces and
Invasions of the said King of Spain; and further referring the particularities
of the designs and attempts of the said King of Spain since the last Parliament
to be reported unto this House by Mr Secretary, moved for a selected Committee
of this House, to be nominated to treat and consult concerning that matter.

Mr Secretary Cecill showed at large the purposes, practices and attempts of
the said King of Spain against her Majesty and her Realms, Dominions and
Subjects, in diverse sorts and at sundry times, together with his great
overthrows in the same by the mighty hand of God, and of her Highnesses Forces,
to his perpetual ignominy and great dishonor throughout the whole World. And
so after a large discourse most excellently delivered by him, concluded with a
Motion for proceeding to the said Committees. Whereupon some Speeches being had
to that end by Sir Edward Hobby and Mr. Francis Bacon, It was agreed, that all
the Privy Council being Members of this House, all the Knights returned for the
Counties into this present Parliament, and all Citizens for Cities returned
into this House, should meet about the said business on Friday next at two of
the Clock in the Afternoon in this House, and any other of this House then to
come to them also at their pleasures that will. Vide plus on Wednesday the 7th
day of December following.

On Wednesday the 16th day of November, Four Bills had each of them one
reading; of which the last being the Bill for the Town of Northampton was upon
the second reading committed unto the Knights for the County of Northampton,
and the Burgesses for the Town of Northampton, Mr. Edward Mountague, Sir Edward
Hobbie and others; And the Bill was delivered to Sir Thomas Cecill. All which
were appointed to meet at two of the Clock in the Afternoon of this day at Sir
Thomas Cecill's House.

Sir Edward Hobby, one of the Committees for the Information of Grants lately
moved in this House in Ecclesiastical Causes, moved for a new day of meeting.
Whereupon Monday next in the Afternoon was appointed for the same, and to be in
this House.

Nota, That although her Majesty had formerly been exceeding unwilling and
opposite to all manner of Innovations in Ecclesiastical Government; yet
understanding at this Parliament of diverse gross and great abuses therein, she
had on Monday the 14th day of this instant November foregoing, not only given
leave and liberty to the House of Commons to treat thereof, but also had
encouraged them to proceed in the reformation thereof, by a Message brought
unto the said House by Sir John Fortescue Chancellor of the Exchequer.
Whereupon the aforesaid Committee here mentioned by Sir Edward Hobby was
appointed. Touching whose further proceedings in the said matter, see on Monday
the 21th, and on Tuesday the 22th day of this instant November ensuing.

The Bill for keeping of Horses from stealing was upon the second reading
committed unto Mr Hubberd, Sir Robert Wroth, Mr Maynard, Mr Portington, Sir
William Brereton, Mr Henry Nevill, Mr Pennington and others; And the Bill and
Committees names were delivered to Mr Hubberd, who with the rest was appointed
to meet to Morrow in the Afternoon in the Middle Temple Hall.

The Amendments in the Bill against Forestallers, Regrators and Ingrossers were
twice read, and the Bill was committed to the former Committees, (who were
appointed to meet on Monday the 7th day of this instant November foregoing) And
there were added unto them Mr Hext, Sir Robert Wroth, Mr Francis Moore, Mr
Litton, Mr Henry Maynard, Sir George Carew, Mr Henry Hubberd, all Barons of
Ports, and Sir Nicholas Parker, who were appointed to meet to Morrow in the
Afternoon in the Middle Temple Hall; And the Bill was delivered to Mr Francis
Moore and Mr Lawrence Hide.

The Proviso which came from the Lords in the Bill from taking Clergy from
certain Offenders, and lately passed in this House and sent up unto their
Lordships, was three times read and passed upon the question.

Mr Hext, one of the Committees in the Bill for the Town of Langford Estover
(who were appointed on Thursday the 10th day of this instant November
foregoing) showed the meeting of the Committees, and many Causes wherefore he
thinks the Bill very unmeet to have any passing in this House. Whereupon none
offering to speak for the said Bill, the same was rejected upon the question
for engrossing.

The Bill for repeal of a Statute of the twenty third of the Queens Majesty,
Entitled, An Act for increase of Mariners and maintenance of Navigation, had
its first reading; And after some Speeches both with the Bill and against it,
it was in the end passed upon the question.

Sir John Fortescue Chancellor of the Exchequer showed unto the House, that
this Afternoon being appointed for two Commitments, the one touching Monopolies
and Patents of Privilege, and the other for the true Answering of the Tenths
and Subsidies from the Clergy to her Majesty, in both which himself is a
Committee amongst others; and that himself and Mr Secretary Cecill are
specially commanded to wait upon her Highness this Afternoon, and therefore
cannot attend the said Commitments; and so moving for a new day of meeting
wished the same to be upon Saturday next at two of the Clock in the Afternoon:
Which albeit it was well liked of, and yielded unto by some; yet was it
overruled by number of Voices, That as concerning the said Monopolies and
Patents of Privilege, the said Commitments should be continued to be held in
the Afternoon of this present day in this House. Vide plus touching this
business on Tuesday the 8th day of this instant November foregoing.

On Thursday the 17th day of November, Two Bills of no great moment had each of
them one reading; of which the last concerning the Lands and Debts of Sir Henry
Unton Knight deceased, had its first reading.

Mr Thomas Jewks is added to the former Committees for Examination of
Privileges and Returns (who were appointed on Saturday the 5th day of this
instant November foregoing) and are to meet this Afternoon in the Middle Temple
Hall.

The Bill also for erecting of Houses of Correction and the punishment of
Rogues and Sturdy Beggars, was read the first time.

On Friday the 18th day of November, Twelve Bills had each of them one reading;
of which the last being the Bill for erecting of Hospitals or abiding or
Working-Houses for the Poor, was upon the second reading committed unto Sir
John Heart, Mr Recorder of London, Mr Tasbrough, all the Readers of the
Middle Temple, Mr Boyce, Mr Henry Bellasis and others; And the Bill was
delivered with the Committees names to the said Mr Boyce, who with the rest was
appointed to meet this Afternoon at two of the Clock in the Middle Temple Hall.

Mr Francis Moore, one of the Committees in the Bill against Forestallers,
Regrators and Ingrossers, (who were appointed on Monday the 17th day of this
instant November foregoing) showed, that the Committees have withdrawn out of
the said Bill those points that concerned Corn, Grain and other Victuals, and
have framed a new Bill for that purpose, Entitled, An Act to make void
Contracts upon Engrossing of Corn, Grain or Victual, which had its first
reading; And the old Bill, for as much thereof as was not withdrawn, was upon
the question Ordered to be engrossed.

Sir Francis Hastings, Mr Francis Bacon and Mr Secretary moved touching the
further preparing of the Bills for the re-edifying of Houses and increase of
Tillage. Whereupon after some other Speeches it was resolved, that the
Committees therein should meet again for the same this Afternoon in this House.

The Bill against dying of Cloths with black Wood alias Logwood, was upon the
second reading committed unto the Citizens for London, York, Coventry,
Canterbury, Bristol, the Burgesses of Hull and Redding, Mr Finch and others;
And the Bill was delivered to Sir John Heart, who with the rest was appointed to
meet in the Guild Hall upon Tuesday next at two of the Clock in the Afternoon.

Mr Sherley, one of the Committees for continuance of Statutes (who were
appointed on Friday the 11th day of this instant November foregoing) showed,
that the greater number of the residue of the Committees being Yesterday
employed in sundry other Committees, could not be present at the same
Committee; and so prayed another day of meeting. Whereupon Monday next at two
of the Clock in the Afternoon was appointed at the former place, viz. the
Inner Temple Hall.

The Bill to restrain the carrying of Worsted-Yarn out of Norwich and Norfolk
unwrought was upon the second reading committed unto the former Committees for
Logwood, and to meet at the same time and place; And the Knights of Norfolk, Mr
Nathaniel Bacon and Mr Southerton were added unto them; And the Bill was
delivered to Sir John Heart one of the Committees.

The Bill concerning the Hospital of Warwick was read the second time, and
committed unto the Knights for Warwickshire, the Burgesses of Warwick, Mr
Linley, Sir Francis Hastings, Mr Recorder of London, Mr. Doctor Caesar, Mr.
Foulk Grevill, Sir Robert Wroth and others; And the Bill was delivered to Mr
Foulk Grevill with a Note of the Committees names, who with the rest was
appointed to meet in the Exchequer Chamber upon Wednesday next at two of the
Clock in the Afternoon.

Thomas Layton Esquire, one of the Knights for the County of Salop having been
much visited with sickness since his coming up to this Session of Parliament,
is for the better hope of recovery of his health licensed by Mr Speaker to
depart home into his Country.

On Saturday the 19th day of November, Four Bills of no great moment had each
of them one reading; of which the last being the Bill for erecting of Houses of
Correction and punishment of Rogues and Sturdy Beggars was upon the second
reading committed unto Mr. George Moore, Mr. Attorney of the Duchy, and Mr.
Attorney of the Court of Wards, Mr. Francis Bacon, Sir Thomas Cecill, Sir
William Moore, Sir Robert Wroth, Mr. Recorder of London and others; who were
appointed to meet on Tuesday next in the Middle Temple Hall at two of the Clock
in the Afternoon.

Sir John Fortescue Chancellor of the Exchequer, one of the Committees for the
Subsidy, who were appointed on Tuesday the 15th day of this instant November
foregoing, showed the meeting of the Committees yesterday, and their assents to
grant unto her Majesty three entire Subsidies, and six Fifteenths and Tenths;
the two first Fifteenths to be levied before next, and three Subsidies to be
paid at three entire payments in the three next years. Whereupon some of the
House were of opinion that the last of the said three Subsidies should have
been in two several years, at two several payments, in the like manner as the
third and last Subsidy granted in the last Parliament was paid. Whereupon Mr.
Secretary Cecill purporting to the House the said Assent of the Committees for
the said payments in manner as Mr. Chancellor had before declared, showing very
many forcible reasons and causes of very great importance for the said speedy
performance of the said payments accordingly. Which done, it was upon the
Question resolved, that the said last payment of the said three Subsidies shall
be made in one year and at one entire payment, in like sort as the two first of
the same three Subsidies are to be paid. Vide December. 7th post.

Mr. Davies showing many Corruptions in the Masters of Colleges in the
Universities of Oxford and Cambridge, in their abusing of the Possessions of
the same Colleges contrary to the intents of the Founders, converting the
benefit of the same to their own private Commodities, prayed the advice of this
House for reformation, and having a Bill drawn to that purpose desired he might
have assistance of some of the Members of this House being learned in the Laws,
for the better digesting of the said Bill against the next sitting of this
Court. Wherein Mr. Speaker referred him to Mr. Francis Moore and Mr. Boise,
with such other Members of the House as are of the Temple together in the same
House with the said Mr. Davies.

Sir Edward Hobbie liking very well of the said Motion made by the said Mr.
Davies, moved that like consideration may be had of Deans and Chapters as of
the said Masters of Colleges.

On Monday the 21th day of November, the Bill against Bastardy was read the
second time, and committed unto the former Committees for erecting of Houses of
Correction and the punishment of Rogues and sturdy Beggars, to meet at the
former time and place.

The Bill for employment of the Poor on work, and to refrain them from
idleness, was read the second time, and committed to the former Committees, to
meet at the same former time and place.

The Bill for the Lord Mountjoy had its first reading.

Sir Thomas Cecill, one of the Committees in the Bill for George Durrant (who
were appointed on Tuesday the 8th day of this instant November foregoing)
showed the meeting of the Committees and sundry particulars of their travel in
the said Bill to the good satisfaction of this House. Whereupon the said Bill
was upon the question Ordered to be engrossed.

Mr. Adrian Gilbert, one of the Burgesses for Burtport in the County of Dorset,
is for his necessary repair into the Country unto his Brother Sir Walter
Raleigh Knight (being as it is said visited with sickness) licensed by Mr.
Speaker to depart into the Country unto his said Brother.

The Bill concerning the Lands and Debts of Sir Henry Vnton Knight deceased was
read the second time, and committed unto Mr. Comptroller, Sir Thomas Cecill and
others; and the Bill was delivered to Sir William Cornwallis, who with the rest
was appointed to meet upon Wednesday next at two of the Clock in the Afternoon
in the Exchequer Chamber.

Mr Baker, one of the Committees concerning Weavers and Spinners (who were
appointed on Thursday the 10th day of this instant November foregoing) brought
in the old Bill, which was recommitted unto the former Committees, and Mr.
Nathaniel Bacon, Mr. Hext, Sir John Savile, Mr. Davies and Mr. Bourchier were
added unto them: All which were appointed to meet in the Middle Temple Hall
upon Wednesday next at two of the Clock in the Afternoon; And the Bill was
delivered unto Mr. Nathaniel Bacon.

Mr. Francis Bacon, one of the Committees for Tillage and re-edifying of Houses
(who were appointed on Saturday the 5th day of this instant November foregoing)
showed the sundry meetings and traverses of the Committees in diverse and sundry
courses concerning the converting of Tillage into Pasture; And that as touching
the said matter of Tillage they have framed a Bill, which he offered unto this
House, requiring the same might be read to Morrow: And as touching the said
matter of re-edifying of Houses, being not so thoroughly digested in the said
Committee as the other was for Tillage, he hops nevertheless to have the same
very shortly ready to go forward together with the other.

Mr. Boyse, one of the Committees in the Bill for Hospitals, abiding and
working Houses for the Poor (who were appointed on Friday the 18th day of this
instant November foregoing) showed the meeting of the Committees and some
Amendments in the Bill; and delivered in the Bill so amended: which Amendments
being twice read, the Bill was upon the Question Ordered to be engrossed.

Mr. Robert Wingfield, one of the Committees touching the abuses of Licenses
(who were appointed on Friday the 11th day of this instant November foregoing)
delivered some particular informations to Mr. Chancellor, and a License with a
Blank to Mr Speaker. Vide concerning this matter on Wednesday the 16th day of
this Instant November foregoing.

Mr Winch, one of the Committees in the Bill to keep Horses from stealing (who
were appointed on Wednesday the 16th day of this instant November foregoing)
showed the meeting of the Committees and some Amendments in diverse parts of the
Bill; and so delivers in the Bill with some Amendments; and the Bill was
re-delivered unto him again to be further considered of by the Committees, and
the Committees names were read, and thereupon were appointed to meet again at
two of the Clock in the Afternoon of this present day in the Middle Temple Hall.

Mr Bourcher moved the House touching the discovery of the Counsel of the same
by some Member thereof, as it should seem; for his said motion is set down very
briefly and imperfectly in the Original Journal Book of the said House; neither
is there any other issue of it there inserted than that Sir Edward Hobbie moved
to have the matter proceeded to further Examination, and the Party to be named.

Sir John Fortescue Chancellor of the Exchequer brought in the Articles for the
three Subsidies and six Fifteenths and Tenths, with the manners and days of
Payments; which being read unto the House and well liked of, were presently
delivered to Mr. Solicitor to draw the Book. Vide December the seventh
Wednesday postea.

On Tuesday the 22d day of November the Bill for the necessary habitation and
relief of the Poor, Aged, Lame and Blind in every Parish was read the second
time, and committed unto the former Committees for erecting of Houses of
Correction and punishment of Rogues and Sturdy Beggars, who were appointed on
Saturday the 19th day of this Instant November foregoing.

The Bill for relief of Hospitals, poor Prisoners and others impoverished by
casual losses, was upon the second reading committed unto the former Committees
for erecting of Houses of Correction and punishment of Rogues, etc. Vide
Committees names page seq.

The Bill for Supply of Relief unto the Poor was upon the second reading
committed unto the said former Committees for erecting of Houses of Correction
and punishment of Rogues, etc.

The Bill for setting the Poor on work was read the second time and dashed upon
the third question for the Committee, and rejected upon the question for
engrossing.

The Bill for petite Forfeitures to go to the relief of the Poor was upon the
second reading committed unto the former Committees in the Bill for erecting of
Houses of Correction and punishment of Rogues and sturdy Beggars.

Sir Edward Hobby moved the House for privilege for Sir John Tracie being a
Member of this House, and now presently at the Common Pleas to be put on a
Jury. Whereupon the Sergeant of this House was presently sent with the Mace to
call the said Sir John Tracie to his attendance in this House, which was
thereupon so done accordingly, and the said Sir John then returned to this
House.

The Bill for the better relief of Soldiers and Mariners was upon the second
reading committed unto the former Committees for erecting of Houses of
Correction and punishment of Rogues and sturdy Beggars (who were appointed on
Saturday the 19th day of this instant November foregoing) and Mr. Arnold was
added unto them.

The Bill for the better governing of Hospitals and Lands given to the relief
of the Poor was upon the second reading committed unto the former Committees
for the erecting of Houses of Correction and punishment of Rogues and Sturdy
Beggars, and Mr. Hubbard was added unto them.

The Bill for Hospitality was read the second time, and dashed upon the
questions for committing and engrossing.

The Bill for the relief of the Poor out of Impropriations and other Church
Livings, was read the second time; And after some Speeches both with the Bill
and against the Bill, upon the doubtfulness of the double question for the
committing was upon the division of the House rejected, with the difference of
twenty nine Voices, viz. with the Yea a hundred and seventeen, and with the No
a hundred forty six.

The Bill for levying of certain sums of money due to the Poor was upon the
second reading committed unto the former Committees for erecting of Houses of
Correction and punishment of Rogues and Sturdy Beggars. And the Bill for
extirpation of Beggary was committed to the same Committees: And then were the
said eleven Bills concerning the relief of the Poor, and the punishment of idle
and sturdy Beggars delivered to Sir Robert Wroth, together with the names of
the Committees (whose names being for the most part omitted upon the said
Saturday the 19th day of this instant November foregoing, when the said first
Bill touching the erecting of Houses of Correction and punishment of Rogues and
sturdy Beggars was first committed unto them, are here all expressly named with
such as were added unto them. Now in respect that nine other Bills were this
present Tuesday referred likewise to them as Committees to consider of them,
being a thing scarce to be pattern'd that one and the same Committee had at one
and the same time eleven Bills in agitation before them, though all upon the
matter tending to a like end and purpose, the said Committees were as
follows, viz. Mr. George Moore, Masters Attorneys of the Duchy and Court of
Wards, Mr. Francis Bacon, Sir Thomas Philips, Sir Thomas Cecill, Sir William
Moore, Sir Robert Wroth, Mr. Edward Philips, Mr. Recorder of London, Sir Thomas
Maunsell, All the Readers of the Houses of Court, Mr. Nathaniel Bacon, Mr.
Miles Sands, Mr. Finch, Mr. Colbrond, Mr. Edmund Boyer, Mr. Edward Leukenor,
Mr. Henry Warner, Mr. John Boyer, Mr. Rosse, Mr. Whalley, Sir William
Cornwallis, Mr. Lea, Mr. Hext, Mr. Richard Mills, Mr. Thomas Smith, Mr. Lea of
Lincoln's Inn, All the Sergeants at Law, Mr. James Harrington, Mr. Wingfield,
Sir Thomas Hobbie, Sir Anthony Cope, Mr. Mark Steward, Mr. Henry Yelverton, Mr.
William Coke, Mr. George Rotheram, Mr. Fettiplace, Mr. Winch, Mr. Hide, All the
Knights of Shires, the Burgesses of Hull, Mr. John Hare, Mr. Coleman, Mr. Hugh
Biston, All Citizens of Cities, and Mr. Tasborough, to which Committees this
present Tuesday also were added Mr. Arnold and Mr. Hubbard.

Sir Edward Hobbie, one of the Committees in the Bill against Counterfeiting of
the hands of the Lords (who were appointed on Saturday the 12th day of this
instant November foregoing) showed their meeting yesterday, and complaining
that albeit Yesterday last in the Afternoon was appointed for their meeting,
and the Committees names with the time and place read yesterday in the House,
none except Mr. Comptroller, Mr. Chancellor, himself and one other more of the
said Committees came to the said Committee, so that nothing was done therein.
And so the names of the said Committees being eftsoons now read by the Clerk,
the said Committees were appointed to meet in the former place at two of the
Clock in the Afternoon of this day, and the Bill with a note of the Committees
names was then delivered to Mr. Comptroller; And thereupon the meeting for the
matter of Tillage was deferred from this Afternoon till to Morrow in the
Afternoon.

Three Bills were sent up to the Lords from the House of Commons by Mr.
Comptroller, Mr. Chancellor of the Exchequer and others; of which the two last
were, one for the establishing of the Town-Lands of Wanting in the County of
Berks to the relief of the Poor, etc. And the last was the Bill for repeal of
the Statute of the twenty third year of her Majesty, Entitled An Act for
increase of Mariners and maintenance of Navigation.

The Bill concerning certain Lands of Sir John Spencer Knight, Mary his Wife
and Robert his Son, was read the first time.

Mr Winch, one of the Committees in the Bill for keeping of Horses from
stealing (who were appointed on Wednesday the 16th day of this instant November
foregoing) showed the meetings of the Committees, and sundry particulars of
their Travels therein; And that resting partly upon the Fairs in sundry
Countries to be certainly set down by those that best know the same Countries,
the Bill was recommitted to the same Committees to meet at the former place
upon Saturday next at two of the Clock in the Afternoon.

Three Bills of no great moment had each of them one reading; of which the
second being the Bill for Arthur Hatch was upon the second reading committed
unto Mr. Sands, Mr. Philips, Mr. Crew, Mr. Finch, Mr. Francis Popham, Sir
Robert Wroth and others, who were appointed to meet upon Thursday next at two
of the Clock in the Afternoon in the Middle Temple Hall.

Mr. Finch one of the Committees for drawing of a Bill for the reformation of
the abuses by Licenses for Marriages without Banes, showed, that some of the
Committees have met at sundry times for the drawing of a Bill for that purpose,
and that himself has by their appointment drawn such a Bill, and showed the
same to such of the Committees as were assembled at their last meeting, being
but very few of them at that time; and so leaves it to the Choice of the House
either to appoint another day for the meeting of another greater number of the
said Committees, that they may be acquainted with the substance of the same
Bill, or else to receive the same Bill into this House presently at their own
good pleasure. And thereupon he was required by this House to deliver in the
said Bill, which he then so did accordingly, and delivered the same to Mr.
Speaker.

On Wednesday the 23th day of November, Four Bills of no great moment had each
of them one reading; of which the last being the Bill concerning Leases made by
Archbishops and Bishops was upon the second reading rejected upon the question
for commitment, and so likewise upon the question for engrossing.

The Bill for repealing part of the Charter granted to the Town of Yarmouth was
upon the second reading committed unto Sir Robert Wroth, Mr Fulk Grevill, all
the Burgesles of the Port Towns, and Knights for Norfolk and Suffolk, Mr.
Nathaniel Bacon and others, who were appointed to meet on Friday next at two of
the Clock in the Afternoon in the Exchequer Chamber.

Mr Walgrave moved touching the Transporting of a great number of Herrings to
Leghorn, which occasioneth both a very great scarcity of Herrings within the
Realm, and is, he says, a great means of spending much Butter and Cheese, to
the great inhancing of the prices thereof by reason of the said scarcity of
Herrings. And having drawn a Bill for redress thereof, offered the said Bill to
the House, and delivered the same to Mr Speaker accordingly.

Seven Bills of no great moment had each of them one reading; of which the last
being the Bill for the speedy punishment of certain Felonies hereafter to be
committed, was upon the second reading committed to the former Committees for
relief of Poor, and punishment of Rogues, etc. (whose names see before on
Tuesday the 22th day of this instant November foregoing) and Mr Wiseman, Mr
Littell, and Mr Lea were added unto them: And the Bill was delivered to Sir
Robert Wroth, who with the rest was appointed to meet this Afternoon in the
Middle Temple Hall.

Mr Francis Moore, one of the Committees in the Bill concerning the Lands and
Debts of Sir Henry Vnton deceased, (who were appointed on Monday the 21th day
of this instant November foregoing) showed the meeting of the Committees, and
opening diverse parts of the said Bill at large, showed further the adding of a
Proviso, which Proviso being twice read, the Bill and Proviso were upon the
question Ordered to be engrossed.

Sir Thomas Cecill, one of the Committees in the Bill for the Town of
Northampton (who were appointed on Wednesday the 16th day of this instant
November foregoing) showed the meeting of the Committees and some part of their
travel; and so delivered in the Bill, referring the same to the further
pleasure of this House. And so the Bill upon the question was Ordered to be
engrossed.

Mr Snagg, one of the Committees in the Bill to restrain the Carriage of
Worsted Yarn out of the City of Norwich and County of Norfolk unwrought, (who
were appointed on Friday the 18th day of this instant November foregoing)
showed the meeting and travel of the Committees without concluding upon any
thing. And thereupon further day was given to the former Committees to meet
again about the same upon Saturday next at two of the Clock in the Afternoon in
the Exchequer Chamber, and the Bill was delivered to the said Mr Snagg.

Mr. Attorney General and Mr. Doctor Stanhop do bring from the Lords An Act
passed with their Lordships concerning the confirmation and establishment of
the deprivation of diverse Bishops in the Beginning of her Majesty's Reign, with
recommendation thereof from their Lordships unto this House. Which being after
their departure back again, signified unto the House by Mr. Speaker, it was
shortly after found by Sir Edward Hobby, that the said Act was not rightly and
duly endorsed by their Lordships, the same Indorsement being made above the
Contents of the said Act, which ought to have been made under it. Whereupon the
House being made privy thereof by Mr. Speaker, Mr. Comptroller, being
accompanied with diverse Members of this House, was sent to the Lords with the
said Act to signify the error, and pray the Amendment. Vide plus concerning
this matter in fine hujus diei.

The Bill concerning Coopers was read the second time, and upon the question
Ordered to be engrossed.

Mr Comptroller and the residue returning from the Lords, showed unto this
House, that they have delivered the said Act together with the said Message of
this House unto their Lordships according to the said charge given them by this
House.

The Bill that Lessees may enjoy their Leases against certain Patentees in
certain Cases was read the first time.

Mr Francis Bacon, one of the Committees concerning Tillage and re-edifying of
Houses and buildings (who were appointed on Saturday the 5th day of this
Instant November foregoing) showed very eloquently and at large the travel of
the said Committees in their sundry meetings together, with his framing a Bill
by their appointment for some fit means of procuring the re-edifying of such
Houses and Buildings; And so offered the Bill to the House, and recommending
the same to their good considerations delivered the Bill to Mr Speaker.

The Bill concerning the Lands of the Lord Mountjoy was upon the second reading
committed to Mr Comptroller, Mr Chancellor of the Exchequer, Mr Solicitor, Mr
Francis Bacon, Mr Recorder of London, Sir Tho. Cecill, Mr Pellham and others;
and the Bill was delivered to Sir Tho. Cecill, who with the rest was appointed
to meet upon Saturday next at two of the Clock in the Afternoon in the Treasury
Chamber.

The Bill concerning George Durant was read the third time, and after many
Speeches both with the Bill and against the Bill, and some tending to
amendments to be made in some parts of the same, it was in the end deferred
from being put to the question till Saturday next, upon some expectation that
the parties to the same Bill may in that mean time grow to some good end
amongst themselves without any further troubling of this House therein.

The said Mr Attorney and Mr. Doctor Stanhop coming from the Lords do signify
unto Mr Speaker, that where their Lordships had this present day sent unto this
House an Act concerning the confirmation and establishment of the deprivation
of diverse Bishops in the beginning of her Majesty's Reign, with a
recommendation thereof from their Lordships unto this House; and did afterward
receive the same Act back again from this House, because the indorsement
thereof was contrary to the ancient, usual and due Custom of the Parliament,
subscribed, and not subscribed according to the same ancient usual and due
Custom of the Parliament, as it ought to have been, their Lordships have now
sent down the said Act again unto this House, indorsed under the same Act,
according to the ancient former usage of the Parliament; And do further signify
unto this House, that as the said superscribing of the said Indorsement of the
said Act in such manner before was indeed a fault, so the same did grow only by
an error in the Clerk of the Upper House, who had never exercised the place
before this present Sessions of Parliament; And that their Lordships liking
very well of that which was done by this House touching the said Error, do
withal wishs this House to continue all former good Order and Courses in all
Parliament proceedings. Vide initium istius materiae inter praecedaneas
relationes hujus Diei.

On Friday the 25th day of November four Bills had each of them one reading; Of
which the last being the Bill concerning the Lands and Tenements of Sir John
Spencer Knight, was upon the second reading committed unto Mr. Winch, Sir
Robert Wroth, Mr. Rotheram, Mr Henry Yelverton, Mr Luke, Sir Richard Knightley,
Mr Henry Hubbard, Mr Robert Wingfield, the Knights for Bedfordshire and Mr
Bourchier; And the Bill was delivered unto Sir Robert Wroth, who with the rest
was appointed to meet at the Middle Temple Hall to Morrow at two of the Clock
in the Afternoon.

The Bill for assuring of certain Lands and Tenements unto Robert Cotton, etc.
was upon the second reading committed unto the former Committees in the Bill
concerning Sir John Spencer, and at the same time and place; And there were
added unto them Sir John Hungerford, Mr William Cecill, the Knights for the
County of Huntington, Mr William Cotton, Mr Henry Mountague and Mr Valentine
Knightley, and the Bill was delivered to Sir Robert Wroth.

The Bill concerning the draining of certain surrounded grounds in the County
of Norfolk was upon the second reading committed unto Mr Nathaniel Bacon, Sir
Anthony Cope, Mr Henry Yelverton, Mr Henry Spillman, Sir Robert Wroth and
others; And the Bill was delivered to the said Sir Robert Wroth, who with the
rest was appointed to meet upon Monday next at two of the Clock in the
Afternoon in the Exchequer Chamber.

Mr Bourchier, one of the Committees in the Bill for the relief of Arthur Hatch
(who were appointed on Tuesday the 20th day of this instant November foregoing)
showed the meeting of the Committees and their travels in hearing of the
Council of all the said Parties: And so reporting the particularities of the
state of the Case to the good satisfaction of the House, delivered in the Bill,
which was thereupon presently Ordered upon the question to be engrossed.

Mr Snagg, one of the Committees concerning Blockwood and Worsted Yarn (who
were appointed on Friday the 18th day of this instant November foregoing)
showed the meeting of the Committees with their Amendments in the said Bill
concerning Blockwood, and delivered in the same Bill with the Amendments, which
being thrice read was upon the question Ordered to be engrossed.

The Bill for increase of people for the service and defense of the Realm was
read the first time.

Mr Secretary Cecill moved the second reading of this Bill to be to Morrow, and
wished all the Members of this House to be present at the same, and provided,
as they shall think fit, to employ their endeavor and Speeches to the
furtherance of the proceedings in the said Bill. Whereupon it was agreed, that
both this Bill, and also the other Bill for increase of Tillage, shall be both
of them read to Morrow next for their second reading.

Mr..... one of the Committees in the Bill for erecting of Houses of Correction
and punishment of Rogues and sturdy Beggars, (whose names see on Tuesday the
22d day of this instant November foregoing) showed the sundry meetings and
travel of the said Committees, and their Amendments of sundry parts of the said
Bill, with addition of the two last leaves; and so delivered in the Bill in
such sort amended. Which Bill being very long and the said Amendments many, the
day being also far spent, the reading of the said Amendments and Addition were
deferred till some other more convenient time.

On Saturday the 26th day of November, Four Bills of no great moment had each
of them one reading; of which the last being the Bill for enrolling and
exemplifying of Defeasances, was upon the second reading committed unto Sir
Edward Hobby, Mr Lieutenant of the Tower, Mr Francis Moore, Mr Edward Lewkenor
and others, who were appointed to meet upon Tuesday next at two of the Clock in
the Afternoon in the Exchequer Chamber.

The Bill concerning the carrying of Sheepskins and Pelts over the Seas was
read the second time, and committed unto Sir Robert Carry, the Burgesses of
Newcastle, Barwick, Northampton and Lincoln, Mr Francis Moore and others, who
were appointed to meet upon Tuesday next at two of the Clock in the Afternoon
in the Exchequer Chamber.

Mr. Sergeant Drew and Mr. Dr. Stanhop do bring from the Lords the Bill
Entitled An Act for establishing of the new College of the Poor at Cobham in
the County of Kent.

The said Mr. Sergeant Drew and Mr. Doctor Stanhop do bring word from the
Lords, that their Lordships do desire that some half a score of this House may
be presently sent to confer with their Lordships in the Chamber near unto the
Upper House, touching an Act lately passed this House and sent up to their
Lordships, Entitled, An Act for the Repeal of a Statute made in the twenty
third year of her Majesty's Reign, Entitled, An Act for the increase of
Mariners, and for the maintenance of Navigation. Whereupon Mr. Comptroller, Sir
Robert Wroth and others were sent unto their Lordships for that purpose
accordingly.

The Bill for Husbandry and Tillage was upon the second reading committed unto
Mr. Francis Bacon, Mr. Yelverton, Mr. Tasbrough, the Citizens of all Cities,
Mr. Green and others; who were appointed to meet here upon Tuesday next at two
of the Clock in the Afternoon in this House.

Mr. Comptroller and the residue returning from the Lords, he did signify unto
the House, that their Lordships do think it very dishonorable that any Act
should be intended to pass in the time of her Majesty's Reign for repealing of
any Law bearing such a title as that is, being An Act for the repeal of a
Statute made in the time of her Majesty's Reign for increase of Mariners and
maintenance of Navigation. And therefore their Lordships do wish this House
would alter the said Title of the said Act, if they shall so think good. And to
that end their Lordships have sent unto this House by them a Note in Paper,
containing two several Titles, either of which are more apt and fit in their
opinions to be by this House set down for the title of the said Act: The first
of which Titles is, An Act made for the increase of Mariners and for
maintenance of Navigation, repealing a former Act made in the twenty third year
of her Majesty's Reign bearing the same title: And the second is, for the
increase of Mariners and for the maintenance of Navigation: Both which Titles
being read by the Clerk, choice was made by the House to have the first of the
said two titles to be set down by this House, for the title of the said Act.
Which said first title being three times read by the Clerk, was resolved upon
the Question so to be set down for the title of the said Act accordingly.

On Monday the 28th day of November, Two Bills of no great moment had each of
them one reading; of which the second being the Bill for the City of Bristol
was upon the second reading committed unto Mr. Dr. James, Mr. Francis Moore,
the Citizens of Bristol, Gloucester, Bath and Wells, Mr. Snagg, Mr. Green and
others; And the Bill was delivered to Mr. Green, who with the rest was
appointed to meet this Afternoon at two of the Clock in the Middle Temple Hall.

Mr. William Bowyer showed, that being a Member of this House, he was this day
served with a Subpoena to appear in the Chancery by one James Biddell, and so
moved for privilege; showing further, that he did signify unto the said James
Biddell, that he was a Member of this House, and therefore willed him to
forbear the serving of the same Process, being against the liberty of this
House; who answered, he would do it notwithstanding any such liberties or
privilege of this House whatsoever.

Mr. Combs and Mr. Henry Powle being likewise Members of this House do show,
that they were this day served with a Subpoena ad testificandum in the
Star Chamber by one Anne the Wife of one Thomas Wye Gentleman; and so in like
manner moving for privilege, the Sergeant of this House was thereupon charged
by this House to bring in the said James Biddel, and the said Anne the Wife of
the said Thomas, to appear in this House and answer the said Contempt.

Sir Thomas Cecill showed the great impoverishment of many her Majesty's
Subjects in the Isle of Ely, and in the Counties of Cambridge, Huntington,
Northampton, Lincoln and Norfolk by surrounding of many Wastes, Marsh and
Watery grounds there, and wishing some redress thereof, offers a Bill to the
House for that purpose, and prays the reading thereof. Whereupon the same was
then read for the first reading thereof accordingly, Entitled, The Bill
concerning watery and surrounded grounds in the Isle of Ely, and in the
Counties of Cambridge, Huntington, Northampton, Lincoln and Norfolk.

Mr. Baker, one of the Committees in the Bill concerning the Wages of Spinners
and Weavers (who were appointed on Thursday the 10th day of this instant
November foregoing) showed the meeting and travel of the Committees, and the
making of a new Bill; and so delivers in both the old Bill and also the new
Bill.

Mr. Attorney General and Mr. Doctor Carew do bring from the Lords the Bill
lately passed this House, and sent up to their Lordships, Entitled, An Act for
the Repeal of a Statute made in the twenty third year of her Majesty's Reign,
Entitled, An Act for increase of Mariners and for the maintenance of the
Navigation, with certain Amendments by their Lordships in the same Bill. Which
being afterward reported unto the House by Mr. Speaker, the same Amendments
were three times read by the Clerk, and so passed upon the question accordingly.

Roger Dodswell, servant to Mr Blowmer, one of the Middle Temple, having entered
into this House, and being no Member of the same, and brought to the Bar by the
Sergeant of this House, was committed to the Sergeants Ward, and was further
referred to be examined this Afternoon by Mr Edward Barker and Mr Hext, and to
be by them afterward reported to this House.

Mr Winch, one of the Committees for Sir John Spencer (who were appointed on
Friday the 25th day of this instant November foregoing) showed the meting and
proceeding of the Committees to some Amendments in the said Bill; and so
delivering in the Bill, and the same Amendments being twice read by the Clerk
of this House, the same Bill upon the question was ordered to be engrossed.

The Bill for increase of people for the strength and defense of the Realm was
upon the second reading, after many Speeches all tending to the good liking and
furtherance of the said Bill, Ordered to be committed to the said former
Committees in the Bill for Tillage, who were appointed on saturday the 26th day
of this instant November foregoing; And so both the Bills with a Note of the
Committees names were delivered to Mr. Comptroller.

Mr Attorney General and Mr Doctor Stanhop do bring from the Lords a Bill
entitled An Act for the better explanation of an Act made in the 13th year of
the Queens Majesty's Reign Capite quarto, concerning Tellors and Receivors,
etc. and do show that their Lordships do specially recommend the same Bill unto
this House.

Three Bills had each of them one reading; of which the last being the Bill for
erecting of Hospitals or abiding and working Houses for the Poor, had its third
reading; and after many Speeches both with the Bill and against the Bill, it
was at last ordered upon the question to be recommitted to the former
Committees; and a Bill with a Note of the Committees names was delivered to Mr
Boyse.

The Bill against excessive Fees of Ecclesiastical Judges and other Officers
and Ministers, was this day in the Afternoon delivered unto Mr. Speaker.

On Tuesday the 29th day of November, Eight Bills of no great moment had each
of them one reading; of which the last being the Bill for repairing of the
Bridges of Newport and Carlion in the County of Monmouth, was upon the second
reading committed unto the Knights for all the Shires, and Burgesses for all
the Boroughs in Wales, Monmouthshire, Hereford and the Citizens of Bristol and
Gloucester, Mr. Sergeant Williams, Mr. Pembridge and Mr. Oldsworth; And the
Bill was delivered to Sir Thomas Jones one of the said Committees, who with the
rest was appointed to meet in the Exchequer Chamber upon Thursday next at two
of the Clock in the Afternoon.

The Bill for the Town of Northampton was read the third time, and upon the
doubtfulness of the question twice put, was dashed upon the division of the
House, by the difference of fifty three persons, viz. with the No a hundred
fifty three, and with the Yea a hundred.

The Bill for Arthur Hatch was read the third time and passed upon the
question, the Learned Council on both sides heretofore having been heard as
well before the Committees as in this House at the Bar.

Mr. Roger Mawdeley, one of the Burgesses for Poole in the County of Dorset, is
for his necessary business licensed by Mr. Speaker to depart home, leaving with
Fulk Onslow Esquire, Clerk of the House of Commons, for the Poor and the
Minister five Shillings, which the said Clerk received accordingly. A like
Precedent of this kind, where the money was left with the Clerk of the said
House, was upon the 25th day of this instant November foregoing being Friday,
at which time Mr. Sherrington Talbot, one of the Burgesses for Chippingham in
the County of Wilts, was licensed by Mr Speaker to depart for his necessary
business, paying unto the Clerk as aforesaid ten shillings for the Poor and the
Minister, which he received accordingly.

On Wednesday the 30th day of November, Four Bills of no great moment had each
of them their first reading; of which the last was the Bill for prohibiting the
bringing into this Realm of any Foreign Cards for Wool.

The Amendments and Additions in the Bill for the erecting of Houses of
Correction and punishment of Rogues and sturdy Beggars being twice read, the
Bill upon the question was Ordered to be engrossed.

The Bill concerning the Possessions of the Bishopric of Norwich was upon the
second reading committed unto Mr Stephenson, Mr Henry Hubbard, Mr Henry Warner,
the Burgesses of Warwick and Linne, Mr Nathaniel Bacon and others; And the Bill
was delivered to Mr Henry Warner, who with the rest was appointed to meet to
Morrow at two of the Clock in the Afternoon in the Exchequer Chamber.

Mr. Dr. James, one of the Committees in the Bill for the City of Bristol (who
were appointed on Monday the 28th day of this instant November foregoing)
showed the meeting of the Committees, their Amendments of some parts of the
Bill, with some Provisoes added, and so delivers in the Bill with the
Amendments.

Mr. Finch, one of the Committees in the sundry former Bills for relief of the
Poor, (whose names see on Tuesday the 22th day of this instant November
foregoing) showed the meeting and travel of the Committees in sundry of the
said Bills, in some of which as they have not as yet thoroughly proceeded, so he
does deliver in a new Bill for relief of the Poor, now into this House.

Mr Francis Bacon, one of the Committees in the Bill for repeal of part of the
Charter of the Town of Tarmouth (who were appointed on Wednesday the 23th day
of this instant November foregoing) showed the meeting and travel of the
Committees, and so delivers in the Bill; whereupon after sundry Speeches both
with the Bill and against the Bill, it was Ordered in the end, that the Learned
Council on both sides should be heard in this House upon Saturday next in the
Afternoon.

Mr Snagg, one of the Committees in the Bill to restrain the carrying of
Worsted yarn unwrought (who were appointed on Friday the 18th day of this
instant November foregoing) and in the Bill for erecting of Hospitals or
abiding and working Houses for the Poor (who were appointed on the same day)
showed the meeting and travel of the Committees at large in both the said
Bills, and their opinions to be, that the said Bill to restrain the carrying of
Worsted Yarn out of Norwich and the County of Norfolk be left to Oblivion; And
that the said Bill for erecting of Hospitals or abiding and working Houses for
the Poor be referred to the further consideration of this House; And so
delivered in both the said Bills. Whereupon the same last recited Bill was
after many Speeches both with the Bill and against it, passed upon the question.

Mr. Hext showing, that he and Mr Sands according to the Commission of this
House unto them have examined Roger Dodswell Servant to Mr Blowmer of the
Middle Temple, now in the Sergeants Ward for entering into this House and being
no Member of the same; and that he finds he so did of mere simplicity and
ignorance, without any evil pretense; the said Roger was brought in to the Bar,
and so submitting himself and taking the Oath of the House was discharged,
paying his Fees. Vide concerning this matter on Monday the 28th day of this
instant November foregoing.

On Thursday the first day of December, Two Bills of no great moment were each
of them read the first time; of which the former was the Bill for provision of
a Preacher in the Tower of London.

Mr James Harrington nothing. Which is all that is set down by Mr Fulk Onslow
Clerk of the House of Commons in the Original Journal Book it self, although
the further intent and meaning of it might very well have been more fully
expressed, which seems to be this, That the said Mr Harrington being a Member
of this House, and having License from Mr Speaker to depart, left nothing with
him the said Mr Onslow toward the Minister who had read Prayers in the said
House during this Parliament, nor for the Poor, which other Members of the same
House at other times did, as appears plainly by that which immediately
follows, and upon like departure of Sir Henry Knivet set down at the end of
this present day also.

Sir Robert Wroth and Mr Sowtherton are nominated to make Collection of the
Members of this House, both for the Minister his pains in saying Prayers in
this House, and for the Poor.

Two Bills of no great moment had each of them one reading; of which the second
being the Bill for maintenance and reparation of Stains Bridge and
Egham-Cawsey, was upon the second reading committed unto Mr. George Moore, Sir
Robert Wroth, Mr. Amersham and others; And the Bill was delivered to Mr. George
Moore, who with the rest was appointed to meet to Morrow in the Afternoon in
the Exchequer Chamber at two of the Clock.

Four Bills also had each of them their third reading; of which the last being
the Bill against Forestallers, Regrators and Ingrossers, was read the third
time, and after sundry Speeches both with the Bill and against it, passed upon
the question.

Mr. Sergeant Drew and Mr. Doctor Stanhop do bring from the Lords a Bill
Entitled An Act concerning the School at Seavenoake.

Two Bills lastly had each of them one reading; of which the second being the
Bill for the better Execution of the Statute made in the twenty third year of
the Queens Majesty's Reign, for the abolishing of Logwood alias Blockwood in
the dying of Cloth, Wool or Yarn, was read the third time, and passed upon the
question.

Sir Henry Knivet, one of the Burgesses for the Borough of Malmesbury in the
County of Wilts, is for his necessary businesses licensed by Mr. Speaker to
depart into the Country, leaving with Mr. Fulk Onslow Clerk of this House ten
shillings for the Poor, and three shillings and four pence toward the
recompense of the Minister that said Prayers in the House, which he received
accordingly.

On Friday the second day of December, the Bill for the establishing of an
Award made between Edmund Cotton Gentleman, and Thomas Harvey Yeoman, was read
the first time.

Mr. Edward Moore, one of the Committees for drawing of a Bill concerning
Armor and Weapons (whose names see before on Tuesday the 8th day of this
instant November) showed the meeting and travel of the Committees, and
delivered in a Bill for that purpose, and another Bill also for the Company of
Armorers for the suppressing of false and deceitful Armor and Weapons brought
into this Realm from beyond the Seas.

Mr. Wingfield, one of the Committees in the Bill for draining and recovery
from the Water of certain over-flown grounds in the County of Norfolk (who were
appointed on Friday the 25th day of November foregoing) showed the meeting and
travel of the Committees and their Amendments in some parts of the said Bill,
and so delivered in the same Bill to the House.

Four Bills of no great moment had each of them one reading; of which the last
being the Bill to prevent double payment of Debts upon Shop-Books was upon the
second reading committed unto Mr. Jackson, Mr. Maynard, Mr. George Moore, Sir
Edward Hobbie, Mr. Wingfield, Mr. Fettiplace, Sir Francis Hastings, Sir Thomas
Cecill and others, and the Bill was delivered to Mr. Fettiplace, who with the
rest was appointed to meet to Morrow at two of the Clock in the Afternoon in
the Exchequer Chamber.

Sir Edward Hobbie, one of the Committees for the Hospital of Warwick (who were
appointed on Friday the 18th day of November foregoing) showed the meeting and
travel of the said Committees, with some Amendments in the Bill, and so
delivered in the Bill to the House.

The Bill for the re-edifying of Whitby-Haven had its second reading, and upon
the several questions for the committing, or the engrossing, was rejected.

Mr. Bourchier, one of the Committees in the Bill touching the transporting of
Sheepskins and Pelts (who were appointed on Saturday the 26th day of November
foregoing) showed the meeting and travel of the Committees, and their
Amendments in some parts of the Bill, and so delivered in the Bill to the House.

The Council Learned on both sides in the Bill concerning the Towns of
Lowestoft and Yarmouth in the County of Norfolk, were this day heard at large
in this House at the Bar till the breaking up of this Court.

On Saturday the third day of December, Four Bills had each of them one
reading; of which the last being the Bill for the speedy punishment of certain
Felons, and the manner of their delivery, was read the first time.

Mr. Thomas Balg Recorder of Stamford and one of the Burgesses of the same, is
for his necessary business in her Majesty's Service, licensed to depart, and
left five shillings with the Clerk of this House for the relief of the Poor,
and the pains of the Minister.

Mr. George Moore, one of the Committees in the Bill for Staines-Bridge and
Egham-Cawsey (who were appointed on Thursday the first day of December
foregoing) showed the meeting and travel of the Committees, and some Amendments
in the said Bill, which Amendments being twice read, the Bill was Ordered to be
engrossed.

The Amendments in the Bill for Bristol being twice read, the same was Ordered
to be engrossed.

Mr. Sergeant Yelverton, one of the Committees in the Bill for repairing of the
Bridge of Newport (who were appointed on Tuesday the 29th day of November
foregoing) showed the meeting and travel of the Committees, and their adding a
Proviso to the Bill, which Proviso being twice read, the Bill was Ordered to be
engrossed.

The Bill for recovery of surrounded Wastes, Marish and Watery grounds in the
Isle of Ely and the Counties of Cambridge, Huntington, Northampton, Lincoln and
Norfolk, was upon the second reading committed to Sir Thomas Cecill, the
Knights of Norfolk, Northampton, Lincoln, Cambridge, Huntington, Suffolk,
Essex, Sussex and Bedford, the Burgesses of the Boroughs in the said Shires,
Mr. Oxborow and others; And the Bill was delivered to Sir Thomas Cecill, who
with the rest was appointed to meet this Afternoon at two of the Clock in the
Exchequer Chamber.

The Bill for the Hospital called Nevill's Hospital in the County of York, had
its third reading. Upon the Motion to have Mr. Bird the Master of the said
Hospital, heard with his Council before the Bill be put to the Question for the
passing, day was given for him to be heard with his Council in the House upon
Monday next.

Five Bills were sent up to the Lords from the House of Commons by Mr.
Comptroller and others; of which the first was the Bill against Forestallers,
Retaylers, etc. the second concerning Arthur Hatch, and a third was for the
abolishing of Loggwood, alias Blockwood in Dying of Cloths.

Two Bills of no great moment had each of them one reading; of which the second
being the Bill concerning the Confirmation and establishment of the deprivation
of diverse Bishops in the beginning of her Majesty's Reign, was upon the second
reading committed unto Mr. Sergeant Heyle, Mr. Solicitor, Mr. Doctor James,
Mr. Doctor Parkins, Mr. Doctor Crompton, Mr. Stephenson, Sir William Moore and
others, and the Attorneyes of the Dutchies and Courts of Wards; and the Bill
was delivered to Mr. Solicitor, who with the rest was appointed to meet on
Monday next at the Middle Temple at two of the Clock in the Afternoon.

Mr. Finch showing some griefs of Ministers in some Cases by Color of a
Statute, made in the first year of Her Majesty's Reign, Entitled An Act for
Conformity of Common Prayer and Service in the Church and of the Administration
of Sacraments, and of a Statute made in the thirteenth year of her said
Majesty's Reign Entitled An Act to reform certain disorders touching Ministers
of the Church, and wishing an Explanation in the one and a mitigation in the
other, offers a Bill unto this House for that purpose.

Mr. Sergeant Drew and Mr. Attorney General do bring from the Lords a Bill
lately passed this House Entitled An Act for establishing the Town Lands of
Wanting in the County of Berks to the relief of the Poor, Amendment of
Highways and maintaining of a School within the said Town, showing that their
Lordships have passed the said Bill in the Upper House, and have added a
Proviso in the same Bill.

The Bill that Lessees may enjoy their Leases against Patentees in some certain
Cases, was upon the second reading committed unto Sir Francis Hastings, Sir
Thomas Hungerford, Mr. Solicitor, Sir Thomas Hobby and others; and the Bill
was delivered with the Committees names to Mr. Comptroller, who with the rest
was appointed to meet upon Tuesday next at two of the Clock in the Afternoon in
the Exchequer Chamber, and the Parties to bring their Council to the Committees.

On Monday the 5th day of December, Six Bills of no great moment had each of
them one reading; of which the last being the Bill for erecting of Houses of
Correction and punishment of Rogues and Beggars, was read the third time, and
passed upon the Question.

The Proviso in the Bill for draining of certain surrounded grounds in the
County of Norfolk was twice read, and the Bill and Proviso were Ordered to be
engrossed.

Mr. Recorder of London, one of the Committees in the Bill for the Lord
Mountjoy (who were appointed on Saturday the 24th day of November foregoing)
showed the meeting and travel of the Committees, and so delivered in the Bill
to the House.

Six Bills were this Morning sent up to the Lords from the House of Commons; of
which the principal were: one concerning the Lands of Sir Henry Unton, and
another to give power and liberty to Sir John Spencer, Mary his Wife and Robert
their Son, to alienate certain Manors and Lands in the County of Somerset.

Mr. Henry Hubbard, one of the Committees in the Bill concerning the Lands of
the Bishopric of Norwich (who were appointed on Wednesday the 30th day of
November foregoing) showed the meetings and travel of the Committees, and
delivering in the Bill, it was after sundry Speeches committed to the former
Committees, and Mr. Brograve the Attorney of the Duchy, the Attorney of the
Court of Wards, and Sir William Cornwallis were added unto them, and appointed
to meet this day at two of the Clock in the Afternoon in the former place, viz.
the Exchequer Chamber, and the Bill and Committees names were delivered to the
said Sir William Cornwallis.

Mr. Doctor Parkins, one of the Committees in the Bill to prevent double
payments of Debts upon Shop-Books (who were appointed on Friday the second day
of this instant November foregoing) showed the meeting and travel of the
Committees and their adding of a Proviso and some Amendments to the Bill, and
so delivered in the Bill.

To Morrow Morning is appointed for the Learned Council of the Lord Mountjoy to
be heard in this House.

Mr. Francis Bacon, one of the Committees in the Bill for tillage and building
of Houses (who were appointed on Saturday the 26th day of November foregoing)
showed at large the meeting and travel of the Committees and their framing of
two new Bills, and delivers both the old Bill and the new Bill into the House.

The Bill concerning Tellors, Receivors, etc. was upon the second reading
committed unto all the Privy Council being of this House, Sir Oliver Lambert,
Mr. Solicitor, Mr. Tasborough, Mr. Francis Bacon, and others; And the Bill and
Committees names were delivered to the said Mr. Comptroller, who with the rest
was appointed to meet to Morrow at two of the Clock in the Afternoon in the
Exchequer Chamber.

Mr. Bird Master of Nevill's Hospital in the County of York (who was appointed
to be heard this day with his Council on Saturday the third day of this instant
December foregoing) was called to the Bar, and heard; who showed that he could
get none to be of Council with him. Whereupon being demanded whom he would
retain of his Council; and Answering that he would have Mr. Godfrey: It was
then agreed, that Mr. Godfrey should be assigned of his Council, and further
day given to hear his Council in this House upon Wednesday next being the 7th
day of this instant December following. At which time the said Mr. Bird's
Council being heard, it should seem that the said Bill touching Nevills
Hospital which had been read the third time, never passed the House.

Mr. Doctor Muffet, one of the Burgesses for Wilton, being Licensed to depart,
left two shillings and six pence with Mr. Fulk Onslow Clerk of this House for
the Poor and the Minister, but nothing for the said Clerk himself.

Mr. John Wingfield, one of the Burgesses for Peterborough in the County of
Northampton, is for his necessary businesses Licensed to depart, and left with
the Clerk five shillings for the Poor and Minister.

Mr. Thomas Hinson, one of the Burgesses for Barnstable in the County of Devon,
was this day Licensed for his necessary business to depart, and left with the
Clerk five shillings for the Poor, and two shillings and six pence for the
Minister.

On Tuesday the 6th day of December, Five Bills of no great moment had each of
them one reading; of which the second being the Bill for establishing an Award
made between Edward Cotton Gentleman and Thomas Harvey Yeoman, was upon the
second reading committed unto Mr Sergeant Harris, Mr Henry Warner and others;
and the Bill was delivered to the said Mr Warner, who with the rest was
appointed to meet to Morrow at two of the Clock in the Afternoon in the
Temple-Hall.

The Amendments in the Bill for the Lord Mountjoy being twice read, the Lord
Marquess of Winchester and the Lord Mountjoy with their Learned Council were
heard at the Bar in this House, before such time as the said Bill and
Amendments were put to the Question for engrossing; and after their departure
out of the House, the said Bill with the Amendments was upon the Question
Ordered to be engrossed.

Sir Hugh Portman Knight, one of the Knights returned into this present
Parliament for the County of Somerset, is Licensed by this House to depart; and
did leave with Mr. Fulk Onslow Clerk of this House, ten shillings for the Poor,
and two shillings for the Minister.

To Morrow in the Afternoon in the Middle Temple Hall, the Committees in the
Conference for reviving and continuance of Statutes are appointed to meet (who
had been appointed on Friday the 4th day of November foregoing.)

On Wednesday the 7th day of December, Five Bills of no great moment had each
of them one reading; of which the last being the Bill against lewd wandering
persons pretending themselves to be Soldiers or Mariners, was upon the second
reading committed unto Mr. Simneil, Mr. Hext, Sir William Moore and others; and
the Bill was delivered to Mr. Hext, who with the rest was appointed to meet
this Afternoon at two of the Clock in the Exchequer Chamber.

The Bill also against Stealers of Corn and Fruit was upon the first and second
reading committed unto the former Committees in the Bill against lewd persons,
etc.

The Bill against the stretching and taintering of Northern Cloth was read the
second time, and Ordered to be engrossed.

Mr. Henry Hubberd, one of the Committees in the Bill concerning the Lands and
Possessions of the Bishopric of Norwich, (who were appointed on Wednesday the
30th day of November foregoing) showed the meeting and travel of the
Committees, and delivered in the Bill with the good allowance of the said
Committees as a Bill in good state.

Mr. Attorney General and Mr. Doctor Stanhop do bring from the Lords a Bill
which their Lordships Entitled An Act for the better and safer Recording of
Fines to be levied in the Court of Common Pleas.

Mr. Eresbie, one of the Committees in the Bill for recovering of surrounded
Waste, Marish and Watery grounds in the Isle of Ely, and the Counties of
Cambridge, Huntington, Northampton, Lincoln, etc. (who were appointed on
Saturday the third day of this instant December foregoing) showed some
Amendments by the Committees, and delivered in the Bill.

The Bill for suppressing the multitude of Maulsters was read the second time,
and committed unto the former Committees (who were appointed on Wednesday the
9th day of November foregoing) and unto the Burgesses of York, Mr. Winch, Mr.
Yelverton and others; And the Bill was delivered to Mr. Litton one of the
former Committees, who with the rest was appointed to meet to Morrow at two of
the Clock in the Afternoon in the Middle Temple Hall. Vide Thursday January
12th ensuing.

Mr. Bird, with Mr. Atkinson and Mr. Godfrey being of his Council, were heard
this day at the Bar. Vide concerning this matter on Monday the 5th day of this
instant December foregoing.

The Bill for increase of people for the strength and defense of the Realm had
its first reading.

Post Meridiem.

The Bill for granting unto her Majesty six Fifteenths and Tenths, and three
entire Subsidies was read the first time.

Nota, That whereas in the last Parliament de an. 35 Regin. Eliz. the House of
Commons was not drawn without much and long dispute both with the Lords and by
themselves to yield unto the grant of three Subsidies and six Fifteenths and
Tenths unto her Majesty, and that the same was done also with Protestation or
Caution, that it should not be made a Precedent for the time to come: Yet it is
evident by this Bill now last read, that the same proportion was again yielded
unto by the said House at this present, and that also assented unto with far
less difficulty and with some harder Conditions on the Subjects part. For a
Committee being appointed to consider of it upon Thursday the 15th day of
November last past, they brought in Articles ready drawn and agreed upon
between them on the Saturday following, being the 19th day of the same Month;
at which time the House being pressed did at length condescend to the said
grant of the said three Subsidies and six Fifteenths and Tenths, to be paid in
a shorter time than those granted in the last Parliament had been. And
thereupon her Majesty's Solicitor on the Wednesday next after, being the 21th
day of the same November, had the said Articles delivered unto him to draw up
the said Bill for the Subsidy accordingly. Which being afterward by him
brought into the said House, was this day read as is aforesaid prima vice. And
being read again the second time on Saturday the 10th day of the said December
also, and thereupon Ordered to be engrossed, had lastly its third reading upon
Wednesday the 14th day of the same Month ensuing; and being then passed the
House, was immediately sent up to the Lords by Mr. Comptroller and others.
Neither will it be amiss finally to observe in this place, that as the gift of
this Parliament exceeded that in the former de an. 35 Regin. Eliz. in respect
of the manner of payment, so that gift also in the Parliament following de an.
43 Regin. ejusdem being of four Subsidies and eight Fifteenths and Tenths, was
much greater than both these that preceeded. By all which it is evident, that
either the public necessity was exceeding urgent in this present and ensuing
Parliament, or that the aforesaid Gift yielded unto by the House of Commons, in
the beforementioned 35th year of her Majesty's Reign, was made a leading
Precedent in the said Parliament ensuing.

On Thursday the 8th day of December three Bills had each of them one reading;
of which the third being the Bill for the better staying of Corn within the
Realm was upon the second reading committed unto Mr George Moore, Mr Wiseman,
Mr Edmond Bacon, Mr Colefield, Mr. Birkeby and others; And the Bill and
Committees names were delivered to the said Mr. Colefield, who with the rest
was appointed to met to Morrow at two of the Clock in the Afternoon in the
Middle Temple Hall.

The Bill for the lawful making of Bays was upon the second reading committed
unto Sir Robert Wroth, Mr. Francis Harvey and others, the Burgesses of Norwich
and Gloucester, the Knights for Devonshire and Cornwall; And the Bill and
Committees names were delivered to Mr. Wiseman, who with the rest was appointed
to meet to Morrow at two of the Clock in the Afternoon in the Exchequer Chamber.

The Bill against the bringing in of Foreign Cards for Wool was upon the
second reading committed unto the said former Committees in the Bill next
foregoing; And Mr. Sergeant Harries, Mr. Sergeant Hoyle, the Knights and
Burgesses for London, and Mr. Hubberd were added unto them, to meet at the
former place and time appointed for the said Bays.

The Bill for Fustians was upon the second reading committed unto the former
Committees also.

Sir Thomas Cecill made a motion for a Bill of Petition to her Majesty to be
drawn and presented unto her, touching Monopolies. Whereupon Mr. Francis Bacon
perused it further, and after sundry Motions and Speeches had touching the said
Monopolies and the abuses of Patents of privilege, it was ordered to be
further referred to the former Committees and unto all the Sergeants at Law
being Members of this House, Mr. Attorneys of the Court of Wards and of the
Duchy, Sir Thomas Cecill and Sir Thomas Cornwallis, who were appointed to meet
on Saturday next in the Afternoon in the Exchequer Chamber, to set down in
Writing what shall be by them thought fit, and delivered unto her Majesty by
the Mouth of Mr. Speaker in the behalf of this House.

Mr. Rosse moving for Privilege was joined with the former Committees for
Privilege.

Mr. Attorney General and Mr. Doctor Carew do bring from the Lords a Bill
entitled An Act for Confirmation of the Jointure of Christian and Mary Sands.

Sir Edward Hobby moved concerning the wanting of some Members of this House
not returned into the Book by the Clerk of the Crown.

The Bill for the increase of People for the strength and service of the Realm,
was upon the second reading committed unto all the Privy Council being Members
of this House, Mr. Francis Bacon, Mr. Solicitor, Mr. Mountague, Sir Thomas
Cecill, Mr. Pelham and others; and the Bill was delivered to Mr. Francis Bacon,
who with the rest was appointed to meet this Afternoon at two of the Clock in
the Exchequer Chamber.

Three Bills lastly had each of them one reading; of which the first being the
Bill to alter the nature of Gavelkind Lands was read the third time and past
upon the question.

The Proviso in the Bill concerning the Town-Lands of Wanting was read the
third time and passed upon the question.

On Friday the 11th day of December, Four Bills of no great moment had each of
them one reading; of which the last being the Bill for the retaining, well
ordering and governing of Mariners and Seamen, was upon the second reading
committed unto all the Burgesses of Port-Towns, the Burgesses for York, the
Knights and Citizens for London, Master Doctor Caesar, Mr. Wally, and others;
and the Bill was delivered to Mr. Doctor Caesar, who with the rest was
appointed to meet upon Monday next in the Afternoon in the Middle Temple Hall.

The Bill for relieving of Clothiers in the Counties of Suffolk and Essex, was
upon the second reading committed unto Mr. Doctor Caesar, Mr. Edward Hubbard,
Mr. Ford, the Burgesses of Coventry and others; And the Bill was delivered to
the said Mr. Ford, who with the rest was appointed to meet to Morrow in the
Afternoon in the Middle Temple Hall.

The Bill for establishing of good Orders in Grammar Schools was read the
second time, and upon the several questions for the committing and the
engrossing was rejected.

Six Bills of no great moment had each of them one reading; of which the first
being the Bill for Confirmation of Statutes Merchants acknowledged in the City
of Lincoln and Town Corporate of Nottingham, was upon the second reading
Ordered to be engrossed.

Seven Bills were sent up to the Lords from the House of Commons by Mr
Comptroller and others; of which one was the Bill concerning Fustians, and
another for the repairing of Stains Bridge and Egham Cawsey.

The Bill also for Tillage and Husbandry was read the first time.

Mr Hext, one of the Committees in the Bill against Stealing of Corn and Fruit,
showed the meeting of the Committees and their Amendments of some parts of the
Bill, and so delivered in the said Bill to the House.

Sir Edward Hobby moved, that the Clerk of the Crown Office in the Chancery,
and the Clerk also of this House do attend to Morrow in the Afternoon in the
Star Chamber upon the Committees for Returns, with their Books of the Returns
of the Knights, Citizens and Burgesses of this present Parliament.

Mr Francis Bacon, one of the Committees in the Bill to preserve the property
of stolen Horses in the true owners, brought in the Bill with some Amendments,
which being thrice read was Ordered to be engrossed.

Mr Snagg, one of the Committees in the Bill for increase of People for the
defense and service of the Realm (who were appointed Yesterday) showed some
Amendments therein by the Committees, and delivered in the Bill with the
Amendments; and the Amendments being twice read, the Bill was upon the question
Ordered to be engrossed.

Mr. Colebrand one of the Committees in the Bill for the better staying of Corn
within the Realm (who were appointed on the day next foregoing) brought in the
said Bill with some Amendments.

Ognelt with his Council was appointed to be heard in the House upon Monday
Morning next, and soin like manner the Council for the Hospital of Warwick.

The Amendments in the Bill for recovering of certain Waste Marish and Watery
Grounds in the Isle of Ely and in the Counties of Cambridge, Huntington,
Northampton, Lincoln, Norfolk and Suffolk being twice read, the Bill was upon
the question Ordered to be engrossed.

Mr. Bourchier one of the Committees in the Bill for Lessees against Patentees,
etc. (who were appointed on Saturday the third day of this instant December
foregoing) delivered in the Bill with certain Amendments and a Proviso added
unto it.

Monday next was this day appointed for the hearing of the Council of Mr.
Throgmorton, and of Sir Moyle Finch, and of the Lord Cobham in this House, and
that they have each of them but one Council apiece.

The Bill for the Lord Marquess of Winchester was upon the second reading
committed unto Mr. Wingfield, Mr. Doctor Caesar, Mr Mainard, Mr. Henry
Mountague, Mr. Francis Moore and others; and the Bill was delivered to the said
Mr. Francis Moore, who with the rest was appointed to meet to Morrow at two of
the Clock in the Afternoon in the Exchequer Chamber.

Mr. Wiseman, one of the Committees in the Bill for Bays (who were appointed on
Thursday the 8th day of this Instant December foregoing) showed the meeting of
the Committees and their Amendments in the same; which Amendments being twice
read, the Bill was Ordered to be engrossed.

The Amendments in the Bill against lewd and wandering persons pretending
themselves to be Soldiers or Mariners, being twice read, the Bill was Ordered
to be engrossed.

The Amendments in the Bill concerning the Possessions of the Bishopric of
Norwich being twice read, the Bill was Ordered to be engrossed.

Mr Sergeant Harries, one of the Committees, in the Bill of establishing of an
Award made between Edward Cotton Gent. and Thomas Harvey Yeoman (who were
appointed on Tuesday the 6th day of this instant December foregoing) showed the
meeting and travel of the said Committees, and delivered in the same Bill.
Whereupon it was Ordered to be engrossed.

Three Bills also had each of them one reading; of which the second being the
Bill for the well Ordering of such as do practice the Science of Surgery,
was read the second time, and after the doubtfulness of the question three
several times put, it was upon the division of the House dashed, with the
difference of twenty nine voices, videlicet with the No one hundred and one,
and with the Yea seventy two.

Two Bills were sent sent up to the Lords from the House of Commons by the
Chancellor and others, together with a third being for the Explanation of a
Statute in Quinto of her Majesty concerning Laborers.

Mr Wiseman one of the Committees in the Bill for bringing in of Foreign Cards
for Wool (who were appointed on Thursday the 8th of this instant December
foregoing) showed the meeting of the Committees, and that eleven only of them
did meet, and six of them liked very well of the Bill, and the other five not:
And so delivered in the said Bill, referring the same to the further
consideration of this House.

Mr Sergeant Drew and Mr Doctor Stanhop do bring from the Lords two Bills
lately passed in this House and now also passed with their Lordships, with some
Additions and Amendments; the one of them being for electing of Hospitals for
abiding and working Houses for the Poor, and the other for the establishing of
the Hospital of Queen Elizabeth in Bristol, and for the relief of the Poor and
Orphans there.

The Bill for the granting of six Fifteenths and Tenths and three entire
Subsidies unto her Majesty had the second reading, and was Ordered to be
engrossed. Vide concerning this Bill of the Subsidy on Wednesday the 7th of
this instant December foregoing.

Edward Leg Esquire, one of the Burgesses for the Borough of Wiggon in the
County of Lancaster, was licensed for his necessary business to depart, and
left with Mr. Fulk Onslow Clerk of the House three shillings six pence for the
Poor and the Minister.

On Monday the 12th day of December the Bill for redress of Abuses and Deceits
used in Painting, was upon the second reading committed unto Mr. George Moore,
Mr. Fettiplace, Sir William Cornwallis, Mr. Recorder of London and others; and
the Bill was delivered to the said Sir William Cornwallis, who with the rest
was appointed to meet to Morrow at two of the Clock in the Afternoon, in the
Exchequer Chamber.

The Bill for confirmation of Letters Patents granted to the Merchant
Adventurers of the City of Exeter, was upon the second reading committed unto
the Knights and Citizens for London, the Burgesses of York, Lynn and Newcastle,
Mr Sergeant Heyle and others; and the Bill and Committees names were delivered
to the said Mr Heyle, who with the rest was appointed to meet this Afternoon at
two of the Clock in the Middle Temple Hall.

The Bill against the buying of Armor brought from beyond the Seas was read
the second time, and rejected upon the several questions for the Committing and
Engrossing.

The Bill for provision of a Preacher in the Tower of London was upon the
second reading committed unto all the Privy Council being Members of this
House, Mr Henry Hubbard, Mr Lieutenant of the Tower, Mr Recorder of London and
others; and the Bill was delivered to Mr Chancellor of the Exchequer, who with
the rest was appointed to meet to Morrow at two of the Clock in the Afternoon
in the Middle Temple Hall.

The Bill also for the building of a Bridge over the River of Wye, was upon the
second reading committed unto Sir Robert Wroth, Mr Herbert Cross, Mr Serieant
Williams and others; and the Bill was delivered to Sir John Scudamore, who with
the rest was appointed to meet to Morrow at two of the Clock in the Afternoon
in the Middle Temple Hall.

Sir Edward Hobbie, one of the Committees for Privilege and Returns (who were
appointed on Saturday the 5th day of November foregoing) showed the meeting and
travel of the Committees in sundry Cases both of privilege and Returns.
Whereupon it was Ordered, that the Clerk of this House should make search for
Precedents against Wednesday next for further consideration then to be
thereupon had by this House in the Cases opened by the said Sir Edward Hobby
unto this House by Order of the residue of the said Committees.

The Bill for the Lord Thomas Howard was upon the second reading committed unto
Mr Chancellor of the Exchequer, Mr. Francis Bacon, Mr. Francis Moore, Mr.
Winch, Mr. Solicitor and others, who were appointed to meet upon Wednesday
next in the Afternoon in the Treasury Chamber between the hours of four and
five of the Clock.

Mr. Secretary one of the Committees in the Bill concerning Tellors and
Receivers (who had been appointed on Wednesday the 5th day of November
foregoing) showed the meeting and travel of the Committees, and their agreement
in writing concerning certain Objections against some part of the said Bill to
the Number of fifteen; which being read to the House by the Clerk, it was
Ordered, that Conference should be had with the Lords for a Committee of both
Houses to be had touching the said Objections. Whereupon the said Mr. Secretary
with some others of this House were then presently sent to the Lords to move
for the said Conference; Who returning afterward again to this House, brought
word that their Lordships did very honorably and kindly accept the said Message
and advice of the said Conference, and had appointed twenty four of themselves
to confer with a convenient Number of this House to meet to Morrow in the
Afternoon, between one and two of the Clock, in the Great Council Chamber at
the Court. Whereupon it was agreed, that all the said former Committees,
together with Mr. Hext, Mr. George Cook, Mr. Finch, Mr. Winch, Mr. Henry
Hubbard, Mr. Edward Mountague and others added unto them, should attend their
Lordships at the said time and place, and that the five Sergeants at Law being
Members of this House should each of them jointly endeavor to defend and
maintain the reasons of the said fifteen Objections equally to be proportioned
to their several charges. And it was further agreed by this House and so
signified unto them by Mr. Speaker, that any other the Members of this House
might in the mean time gather any other Objections against any parts of the
said Bill, besides the said fifteen Objections or of any of them, and signify
the same unto this House to Morrow, sitting the Court.

The Bill lastly for the relief of the Poor was read the third time, and passed
upon the question.

On Tuesday the 13th day of December six Bills had each of them one reading; of
which the last being the Bill for the true making of Daggers, Swords and
Rapiers, and of the Blades of every of them, was read the second time and
rejected upon the several questions for the committing and engrossing.

The Amendments in the Bill for Bristol were thrice read, and passed upon the
question.

The Bill for the recovery of certain Waste Marish and Watery Grounds in the
Isle of Ely and the Counties of Cambridge and Huntington, Northampton, Lincoln,
Norfolk and Suffolk was read the third time, and passed upon the question.

The Bill for the relief of the Poor which passed this House yesterday, and the
Bill for the recovering of certain Waste Marish and Watery Grounds in the Isle
of Ely and Counties of Cambridge and Huntington, Northampton, etc. were sent up
to the Lords by Mr. Comptroller and others.

The Bill for Husbandry and Tillage was read the second time, and after some
amendments therein by some of the Committees in the Committee Chamber of this
House, and the said Amendments being twice read, the Bill was Ordered to be
engrossed.

The Committees names for Conference with the Lords this Afternoon were this
day delivered to Mr. Comptroller.

Mr. Sergeant Drew and Mr. Doctor Stanhop do bring from the Lords the Bill
against Forestallers, Regraters and Ingrossers with some Amendments, which Bill
lately passed this House, and was sent up to their Lordships.

Mr. Crook, Mr. Mountague, Mr. Solicitor, Mr. Oldsworth, Mr. Robert Wroth,
Mr. Badger, Mr. George Moore and Mr. Miles Sands went up presently into the
Committee Chamber to consider further of the Bill of Tillage.

Mr. Shirley, one of the Committees for continuance of Statutes (who were
appointed on Friday the 11th day of this November foregoing) showed the meeting
and travel of the said Committees, together with their framing of a Bill for
the reviving, continuance and explanation of sundry Statutes, and so delivered
in the Bill.

Mr. Snagg, one of the Committees for confirmation of Letters Patents granted
to the Merchant Adventurers in the City of Exeter (who were appointed on Monday
the 12th day of this instant December foregoing) showed the meeting of the
Committees and their utter disliking of the said Bill, showing the reasons
thereof; and so delivered in the said Bill as not fit to pass in this House.

On Wednesday the 14th day of December, Five Bills of no great moment had each
of them one reading; of which the last being the Bill for the granting of three
Subsidies and six Fifteenths and Tenths was read the third time and passed upon
the question. Vide concerning this Bill on Wednesday the 7th day of this
instant December foregoing.

Mr. Attorney General and Mr. Doctor Stanhop do bring from the Lords a Bill
lately passed in this House entitled An Act for the explanation of the Statute
made in the first year of her Majesty's Reign concerning Laborers; showing
that their Lordships have likewise passed the same, with some Amendments.

Mr. Secretary, one of the Committees appointed to have Conference with the
Committee of the Lords yesterday in the Afternoon at the Court, showed at large
some particulars of the said Conference; and concluded, that their Lordships
did desire, that the Copy of the Objections read unto them by the Committees of
this House, might be delivered unto their Lordships in Writing, to the end
after due consideration had by them upon the same Objections, their Lordships
might in the like manner answer this House in the same in writing. Whereupon
after sundry Speeches of other the Committees of this House, It was agreed,
their Lordships should have such Copy in writing both of the said Objections,
and also of such other Objections as the Members of this House should set down
or collect, to be further added to the former Objections; and so delivered in
the Bill and Objections.

Mr Sergeant Lewkener, one of the Committes in the Bill for confirmation and
establishment of the deprivation of diverse Bishops in the beginning of her
Majesty's Reign (who were appointed on Saturday the third day of this instant
December foregoing) showed the meeting and travel of the said Committees, with
some Amendments to the Bill; And so did deliver in the said Bill to the House.

Two Bills of no great moment had each of them one reading, of which the second
being the Bill for establishing of the Possessions of the Bishopric of
Norwich, was read the third time, and stayed from being put to the question for
passing till to Morrow that the Council of Mistress Leicester have been heard
in this House.

Mr Francis Moore, one of the Committees for consideration to be had touching
the method and substance of the humble thanks to be yielded unto her Majesty by
Mr Speaker, in the name and on the behalf of this whole House, for her Highness
most gracious care and favor, in the repressing of sundry inconveniences and
abuses practiced by Monopolies and Patents of privilege to be set down in
writing, showed the meeting, and travel of the said Committees therein, and
delivered a Note thereof in writing, which being then read by the Clerk, was
well liked of. Whereupon Mr Speaker moved the House, that albeit he was ready
to perform their Commandment according to the substance and effect of the said
Note in Writing; yet they would not tie him to the strict and precise form of
the words and terms set down in the same Note, so as he should prosecute the
substance and reasons thereof, which was then yielded unto accordingly. Vide
concerning this matter on Tuesday the 8th day of November foregoing.

Friday next is appointed to hear the learned Council in the Cause of Lessees
and Patentees.

On Thursday the 15th day of December, Two Bills had each of them one reading;
of which the second being the Bill for the lawful making of Bays was read the
third time, and past upon the question.

The Amendments in the Bill for relieving of Cloathiers concerning the weight
of short broad and colored Clothes to be made in the Counties of Suffolk and
Fssex, were read twice and ordered to be engrossed.

The Bill for the better staying of Corn within the Realm passed upon the
question, upon the division of the House, upon many Arguments, with the
difference and advantage of twenty nine voices, viz. with the Yea one hundred
twenty four, with the No eighty five. Whereupon after a motion, that according
to the ancient Orders of this House all the Members of the same which did sit
against against the passing of the said Bill, should go forth of the House to
bring in the Bill into the House again, together with the residue of the
Members of this House which went out before that were for the passing of the
said Bill; (wherein as sundry Speeches were used both pro and contra, so) at
last it was resolved it should be so done and observed for Orders sake
accordingly. And then all the Members of this House being gone forth saving
only Mr Speaker and the Clerk, Mr Comptroller brought in the Bill in his hand
accompanied with all the said Members of this House, and delivered in the same
Bill to Mr Speaker according to the ancient former usage of this House in that
behalf, observed. Vide a like Precedent on Friday March the 21. in Parliament
de ano 31o Eliz.

The old Objections and the new to the number in all of nineteen, collected
against sundry parts of the Bill concerning Tellors and Receivers, etc. and
prepared to be delivered to the Lords, were read by the Clerk, and presently
thereupon were sent up to the Lords together with the Bill lately passed this
House to preserve the property of stolen Horses, and for the true making of
Bays. One other Bill likewise passed in this House this present day, Entitled
An Act for the better staying of Corn within the Realm, etc. And also the Bill
concerning the City of Bristol, and the Bill for erecting of Hospitals and
Houses of Correction and abiding Houses for the Poor, perfected according to
their Lordships Amendments in both the same Bills; albeit their Lordships
direction in some Amendments were repugnant to the former accustomed ancient
Orders of Parliament in such Cases used, as in annexing those Amendments to the
said Bill engrossed in Parchment, and indorsed with Soit baille aux Communes,
where the same Amendments so annexed ought to have been set down in Paper, and
without any indorsement in the same Paper at all. And one other Bill lately
passed this House for the Explanation of the Statute made in the 5th year of
her Majesty's Reign concerning Laborers, which Bill being lately passed in
this House, and sent up unto their Lordships, was afterward passed by their
Lordships with the Amendment of one only word, and so sent down unto this House
from their Lordships: which Amendment being affiled to the said Bill and
engrossed in Parchment, and so engrossed with Soit baille aux Communes, was
sent also to their Lordships, to pray that the said Amendments may be returned
unto this House in Paper affiled to the said Bill, without any indorsement in
the said Paper, according to the ancient form of Parliament in such Case used,
to the end this House may thereupon proceed to the due and orderly perfecting
of the same Amendments accordingly. Vide concerning this matter at large upon
Thursday the 20th day of this instant December ensuing, where this matter is
fully handled.

The Bill for increase of people for the service and strength of the Realm, was
read the third time, and after many Arguments and speeches to the said Bill for
the passing thereof, and sundry contradictory speeches, but only to some parts
or branches of the same Bill, till such time as the day was far spent, and the
matter then in hand being of very great wight and moment, Mr Speaker moved to
know the pleasure of the House whether they would in that regard be pleased to
defer the said matter to be further argued till to Morrow. Whereof as many of
the Members of this House seemed to like well, so many others urging the
contrary, it grew in the end to a question, whether the said matter should be
deferred for further Argument till to Morrow, or else be presently continued;
It was upon the doubtfulness of the voices upon the putting of the question,
ordered by the division of the House, with the difference and advantage of nine
Voices or Poles, ( viz. with the Yea one hundred and eight, and with the No one
hundred and seventeen) that the said Argument should not be any longer
continued this day, and thereupon the Court did immediately rise.

On Friday the 16th day of December, Five Bills had each of them the third
reading, and passed upon the question; of which one was against the stretching
and tentering of Northern Cloth, and another against the transporting of
Sheepskins and Pelts; and a little after all the said five Bills so passed in
the House were sent up to the Lords by Mr Comptroller and others.

The Bill for Confirmation of the Jointure of Christian Lady Sands was upon the
second reading committed unto Mr Comptroller, Mr Secretary, Mr Brograve,
Attorney of the Duchy, Sir William Moore, Mr Edward Lewkenor, Sir Francis
Hastings and others: And the Bill was delivered to the said Sir William Moore,
who with the rest was appointed to meet to Morrow in the Afternoon in the
Exchequer Chamber.

Mr Snagg, one of the Committees in the Bill for Provision of a Preacher in the
Tower of London (who were appointed on Monday the 12th day of this instant
November foregoing) showed the meeting and travel of the said Committees, and
by their appointment delivered in the Bill, as not fit to have any Course or
passing in this House.

After many arguments in the Bill for increase of People for the service and
strength of the Realm both with the Bill and also against it, a Motion was
made, that a Proviso engrossed in Parchment might be added to the same Bill,
which was three times read; And the Bill and Proviso being put to the question,
the same did pass accordingly upon the question; And it was then Ordered that
the said Proviso should be inserted and written in the end of the said Bill, as
a parcel of the same.

On Saturday the 17th day of December the Bill for the relieving of Cloathiers
concerning the weight of short broad colored Cloths to be made within the
Counties of Suffolk and Essex, was read the third time and passed upon the
question; and also upon the division of the House, with the difference and
advantage of twenty six Voices, ( viz. with the Yea one hundred and five, and
with the No seventy nine) which being done and a Motion thereupon made by some,
that those which did sit against the Bill might rise and go forth to fetch and
bring in the Bill into this House, accompanied with the residue of the Members
of this House according to the ancient orders of the House in such Case used;
Mr Speaker did thereupon move that in regard of the preciousness of this
present time, the Parliament being so near an end, it might please this-House
in yielding and assenting to the due allowance of the right of the said Order
in the said Course thereof in the Ceremony of bringing in this Bill, the
Execution of the same may for this time be omitted and forborne in regard of the
shortness of the time, and was thereupon so assented unto and Ordered
accordingly upon the question.

Nota, That there is an excellent Precedent of the full performance of this
Ceremony on Thursday the 15th day of this instant December foregoing (with
which also agrees another like Precedent which fell out in the Parliament in
an. 31 Regin Eliz. upon Friday the 21. day of March) and yet this present
passage is somewhat more rare than either of those, in respect that the said
Ceremony contrary to the ancient usage of the House of Commons was omitted upon
the Motion of the Speaker, after it had been put to the question, and overruled
by the major part of voices.

The Bill for Husbandry and Tillage was read the third time and passed upon the
question, and after many Arguments was sent up to the Lords by Mr Secretary and
others.

The Council on both sides in the Bill concerning the Possessions of the Bishop
of Norwich were heard at the Bar, and the Bill after the Council sequestered
was put to the question, and so passed accordingly.

On Monday the 19th day of December the Amendments in the Bill concerning the
confirmation and establishment of the Deprivation of diverse Bishops in the
beginning of her Majesty's Reign being thrice read, the Bill with the
Amendments passed upon the question.

Two Bills had each of them one reading; of which the second being the Bill
against lewd and wandering persons pretending themselves to be Soldiers or
Mariners, was read the third time and referred after sundry speeches unto Sir
Robert Wroth and others, to go up unto the Committees Chamber of this House and
to amend some parts of the said Bill according to some of the said motions.

Mr Attorney General and Mr Doctor Stanhop do bring from the Lords a Bill
passed with their Lordships entitled An Act for confirmation of the Subsidy
granted by the Clergy; and do show that their Lordships do recommend the same
to this House for the speedy expedition of the same Bill in this House.

The Bill for confirmation of the Subsidy granted by the Clergy had its first
reading.

Mr Attorney General and Mr Doctor Stanhop do bring from the Lords a Bill
lately passed from their Lordships by the good assent and agreement of the said
parties, Entitled An Act of Parliament for Arthur Hatch her Majesty's Ward,
for the enjoying of the Rectory and Parsonage of South Molton in the County of
Devon for certain years, reserving the usual Rent.

The Amendments of the Committees of this House, that (...) may enjoy their
Leases against Patentees in several Cases, being twice read, and also one
Proviso for her Majesty in the same Bill likewise twice read, were ordered to
be joined and inserted into the said Bill; And one special Proviso also for Mr
Throgmorton being twice read, It was Ordered after many Arguments upon the said
Bill and last Proviso pro and contra, That Mr Throgmorton and Mr Moyle Finch
being at the Door of this House should be severally called in and demanded by
Mr Speaker, whether they would assent to have the matter in controversy between
them referred to be ended by such Arbitrators as had been before nominated for
that purpose unto them in the Committee, viz. the Lord Keeper and the Lord
Treasurer, and the two Chief Justices, and in what sum they would be bound each
to other for their standing to and performing of such Award therein so to be
made: It was at last after sundry such demands made, resolved by both their
assents at the Bar in this House, that each of them should enter into Bond unto
the other in the sum of five thousand pound to stand to the Order and
Arbitrament of the Lord Archbishop of Canterbury, the Lord Keeper of the Great
Seal of England, and the two Chief Justices, or any three of them, for and
concerning the two Leases in question; So as the same Order or Arbitrament be
made before the first sitting of this Court which shall happen to be held next
after the Feast of the Nativity of our Lord now next ensuing, and the Condition
of the Bond to be drawn by the Learned Council of the Parties, and to be
perused and considered of further by Mr Speaker.

On Tuesday the 20th day of December, the Bill for Confirmation of the Subsidy
granted by the Clergy was read the second time, and passed upon the Question.

Mr Recorder of London, one of the Committees in the Bill against lewd and
wandering persons pretending themselves to be Soldiers or Mariners (who were
appointed on Wednesday the 7th day of this instant December foregoing) showed,
that they had amended the said Bill in some parts; which Amendments being twice
read to the House, before any allowance for the third reading of them, several
Members of this House did argue to the parts of the said Bill and Amendments,
both with it and against it; after which, Committees were appointed in the said
Bill against wandering Soldiers and Mariners, and also in the Bill concerning
Lessees and Patentees against the next sitting of this Court, and to meet to
Morrow in the Afternoon in the Middle Temple Hall, who were as follows, viz.
Mr Solicitor, Sir Thomas Egerton, Sir Gilley Merick, Mr Rosse, Mr Recorder of
London, Mr Brograve Attorney of the Duchy, Sir George Carey, Mr Crew, Mr John
Hunt, Mr Philips, Mr Finch, Mr Hext, Mr Sergeants Harries, Heyle and Warherton,
Sir Walter Raleigh, Sir Robert Wroth, Sir Oliver Lambert, Mr Francis Moore, Sir
Henry Norris, Mr Bourchier, Mr Mountague, Mr George Crook, together with all
the Committees in all other Bills formerly committed by this House, and not as
yet expedited, who are likewise to meet at the aforesaid time and place
concerning such Bills as are committed unto them.

Mr Attorney General and Mr Doctor Stanhop did bring three Bills from the
Lords, which had passed before in this House, and had been sent up to their
Lordships; whereof one was the Bill for erecting of Houses of Correction and
punishment of Rogues, Vagabonds and Sturdy Beggars; which Bill their Lordships
had passed with some Amendments and Additions. Another Bill was for relief of
the Poor, which Bill their Lordships had in like manner passed with some
Amendments and Additions. And the third was for Explanation of a Statute made
in the first year of the Queens Majesty's Reign, concerning Laborers, which
Bill their Lordships had also before passed with some Amendments, and sent it
down into this House, and had received the same again afterward; with Message
from this House, that this House had no Warrant to take notice of that
Amendment, because it was in Parchment and not in Paper: And showed, that their
Lordships did not expect any exception of such Levity from the Gravity of this
House; and the rather because this House had before in this present Sessions of
Parliament admitted of such like Amendments in Parchment from their Lordships
in two other Bills, and not in Paper, without any such exception; their
Lordships taking it not to be much material whether such Amendments be written
in Parchment or in Paper, either white Paper, black Paper or brown Paper. Which
Message being so delivered, and the said Mr Attorney and Mr Doctor Stanhop
departed, Mr Speaker reported unto the House the substance of the same Message,
putting them in remembrance, that the said Amendment not only was not in Paper,
but was also subscribed or indorsed with Soit baille aux Communes. And further
showed, that the Cause of the said returning of the said last recited Bill unto
their Lordships, to the end the said Amendments thereof might be sent down by
their Lordships unto this House in Paper, without any such subscription or
indorsement, and not in Parchment, did proceed upon the Advertisement of the
Clerk of this House unto Mr Speaker, that the Ancient and usual Order of the
Parliament in both Houses was and is, that Amendments in Bills are to be set
down only in Paper and not in Parchment, and that also without any manner of
Endorsement in the same Amendments at all, because the Indorsement thereof is
subscribed in the Engrossed Bill it self under the Indorsement of this House,
in the same Bill. Whereupon some of the Members of this House charging the said
Clerk, that by his default and Error this House was charged by the Lords with
the said imputation of Levity, the said Clerk then humbly prayed, that some of
the Ancient Parliament men of this House might have the Examination of the said
Cause, how it had been proceeded in, and to report such the default and error
of the Clerk, if any such were. The House thereupon resolved to hear the said
Clerk speak himself. Which done, the said Clerk of this House showed, that the
Clerk of the Upper House coming into the Exercise of his Office but in this
present Sessions of Parliament, the two Bills mentioned by Mr Attorney to have
been sent to this House from the Lords with Amendments in Parchment (and unto
which no Exceptions had been taken by this House) he the said Clerk of this
House did in some friendly and courteous intention toward the said Clerk of
the said Upper House, seek to salve up those mistakings for the time only in
some part of them, but not in the whole, and so to make the said Clerk of the
said Upper House afterward acquainted with the due Order and Form of the
Reformation therein against other times afterward in like Cases, and had so
made one of the Clerks of the said Clerk of the Upper House privy of the right
course and manner of the sending down such Amendments in Paper and not in
Parchment, and that also without any Indorsement: yet nevertheless the said
Amendment in the said Bill so returned as before said, was eftsoons both sent
down in Parchment and also subscribed or Indorsed with [ Soit baille aux
Communes] contrary to the said advice and instruction of the said Clerk of this
House, so as aforesaid given to one of the Clerks of the said Clerk of the
Upper House. And did further aver unto this House, that the said three Bills
being passed in this House Engrossed in Parchment, are the Bills of this House
and not the Bills of the Lords, though sent up by this House to their
Lordships, and do still remain the Bills of this House: And that if their
Lordships would have any words of Amendment either taken out of the same Bill,
or put into it, or else otherwise altered or changed in it, then must such
words be set down in Paper by their Lordships and annexed to the Bill, showing
the line and place of the line in the Bill where such words should be either
taken out or put in, and then their Lordships to subscribe or Indorse under the
superscription or Indorsement of this House in the same Bill, A ceste Bille
avecque les amendments a mesme le Bille annexe, les Seigneurs sent assentus.
But if their Lordships do add any new matter or Proviso to the said Bill which
was not before in the same Bill, then must all that be engrossed in Parchment
and affiled to the said Bill, and the said Bill must be subscribed or Indorsed
under the subscription or Indorsement of this House in the same Bill, A ceste
Bille avecque le schedule a mesme le Bille annexe, les Seigneurs sont assentus:
or, A ceste Bille avecque une provision annexe, les Seigneurs sont assentus, if
it be a Proviso and not a Schedule to the body of the Bill: Then also must the
said Schedule or Proviso so Engrossed in Parchment be annexed to the said Bill,
and be subscribed and Indorsed by their Lordships under such Schedule or
Proviso, Soit baille aux Communes, and so be sent down to this House passed by
their Lordships; which done, the said words in Paper must be taken out of the
same Bill, or else put into the same Bill only by this House in the said Lines
and places of Lines according to the direction of the Lords said Amendments in
Paper; And the said Schedule or Proviso, being three times read and passed in
this House upon the question, the same Schedule or Proviso must be subscribed
and Indorsed by this House under their Lordships said Indorsement thereof, A
ceste Schedule les Communes sont assentus, if it be a Schedule; or, A ceste
provision les Communes sont assentus, if it be a Proviso. Which Course being so
then also approved by some of the Ancientest now Parliament Members of this
House, It was thought meet that all the Members of this House being of her
Majesty's Privy Council, together which the best sort of the rest of the
Members of this House, accompanied with the Sergeants at Law which are of this
House, should be presently sent to their Lordships from this House, without
carrying up any Bill at all, and to signify unto their Lordships in the name of
this whole House, That as this House had not in any manner of sort erred in
their said returning unto their Lordships the said Bill and Amendments in
Parchment to have had the same done in Paper and without any Subscription or
Indorsement at all, to the end this House might by Warrant thereof have
inserted the same Amendments into that their own engrossed Bill according to
the ancient Order of Parliament in such Cases formerly used by this House: So
this House does take it self to be very hardly dealt with, to be taxed by their
Lordships with imputation of Levity, and reproached by other unusual and
unnecessary terms delivered unto them this day in the said Message from their
Lordships. And then upon some further Motion it was resolved, that Mr
Secretary, accompanied with Mr Chancellor of the Exchequer and others, should
be thereupon sent to their said Lordships presently for that purpose. Which
done, the said Mr Secretary putting the House in mind that the Lords had sent
down to this House three Bills, at their time of sending down their said
Message to this House, Moved, that this House would be pleased to accompany
this their Message unto their Lordships imposed upon him, with the Bill which
this day passed in this House, for Confirmation of the Subsidy of the Clergy.
Which being yielded unto, the Amendments of the Lords in Paper annexed to the
said engrossed Bill of this House, Entitled An Act for the Explanation of the
Statute made in the first year of her Majesty's Reign concerning Laborers,
were three times read by the Clerk and agreed upon the Question, and presently
inserted into the said engrossed Bill accordingly; and both Bills were
thereupon sent up to their Lordships by the said Mr Secretary and others,
together with the said Message of this House; and at their returning back
again, the said Mr Secretary signified unto this House that he had delivered
their said Message unto the Lords according to their charge laid upon him
therein. But what was their Lordships Answer is most negligently and
inconsiderately omitted by Fulk Onslow Esquire Clerk of the House of Commons;
though it may be not improbably gathered, that their Lordships did rest very
well satisfied with this Message of the said House of Commons, and did impute
the said mistakes to be the inexperience of the said Thomas Smith Esquire their
new Clerk, who had this Parliament succeeded unto Anthony Mason Esquire, formerly
Clerk of the Upper House. Which may the rather be conjectured, because there
was another Precedent this very Parliament upon Thursday the 24th day of
November foregoing, in which the Lords upon a like mistake of the said Clerk
did very honorably acknowledge the said error and caused it to be amended.

The next thing finally that ensues upon relation of the aforesaid great
business, is the Adjournment of the Parliament, which is entered in these very
words following.

This day this Court was Adjourned until the 11th day of January next coming at
eight of the Clock in the Morning by her Majesty's Commandment, and so likewise
the Upper House.

Upon which said 11th day of January being Wednesday, the House (according to
the aforesaid Adjournment upon Tuesday the 20th day of December last past) met
again, and without any further Ceremony proceeded in such ordinary Bills and
businesses as had been left unperfected in the former meeting; the first of
which that is expressed in the Original Journal Book of the House of Commons,
was the giving of the first reading unto the Amendments and Provisoes of the
Lords added unto the Bill lately passed in this House and sent up to their
Lordships, and again returned from them with the said Amendments and Provisoes,
being Entitled An Act for the erecting of Houses of Correction and punishment
of Rogues, Vagabonds and Sturdy Beggars.

The Amendments and Provisoes of the Lords in the Bill lately passed in this
House, Entitled An Act for the relief of the Poor, were likewise this day read
in the House for the first reading of the same Amendments and Provisoes.

The Bill for Arthur Hatch her Majesty's Ward for the enjoying of the Rectory
and Parsonage of South-Molton in the County of Devon for certain Years,
reserving the usual Rent, was read the first time.

The Bill concerning the Highway Lands of Ailesbury in the County of
Buckingham was upon the second reading committed unto Mr Chancellor of the
Exchequer, Mr Recorder of Lendon, Mr Lea, the Burgestes of Aylesbury, Mr Boyer,
and others; who were appointed to meet in the Inner Temple Hall at two of the
Clock in the Afternoon of this day.

Mr Hext, one of the Committees in the Bill against wandering Soldiers and
Mariners, and in the Bill concerning Lessees and Patentees, showed that for
lack of meeting of the Committees to a convenient number they had done nothing
in those Bills, and so prayed another time for their meeting. Whereupon the
former Committees (who had been nominated on Saturday the third day, and on
Wednesday the 7th day of December foregoing) were appointed to meet to Morrow
at Serjeants-Inn Hall in Chancery Lane, at two of the Clock in the Afternoon
for the said Bill against wandering Soldiers and Mariners, and the Bill and
Committees names were delivered to Mr Hext one of the said Committees: and the
further course of the said Bill concerning Lessees and Patentees to be deferred
to be further considered of by the former Committees in the same.

The Bill for Limitation of time for bringing of Formedons in the Deseender,
and Writs of Error, was upon the second reading committed unto Mr Sergeants
Heyle, Harris and Walberton, Mr Attorneys of the Duchy and Court of Wards, Mr
Sands, Sir Edward Hobby and diverse others, who were appointed to meet to Morrow
in the Afternoon at two of the Clock at Serjeants-Inn Hall in Chancery Lane.

The Bill for Costs to be awarded in a Prohibition, was upon the second reading
committed to the former Committees, to meet at the former day and place, and
Mr. Doctor James, Mr. Doctor Bennit, Mr. Doctor Caesar, Mr. Doctor Parkings,
Mr. Doctor Crompton and others were added unto them for this Bill.

The Amendments and Proviso of the Committees in the Bill to prevent double
payments of Debts upon Shop-Books was deferred till to Morrow to be further
considered of, for the perfecting of the same, above in the Committees Chamber
for this House.

The Bill lastly for taking away of Clergy from Robbers of Houses in the day
time, though no person be therein, was read the first time.

On Thursday the 12th day of January, Three Bills had each of them one reading;
of which the last being the Bill for the due execution of Ordinances made by
Corporations, was upon the second reading committed unto Mr. Philips, Mr.
Sergeant Walberton and others, who were appointed to meet to Morrow in the
Afternoon at two of the Clock at Serjeants-Inn in Chancery Lane.

The Bill to restrain the excessive making of Malt was read the second time
and committed to the former Committees which had been in two other Bills before
framed to this purpose (whereof the first had its second reading, and was
committed upon Wednesday the 9th day of November foregoing, and then as it
seems being rejected by the Committees, a new Bill was to that purpose by them
framed, which had its second reading on Wednesday the 7th day of December
foregoing, and was thereupon committed to the former Committees and some
others, who, as may very plainly be gathered, disliking the said new Bill,
framed yet a third Bill more to the like effect, which was this present
Thursday read the second time and committed to all the former Committees in the
two other Bills; whose names because they are in the former Commitments but in
part set down, are now at last in this place inserted at large, in respect that
the said Bill touching Maultsters was so often altered, which is not usual, the
names of which Committees were as follows, viz. Sir Robert Wroth, Mr.
Hubberd, Mr. Liere, the Burgesses of York, Hull, Worcester and Gloucester, Mr.
Bembridge, Mr. Henry Yelverton, Mr. Wallis, Mr. Oglethorp, Mr. John Caswell,
Sir Henry Norris, Mr. Henry Vaughan, Mr. Green, Sir Henry North, Mr. George
Rotheram, Mr. William Ford, Mr. Miles Sands, Mr. Recorder of London, Mr.
Stevenson, Mr. Michael Stanhop, Mr. Swain, Mr. Little, Mr. Fulk Grevill, Mr.
Peake, Mr. Litten, Mr. Nathaniel Bacon, the Burgesses of Norwich and Cambridge,
Warwick, Coventry and Tewxbury, Sir Thomas Hobby, Mr. Winch, Mr. Yelverton, the
Knights and Burgesses of Bedford, Sir William Brereton, Mr. Austen, Mr. Henry
Hubberd, Mr. Sergeant Walberton, Sir Francis Knolles, Mr. Edward Lewkenor, Mr.
Stoughton, Mr. Stringer, Doctor Bennit, Mr. Smith and Sir John Tracy; and the
Bill and Committees names were delivered to Mr. Hubberd, one of the said
Committees, who with the rest was appointed to meet to Morrow at two of the
Clock in the Afternoon at Serjeants-Inn in Chancery Lane.

Mr Attorney General and Mr Doctor Stanhop did bring word from the Lords, that
whereas there did pass a Bill in this House entitled An Act for the increase
of People for the service and strength of the Realm, which was sent up to their
Lordships by this House, their Lordships have had the same Bill twice read in
the Upper House with their Lordships; and did further signify that their
Lordships did desire a Conference touching that Bill with a Selected Number of
the Members of this House; and that their Lordships had appointed thirty one of
themselves for that purpose, and have appointed the place of meeting to be in
the great Council Chamber at the Court between one and two of the Clock in the
Afternoon. Upon the delivery of which Message to the House by Mr Speaker, there
were appointed for the said Conference all the Privy Council being Members of
this House, Sir Thomas Cecill, Sir Walter Raleigh, Sir William Cornewallis, Mr
Francis Bacon, all the Sergeants at Law, Mr Fulk Grevil, Sir Robert Wroth, Sir
William Moore, Sir Thomas Conisby, Sir George Carey, Mr. Solicitor, Master
Philips, with diverse others.

And it was then further Ordered, that the two Commitments this day appointed
to have been holden to Morrow in the Afternoon in Serjeants-Inn in
Chancery Lane, should be deferred unto Saturday next in the Afternoon in the
said place; And that Mr. Comptroller with some other Members of this House do
presently repair unto the Upper House to move their Lordships on the behalf of
this House, that their Lordships would be pleased to set down in writing unto
this House the reasons their Lordships have to object against the said Bill,
That the said Committees of this House may be the better informed to satisfy
their Lordships therein to Morrow at the said Conference.

Mr. Comptroller with other the Members of this House returning from the Lords
showed, that they have moved their Lordships for the having of the said Reasons
delivered unto this House in Writing, according to the Charge of this House
delivered unto him and them by this House in that behalf; and that their
Lordships Answer was, that they did think it to be against the ancient Orders
of Parliament to deliver any reasons in writing before a verbal Conference
first had of both Houses together, which was to be done to Morrow. Vide Jan.
24. postea.

The Bill for the Hundred of Beynersh alias Benherst in the County of Berks was
read the second time, and upon the question was Ordered to be engrossed.

The Amendments this day made by some of the Members of this House above in the
Committees Chamber of this House in the Bill to prevent double payment of debts
upon Shop-Books, were twice read, and upon the question were Ordered to be
engrossed.

The Amendments and Provisoes of the Lords to the Bill lately passed in this
House, entitled An Act for the erecting of Houses of Correction and punishment
of Rogues, Vagabonds and Sturdy Beggars, being twice read for the second and
third reading of the same Amendments and Provisoes, were together with the said
Bill after sundry Speeches first had, referred to the further Examination and
Consideration of Sir Walter Raleigh, Mr. Francis Bacon, Mr. Solicitor, Mr.
Lewkenor, Mr. Wingfield, Sir Edward Hobby, Sir William Cornwallis, Mr. Hext,
Mr. Sergeant Harries and Sir Robert Wroth, who were appointed to meet this
Afternoon together with the other Committees in the Bill against wandering
Soldiers and Mariners, at Serjeants-Inn n Chancery Lane.

Mr. Sergeant Drew and Mr. Dr. Stanhop did bring from the Lords one Bill lately
passed this House and sent up to their Lordships, Entitled An Act for the
naturalizing of certain Englishmens Children and others born beyond the Seas,
and do show that their Lordships have passed the same Bill with some Amendments
of their Lordships in the same Bill.

The Learned Council for the Hospital of Warwick being this day present at the
Bar in this House, and no Council at all for any adverse party then appearing
to be present, it was resolved that one..... Ognell being Prisoner in the Fleet
should be advertized by Mr. Sergeant Harris, that to Morrow is given for him to
bring his Council into this House, if he so will, at his own peril. And further
it is resolved, that if the said Ognell shall not then bring his Council
accordingly, this House will then further proceed for the behalf of the said
Hospital as shall appertain without further delay.

The Bill to reform deceits and breaches of trust touching Lands given to
Charitable uses, was read the first time.

On Friday the 13th day of January, Two Bills of no great moment had each of
them one reading; of which the second being the Bill concerning Garret de
Malines, and John Hunger Merchants Strangers, was upon the second reading
committed unto the Knights and Burgesses of London, Mr. Thomas Smith, Sir
Walter Raleigh, Mr. Oldsworth and others; and the Bill and Committees names
were delivered to Sir John Heart, one of the Committees, who with the rest was
appointed to meet upon Monday next at two of the Clock in the Afternoon in
Serjeants-Inn in Chancery Lane.

Mr. Oldsworth, one of the Committees in the Bill for the erecting and building
of a Bridge over Wye at Wilton upon Wye, near the Town of Rosse in the County
of Hereford (who were appointed on Monday the 12th day of December foregoing)
showed the meeting and travel of the Committees, with some Amendments by them
in the Bill, and so delivered in the said Bill into the said House.

Two Bills of no great moment had each of them one reading; of which the second
being the Bill concerning the suppression of unlawful and unsized Bread, was
upon the second reading committed unto the Knights and Citizens of London, Mr.
Edward Hubbard, the Burgesses for Chester, Worcester, Oxford, Bristol,
Winchester and Cambridge, Sergeant Harris and others, who were appointed to
meet to Morrow in the Afternoon at two of the Clock at Serjeants-Inn in
Chancery Lane, and the Bill and Committees names were delivered to Mr Recorder
of London.

The Learned Council on both Parties concerning the Bill for the Hospital of
Warwick being present at the Bar, and heard at large, it was after sundry
Arguments and Speeches both against the Bill and with the Bill Ordered upon the
question to be engrossed.

Sir Walter Raleigh, one of the Committees in the Bill against wandering
Soldiers and Mariners, and for conferring some part of the same Bill, with the
Lords Amendments and Provisoes in the Bill lately passed in this House
Entitled, An Act for the erecting of Houses of Correction and punishment of
Rogues, Vagabonds and Sturdy Beggars, showed the meeting and travel of the
Committees, and that they do think it convenient that some Conference be prayed
with the Lords by this House as well touching some parts of their Lordships
said Amendments and Provisoes, as of some parts of their Lordships said
Amendments tending to the body of the said Bill: Upon which it was after some
few Speeches had by some Members of this House concerning the said Motion,
thought good to respite any further proceeding in the said Motion for
Conference till to Morrow, in regard partly that another Conference is already
appointed to be had this Afternoon with their Lordships at the Court by certain
Committees of the House upon a former appointment.

Mr Finch, one of the Committees in the Bill for Costs in a Prohibition (who
were appointed on Wednesday the 11th day of this instant January foregoing)
showed the meeting and travel of the Committees, with some their Amendments to
the Bill; and so delivered the Bill into the House; which Amendments being
twice read, and the Bill after sundry Speeches further then also in some part
altered, the Bill was upon the Question Ordered to be engrossed accordingly.

Mr John Acton, one of the Burgesses for Droitwich in the County of Worcester,
is for his special business licensed by Mr. Speaker to depart.

On Saturday the 14th day of January, Two Bills of no great moment had each of
them one reading; of which the second being the Bill to reform deceits and
breaches of trust touching Lands given to charitable uses was upon the second
reading committed unto Mr. Sergeant Harris, Mr. Sergeant Lewkenor, Mr. Sergeant
Warberton, the Knights and Burgesses for London, Mr. Miles Sands, Sir Robert
Wroth and others; and he Bill and Committees names was delivered to Mr.
Sergeant Harris, who with the rest was appointed to meet upon Monday next at
two of the Clock in the Afternoon at Serjeants-Inn in Chancery Lane.

The Bill for the reviving, Continuation and Explanation and perfecting of
diverse Statutes was upon the second reading committed unto all the
Privy Council being Members of this House, Sir Walter Raleigh, Sir Edward
Hobby, Mr. Anthony Wildman, Mr. Solicitor, Mr. Francis Bacon, Sir George
Carey, Mr. Fulk Grevill, Sir Oliver Lambert, Mr. Brograve, Attorney of the
Duchy, with diverse others, who were appointed to meet in the Exchequer Chamber
upon Tuesday next at two of the Clock in the Afternoon.

Mr. Attorney General and Mr. Doctor Stanhop coming from the Lords, Mr.
Attorney showed, that whereas Yesterday in the Conference at the Court by the
Committees of both Houses it pleased their Lordships to appoint him to deliver
unto the Committees of this House such defects as their Lordships did conceive
to be in the Bill lately passed in this House, for the increase of people for
the service and defense of the Realm, which he then did so deliver accordingly;
at which time the same was verbally answered but only by one of the said
Committees of this House, and that also with protestation of no advantage to be
taken thereby to the prejudice or hindrance of the Bill: At which time also, as
it was prayed by the said Committees of this House, that their Lordships would
vouchsafe to set down the said pretended defects in writing, and their
Lordships then assented so to do; so their Lordships did now send down the same
in writing unto this House accordingly. And so the said Mr. Attorney did
deliver the same to Mr. Speaker, and then departed. Vide January the 24th
Tuesday poslea.

The Bill for Arthur Hatch her Majesty's Ward for the enjoying of the Rectory
and Parsonage of South-Molton in the County of Devon, for certain years
reserving the usual rent, was read the third time and passed upon the Question.

Sir Walter Raleigh renewing the Motion for a Conference to be prayed with the
Lords concerning their said Amendments and Provisoes in the Bill for erecting
of Houses of Correction and punishment of Rogues and Sturdy Beggars, for the
better reconciling of the same with the Bill now begun in this House against
wandering Soldiers and Mariners, it was thereupon thought convenient by this
House that he the said Sir Walter Raleigh accompanied with a convenient number
of the Members of this House, should presently repair to the Upper House to
move for the said Conference accordingly.

Sir Walter Raleigh and the residue returning from the Lords, after the Bill to
prevent double payment of Debts upon Shop-Books had been read the third time
and passed the House, he showed that they moved their Lordships for the said
Conference on the behalf of this House, and that their Lordships have thereupon
appointed six of themselves to meet for that purpose with a convenient number
of the Members of this House upon Monday next at eight of the Clock in the
Morning in the second Chamber of the Upper House: And did further show unto
this House, that when he and the residue (after the said Motion made unto their
Lordships for the said Conference) did attend their Lordships Answer, and were
called in to receive the same, their Lordships did then deliver the said Answer
unto the said Members of this House at the Bar, not using any of their
Lordships former and wonted courteous manner of coming down toward the said
Members of this House to the Bar, but all of them sitting still in their great
Estates very solemnly and all covered, the Lord Keeper sitting also still in
like manner covered, delivered the said Answer unto the said Members of this
House, to the great indignity of this House, and contrary to all former usage
of their Lordships heretofore toward the Members of this House in like Cases
accustomed. Whereupon their Lordships innovation being misliked of by sundry
Members of this House very much, and in some part debated by them, for further
resolution thereupon there were nominated and appointed for that purpose Mr.
Comptroller, Sir Walter Raleigh, Mr. Grevill, Sir Robert Wroth, Sir Oliver
Lambert, Mr. Hext, Mr. Chancellor of the Exchequer, Sir Anthony Mildmay with
many others, who were appointed to meet this Afternoon at two of the Clock in
Serjeants-Inn in Chancery Lane, to inform themselves in the said Cause against
that time of Conference accordingly. Vide on January the 12th Friday, residuum
istius materiae.

Mr. Bacon reciting in part the proceedings Yesterday in the Conference with
the Lords at the Court, and putting the House in mind of the Objections of the
Lords, delivered this day in writing by Mr. Attorney General, moved for a
Committee of some selected Members of this House to be nominated to confer and
consider upon the said Objections for the better answering of the same to the
maintenance of the Bill. Whereupon some desiring that the said Objections might
be read, all was then further deferred till Monday next, the time being now far
spent, and the House ready to rise.

On Monday the 16th of January, Two Bills had each of them one reading; of
which the first being the Bill for explanation and addition of an Act of Quinto
Reginae for maintenance of the Navy, was read the first time.

The 31. Objections of the Lords touching the Bill lately passed in this House,
and sent up to their Lordships, Entitled An Act for the increase of People for
the service and defense of the Realm, were read to the House upon the Motion of
Mr Francis Bacon, who after the reading of the aforesaid objections moved
eftsoons for a Committee of some select Members of this House to have some
speedy Conference together to their better maintenance of the said Bill, and
answering or confuting the said Objections. Whereupon were nominated and
appointed these following, viz. All the Privy Council being Members of this
House, Sir Thomas Cecill, Mr Francis Bacon, Mr Solicitor, Mr Brograve,
Attorney of the Duchy, Mr Sergeant Warberton, Mr Sergeant Harries, Mr Sergeant
Heyle, Mr Sergeant Lewkenor, Mr Sergeant Williams, Mr Miles Sands, Mr Francis
Moore, Mr Combs, Mr Philips, Mr. Crew, Sir Walter Raleigh, Mr. Lawrence Hide,
Mr. Yelverton, Mr. Robert Wingfield, Mr. Wiseman, Mr. Recorder of London, Sir
Anthony Mildmay, Sir Edward Hobby Sir Thomas Conisby, Mr. George Crook and Mr.
Humphrey Conisby, to meet this Afternoon at two of the Clock in the Exchequer
Chamber for that purpose, and the Objections and Committees names were
delivered to Mr. Comptroller. Vide January the twenty fourth.

Sir Edward Hobby moved that the Sergeant of this House be commanded to call
Leicester to appear in the House for the serving of a Subpoena upon Sir Henry
Norris, and also to warn one Stevens.

Whereupon Mr. Arnold moved for the like Order for a Privy Seal served upon him
by a Member of this House Returnable into the Court of Wards. But what farther
proceeding there followed in either of the matters is very negligently omitted
in the Original Journal Book of the House of Commons.

Mr. Wingfield, one of the Committees in the Bill for the due Execution of
Ordinances made by Corporations (who were appointed on Thursday the 12th day of
this instant January foregoing) showed the meeting of the Committees, and their
good liking of the Bill to pass as it is already framed; and so delivered in
the Bill, and moved that it might be put to the question for the engrossing,
which was so done accordingly.

Mr. Sergeant Warberton, one of the Committees in the Bill for limitation of
time for bringing of Formedons in the Descender and Writs of Error (who were
appointed on Wednesday the 11th day of this instant January foregoing) showed
the Opinions of the Committees to be that the Bill is fit to be reserved till
the next Parliament, and so delivered in the Bill.

Sir Edward Hobby, one of the Committees in the Bill for the Jointure of the
Lady Sands (who were appointed on Friday the 16th day of December foregoing)
moved for a new day to be appointed for the meeting of the Committees.
Whereupon day was given upon Wednesday next at two of the Clock in the
Afternoon in the Exchequer Chamber.

The Bill for the relief of the Hundred of Beynersh alias Benherst in the
County of Berks was read the third time and passed upon the question.

Mr. Comptroller, one of the Committees of this House for Conference this
present Morning with the Committees of the Lords touching their Lordships
Amendments and Provisoes to the Bill lately passed this House, Entitled, An
Act for the erecting of Houses of Correction and punishment of Rogues,
Vagabonds and Sturdy Beggars (who were appointed on Thursday the 12th day of
this instant January foregoing) showed the travel of the Committees of this
House with the Committees of the Lords in the said Conference at large, and so
leaving the further consideration to the resolution of this House, the further
reading of the said Provisoes was after sundry Speeches then had deferred till
to Morrow.

Two Bills also had each of them one reading; of which the first being the Bill
for the Hospital of Warwick, was read the third time and passed upon the
question.

Mr. Sergeant Drew and Mr. Doctor Carew do bring word from the Lords, that
their Lordships have given two readings to the Bill lately passed in this House
and sent up to their Lordships concerning the establishment of the Possessions
of the Bishopric of Norwich; and that for the better expediting of the Bill,
their Lordships do desire present Conference with a Committee of this House
with six of their Lordships. Whereupon Mr. Brograve, Attorney of the Duchy,
Mr. Francis Bacon, Sir Edward Hobby, Sir William Cornwallis, Sir Robert Wroth,
Sir William Moore, Mr. Miles Sands, Mr. Warner, Mr. Sergeant Warberton, Mr.
Lieutenant of the Tower and Mr. Edward Hubberd were nominated and sent
presently for that purpose accordingly.

Four Bills were sent up to the Lords from the House of Commons by Sir Tho.
Cecill and others; of which one was the Bill to prevent the double payment of
Debts upon Shop-Books.

The Bill that Sir Anthony Mildmay may dispose of his Lands intailed to him by
Sir Walter Mildmay his Father, was upon the second reading committed unto Mr.
Secretary, Mr. Chancellor of the Exchequer, Sir Thomas Cecill, Sir Edward
Hobby, Mr. Solicitor, M. Philips, Mr. Sergeant Halle and others; and the Bill
and Committees names were delivered to Mr. Chancellor of the Exchequer, who
with the rest was appointed to meet to Morrow at two of the Clock in the
Afternoon in the Exchequer Chamber.

Mr. Sergeant Drew and Mr. Doctor Stanhop did bring from the Lords a Bill which
lately passed in this House, and was sent up unto their Lordships, Entitled An
Act for the repressing of Offenses that are of the nature of Stealth, and are
not Felonies by the Laws of the Realm, which Bill their Lordships have also
passed with some Amendments.

On Tuesday the 17th day of January, Four Bills had each of them one reading;
of which the last being the Bill for the assurance of the Jointure of Joyce the
Wife of John Thornbrigg was read the second time, and upon the several
questions was rejected.

The Bill to reform sundry abuses in the Garbling of Spices and Drugs, was read
the second time and rejected upon the several questions for the committing and
for the engrossing.

Mr Sergeant Drew and Mr Doctor Stanhop did bring from the Lords a Bill
concerning a Lease of great value procured to be passed from her Majesty by
William Kirkham the Younger, which Bill their Lordships have passed, and do
desire the speedy expediting thereof in this House, the same Bill greatly
importing her Majesty. Whereupon the same Bill was presently read in this House
for the first reading thereof accordingly.

The Amendments and Provisoes of the Lords to the Bill lately passed in this
House, Entitled An Act for the erecting of Houses of Correction and punishment
of Rogues, Vagabonds and Sturdy Beggars, being read for the third reading
thereof, the Bill being put to the Question, and after sundry Speeches and
Arguments first had both with the Bill and against the Bill, was dashed upon
the division of the House, with the advantage and difference of forty Voices,
viz. with the No a hundred and six, and with the Yea sixty six upon the
doubtfulness of two several former questions for the passing thereof.

Mr Attorney General and Mr Doctor Stanhop do bring from the Lords a Bill
lately passed in this House, Entitled An Act for the establishment of the
Bishopric of Norwich and the Possession of the same, against a certain
concealed pretended title made thereunto; and do show that their Lordships have
also passed the same Bill, with a Proviso thereunto added by their Lordships,
and so delivered the Bill to Mr Speaker.

On Wednesday the 18th day of January, Eight Bills had each of them one
reading; of which the first being the Bill for renewing, continuance and
explanation of an Act for the necessary relief of Mariners and Soldiers was
read the first time; And the last being the Bill to tax all Lands and Goods for
the payment of the Subsidy in the same Parish where it lies, was read the
first time, and rejected upon the Question for a second reading.

The Committees in the Bill to restrain the excessive making of Malt, (who
were appointed on Thursday the 12th day of this instant January foregoing) and
the Committees in the Bill to restrain deceits and breaches of Trust (who were
appointed on Saturday the 14th day of this instant January foregoing) are
appointed to meet in the Exchequer Chamber this Afternoon at two of the Clock.

Mr Finch, one of the Committees in the Bill against wandering Soldiers and
Mariners (who were appointed on Wednesday the 7th day of December foregoing)
showed the meeting and travel of the Committees, and that they have made a new
Bill for that purpose; and so delivering in both the old Bill and the new Bill,
prayed the speedy expediting of the said new Bill. Whereupon the same Bill was
then presently read for the first reading.

The Bill to enable Thomas Knivet Esquire to dispose of certain LandsEntailed
to him by Dame Anne Knivet his Mother, was upon the second reading committed
unto Mr. Sergeant Williams, Mr. Sergeant Warberton, Sir Walter Raleigh, Mr.
Brograve Attorney of the Duchy, and others; and the Bill and Committees names
were delivered to Sir Walter Raleigh, who with the rest was appointed to meet
to Morrow at two of the Clock in the Afternoon in the Exchequer Chamber.

The Bill for taking away of Clergy from Robbers of Houses in the day time
though no person be in the House at the time of the Robbery, was upon the
second reading referred to Sir Robert Wroth, Mr Sergeant Hale and others, to
consider further for some Amendments in the same Bill presently in the
Committee Chamber of this House.

The Bill for Explanation and Addition of an Act of 5o Reginae for the
maintenance of the Navy, was upon the second reading committed unto Sir Walter
Raleigh, Mr. Henry Hubberd, Mr. Cole, Mr. Chapman, Mr. Doctor Caesar, Mr.
Lewkenor and others; and the Bill and Committees names were delivered to Mr.
Doctor Caesar, who with the rest was appointed to meet in the Exchequer Court
at two of the Clock in the Afternoon.

The Bill concerning Lessees and Patentees, with a Note of the Committees
names, was delivered to the former Committees (who were appointed on Saturday
the 3d day of December foregoing) to be further considered by them concerning
such their Amendments in the same Bill as have not yet been read in this House.

The Bill for confirmation of Ordinances made by Corporations was read the
third time, and after sundry Speeches and Arguments both with the Bill and
against the Bill, and upon some Motions to be made for the said Bill before it
should be put to the Question for the passing, the question was first made for
the said Amendments, and resolved both upon the question and also upon the
division of the House with the difference and advantage of sixty five Voices,
viz. with the Yea seventy, and with the No a hundred thirty five, that the
Amendments should not be made to the said Bill; and then afterward the said
Bill being put to the question accordingly, the same Bill was dashed.

Mr Attorney General and Mr Doctor Stanhop coming from the Lords, Mr Attorney
showed, that their Lordships commanded him to signify unto this House, that
whereas their Lordships received a Bill from this House Entitled An Act for
increase of people for the service and defense of the Realm, their Lordships
having a very good liking of the meaning and intent of the said Bill, and
finding nevertheless sundry imperfections in the said Bill, have not only
imparted those imperfections in a verbal Conference by a Committee of their
Lordships unto a Committee of this House, but also did afterward deliver the
same in writing unto this House; since which time their Lordships have heard
nothing thereof from this House; their Lordships do now desire to understand
the further mind of this House touching the same Bill. Which Message being
reported unto the House by Mr Speaker, and the said Mr. Attorney and Mr. Doctor
Stanhop first sequestered, it was thereupon resolved by this House, that Answer
should be made unto their Lordships, that this House has not omitted any
opportunity to consider of the said pretended imperfections for the further
Answering of them with all possible Convenience, and will signify the same
unto their Lordships with as convenient speed as they can. Which Answer for
this time was immediately after delivered by Mr. Speaker unto the said Mr.
Attorney and Mr. Doctor Stanhop to be returned unto their Lordships
accordingly. Vide Jan. 24. Tuesd. postea.

On Thursday the 19th day of January, the Bill for reuniting the Manor of
Paris Garden in the County of Surrey, was upon the second reading committed
unto Mr. Brograve Attorney of the Duchy, Mr. Norton, Mr. Wiseman, Mr. Sergeant
Williams, Mr. Edmund Boyer, and Mr. Francis More and others; and the Bill with
the Committees names was delivered to Mr. Edmund Boyer, who with the rest was
appointed to meet to Morrow in the Afternoon in the Middle Temple Hall at two
of the Clock.

The Bill for the repealing of a branch of a Statute made in the thirty fourth
Year of King Henry the Eighth, Entitled, The Ordinance for Wales, was read the
second time, and not being spoken against by any was Ordered to be engrossed.

Mr Snagg, one of the Committees in the Amendments of the Bill for the
reviving, continuing, explanation and perfecting of diverse Statutes (who were
appointed on Saturday the 14th day of this instant January foregoing) and in
the Bill also for taking away of Clergy from Robbers of Houses in the day time
though no person be in the House at the time of the Robbery done (who were
appointed Yesterday) showed the meeting and travel of the Committees, and
sundry their Amendments and Additions to the said Bills at large, and so
delivered in both the said Bills into the House accordingly.

Mr. Sergeant Harris, one of the Committees in the Bill to reform deceits and
breaches of Trust (who were appointed on Saturday the 14th day of this instant
January foregoing) showed the meeting and travel of the Committees, and some
their Amendments and Additions to the same Bill, which Amendments and Additions
being twice read, the Bill was upon the Question Ordered to be engrossed.

Mr. Francis Bacon, one of the Committees of this House to confer and consider
of the 31. Objections of the Lords unto the Bill lately passed this House,
Entitled, An Act for the increase of people for the service and defense of the
Realm, showed the meeting and travel of the Committees, and that they have set
down in writing Answers to the same Objections ready to be presently sent to
their Lordships if this House shall so think good, and so moved the present
reading of the same Answers in this House. Whereupon the Clerk of this House
did severally read all the said Objections, and the said Mr. Bacon did then
also read every several Answer to the same Objections particularly and
distinctly. Which being done, it was after some Motions and Speeches of sundry
Members of this House resolved by this House, that the said Answer in writing
should be sent up from this House to their Lordships presently by Mr.
Comptroller, accompanied with a convenient number of the Members of this House,
which was so done thereupon accordingly. Vide concerning this matter on Tuesday
the 24th day of this instant January ensuing.

Mr. Brograve Attorney of the Duchy, one of the Committees in the Bill for
confirmation of the Jointure of Christian Lady Sands (who were appointed on
Friday the 16th day of December foregoing) showed the meeting and travel of the
said Committees at large, and concluded with a Motion that the Council of both
sides may be heard in this House for the better satisfaction of this House in
the Cause. Whereupon it was Ordered that their Council should be heard in this
House upon Saturday next accordingly, and both the Parties to have but one
Council a-piece.

The Bill to take away future uses creating perpetuities of Lands was read the
first time.

The Bill against the Excess of Apparel was upon the second reading committed
unto all the Privy Council being Members of this House, Sir Walter Raleigh, Sir
Edward Hobby, Sir Thomas Conisby, Sir Oliver Lambert, Mr. Yelverton and others;
and the Bill and Committees names were delivered to Mr. Comptroller, who with
the rest was appointed to meet to Morrow at two of the Clock in the Afternoon
in the Exchequer Chamber. Vide Febr. 7th.

On Friday the 20th day of January, the Bill for the sale of the Lands and
Goods of John Sharp to pay his Debts, was upon the second reading committed
unto Sir John Heart, Mr. Henry Hubberd, Mr. Nevill, Mr. Thomas Smith, Mr.
Southerton, Mr. Colebrand and others; and the Bill with the Committees names
was delivered to Mr. Southerton, who with the rest was appointed to meet this
Afternoon at two of the Clock in the Middle Temple Hall.

The Bill that Thomas Culpepper and John Culpepper may dispose of their Lands
whereof they are Tenants in Tail as other Tenants in Tail may do, was read the
second time and committed to Mr Barker, Mr. Sergeant Harris, Mr. Hide, Mr.
Wiseman, Mr. Wingfield, Mr. Sergeant Williams, and Sir William Cornwallis; and
the Bill and Committees names were delivered to the said Mr. Sergeant Williams,
who with the rest was appointed to meet in the Middle Temple Hall at two of the
Clock this Afternoon.

Mr. Sergeant Harris, one of the Committees in the Bill that Lessees may enjoy
their Leases (who were appointed on Saturday the 3d day of December foregoing)
and in the Bill concerning the suppressing of unlawful and unsized Bread (who
were appointed on Friday the 13th day of this instant January foregoing) showed
the meeting and travel of the Committees in both the said Bills, and their
Amendments in the Bill concerning Lessees and Patentees; which Amendments being
then twice read, the Bill was upon the question Ordered to be engrossed.

And further showed, that the said Bill concerning the suppressing of unlawful
and unsized Bread was in opinion of the said Committees fit to be reserved till
another Parliament.

The Amendments and Proviso of the Lords to the Bill entitled An Act for the
relief of the Poor being thrice read, the said Amendments were assented unto,
and the said Proviso passed upon the question.

The Amendments of the Lords to the Bill entitled An Act for the Naturalizing
of certain English men's Children and others born beyond the Seas being three
times read, were assented unto by this House upon the question.

The Proviso of the Lords added to the Bill entitled An Act for the
establishment of the Bishopric of Norwich and the Possessions of the same
against a certain pretended concealed Title made thereunto, being three times
read, the same Proviso passed upon the question.

Three Bills also had each of them one reading; of which the last being the
Bill to reform Deceits and Breaches of Trust touching Lands given unto
Charitable Uses was read the third time, and passed upon the question.

The Amendments of the Lords in the Bill lately passed in this House entitled
An Act for the repressing of Offenses that are of the nature of Stealth and are
not Felonies by the Laws of the Realm, being thice read, were assented unto by
this House.

Four Bills were sent up to the Lords from the House of Commons by Mr.
Comptroller and others; of which the first was the Bill for the establishment
of the Bishopric of Norwich, and the Possessions of the same against a certain
pretended concealed Title; and the second was the Bill for Arthur Hatch etc.
with two others of no great moment, which passed the House this present day;
with further Order that this House desired some Conference with their Lordships
for the further satisfaction of this House touching the said innovation of
their Lordships said manner of their late giving Answer unto the Members of
this House contrary to their Lordships former usage in such Cases heretofore.

The Bill for the most Commodious usage of Lands dispersed in Common Fields was
read the second time, and rejected upon the several questions for the
Committing and Engrossing.

William Kirkham the younger was brought into this House to the Bar and heard
at large; and resolved further by the House not to hear him any further nor any
Council for him: Nevertheless to hear the Council to Morrow of such as pretend
any interest under the title of Kirkham to any the Lands comprehended in the
Lease mentioned in the Bill.

Mr Attorney General and Mr Doctor Stanhop do bring from the Lords a Bill
lately passed in this House entitled An Act for the maintenance of Husbandry
and Tillage, which Bill their Lordships have also passed with very many
Amendments and with a Proviso. And showed further, That their Lordships
commanded him to show unto this House, that their Lordships had very willingly
yielded unto the Motion of this House made unto their Lordships this present
day for Conference, and that their Lordships had for that purpose appointed the
Number of twenty of themselves, and do desire that the same Conference may be
had presently, if it shall so please this House. Which being done, and the said
Mr Attorney and Mr Doctor Stanhop gone out of the House, It was resolved that a
convenient number of this House should presently attend their Lordships in the
said Conference. And the same being afterward so signified unto the said Mr
Attorney and Mr Doctor Stanhop, who were called again into this House to
receive that answer, all the Privy Council being Members of this House, Sir
William Moore, Mr Fulk Grevil and others being Members of this House were
presently thereupon sent up unto their Lordships accordingly.

The Bill for the reviving, continuing and Explanation of an Act for the
necessary relief of Mariners and Soldiers was upon the second reading
committed unto the Committees in the Bill against the excess of Apparel (who
were appointed yesterday foregoing) and to meet in the Exchequer Chamber at two
of the Clock this Afternoon, and Mr Arnold was now added to the same Committee.

The Amendments of the Committees in the Bill for taking away of Clergy from
Robbers of Houses in the daytime though no body be in the House at the time of
the Robbery done, being twice read, the Bill was upon the question Ordered to
be engrossed.

The Bill to prohibit the carrying of Herrings was upon the second reading
committed unto Mr Walgrave, Mr Oldsworth, Mr Edward Lewkenor, Mr Wiseman and
others, who were appointed to confer presently in the Committee Chamber of this
House.

Mr Comptroller and the residue returning from the Lords, Mr Secretary showed
that in the debate of the..... but touching what business this Report was made
by Mr Secretary, or what that business was, is evey negligently omitted by Fulk
Onslow Esquire Clerk of the House of Commons, in the Original Journal Book it self
of that House, although a whole blank Page be there left with intention
doubtless at first to have inserted it: And therefore it shall not be amiss
here in some sort to set it down, partly out of some former passages of the
said Journal Book, and partly out of the Original Journal Book of the Upper
House. And first for the business it self, it was grounded upon some distaste
that Sir Walter Raleigh and other Members of the House of Commons had received
from the Carriage of the Lords toward them in not rising unto them upon the
delivery of an Answer to a certain Message brought up by them to their
Lordships on Saturday the 14th day of this instant January foregoing, as is
there set down at large. To which said distaste of theirs the Lords did this
present Friday, being the 20th day of the same Month, in the Conference had
between the Committees of either House, desire to make satisfaction according
to the resolution had by their Lordships in their own House Yesterday being
Thursday. Which said Resolution or Answer of their Lordships was as it should
seem now reported unto the House of Commons by Mr Secretary Cecill upon his
return with the other Committees from the said Conference, and is set down upon
the said Thursday being the 19th day of the said instant January in the
abovementioned Original Journal Book of the Upper House much to the purpose and
effect following, viz.

That their Lordships Answer was, that in the delivery of the said Message unto
the said Sir Walter Raleigh and others the said Members of the House of
Commons, upon Saturday the 14th day of this instant January last past, their
Lordships had not given unto them the said Members of the said House any just
distaste, or therein offered unto the said House of Commons it self any
indignity at all; but that their Lordships had therein observed the ancient
Order of Parliament, which they were fully satisfied to be as follows, viz.

That when any Bills or Messages are brought from the House of Commons to be
presented to the Upper House, the Lord Keeper and the rest of the Lords are to
arise from their places and go down to the Bar, there to meet such as come from
the House of Commons, and from them to receive in that place their Messages or
Bills: But contrariwise, when any Answer is delivered by the Lord Keeper in the
name and behalf of the House, to such Knights and Burgesses as come from the
House of Commons, the said Knights and Burgesses are to receive the same
standing toward the lower end of the House without the Bar, and the Lord
Keeper is to deliver the same sitting in his place with his head covered, and
all the Lords keeping their places. And hereupon the House of Commons was
satisfied, and the same form was afterward kept accordingly.

Nota, That this little foregoing Passage only is supplied out of the Original
Journal Book of the Upper House, and now what ensues is again inserted out of
that of the House of Commons.

On Saturday the 21th day of January, Two Bills of no great moment had each of
them one reading; of which the last was the Bill for restraint of carrying of
Corn or Grain out of this Realm at certain times.

Mr Francis Goodwin, one of the Committees in the Bill for establishing certain
Lands given by Will for the maintenance of the Highways at Ailesbury in the
County of Buckingham (who were appointed on Wednesday the 11th day of this
instant January foregoing) brought in the Bill with some Amendments, which
being twice read, the Bill was upon the Question Ordered to be engrossed.

Mr Walgrave, one of the Committees in the Bill to prohibit the carrying of
Herrings beyond the Seas (who were appointed Yesterday) showed the meeting of
the Committees and their Amendments of the Bill, which Amendments being twice
read, the Bill was upon the question Ordered to be engrossed.

The Bill that the Plaintiffs shall pay the Defendants their Costs by lying in
Prison for want of Bayl if the Action pass against the Plaintiffs, and for the
punishment of wrongful Arrests upon forged Warrants, was read the first time.

Mr Solicitor, one of the Committees in the Bill for the reviving,
continuance, explanation and perfecting of diverse Statutes (who were appointed
on Saturday the 14th day of this instant January foregoing) showed the meeting
and travel of the Committees and some their Amendments in the same Bill; which
Amendments being twice read to the House, it was after many Motions and
Speeches for recommitment of the same Bill Ordered upon the Division of the
House in the doubtfulness of two former Questions with the advantage of thirty
Voices, viz. with the No an hundred twenty four, with the Yea ninety one, that
the said Bill should not be recommitted: And afterward upon another Question
it was Ordered that the said Bill should be engrossed.

The Lord Sands and Sir Walter Sands with their Council were present here in
this House at the Bar and heard at large touching the Bill for the Confirmation
of the Jointure of Christian Lady Sands (which had been read the second time
and committed on Friday the 16th day of December foregoing.) Vide January 24.
Tuesday postea.

The Bill against lewd and wandering persons pretending themselves to be
Soldiers or Mariners was read the third time, and after many Speeches and
Arguments, some with the Bill and some against the Bill, was in the end put to
the Question, together with a Proviso added thereunto and three times read, and
so passed accordingly.

Mr. Edward Hubberd, one of the Committees in the Bill to restrain the
excessive making of Malt and disorderly Brewing of strong Beer (who were
appointed on Thursday the 12th day of this instant January foregoing) showed
the meeting and travel of the said Committees with some their Amendments to the
said Bill, and so delivered in the Bill to the House.

On Monday the 23th day of January, Three Bills of no great moment had each of
them one reading; of which the third being the Bill for Explanation of a Saving
in a Statute made xxviio Reg. Eliz. Entitled, An Act for the better foundation
and relief of the Poor of the Hospital of Eastbridge in the County of
Canterbury, was read the second time and rejected upon the several Questions
for the committing and engrossing.

Sir John Heart, one of the Committees in the Bill concerning Garret de Malines
and John Hunger Merchants Strangers (who were appointed on Friday the 13th day
of this instant January foregoing) showed the meeting and travel of the
Committees, and their making of a new Bill for sundry considerations then
opened by him, and so delivered in both the old Bill and the new Bill.

The Bill for the better measuring of seven Miles from the Town of
Great-Yarmouth, according to a Statute made in the thirtieth Year of King
Edward the Third, was upon the second reading committed unto Mr. Comptroller,
Mr. Chancellor of the Exchequer, Mr. Brograve Attorney of the Duchy, Mr.
Maynard, Mr. Fulk Grevill, Mr. Walgrave and others; and the Bill with the
Committees names was delivered to the said Mr. Fulk Grevill, who with the rest
was appointed to meet to Morrow in the Afternoon at two of the Clock in the
Exchequer Chamber.

Mr. Shirley, one of the Committees in the Bill for the sale of the Lands and
Goods of John Sharp to pay his Debts (who were appointed on Friday the 20th day
of this instant January) showed the meeting and travel of the Committees with
some their Amendments to the same, and so delivered in the said Bill to the
House.

The Bill for reviving, continuance, explanation and perfecting of diverse
Statutes was read the third time and passed upon the Question.

Five Bills were sent up to the Lords from the House of Commons by Mr.
Comptroller and others; of which one was the Bill against lewd and wandering
persons pretending themselves to be Soldiers and Mariners, and another for the
Naturalizing of certain Englishmens Children and others born beyond the Seas.

The Amendments and Provisoes of the Lords in the Bill for the maintenance of
Husbandry and Tillage lately passed this House being three times read, the said
Amendments were assented unto and the said Proviso passed upon the Question.

The Bill that Lessees may enjoy their Leases against all Patentees their Heirs
and Assigns, notwithstanding any default of payment of their Rent during the
time that the Reversion or Inheritance remained in the Crown, was read the
third time and passed upon the Question.

The Bill for reviving, continuance, explanation and perfecting of diverse
Statutes, and the Bill that Lessees may enjoy their Leases against all
Patentees, their Heirs and Assigns, notwithstanding any default of payment of
their Rents during the time that the Reversion or Inheritance remained in the
Crown, were sent up to the Lords by Mr. Secretary and others.

Mr. Sergeant Drew and Mr. Doctor Carew did bring word from the Lords, that
whereas a Bill lately passed in this House was sent up unto their Lordships
Entitled An Act for the increase of People for the service and defense of the
Realm, and their Lordships had thereupon caused the same Bill first to have two
readings in the Upper House, and finding many imperfections in the same Bill,
yet their Lordships very well liking of the intent and scope of the said Bill
and the good furtherance thereof, moved for Conference with some of the Members
of this House touching the said Bill, wherein the said imperfections were first
imparted by their Lordships unto the Committees of this House in a Verbal
Conference, and afterward sent down by their Lordships to this House in
writing; and Answers thereupon returned by this House to their Lordships in
writing, to the same imperfections; their Lordships very much affecting the
purport and true meaning of the said Bill, and wishing all good furtherance
therein, do desire that a convenient number of selected Members of this House
may be appointed to have Conference with six of their Lordships touching this
matter to Morrow at eight of the Clock in the Morning in the Chamber next the
Upper House: And do also desire, that a convenient number of the Members of
this House may be in like manner appointed to meet with their Lordships to
Morrow at two of the Clock in the Afternoon in the Great Council Chamger at the
Court for Conference touching the Bill passed by their Lordships and sent down
by them unto this House, Entitled An Act for the better Explanation and
Execution of the Act made in the thirteenth year of the Queens Majesty's Reign
Cap. 4to concerning Tellors, Receivers, etc. Whereupon Mr. Comptroller, Mr.
Secretary, Mr. Chancellor of the Exchequer, Mr. Francis Bacon, Mr. Brograve
Attorney of the Duchy, and all the Sergeants at Law being Members of this
House, Mr. Recorder of London, Mr. George Moore, Mr. Yelverton, Sir Walter
Raleigh, Mr. Fulk Grevill, Sir Thomas Cecill and Mr. Attorney of the Court of
Wards, were nominated and appointed to attend their Lordships to Morrow in the
Morning at eight of the Clock in the Chamber next to the Upper House
accordingly.

The former Committees of this House in the said Bill concerning Tellors,
Receivers, etc. (who were appointed on Monday the 5th day of December
foregoing) were this day likewise appointed to attend their Lordships to Morrow
at two of the Clock in the Afternoon at the said great Council Chamber at the
Court. Vide concerning this Matter, as also touching the Bill for Increase of
People, etc. on Tuesday the 24th day of this instant January immediately
ensuing.

The Amendments in the Bill to restrain the excessive making of Malt and
disorderly brewing of strong Beer being twice read, the Bill was after many
Speeches and Arguments both with the Bill and against the Bill ordered upon the
question to be engrossed.

On Tuesday the 24th day of January the Bill concerning Garret de Malins and
John Hunger Merchants-Strangers had its first reading, being a new Bill, and
was brought in by the Committees of the old Bill, who were appointed on Friday
the 13th day of this instant January foregoing, and had thought fit that the
said old Bill should be rejected.

The new Bill also for the disposing of certain Lands to Mr Thomas Knivet, was
read the first time (after that the old Bill had been rejected by the
Committees thereof, who were appointed on Wednesday the 18th day of this
instant January foregoing.)

The Bill for Confirmation of the Jointure of Mary Lady Verney was upon the
second reading committed unto Mr Philips, Mr Sands, Mr Francis Goodwin, Mr
Snagg, Mr Oglethorpe and others; and the Bill with the Committees names were
delivered to Mr Snagg, who with the rest were appointed to meet at four of the
Clock this Afternoon in the Middle Temple Hall.

The Bill for establishing an Award made between Edmund Cotton Gentleman and
Thomas Harvey Yeoman for the assurance of certain Lands in the County of
Norfolk to Thomas Bennet and his Heirs for ever, was read the third time and
passed upon the question, the learned Council on both sides being first heard
at large at the Bar.

After sundry long Speeches by diverse Members of this House in the Bill for
Confirmation of the Jointure of Christian Lady Sands both with the Bill and
against the Bill, with some motions for having the matter between the Lord
Sands and Sir Walter Sands referred to Arbitrament or Comprmise, it was at last
resolved upon the question, that according to the said Motions the said course
should be taken for Compromise accordingly, and the said Parties should become
bound each to other for the performance of such Award or Arbitrament as should
be made by Arbitrators to be named by this Court; And further, that the said
Lord Sands and Sir Walter Sands be warned to be here in this Court to Morrow to
understand the purpose of this House in that behalf accordingly. Vide
concerning this matter on Saturday the 21. day of this instant January
foregoing. Vide etiam diem sequentem.

Mr Comptroller showed that himself and the residue of the Committees appointed
by this House for Conference with the Lords touching the Bill Entitled An Act
for the increase of People for the service and Defense of the Realm, have
attended their Lordships this Morning according to the Charge of this House
given to him and the residue of the Committees for that purpose. And further
showed, that their Lordships having perused and considered the Answer of this
House in writing to their Lordships Objections in writing delivered by them to
this House, their Lordships cannot give passage to the said Bill: But liking
very well of the purpose and intent of the said Bill, their Lordships do wish
another Bill to be drawn and proceeded in to the said effect in some good
course; and do purpose to send down unto this House to Morrow Morning some
points or heads in writing for that purpose. Vide touching this business on
Thursday the 12th day, Saturday the 14th day, Monday the 16th day, Wednesday
the 18th day, Thursday the 19th day, and on Monday the 23d day of this instant
January foregoing. Vide itidem diem sequentem.

On Wednesday the 25th day of January Mr Snagg one of the Committees in the
Bill for Confirmation of the Jointure for the Lady Mary Verney wife of Sir
Edmund Verney Knight (who were appointed on the day foregoing) showed the
meeting and travel of the Committees, and some few Amendments in the same Bill,
and so delivered in the Bill.

Two Bills of no great moment had each of them one reading; of which the second
being the Bill for the avoiding of deceit in Measure and Weights, was read the
first time.

The Committees in the Bill for the better measuring of seven Miles from the
Town of great Yarmouth (who were appointed on Monday the 23d day of this
instant January foregoing) are ordered to meet at two of the Clock this
Afternoon in the Exchequer Chamber.

The Committees in the Bill also for reviving, continuing and explanation of an
Act for the necessary relief of Soldiers and Mariners are likewise to meet
this Afternoon at two of the Clock in the Exchequer Chamber.

The Bill for the better Execution of Judgments was upon the second reading
committed unto Mr Brograve Attorney of the Duchy, Mr Finch, Mr Yelverton, Mr.
Carew, Mr. Francis Bacon and others; and the Bill and Committees names were
delivered to the said Mr. Carew, who with the rest was appointed to meet this
Afternoon at two of the Clock in Grayes-Inn Hall.

The Amendments in the Bill for erecting and building of a Bridge over the
River of Wye at Wilton upon Wye near the Town of Rosse in the County of
Hereford being twice read, the same was upon the question ordered to be
engrossed.

The Amendments in the Bill for Confirmation of the Jointure of the Lady Verney
Wife of Sir Edmund Verney Knight, being twice read, the Bill was upon the
Question ordered to be engrossed.

The Amendments in the Bill for the reuniting of the Manor of Paris Garden in
the County of Surrey being twice read, the Bill was upon the question Ordered
to be engrossed.

Two Bills also had each of them one reading; of which the second being the
Bill to restrain the excessive making of Malt, was read the third time, and
after sundry Arguments both with the Bill and against the Bill, and certain
words stricken out in the first Proviso, in one place thereof the word [such]
and in another place thereof these words [or Maults for his own expenses only]
passed upon the Question.

Mr. Attorney General and Mr. Doctor Stanhop do bring word from the Lords, that
whereas a selected number of their Lordships in a Verbal Conference with a
Committee of some of the Members of this House concerning a Bill lately passed
in the Upper House and sent down by their Lordships unto this House, Entitled
An Act for the better Explanation and Execution of the Act made in the
thirteenth year of the Queens Majesty's Reign concerning Tellors, Receivors,
etc. diverse exceptions were then taken by the Committees of this House unto the
said Bill, and were afterward sent up to their Lordships by this House in
writing; with which said Exceptions their Lordships not being satisfied, have
sent down unto this House their Lordships Answer unto the same also in like
manner in writing: And so did then deliver the same to Mr. Speaker and
departed. Which Message being reported unto the House by Mr. Speaker, it was
resolved, that the former Committees of this House in that Cause (who were
appointed on Monday the 5th day of December foregoing) with some others then
added unto them, should meet this Afternoon at two of the Clock in the
Exchequer Chamber to confer and consider of their Lordships said Answer in
writing accordingly.

The Lord Sands and Sir Walter Sands being present in this House, Mr. Speaker
imparted unto them the Motion of this House for compromising the Cause.
Whereunto the Parties assenting, after either of them had been heard speak
severally their further minds unto this House in some particulars, the said
Lord Sands made choice of the Earl Marshal and of Mr Comptroller, and the said
Sir Walter Sands made choice of Mr Secretary and Mr Chancellor of the
Exchequer for the said Compromise. Whereupon the Earl Marshal after his
pleasure first signified unto this House, the meeting of the same Committees
was then appointed to be at the Court to Morrow in the Afternoon. Vide
concerning this matter on Saturday the 21th day, Monday the 23th day, and on
Tuesday the 24th day of this instant January foregoing.

Four Bills were sent up to the Lords from the House of Commons by Mr.
Comptroller and others; of which the second was the Bill to prohibit the
carrying of Herrings, and the third to retain the excessive making of Malt.

Mr Sergeant Lewkenor, one of the Committees of this House for the late
Conference with the Committees of the Lords upon Monday last in the Morning
concerning the Bill for increase of people for the service and defense of the
Realm, did bring from the Committees of the Lords certain Articles or Heads in
writing unto this House, for the framing of a new Bill to the purpose presently
of the old Bill, though not in that form, to the end their Lordships may
understand the opinion and liking of this House touching the same Articles or
Heads; and so delivered in the same Articles in writing into this House.
Whereupon after many Speeches and Arguments by diverse Members of this House for
the reading or not reading, for the committing or not committing of the said
Articles, pro and contra, it was at last resolved upon the question, that the
said Articles should be read, and so they were thereupon read accordingly.
Which done, after some further debating for the retaining or the returning of
the same Articles, and for Answer therein to their Lordships, it was Ordered,
that the said Mr Sergeant Lewkenor should presently himself alone go and
deliver the said Articles again unto such of the said Lords Committees as he
had first received them of; signifying for Answer only, that they had been read
in this House, and no more. Vide concerning this matter on Thursday the 12th
day, on Saturday the 14th day, on Monday the 16th day, on Thursday the 19th
day, on Monday the 23th day, and on Tuesday the 24th day of this instant
January foregoing.

Mr Finch, one of the Committees in the Bill against excess of Apparel (who
were appointed on Thursday the 19th day of this instant January foregoing)
showed the meeting and travel of the Committees and some of their Amendments in
the same Bill, and likewise their framing of a new Bill to avoid the great
excess used in wearing of Ruffs. And so delivered in both the said Bills into
this House.

On Thursday the 26th day of January, Two Bills had each of them one reading;
of which the second being the Bill concerning Garret de Malynes and John Hunger
Merchant Strangers, was read the second time, and Ordered upon the Question to
be engrossed.

Mr Arnold, one of the Committees in the Bill for the reviving, continuing and
explanation of an Act for the necessary relief of Mariners and Soldiers,
prayed a new day of meeting for the Committees in that Bill. Whereupon Mr
Arnold, Sir Henry Norris, Sir Giles Merrick, Sir Oliver Lambert, the Knights
and Burgesses for London, Mr Hext, Mr Wiseman, Mr Doctor Sands, Mr Cole, Sir
Thomas Conisby, Mr Harper, Sir Francis Hastings, Mr Snagg, Mr James Harrington,
Sir Francis Popham with many others, who were nominated and appointed to meet
this Afternoon at two of the Clock in the Middle Temple Hall.

The Bill for the settling and disposing of certain Lands of Mr Thomas Knivets
was read the second time, and Ordered upon the Question to be engrossed.

Two Bills also had each of them one reading; of which the last being the Bill
for further Ceremony and Credit to be required for Mills, was read the second
time, and upon the Question for the Commitment thereof was upon the division of
the House Ordered not to be committed, with the advantage of forty six Voices,
with the No a hundred and forty, and with the Yea ninety four, and afterward
upon another question for the engrossing was Ordered to be engrossed.

Mr Sergeant Drew and Mr. Doctor Carew did bring from the Lords a Bill passed
with their Lordships, Entitled An Act for the reforming of sundry abuses
committed by Soldiers and others, used in her Majesty's Services concerning
the Wars.

The Learned Council of certain persons pretending interest under the title of
William Kirkham the Younger, to some of the Lords comprehended in the Lease
mentioned in the Bill, were this day heard at large in this House, and were
appointed to prepare their Provisoes to be offered unto the Bill against to
Morrow.

Mr. Sergeant Drew and Mr. Doctor Stanhop did bring from the Lords a Bill
passed with their Lordships Entitled An Act for punishment of Rogues,
Vagabonds and Sturdy Beggars.

The Bill for the reforming of sundry abuses committed by Soldiers and others
used in her Majesty's Services concerning the Wars, was read the first time.

On Friday the 27th day of January, the Bill that Plaintiffs shall pay the
Defendants their Costs lying in Prison for want of Bayl if the Action pass
against the Plaintiff, was read the second time and committed unto Mr. Sands,
Mr. Boys, Mr. Snagg, Mr. George Crook, Mr. Recorder of London and others, who
were appointed to meet this Afternoon at two of the Clock in the Middle Temple
Hall.

The Committees likewise in the Bill for the execution of Judgment (who were
appointed on Wednesday the 25th day of this instant January foregoing) and the
Committees in the Bill for avoiding of deceits in measures and weights, were
likewise appointed to meet at the same time and place, which was now upon the
second reading committed to the former Committees in the Bill that the
Plaintiffs shail pay the Defendants their Costs, and Mr. Johnson was added unto
them.

The Bill for punishment of Rogues, Vagabonds and Sturdy Beggars, was read the
first time.

The Amendments in the Bill for Explanation and Addition of an Act of quinto
Regin. Eliz. for maintenance of the Navy being twice read, the Bill was
rejected upon the question for engrossing.

Two Bills of no great moment had each of them one reading; of which the second
being the Bill to give some remedy against the decay and spoil of the Queens
Majesty's Highways in the Counties of Sussex, Surrey and Kent through
disorderly carrying to Iron Forges and Furnaces, was read the second time and
committed to the Knights of those three Shires, Mr. Shirley, Mr. Binley, Mr.
Oglethorp, Mr. Colebrand, Mr. Edward Lewkenor and others; and the Bill and
Committees names were delivered to the said Mr. Colebrand, who with the rest
was appointed to meet to Morrow at two of the Clock in the Afternoon in the
Middle Temple Hall.

The Bill for Reformation of sundry abuses committed by Soldiers and others
used in her Majesty's Services concerning the Wars, was upon the second reading
committed unto Mr. Grevill, Sir Robert Wroth, Sir Walter Raleigh, Mr. Henry
Nevill, Sir George Carcy, Mr. Brograve Attorney of the Duchy, and diverse
others; and the Bill and Committees names were delivered to Sir Walter Raleigh,
who with the rest was appointed to meet to Morrow at two of the Clock in the
Afternoon in the Exchequer Chamber.

Mr. Sergeant Drew and Mr. Doctor Stanhop did bring from the Lords a Bill
lately passed in this House, Entitled An Act to reform deceits and breaches of
trust touching Lands given to Charitable uses, and did show that their
Lordships have likewise passed the same Bill with a Proviso and some Amendments.

The Amendments and Provisoes of the Lords to the Bill lately passed in this
House, Entitled An Act to reform deceits and breaches of trust touching Lands
given to Charitable uses, being three times read, the said Amendments were
assented unto by this House, and the said Proviso passed upon the Question
accordingly.

The Bill concerning the Highway Lands of the Town of Aylesbury in the Country
of Buckingham was read the third time, and upon some Motions by some Members of
this House was Ordered to be respited from being put to the Question till to
Morrow, that the Council of the other sides may be here.

Mr Doctor Carew and Mr Doctor Stanhop did bring from the Lords the Bill lately
passed in this House Entitled An Act against lewd and wandering persons
pretending themselves to be Soldiers and Mariners: And did show in like
manner, that their Lordships had passed the same Bill with some Amendments.

The Amendments of the Lords in the Bill lately passed in this House Entitled
An Act against lewd and wandering persons pretending themselves to be Soldiers
and Mariners, being three times read, the same Amendments were upon the
question assented unto accordingly.

The Committees of this House in the Bill from the Lords Entitled An Act for
the better Explanation and Execution of an Act made in the thirteenth year of
the Queens Majesty's Reign Capito quarto, concerning Tellors, Receivors, etc.
(who were appointed on Wednesday the 18th day of this instant January
foregoing) were appointed to meet this Afternoon in the Exchequer Chamber at
two of the Clock, and have further consideration and Conference amongst
themselves touching the proceeding in the same Bill.

On Saturday the 28th day of January, the Bill for punishment of Rogues,
Vagabonds and Sturdy Beggars was read the second time and committed unto some
Members of this House to be considered of in the Committee Chamber of this
House.

The Bill for Confirmation of the Jointure of Mary Lady Verney Wife of Sir
Edmund Verney Knight, was read the second time and passed upon the Question.

Goodale, one of the adverse Parties to the Bill concerning the Highway Lands
of the Town of Aylesbury being present in this House and praying some words to
be inserted into the said Bill, which being upon due and deliberate
consideration of this House admitted to be inserted accordingly, and three
times read, the Bill was put to the question, and passed thereupon accordingly.

Mr. Pembridg, one of the Committees in the Bill for reviving, continuing and
explanation of An Act for the necessary relief of Mariners and Soldiers (who
were appointed on Thursday the 26th day of this instant January foregoing)
showed the meeting and travel of the Committees and some their Amendments to
the Bill, and so delivered in the Bill to the House.

The Bill for punishment of Rogues, Vagabonds and Sturdy Beggars was read the
third time and passed with an Amendment of this House in the last line of the
same Bill, viz. by inserting these words [end of the] between the first word
[the] and the word [first] in the same line.

Mr. Sergeant Drew and Mr. Doctor Carry did bring from the Lords a Bill passed
with their Lordships, entitled An Act against the decaying of Towns and Houses
of Husbandry; and another Bill which lately passed in this House, and was sent
up to their Lordships, entitled An Act for the lawful making of Bays within
the Counties of Fssex and Suffolk; which Bill is also passed with their
Lordships, with a Proviso added to the same by their Lordships; which said
Proviso being three times read, was passed upon the question.

The Bill against the decaying of Towns and Houses of Husbandry had its first
reading.

On Monday the 30th day of January the Bill concerning Garret de Malynes and
John Hunger Merchant Strangers was read the second time.

There were seven Bills this Morning sent up to the Lords from the House of
Commons by Mr Secretary and others; of which the first was the Bill for
Punishment of Rogues, Vagabonds and Sturdy Beggars; the second for the lawful
making of Bays; And the third was the Bill to reform deceits and breaches of
trust touching Lands given to Charitable uses: with order also to move their
Lordships for Conference some time after this present day with their Lordships,
concerning the Bill lately passed with their Lordships, and sent down by them
unto this House, entitled An Act to reform sundry abuses committed by
Soldiers and others used to her Majesty's services concerning the Wars.

Mr Chancellor of the Exchequer, one of the Committees for Conference amongst
themselves concerning the Bill entitled An Act for the better Explanation and
Execution of the Act made in the 13th year of the Queens Majesty's Reign Cap.
quart. concerning Tellors and Receivors, etc. showed the meeting and travel of
the Committees, and their not liking to pass the same Bill in this House in
manner and form as the same was passed with the Lords, in regard of many
inconveniences appearing in the same Bill, which were then opened by him at
large: And showed further, that they thought good to frame a new Bill in that
Cause with a better and more reasonable form; and so delivered in the same
Bill, which was thereupon presently read for the first reading accordingly.

Mr Snagg one of the Committees in the Bill that the Plaintiffs shall pay the
Defendants Costs lying in Prison for want of Bail (who were appointed on Friday
the 27th day of this instant January foregoing) and in the Bill to avoid
deceits in Measures and Weights, showed the meeting and travel of the
Committees with their Amendments to the said Bill to avoid deceits in Measures
and Weights, and their opinion of reserving the said other Bill till another
Parliament, and so delivered in both the said Bills into the said House.

Mr Doctor Carew and Mr Doctor Stanhop did bring from the Lords a Bill
entitled An Act for the Confirmation of Statutes Merchants acknowledged in the
Town Corporate of Newcastle upon Tyne.

The Bill against the decaying of Towns and Houses of Husbandry was read the
second time, and committed unto the former Committees in the Bill for reforming
of sundry abuses by Soldiers and others used in her Majesty's service
concerning the Wars (who were appointed on Friday the 27th day of this instant
January foregoing) and to meet this Afternoon at two of the Clock in the
Exchequer Chamber, as in the said other Bill is likewise appointed; and the
Bill and Committees names were delivered to Mr Chancellor of the Exchequer.

Mr Secretary and the residue returning from the Lords, he showed their
delivering both of their Bills and of the message of this House unto their
Lordships, as he had in charge by this House to do. And further showed, that
their Lordships have appointed twenty of themselves to meet with a convenient
number of the Members of this House for the Conference in the great Council
Chamber at the Court at two of the Clock in the Afternoon concerning the said
Bill entitled An Act for the reforming of sundry abuses by Soldiers and
others used in her Majesty's services concerning the Wars.

The Bill for Confirmation of the Jointure of Christian Lady Sands was read the
third time.

Two Provisoes engrossed in Parchment being offered unto this House by the Lord
Sands to be added to the said Bill, were twice read, and upon the second
reading of the same Provisoes it was Ordered after many and sundry Arguments
and Speeches of diverse Members of this House, that the same Provisoes should be
committed unto Mr. Comptroller, Mr. Chancellor of the Exchequer, Mr. Brograve
Attorney of the Duchy, Mr. Solicitor, Mr. Sergeant Williams, and others; and
the Provisoes were delivered to Mr. Solicitor, who with the rest was appointed
to meet to Morrow at eight of the Clock in the Afternoon in the Committee
Chamber of this House. Vide concerning this matter on Saturday the 21th day,
and on Tuesday the 24th day of this instant January foregoing.

On Tuesday the 31th day of January the Bill for Confirmation of Statutes
Merchants acknowledged in the Town Corporate of Newcastle upon Tyne, was read
the first time.

The Amendments in the Bill for reviving, continuing and Explanation of an Act
for the necessay relief of Mariners and Soldiers being twice read, the Bill
was upon the question Ordered to be engrossed.

The Amendments in the Bill for avoiding deceits in Measures and Weights were
twice read, and after some Speeches had by sundry Members of this House
touching the same Bill pro and contra, the Learned Council of the Clerk of the
Market being upon a motion of some of this House admitted to be heard at the
Bar, and called for that purpose by the Sergeant of this House to come in, the
Sergeant showed that the said Clerk of the Market was gone down into the Hall
to fetch his said Council, in the mean time whereof the House entered into
another Cause, and the said Bill was thereupon committed to be put to the
question for engrossing.

The Bill for the more speedy payment of the Queens Majesty's debts and for the
better explanation of the Act made in the 13th year of the Queens Majesty,
entitled An Act to make the Lands, Tenements, Goods and Chattels of Tellors,
Receivers, etc. liable to the payment of their debt, was read the second time
and committed unto the former Committees, and Sir Walter Raleigh, Mr Fulk
Grevil, Mr Swayne, Sir Anthony Mildmay, Sir Anthony Cope and others were added
to them; and the Bill with the Committees names was delivered to Mr Solicitor
one of the said former Committees, who with the rest was appointed to meet to
Morrow at four of the Clock in the Star Chamber in the Afternoon.

Mr Fulk Grevil one of the Committees in the Bill for the better measuring of
seven Miles from the Town and Haven of Great Yarmouth in the County of Norfolk
(who were appointed on Monday the 23d day of this instant January foregoing)
showed the meeting of the Committees, and that they cannot agree upon any thing
touching the said Bill; and so delivered in the same Bill in such manner as he
before received the same out of this House.

Mr Sherley one of the Committees in the Bill concerning the highways in
Sussex, Surrey and Kent (who were appointed on Friday the 27th day of January
foregoing) showed the meeting and travel of the Committees with some their
Amendments in the same; and so delivered in the said Bill.

The two Provisoes to the Bill for Confirmation of the Jointure of Christian
Lady Sands being returned to the House by the Committees and read the third
time, the said Bill and Provisoes were passed upon the question. Vide
concerning this business on Saturday the 21. day, on Tuesday the 24th day and
on Monday the 30th day of this instant January foregoing.

The Proviso in Parchment offered unto the Bill entitled An Act concerning a
Lease of great Yearly Value procured to be passed from her Majesty by William
Kirkham the younger, was twice read; and after many disputes and Arguments by
sundry Members of this House, the same Proviso was read again for the third
reading, and then the said Bill was in like manner read the third time; which
done, the question was put for the annexing of the said Proviso to the said
Bill, and Ordered upon the question and upon the division of the House with the
advantage of six Voices, that the said Proviso should not be annexed to the
said Bill, the Yea being but seventy, and the No being seventy six. And
afterward the Bill being in like manner put to the question, the said Bill was
passed upon the question and upon the division of the House with the advantage
of four Voices, the Yea being seventy five, and the No being but seventy one.
Vide concerning this matter on Friday the 20th day of this instant January
foregoing.

On Wednesday the 1. day of February three Bills of no great moment had each of
them one reading; of which the last being the Bill for reviving, continuing and
Explanation of an Act for the necessary relief of Mariners and Soldiers was
read the third time and passed upon the question

The Amendments in the Bill against the Excess of Apparel was read the second
time and Ordered upon the question to be engrossed.

The Bill for the maintenance of Hospitality and for increase of all Victuals
and Flesh, whereby the Poor shall be much relieved, was read the second time,
and rejected upon the several questions for the committing and engrossing.

The Amendments and Provisoes of the Lords to the Bill lately passed in the
House and sent up to their Lordships from this House, entitled An Act against
Forestallers, Regrators and Ingrossers, being three times read, the said
Amendments and Proviso where dashed upon the questions.

Two Bills lastly had each of them one reading; of which the last being the
Bill for the Confirmation of Statutes Merchants in the Town Corporate of
Newcastle upon Tyne, was read the third time and passed upon the question.

Mr Recorder of London, Mr Tanfield, Mr Wiseman, Mr Snagg, Mr Finch, Mr Lea, Mr
Francis Moore, Mr Boys, Mr Hide and Mr John Shirley were added to the former
Committees in the Bill for the better Execution of Judgment (who were appointed
on Wednesday the 25th day of this instant January foregoing) and were appointed
to meet this Afternoon at two of the Clock in the Middle Temple.

On Friday the third day of February, the Bill to restrain the Lading of Corn
in some Ports was upon the second reading committed unto Mr Colebrand, Mr Hext,
Sir Thomas Mounson, Mr Arnold, the Burgesses of Port Towns, Mr Shirley and
others, who were appointed to meet this Afternoon at two of the Clock in the
Middle Temple Hall.

The Bill also for the restraint of carrying of Corn out of the Realm was read
the second time and committed to the last former Committees, and the same time
and place appointed for meeting, and both the said Bills and Committees names
were delivered to Mr Colebrand.

The Bill against the excess of Apparel was read the third time and passed upon
the Question.

Mr Sergeant Drew and Mr. Doctor Stanhop did bring from the Lords a Bill
Entitled An Act for the reformation of the abuses touching Wine-Casks with
special recommendation for the speedy proceeding in the same Bill; and did
further bring word from their Lordships, that whereas their Lordships received
a Bill from this House Entitled An Act for the reviving, continuance and
explanation of diverse Statutes, which Bill as their Lordships do wish good
success unto, so their Lordships do in that respect pray present Conference of
some convenient number of this House with six of their Lordships. Whereupon Mr.
Shirley, Mr. Snagg, Mr. Duport, Mr. Francis Moore, Mr. George Crook, Mr.
Finch, Mr. Oldsworth, Sir Robert Wroth, Mr. Wiseman, Mr. Boys, Mr. Tasborough,
Mr. Colebrand, Mr. George Moore, Sir Francis Hastings and Mr. Sergeant Lewkenor
were presently appointed for that purpose accordingly.

Four Bills were sent up to the Lords from the House of Commons by Sir Francis
Hastings and others; of which the first was the Bill for Confirmation of
Statutes Merchants acknowledged in the Town Corporate of Newcastle upon Tyne;
And the second was for the renewing, continuance and explanation of an Act for
the necessary relief of Soldiers and Mariners.

Mr. Secretary one of the Committees in the Bill for reforming of sundry abuses
committed by Soldiers and others used in her Majesty's Services concerning the
Wars (who were appointed on Friday the 27th day of January foregoing) showed
that he and the other of the Committees of this House have attended the
Committees of their Lordships in that Bill accordingly; And that they found
their Lordships very honorably inclined to hear the further minds and opinions
of this House touching any the parts or points of the said Bill for their
Lordships better satisfactions concerning the same. And so moving for another
meeting of the said Committees of this House to consider and confer touching
the said Bill amongst themselves in the mean time, the Committees names were
thereupon read by the Clerk, and the time of their meeting set down to be to
Morrow at two of the Clock in the Afternoon in the Exchequer Chamber.

Mr. Francis Bacon, one of the Committees in the Bill lately passed in the
Upper House and sent down by the Lords to this House, Entitled An Act against
the decaying of Towns and Houses of Husbandry, showed the meeting of the
Committees, and that the more part of them being employed in the Committee of a
Bill for the more speedy payment of the Queens Majesty's Debts (who were
appointed on Tuesday the 31th day of January foregoing) And in the Bill for the
better explanation of the Act made in the thirteenth year of her Majesty's
Reign Entitled An Act to make the Lands, Tenements, Goods and Chattles of
Tellors, Receivors, etc. liable to the payment of their Debts, they would
proceed in the said other Bill, and so moved for another meeting for that
purpose. Whereupon it was Ordered the same should be at two of the Clock in the
Afternoon of this present day in the Exchequer Chamber.

Mr. Sergeant Drew and Mr. Doctor Stanhop did bring from the Lords a Bill
lately passed in this House and sent up to their Lordships Entitled An Act for
the establishing of the Lands given by John Bedfords Will to the perpetual
repair and Amendments of the Highways at Aylesbury in the County of Buckingham
according to the said Will; And did show that their Lordships had likewise
passed the same Bill in the Upper House with some Amendments, and with a
Proviso annexed unto the same by their Lordships; and so did deliver the said
Bill to Mr. Speaker.

Sir Francis Hastings and others returning from the Lords, he showed the
delivering of the Bills unto their Lordships which were sent up unto them by
himself and others the Members of this House.

The Bill for Reformation of abuses in Wine-Casks was upon the second reading
committed unto Sir Robert Wroth, the Knights and Burgesses of London, Mr.
Snagg, Mr. Wiseman, Mr. Thomas Smith, the Burgesses of York, Mr. Peirson, Mr.
Hext, Mr. Stevenson, Mr. George Moore and Mr. Lilley; and the Bill and
Committees names were delivered to Mr. Hext, who with the rest was appointed to
meet to Morrow in the Morning at eight of the Clock in the Committee Chamber.

On Saturday the 4th day of February, Mr. John Shirley one of the Committees in
the Bill for the better Execution of Judgment (who were appointed on Wednesday
the 25th day of January foregoing) showed the meeting and travel of the
Committees and some their Amendments in the Bill, and so delivered in the Bill.

The Bill for erecting and building of a Bridge over the River of Wye at Wilton
upon Wye near the Town of Rosse in the County of Hereford, was read the third
time and passed upon the question.

Mr Doctor Carew and Mr Doctor Stanhop did bring from the Lords a Bill passed
in this House and sent up to their Lordships, entitled An Act for establishing
a Jointure to Anne Lady Wentworth now wife of William Pope Esquire, and for the
better enabling of William Pope aforesaid to sell certain of his Lands for the
payment of his Debts, and another for the confirmation of the Jointure of the
Lady Verney wife of Sir Edmund Verney Knight, which Bill their Lordships have
also passed with some Amendments.

The Bill for the more speedy payment of the Queens Majesty's Debts, and for
the better explanation of the Act made in the 13. year of the Queen entitled
An Act to make the Lands, Tenements, Goods and Chattels of Tellors, Receivours,
etc. liable to the payment of their debts, was read the third time, and after
very many Speeches and Arguments both with the Bill and against the Bill, was
in the end passed upon the Question, and upon the division of the House, with
the advantage of thirty three voices, viz. with the Yea one hundred ninety
five, and with the No one hundred and twelve.

Mr Doctor Carew and Mr Doctor Stanhop did bring from the Lords a Bill lately
passed in this House and sent up to their Lordships, entitled An Act against
the deceitful Stretching and Taintering of Northern Clothes; and did show that
their Lordships have also passed the same Bill in the Upper House with some
Amendments added by their Lordships to the same Bill, and so did deliver the
Bill to Mr Speaker.

The said Mr Doctor Carew and Mr Doctor Stanhop did bring from their Lordships
a Bill lately passed in this House and sent up unto their Lordships, entitled
An Act for the reviving, continuance, explanation, perfecting and repealing of
diverse Statutes; and did show that their Lordships have in like manner passed
the same Bill with some Amendments and a Proviso; and so delivered in the Bill
and Proviso to Mr Speaker.

On Monday the 6th day of February two Bills had each of them one Reading; of
which the first being the Bill for reformation of retailing Brokers and
Pawn-takers was read the first time.

Mr Boys one of the Committees in the two Bills, the one against carrying of
Corn out of the Realm and the other to restrain the lading of Corn in some
Ports, showed the meeting and travel of the Committees with some Amendments in
one of the same Bills, and so delivered in the same Bills into this House.

Mr Francis Bacon one of the Committees in the Bill lately passed in the Upper
House by the Lords, and sent down to this House, against the decaying of Towns
and Houses of Husbandry, showed the meeting and travel of the Committees and
their Amendments to the same Bill, which Amendments being read to the House
were very well liked of by the whole House.

Thomas Bashfield was present at the Bar and charged with a contempt against
the privilege of this House in disturbing by way of an Appearance of Robert
Sherry a Member of this House returned a Burgess for the Town of Ludlow in the
County of Salop, and was for his said contempt then committed to the Sergeants
Ward, there to remain during the Pleasure of this House, and was on the next
day after discharged of his Imprisonment paying his Fees and taking the Oath of
Supremacy.

Five Bills were sent up to the Lords from the House of Commons by Mr
Comptroller and others; of which the last was the Bill for the Conrfimation of
the Jointure of Mary Lady Verney, wife of Sir Edmund Verney Knight.

The Amendments and Provisoes of the Lords in the Bill lately passed in this
House for establishing of the Lands given by John Bedfords Will to the
perpetual repair and amendments of the Highways at Aylesbury in the County of
Bucks according to the said Will, being three times read, the same Amendments
were assented unto, and the Proviso likewise passed upon the question.

Mr Doctor Carew and Mr Dr Stanhop did bring from the Lords a Bill lately
passed in this House and sent up to their Lordships for the further continuance
and explanation of an Act for the necessary relief of Soldiers and Mariners
made in the thirty fifth year of the Queens Majesty's Reign that now is; and
did show that their Lordships have in like Case passed the same Bill in the
Upper House with some Amendments, and so delivered in the said Bill to Mr
Speaker.

The Bill for the Amendments of the Highways in the Counties of Sussex, Surry
and Kent, was read the third time and passed upon the question.

The Amendments of the Committees of this House in the Bill lately passed by
the Lords against the decay of Towns and Houses of Husbandry, and sent down by
their Lordships into this House, being three times read, were assented unto by
this House upon the question accordingly. Whereupon the said Bill and
Amendments being read for the third reading, and put to the question for the
passing, the said Bill and Amendments in that form were passed by this House
upon the same question.

Mr Doctor Carew and Mr Doctor Stanhop, did bring from the Lords two Bills; of
which the first was the Bill for the draining and recovery of certain overflown
Grounds in the County of Norfolk, and delivered the same Bill to Mr Speaker.

On Tuesday the 7th day of February, Two Bills of no great moment had each of
them one reading; of which the second being the Bill for establishing a
Jointure to Anne Lady Wentworth now Wife of William Pope Esquire, and for the
better enabling of the said William Pope to sell certain of his Lands for the
payment of his debts, was read the second time and committed to Mr.
Comptroller, Mr. Lewkenor, Mr. Francis Bacon,

Mr. Oglethorpe, Mr. Boys, with diverse others, who were appointed to meet this
Afternoon at two of the Clock in the Court of Wards.

The Amendments and Proviso of the Lords in the Bill lately passed in this
House entitled An Act for the reviving, continuance, explanation, perf cting
and repealing of diverse Statutes, being thrice read, the Amendments were
assented unto, and the Proviso was passed upon the question.

The Bill lately passed in this House entitled An Act for the amendment of
Highways in Sussex, Surry, and Kent, The Bill for the establishing the Lands
given by John Bedford's Will to the perpetual repair and amendments of the
Highways at Aylesbury in the County of Buckingham, with one other of no great
moment, were sent up to the Lords by Mr. Comptroller, Mr. Chancellor and others.

The Bill for the better measuring of seven Miles from the Town of
Great-Yarmouth according to a Statute made in the 31th Year of King Edward the
Third was read the third time, and dashed upon the Question by the division of
the House, with the difference of eighteen Voices, viz. with the No a hundred
and eight, and with the Yea ninetv

Mr Sergeant Drew and Mr Doctor Carew did bring word from the Lords, that their
Lordships do desire a Conference of a convenient number of the Members of this
House with twenty of their Lordships this Afternoon in the Chamber next the
Upper House, touching the Bill lately passed in this House Entitled An Act
against the excess of Apparel. Whereupon it was Ordered that the former
Committees of this House in the same Bill (who were appointed on Thursday the
19th day of January foregoing) shall attend their Lordships accordingly.

Post Meridiem.

The Bill for reformation of retailing Brokers and Pawn-Takers was read the
second time, and thereupon committed unto Mr George Moore, Mr Heart, Mr Recorder
of London, Mr Lewkenor, Mr Wiseman, Mr Ludlow, Sir John Leviston, Mr Crompton,
Mr Conisby, Mr Lidley, Mr Johnson and Mr Doctor Parkins, who were appointed to
meet to Morrow Morning in the Committee Chamber.

The Amendments and Proviso of the Lords in the Bill lately passed in this
House and sent up unto their Lordships, Entitled An Act for the recovery of
three hundred thousand Acres more or less of waste Marish and Watery grounds in
the Isle of Ely, and in the Counties of Cambridge, Huntington, Northampton,
Lincoln, Norfolk and Suffolk were read three times.

The Provisoes of the Lords in the Bill lately passed in this House and sent up
to their Lordships, Entitled An Act concerning the draining and recovery from
the Water of certain overflown grounds in the County of Norfolk, were three
times read; in which time of the last reading of these Provisoes Mr. Chancellor
of the Exchequer came to the House, and then presently told Mr. Speaker and the
residue of this House, that her Majesty commanded him to signify unto Mr.
Speaker and to the residue of this House, that her Majesty's express pleasure
was, that the said two Bills concerning the draining of Marish and Fenny
grounds should not be any more read in this House.

The Amendments and Proviso of the Lords to the Bill lately passed in this
House and sent up unto their Lordships, Entitled An Act against the deceitful
stretching and taintering of Northern Cloth, being three times read, the said
Amendments were assented unto, and the said Proviso passed upon the Question.

The Bill Entitled An Act for the reviving, continuance, explanation,
perfecting and repealing of diverse Statutes was sent up unto their Lordships by
Mr. Chancellor of the Exchequer and others.

Mr. Comptroller, one of the Committees of this House for Conference with the
Committees of the Lords this Afternoon concerning the Bill lately passed in
this House and sent up unto their Lordships, Entitled An Act against the
Excess of Apparel, etc. showed their meeting with the said Committees of the
Lords, and that their Lordships have no good liking of the said Bill for sundry
imperfections in the same not answerable to her Majesty's Proclamation touching
the degrees and qualities of persons; And that their Lordships showing
themselves very courteously and kindly toward the said Committees of this
House could have been well pleased to have proceeding with a more convenient
Bill for the said purpose, if the expected shortness of the Parliament could so
have permitted. Whereupon the House resolved not to deal any further touching
that matter this Parliament.

The said Mr. Comptroller then also further showed, that he and other the
Committees of this House in the Bill Entitled An Act for the enabling of
Edmund Mollineux Esquire to sell Lands for the payment of Debts and Legacies,
and in the Bill for establishing the Jointure to Anne Lady Wentworth now Wife
of William Pope Esquire, and for the better enabling the said William Pope to sell
certain of his Lands for the payment of his Debts (who had been appointed in
the beginning of this present day) showed the meeting of the Committees and
their some small Amendments in both the same Bills, and so delivered in both
the said Bills; which Bills being each of them read severally for the third
reading, the said Amendments being likewise three times read, the said Bills
were thereupon passed upon the Question accordingly.

The Amendments and Provisoes of the Lords to the Bill lately passed in this
House Entitled An Act for the further continuance and explanation of an Act
for the necessary relief of Soldiers and Mariners being three times read, the
Amendments were assented unto, and the Proviso passed upon the Question
accordingly.

The Amendments of the Committees in the Bill for the better Execution of
Judgments being twice read, the same were upon the Question Ordered to be
engrossed.

On Wednesday the 8th day of February, the Bill Entitled An Act for the
establishing a Jointure to Anne Lady Wentworth now Wife of William Pope
Esquire, and for the better enabling of the said William Pope to sell certain
of his Lands for the payment of his Debts, The Bill Entitled An Act for the
enabling of Edmund Mollineux Esquire to sell Lands for the payment of Debts and
Legacies, The Bill Entitled An Act against deceitful stretching and taintering
of Northern Cloth, The Bill entitled An Act for the further continuing and
Explanation of an Act for the necessary relief of Soldiers and Mariners made
in the thirty fifth year of the Queens Majesty's Reign that now is, were sent
up to the Lords by Mr. Comptroller and others.

The Bill for reformation of abuses in Wine-Casks was read the third time, and
dashed upon the Question.

The Bill for the better Execution of Judgments was read the third time, and
passed upon the Question.

Mr. Wingfield moved for the ordinary proceeding of this House in the usual
course of Parliament to be permitted, concerning the two Bills lately passed in
this House concerning sundry surrounded grounds in sundry Counties of this
Realm, and sent up from this House unto the Lords, and there in like manner
passed with their Lordships in the Upper House with some Amendments and some
Provisoes sent down again by their Lordships unto this House, the further
proceeding of this House in which Bill was yesterday restrained by a Message
delivered from her Majesty by Mr. Chancellor of the Exchequer unto Mr. Speaker
and this whole House.

Mr. Doctor Carew and Mr. Doctor Stanhop did bring from the Lords a Bill lately
passed in this House and sent up to their Lordships, Entitled An Act that
Lessees may enjoy their Leases against all Patentees, their Heirs and Assigns,
notwithstanding any default in payment of their Rents during the time that the
Reversion or Inheritance remained in the Crown; And did show that the same Bill
has likewise passed with their Lordships with some Amendments and a Proviso;
and so delivered in the same Bill to Mr Speaker.

Mr Sergeant Drew, Mr Attorney General and Mr. Doctor Stanhop did bring from
the Lords a Bill Entitled An Act for the Queens Majesty's most Gracious
general and free Pardon.

Post Meridiem.

The Amendments and Provisoes of the Lords in the Bill lately passed in this
House and sent up to their Lordships from this House Entitled An Act that
Lessees may enjoy their Leases against all Patentees, their Heirs and Assigns,
notwithstanding any default of payment or their Rents, during the time that the
Reversion or Inheritance remained in the Crown, being three times read, the
said Amendments were assented unto; and the said Provisoes were passed upon the
Question.

The Amendments of the Committees of this House in the Bill that lately passed
in the Upper House and was sent down by their Lordships to this House,
Entitled An Act for reformation of Retailing Brokers and Pawn-Takers being
three times read, the said Amendments were assented unto and the Bill likewise
passed upon the Question.

On Thursday the 9th day of February, the Bill Entitled An Act for Reformation
of Retailing Brokers and other Pawn-Takers, The Bill Entitled An Act that
Lessees may enjoy their Leases against all Patentees, their Heirs and Assigns,
notwithstanding any default of payment of their Rents during the time that the
Reversion or Inheritance remained in the Crown, And the Bill Entitled An Act
for the better Execution of Judgment, were sent up to the Lords by Mr.
Comptroller and others.

The Bill for the Queens Majesty's most gracious general and free pardon was
once read and passed upon the Question.

Nota, That whereas to the passing of other Bills three distinct and several
Readings are required, here the Bill for her Majesty's most gracious Pardon
passed upon the first Reading.

Mr Sergeant Drew and Mr Doctor Carew did bring from the Lords the Bill
Entitled An Act for the Grant of three Subsidies and six Fifteenths and
Tenths, and did show that their Lordships have in like manner passed the same
Bill; and so delivered the same to Mr Speaker, to the end he may carry the same
up into the Upper House to be presented by him unto her Majesty in the name of
this whole House.

Nota, That the Original Journal Book of the House of Commons ended here, and
contained no other or further Passages of this day, although her Majesty came
in Person in the Afternoon to the Upper House, which is therefore supplied out
of the fragmentary and imperfect Journal mentioned more particularly at the
beginning of this present Journal, as follows.

The Queens Majesty came to the Upper House somewhat after three of the Clock
in the Afternoon this present Thursday being the 9th day of this instant
February, of which the House of Commons having notice, repaired thither with
Christopher Yelverton Sergeant at Law their Speaker, who having in the name of
the House presented her Majesty with the Bill of three Subsidies and six
Fifteenths and Tenths, and amongst other things desired her Majesty's Royal
Assent to such Laws as had passed the two Houses, he was Answered according to
her Majesty's Commandment by the Lord Keeper, that she thankfully accepted the
said Gift of her Loving Subjects, and very well allowed of the said Speakers
pains and Speech.

Then Mr Smith, the Clerk of the Upper House, having read the Titles of all the
Acts, her Majesty gave her said Royal Assent to twenty four public Acts or
Statutes, and to nineteen private, and refused or quashed forty eight several
Bills which had passed both the Houses. After which Sir Thomas Egerton Knight,
Lord Keeper of the Great Seal of England, by her Majesty's Commandment
Dissolved this present Parliament.

THE JOURNAL OF THE House of LORDS.
A Journal of the passages of the Upper House of Parliament holden at
Westminster, Anno 43 Reginae Eliz. Anno Domini 1601. which began there on
Tuesday the 27th Day of October, and then and there continued until the
Dissolution thereof, on Saturday the 19th Day of December ensuing, Anno 44
Reginae ejusdem.

THIS Journal of the Upper House (containing part of the passages of the Upper
House, in the 10th and last Parliament of her Majesty's Reign) is plentifully
stored not only with the ordinary business of Reading Bills, with the
Committing, Amending and expediting of them; but also with diverse very useful
and good Precedents touching the Liberties and Privileges of the House it
self. In which also diverse Speeches, and other passages which were not found in
the Original Book of the said House, are supplied out of other private Journals
of that time of very good Authority. But yet to avoid confusion, whatsoever is
here inserted out of the said private Journals, is particularly distinguished
from that which is taken out of the abovementioned Original Journal Book of
the Upper House, by some Animadversion or expression thereof both before and
after the inserting of it.

Before the particular relation of each days passages of the Upper House in
this Parliament be inserted out of the Original Journal Book it self of the
said House, all the Proxies both usual and unusual (entered also at the
beginning thereof) which had been returned and delivered in unto the Clerk of
the said House during the continuance of the same; are here in the next place
to be transcribed and set down all of them together, and cannot be so orderly
digested and referred to each day on which they were returned, as formerly they
have been. For whereas before this Parliament, and the last past in Anno 39
Reginae Eliz. Henry Spilman and Anthony Mason Esquires who had been
successively Clerks of the said Upper House, did usually enter the said Proxies
at the beginning of each Journal, with express mention of several days on which
they were introducted or returned; now Thomas Smith Esquire, as well in this
Parliament as in that which last preceded in the said 39th year of her Majesty
(when he succeeded unto the said Anthony Mason in the place of the said Clerk
of the Upper House) did only generally enter them at the beginning of this
present and that last foregoing Journal ( de Anno 39 Eliz. as aforesaid) as had
been formerly accustomed, saving that it differed somewhat in the manner of
entering them; and that the several days also on which they had been introducted
and delivered unto him, were not at all set down or expressed. Which course
having heen since also followed (unto this present year 1629.) the said Proxies
can be no more referred to the proper days as in diverse foregoing Journals they
have been, but must be once for all generally set down at the beginning of this
present Journal in manner and form following.

Literae procuratoriae in hoc Parliamento sunt allatae

Archipiescopi Eboracensis Matthaei, etc. qui procuratores suos constituit
Johan. Archiepiscopum Cantuarien' and Tobiam Episcopum Dunelmen' conjunctim and
divisim.

Nota, That whereas there is an ( etc.) after the word Matthaei in the Proxy
foregoing, it seems that these words are left out, viz. absentis ex licentia
Dominae Reginae; and so if nothing had been omitted, the said Proxy, as may
very probably be conjectured, should have been thus inserted, Archiepiscopi
Eboracensis Matthaei absentis ex licentia Dominae Reginae, qui procuratores,
etc. as is before set down.

Nota also, that the Proxies are all entered in the Genitive Case, and must
therefore be referred to those foregoing words, viz. Literae procuratoriae in
hoc Parliamento sunt allatae.

Henrici Episcopi Carliolen. qui procuratores suos constituit Matthaeum
Archiepiscopum Eboracen' and Ricardum Episcopum Cestren' conjunctim and divisim.

Galsridi Episcopi Gloucestren', qui procuratores suos constituit Ricardum
Episcopum London, Anthonium Episcopum Meneven', and Gulielmum Episcopum Exon'
conjunctim and divisim.

Herberti Episcopi Hereforden', qui procuratores suos constituit Johannem
Episcopum Rossen', Gulielmum Episcopum Coventr' and Litchfield, and Gulielmum
Episcopum Norwicen' conjunctim and divisim.

Gulielmi Episcopi Norwicen', qui procuratorem suum constituit Johannem
Archiepiscopum Cantuarien'.

Nota, That the Bishops Proxies are set before the Proxies of the Temporal
Lords, not because, as I suppose, they were all returned first, but because of
their Ecclesiastical dignities, and in respect that the Archbishop of
Canterbury one of their Order, is the first Peer of the Realm. Whence also
their names are usually first set down in the Journal Book, where the presence
of all the Lords is noted each day when they sit as long as the Parliament
continues. Then follow the Proxies of the Temporal Lords in such order as they
are here set down.

Rogeri Comitis Rutland (which as the rest is put in the Genitive Case in
relation to those first words, Literae procuratoriae in hoc Parliamento sunt
allatae) qui procuratorem suum constituit Carolum Comitem Nottingham magnum
seneschallum hospitii Reginae and magnum Admirallum Angliae.

Edwardi Comitis Bedford, qui procuratorem suum constituit Oliverum Dominum St
John de Bletsoe.

Caroli Domini Mount joy, qui procuratorem suum constituit Carolum Comitem
Nottingham magnum seneschallum Hospitii Reginae and magnum Admirallum Angliae.

Gulielmi Comitis Bathon', qui procuratorem suum constituit Carolum Comitem
Nottingham magnum seneschallum Hospitii Reginae and magnum Admirallum Angliae.

Edwardi Domini Morley, qui procuratorem suum constituit Carolum Comitem
Nottingham magnum seneschallum Hospitii Reginae and magnum Admirallum Angliae.

Anthonii Vicecomitis Mountague, qui procuratorem suum constituit Thomam
Dominum Buckhurst magnum Thesaurarium Angliae.

Gulielmi Domini Sands, qui procuratorem suum constituit Carolum Comitem
Nottingham.

Edwardi Domini Stafford, qui procuratorem suum constituit Carolum Comitem
Nottingham.

Georgii Comitis Huntington, qui procuratorem suum constituit Edwardum Comitem
Wigorn'.

Thomae Vicecomitis Bindon, qui procuratorem suum constituit Carolum Comitem
Nottingham.

Domini Lumley, qui procuratorem suum constituit Thomam Dominum Darcy de Chiche.

Johannis Domini Darcy, qui procuratorem suum constituit Gilbertum Comitem
Salop.

Henrici Comitis Kanciae, qui procuratorem suum constituit Gilbertum Comitem
Salop.

Edwardi Comitis Oxon, qui procuratorem suum constituit Carolum Comitem
Nottingham.

Thomae Domini Burleigh, qui procuratorem suum constituit Henricum Comitem
Northumberland.

Nota, That in respect that this present Parliament was the last of her
Majesty's Reign, and these Proxies are entered after a different manner from
most of those in the Queens time which are before set down, they are all of
them therefore Transcribed both ordinary and extraordinary out of the Original
Journal Book of the Upper House; of which the Ordinary I call those, when a
Spiritual Lord constituteth two Proctors, and a Temporal Lord one; and those
Extraordinary, when a Temporal Lord constituteth more than one Proctor, and a
Spiritual Lord but one or more than two.

Nota also, that the Earl of Nottingham had eight several Proxies sent unto him
this Parliament, by which it is plain that by the Ancient Custom and usages of
the Upper House every Member thereof is capable of as many Proxies as shall be
sent unto him, although the said Custom be at this day altered by an Order made
in the said House upon the day of in Anno 2. Regis Caroli, Anno Dom. 1626.
(upon the engrossing of many Letters procuratory by George Duke of Bucks) that
no Lords Spiritual or Temporal should be capable of above two of the said
Proxies.

The abovementioned Proxies being set down in manner and form as aforesaid,
now follows in the next place the beginning of the Parliament it self, and
the manner of her Majesty's coming to the same.

On Tuesday the 27th day of October and the first day of this present
Parliament, about three of the Clock in the Afternoon the Queen went by Land to
Westminster Church, riding in a Chariot made all open, only like a Canopy at
the Top, being of Cloth of Silver or Tissue, with diverse Lords and others in
their degree being Marshalled by the Heralds; where having heard a Sermon, she
went into the Upper House, and being there set, the Lords Spiritual and
Temporal took their several places, whose names are Transcribed out of the
Original Journal of the Upper House in manner and form following.

Johannes Archiepiscopus Cantuarien'. Thomas Egerton Miles, Dominus Custos
magni Sigilli. Dominus Buckhurst Dominus Thesaurarius Angliae. Matchio Winton.
Comites.
Comes Sussex Magnus Mareschallus. Comes Nottingham Magnus Admirallus Angliae
and Magnus seneschallus Hospitii Reginae. Comes Northumbr. Comes Salop. Comes
Darbiae. Comes Wigorn'. Comes Cumbriae. Comes Pembrooke. Comes Hertford. Comes
Lincoln.
Episcopi.
Episcopus London. Episcopus Dunelmen. Episcopus Wintonien. Episcopus Roffen.
Episcopus Coventr' and Litchfield. Episcopus Wigorn. Episcopus Bathon' and
Wellen. Episcopus Meneven. Episcopus Lincoln. Episcopus Asaphen. Episcopus
Cestren. Episcopus Cicestren. Episcopus Exon. Episcopus Sarisburien. Episcopus
Elien. Episcopus Petriburgen.
Barons.
Dominus Zouch. Dominus Cobham. Dominus Stafford. Dominus Gray de Wilton.
Dominus Dudley. Dominus Lumley. Dominus Stourton. Dominus Windsor. Dominus
Mordant. Dominus Wharton. Dominus Rich. Dominus Willoughby de Parham. Dominus
Sheffield. Dominus Darcie de Chiche. Dominus Chandots. Dominus St John de
Bletsoe. Dominus Compton. Dominus Norreys. Dominus Howard de Walden.
These names being thus inserted out of the Original Journal Book, now follow
some other passages of this day with the sum of the Lord Keepers Speech out of
a private Journal of the House of Commons.

The Knights, Citizens and Burgesses of the House of Commons having notice that
her Majesty with diverse Lords Spiritual and Temporal and others were set in the
Upper House, hasted thither; but before they came, the door of the House was
shut, and notwithstanding any means that was made by them, was still kept shut
until the Lord Keeper had ended his Speech: the substance or chief scope of
which said Speech was as follows.

He used persuasion of thankfulness, and of obedience, and also showed her
Majesty's desire of dissolution of this Parliament before Christmas. He showed
unto us the necessity we stand in, and the means to prevent it; the necessity,
the Wars between Spain and England; the means, Treasure, etc. His advice was,
that Laws in force might be revised and explained, and no new Laws made. Our
Enemies he said were Enemies to God, the Queen and the peace of this Kingdom,
conspired to overthrow Religion, to reduce us to a Tyrannical servitude. These
Enemies he named to be the Bishop of Rome and the King of Spain. Our state
being thus, he summoned us to be provident, by reason we deal with a provident
Enemy; and confident, because God has ever, and I hope will ever, bless the
Queen with successful fortune. He showed how apparent his providence was by the
means and course he takes for our instruction; And secondly the success we had
against him by Gods strong Arm of defense in Anno 1588. and diverse other times
since. You see to what effect the Queens support of the French Kings Estate
has brought him; even made him one of the greatest Princes in Europe; when her
Majesty's Forces there left him, how again he was fain to Ransom a servile
Peace at our enemies the Spaniards hands with dishonorable and servile
Conditions. For the Low Countries, how by her aid, from a confused Government
and State she brought them to an Unity in Counsel, and defended them with such
success in her Attempts against the greatest power of the Spaniards Tyrannical
designs, which have so much gauled him, that how many desperate practices have
been both devised, consented to and set on foot by commandment of the late King
his Father, I need not show you, neither trouble you with Arguments for proof
thereof, being confessed by them that should have been Authors themselves. But
de mortuis nil nisi bonum. I would be loath to speak of the dead, much more to
slander the dead. I have seen her Majesty wear at her Girdle the price of her
blood; I mean Jewels which have been given to her Physicians to have done that
unto her, which I hope God will ever keep from her; but she has rather worn
them in Triumph than for the price, which has not been greatly valuable.

Then he fell to persuade us, because new occasions were offered of
consultations, to be provident in provision of means for our own defense and
safety, seeing the King of Spain means to make England miserable by beginning
with Ireland; neither does he begin with the Rebels, but even with the
Territory of the Queen her self. He showed that Treasure must be our means, for
Treasure is the sinews of War.

Nota, That the substance of this Speech is only here inserted as it was
afterward repeated in the said House upon Tuesday the third day of November,
which next ensued, by Sir Robert Cecill her Majesty's principal Secretary, who
had done it to satisfy diverse Members of the same, who could not get into the
Upper House to hear it this first day of the Parliament as is aforesaid.

Now follow the Names of the Receivors and Tryors of Petitions out of the
Original Journal Book of the said House.

As soon as the Lord Keeper had ended his Speech, and that such of her
Majesty's Privy Council and others of the House of Commons as had privately got
in and heard it, were departed down to their own House, Thomas Smith Esquire Clerk
of the Upper House read the Names of the Receivors and Triors of Petitions in
French, which were as follows.

Receivors of Petitions for England, Ireland, Wales and Scotland, Sir John
Popham Knight, Lord Chief Justice, Francis Gaudy, one of the Justices of the
Kings Bench, George Kingsmell, one of the Justices of the Common Pleas, Dr
Carew and Dr Stanhop:

Receivors of Petitions for Gascoign, and other Lands and Countries beyond the
Seas and of the Isles, Sir Edmund Anderson Knight, Lord Chief Justice of the
Common Pleas, Sir William Perriam Knight, Lord Chief Baron, Thomas Walmesley
one of the Justices of the Common Pleas, Dr Swale and Dr Howard. They who will
deliver Petitions, to deliver them within six days.

Triors of Petitions for England, Ireland, Wales and Scotland.

The Archbishop of Canterbury, the Marquess of Winchester, the Earl of Sussex
Lord Marshal of England, the Earl of Nottingham Lord High Admiral of England
and Steward of the Queens House, the Earl of Hartford, the Bishop of London,
the Bishop of Durham, the Bishop of Winchester, the Lord Zouch, and the Lord
Cobham.

All these or any four of them, calling unto them the Lord Keeper of the Great
Seal, and the Lord Treasurer and also the Queens Sergeants at their leisure, to
meet and hold their place at the Chamberlains Chamber.

Triors of Petitions for Gascoign and other Lands and Countries beyond the Seas
and of the Isles:

The Earl of Oxford High Chamberlain of England, the Earl of Northumberland,
the Earl of Shrewsbury, the Earl of Worcester, the Earl of Huntington, the
Bishop of Rochester, the Bishop of Lincoln, the Lord Hunsdon Chamberlain to the
Queen, the Lord Le Ware, the Lord Lumley and the Lord Burleigh.

All these or four of them calling unto them the Queens Sergeants and the
Queens Attorney and Solicitor when their leisure did serve them, to meet and
hold their place in the Treasurers Chamber.

Then the Lord Keeper continued the Parliament, which is set down in the
Original Journal Book in manner and form following.

Dominus Custos Magni Sigilli ex mandato Dominae Reginae continuavit praesens
Parliamentum usque in diem Veneris proxime futurum, viz. 30m diem Octobris.

Nota, That although there be some short mention made of the Presentment of the
Speaker of the House of Commons in the Original Journal Book of the Upper
House, yet because it is very imperfectly and briefly Entered there, I have
therefore supplied it somewhat largely out of a private Journal of the House of
Commons.

On Friday the 30th day of October about one of the Clock in the Afternoon, her
Majesty came by Water to the Parliament Chamber, commonly called the Upper
House, and being Apparelled in her Royal Robes and placed in her Chair of
State, diverse also of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal being present, the
Knights, Citizens and Burgesses of the House of Commons, who had attended at
the Door of the said House with John Crook Esquire Recorder of London, their
Speaker Elect, the full space of half an hour, were at last as many as
conveniently could let in, and the said Speaker was led up to the Bar or Rayl
at the lower end of the same House, by the hands of Sir William Knolles Knight
Comptroller of her Majesty's Household, and Sir John Fortescue Chancellor of the
Exchequer, and presented to her Majesty, to whom after he had made three low
Reverences he spoke in effect as follows.

MOST Sacred and Mighty Sovereign, Upon your Majesty's Commandment your most
dutiful and loving Commons, the Knights, Citizens and Burgesses of the Lower
House have chosen me your Majesty's most humble Servant being a Member of the
same House, to be their Speaker; but finding the weakness of my self and my
ability too weak to undergo so great a burden, I do most humbly beseech your
Sacred Majesty to continue your most gracious favor toward me, and not to lay
this charge so unsupportable, upon my unworthy and unable Self: And that it
would please you to Command your Commons to make a new Election of another more
able and more sufficient to discharge the great service to be appointed by your
Majesty and your Subjects. And I beseech your most excellent Majesty not to
interpret my denial herein to proceed from any unwillingness to perform all
devoted dutiful service, but rather out of your Majesty's Clemency and Goodness
to interpret the same to proceed from that inward fear and trembling which has
ever possessed me, when heretofore with most gracious Audience it has pleased
your Majesty to License me to speak before you. For I know and must acknowledge
that under God, even through your Majesty's great bounty and favor I am that I
am; And therefore none of your Majesty's most dutiful Subjects more bound to be
ready, and being ready, to perform even the least of your Majesty's
Commandments. I therefore do most humbly beseech your Majesty, that in regard
the Service of so great a Prince and flourishing Kingdom may the better and
more successfully be effected, to Command your dutiful and loving Commons, the
Knights, Citizens and Burgesses of the Lower House, to proceed to a new
Election.

Then after he had made three Reverences, the Queen called the Lord Keeper, to
whom she spoke something in secret; And after, the Lord Keeper spoke in effect
thus much.

Mr Speaker, Her Majesty with gracious attention having heard your wise and
grave excuse for your discharge, Commanded me to say unto you, that even your
Eloquent Speech of defense for your self is a great motive, and a reason very
persuasive both to ratify and approve the choice of the loving Commons, the
Knights, Citizens and Burgesses, as also to commend their wise and discreet
choice of your self in her gracious censure, both for sufficiency well able,
and for your former Fidelity and Services well approved and accepted of: And
therefore her Majesty takes this Choice of you for bonum omen, a sign of good
and happy success, when the beginning is taken in hand with so good Wisdom and
Discretion.

Her Majesty therefore Commanded me to say unto you, that she well likes of
your Election, and therefore she ratifieth it with her Royal Assent.

Then Mr Speaker making three low Reverences Answered in this sort.

MOST Sacred and most Puissant Queen, seeing it has pleased you to Command my
Service by Consenting to the free Election of your dutiful and loyal Subjects,
the Knights, Citizens and Burgesses, of me to be their Speaker, I most humbly
beseech your Majesty to give me leave to show unto you the dutiful thoughts and
earnest affections of your loyal Subjects to do your Majesty all Services, and
to defend your Royal and Sacred Person both with their Lives and Goods,
against, etc. And so made a vehement Invective agaiost the Tyranny of the King
of Spain, the Popes Ambition, the Rebels of Ireland, which he said were like a
Snake cut in pieces, which did crawl and creep to join themselves together
again. And lastly, with Prayers to continue the prosperous Estate and Peace of
this Kingdom, which has been defended as he said by the Mighty Arm of our
Dread and Sacred Queen. To which she Answered openly her self, No, but by the
mighty hand of God, Mr Speaker. Then he proceeded to the last part, to beseech
her Majesty for freedom of Speech to every particular Member of this House and
their Servants. And lastly, if any mistaking of any Message delivered unto him
from the Commons should happen, that her Majesty would attribute that to his
weakness in delivery or understanding, and not to the House, as also any
forgetfulness through want of Memory, or that things were not so judiciously
handled or expressed by him as they were delivered by the House.

To which after the Queen had spoken to the Lord Keeper as aforesaid, (after
three Reverences by the Speaker) the Lord Keeper said in effect as follows.

Mr Speaker, Her Majesty does greatly commend and like of your grave Speech,
well divided, well contrived; the first proceeding from a sound Invention, and
the other from a settled Judgment and Experience. You have well, and well indeed
weighed the Estate of this Kingdom, well observed the greatness of our Puissant
and Grand Enemy the King of Spain, the continual and excessive Charges of the
Wars of Ireland, which if they be well weighed, do not only show the Puissance
of our Gracious Sovereign in defending us, but also the greatness of the charge
continually bestowed by her Majesty even out of her own Revenues to protect us,
and the exposing of her Majesty to continual trouble and toilsome cares for the
benefit and safety of her Subjects. Wherefore Mr Speaker, it behooves us to
think and say, as was well delivered by a grave Man lately in a Concio ad
Clerum, Opus est subsidio me fiat excidium.

Touching your other requests for freedom of Speech, her Majesty willingly
consents thereto, with this Caution, that the time be not spent in idle and
vain matter, painting the same out with froth and volubility of words, whereby
the Speakers may seem to gain some reputed credit by imboldening themselves to
contradiction, and by troubling the House of purpose with long and vain
Orations to hinder the proceeding in matters of greater and more weighty
importance. Touching access to her Person, she most willingly grants the
same, desiring she may not be troubled unless urgent matter and affairs of
great consequence compel you thereunto: for this has been held for a wise
Maxim, In troubling great Estates, you must trouble seldom.

For Liberties unto your selves and persons, her Majesty has Commanded me to
say unto you all, that she ever intends to preserve the Liberties of the
House, and grants freedom even unto the meanest Member of this House: But her
Majesty's Pleasure is, you should not maintain and keep with you notorious
persons either for life or behavior, and desperate Debtors who never come
abroad, fearing Laws, but at these times; Pettifoggers and Vipers of the
Commonwealth; Prolling and Common Sollicitors, that set dissension between Man
and Man; and men of the like condition to these: These her Majesty earnestly
wishes a Law may be made against; as also that no Member of this Parliament
would entertain or bolster up any man of the like humor or quality, on pain of
her Highness displeasure. For your excuse of the House and of your self, Her
Majesty Commanded me to say, that your sufficiency has so oftentimes been
approved before her, that she doubts not of your sufficient discharge of the
place you shall serve in. Wherein she wills you to have a special Eye and
regard not to make new and idle Laws, and trouble the House with them; but
rather look to the abridging and repealing of diverse obsolete and superfluous
Statutes; As also first to take in hand matters of greatest moment and
consequence. In doing thus, Mr Speaker, you shall fulfill her Majesty's
Commandment, do your Country good, and satisfy her Highnesses expectation.
Which being said, the Speaker made three Reverences to the Queen.

Nota, That this foregoing Speech of the Lord Keeper is not found in the
Original Journal Book of the Upper House, but is supplied out of a private
Journal of the House of Commons, out of which also the whole business of this
Afternoon touching the Speakers Presentment, Speech and Allowance are
transcribed. And I have always conceived it most proper to refer the large
relation of these and such like other Speeches and Passages (if warranted by
any good Authority) to the Journals of the Upper House in which they are acted
and delivered, and only for Order to leave some short Memorial of them in the
Journals of the House of Commons.

Now follows the continuance of the Parliament out of the Original Journal Book
of the Upper House, where it is Entered in these words, viz.

Dominus Custos magni Sigilli ex mandato Dominae Reginae continuavit praesens
Parliamentum usque in diem Jovis quintum Mensis Novembris.

After which, (as is set down in the foresaid private Journal) room being made,
the Queen came through the Commons to go to the great Chamber, who graciously
offering her hand to the Speaker he kissed it; but not one word she spoke unto
him; and as she went through the Commons, very few said God save your Majesty,
as they were wont in all great Assemblies; and so she returned back again to
Whitehal by Water.

Now follow the next days Passages out of the Original Journal Book of the
Upper House.

On Thursday the 5th day of November (to which day the Parliament had been last
continued on Friday the 30th day of October foregoing) were two Bills read; of
which the first being for Assurance of Lands, and the second for the restraint
of the excessive and superfluous use of Coaches within the Realm of England,
were each of them read prima vice.

On Saturday the 7th day of November, the Bill for Assurance of Lands was read
secunda vice, and committed unto the Archbishop of Canterbury, the Lord
Treasurer, the Earl of Nottingham, the Earl of Worcester, the Earl of
Cumberland, the Earl of Lincoln, the Lord Bishop of London, the Lord Bishop of
Durham, the Lord Bishop of Winchester, the Lord Zouch, the Lord Cobham, the
Lord Gray, the Lord Rich, the Lord Howard of Walden; and the Lord Chief Justice
of her Majesty's Bench, the Lord Chief Justice of the Common Pleas, the Lord
Chief Baron and Mr Attorney General were appointed to attend their Lordships.

The Bill to restrain the excessive use of Coaches within this Realm of England
was read secunda vice, and rejected.

Hereupon Motion was made by the Lord Keeper, that forasmuch as the said Bill
did in some sort concern the maintenance of Horses within this Realm,
consideration might be had of the Statutes heretofore made and Ordained
touching the breed and maintenance of Horses; And that Mr Attorney General
should peruse and consider of the said Statutes, and of some fit Bill to be
drawn and preferred to the House touching the same, and concerning the use of
Coaches; And that he should acquaint therewith the Committees appointed for the
Bill beforementioned for Assurance of Lands. Which Motion was approved by the
House.

The Bill for the preservation of Pheasants and Partridges was read prima vice.

On Tuesday the 10th day of November, Two Bills had each of them one reading;
of which the second being the Bill for preservation of Pheasants and
Partridges, was read secunda vice, and committed unto the Archbishop of
Canterbury, the Lord Treasurer, the Earl of Nottingham, the Earl of
Northumberland, the Earl of Derby, the Earl of Worcester, the Earl of
Cumberland, the Earl of Pembrook and diverse others to attend the Lords, ( Vide
concerning this attendance of the Judges upon the Lords Committees, on Thursday
the 3d day of this instant November foregoing) who were appointed to meet at
the Little Chamber near the Parliament presence; and the Bill was delivered to
the Archbishop of Canterbury.

On Thursday the 12th day of November (to which day the Parliament had been
last continued on Tuesday foregoing) The Bill concerning Musters, Soldiers and
other things appertaining thereunto, was read secunda vice, and committed unto
the Archbishop of Canterbury, the Lord Treasurer and diverse other Lords both
Spiritual and Temporal; And the Lord Chief Justice of England, the Lord Chief
Justice of the Common Pleas, Mr Justice Walmesley, Mr Justice Warberton, Mr
Sergeant Yelverton and Mr Attorney General were appointed to attend the Lords.

Two Bills were brought up to the Lords from the House of Commons by Sir
William Knolles and Mr Secretary Herbert; of which the first being the Bill
against fraudulent Administration of Intestates goods was read prima vice.

The Bill for Assurance of Lands was this day returned to the House with
certain Amendments by the Lord Archbishop of Canterbury, the first of the
Committees; which Amendments were presently twice read, and thereupon the Bill
was appointed to be engrossed.

Memorandum, That upon the reading of the said Amendments the Lord Bishop of
London, one of the Committees, did offer to speak unto the Bill, or unto the
said Amendments. Whereupon a doubt was moved by the Earl of Nottingham Lord
Steward, whether it were agreeable to the good Order and Ancient Custom of the
House, that the said Lord Bishop being one of the Committees, and dissenting
from the rest in some matter either of the Bill or of the Amendments, might
speak thereunto upon the bringing in and presenting of the Amendments, or no.
Which doubt being upon this occasion propounded in generality to the House by
the Lord Keeper and put to the question, It was adjudged and resolved by the
major part, That any Committee might speak in like case either to the body of
the Bill or to the Amendments upon the bringing in of the same, before it be
engrossed. Upon which resolution Order was given to the Clerk of the
Parliament, that a remembrance or observation thereof should be Entered in the
Journal Book, for the resolving and clearing of the like doubt if it should
happen hereafter. And thereupon after the reading of the Amendments the said
Lord Bishop of London proceeded to his Speech, and the Bill was appointed to be
engrossed as aforesaid. Vide in the Parliament de an. 39 Regin. Eliz. on
Tuesday the 24th day of January.

Memorandum. Report was made unto the House by the Lord Zouch of one William
Hogan an Ordinary Servant of the Queens Majesty, Arrested and Imprisoned upon
an Execution by one John Tolkerne, since the beginning of the Parliament. And a
Motion was likewise made by his Lordship to know the Judgment and resolution of
the House in this point, whether any Ordinary Servant of her Majesty (though he
be none of the Parliament) be not privileged and protected from Arrest during
the time of the Parliament by virtue of his said Service to her Majesty, in
like sort as the Servants of the Lords of the Parliament attending the said
Lords their Masters are privileged and freed for that time from any Arrests of
their Persons: And withal, being Arrested upon Execution, whether in this Case
he may by good Order of this House be discharged. Which Motion and doubt the
Lord Zouch professed that he did the rather propound, because (though there
were diverse Examples of former times touching the Servants of the Lords of the
Parliament) the like to this concerning one of the Queens Servants had not been
(so far as was remembered) brought in question heretofore. And therefore it
pleased the Lords to take knowledge of this Motion, and to give Order that
Tolkerne should be sent for, at whose Suit the Arrest was made; And withal,
that such Precedents as the Clerk of the Parliament could show, should be
looked out and made known to the House. Vide plus concerning this matter on
Monday the 23th day of this instant November following.

On Saturday the 14th day of November, (to which day the Parliament had been
last continued on Thursday foregoing, by occasion of sending for the aforesaid
Tolkerne) request was made by Mr Conisbie Gentleman Usher to the House, and
signified by the Mouth of the Earl of Nottingham Lord Steward, That for as much
as the bringing of any person before the Lords (upon breach of the Privilege
of the House) did appertain (as the said Mr Conisbie supposed and alleged) to
his place, though in the last Parliament (by some mistaking as he thought) the
Sergeant at Arms was employed therein; That therefore their Lordships would be
pleased to confirm and settle such Order, as he might at this time and from
henceforth have the Right of his place in that behalf. Whose request being
considered of by the Lords, it was thought meet, that the Lord Archbishop of
Canterbury, the Lord Treasurer, the Earl of Nottingham, the Earl of Worcester,
the Lord Bishop of Winchester, the Lord Zouch and the Lord Cobham should at
their next meeting upon any other occasion take notice of such Precedents as
could be produced therein, either for the Gentleman Usher or for the Sergeant
at Arms, and thereof to make Report to the House, whereupon their Lordships
would proceed to the deciding of the question between them. Vide concerning
this business on Tuesday the first day of December next following.

The meeting of the Committees about the Bill concerning Musters, Soldiers,
etc. (who were nominated on Thursday the 12th day of this instant November
foregoing, and appointed to meet this Afternoon) was upon Motion to the House,
by some of the Committees, deserr'd until Monday next being the 16th day of
this instant November by eight of the Clock in the Morning.

A Motion was made by the Lord Keeper, that the Gentleman Usher might be sent
to such Lords as are absent from the Parliament, and have not sent their
Proxies, to admonish them thereof.

Five Bills had each of them one reading; of which the second being the Bill
for suppressing the multitude of Alehouses and Tippling-Houses was read
secunda vice, and committed to the Lord Treasurer, the Earl of Worcester, the
Earl of Hartford, the Earl of Lincoln, the Bishop of Winchester, the Bishop of
Lincoln, the Bishop of Bath and Wells, the Bishop of Chester, the Bishop of
Exeter, the Bishop of Ely, the Lord Zouch, the Lord Cobham, the Lord Rich, the
Lord Sheffield, the Lord Chandois, the Lord St John of Bletsoe and the Lord
Compton; and the Lord Chief Justice of England, Mr Justice Gaudy, Mr Baron
Savile and Mr Sergeant Yelverton were appointed to attend their Lordships.

The third Bill also being for the avoiding of unnecessary delays of
Executions upon Judgment in Debt was read secunda vice, and committed unto the
Lord Treasurer, the Earl of Worcester, the Earl of Pembrook, the Bishop of
Rochester, the Bishop of Worcester, the Bishop of St Asaph, the Lord Cobham,
the Lord Chandois, the Lord St John of Bletsoe; and Mr Justice Gaudy, Mr Baron
Savile and Mr Sergeant Yelverton were appointed to attend their Lordships.

The Lord Zouch renewed his former motion concerning the Arrest of William
Hogan her Majesty's Ordinary servant, at the suit of John Tolkerne. Whereupon
the Clerk of the Parliament was required to show forth all such Precedents as
he had found touching the Arrests of any Persons privileged by Parliament,
having received directions from the Lords for that purpose as is before
Recorded; of which sort out of the Journal Book remaining in his custody there
were to be found only these four hereunder mentioned, and no more.

1. Anno 27. Reginae Fliz. die Martis, primo die Decembris, of James Diggs
servant to my Lords Grace of Canterbury.

2. Anno 27. Reginae Eliz. die Lunae 7. Die Decembris, of Robert Finneis
servant to the Lord Viscount Binden.

3. Item, in the last Parliament of 39 Eliz. 26. die Novembris, of Edward
Barston servant to the Lord Chandois; and 8. die Decembris of John York the
Lord Archbishops servant.

4. Item Anno 14. Reginae die ultimo Junii, It appears that the Lord Cromwell
made complaint unto the Parliament of an Attachment served upon his Person; and
that his Lordship was by Order of the Parliament discharged of the Attachment:
but whether this Attachment was served in the time of the Parliament, it does
not certainly appear.

Which said Precedents being accordingly presented to the Lord Keeper, the same
were presently read, together with certain Observations out of a Book written
by Richard Crompton Esquire, Entitled the Authority and Jurisdiction of the
Queens Courts, concerning the proceedings of the House in the like case of
George Ferrers Gent. an ordinary servant to King Henry 8. about the thirty
fourth year of his Reign.

This being done, albeit sundry Motions were thereupon made by diverse of the
Lords for a present proceeding in this matter, nevertheless because the said
Tolkerne having been formerly sent for, could not yet be found, and also in
respect there was less appearance of the Lords this day than at other times,
and this matter concerning the privilege of the House, was of great
importance, and therefore required a more full Assembly, Stay was made of any
further proceeding until Thursday next being the 19th day of this instant
November: And in the mean time it was Ordered, that Tolkerne should again be
sent for, to appear before the Lords in the House that day by nine of the Clock
in the Morning. Vide concerning this matter on Monday the 23th day of this
Instant November following.

On Monday the 16th day of November (to which day the Parliament had been last
continued on Saturday foregoing,) the Bill for reuniting Eye and Dunsden to the
Manor of Sunning was read secunda vice.

Motion was made by the Lord Sheffield upon reading of this Bill, that Thomas
Crompton, Son of Thomas Crompton Esquire deceased, with Henry Best, Francis
Jackson and others whom it may concern, should be heard in the House, whether
they or any of them could pretend any right or Interest in these Lands in
respect of a Grant heretofore made thereof by her Majesty to the said Thomas
Crompton. Which Motion was well approved by the House; and Ordered, that the
Gentleman Usher should move the said parties to appear before their Lordships
in the House for that purpose upon Saturday next the 21. day of this Instant
November by eight of the Clock in the Morning, and to bring them such persons
as are interested in the Conveyance of those Lands. Vide December 7th Monday
postea.

Memorandum, That the Committees upon the Bill for Musters and Soldiers (who
were appointed to meet this Afternoon on Thursday the 12th day of this instant
November foregoing) have upon a Motion to the House appointed another meeting
about the same, upon Thursday Morning next, being the 19th day of this instant
November before the House sit.

Three Bills of no great moment had each of them one reading; of which the last
being the Bill for establishing of the Remainder of certain Lands of Andrew
Kettlebie Esquire upon Francis Kettlebie, was read the first time.

Upon reading whereof it was Ordered by the Lords, that Andrew Kettlebie Esquire
and Jane his Wife (whom the Bill concerns) should be heard in the House,
either by themselves or by any other person or persons sufficiently deputed and
appointed by them in that behalf, what they could answer and allege concerning
the same. And the Gentleman Usher was appointed to give them present notice of
this Order.

A Motion was made again by some of the Lords touching William Hogan Prisoner
in the Fleet, that he might be sent for out of the said Prison and brought into
the House before the Lords, to the end he might make relation of his Cause,
that thereupon such Order might be speedily taken with him as should by the
Court be found meet and agreeable to the privilege of the said Court. Upon
which Motion it was debated by what course the said Hogan should be brought out
of the Fleet, being then in Execution, whether by Warrant to be directed from
the Lords to the Lord Keeper, requiring him to grant forth a Writ in her
Majesty's name for the bringing of the said Hagan from thence, or by immediate
direction and order from the House to the Gentleman Usher or Sergeant at Arms,
without any such Writ. Which being put to the question by the Lord Keeper, it
was resolved and Ordered by the general consent of the House, that it should be
done by immediate direction and Order from the House without any such Writ as
aforesaid. And accordingly Ordered, that the said William Hogan should be sent
for and brought before the Lords by the Gentleman Usher into the said House of
Parliament upon Thursday next being the 19th day of this instant November, by
nine of the Clock in the Morning. Vide touching this business on Monday the
23th day of this instant November ensuing.

Dominus Custos Magni Sigilli continuavit praesens Parliamentum usque in diem
Jovis, viz. 19 diem Novembris.

On Thursday the 19th day of November, the Bill for Breed and increase of
Horses of Service within the Realm, was read prima vice.

Two Bills were brought up to the Lords from the House of Commons; of which the
second was to avoid and prevent diverse misdemeanors in lewd and idle persons;
And the third was for confirmation of Grants made to the Queens Majesty, and of
Letters Patents made by her Highness to others. Touching which Bill see at
large on Thursday the 17th day of December following.

The Lord Mordant not able to attend for want of Health certified by the Lord
Compton.

This day William Hogan was brought from the Fleet into the House before the
Lords, who having made (as he was required to do) relation of his Arrest, and
of the time, and parties that Arrested him, declaring that he was Arrested by
the Undersheriff of the County of Surrey and others assisting him, upon
Saturday before the beginning of the Parliament (which began on the Tuesday
following) and that it was known to the said Undersheriff that he was her
Majesty's Ordinary Servant, and moreover that he thought Tolkerne was not privy
to his Arrest at that time contrary to the privilege of that Court; Upon the
offer and Petition of the said William Hogan himself to pay the principal Debt
of fifty Pounds, it was Resolved and Ordered by the Lords, that the said
William Hogan should enter into sufficient to abide the Order and Judgment of
the Earl of Cumberland, the Lord Bishop of London and the Lord Zouch, for such
satisfaction to be made of the debt of fifty pounds, and any costs and charges,
as by the said Lords should be thought fit, (the Bond to be taken to the said
Lords) and thereupon be discharged out of Prison and out of Execution: And
likewise that the Warden of the Fleet should be free from any trouble, damage
or molestation for discharge of the said William Hogan. It was likewise Ordered
by the Court that the Undersheriff and any others that did Arrest or assist
the Arrest of the said William Hogan, shall be sent for to appear before the
Lords in the House on Saturday next being the 21th day of this instant November
by nine of the Clock in the Morning. Vide concerning this matter on Monday the
23th day of this instant November ensuing.

On Saturday the 21th day of November, to which day the Parliament had been
last continued on Thursday foregoing, Three Bills had each of them one reading;
of which the last being the Bill for Assurance of Lands was read tertia vice.

Upon the reading of which said Bill sundry Objections were made against some
points of the same by the Lord Bishop of London and diverse others of the Lords,
insomuch that the House was divided in opinion whether it should be put to the
question for the passing thereof or no; Many of the Lords affecting well the
said Bill, and wishing that any defect therein might be rather reformed than by
the question to put it to the hazard of being rejected. By which occasion it
was thought meet, first to propound another question, viz. whether the said
Bill having been referred to Committees at the second reading, and been by them
returned with some Amendments, and thereupon appointed to be engrossed, may now
after the engrossing thereof and third reading be committed again or no. Which
being accordingly put to the question, and the number both of the affirmative
part and negative, falling out to be equal (upon the accompting of them by the
Lord Bishop of London and the Lord Gray appointed by the Lords for that
purpose) it was adjudged that the Voices of the negative part which were
against the new committing of the Bill should prevail, following therein the
usual rule of Law (whereof the Lord Keeper made mention) that where the numbers
of the affirmative and negative are equal, semper praesumitur pro negante. And
after that the Bill it self being put to the question, whether it should pass
or no, was by the major part denied and refused.

A Motion was made by the Lord Keeper and approved by the Lords, that the
ancient course of the House may be observed hereafter, in certifying the
excuses of such Lords as should be absent from the House upon reasonable
occasion, which ought to be done by one of their Peers, and not by other
Information.

Thomas Crompton, Henry Best and Francis Jackson made their appearance in the
House, and being demanded whether the Bill concerning Eye and Dunsden might
lawfully pass without their prejudice; they Answered, that it might so do, and
that they could take no exceptions at it. Vide Dec. 7th Monday postea.

Hodie introduction est breve Francisci Domini Norris qui praesenti Parliamento
interesse summonebatur, and admissus est ad praeheminentiae sedendi in
Parliamento locum, salvo jure alieno.

On Monday the 23th day of November, to which day the Parliament had been last
continued on Saturday foregoing, the Bill for reuniting Eye and Dunsden to the
Manor of Sunning was read tertia vice, and sent down to the House of Commons
by Mr Doctor Stanhop and Mr Hone.

The Bill to avoid and prevent diverse misdemeanors in lewd and idle persons was
read secunda vice.

Nota, That there is no mention at all in the Original Journal Book of the
referring of this Bill unto Committees upon the second reading thereof, nor yet
that it was Ordered to be engrossed: By which it may seem, that either the
omission of it did happen by the negligence of Thomas Smith Esquire now Clerk
of the Upper House, who did forget to set down the referring of it to
Committees (if it were at all committed) or else that it being not committed,
was engrossed of Course. And it is the rather probable, that this happened not
by any omission of the said Clerk, in respect that diverse other Bills at this
Parliament are set down in the Original Journal Book of the said Upper House to
have been read the second time without any further mention either of the
Commitment or engrossing, as on Wednesday the 2d day, Friday the 4th day,
Wednesday the 9th day, Saturday the 12th day, Monday the 14th day, and on
Wednesday the 16th day of December next ensuing.

The Bill for Confirmation of Grants made to the Queen and of Letters Patents
made by her Highness to others, was read secunda vice and committed unto the
Lord Archbishop of Canterbury and others (who were appointed to meet at the
great Council Chamber) And the Bill was delivered to the said Lord Archbishop
of Canterbury the first of the Committees.

The Bill for increase and breed of Horses of service within this Realm was
read secunda vice, and committed unto the Earl of Nottingham Lord Steward, and
others; And the Bill was delivered unto him being the first of the Committees.
Vide November 26th Thursday.

The meeting of the Committees upon the Bills concerning the suppressing of the
multitude of Alehouses, and for the avoiding of unnecessary delays of
Executions upon Judgments in Debt (who were appointed on Saturday the 14th day
of this instant November foregoing) was upon a Motion of the Lord Treasurer
appointed to be upon Thursday next at the little Chamber near the Parliament
presence before the House sit, for that the Committees could not conveniently
meet at the times formerly appointed for the same.

The Undersheriff of the County of Surry that Arrested William Hogan was
brought into the House to Answer for the same, and by Order of the House
committed to the Prison of the Fleet. Vide concerning this matter on Thursday
the 12th day, Saturday the 14th day, Monday the 16th day, and on Thursday the
19th day of this instant November foregoing; as also on Thursday the 26th day
of the same Month following.

On Tuesday the 24th day of November, Three Bills of no great moment had each
of them one reading; of which the last being the Bill for the establishing of
the remainder of certain Lands of Andrew Kettlebie was read secunda vice, and
committed unto the Earl of Worcester, the Lord Cobham, the Lord Chandois and
the Lord Howard of Walden; And the Bill was delivered unto the said Lord
Howard, who with the rest was appointed to meet on Saturday next by two of the
Clock in the Afternoon at the Chamber of Parliament Presence.

This day the Wife of Andrew Kettlebie made her appearance in the House in the
behalf of her Husband and her Self, excusing his not coming by reason of his
great Age and Infirmities; And withal prayed that their Council Learned might
be heard. Whereupon it was Ordered, that both their Council and the Council of
Francis Kettlebie should be heard in the House upon Thursday next being the
26th of this instant November, in the Morning.

On Thursday the 26th day of November, to which day the Parliament had been
last continued on Thursday foregoing, one Bill being for the more peaceable
Government of the parts of Cumberland, Northumberland, Westmerland and the
Bishopric of Durham was read the second time and committed: But in respect
that the manner of committing Bills during all this Parliament was the same,
and that the Judges and her Majesty's Learned Council were always appointed to
attend the Lords Committees and never made Joint-Committees with them, as is at
large observed in the next precedent Parliament, therefore the names of the
said Committees are for the most part omitted.

It was Ordered by the House upon the humble Petition of William Hone
Undersheriff of the County of Surrey, that he should be enlarged and set at
liberty out of the Prison of the Fleet, whither he was lately committed for
Arresting William Hogan her Majesty's Servant. Vide concerning this matter on
Monday the 23th day of this instant November foregoing.

The Council of Andrew Kettlebie Esquire and Francis Kettlebie were heard in the
House; And thereupon the Committees of the said Bill were appointed to meet
upon Saturday next by two of the Clock in the Afternoon at the Chamber of
Parliament Presence; And the Lord Archbishop of Canterbury, the Lord Gray and
the Lord Windsor were added unto the said Committees; And the Lord Chief
Justice of the Common Pleas to attend with the others formerly appointed: And
the Bill was delivered to the Lord Howard of Walden.

Nota, That here the Bill was delivered to the Lord Howard of Walden being the
puisne Baron of the Committees; and on Monday the 23th day of this instant
November foregoing, two several Bills being committed, the one of them was
delivered to the Archbishop of Canterbury, and the other to the Earl of
Nottingham, who were each of them the first or chief of either of the said
Committees: By which it is plain, that as well in the Upper House as in the
House of Commons, after any Bill is committed upon the second reading, it may
be delivered indifferently to any of the said Committees. Vide also concerning
this matter on Tuesday Dec. 8th ensuing. And so the Parliament continued until
Tuesday the first day of December. On which day two Bills had each of them one
reading; of which the second being the Bill for confirmation of all Leases made
and to be made according to the true intent of the last Will and Testament of
George Lord Cobham Deceased, was read prima vice.

Six Bills were brought up to the Lords from the House of Commons by Sir
William Knolles, Mr Secretary Herbert and others; of which the fifth was the
Bill for the enabling of Edward Nevill of Berling in the County of Kent, and
Sir Henry Nevill Knight, his Son and Heir Apparent, to dispose of certain
Copyhold Lands parcel of the Manor of Rothersield in the County of Sussex, and
of the Manor of Ailesby and Felding in the County of Warwick.

And the sixth being the Bill to avoid trifling and frivolous Suits of Law in
her Majesty's Courts of Westminster, was read prima vice.

Whereas the Lords Spiritual and Temporal of the Higher Court of Parliament
were this day informed that one William Vaughan Servant to the Earl of
Shrewsbury was of late Arrested, contrary to the privilege of the said Court,
by the procurement of one William Crayford of Mongcham in Kent, and committed
to the Prison of Newgate, where he yet remains; It was therefore Ordered by
the said Court, that a Sergeant at Arms shall be sent to the Keeper of that
Prison, and require him in their Lordships names to bring the said William
Vaughan before the Lords in his Company into the Upper House of Parliament to
Morrow being the second day of this Instant December by nine of the Clock in
the Morning; and that the said Sergeant at Arms shall also bring before the
Lords at the time and place prefixed the said William Crayford, together with
such other Persons as did either Arrest or assist the Arresting of the said
William Vaughan. Vide on Saturday the 19th day of the Month following.

Memorandum that the Sergeant at Arms was this day sent for the parties above
mentioned in like sort as the Gentleman Usher had been formerly sent for
others: And forasmuch as the Committees that were appointed on Saturday the
14th day of November foregoing to decide the question between them in that
behalf, had not yet performed the same, It was therefore Commanded by the House
that a remembrance should be made that the sending for any parties before the
Lords at this time or heretofore by the Gentleman Usher or Sergeant at Arms,
should not be prejudicial to either of their rights, until the said Committees
should have convenient time to consider of and decide this question betwixt
them. Vide November the 14th Saturday foregoing.

Upon a Motion made to the House by the Lord Treasurer, it was agreed, that the
Committees in the two several Bills, the one concerning Musters and Soldiers
(who were appointed on Thursday the 12th day of November foregoing) and the
other for confirmation of Letters Patents (who were appointed on Monday the
twenty third day of November foregoing) should join in one Committee for both
Bills.

Nota, That although it be ordinary for a Committee upon some new occasion to
be increased in the number, or for diverse Bills to be referred to one and the
same Committee; yet I conceive this Precedent here immediately foregoing to be
very rare and exotic, in respect that two several Committees appointed at
several times in two several Bills, are united together and made as one
Committee to both the said Bills.

On Wednesday the second day of December three Bills had each of them one
reading; of which the first being the Bill to avoid trifling and frivolous
suits in Law in her Majesty's Courts at Westminster, and the second being the
Bill for the Denization of certain persons, were each of them read secunda vice
and committed.

Nota, That here were two several bills read secunda vice, but no mention made
either of their Commitment or Engrossing; The supposed Cause or reason of which
omission see more at large on Monday the 23. day of November foregoing.

The Bill concerning the suppressing of the multitude of Alehouses, etc. was
returned to the House by the Lord Treasurer with certain Amendments.

William Crayford by whose procurement and assistance William Vaughan the Earl
of Shrewsburys servant was Arrested and committed to Newgate; and one
Millington an Attorney, the said Crayfords Master, as also the Undersheriff of
Middlesex, and another Person that was Bailiff with Crayford in Arresting the
said Willam Vaughan; all which persons having been heard particularly by the
Lords, and the said Millington, the Undersheriff and Crayfords fellow Bailiff
protesting that they knew not the said Vaughan to be a man privileged by the
Parliament at the time of the Arrest, It was Ordered that the said Millington,
the Undersheriff and the said Bailiff should be dismissed for that Cause: But
forasmuch as by the confession of the Undersheriff it does plainly appear to
the Lords, that the said Crayford had very maliciously and upon unnecessary
suits, that did not concern himself, prosecuted the serving and laying of
sundry Executions upon William Vaughan, it was thought meet and so Ordered,
that he should be committed to the Prison of the Fleet: And because also the
Keeper of Newgate having seen their Lordships Order by the hands of the
Sergeant at Arms for the bringing of the said Vaughan did not perform the same,
pretending he could not with his safety remove him out of Prison being in
Execution, he was in like sort committed to the Fleet for neglecting the said
Order. And for the Prisoner William Vaughan the Lords resolved to enter into
some further consideration for the bringing of him before them into the House.
And thereupon their resolution concerning the same was respited until some
other time. Vide concerning this matter on Saturday the 19th day of this
instant December following.

On Thursday the 3d day of December two Bills had each of them one reading; of
which the second being the Bill for enabling of Edward Nevil of Berling in the
County of Kent, and Sir Henry Nevil Knight his Son and Heir apparent, to
dispose of certain Copyhold Lands parcel of the Manor of Rotherfield in the
County of Sussex, and of the Manor of Aylesby and Felding in the County of
Warwick was read prima vice.

The Amendments of the Bill against the multitude of Alehouses and
Tipling-Houses were this day twice read; And thereupon the Bill Ordered to be
Engrossed.

Three Bills had each of them one reading; of which the first being the Bill
for Assurance of certain Manors and Lands for part of a Jointure to Lucy
Countess of Bedford was read prima vice.

Two Bills were brought up to the Lords from the House of Commons; of which the
first being the Bill against Drunkards and Common Haunters of Alehouses and
Taverns was read prima vice.

The Lords were this day informed by the Earl of Worcester of an Arrest made of
the person of Robert Treswell Somerset, one of her Majesty's Heralds at Arms in
Ordinary, at the Suit of one Margery Fitchet of London. Whereupon it was
Ordered by the Court, that the Sergeant at Arms should be sent for the said
Margaret Fitchet, and for William Smith and William Lane that made the Arrest,
and should bring them before the Lords into the Upper House to Morrow being the
4th day of this instant December; And that the said Sergeant should also bring
Robert Treswell himself at the time and place prefixed. Vide concerning this
matter on Tuesday the 8th day of this instant December following.

Motion was made by the Lord Keeper on the behalf of the Lord Chandois,
signifying that his Lordship was constrained to repair into the Country for the
finding of an Office which did greatly import him in his Estate, and therefore
desired their Lordships allowance of his absence for some few days, whereunto
they willingly assented.

Memorandum, That whereas it was formerly Ordered, that the Keeper of the
Prison of Newgate, having in his Custody, William Vaughan Servant to the Earl
of Shrewsbury upon Execution, should bring the person of the said William
Vaughan on Wednesday the second day of this instant December, before the Lords
Spiritual and Temporal into the Upper House of the High Court of Parliament; of
which Order the said Keeper having taken notice by a Sergeant at Arms, did
notwithstanding refuse to bring the said Prisoner into the Court, and for the
said refusal and contempt was the same day by Order of the Court committed to
the Prison of the Fleet; And Order likewise was given that such Precedents as
could be found touching the proceeding of the Court in like case of Arrest in
Execution should be produced at the next sitting of the said Court: It is
therefore upon view and consideration of diverse Precedents and Remembrances
produced this day, and differing from the manner of proceeding Ordered by the
said Court, that the Lord Keeper shall forthwith make out a Writ of privilege
of Parliament to the Sheriffs of London and Middlesex, to have the body of the
said Prisoner William Vaughan with the Cause of his Imprisonment before the
said High Court at the Upper House to Morrow the 4th day of this instant
December by eight of the Clock in the Morning. Vide December 19th Saturday
postea.

A Copy of the Order last above-specified concerning William Vaughan subscribed
by the Clerk of the Parliament, was delivered to the Lord Keeper for making out
of the Writ.

On Friday the 4th day of December, the Bill against Drunkards and Common
Haunters of Alehouses and Taverns, The Bill for levying of Fines with
Proclamation of Lands within the City of Chester, The Bill for enabling of
Edward Nevil of Berling in the County of Kent, and Sir Henry Nevil Knight, etc.
And the Bill for Confirmation of Letters Patents made by King Edward the Sixth
to Sir Edward Seymour Knight, were each of them read secunda vice: But no
mention made either of their Commitment or Engrossing; the supposed cause or
reason of which omission see more at large on Monday the 23th day of November
foregoing.

The Bill for the suppressing of the multitude of Alehouses and Tippling Houses
was read tertia vice, and sent to the House of Commons by Mr Doctor Carew and
Mr Coppin Clerk of the Crown.

Two Bills also had each of them one reading; of which the first being the Bill
for the assurance of certain Lands for part of a Jointure to Lucy Countess of
Bedford, was read the second time and committed to the Earl of Worcester and
others, who were appointed to meet at the Earl of Worcesters Chamber at the
Court to Morrow by two of the Clock in the Afternoon; And the Bill was
delivered to the said Earl of Worcester.

Whereas Order was taken at the last sitting of the Court of Parliament, viz.
3o die Decembris, that a Writ of Privilege of Parliament should be made out by
the Lord Keeper unto the Sheriffs of London and Middlesex for the having of the
body of William Vaughan Prisoner in Newgate, together with the Cause of his
Imprisonment before the said Court this present day, the said Writ having been
thereupon made out by the Lord Keeper, and the same together with the said
Prisoner William Vaughan and the Cause of his Imprisonment being returned and
brought this day into the Court by the Undersheriff of the County of
Middlesex, and the said Prisoner William Vaughan having there made Declaration
of the notorious frauds and practices used by William Crayford and others, for
the Arresting of the said Vaughan; And likewise Crayford having been heard what
he could say for himself in that behalf; Forasmuch as it appeared unto the
Lords, that besides the breach of the Privilege of the said High Court, the
said Crayford had fraudulently and maliciously taken out and laid upon the said
Vaughan diverse Writs of Execution and Outlawry of many years past, and utterly
without the privity and knowledge of most of the parties to whom the said Suits
appertained, of which parties some were avowed to have been a good while since
Deceased: It is therefore agreed and Ordered by the general consent of the
Court, That the said William Vaughan shall be forthwith discharged out of
Prison and Execution, and the said Sheriff shall be free from any trouble,
damage or molestation for his said discharge. And it is likewise Ordered, that
for satisfaction of any such Debts as shall be found due to be paid by the said
Vaughan upon the Arrest mentioned and recited in the aforesaid return of the
Sheriffs Writ, the said Vaughan shall enter into sufficient Bond to stand to
such Order as shall be set down by certain of the Lords of the Parliament,
namely the Earl of Worcester, the Earl of Pembrook, the Lord Bishop of Durham,
the Lord Bishop of Winchester, the Lord Windsor and the Lord St John, to whom
by the Court the Ordering thereof is committed. And moreover it is Ordered,
that the said Crayford shall be returned to the Prison of the Fleet, and kept
Close Prisoner until further direction be given for his Enlargement; And that
the Keeper of Newgate lately Committed to the Fleet for not bringing the
Prisoner into the Court, shall be presently discharged. Vide concerning this
matter on Saturday the 19th day of this instant December following.

On Saturday the 5th of December, the Bill for maintenance of the Navy,
increase of Mariners, and avoiding the scarcity of Victuals was read prima vice.

Report was made to the House by the Lord Archbishop of Canterbury, the first
of the Committees in the Bill concerning Musters, Soldiers, etc. (whose names
see before on Thursday the 12th day of November foregoing) that the said
Committees having oftentimes met and conferred about that Bill did find so many
imperfections in the same, as it could not conveniently be amended; And
therefore thought it meet to draw a new Bill instead thereof, which he
presented to the House.

The Bill Entitled An Act for the more peaceable Government of the parts of
Cumberland, Northumberland, etc. was returned to the House with certain
Amendments, which Amendments were presently twice read, and thereupon the Bill
commanded to be engrossed.

The Bill concerning Captains, Soldiers and others; retained in the Queen
Services in the Wars, was read prima vice.

One Bill was brought up to the Lords from the House of Commons, by Mr
Comptroller, Mr Secretary Cecill, Sir John Fortescue, Mr Secretary Herbert and
others, which being for reformation of deceits and frauds of certain Auditors
and their Clerks, in making deceitful and untrue particulars, was read prima
vice.

Upon Complaint made to the House by the Lord Archbishop of Canterbury of great
disorders committed by certain Pages and others belonging to some of their
Lordships, or to some of the House of Commons, in offering violence to diverse
persons, and particularly to his Lordships Bargeman, but especially to one
George Percivall a Servant to the Lord Bishop of Peterborough who was abused
and beaten as was informed by one of Sir John Harrington's Servants named.....
It was Ordered by the Court, that the Committees under-named shall call the
said Percivall and..... before them upon Monday next, being the 7th day of this
instant December, at the Parliament Chamber, and upon Examination of the matter
shall inflict such punishment on the Offender as they shall find Cause; And it
is likewise Ordered, that the Lord Keeper shall conser with the Speaker of the
House of Commons for some course to be considered of and taken for reformation
of like abuses hereafter.

Committees to examine the abuses offered by Sir John Harrington's Servant to a
Servant of the Lord Bishop of Peterborough, the Earl of Lincoln, the Lord
Bishop of London, and the Lord Zouch.

On Monday the 7th day of December, Two Bills had each of them one reading; of
which the first being the Bill for the more peaceable Government of the parts
of Cumberland, Northumberland, Westmerland, the Bishopric of Durham, was read
tertia vice, and sent down to the House of Commons by Doctor Carew and Mr
Doctor Stanhop.

The Bill to avoid double payment of Debts was brought up to the Lords from the
House of Commons by Mr Comptroller, Sir Edward Hobbie and others.

Four Bills also had each of them one reading; of which the third being the
Bill for Confirmation as well of all Grants made to the Queens Majesty, and of
all Resumptions made by her Highness, of the Possessions of any Archbishopric
or Bishopric, as of Letters Patents made by her Majesty to others, was read
prima vice.

The Bill for Reformation of Grants made to the Queen, and by Letters Patents
made by her Highness to others, was this day returned to the House with certain
Amendments by the Lord Treasurer the first of the Committees. Vide concerning
this Bill on Thursday the 17th day of this instant December following.

Memorandum, That upon a Motion made this 7th day of December to the House by
the Lord Zouch, that the Lady Fane by her Letters to Sir Anthony Mildmay, had
signified that she had not given her consent to the passing of the Bill
concerning the enabling of Edward Nevill and Sir Henry Nevill his Son to
dispose of certain Copyhold Lands, etc. as was mentioned in the said Bill; the
said Sir Anthony Mildmay was called before their Lordships, who produced the
said Letter, and the same was read in the House: And thereupon it was Ordered,
that any further proceeding in the Bill should be respited until Wednesday next
by ten of the Clock in the Forenoon, at what time the Lady Fane might be heard
what she could say against the same, if she would then be present. Vide
concerning this business on Wednesday the 9th day of this instant December
ensuing.

This day Sir William Knolles, Sir Edward Hobbie Knights, with diverse others of
the House of Commons, delivered a Message from the Knights and Burgesses of the
said House, desiring Conference with some of their Lordships about the Bill
concerning the uniting of Eye and Dunsden to the Manor of Sunning. Upon
delivery of which Message, after the said Sir William Knolles and the rest had
a little withdrawn themselves, and then upon propounding of this Motion to the
House the Lords had assented thereunto, Answer was made by the Lord Keeper
(sitting in his place and the rest of the Lords also keeping their places) unto
the said Sir William Knolls, etc. that the Lords had yielded to the Conference,
and had appointed certain Committees (under-named) to meet with some select
persons of the House of Commons for that purpose, viz. the Lord Treasurer, the
Lord Steward, the Lord Bishop of London, the Lord Bishop of Winchester, the
Lord Zouch and the Lord Cobham, appointed to meet at the Outer Chamber near the
Parliament Presence to Morrow the 8th day of this instant December by eight of
the Clock in the Morning. Vide concerning this matter on Monday the 16th day,
and on Saturday the 21th day of November foregoing.

On Tuesday the 8th day of December, Six Bills had each of them one reading; of
which the last being the Bill concerning Captains and Soldiers and other the
Queens Services in the Wars, was read secunda vice, and committed to the
Committees, formerly appointed for the first Bill of that kind (whose names see
before on Thursday the 12th day of November) with addition of the Lord Windsor;
and the said Committees to meet about the said Bill upon the first opportunity
of meeting about any other Bill; and the Bill was delivered to the Earl of
Nottingham Lord Steward the third of the Committees.

Nota, That here this Bill was delivered to the Earl of Nottingham being the
third of the Committees, of whom the Lord Archbishop of Canterbury and the Lord
Treasurer were the two first: Whereas on Monday the 23th day of November
foregoing, a Bill being committed upon the second reading was delivered unto
the Archbishop of Canterbury the first of the Committees; And on Thursday the
26th day of the same Month upon the Commitment also of a Bill in the like
manner, it was delivered unto the Lord Howard of Walden being the puisne Baron
or last of the Committees. By which it is plain, that as well in the Upper
House as in the House of Commons, after any Bill is committed upon the second
reading, it may be delivered indifferently to any of the said Committees.

A Proviso was offered by the Earl of Worcester in the behalf of the Earl of
Shrewsbury, to be annexed unto the Bill Entitled An Act for Confirmation of
Grants made to the Queens Majesty, and of Letters Patents made by her Highness
to others. Which Proviso together with the Amendments in the said Bill
(returned Yesterday to the House by the Committees) were presently read. And
forasmuch as the Lords desired a speedy proceeding in this Bill, they sent Dr
Carew and Dr Stanhop to the House of Commons, to move them that some meet
persons of that House might join in Conference with the Lords being to the
number of twenty or thereabouts, concerning the Proviso and Amendments
aforesaid; And that the meeting about the same might be at the Outward Chamber
near the Parliament Presence to Morrow the 9th day of this instant December by
eight of the Clock in the Morning. Upon delivery of which Message to the House
of Commons they assented accordingly to the Motion made in that behalf. Vide
concerning this matter on Thursday the 17th day of this instant December
ensuing.

Upon a Motion sent this day from the House of Commons by Sir Walter Raleigh,
Sir Francis Hastings, Sir Edward Hobbie and others, signifying that they
desired Conference with some of their Lordships for certain matters concerning
the Honor of both Houses, the Lords hereafter named were Selected and Chosen
to confer thereabout with such as should be nominated and sent by the House of
Commons, and the time and place of meeting appointed upon Thursday next, being
the 10th day of this instant December, by eight of the Clock in the Morning, at
the Outward Chamber near the Parliament Presence, which was signified to Sir
Walter Raleigh and the rest in Answer of their Message. The Lord Archbishop of
Canterbury, the Lord Treasurer, the Earl of Nottingham Lord Steward, the Earl
of Northumberland, the Earl of Worcester, the Bishop of London, the Bishop of
Durham and the Bishop of Winchester, the Lord Zouch, the Lord La Ware, the Lord
Cobham and the Lord Howard of Walden.

This day the Lord Archbishop of Canterbury, the first of the Committees in the
Bill concerning Andrew and Francis Kettlebie (whose names see before on Tuesday
the 24th day of November) made Report to the House, that the said Committees
did desire and had endeavored to make some agreement betwixt the parties, by
procuring the Wife of Andrew Kettlebie to accept of reasonable Conditions for
her Estate, which they held to be a better course than that the Bill should
proceed absolutely without any help for the said Wife: But forasmuch as the
said Committees could not prevail therein with her (who utterly refused all
composition) they therefore returned the Bill again to the House without
alteration in such sort as they received the same; Thereupon Order was given
for engrossing thereof.

The matter concerning the Arrest of Robert Treswel Sommerset one of the
Heralds, was referred to her Majesty's Commissioners for those Causes that
concern the Lord Marshalls Office, and the parties that were sent for to be
discharged. Vide on Thursday the third day of this instand December foregoing.

The Lord Burleigh not able to attend for want of health signified by the Lord
Keeper.

On Wednesday the 9th day of December Mr..... being of Council with the Lady
Fane, was heard in the House what he could say in her behalf against the Bill
of Edward Nevill and Sir Henry Nevill his Son. Whereupon the Lords finding no
Cause why the proceeding of the said Bill should be longer stayed or forborne,
Order was presently given for the third reading thereof.

The Bill for the enabling of Edward Nevill of Berling in the County of Kent
and Sir Henry Nevill Knight his Son and Heir apparent, to dispose of certain
Copyhold Lands, was read tertia vice.

Upon the third reading of which said Bill, and before the putting thereof to
the question whether it should pass or no, the Lady Fane yielded her consent to
the passing of the same, being thereunto persuaded by sundry of the Lords. Vide
concerning this matter on Monday the 7th day of this instant December foregoing.

The Bill to avoid the double payment of Debts was read secunda vice, but no
mention is made either of the Commitment or engrossing thereof, the supposed
cause or reason of which omission see more at large on Monday the 23d day of
November foregoing.

The Lord Treasurer made Report that the Committees in the Bill concerning
Letters Patents and Conveyances, etc. could not proceed to any certain
Conference with those that were sent from the House of Commons for that
purpose, in respect of some doubts that were conceived, whether the Proviso
offered to be annexed thereunto were necessary or no. And thereupon Mr Attorney
General was required to deliver his opinion in that behalf. Which being done by
him accordingly to this effect, That he thought the said Proviso to be needless
and unnecessary, and the Judges also concurring with him in that opinion:
Nevertheless upon a motion made by the Lord Bishop of London, that the Council
learned of the Earl of Shrewsbury and Mr Holcroft (whom the said Proviso did
concern in particular) might be heard in the House as they desired touching the
same; it was thought meet and agreeable to the honor and dignity of the House,
that they should be so heard: To which end their Council were appointed to give
their Attendance to Morrow the 10th day of this instant December by eight of
the Clock in the Morning.

And moreover for the better satisfaction of the House of Commons for the
present, Mr Sergeant Yelverton, Mr Dr Carew and Mr Dr Stanhop were sent unto
them with this Message, to signify their Lordships desire to have proceeded to
Conference with them this Morning about the said Bill (as was yesterday
appointed) And that the Lords were the more willing to give furtherance to the
expediting of the said Bill, in regard the same was especially recommended unto
their Lordships from the said House: But forasmuch as they found not themselves
sufficiently prepared for this Conference, by reason of doubts that were not
yet cleared unto them, they desired the said Conference might be respited till
Friday Morning next by eight of the Clock at the outward Chamber near the
Parliament presence. Unto which Motion the House of Commons willingly assented.
Vide concerning this matter on Thursday the 17th day of this Instant December
following.

On Thursday the 10th day of December, the Bill for the establishing the
remainder of certain Lands of Andrew Kettlebie Esquire upon Francis Kettlebie,
was read tertia vice and sent to the House of Commons by Dr Stanhop and Dr Hone.

Two Bills had each of them one reading; of which the first being the Bill to
avoid double payment of Debts was read tertia vice and expedited.

The Bill concerning Resumptions, etc. (which was committed on Tuesday the 8th
day of this instand December foregoing, although the mention thereof as being
of little moment is there purposely omitted) was this day delivered to the Lord
Treasurer one of the Committees.

The Council learned as well on the behalf of the Earl of Shrewsbury as of Tho.
Holcroft, Henry Candish and William Candish Esquires, were heard at large in
the House (as was yesterday appointed;) And thereupon Mr Attorney was required
to deliver his opinion again of the said Provisoes offered on either part.
Which being done by him accordingly in more particular and ample manner than
before, and having withal delivered his resolution to sundry questions
propounded unto him by diverse of the Lords concerning the said Cause, it was
Ordered as follows.

Upon debate in the House concerning the several Provisoes offered by the Earl
of Shrewsbury and by Thomas Holcroft, Henry Cavendish and William Cavendish
Esquires, to be annexed to the Bill Entitled An Act for Confirmation of Grants
made to the Queens Majesty and others; It was at last agreed that the Lord
Chief Justice of her Majesty's Bench, the Lord Chief Justice of the
Common Pleas, calling unto them the rest of the Judges, and Mr Attorney
General, should draw some new Provisoes, such as they should think indifferent
for all Parties, and meet to be annexed to the said Bill, and should present
the same to the Lords to Morrow in the Morning before their Conference with the
House of Commons about the said Bill. Vide concerning this matter on Thursday
the 17th day of this instant December ensuing.

The Lord Keeper signified unto their Lordships that he received Commandment
from her Majesty to let them understand her Pleasure to be, that the Parliament
should end upon Thursday the 17th day, or Friday the 18th day of this instant
December at the furthest, to the end their Lordships may repair home into their
Countries against Christmas. And therefore she required them to employ and
spend that time which remains, in matters concerning the public, and not in
private Causes.

Memorandum, Quod die decimo praedicto, viz. dicti Mensis Decembris, Those of
the House of Commons that were appointed to confer with some of the Lords (upon
the Message lately sent from the said House signifying their desire of
Conference for some matter touching the Honor of both Houses) did make known
unto the Lords of the Committees nominated for that purpose, that the occasion
of such their Message was, for that (as they were informed) Mr Attorney General
had preferred a Bill into the Star Chamber against one Belgrave a Member of the
House of Commons, for and concerning some matter of misdemeanour pretended to
be done toward the Earl of Huntington a Lord of the Upper House. And therefore
they desired this mutual Conference, letting their Lordships understand, that
to the preferring of the said Bill they conceived just exceptions might be
taken by them for two respects.

First, That Belgrave being a Member of the House of Commons was thereby vexed
and molested during his Service in the time of Parliament, contrary to the
Honor and Privilege of the House, saying that no Member of that House ought
by any such means in time of his Service to be distracted either in body or
mind. The other, because in the said Bill preferred by Mr Attorney General, who
had been heretofore Speaker of that House, and therefore as they thought, ought
to have more regard to the honor and liberty of the same, certain words and
clauses were inserted, which were taken to be prejudicial and derogatory to the
honor of the said House. And therefore they desired that the Lords would
peruse and consider of the said Bill. Whereupon the said Bill being offered to
be read, and for as much as it appeared that it was not an authentic Bill
testified by the hand of the Clerk of the Star Chamber, as had been meet, the
Lords thought it not meet (though otherwise they were willing to have it read)
nor agreeable to the proceeding of such a Court, that the said Bill or Scroll
shall be received to reading. And therefore with a Message to that effect were
pleased to send it down again to the House of Commons by Mr Sergeant Yelverton
and Mr Dr Hone; who finding the House risen before they came, brought the said
Bill back again. Vide concerning this matter on Monday the 14th day of this
instant December following.

On Friday the 11th day of December, the Bill concerning Captains, Soldiers
and other in the Queens Services in the Wars, was returned to the House by the
Lord Steward with certain Amendments, and a Proviso thought meet by the
Committees (whose names see on Thursday the 12th day of November foregoing, as
also on Tuesday the 8th day of this instant December last past) which
Amendments and Provisoes were presently twice read, and thereupon the Bill
Commanded to be engrossed.

The Bill for maintenance of the Navy, increase of Mariners, etc. (which was
committed on Monday the 7th day of this instant December foregoing, although
the mention thereof as being of little moment be there purposely omitted) was
returned to the House by the Lord Treasurer the first of the Committees with
certain Amendments, which were presently twice read.

Four Bills were brought up to the Lords from the House of Commons; of which
the two last were, one for the Assurance of the Parsonage of the Vicaridge of
Rotherston in the County of Chester, and a Scholars Room in the Cathedral
Church of Christ in Oxon, of the Foundation of K. H. 8. by the Dean and Chapter
of the said Cathedral Church, to Thomas Venables Esquire and his Heirs for ever;
And the other for the Augmentation of Rachel Wife of Edward Nevil in the
Counties of Kent: both which Bills were read prima vice.

Memorandum, A Proviso being drawn by the Judges for the Bill for Confirmation
of Grants made by her Majesty, etc. as by the Court was Yesterday appointed,
the same was presented to the House by the Lord Treasurer the second of the
Committees, testified by Mr Attorney General, that both Parties, viz. the Earl
of Shrewsbury and Thomas Holcroft Esquire etc. like of it, and the same was read
prima vice, and Conference had immediately with the Committees of the House of
Commons in the Outward Chamber. Vide concerning this matter on Thursday the
17th day of this instant December following.

The Bill beforementioned sent down Yesterday by Mr Sergeant Yelverton and Dr
Hone was sent by them again with the same Message, and moreover to signify
unto them, that the Lords are ready to have Conference with them. Whereunto the
House of Commons returned Answer, that for the Conference they are ready to
meet with the Lords forthwith; And concerning the Bill, they will do what shall
be fit. Vide Concerning this on Thursday the 17th of December ensuing.

On Saturday the 12th day of December, Eight Bills were brought up to the Lords
from the House of Commons by Mr Secretary Cecill, Mr Secretary Herbert and
others, which were each of them read prima vice; of which the first was for
reformation of abuses in Sheriffs and other their inferior Officers for not
duly executing Writs of Proclamation upon Exigents according to the Statute of
31 Eliz. And the second was the Bill for prohibiting Fairs and Markets to be
holden on the Sunday.

Two Bills also had each of them one reading; of which the first being the Bill
for the Grant of four entire Subsidies and eight Fifteenths and Tenths granted
by the Temporalty, was read prima vice. Vide concerning this Bill on Monday the
14th day and on Tuesday the 15th day of this instant December ensuing.

The Lords and those of the House of Commons not having time yesterday to
conclude their Conference about the Bill concerning Letters Patents and
Conveyances, etc. another meeting was then appointed for them this Morning; Mr
Attorney General and Mr Doctor Carew were therefore sent unto them to let them
know, that their Lordships were ready presently to meet. Unto which Message the
House of Commons returned Answer, that they would make their repair to their
Lordships forthwith for that purpose. Vide concerning this matter on Thursday
the 17th day of this instant December ensuing.

The Bill for the perfecting the Jointure of the Lady Bridget Countess of
Sussex, Wife of Robert Earl of Sussex, was read secunda vice, but no mention
was made either of the Commitment or Engrossing thereof; the supposed cause or
reason of which omission see more at large on Monday the 23th day of November
foregoing.

The Bill concerning the Jointure of the Countess of Bedford was returned to
the House by the Earl of Worcester first of the Committees (who were appointed
on Friday the 4th day of this instant December foregoing) with a Proviso and
certain Amendments thought meet to be added, together with a Petition of the
Lady Russell against the said Bill.

The Lords that were appointed Committees for the Bill touching Letters
Patents, etc. went forth to the outward Chamber to have Conference with those
of the House of Commons appointed Committees for the same Bill, but nothing
concluded touching the Amendments, because the said Committees had no power to
conclude; and therefore after long debate the Bill was brought back to the
House, and the relation thereof referred to be made by Mr Attorney, and the
same deferred till the Afternoon sitting, by reason the day was spent.

Domimus Custos Magni Sigilli continuavit praesens Parliamentum usque in horam
tertiam post Meridiem hujus diei.

About which hour the Lord Keeper and diverse Lords having assembled themselves,
five Bills had each of them one reading; of which the first concerning the
draining and recovery from the Water of certain Overflown-Grounds in the County
of Norfolk; The second for Reformation of Abuses committed in buying and
selling of Spices and other Merchandises; and the third to prevent Perjury and
Subornation of Perjury and unnecessary expenses in suits of Law, were each of
them read secunda vice. But no mention is made either of their Commitment or
Engrossing, the supposed cause or reason of which omission see more at large on
Monday the 23th day of November foregoing.

The Proviso that was pretended to be added to the Bill for the Maintenance of
the Navy, increase of Mariners, etc. was this day twice read in like sort as
the Amendments of the said Bill had been before, and thereupon the Bill was
appointed to be forthwith engrossed.

The Bill for the maintenance of the Navy, increase of Mariners, etc. was read
tertia vice, and sent to the House of Commons, together with the Bill
concerning Captains, Soldiers, etc. by Dr Carew and Dr Hone.

The Amendments and Proviso in the Bill concerning the Countess of Bedfords
Jointure were twice read, and likewise the Lady Russells Petition was read.
Whereupon it was appointed that the Proviso should be engrossed in Parchment,
and the Amendments in Paper.

The Committees in the Bill for the observation of Orders in the Exchequer (who
were nominated on Thursday the 10th day of this instant December foregoing)
were appointed forthwith to meet in the little Chamber near the Parliament
Presence, to consider of a Proviso drawn by the Lord Chief Justice and the rest
of the Judges, by direction of the Committees: which Proviso having been
considered of accordingly, was brought into the House and presently twice read;
And thereupon the said Proviso was commanded to be engrossed.

The Bill for the assuring the Patronage of the Vicaridge of Rotherston in the
County of Chester, and a Scholars room in the Cathedral Church of Christ in
Oxon (of the Foundation of King Hen. 8th) by the Dean and Chapter of the said
Cathedral Church, to Thomas Venables Esquire and his Heirs for ever, was read
secunda vice. But no mention is made either of the Commitment or Engrossing,
the supposed cause or reason of which omission see more at large on Monday the
23th day of November foregoing.

Relation was made by Mr Attorney of the Conference with the Committees of the
House of Commons touching Amendments of the Bill of Letters Patents, etc.
Whereupon because the Committees of both Houses were not agreed, it was thought
good they should meet again upon Monday Morning being the 14th day of this
instant December, and should have Authority to agree touching the setting down
and penning of the said Amendments, and reducing of them to a certainty,
together with the Committees of the House of Commons coming with the like
Authority, that afterward the same might be presented to the Judgment of the
House. This Motion was sent down by Dr Carew and Dr Hone, and was accepted.
Vide concerning this matter on Thursday the 17th day of this instant December
ensuing.

On Monday the 14th day of December, to which day the Parliament had been last
continued on Saturday foregoing, the Bill for the better observation of certain
Orders in the Exchequer set down and established by virtue of her Majesty's
Privy Seal, was read tertia vice; And the Proviso thought meet by the
Committees to be added, was also read the third time.

The Bill for the Assurance of certain Manors and Lands for part of a Jointure
to Lucy Countess of Bedford; And the Provisoes and Amendments presented by the
Committees to be added, were also read the third time; both which Bills were
sent to the House of Commons for their consideration of the several Provisoes
and Amendments, by the hands of Dr Swale and the Clerk of the Crown.

Four Bills also had each of them one reading; of which the last being the Bill
for the Grant of four entire Fifteenths and Tenths granted by the Temporalty
was read secunda vice. But no mention is made either of the Commitment or
engrossing thereof, the supposed cause or reason of which omission see more at
large on Monday the 23th day of November foregoing. Vide also concerning this
Bill on Tuesday the 15th day of this instant December immediately following.

Two Bills were brought up to the Lords from the House of Commons; of which the
second being the Bill for Confirmation of the Charter of King Edward the Sixth,
of the three Hospitals of Christ, Bridewell and St Thomas the Apostle, to the
Mayor, Commonalty and Citizens of London, was read prima vice.

The Bill to confirm the Assurance of the Manors or Farms of Sagebury alias
Sadgebury and Obden, and other Hereditaments to Samuel Sands Esquire and John
Harris Gent', and their Heirs; And the Bill for the Amendment of certain
imperfections of a Statute made in the Eighth Year of her Majesty's Reign
concerning the true making of Hats, were each of them read secunda vice: But no
mention is made either of their Commitment or engrossing, the supposed cause or
reason of which omissions see more at large on Monday the 23th day of November
foregoing.

The Paper or Scroll concerning Belgrave was this day returned from the House
of Commons subscribed by the Clerk of the Star Chamber, and excuse made by them
for not sending the same at the first. Vide concerning this matter on Thursday
the 10th day of this instant December foregoing.

Dominus Custos magni Sigilli continuavit praesens Parliamentum usque ad horam
secundam post Meridiem hujus instantis diei.

About which hour the Lord Keeper and diverse Lords Assembling, Six Bills had
each of them one reading; of which the third being the Bill for the
Augmentation of the Jointure of Rachell Wife of Edward Nevill of Berling in the
County of Kent was read secunda vice: But no mention is made either of the
Commitment or engrossing of the same, the supposed cause or reason of which
omission see more at large on Monday the 23th day of November foregoing.

The Bill concerning the erecting of a Harbor and Bay in the North part of
Devon, etc. was returned to the House by the Lord Steward with one Amendment,
which was presently twice read.

The Bill prohibiting Fairs and Markets to be holden on Sunday, was read
secunda vice, and Committed: But in respect that all the Commitments of Bills
this Parliament were of one and the same nature, wherein the Judges were always
appointed to attend the Lords Committees, and never nominated as Joint
Committees with them, (as see more at large discussed on Saturday the 7th day
of November foregoing) therefore the said Committees names are in this place as
in diverse others purposely omitted, as being matter of no great moment; yet
none of the Judges were appointed to attend upon the Lords Committees in this
present last abovementioned Bill, but only the Attorney General.

Upon Motion made by the Earl of Worcester, It was Ordered by the House that
William Crayford Prisoner in the Fleet should come to make his humble
submission before the Lords in the said House to Morrow by nine of the Clock in
the Morning. Vide concerning this matter on Saturday the 19th day of this
instant December ensuing.

The Council as well of the Company of Plaisterers as Painters were appointed
to be heard in the House to Morrow in the Afternoon. Vide touching this
business on Monday the 18th day of this instant December following.

On Tuesday the 15th day of December, Three Bills had each of them one reading;
of which the second being the Bill for the erecting and making a Harbor and
Bay on the North part of Devon in the River of Severn for the Safeguard of Men
and Shipping, and to the public good of the Commonwealth, was read tertia
vice, and sent down to the House of Commons, for their considerations of the
Amendments, by Dr Stanhop, Dr Swale and Dr Hone.

The Bill for the Grant of four entire Subsidies and eight Fifteenths and
Tenths granted by the Temporalty, was read tertia vice and expedit.

Nota, That whereas in the Parliament which was begun and holden at
Westminster, in Anno 35 Regin. Eliz. Anno Domini 1592. The Knights, Citizens
and Burgesses of the House of Commons were not drawn, without much and long
dispute both amongst themselves and with the Lords, to yield unto the Grant of
three Subsidies and six Fifteenths and Tenths (being a greater Gift than had
been before ever given unto her Majesty) and that the same was then also
assented unto in respect of the great dangers were newly threatened to her
Majesty from Rome and Spain, with caution and promise nevertheless, that it
should not be drawn into Precedent for future times; Yet in the next Parliament
which ensued in an. 39 Regin. Eliz. Anno Domini 1596. although none of the said
imminent dangers which had been feared in the abovementioned thirty fifth Year
of her Majesty's Reign, had to that time come into any real Execution, the
House of Commons was notwithstanding again drawn to yield unto the same
proportion of three Subsidies and six Fifteenths and Tenths to be paid also to
her Majesty within a shorter time. And now lastly in this present Parliament in
an. 43, and 44 Regin. ejusdem Anno Domini 1601. the said House was finally
drawn (in respect chiefly of the troubles of Ireland, where the Spaniard had
set footing) to present unto her Highness the extraordinary and great Gift of
four Subsidies and eight Fifteenths and Tenths; The Bill whereof did this
present Tuesday being the 15th day of this instant December pass the Upper
House upon the third reading, as it had formerly passed the House of Commons on
Saturday the 5th day of this instant Month foregoing, and had been then sent up
unto the Lords by Mr Comptroller and others, although the sending up thereof at
the said time be very negligently omitted by Thomas Smith Esquire Clerk of the
Upper House in the Original Journal Book of the said House. From all which
matters, lastly, compared together, this one Thesis or Conclusion may be drawn,
That whatsoever the Subject does once yield unto, may be afterward advanced,
but seldom falls.

The Bill for Naturalizing certain persons born beyond the Seas was read
secunda vice.

The Bill for Confirmation of the Subsidy of the Clergy was read prima, secunda
and tertia vice.

Memorandum, That at the second and third reading of the said Subsidy, the body
of the Grant was omitted to be read according to the accustomed manner, and
only the Preface and Confirmation of the Grant were read; And the Bill was sent
to the House of Commons by Mr Sergeant Yelverton, Mr Doctor Stanhop and Mr
Doctor Hone.

Upon the humble Petition of William Crayford lately Committed to the Prison of
the Fleet, and upon his humble Submission and acknowledgment of his offense, he
was by the Order of the Court enlarged and set at liberty. Vide concerning this
matter on Saturday the 19th day of this instant December following.

Dominus Custos magni Sigilli continuavit praesens Parliamentum usque ad horam
secundam post Meridiem hujus instantis diei.

About which hour the Lord Keeper and diverse other Lords being Assembled, the
Bill for Naturalizing of certain persons born beyond the Seas was read tertia
vice and expedit.

Eight Bills were brought up to the Lords from the House of Commons; of which
the first being the Bill for continuance of diverse Statutes and for repeal of
some others, And the second being against the transportation of Ordnance, Gun
Metal, Iron Oar, Iron Mine and Iron Shot, were each of them read prima vice.

On Wednesday the 16th day of December, the Bill for re-edifying, repairing and
maintaining of two Bridges of the River of Eden near the City of Carlisle in
Cumberland was read prima and secunda vice.

Seven Bills of no great moment had each of them one reading; of which the
fourth being the Bill for the continuance of diverse Statutes, and for repeal of
some others, And the fifth to redress the misimployment of Lands, Goods and
stock of money heretofore given to charitable uses, were each of them read
secunda vice: but there is no mention made either of their commitment or
engrossing, the supposed cause or reason of which omission see more at large on
Monday the 23th day of November foregoing.

Eight Bills were brought up to the Lords from the House of Commons by Mr
Secretary Cecill, Sir Walter Raleigh and others; of which the first being the
Bill for ending and appeasing of all Controversies, matters and debates between
Francis Kettlebie of the one part, and Andrew Kettlebie and Jane his Wife of
the other part; and the second being for the recovery of many thousand Acres of
Marish and other grounds subject commonly to surrounding within the Isle of Ely
and Counties of Cambridge, Huntington, Northampton, Lincoln, Norfolk and
Suffolk were each of them read prima vice; And also the fifth being the Bill
for the necessary relief of Soldiers and Mariners was read prima vice.

A Message was delivered from the House of Commons by Mr Comptroller and
others, that the said House was not satisfied concerning the Proviso added by
the Lords to the Bill Entitled An Act for the better observation of certain
Orders in the Exchequer, and therefore desired Conference with some of their
Lordships about the same.

The Conference was yielded unto and appointed to be this Afternoon in the
Outward Chamber.

The Bill Entitled An Act for Reformation of deceits of certain Auditors, etc.
being returned to the House with certain Provisoes and Amendments, the Bill
with the same was forthwith twice read and Ordered to be engrossed.

Upon Conference with the House of Commons concerning the Bill for Confirmation
of Grants made to the Queens Majesty, etc. It was agreed by the Committees of
both Houses, that certain Provisoes and Amendments should be added to the said
Bill; which being returned to the House were presently twice read, and so
commanded to be engrossed: And thereupon the Bill it self with the said
Provisoes and Amendments was read the third time and sent to the House of
Commons for their consideration of the same, by Mr Attorney General and Dr
Stanhop.

Dominus Custos Magni Sigilli continuavit praesens Parliamentum usque ad horam
secundam post meridiem instantis diei.

About which hour the Lord Keeper and diverse other Lords Assembling, Eleven
Bills had each of them one reading; of which the Bill for the recovery of many
thousand Acres of Marish Grounds subject commonly to surrounding within the
Isle of Ely, etc. The 6th being for the redress of certain Abuses and Deceits
used in Painting, The 7th concerning matters of Assurances among Merchants, And
the 8th being the Bill for Assize of Fuel were each of them read secunda vice.

Upon the meeting this Afternoon of those of the House of Commons appointed to
confer with the Lords Committees in the Bill entitled An Act for the better
observation of certain Orders in the Exchequer, etc. (who were appointed on
Thursday the 10th day of this instant December. foregoing) concerning a Proviso
added by the Lords to that Bill, after some debates of the Committees on both
parts, thereupon those of the House of Commons did signify, that the said House
would allow of the said Proviso, so as the same might be in some certain point
amended. Whereupon a question grew between them, Whether the said Amendment of
the Proviso should be made in the Upper House (upon notice given thereof by the
Committees) and so be sent down again, or else be made in the House of Commons:
which doubt being reported by the Lords Committees by Order and Appointment of
the House, It was agreed by the common consent, that the Amendments should be
made in the House of Commons and sent up in Paper, and to be here inserted in
the body of the Proviso. Which Order was by the Lords Committees signified to
the Committees of the House of Commons, and they thereunto assented.

Whereas it has been accustomed in former Parliaments that toward the end of
a Parliament, a Collection should be made amongst the Lords for the Poor, and
it was this day moved by the Lord Archbishop of Canterbury, that the like
Collection might be made at this time; It was upon this Motion Ordered by the
House, that there should be such a Collection made accordingly: And that the
Lord Bishop of Chester, the Lord Bishop of Peterborough, the Lord Zouch and the
Lord Rich should be Collectors of the same, and after such rates as have been
usually given and bestowed by the Lords for the said Charitable purpose in
former Parliaments, and they to take Order for the distribution of it.

On Thursday the 17th day of December the Bill for the relief of the Poor was
read secunda vice.

It was Ordered that Edward Comber of the Middle Temple should be presently
sent for and brought before the Lords in the House for that (contrary to the
Privilege of this Court) he has caused one Thomas Gerrard Gentleman to be
Arrested. And it was likewise Ordered, that such Persons as made the Arrest or
did assist the same, shall likewise be sent for by the Sergeant at Arms to
answer their doings therein.

The Bill for the necessary relief of Soldiers and Mariners was read secunda
vice.

Two Bills were brought up to the Lords from the House of Commons; of which the
first being the Bill for the Assurance of certain Manors and Lands for part of
a Jointure to Lucy Countess of Bedford was returned expedited.

Two Bills also had each of them one reading; of which the second being the
Bill for Reformation of Deceits and Frauds of certain Auditors and their
Clerks in making deceitful and untrue Particulars, was read tertia vice, and
sent to the House of Commons by Dr Carew and Dr Hone.

The Bill was brought back from the House of Commons entitled An Act for
confirmation of Grants made to the Queens Majesty, and of Letters Patents made
by her Highness to others, expedit.

Nota, That there was much dispute and some difference between the two Houses
touching this Bill, after that it had been sent up from the House of Commons to
the Lords, and sent down again from their Lordships to the House of Commons
with diverse Amendments; as see on Thursday the 19th day of November, and on
Monday the 23th day of the same Month last past, as also on Monday the 7th day,
Tuesday the 8th day, Wednesday the 9th day, Thursday the 10th day and Friday
the 11th day of this instant December foregoing.

The Bill for Confirmation of the Subsidy granted by the Clergy was returned
from the House of Commons expedited.

The Bill concerning the Assize of Fuel was read tertia vice and expedit.

Dominus Custos Magni Sigilli continuavit praesens Parliamentum usque ad horam
secundam post meridiem hujus instantis diei.

About which hour the Lord Keeper and diverse other Lords assembling, Five Bills
of no great moment had each of them one reading; of which the second being the
Bill for the strengthening of the Grants made for the Maintenance and
Government of the House of the Poor called St Bartholomews Hospital, of the
Foundation of King Hen. the Eighth, was read secunda vice.

The Bill for the recovery of many hundred thousand Acres of Marshes and other
Grounds subject commonly to surrounding within the Isle of Ely and Counties of
Cambridge, Huntington, Northampton, Lincoln, Norfolk and Suffolk was read
iertia vice and expedit.

Upon the third reading of this Bill it was moved by the House, that certain
Additions might be put in the Title of the Bill and Amendments in some part of
the body thereof, and the Lord Chief Justice and Mr Attorney were required to
draw the same, which was done presently by them and presented to the House.
Whereupon the said Additions and Amendments were thrice read, and then sent to
the House of Commons, for their consideration of the same, by Mr Attorney and
Mr Dr Hone who returned presently from the House of Commons with their
allowance of the said Amendments and Addition in the Title of, of the Counties
of Essex, Sussex, Kent and the County Palatine of Durham.

Three Bills also had each of them one reading; of which the last being the
Bill to make the Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments of Edward Lucas Gentleman
deceased, Executor of the last Will and Testament of John Flowerden Esquire
deceased, liable, etc. was read secunda vice; but no mention is made either of
the Commitment or Engrossing thereof, the reason or cause of which omission,
see more at large on Monday the 23d day of November foregoing.

Conference was desired by the House of Commons with some of their Lordships
about the Bill sent to them this day concerning the reformation of Deceits and
Frauds of certain Auditors, etc. The Conference was yielded unto and appointed
to be presently at the outward Chamber near the Parliament Presence.

On Friday the 18th day of December, Four Bills had each of them one reading;
of which the last being the Bill for the Queens Majesty's most Gracious General
and free Pardon was read prima vice, and sent to the House of Commons by Mr
Attorney General and Mr Doctor Stanhop.

Memorandum, that whereas a Bill has been presented to the High Court of
Parliament by the Company of the Mystery or Trade of Painters, making thereby
complaint against the Company of Plaisterers for and concerning certain wrongs
pretended to be done to the said Painters by the Company of Plaisterers, in
using some part of their Trade of Painting, contrary to the right of their
Charter (as is pretended) and humbly seeking by the said Bill, reformation of
the said wrong; And whereas the said Bill passed not the Upper House of
Parliament for just and good reasons moving the Lords of the Higher House to
the contrary: Yet nevertheless the Lords of the Upper House have thought it
meet and convenient that some course might be taken for reformation of any such
wrong as may be found truly complained of and fit to be remedied, and for the
settling of some good agreement and Order for the said Painters and Plaisterers,
so as each sort of them might exercise their Trade conveniently without
impeaching one the other: It is therefore Ordered by the Court of the Upper
House of Parliament, that the said complaint and cause of the said Painters
(which proceeded not in Parliament) shall be referred to the Lord Mayor of
London, and the Recorder of London, to be heard and examined, adjudged and
Ordered as in Justice and Equity shall be found meet; And that at the time or
times of the hearing of the said Cause, the Lord Chief Justice of England, the
Lord Chief Justice of the Common Pleas, Mr Justice Gawdie, Mr Baron Clark and
Mr Attorney General or any four, three, or two of them, shall assist and give
their help for the making and establishing some good Order and Agreement. And
that the said parties complainant, and also the Company of the Plaisterers
shall observe and keep such Order as by the said Mayor, the Lord Chief Justice
of England, the Lord Chief Justice of the Common Pleas, Mr Justice Gawdie, Mr
Baron Clark, Mr Attorney General, Mr Recorder of London, or any six, five, four
or three of them (whereof the Lord Mayor and the Lord Chief Justice of England
or Lord Chief Justice of the Common Pleas to be two) shall be set down and
prescribed. Vide concerning this matter on Monday the 14th day of this instant
December foregoing.

Memorandum, that whereas William Crayford of Mongham in the County of Kent
Gentleman, was this day brought before the Lords Spiritual and Temporal in the
Upper House of Parliament to answer an Information made against him, that he
had procured and suborned his Son William Crayford to lay sundry Executions and
Outlawries on William Vaughan Gentleman Servant to the Earl of Shrewesbury,
contrary to the privilege of the Court; And the said Crayford having been
heard in the presence of William Vaughan what he could say concerning the said
Information, wherein he protested that he was guiltless, and that his said Son
had not in any sort received such direction from him as was informed; It was
therefore by the Court thought meet and so Ordered, that the examination and
determining of the controversies and Suits depending between the said Crayford
and Vaughan should be referred to the Earl of Worcester, the Lord Bishop of
London and the Lord Cobham; And that they the said Crayford and Vaughan should
enter into good and sufficient Bonds each to other to stand to, observe and
perform such Award and Arbitrament as the said Lords shall make and set down
between them. Vide concerning this Matter on Saturday the 19th day of this
instant December immediately following.

On Saturday the 19th day of December a Motion was made in the House, for
avoiding of all further controversy between William Crayford and William
Vaughan Gentlemen, That forasmuch as each of them took mutual Exception one to
the other touching the Bonds whereinto they formerly entered by Order of the
Court (the said William Crayford alleging that it sufficed not William Vaughan
alone to be bound, because his Heirs or some other claiming by and from him
might trouble and molest him: And that the said Vaughan is insufficient; And
the said William Vaughan alleging, that if William Craysord were bound alone,
his Sons or Heirs might molest and trouble the said Vaughan without hazard of
the Bond) some further Order might thereupon be taken; It was therefore this
day Ordered by the Court, that the said William Crayford and his eldest Son
Edward Craysord should enter into sufficient Bond unto the said William
Vaughan, without hazard of the Bond, for themselves and their Heirs, that they
and every of them shall stand to the Award and Arbitrament of the Earl of
Worcester, the Lord Bishop of London and the Lord Cobham, or any two of them;
And that also the said William Vaughan shall enter into like Bond with a
sufficient surety for himself and his Heirs, to stand to the said Award of the
Lords beforementioned, or any two of them so as such Award be made before the
Feast of Easter next following. And moreover, it is Ordered by the Court that
if they or either of them shall refuse to enter into Bond according to the said
Order, That the Lord Keeper (notwithstanding the ending of the Parliament, and
thought it be after the time) shall commit them or either of them to close
Prison so refusing, there to remain until the party refusing be conformable to
the said Order. Vide concerning this matter on Tuesday the first day, Wednesday
the second day, Thursday the third day, Friday the fourth day Monday the
fourteenth day, Tuesday the fifteenth day, and on Friday the eighteenth day of
this instant December foregoing.

Dominus Custos Magni Sigilli continnavit praesens Parliamentum usque ad horam
secundum post meridiem hujus instantis diei.

About which hour in the Afternoon the Queens Majesty was personally present,
being accompanied with the Lord Archbishop of Canterbury, Sir Thomas Egerton
Knight Lord Keeper of the Great Seal, the Lord Buckhurst Lord Treasurer of
England, and with diverse other Lords Spiritual and Temporal; but what was there
done is not mentioned in the Original Journal of the Upper House, and is
therefore supplied out of a very elaborate private Journal of the House of
Commons.

Her Majesty with diverse Lords Spiritual and Temporal being set in the Upper
House in their Parliament Robes between two and three of the Clock in the
Afternoon, the Knights, Citizens and Burgesses of the House of Commons had
notice thereof, and thereupon repaired thither with John Crook Esquire
Recorder of London their Speaker, who being placed at the Rail or Bar at the
lower end of the said Upper House, after he had made three Reverences to her
Majesty fitting under a rich Cloth of State, spoke to this effect following.

That Laws were not at first made with humane Pen, but by Divine Ordinance;
That politic Laws were made according to the evil conditions of Men, and that
all Laws serve not for all times, no more than one Medicine for all Diseases;
If he were asked, what were the first and chiefest thing to be considered, he
would say, Religion. So Religion is all in all, for Religion breeds Devotion,
Devotion breeds Zeal and Piety to God, which breeds Obedience and Duty to the
Prince, and obedience of the Laws, which breeds Faithfulness and Honesty and
Love, Three necessary and only things to be wished and observed in a well
Governed Commonwealth. And that her Majesty by planting true Religion had laid
such a Foundation upon which all those Virtues were so planted and builded,
that they could not easily be rooted up and extirpated. And therefore he did
acknowledge, that we ought and do acknowledge that we will praise God and her
Majesty for it. And then he descended to speak of Governments and Laws of
Nations, among and above all which he principally preferred the Laws of this
Land, which he said were so many and so wise, that there was almost no offense
but was met with in a Law. Notwithstanding her Majesty being desirous for the
good of her Land to call a Parliament for redress of some old Laws and making
some new, her dutiful and loving Subjects having considered of them, have made
some new, and amended some old, which they humbly desire may be made Laws by
her most Royal Assent which gives life unto them. And so after thanks given
for the Pardon by which we dread your Justice and admire your mercy, and a
prayer unto her Majesty that she would accept as the Testimonies of our Love
and duty offered unto her, with a free Heart and willing Spirit, Four entire
Subsidies and Eight Fifteenths and Tenths, to be collected of our Lands and
Livelihoods; In speaking whereof he mistook and said, Four entire Fifteenths
and Eight Subsidies, but he was remembered by some of the Council that stood
near about him, and so spoke right as aforesaid; and having craved pardon for
his offense, if either he had forgotten himself in Word or Action, he ended.

The which the Lord Keeper Answered thus in effect. First as touching her
Majesty's proceedings in the Laws for her Royal Assent, that should be as God
should direct her Sacred Spirit. Secondly, For your presentation of Four
Subsidies and Eight Fifteenths and Tenths; Thirdly, your humble thankfulness
for the Pardon, for them and yourself; I will deliver her Majesty's Commandment
with what brevity I may, that I be not tedious to my most gracious Sovereign.
First she says, touching your proceeding in the matter of her Prerogative,
that she is persuaded Subjects did never more dutifully; And that she
understood you did but obiter touch her Prerogative, and no otherwise but by
humble Petition; And therefore, that thanks that a Prince may give to her
Subjects, she willingly yields: But she now well perceives, that private
respects are privately masqued under public presence. Secondly, touching the
presentation of your Subsidy, she specially regards two things, both the
persons and the manner. For the first, he fell into Commendations of the
Commonalty; for the second, the manner, which was speedy, not by persuasion or
persuasive inducements, but freely out of duty with great contentment. In the
thing which ye have granted, her Majesty greatly commends your confidence and
Judgment; And though it be not proportionable to her occasions, yet she most
thankfully receives the same as a loving and thankful Prince; And that no
Prince was ever more unwilling to exact or receive any thing from the Subject
than she our most gracious Sovereign; For we all know she never was a greedy
Grasper nor strait-handed Keeper; And therefore she commanded me to say, that
you have done (and so she takes it) dutifully, plentifully and thankfully.

For your self, Mr Speaker, her Majesty commanded me to say, that you have
proceeded with such Wisdom and Discretion, that it is much to your
Commendations; and that none before you has deserved more.

And so he ended after an Admonition given to the Justices of the Peace, that
they would not deserve the Epithetes of prolling Justices, Justices of
Quarrels, who counted Champetrie good Chevesance, Sinning Justices who do suck
and consume the wealth and good of the Commonwealth; and also against those
who lie (if not all the Year, yet) at least three quarters of the year in this
City of London.

After the before-recited Speeches were ended as abovesaid, then were the
titles of all the Acts read in their due Order.

After which ended, and her Majesty's Assent thereunto, then the Dissolution of
the Parliament followed by the Lord Keeper, which is entered in the Original
Journal Book of the Upper House in these words following, viz.

Dominus Custos magni Sigilli ex mandato Dominae Reginae Dissolvit hoc praesens
Parliamentum.

THE JOURNAL OF THE House of COMMONS.
A Journal of the Passages of the House of Commons in the Parliament holden at
Westminster, Anno 43 Reginae Eliz. Anno Domini 1601. which began there on
Tuesday the 27th Day of October, and then and there continued until the
Dissolution thereof, on Saturday the 19th Day of December ensuing, Anno 44
Reginae ejusdem.

THIS large and copious Journal contains in it not only a number of excellent
Passages concerning the Orders and Privilege of the House of Commons, which
are usually found in other Journals of the same House; but also much matter
touching the public State, and that great grievance of the Realm by reason of
Patents of Privilege or Monopolies, in the abdication or censure of which her
Majesty most graciously concurred with her Subjects: In which also a great
number of Speeches and other Passages which were not found in the Original
Journal Book of the said House, are supplied out of a Journal of the same House
taken at this Parliament by one of the Members thereof. But yet to avoid
confusion, whatsoever is here inserted out of the said private Journal, is
particularly distinguished from that which is taken out of the abovementioned
Original Journal Book of the House of Commons, by some Animadversion or
expression thereof both before and after the inserting of it.

The tenth Parliament of our Sovereign Lady Elizabeth by the Grace of God of
England, France and Ireland Queen, Defender of the Faith, etc. begun at
Westminster upon Tuesday being the 27th day of October in the forty third year
of her Majesty's Reign, upon which day many of the Knights for the Shires,
Citizens for Cities, Burgesses for Boroughs, and Barons for Ports returned into
the same Parliament did make their appearance at Westminster aforesaid before
the Right Honorable the Earl of Nottingham Lord Admiral and Lord Steward of
her Highnesses most Honorable Household, and did then and there take the Oath
according to the Statute in that behalf made and provided, tendered by the said
Earl, or by his Deputies, who were Sir William Knolls Comptroller of her
Majesty's Household, Sir John Stanhop her Highness Vice-Chamberlain, Sir Robert
Cecill Principal Secretary, and John Herbert Esquire second Secretary. After which
all the said Lord Steward's Deputies and some others of the House of Commons
having gotten into the Upper House, and her Majesty with diverse of the Lords
Spiritual and Temporal being set, the greatest part of the residue of the
Members of the said House of Commons had notice thereof about four of the Clock
in the Afternoon, being at that time still suting in the said House and
expecting her Majesty's Pleasure to be sent for up unto the said Upper House
according to the ancient usage and custom of former Parliaments; And thereupon
the said residue repaired immediately unto the Door of the said House, but
could not be let in, the Door being still kept shut, and so returned back again
unto their own House much discontented. Shortly after which time the Right
Honorable Sir William Knolls, one of the Deputies aforesaid, came down into
the said House of Commons, and so being there set with the said residue for
some little space of time, Mr Richard Lieffe, one of the Barons returned into
this present Parliament for the Port of Hastings in the County of Sussex, stood
up, and showing unto the said Comptroller the wrong done unto the greatest part
of the Members of this House, in their not being suffered to come into the said
Upper House to hear her Majesty's Pleasure signified by the Mouth of the Lord
Keeper of the Great Seal of England, humbly desired the said Comptroller to be
a means, that the effect thereof might be imparted unto some of the Members of
this House for their better satisfactions. Which as his Honor did think very
reasonable and meet to be done at convenient time, so did he impute the said
fault wholly to the Gentleman Usher of the said Upper House. Which done, and
the residue of the said Deputies being shortly after come into the said House
of Commons, and there sitting, the said Mr Comptroller after some pause stood
up, and showing unto this House that his place was to break the silence of this
House for that time, and putting the House in mind to make Choice of a Speaker
according to her Majesty's Pleasure given unto them in that behalf, showed that
in his opinion he thinks Mr John Crook, Recorder of London, returned one of
the Knights for the City of London into this present Parliament, to be a very
fit, able and sufficient Man to supply the whole Charge of the said Office of
Speaker, being a Gentleman very Religious, very Judicious, of a good
Conscience, and well furnished with all other good parts; yet leaves
nevertheless the further consideration thereof to this House; and so did sit
again. Which done, and no one contrary Voice at all being delivered, the said
Mr Crook after some large Pause first taken stood up, and very Learnedly and
Eloquently endeavored to disable himself at large, for the burden of that
charge, alleging his great defects both of Nature and of Art fit to supply
that place, and showing all full Complements for the same to abound in many
other Learned and grave Members of this House; in the end prayed most humbly
that they would accept of his due excuse, and be pleased to proceed to a new
Election; and did then sit down again. Whereupon the said Mr Comptroller did
stand up, and said, that hearing no negative Voice he took it for a due
Election, and demanding the further opinion of this House therein, they all
Answered Yea, and gave their Assents. Whereupon the said Mr Comptroller and the
Right Honorable Sir John Stanhop her Majesty's Vice-Chamberlain immediately
went to the said Mr John Crook, and did set him in the Chair; which done, the
said Mr Crook after some little pause did stand up, and yielding unto this
whole House most humble thanks for their great good opinion of him and loving
favor toward him; and praying them to accept of his willing mind and
readiness, and to bear with his unableness and wants in the service of this
House, referred himself to their good favors. And then the said Mr Comptroller
signified further unto this House, that her Majesty's Pleasure was, that the
Members of this House having made choice of their Speaker should present him
unto her Highness upon Friday next following in the Afternoon. And so then
every man departed and went his way.

On Friday the 30th day of October about one of the Clock in the Afternoon the
Knights, Citizens and Burgesses of the House of Commons with John Crook Esquire
Recorder of London, their Speaker Elect, Assembled together in their own House,
and having stayed there a good while silent, and attending her Majesty's
Pleasure to be sent for to the Upper House, and hearing nothing thereof, they
did at length depart out of their own House and went of themselves toward the
said Upper House there to be more near and ready to come before her Highness at
such time as she should be pleased to send for them, which she did accordingly
after they had waited at the said Upper House Door about half an hour; where
the Speaker aforesaid being presented unto her Majesty, was, notwithstanding
his excuse made according to the usual form to the contrary, approved and
allowed by her. And upon her said Majesty's granting of such Petitions of
course as the said Speaker did lastly make in the name of the House of Commons,
touching liberty of Speech, free access to her Majesty, and freedom from
Arrests and Suits, he with the rest of the said Commons House returned back to
their own House, the Sergeant of the said House carrying the Mace before the
said Speaker into the said House.

Where the said Speaker after some good pause of time did signify unto the
Members of the said House (being most of them set in their several places) that
her Majesty's pleasure delivered by the Lord Keeper was, that this Parliament
should be a short Parliament; And therefore she willed that the Members of this
House should not spend the time in frivolous, vain and unnecessary Motions and
Arguments, but only should bend all their best endeavors and travails wholly
in the devising and making of the most necessary and wholesome Laws for the good
and benefit of the Commonwealth and the Realm. And further showed, that her
Highness did purpose that the Members of this House should have convenient
scope of time to repair home into their Countries before Christmas for her
Majesty's better Service in their Countries; And declared withal, that in
regard of some matters of great importance her Highness had Adjourned this
Court till Thursday next at nine of the Clock in the Forenoon. Which done, the
Members of this House did forthwith rise and depart without reading any Bill at
all, by reason of the Adjournment, taking the same to extend as well to this
House as to the said Upper House; but were mistaken, as upon the next Morning
further afterward appeared upon advertisement of the said Lord Keeper to Mr.
Speaker, that the said Adjournment did only tend to the said Upper House, and
not to this House.

Nota, that in the last foregoing Parliament de Anno 39 and 40. Reginae Eliz.
Anno Domini 1597. The House of Commons upon a like mistake, which happened
chiefly through the negligence of Christopher Yelverton Sergeant at Law their
Speaker at that time, was Adjourned, upon Thursday the 27th day of October unto
Saturday following being the 5th day of November in Anno praedicto, where this
said matter was fully handled by a large Animadversion upon it, ut vide ibidem.

Nota also, That the passages of these two foregoing days are more orderly and
copiously set down in the Original Journal Book of the House of Commons than
usual, and are therefore wholly inserted out of it, with the addition and
alteration only of some few matters of course.

On Saturday the 31th day of October Mr Francis Bacon, returned into this
present Parliament one of the Burgesses for the Borough of Ipswich in the
County of Suffolk, and also for the Borough of St. Albans in the County of
Hartford, showed unto this House that he makes choice to stand for the said
Borough of Ipswich. Whereupon it was Ordered by this House, that a Warrant be
made to the Clerk of the Crown-Office in the Chancery for the awarding of a new
Writ for returning of another Burgess for the said Borough of St Albans in lieu
and stead of the said Mr Francis Bacon.

Mr George Goring, one of the Burgesses for the Borough of Jews in the County
of Sussex, showed on the behalf of Mr Goddard Pemberton returned into this
present Parliament a Burgess for the sasd Borough of Jews, and also for the
Borough of Peterborough in the County of Northampton, that the said Mr.
Pemberton makes choice to stand for the said Borough of Peterborough: It is
thereupon Ordered by this House that a Warrant be made to the Clerk of the
Crown-Office in the Chancery for the awarding of a new Writ for the Choosing and
returning of another Burgess for the said Borough of Jews in lieu and stead of
the said Mr Goddard Pemberton.

A Committee was appointed to travel in the Examination of such Returns and
matters of privilege as shall happen questionable in this House during this
present Sessions of Parliament, and to report their Proceedings therein unto
this House from time to time for the further resolution of this House to be had
in the same accordingly, viz. All the Privy Council being Members of this
House, Mr Thomas Knivet, Mr Attorneys of the Duchy and Court of Wards, Sir
Francis Hastings, Sir Robert Wroth, Mr Michael Stanhop, Mr Francis Bacon, Sir
Edward Hobbie, Mr Solicitor, Mr George Moore, Mr Peake, Mr Sergeant Heyle, Mr
Leife, Mr Jerome Horsey, Mr Henry Hubberd, Sir Walter Raleigh, Sir Robert
Knolls, Sir Edward Stafford, Mr Henry Maynard, Mr Snigg, Mr Oldworth, Mr Boyse,
Mr Wiseman, Mr Lake, Mr John Hare, Mr Sergeant Harris, Sir Richard Knightley,
Mr Francis Fortescue, Mr. Robert Wingfield and Mr. William Coke, who were
appointed to meet upon Thursday next in the Afternoon in the Court of Wards;
And the Note of the Committees names was delivered to Sir Edward Hobbie.

The Bill for the strengthening of certain Grants made for the maintenance and
Government of certain Hospitals in London, was read the first time.

The Bill also against excessive and common Drunkenness had its first reading.

On Monday the second day of November, Two Bills had each of them one reading;
of which the second being the Bill to preserve the Breed of Horses, and to
avoid the common stealing of them, was read the first time. After which diverse
Speeches were made, which are transcribed out of the abovesaid private Journal.

Sir Edward Hobbie made a Speech for the abridging of Penal Laws, which he said
were like Thorns that did prick, but did yield no Fruit; And that they being
not looked unto, it bred in us an alteration in manners: And therefore the
Proverb must needs be fulfilled Morum mutatio mutationem legum requirit. Times
are not as they have been, and therefore the necessity of time makes a
necessity of alteration of Laws, with many other circumstances touching the
shortness of Statutes, and commending the proceeding of former ages, he
concluded with a desire of a Committee.

Which Speech was seconded by Mr Sergeant Harris, who said that in the 27th
year of the Queen the like Motion had been made, and that then by reason of the
shortness of the time and sudden ending of the Parliament, nothing was done
therein: Notwithstanding he said, that now this motion being so happily made,
and that then by reason of the shortness of the time nothing was done, he
thought it fit for a Committee.

He was seconded again by Mr Wiseman of Lincoln's Inn, who was of the same mind,
and said, That diverse particular Laws of his knowledge were now both needless
to be performed, as also dangerous to the Subject by reason of the Penalties.
Whereupon the House agreed that the said Bill should be committed, and
Committees were nominated (which are inserted out of the Orinal Journal Book it
self) viz. All the Privy Council being Members of this House, Mr Dr Caesar,
Master of Requests, Sir Edward Hobbie, Mr Wiseman, Mr Dr Crompton, Mr Dr
Perkins, Mr Dr Dunn, the Knights and Citizens for London, the Knights and
Citizens for Norwich, Sir Walter Raleigh, Mr Tanfield, Mr Francis Bacon, Mr
Robert Wingfield, Sir Robert Wroth, Sir George Moore, Sir Moile Finch, Sir John
Harrington, Sir Thomas Leighton, Mr Snigg, Mr Phillipps, Mr Winch, Mr. Tho.
Culpepper, Mr. Hide, Mr. Oldsworth, Mr. Maynard, the Lord Howard, Sir Richard
Knightley, Sir Robert Carey, the Lord Clinton, Mr. Dale, Mr. William Lane, Mr.
Michael Stanhop, Mr. Warcop, Sir Henry Nevil, Sir Arthur George, Sir Edward
Hungerford, Sir William Strowde, Sir William Courtney, Mr. John Egerton, Mr.
Dr. James, Sir Crew Rawleigh, Mr. Boyse, Sir Henry Brunker and Sir Thomas
Gerrard, who were appointed to meet in the Exchequer Chamber upon Friday next
in the Afternoon.

The Bill for the explanation of such Statutes as touch Leases to be made by
Archbishops and Bishops, was read the first time.

Monition was this day given by Mr. Speaker unto the Members of this House;
that they would forbear from henceforth to come into this House with their
Spurs on, in regard it is very offensive to many others of the residue of them.
Thus far out of the Original Book it self.

Others also (although nothing were done therein) moved to have Boots and
Rapiers taken away, as is set down in the above mentioned private Journal.

On Tuesday the 3d day of November, Upon a Motion made by Mr. Speaker on the
behalf of Mr. Fulk Onslow the Clerk of this House, for that it has pleased God
to visit him with an Ague, That it would please this House to vouchsafe their
allowance unto Cadwallader Tydder his Servant to execute the place in his
absence as Deputy unto the said Mr. Onslow, until it shall please God to
restore him to health. Which was willingly assented unto by the whole House,
and by Order of the whole House the said Tydder took the Oath of Supremacy.

Nota, That there was a like precedent in the second meeting of the Parliament
(after an Adjournment thereof) in Anno 28 and 29. Regin. Eliz. An. Dom. 1586.
when upon the like Motion of the Speaker on Wednesday the 15th day of February,
William Onslow kinsman of the said Mr. Fulk Onslow, being at that time a Member
of the House of Commons, was during his sickness allowed by the said House to
exercise and supply the place of Clerk thereof as at this present time
Cadwallader Tydder servant to the said Mr. Fulk Onslow was licensed to supply
the same.

Six Bills of no great moment had each of them one reading; of which the last
being the Bill for the better preserving the breed of Horses, and to avoid the
common stealing of them, was upon the second reading committed unto Sir Edward
Hobbie, Sir Robert Wroth, Mr. Walter Cope, Mr. Fulk Grevil, Mr. Hide and
others, who were appointed to meet on Monday next in the Exchequer Chamber at
two of the Clock in the Afternoon; And the Bill and Committees names were
delivered to Sir Robert Wroth.

The Bill to reform the Abuses in Inns, Victualling-Houses, etc. was read the
second time, and being put to the question for committing, was upon the
question refused to be committed.

Upon a Motion made by Mr. Leife, that whereas many Members of this House,
which could not come to the Upper House upon the first day of this Parliament
(the Door being kept shut) to hear her Majesty's pleasure signified by the
Mouth of the Lord Keeper, of the Causes of her Majesty's calling of this
Parliament, they might in some sort be satisfied of the same, He puts Mr.
Comptroller in mind of his Honors promise to relate the same unto them. Who
thereupon desired Mr. Secretary Cecil (because he the said Mr. Comptroller was
not there himself) to make the same relation; which the said Mr. Secretary
doing at large, The chief intent and scope thereof appeared to aim at the
setting forth of two things especially, the First the Danger the Kingdom stood
in, in respect of the power and malice of the Spaniard: the Second that timely
provision of Treasure might be made for the prevention. Thus far out of the
Original Journal Book it self. Mr Secretary Cecil's Speech, which follows,
being spoken after that he had repeated the Lord Keepers Speech, is inserted
out of the beforecited private Journal of the House, in manner and form
following.

For my own advice touching the particular Counsels of this House, I wish that
we would not trouble our selves with any fantastic speeches or idle Bills, but
rather such as be for the general good, both light in conception, and facile in
execution. Now seeing it has pleased you all hitherto with patience to hear
me, if with your favor I may particularize and show the grounds of the former
delivered Speech touching the State of Ireland, I shall be very glad both for
my own discharge and for your satisfaction. The King of Spain having quit
himself of France by a base and servile Peace, forgets not to follow the
Objects of his Fathers Ambition, England and the Low Countries. He has made
Overtures of Peace, which if they might both be honorable and for the public
good, I hold him neither a wise nor an honest man would impugn them. He has
put an Army into Ireland, the number Four thousand Soldiers, under the conduct
of a valiant, expert and hardy Captain; who chooses rather than return into
his own Country without any famous enterprise, to live and die in this service.
These Four thousand are three parts Natural Spaniards, and of his best expert
Soldiers, except them of the Low Countries: Those he could not spare, because
of his enterprise of Ostend. And how dangerous the loss of that Town would be
to this Land, I think there is no man of experience but can witness with me;
For he would easily be Master of all that Coast, so that the Trade between
England and the Low Countries would be quite dissolved; Yea he would be so
dangerous a Neighbor to us, that we which are now Tenants by discretion are
likely shortly to be Tenants by the Courtesy. When he is our Neighbor of the
Low Countries, what Neighbor has Spain to whom he shall not be troublesome.

I will show you further what besides this he has done, and how Eagle-eyed he
is continually over us; To resist the Turks attempts, he has sent Ten thousand
Men; To the Low Countries nine thousand; In an Enterprise of his own against
the Turk he has sent..... which being dispatched, those Soldiers shall return
against the next Spring and second these four thousand men. Now in the
Enterprise for Ireland, to resist those attempts in being, and the ensuing
Provisions against us, let us consider the certainty of our Estate in Ireland;
We have there an Army, and nothing but an Army, fed even out of England, with
what charge it brings to the Queen, what trouble to the Subject, what danger it
is to them there left if the provision should fail, what hurt to the
Commonwealth by making things at a higher rate than otherwise they would be, I
refer it to your Wisdoms to imagine. Over this, I assure you, it is beyond all
Precedent and conjecture, his presence and cause of War there, is to defend the
Catholic Cause, I mean, to tear her Majesty's Subjects from her; for I may say
she has no Catholic obedient Subject there, because she stands
Excommunicate at this present by force of two Bulls of this Popes, by which the
Subjects are absolved of their obedience. That you do only remember you do it
pro aris and focis; Yea we do it for a Prince that desires not to draw any
thing extraordinary out of the Coffers of her Subjects. She sells her Land to
defend us, she supporteth all the Neighboring Princes to gain their amities
and establish our long Peace; Not these five, or seven, or ten years, but forty
three Years for all our Prosperities. I hope I shall not see her Funeral upon
which may be written, Hic solum restat victrix Orientis. And I pray God I may
not. What we freely give unto her, she living bestows it to our Good, and dying
doubtless will leave it for our profit. Thus have I out of mine own genius for
mine own part delivered unto you what I know. And touching that I have spoken
in performing your Commandment, I will take no thanks from you for my pains,
for no man cares with less affection to speak in this Assembly, or desires to
gratify any particular Member of this House more than my self.

Mr. George Moore moved, that whereas the Lord Keepers Oration was, that the
greatest matters should be handled in the beginning of the Parliament, a
Committee might be chosen to certify the House what those matters were, that
Order might be taken accordingly.

Thus far out of the aforesaid private Journal of the House of Commons. The
Committees names who were appointed upon the aforesaid Motion of Mr. George
Moore to consider what those weighty matters were, which had likewise in part
been touched in Mr. Secretary Cecills Speech immediately foregoing, do now also
follow out of the Original Book it self, which were these, All the
Privy Council being Members of this House, the Knights of the Shires, the
Barons of the Cinque Ports, the Knights and Citizens for London and York, Sir
Thomas Egerton, Mr. Solicitor, Sir Edward Stanhop, Mr. Sergeant Heile, Mr.
Sergeant Harris, Mr. Henry Brunker, Mr. Glastock, Mr. Leonard, Sir William
Harvy, Mr. Henry Hubberd, Sir William Strowde, the Burgesses of Totnesse, Mr.
Hide, Mr. Winch, Sir Richard Knightly, Sir Richard Hampden, My Lord Howard of
Effingham, Sir Francis Darcy, Sir Robert Cross, Mr. Tyne, The Citizens for
Norwich, Mr. Francis Bacon, Sir Edward Hobbie, Mr. Doctor Caesar, Mr.
Newdigate, Mr. Philipps, Mr. Robert Wingfield, Mr. Maynard, The Citizens for
Bristoll, Sir Matthew Brown, Mr. Jones for Hereford, Mr. Francis Moore, Mr.
Mountague, Sir Moile Finch, Mr. Edward Barker, Sir John Egerton, Mr. Boice, Mr.
Lake, Mr. Cope and Mr. Richard Warberton, who were appointed to meet in this
House upon Saturday next at two of the Clock in the Afternoon. Vide December 5.
Saturday postea.

On Wednesday the 4th day of November, the Bill for the better keeping of the
Sabbath day, was upon the second reading committed unto Sir George Moore, Sir
William Wray and diverse others, who were appointed to meet this Afternoon in
the Middle Temple Hall at two of the Clock.

Thus far out of the Original Journal Book of the House of Commons, the rest
that follows touching the Election of Sir Andrew Nowell to be one of the
Knights for Rutlandshire, being at the same time Sheriff of the said County,
being but briefly and imperfectly set down, is therefore supplied out of the
said private Journal of the House of Commons.

Mr. Sergeant Harris moved the House, that in respect great danger and
inconvenience might grow by the want of any one particular Member of this
House, Therefore he thought good to certify the want of a Knight for
Rutlandshire; For he said, that Sir Andrew Nowell being Sheriff of the County
had returned himself jointly with Sir John Harrington to be Knight, which he
took in Law to be a void Return, because it is against the express words of the
Writ, which are, Ita quod neque tu neque aliquis alius Vicecomes alterius
Comitatus eligatur, etc. which he thought good to move the House in referring
it to their considerations; And prays that the Record may be sent for from
the Clerk of the Crown; for says he, we know in Law, that a man cannot make an
Indenture to himself and the County, for there are required two persons.

To which Sir Edward Hobbie replied, that notwithstanding this, the House might
well receive him. And he vouched a Precedent in the 31th of this Queen, when a
Writ was directed to the Bailiffs of Southwark to return Burgesses, and they
returned themselves and were received. But if we do not receive him, another
question will grow, Whether a new Warrant must go from the Speaker to Elect a
new Knight, or from the Clerk of the Crown. To which it was agreed per omnes,
that from the Speaker.

Then Mr. Wiseman of Lincoln's Inn stood up and showed the necessity of having
all our Members, because otherwise the Body is but maimed; as also how
dangerous a Precedent this would be if it might pass with the Applause of this
House; And lastly, the reason of putting in the aforesaid special words in the
Writ, because it must be necessarily intended, that they being so great
Officers, having so great a charge, and their presence in their Countries so
requisite, should not be returned. Besides, for that time they be the chief men
of the Shire, Freeholders peradventure for favor sake would rather choose him
than men far more sufficient for that place.

Mr. Carey moved, whether if it were with his will, he should be punished by
Fine or otherwise.

Sir John Harrington said, of his own knowledge he knew him to be very
unwilling: But the Freeholders made Answer they would have none other.

Mr. Speaker said, it could not be intended against his will, for his hand is
to the Indenture; but he moved whether it should be intended that this Sir
Anthony Nowell were una and eadem persona, or no; And though it were, yet
whether they could take notice thereof, not being certified out of the
Chancery. To which all the House said, there was no other of the name.

Then Mr. Comptroller stood up and moved, that in respect the Return was joint,
and that they did disallow Sir Anthony Nowell, he desired to be resolved of the
Learned Masters of the Law in this House, whether all the Return were
insufficient, and so Sir John Harrington to be excluded. To which all the whole
House said No.

Mr. Sergeant Harris said No, because the said Warrant is affirmative to choose
any but the Sheriff, who is excepted by special words; so that the Return of
the other is warranted, but that of himself is void.

Sir Edward Hobbie Answered and said, nay then Mr. Sergeant, if you stand on
that, I think there are few Knights in this House lawfully chosen, for the
words of the Writ and Statute are, that he must be Commorant within the County,
which but few are. To which not one word was Answered. And that Clause was
hushed up.

Mr. Speaker said, Well, I will put it to the question, which shall be twofold,
one whether the Return be void, the other whether a new Warrant shall be sent
forth. To which being twice moved, all cried I, I, I; not one man said No.

Sir Edward Hobbie said, Mr. Speaker the Warrant must go from your self, for in
the twenty seventh Year of this Queen, when Parrie was Burgess for Queenborough
a new Election was made, and the Warrant was sent from the Speaker.

Nota, That this resolution of the House is directly contrary to a former
Precedent agreed on in the House of Commons upon Friday the 21th day of
February in the Parliament de An. xxxio Regin. Eliz. Anno Dom. 1588, 1589.
where Mr. St Poole being both Knight for the County of Lincoln and Sheriff of
the same also, was notwithstanding allowed to retain his place in the said
House as a Member thereof, and had only License given unto him to depart into
the said County about the business of his said Sheriffwick, in no other form or
manner than is vouchsafed of course to the Members of the said House upon any
urgent occasions by them alleged, requiring their absence for some time, be it
longer or shorter. Where other Precedents also to this purpose are vouched, and
yet perhaps both the said Precedents may stand good and be reconciled, with
this difference, that where any man is first Sheriff of some County and then
Elected a Knight of the same, or a Citizen, Burgess or Baron of any City,
Borough or Cinque-Port of the same, that in this Case his Election is void,
because it must of necessity follow, as in this Case of Sir Andrew Nowell it
did, that he must return himself, which cannot be good in Law. But where a man
is first Elected a Member of the House of Commons, be it Knight, Citizen,
Burgess or Baron, and is afterward made Sheriff of some County, here his first
Election stands good, as it should seem also it does, although he may be
first made a Sheriff of some County, and be afterward Elected a Knight,
Citizen, Burgess or Baron of and in some other Shire or County. And the reason
of all is plain, in respect, that in all these latter Cases his Return cannot
be made by himself, but by the Sheriff of the County where he is Chosen. This
only holds good in the Case of Knight of the Shire.

The Bill for Explanation of such Statutes as touch Leases to be made by
Archbishops and Bishops, was read the second time and rejected, after Mr. Boise
had spoken to it as follows.

To which only Mr. Boise stood up and said, that this Act would be prejudicial
to the Bishop present and the Successor, to their Servants and to the Bishops
own Farmers and Tenants; To the Bishop present, in the maintenance of his
Estate which comes only by continual Fines, which if they be taken away, then
are they not able to maintain that Hospitality, and keep that retinue either
belonging to their place or answerable to their living. For consider the
Revenue of the greatest Bithoprick in England, it is but two thousand two
hundred pounds, whereof he pays for Annual Subsidies to the Queen five
hundred pounds. And what damage we shall do both to him and his Successor
herein, his Revenue being so beneficial to her Majesty, I refer to all your
Judgments.

To the Successor it must needs be more hurtful; For when he first comes in,
he pays First Fruits, and yet is not allowed to make his benefit by Fines,
which all Bishops Farmers are content to do, so that he is cast one whole
Annual value behind hand, and perhaps has no power neither to make Leases in
twelve or sixteen Years. This, Mr. Speaker, will induce the Ministers of the
Word not to seek Bishoprics, whereby we may bring the Clergy both to Poverty
and Contempt, from which they have ever been carefully defended and provided
for even by the most ancient Statutes and Laws of this Land now extant.

Hurtful it is to their Servants (for this may be every Man's Case) We know very
many good Gentlemen's Sons serve Bishops, and how can they reward their long and
faithful Services, but only by means of granting over of these Fines or some
other means out of their Spiritual Function? But this Act is good for the
Courtier; but I may speak no more of that point.

Lastly, Mr. Speaker, my self am Farmer to a Bishop and I speak this as in my
own Case (on my knowledge) to the House, that it is ordinary upon every Grant
after four or five years, ever (...) and take a new Lease, but I refer it to
the consideration of the House to do their Pleasure (...) Only this I can
certify, That I have (...) of the Bill the last Parliament exhibited to this
purpose, which I having conferred together with the present Bill, do find them
to be word for word all one. And the last was rejected. Whereupon this was also
(as is beforementioned) rejected.

Thus far out of the aforementioned private Journal, the residue of this days
Passages that follows are transcribed out of the Original Journal Book of the
House of Commons it self.

The Bill that Plaintiffs in Writs of Error shall give good Bayl, was read the
second time, and committed unto Mr. Carry, Mr. Tanfield and others, who were
appointed to meet upon Monday next in the Middle Temple Hall at two of the
Clock in the Afternoon.

The Bill against fraudulent Administration of Intestates Goods was upon the
second reading committed unto the last former Committees in the Bill for Writs
of Error, to meet at the same time and place.

The Bill against excessive and common Drunkenness was also read the second
time and committed to the former Committees in the Bill for the Sabbath day,
and to meet in the Temple-Hall this Afternoon.

The Bill touching the sowing of Hemp was read the second time, and upon the
question for committing was upon the division of the House, with the advantage
of fifty Voices Ordered to be committed, viz. with the Yea a hundred and three,
and with the No a hundred forty two. And upon the question for the engrossing,
was Ordered not to be engrossed.

The Committees names for the Bill of Subsidy, (whose names see on Monday the
second day of this instant November foregoing) as also the Committees names for
penal Laws, (who were appointed on Tuesday the third day of this same Month
foregoing) were this day delivered to Mr Comptroller.

The Bill touching the Sabbath, and the Bill against Drunkenness, were
delivered to Mr Edward Mountague one of the Committees.

On Thursday the 5th day of November, Two Bills of no great moment had each of
them one reading, of which the first concerning matters of Assurances used
amongst Merchants was read the first time.

Sir Francis Hastings, one of the Committees in the Bill for the better keeping
of the Sabbath day (whose names see on Yesterday immediately foregoing) showed
the travel of the Committees, and brought in the Bill with some Amendments and
a Proviso, and prayed the reading thereof, the Bill standing upon two parts,
the latter part thereof not having been dealt in at all by the Committees.

The Amendments and Proviso in the Bill for the better keeping of the Sabbath
day were twice read. And the Bill it self being read for the second reading was
Ordered to be engrossed.

Two Bills also had each of them one reading; of which the second being the
Bill for the suppressing of deceits in Weights and Measures was read the first
time.

Upon a Motion made this day a Committee was appointed to consider of the
Statute for relief of the Poor, and for continuance and Explanation of
Statutes, etc. viz. Sir Robert Wroth, Mr Philipps, Sir Edward Hobbie, Sir
Francis Hastings, Sir George Moore and others, who were appointed to meet upon
Thursday next in the Exchequer Chamber at two of the Clock in the Afternoon.

The Bill for Resormation of Abuses in Alehouses and Tippling Houses was read
the second time, and committed unto Sir Edward Stanhop, Mr Wiseman, Mr Johnson,
Sir Robert Wroth, Sir Francis Darcy, Mr Peake, Mr Edward Philipps, the
Burgesses of Newcastle and others; and the Bill was delivered to Sir Robert
Wroth, who with the rest was appointed to meet upon Wednesday next in the
Exchequer Chamber at two of the Clock in the Afternoon.

Two Bills had each of them one reading; of which the second being the Bill
against Blasphemous Swearing was read the first time.

Thus far out of the Original Journal Book of the House of Commons it self; the
residue of this days passages is transcribed out of the often above mentioned
private Journal.

Mr Bacon stood up to prefer a new Bill and said, Mr Speaker, I am not of their
mind that bring their Bills into this House obscurely, by delivery only to your
self or to the Clerk, delighting to have the Bill to be incerto authore, as
though they were either ashamed of their own work or afraid to father their own
Children; But I, Mr Speaker, have a Bill here, which I know I shall no sooner
be ready to offer, but you will be ready to receive and approve. I liken this
Bill to that sentence of the Poet who set this as a Paradox in the forefront
of his Book, first Water, then Gold, preferring necessity before pleasure. And
I am of the same opinion, that things necessary in use are better than those
things which are glorious in estimation. This Mr Speaker, is no Bill of State
nor of Novelty, like a stately Gallery for pleasure, but neither to dine in nor
sleep in; But this Bill is a Bill of repose, of quiet, of profit, of true and
just dealings; The Title whereof is, An Act for the better suppressing of
abuses in Weights and Measures.

We have turned out diverse Bills without disputation: And for a House of wisdom
and gravity as this is, to bandy Bills like Balls, and to be silent as if no
body were of Council with the Commonwealth, is unfitting in my understanding
for the State thereof. I Will tell you Mr Speaker, out of mine own Experience,
that I have learned and observed, having had Causes of this nature referred to
my Report; That this fault of using false Weights and Measures is grown so
intolerable and common, that if you would build Churches, you shall not need
for Battlements and Bells, other than false Weights of Lead and Brass. And
because I would observe the advice given in the beginning of this Parliament
that we should make no new Laws; I have only made this Bill a confirmation of
the Statute of the 11th of Hen. the 7th with a few additions, to which I will
speak at the passing of the Bill, and show the reasons of every particular
Clause, the whole being a Revival of a former Statute: for I take it far better
to scowre a Stream, than to turn a Stream. And the first Clause is, that it is
to extend to the principality of Wales, to constrain them to have the like
Measures and Weights to us in England.

Sir Robert Cecill moved the House to have their opinions, in that there wanted
a chief Member, viz. a Knight of Denbigh Shire. And he said, I am to certify
the House thus much, in respect of some disorder committed there touching the
Election by Sir Richard Trevor and Sir John Fludd, to which Sir John Salisbury
is a party, the Sheriff could not proceed in Election. For mine own part I
think it fit that Mr Speaker should attend my Lord Keeper therein ( quod nota,
attend) if it please you, You shall hear the Letter which was read, and the
Contents thereof was, That on the one and twentieth day of October at he hept
the County day, and there being quietly choosing the Knights for the Shire, a
Cry came suddenly that Sir Richard Trevor and Sir John Fludd on the one part,
and Sir John Salisbury on the other, were a fighting, and all their Companies
were ready to do the like. Whereupon presently I went to the Churchyard where
they were, and there I found both parties with their Swords drawn ready, but
with much a do pacified them both; and fearing lest by drawing such a Multitude
together, there might great danger and bloodshed happen, I made Proclamation
that every man should depart. By means whereof I did not execute her Majesty's
Writ as I thought to have done, rather choosing to adventure your Honors
censures herein, than to hazard so great a bloodshed. Subscribed,

Your Honors most humbly at Commandment, Owen Vaughan.


Also Mr. Secretary said there was a Schedule annexed to the Letter which had
some matters of importance not fit to be read; Yet if it please the House to
command it, they should. Whereupon all cried No No.

Sir Edward Hobbie answered, Methinks under favor, the motion Mr. Secretary
made is good, but the form therein (I speak with all reverence) not fitting the
State of this House. For he said, Mr Speaker shall attend my Lord Keeper.
Attend? It is well known that the Speaker of the House is the Mouth of the
whole Realm; And that the whole State of the Commonalty of a Kingdom should
attend one Person; I see no reason. I refer it to the consideration of the
House: Only this proposition I hold, That our Speaker is to be commanded by
none, neither to attend any, but the Queen only.

Mr Johnson said, The Speaker might ex Officio send a Warrant to the Clerk of
the Crown who is to certify the Lord Keeper, and so to make a new Warrant.

Sir Edward Hobbie said, That for Election of Burgesles he had seen half a
score yesterday with Sir John Puckerings hand, when he was Speaker.

Mr Speaker said, I may inform you of the Order of the House, that a Warrant
must go from the Speaker to the Clerk of the Crown, who is to inform the Lord
Keeper, and then to make a new Writ.

Mr Secretary Cecill said, I should be very sorry to detract from any
particular Member of this House, much more from the general State; my meaning
was mistaken and my words misconstrued, yet both in substance agreeing with Mr
Speaker.

Post Meridiem.

At the Committee held this Afternoon touching Returns and matters of
privilege (who had been appointed on Saturday the 31. day of October
foregoing) there were showed diverse Precedents to prove that the Warrant to be
directed to the Clerk of the Crown for a Writ to be sent out for a new Election
of any Member of the House, ought to be directed from the Speaker, which said
Precedents were as follows, viz.

In Anno 27. Reginae Eliz. Anno Domini 1584. 4th Decembris, Valentine Dale
Master of the Requests was returned Burgess for Chichester and also for Hindon,
but he chose Chichester; And John Puckering Speaker directed his Warrant to the
Clerk of the Crown to send a Writ to make a new Election in Hindon, which bare
date the 10th of December, six days after 27 Eliz.

Secondly, In Anno 27o Regin. Eliz. Anno Domini 1584. 21o Decembr. the Writ
bearing Test 19 February for the same matter, In which the style of the House
is, Knights, Citizens, Burgesses and Barons, quod nota.

Thirdly, Anno praedicto Regin. ejusdem Anno Domini 1584. 19 Febr. when Parry
being Burgess of Quecnborough in Kent was Attainted of Treason, A Warrant was
directed to the Clerk of the Crown to make a new Writ dated the 19th day of
February aforesaid, in which Warrant under the Speakers own hand was inserted a
reason to this effect, viz. because the said Parry is disabled by reason of his
Attainder.

Fourthly, In Ano xxviio praedict. Regin. Eliz. Anno Dom. 1584. 30 Novembr.
Thomas Bodley was Elected Burgess of Portsmouth and also Baron for one of the
Cinque Ports, viz. Hieth, but he took Portsmouth and refused the other;
whereupon a Warrant was directed as abovesaid, but no Test of the Writ was
there.

Fifthly, 28th January 1584. Alexander Pine Esquire chosen Burgess for Taunton
being Deceased, a new Writ was made. The Writ bare Test 30th January.

Sixthly, 3o Decembr. Anno Domini 1584. John Puckering being Speaker was chosen
for Bedford and Caermarthen, and chose Bedford, whereupon a Warrant was made to
the Clerk of the Crown for a new Writ, which bare date the 4th day of December
Anno xxviio Regin. Eliz. All which Warrants were signed by the Speaker John
Puckering.

For the matter between Doctor Awbrey Doctor of the Civil Law, and Mr. William
Delabarr Barrester of the Common Law of Lincolns Inn touching the Burgessship
of Cardigan in Wales, the Cause stood thus.

Cardigan has been by ancient Precedents ever since the first Year of Queen
Elizabeth a Burgess Town, and ever the Return of the Indenture has been for
Cardigan only. Now this Parliament, the Sheriff of the Shire favoring a Town
called Aberystwith, after he received the Parliament Writ, sent his Warrants to
the Bailiffs of Aberystwith to choose a Burgess, etc. who chose a Burgess, viz.
Doctor Awbrey, and returned him Burgess for Cardigan and Aberystwith, and
showed in the Indenture the Election to be made by both Towns; And the
Indenture was signed with the Sheriffs hand. On the other side the Bailiffs of
Cardigan understanding the Writ to be come to the Sheriff, took notice thereof,
and without Warrant from the Sheriff made an Indenture and Election of William
Delabarr, and sent the same in a Letter to him. Mr Delabarr sought the Sheriff
or his Deputy in London to deliver the Indenture of Cardigan, but not finding
him, delivered the same to the Clerk of the Crown, paid his Fees, was sworn and
admitted into the House till this present day. Now at this Committee for
Privileges Dr. Awbrey came to complain; the Committees found upon Examination
of the matter, that the County Court was as well kept at Aberystwith as at
Cardigan, alternis vicibus, and that the County Court was to be kept this time
at Aberystwith. So when they went to the Conference both Awbrey and Delabarr
were desired to depart forth. And upon Consultation these Questions arose;
First, Whether the House have Power to Fine the Sheriff, because according to
the Statute, he sent not his Warrant to Cardigan; Next, If he be punishable by
the Penalty of the Statute; Also if he have pursued his Authority in making his
Election in Aberystwith. Which are left with diverse other doubts to the
discussing of the House the next day, and to the Report of Sir Edward Hobbie or
Mr. Solicitor.

Also in the twenty third of Elizabeth a Warrant to the Town of Hull from the
Speaker Popham (now Lord Chief Justice, being then Speaker.)

Sir Edward Hobbie at this Committee said, Awbrey and Delabarr, the one a
Civil, the other a Common Lawyer; That he might say to them as the Duke of
Millain said of the Thief, It is no matter, whether goes first, the Hangman or
the Thief.

The Town of Harwich in Essex and Newtown in the County of Southampton have
returned Burgesses this Parliament, which they never did before.

Thus far out of the aforesaid private Journal. The ensuing days Passages do
follow out of the Original Book it self.

On Friday the 6th day of November, Three Bills of no great moment had each of
them one reading; of which the last being the Bill to avoid diverse misdemeanors
in base and idle Persons, was read the first time.

Mr. Dr. James being a Committee in the Bill against Drunkenness, which was
committed on Wednesday the 4th day of this instant November foregoing, declared
the meeting and travel of the Committees and their framing of a new Bill to
that purpose, and so delivered in both the old and the new Bill.

Three Bills also had each of them one reading; of which the last being the
Bill for the better keeping of the Sabbath day was read the third time and
Ordered to be referred to the former Committees (whose names see on Wednesday
the 4th day of this instant November foregoing) for the framing of a new Bill;
And Sir Robert Wroth, Mr. Solicitor, Mr. Wingfield, Mr. Glascock, Mr. Henshaw,
Mr. Johnson and Sir William Wray were added to the said former Committees, to
meet this day in the Afternoon at two of the Clock in the Exchequer Chamber.

Two Bills lastly of no great moment had each of them one reading; of which the
first being the Bill against false Returns, and not returning Writs by Warrant
by Sheriffs and Bailiffs, was read the third time and dashed upon the question.

On Saturday the 7th day of November, the Bill that the Lord Marquess of
Winchester may dispose of his Lands whereof he is Tenant in Tail as other
Tenants in Tail by the Laws and Statutes of the Realm may do, a private Statute
made 27 Henr. 8. to the contrary notwithstanding, and for Confirmation of a
Partition heretofore had before the late Lord Marquess of Winchester Deceased,
and the now Lord Mountjoy, by Virtue of a Statute made in the last Parliament,
was read the first time.

The Bill for the better setting of Watches was read the second time and
committed unto Sir George Moore, Sir Robert Wroth, the Knights and Citizens for
London and Westminster, Mr Wiseman and others, who were appointed to meet upon
Thursday next at two of the Clock in the Afternoon in the Middle Temple Hall.

The Committees for Returns and Privileges (whose names see on Saturday the
31th of October foregoing) were appointed to meet upon Wednesday next.

The Bill to avoid diverse misdemeanors in base and idle persons was upon the
second reading committed unto the last former Committee in the Bill for setting
of Watches, and Mr Johnson was added unto them; And the Bill was delivered unto
Sir Robert Wroth one of the same Committee, and Mr Sergeant Harris to be
exempted out of the Committee, because he spoke against the body of the Bill,
according to the ancient Order in Parliament.

The Bill against Drunkards and Common Haunters of Alehouses and Taverns was
read the second time and committed to the former Committees for the Sabbath
(whose names see before on Wednesday the 4th day of this instant November
foregoing) and to the Committees for Drunkenness (who were appointed on the
said 4th day of November) And there were added unto them Mr Francis Darcy and
Mr Francis Moore, who were appointed to meet upon Friday next at two of the
Clock in the Afternoon at the Middle Temple Hall.

The Bill for suppressing of deceits used in Weights and Measures was read the
second time, and upon the question for engrossing, dashed.

Upon a Motion made by Sir Edward Hobbie a Member of this House, that where
one..... Woodall, Servant and Attendant upon William Coke Esquire returned into
this present Parliament one of the Burgesses for Westminster, was Yesterday
Arrested at the Suit of one Robinson Citizen of London, upon a Bill of
Middlesex, and committed into Newgate, London, to the great indignity and
contempt of the Privileges and Liberties of this House, That the Sergeant of
this House should be presently sent into Newgate to bring the said Woodall now
Prisoner there unto this House this present Forenoon, sitting the Court. And
after some short space of time he was accordingly brought into this House from
Newgate; and being at the Bar with his Keeper attending upon him, he was by
Order of this House discharged from his said Keeper and from his said
Imprisonment, and delivered unto his said Master, to bring him again upon
Monday next unto this House; with further Order unto the Sergeant, to bring or
cause the said Robinson to come into this House upon Monday next to Answer the
said contempt, and to abide the further Order and resolution of this House
therein accordingly.

Upon a Motion made by Sir Francis Hastings a Member of this House, complaining
of some abuse offered unto him and sundry other the Members of this House
Yesterday, by the lewd misdemeanors of Pages and other unruly persons upon the
outer stairs in the passage into this House, showed, that he then seeing the
said disorders, thought it fit to lay hold of one of that disordered Company,
such a one as he could, and so apprehended one Rowland Kendall as an Agent in
these misdemeanors, who being brought unto Mr Speaker, was committed Prisoner
to the Sergeant of this House: And in the end moved, that he may be remitted
upon his humble Submission unto this House, and with that punishment which he
has already sustained since Yesterday by Imprisonment (if this House shall so
think meet) the rather because he cannot directly charge him in the particular,
but that he was amongst the said disordered Company. Whereupon the said Kendall
was brought to the Bar by the Sergeant, and was after his humble Submission,
sequestered until the House should further resolve therein. And then afterward
being brought again to the Bar, upon his humble Submission as aforesaid, was
discharged, after Admonition given unto him (for his behavior hereafter) by Mr
Speaker at large.

Thus far out of the Original Journal Book of the House of Commons touching
this Forenoons Passages; Those of the Afternoon are transcribed out of the
often mentioned private Journal.

Post Meridiem.

In the Afternoon the same day at the Committee in the House touching the
Subsidy,

Sir Walter Raleigh moved the House to consider to what intent they came
together, and now in their coming what was to be considered. For the Subsidy
and the manner and quality thereof I will now only intimate thus much unto you,
That the last Parliament, only three Subsidies were granted, upon fear that the
Spaniards were coming; but we see now they are come, and have set foot even in
the Queens Territories already, and therefore are the more of us to be
respected and regarded. And seeing the sale of her Highness's own Jewels, the
great Loans the Subjects have lent her, yet unpaid, the continual selling of
her Lands and decaying of her Revenues, the sparing ever out of her own purse
and apparel for our sakes will not serve, but yet she must be fain to call her
Court of Parliament for our advice and aid in this Case, I wish for my own part
(as a particular Member of this Commonwealth) that we may not do less than we
did before; And that we also would bountifully according to our Estates,
contribute to the necessity of her Majesty, as now it stands.

Mr Wiseman after a discreet and judicious Speech made touching Gods protecting
us for Religion sake or peace and quietness, the safety of her Majesty's
person, the great victories we have had, the greatness of Neighboring Princes
raised only by her Majesty, so that she has spent, as it was said by Sir
Walter Raleigh, so much, that now she is fain to desire the help of her
subjects; Let us therefore draw to some head and leave our Orations and
Speeches fitter for a Parliament than for a Committee. We are to consider only
what is fit to be given; And as for my part as a poor Member and one of the
meanest in this House, I will be bold to deliver mine opinion first, because
some must break the Ice. Three pound Land and under to pay two shillings eight
pence in the pound, and five pound goods and under to pay one shilling eight
pence in the pound, and double Tenths and Fifteenths as soon as may be. Although
I may seem over bold, being but a Rural and Countryman, to speak even out of my
Element in this Case; Yet I do heartily crave pardon of all, beseeching that
neither my unaptness or disorder of Speech, nor the unworthyness of my Person
may prejudice the Cause.

Sir Robert Wroth, that four pound Land full Subsidy, and six pound goods full
Subsidy might be paid to her Majesty.

Sir Francis Hastings moved, that three pound men might be exempted, and all
others above that rate to pay according to the rate to make up a full Subsidy.

Mr Philipps moved, that the four pound men might be exempted, and four
Subsidies received from the Rich, which should be termed a Contribution,
because it might make no innovation.

Sir Walter Raleigh said, If all pay alike, none will be agreived; if any be
exempted, doubtless it will breed much grief, and the feeling will be great to
those three pound men that will feel any thing, but it will be nothing to them
that know any thing.

Sir Edward Hobbie said, We cannot hear you speak out, you should speak
standing that so the House might the better hear you. So Sir Walter Raleigh
said that being a Committee, he might speak either sitting or standing, and so
repeated over again the former Speech.

Mr Secretary Cecill said, Because it is an Argument of more Reverence, I chose
to speak standing. As long as the Queen by the advice of her Council did find
means to spare you, so long she ever desired that her Subjects might not be
charged: But if her Majesty as soon as the last Subsidy had been spent, should
have again resorted unto you, I do assure you this Parliament had been called
in October last. Now if upon providence and foresight, you did contribute unto
her Majesty; much more should we now do the same, seeing a resolute Company of
Soldiers have entrenched themselves in her Majesty's Kingdom of Ireland, and
more Supplies thither are daily expected. It is time to open our Coffers, that
we may obviate in the beginning these few Forces of the Spaniards, lest growing
to greater Forces we cannot expel them with less than five hundred thousand
pound, which we may now do with one hundred thousand in present. If there be
any that sits next the Door that desires to sit next the Chair to give his
opinion, I will not only give him my place, but thank him to take my charge.

This was conceived to be Sir Edward Hobbie, who coming to sit near the Chair
and not giving him place, sat next the Door.

We that sit here, for my part, take your favors out of courtesy, not out of
duty; but to the purpose. The Queen has occasion to use, as diverse in this
House do know, three hundred thousand pound before Easter, how this shall be
raised and gathered, that is the question; for without this proportion of
charge, neither the Spaniards in Ireland can be repelled, and the Wars there
maintained, neither her Majesty's other affairs be set on foot, neither
provision sufficient can be set on foot or made from defense of Foreign
Invasions. Admit with a less charge we should now expel him, will any man be so
simple to think he will give over the enterprise being of so great consequence,
and grow desperate? I should think him but a man of shallow understanding and
less policy. Surely if we had been of that mind when he had that great
overthrow of his invincible Navy in eighty eight, we had been destinated to
perdition. For how many changeable enterprises of puissant and great
consequence has he since made? The like, if his Forces in Ireland should now
fail, would he do again. And therefore that provision we now make, if he should
be expelled with a less matter, would serve to make defense against his next
Invasion of that Kingdom, as also enrich her Majesty to be ready to furnish her
Navy and Forces the speedier for her safety. Besides, if he bestow such Masses
of Treasure for the gaining of one poor Town, Ostend, what will he do to gain
so strong and famous a Kingdom as Ireland? I will by the leave of a worthy
person who sits by me, and knows these things better than I do, yield a
particular account unto you of the state it self. First, the last whole Subsidy
after the rate of four pound Lands and eight groats Goods, came not to above
fourscore thousand pounds; the Subsidy of the Clergy twenty thousand pound, the
double Fifteenths threescore thousand pounds; All which is eightscore thousand
pounds. Since my Lord of Essex's going into Ireland, she has spent three
hundred thousand pound. So the Queen is behind one hundred and forty thousand
pound. Thus we refer the matter to your judicious consideration: We only show
you the present state of the Queen and her affairs, wishing no man to look that
we should give advice what is to be done, as though you your selves who are the
wisdom of the Land, could neither direct your selves, nor upon these reasons
alleged judge of the necessity of the State.

Mr Comptroller, Sir John Fortescue and Secretary Herbert spoke all to the like
effect; only Sir John Fortescue added this, that what pleased the House in the
name of the Subsidy to bestow the same, Her Majesty did and would ever employ
to their uses; so that dying, it might be written on her Tomb, Quod occupatus
vixit, so that she dying lives still employing all to the safety of her
Subjects. And I beseech you remember, that the Great Turk when he Conquered
Constantinople found therein three hundred Millions of Gold; If they, quoth he,
had bestowed three Millions in defense of their City, he could never have
gotten it. From this Blindness I pray God defend us, that we may not be
backward to give four Subsidies to her Majesty, for want whereof in time we may
happen to lose that which will not be recovered or defended with a hundred.

So after a few other Conferences and Speeches pro and con, it was concluded,
that the House should be certified of the proceeding on Monday, and by general
consent the three pound men to be included. And so the House about six of the
Clock it being dark Night, rose confusedly, and would sit no longer. Vide
concerning this matter on Saturday the 5th of December postea.

Note, That Mr Maynard by consent of the whole House sat in the Chair as Clerk
to register the Order of this Committee, who wrote at the least two Sheets of
Paper. By consent also he was licensed to put on his Hat.

Thus far out of the aforesaid private Journal; we now return to the Original
Journal Book it self.

On Monday the 9th day of November, the Bill for the strengthening of the
Grants made for the maintenance and Government of the House of the Poor called
St Bartholomews Hospital of the Foundation of King Henry the Eighth, according
to a Covenant made by the said King, was read the first time.

Two Bills also had each of them their first reading; of which the second was
the Bill for the benefit of Merchants and advancement of her Majesty's Customs
and Subsidies both Inward and Outward.

The Bill for Reformation of certain Abuses concerning Process and Pleadings in
the Court of Exchequer upon supposals without just grounds in the Office of the
Treasurers Remembrancer, was read the second time and committed unto all the
Privy Council being Members of this House, The Queens Learned Council Members
also of this House, Sir Robert Wroth, Sir Edward Hobbie, Mr Philipps and
others, who were appointed to meet to Morrow in the Afternoon in the Exchequer
Chamber at two of the Clock; and the Bill and Committees names was delivered
unto Mr Chancellor of the Exchequer one of the Committees.

The Committees for continuance of Statutes, (who were appointed on Thursday
the 5th day of this instant November foregoing) were deferred until Thursday
next in the Afternoon.

Thus far of this days Passages out of the Original Journal Book of the House
of Commons; what follows is out of the private Journal.

Heyward (...) Esquire did this day prefer a Bill against the multitude of Common
Sollicitors, and at the same time spoke as follows. May it please you, Mr
Speaker, It was well said by a Worthy Member of this House Mr Francis Bacon,
that every man is bound to help the Commonwealth the best he may; much more is
every man in his particular bound, being a Member of this House, if he knew any
dangerous Enormity toward the Commonwealth, not only to open it, but if it
may be, oppose it. We being all here within these Walls together may be likened
to a Jury close shut up in a Chamber; every man there upon his Oath, and every
man here upon his Conscience, being the Grand Jurymen of the Land, bound to
deal both truly and plainly. Herewith (though a most unworthy and least
sufficient Member of this House) my self being touched, I had rather adventure
my Credit by speaking though confusedly, than to stretch my Conscience (knowing
so great a mischief and inconvenience unto this Kingdom) by silence in so
pleasing a Cause as I do persuade my self this Bill will be to every man that
hears it. To which Mr Speaker, because I may have benefit of Speech if occasion
serve, at the second reading thereof, I will not speak more at this present,
but only touching the very Tract of the Bill it self. The Honorable Personage,
that in the Upper House in the beginning of this Parliament, spoke against the
lewd abuses of prolling Sollicitors and their great multitude, who set
dissension betwixt man and man, like a Snake cut in pieces crawl together to
join themselves again to stir up evil Spirits of Dissension; He I say advised
us, That a Law might be made to repress them; I have observed that no man in
this Parliament ever offered to prefer any such Bill to this House, but sure I
am no man spoke to this purpose. I have therefore Mr Speaker, presumed out of
my young Experience, because I know part of their abuses, and with that small
Portion of Learning that I have, to draw a Bill, and here it is. The title is
thus: An Act to repress the multitude of Common Sollicitors. The body of the
Act disableth all persons to solicit any Cause other than their own. There are
excepted and fore-prized four several sorts, Lawyers and Attorneys in their own
Courts; where they be sworn Servants in Livery, and Kinsmen within the fourth
degree of Consanguinity. And no man within this Kingdom but may find a fitting
and convenient Solicitor within these four Degrees. And I humbly pray, it
being so short, that the Bill may be read and received.

Mr Secretary Cecill spoke touching the Subsidy as follows, viz.

When it was the good pleasure of this House to give Order to the Committees to
consider the common danger of the Realm, in which not only every Member of this
House but every man in the Kingdom is interested, it liked the Committees after
their resolution to choose one among all to give account of their proceedings,
and that is my self. I do know it were the safest way for a man's memory to
deliver the last resolution without any precedent Argument; for rare is the
Assembly in which there is not some variety of opinions. I need not recite the
form, the Committee by reason of so good attendance being little inferior to
our Assembly at this present. Yet if it be true that forma does dare Essentiam,
it will be somewhat necessary for me to deliver the manner of our proceedings
and the circumstances, rather than hazard the interpretation of such a
resolution.

The day was Saturday last, the place this House, the time about four hours;
and I am of opinion, if we had all agreed upon the manner, as we did speedily
upon the matter, all had been dispatched in an hour. It seemed by the ready
consent of the Committees that they came not to look on one another, or like
Sheep one to accompany another; but the matter was well declared by some, and
at length consented unto by all. Our contention bred difference, and difference
cause of Argument, both how to ease the State, and make this Subsidy less
burthensom which shall be received. Some were of opinion that the three pound
men should be spared, because it was to be considered they had but small
Portions. Others were of opinion that the four pound men should give double,
and the rest upwards should be higher Sessed. Others were of other Opinions.
Again it was moved, whether this Subsidy should go in the name of a Benevolence
or Contribution, or whether in the name of a fourth Subsidy; but at length most
Voices resolved it should have the old name of a Subsidy, because Subsidium and
Auxilium are all one. The most Voices concluded that there should be no
exception of the three pound men, because according to their rate some were
Sessed under value; besides, separation might breed emulation, suspicion of
partiality and confusion. The time was resolved upon. And in respect of
expedition, to be by the first of February. And the whole Realm when each man
comes into his Country will be better satisfied when they shall know they have
spared no man, nor made any disjunction. It was said by a Member of the House,
that he knew some poor people pawned their Pots and Pans to pay the Subsidy. It
may be you dwell where you see and hear; I dwell where I hear and believe. And
this I know that neither Pot nor Pan, nor Dish nor Spoon, should be spared when
danger is at our Elbows. But he that spoke this, in my Conscience spoke it not
to hinder the Subsidy, or the greatness of the Gift, but to show the Poverty of
some Sessed, and by sparing them to yield them relief. But by no means I would
have the three pound men exempted, because I do wish the King of Spain might
know how willing we are to sell all in defense of Gods Religion, our Prince and
Country.

I have read when Hannibal resolved to sack Rome, he dwelt in the Cities
adjoining, and never feared or doubted of his Enterprise, till word was brought
him that the Maidens, Ladies and Women of Rome sold their Ear Rings, Jewels and
all their necessaries to maintain War against him. I do take my self in duty
bound to acquaint this House with the modesty of the Committee at the
Proposition; that where first this House never stuck to commit it, they never
stuck (understanding the reasons) to grant it. I do persuade my self, that the
bonus genius of this House did not wish a more resolved unity, than we had
unity in resolution. And of this great Committee it may be said, de majoribus
Principes consultant, de minoribus omnes. Thus by your Commandments have I
undergone this Charge, and will be ready to do the like duty whenever you
command me.

Then after Consultation had of the great occasions, it was put to the
Question, whether the double Tenths and Fifteenths should be paid by the first
day of February, viz. for this fourth Subsidy before the third begin; and that
the first payment of the first three Subsidies should be brought in by the 10th
of June, viz. half a Subsidy; And all said Yea, and not one No.

Then was a Motion made by Sir Robert Wroth, that this new Subsidy might be
drawn in a Bill by it self, to which should be annexed a Preamble of the great
necessities, the willingness of the Subject, and that it might be no Precedent;
but that would not be yielded unto.

Then Mr Speaker asked the House if they would appoint Committees, so they
appointed the Queens Council and all the Sergeants of the House and no more.

Mr Francis Moore moved that, that which was done might be completely done, and
the Subsidy gathered by Commission and not by the old Roll; for peradventure
some were dead, others fallen to Poverty, others Richer, and so deserved to be
inhansed, etc. And withal he said, that the granting of this Subsidy seemed to
be the Alpha and Omega of this Parliament.

Mr Wingfield moved the Honorable of the Council, Members of this House, That
seeing the Subsidy was granted, and they yet had done nothing, it would please
her Majesty not to dissolve the Parliament till some Acts were passed.

Sergeant Harris said, The Motion of the Gentleman that last spoke, is not now
to be discussed; we are to speak touching the Subsidy.

Mr Francis Bacon after a Repetition of some of what was done Yesterday, that
the three pound men might not be excluded, he concluded, that it was Dulcis
tractus pari jugo, therefore the Poor as well as the Rich not to be exempted.

Sir Walter Raleigh said, I like not that the Spaniards our Enemies should know
of our selling our Pots and Pans to pay Subsidies; well may you call it Policy,
as an Honorable Person alleged; but I am sure it argues Poverty in the State.
And for the Motion that was last made of Dulcis tractus pari Jugo, Call you
this par jugum, when a poor man pays as much as a rich, and peradventure his
Estate is no better than he is set at, or but little better; when our Estates
that be thirty pound or forty pound in the Queens Books, are not the hundred
part of our Wealth? Therefore it is not Dulcis nor pari.

Mr Secretary Cecill, That now seeing one of the weightiest matters and causes
of Calling this Parliament was agreed upon, he doubted not but we should have
both a quick Parliament and speedy payment. But for that the Gentleman said on
my right hand, that the Subsidy was the Alpha and Omega of this Parliament, I
think he spoke it not simply out of humor, but rather upon probability; for I
can assure you her Majesty is as respective over you touching her Laws, which
she desires may be perused and amended, that she means not to Dissolve this
Parliament till some things be amended. For that, that I said touching the
Spaniards knowing of our sale of our Pots and Pans and all we have to keep him
out, which should be a matter of Policy, to which the Gentleman on my left hand
(Sir Walter Raleigh) took Exceptions, I say it is true, and yet I am mistaken:
I say it is good the Spaniards should know how willing we are to sell our Pots
and Pans and all we have to keep him out; Yet I do not say, it is good he
should know we do sell them: that is, I would have him know our willingness to
sell (though there be no need) but not of out Poverty in selling, or of any
necessity we have to sell them, which I think none will do, neither shall need
to do. Then all the House cried No, No, as much as to say, no man did so.

Sir Arthur Gorge moved, that it would please the Council that Order might be
taken that Justices of the Peace might be Sessed according to the Statute, viz.
at twenty pound Lands, whereas there be few Justices that be above eight or ten
pound by Mr Secretary noted in his Table Book.

Then Sergeant Heyle stood up and made a Motion, saying: Mr Speaker, I marvel
much that the House will stand upon granting of a Subsidy, or the time of
payment, when all we have is her Majesty's; and she may lawfully at her
Pleasure take it from us; Yea she has as much right to all our Lands and Goods
as to any Revenue of her Crown. At which all the House hemmed, and laughed and
talked. Well quoth Sergeant Heyle, all your Hemming shall not put me out of
Countenance. So Mr Speaker stood up and said, It is a great disorder that this
should be used; for it is the ancient use of every man to be silent when any
one speaks; and he that is speaking should be suffered to deliver his Mind
without interruption. So the said Sergeant proceeded, and when he had spoken a
little while, the House hemmed again, and so he sat down. In his latter Speech
he said, he could prove his former Position by Precedent in the times of Henry
the Third, King John, King Stephen, etc. which was the occasion of their
Hemming.

Mr Monntague of the Middle Temple said, that there were no such Precedents;
and if all Preambles of Subsidies were looked upon, he should find it were of
Free Gift. And although her Majesty requires this at our hands, yet it is in
us to give, not in her to exact of Duty. And for the Precedents there be none
such, but touching a tenth Fleece of Wool, and a tenth Sheaf of Corn that was
granted to Edward the Third at his going to the Conquest of France, because all
the Money then in the Land to be levied by way of Subsidy, would not be any way
answerable to raise that great Mass he desired. And so having these Tenths he
sold them to private men to gain that Subsidy, and so raised Money to himself
for his Enterprise.

Thus far out of the said private Journal; the residue of this days Passages
that follow, and those also of the day ensuing are transcribed out of the
Original Journal Book it self of the same House.

The Queens Learned Council and all the Sergeants at Law being Members of the
House (after the foregoing long dispute touching the Subsidy and the conclusion
thereof) are appointed by the House to draw into the form of a Bill the
Articles agreed upon by the Committees for the Subsidy; and also the days of
payment agreed upon by the said House this present day; and Ordered to meet at
their Pleasures as often as they shall think sit from day to day and from time
to time. Vide plus de ista materia December 5. Saturday postea.

On Tuesday the 10th day of November, Five Bills had each of them one reading;
of which the last being the Bill against blasphemous Swearing was read the
second time and committed unto Sir Francis Hastings, Sir Robert Wroth, Sir
George Moor, Sir Thomas Leighton and others, who were appointed to meet upon
Saturday next in the Middle Temple Hall at two of the Clock in the Afternoon.

The Bill for uniting and consolidation of certain small Churches in the City
of Exeter was read the second time and committed unto Sir Walter Raleigh, Sir
Francis Darcie, Mr Solicitor, Mr Sergeant Heyle, Mr Secretary Harris, all the
Doctors of the Civil Law and others, who were appointed to meet upon Monday
next at two of the Clock in the Afternoon in the Middle Temple Hall.

Robinson Citizen of London was brought to the Bar by the Sergeant and charged
by Mr Speaker in the name of this House with his offense in procuring to be
Arrested one Wooddall Servant Attendant upon William Cook Esquire a Member of this
House, to the great contempt, indignity and prejudice of this whole House. And
the Members thereof: being asked what he could say for himself for his defense,
answered, that he was heartily sorry for that he had given any cause of offense
unto this House, most humbly craving Pardon for the same; And most confidently
protested and affirmed, that he knew not, nor ever heard before the said Arrest
made, that the said Wooddall was Servant or belonging to any Member of this
House, but had delivered the Warrant by which he was Arrested, unto the Officer
long before the Parliament began. Whereupon after some Speeches had therein he
was by the Order of this House discharged, paying his Fees to the Sergeant and
Clerk.

Two Bills also had each of them one reading; of which the second being the
Bill for the benefit of Merchants and advancement of her Majesty's Customs and
Subsidies both Inwards and Outward, was upon the second reading committed unto
all the Privy Council and Learned Council being Members of this House, the
Knights and Citizens of London, Sir Walter Raleigh and others; And the Bill was
delivered to Mr Secretary Herbert, who with the rest was appointed to meet upon
Thursday next in the Exchequer Chamber at two of the Clock in the Afternoon,
and all her Majesty's Customers and Officers appertaining to the Custom-House,
and other Merchants to have warning to be then and there present to attend the
Committees.

On Wednesday the 9th day of November, Mr Snigg made Report of the meeting of
the Committees and of their travel in two Bills, viz. That the Plaintiff in
Writs of Error shall give good Bail, brought in with some Amendments and
Alterations; and the other against fraudulent Administration of Intestates
goods, without any Amendments. And so delivers them in and prays the
reading.

The Amendments in the Bill that the Plaintiffs in Writs of Error shall give
good Bail were twice read. And also the Bill against Intestates Goods were
Ordered to be engrossed.

Three Bills had each of them one reading; of which the last being the Bill for
the Inhabitants of Rachdale in the County of Lancaster, was read the second
time and committed unto Mr Francis Moore, Mr Holcroft, the Knights for
Lancaster, Mr Hancock, Mr Beeston and others, who were appointed to meet upon
Wednesday next in the Middle Temple Hall at two of the Clock in the Afternoon.

Three Bills had each of them one reading; of which the last being the Bill for
abbreviation of Michaelmas Term was read the second time; and upon the question
whether it should be committed or no, the Knights and Citizens of London were
against it. And therefore upon the nominating of the Committees it was doubted
and questioned whether they could be admitted into the said Committee or no.
Which dispute because it is omitted in the Original Journal Book of the House
of Commons, is therefore supplied out of that often before-cited private
Journal of the same House.

Sir Edward Hobbie spoke first and said, that it was against the Order of the
House to admit the Knights and Citizens of London to be of the Committee,
because they had given their Voice already against the body of the Bill.

Mr Secretary Cecill said, I am willing to speak in two respects; the one
touching the Bill it self, the other touching the Controversy in the House
about the Commitment. Touching the Bill, I dare not upon my own Judgment be so
venturous or bold to reject this Bill, unless first it might have a Commitment.
For the wisdom of that time when it was first instituted was so apt to look
into imperfections, that doubtless if an inconvenience had been but espied,
they would straight have avoided it. Therefore in my opinion it is not fit for
us to look into the Actions of former Ages, but upon mature and advised
deliberation. I do therefore greatly commend the Wisdom of this House in
Committing this Bill and others of the like nature, before we reject them. For
the other part, though it be a Rule in the House that those against the Bill
should be no Committees, yet in a case of so great consequence and so greatly
touching the State of the City of London, there is no reason but that they may
have their particular Voices as Committees as well as every Member of this
House; neither have we reason to exclude them more than any other, especially
they being chosen for the most principal City of this Kingdom, which is the
Chamber of her Majesty, whom we should the rather respect for her Majesty's
sake, who does and will remember their Loyalty and Faithfulness showed unto her
in the late dangerous Action ( viz. the Earl of Essex's rising) for which if
ever Prince had Cause of thankfulness unto her Subjects, doubtless her Majesty
is to confess as much. In my opinion therefore we should do great wrong and
purchase great blame at their hands that sent them hither in Trust, if in a
matter of this consequence, and so particularly touching the State of this
City, we should not admit them Committees.

Mr Wiseman said, that by committing of a Bill the House allowed of the body
thereof though they disallowed of some imperfections in the same, and therefore
committed it to some chosen men of Trust to reform or amend any thing therein
which they found imperfect. And it is to be presumed that he that will give his
No to the Committing of a Bill, will be wholly against the Bill. And therefore
the House allowing of this Bill to be committed, are (in my opinion) to
disallow any that will be against the body of the Bill for being Committees.

Mr Comptroller said, he was of opinion, for the reason before alleged, that
they ought to be Committees, but he moved another question, Whether a Committee
speaking against the Bill at the Commitment, may also speak at the engrossing
thereof in the House, and have his free Voice.

Sir Edward Hobbie said, that may be resolved upon by many Precedents. And for
mine own opinion, I think that he that is against the body of the Bill can be
no Committee; And he that being a Committee speaks against the Bill, may also
speak hereafter in the House.

Mr. Fulk Grcvil said, That a Committee was an artificial body framed out of us
who are the general body; And therefore that which is spoken at the Committees,
evanescit, it is gone, when the body which is the Commitment is dissolved; and
then every particular Committee is no more a part of the artificial body but of
us the general body, when he has his free voice as though he had never spoken
before.

Then Mr. Speaker stood up and said, I will propound two questions; The first,
if when a man has spoken against the body of the Bill, he may be a Committee;
The second, whether any Member of this house after having been a Committee in
any Bill, may afterward speak in the Negative part against the said Bill. Now,
quoth he, I will propound the first question: All they that will have a Man
that has been against the body of the Bill to be a Committee, let them show
their opinions by saying Yea; and not one said Yea. All they that will not, say
No; All said No. So he did for the second question, and not one said No, but
all Yea. Which said Order and resolution was appointed by the House to be
entered for a future Precedent accordingly.

Then he put it to the question, whether they of London notwithstanding this
Order, in respect this Commitment greatly concerns the State of the City,
should be Committees. And the Yeas were greater than the No's. And thereupon
the said Knights and Citizens for London were nominated with the other
Committees, whose names are now here in the next place inserted out of the
Original Journal Book of the same House in manner and form following.

All the Privy Council and all the Queens Learned Council being Members of the
House, All the Sergeants at Law being of this House, Sir George Moore, Sir
Thomas Conisbie, Sir Charles Cavendish, Sir Michael Sands, Sir Edward Hobbie,
Sir William Wray, the Knights for the Twelve Shires of Wales, the Knights for
Cornwall and Devonshire, the Burgesses for the Borough Towns beyond Trent, the
Burgesses for Lancaster, Mr Wingfield, Mr Thynne, Mr Fulke Grevill, Sir John
Egerton, Sir Francis Hastings, Mr Carew, Mr Francis Moore, Mr Maynard, Mr
Varney, Mr Swain, Sir Robert Wroth, Sir Jerome Bows, Sir Molle Finch, Sir
Francis Darcy, the Knights and Citizens for London, Mr Barrington, Mr Hancock,
Mr Tate and Mr Thomas Jones. And the Bill and Committees names were delivered
to Mr Fulk Grevill, who with the rest was appointed to meet upon Wednesday next
in the Exchequer Chamber at two of the Clock in the Afternoon.

On Thursday the 12th day of November, Five Bills of no great moment had each
of them one reading; of which the last being the Bill to avoid trifling and
frivolous Suits in Law, was read the second time and committed unto Mr
Lashbrooke, Mr Hubbard and others, who were appointed to meet to Morrow in the
Afternoon in the Middle Temple Hall at two of the Clock.

The Bill against Common Sollicitors, etc. was read the second time and
committed to the last former Committees, who were appointed to meet at the same
time and place.

The Bill against fraudulent Administration of Intestates goods, and the Bill
for avoiding of unnecessary delays of Execution upon Judgments, were each of
them read the third time and passed upon the question, and were sent up to the
Lords by Mr. Comptroller, Mr. Secretary Herbert and others.

Two Bills also of no great moment had each of them one reading; of which the
first being the Bill for Denization of certain persons born beyond the Seas was
read the second time and Ordered to be engrossed.

John Baker was brought to the Bar and charged by Mr. Speaker in the name of
this House, with contempt committed by him against the Liberties and
Privileges of this House in Arresting of one..... Wooddall servant unto
William Cook a Member of this House; who answered, that he knew not, that the
said Wooddall did belong unto the said Mr. Cook or unto any other Member of
this House: and was by the Order of this House committed to the Serjeant's
Custody until to Morrow, at which time the House has appointed to take surther
Order therein.

The Bill for confirmation of Grants made to the Queens Majesty and of Letters
Patents from her Highness to others, was read the second time and committed
unto all the Queens Privy Council being of this House, Mr. Francis Moore, Mr.
Tanfield and others; And the Bill and Committees names were delivered to Mr.
Secretary Herbert, who with the rest was appointed to meet upon Saturday next
at two of the Clock in the Afternoon in the Exchequer Chamber.

The Bills formerly appointed to have been sitten upon in Committee upon
Saturday next, are deferred until Monday in the Afternoon.

On Friday the 13th day of November the Bill for the restraining of Butchers in
and about the City of London from selling, and covetous Ingrossers from buying
of Fells and Sheepskins, etc. had its first reading.

Two Bills had each of them one reading; of which the second being the Bill or
Petition of Cloth-workers had its first reading.

Mr. Johnson made Report of the meeting and Travel of the Committees in the
Bill for punishment of idle and base persons, with certain Amendments.

The Bills and Committees names touching trifling Suits and against common
Sollicitors were delivered to Mr. Boyce.

The Amendments in the Bill for punishment of Offenses in base and idle Persons
were twice read, and with the Bill Ordered to be engrossed.

Two Bills also had each of them one reading; of which the second being the
Bill concerning matters of Assurances used amongst Merchants was read the
second time, and Committed unto all the Privy Council being Members of this
House, all the Doctors of the Civil Law likewise of this House, Sir Walter
Raleigh and others, who were appointed to meet upon Thursday next in the
Exchequer Chamber at two of the Clock in the Afternoon.

John Baker was brought to the Bar by the Sergeant and charged by Mr. Speaker
with his offense, etc. was asked what he could answer for himself. Upon his
humble submission made, earnest protestations of not knowing the said Wooddal
to pertain to any Member of this House, and being Sequestered until the House
had considered of the same, he was again brought to the Bar and by Order of the
House discharged paying his Fees. Vide concerning this matter on Yesterday
immediately foregoing.

Thus far out of the Original Journal Book of the House of Commons; the residue
of this days Passages are inserted out of the private Journal.

Mr Hugh Beeston stood up in the lower end of the House and said, Mr Speaker,
We that be here cannot hear you that be above, I would it would please them
that speak there to speak louder. Also I am to certify you, that I am here for
a Town, but not for mine own Country of Denbighshire or for any part thereof;
but if I should not speak somewhat for my Country, I dare never go thither
again. Therefore I heartily beseech you, Mr Speaker, That the House may be
resolved what course is taken according to the Order of the House for the
Election of a Knight and Burgess, for they cannot but find themselves grieved
for want of the Election. But what is done I know not.

Mr Secretary Cecill said, Because I was the Reporter of the stay of the
Election, as also of the proceeding. I will now also certify you, that there
was Order taken for the sending out of a Warrant for the Election; but what is
done therein, I know not.

Mr Speaker said, I gave Warrant to the Clerk of the Crown according to the
ancient form to send out a new Writ, who answered me that the Lord Keeper
desired to have the Warrant directed to him for a new Writ and for his Warrant
for sealing thereof, so that nothing is done therein.

Sir Edward Hobbic said, There is no Court that does not observe his Rites and
follow his Privileges, much more this High Court of Parliament being the
greatest, and Commander of all other Courts, does and ought to observe the same
most strictly; And all the Precedents which I have seen and observed touching
this point have ever gone to the Clerk of the Crown and to none other. And
therefore I take it, that course ought inviolably to be observed.

Sir George Moore said, I agree with the Gentleman that last spoke, that
Precedents ought to be observed; but yet not altogether, upon urgent occasion
or by necessity of time: knowing this, I take it my duty to inform you, if any
alteration have been, it proceeded from the imperfection of a Speaker. It was
well observed by an ancient Member of this House, that no Conserence with the
Lords touching a Subsidy should be had: Yet that Rule has been altered in late
Parliaments by reason of special Causes. So do I think it would be more
Honorable to this House to direct our Warrant to the Lord Keeper, than to any
inferior Minister in the Chancery.

Sir Francis Hastings said, By the leave of your Honorable Favors, I will
show you that I my self was Yesterday with the Lord Keeper, and how Honorably
I heard him speak of this House; that he desired nothing more than to show the
duty and love he bears us, as also himself would be our immediate Officer,
and would be willing and glad to receive a Warrant from us, so it might be
directed to him for his discharge, be it in what terms soever we pleased. And
he said, he doubted not, but if this Honorable House knew so much, they would
rather choose him than any other for their Minister. Thus much I thought good to
certify this House of, which being spoken in private unto me, I now deliver in
public unto you for my own advice. I think nothing can be more Honorable unto
this House, than to have a Person of so great Estate, to whom we may direct our
Warrant as to our Minister.

Mr Francis Bacon said, It is far more Honorable for this House in my opinion,
when our Warrant shall move the principal Member of Justice, than when it shall
command a base petty or inferior Servant to the Clerk of the Crown, or the
Clerk of the petty Bag. It will be said, that our Warrant Emanavit improvide,
when we shall direct our Warrants to these base Officers, when we may move the
Great Seal of England by it, even as soon as either petty Bag or petty Officer.

Mr Speaker said, I was and ever am Zealous and Jealous of the Privileges and
Orders of this House. I was commanded by you to send forth a Warrant for the
Election of a Knight and Burgess; I found a resolution, that during the time of
the sitting of this House, the Speaker for a new Election is to make a Warrant
directed to the Clerk of the Crown: so that in my doing thereof I hope I have
done rightly.

Mr Secretary Cecill said, I hope I shall move unto you a Conclusion which will
end this Controversy, and in the mean time a saving to all persons. I mean not
to second my former Error, for which I was excepted unto; that is, that Mr
Speaker or any Member should attend the Lord Keeper; but that four might be
Assigned by this House to go to the Lord Keeper. I say to go (as if he should
have said, mark. I say not to attend) to the Lord Keeper to know the cause of
the stay, as also his request unto this House: And that other six might be
Assigned to call before them the Clerk of the Crown, the Clerk of the petty Bag
and the Clerk of this House, with their Precedents and Books to see to whom
this Warrant has in former times been directed, and whether the Privileges in
former Ages have danced a Pavin to and fro, and according to the time have been
altered. This to be done this Afternoon, and to certify this House to Morrow,
and then we to make a determinate resolution.

To which all said, A good Motion.

Mr Holcroft of Cheshire said, May it please you, Mr Speaker, the County day
for Denbighshire is on Thursday next, and therefore there had need be speed
made, otherwise there can be no Election this Parliament.

Mr Speaker said, Will it please you to name the six Committees, so the House
named Sir Edward Hobbie, Sergeant Harris, Sir Francis Hastings, etc. The
Speaker likewise said, Will it please you to name the four to go to the Lord
Keeper, so the House named Secretary Herbert, Sir Edward Stanhop, Sir Edward
Stafford and Mr Fulk Grevill.

Thus far out of the aforesaid private Journal. The next days Passages do now
follow in part out of the Original Journal Book it self.

On Saturday the 14th day of November, Mr Cotton a Member of this House moved
for the receiving of two Bills, which he then offered to the consideration of
the House, and were accepted accordingly; but were not then read by reason of
sundry occasions of let, and for that also Mr Speaker had not perused them.

Three Bills also had each of them one reading; of which the third being the
Bill that Edward Markham may dispose of his Lands as other Tenants in Tail
lawfully may do, was read the second time, and committed unto Sir Robert Wroth,
Sir Moyle Finch and others, who were appointed to meet upon Friday next at two
of the Clock in the Afternoon in the Court of Wards, and the Parties whom it
concerns to bring their Evidences and Writings to the Committees.

One other Bill touching making of Clothes was read prima vice.

Mr Johnson informed the House, that sundry Members of this House have been
served with Subpoena's, viz. Edward Mountague Esquire to appear in Chancery upon
the 6th day of this instant November ad respondend. Will. Riddlesden; upon Sir
Michael Sands to appear in the King's Bench ad testificand' die Veneris prox'
post Crast' Sancti Martin. at the Suit of John Stow; upon Goddard Pemberton to
be in the Chancery, viio die Novembr. ad Sect. Will. Wood. Whereupon the
Sergeant was appointed to bring unto this House the persons that served or do
prosecute the said Subpoena's, to Answer in this House for their said Contempts.

Thus far out of the Original Journal Book of the House of Commons; the further
dispute of this business and the residue of the Passages of this day are in the
next place supplied out of the often before-recited private Journal of the said
House.

The said Mr Johnson after he had vouched the aforesaid precedent instances
touching other Members of the House that had been served with several
Subpoena's, certified the said House further thus much, that the Informer came
to his Lodging this Morning as he was coming out of his Door and asked for him;
he told him he was the man. Then said the Informer, The Queen Greets you well.
What Is this quoth I? A Subpoena quoth the Informer, and I charge you to appear
upon it according to the Contents. Then I told him that I was of this House and
could not attend. He Answered me again, there it is, I care not, look you to it
at your peril.

Mr David Waterhouse stood up and showed, that that Subpoena came out of his
Office, and further showed the necessity of obeying of it, for that a Cause for
want of Witnesses might be lost; therefore the hearing being appointed at a day
certain, the Client might peradventure be undone if he should not have this
Subpoena ad testificandum in due time both served and appeared unto.

Sir Edward Hobbie alleged diverse Precedents touching this point, as 10
February 27th Eliz. Mr Kerle served one Roger Stepney with a Subpoena into the
Star Chamber, and for this he was adjudged to the Sergeants keeping for six
days, and to pay five Marks Charges: And 25 March 27 Eliz. Mr Crook served a
Member of this House with a Subpoena into Chancery, and for so doing was
adjudged to give a Copy of the Bill, twenty shillings for Charge, and was
Committed.

Mr Wiseman said, notwithstanding the Allegations and excuse of the Gentleman
that spoke in favor of the Subpoena ad testificandum, I think it deserves no
less favor than the other: For if the necessity of the Cause were such that he
must needs be served and spared out of this House, the party ought to ask leave
of the House, or at least of the Speaker, or entreat him to relate the same to
the House.

Sir George Moore said, I think as the Gentleman that last spoke, for the like
Subpoena being brought the last Parliament, it grew to a question, whether it
were an impeachment to the Privilege of the House; And after some dispute, an
ancient Member of this House showed diverse Precedents how that the minds of the
Members of this House ought to be freed as well as their bodies. Whereupon two
Members were sent to require the Lord Keeper to reverse that Subpoena, etc. He
also spoke of a Quo Warranto for the Liberties of the Black-Fryars withheld,
but to what purpose ignoro.

Then it grew to a question, whether a Burgess of a Parliament may be served
with a Subpoena ad testificandum; And it was concluded that he could not.

So after this dispute they agreed, that the Sergeant should be sent to Arrest
all those to appear that had procured the Subpoena's aforesaid, to Answer their
contempts with all speed.

Sir Francis Hastings stood up and made a relation of the proceedings which he
with the other Committees had made according to the Commandment of the House
the day before. He said, We called before us the Clerk of the Crown, the Clerk
of the petty Bag, and our Clerk of the Parliament.

The Clerk of the Crown showed us sive Warrants and one Order, all one Course
and one form, and all in the 27 Eliz. Three of the Warrants were directed to
the Clerk of the Crown, two without direction; and he showed us Writs without
Warrant. Then we called the Clerk of the petty Bag, who would show us no
Warrant but only a Record of Writ in his Roll of 39 Eliz. only he said (but we
heard him not) that Warrants had been granted to the Clerk of the petty Bag.
The Clerk of the Parliament showed unto us two Precedents of 5 Eliz. and of 13
Eliz. every one without direction, but with these words or to the like effect
as I take it, [It is required such and such a thing be done.]

Sir Edward Hobbie said, Because the truth hereof may be made more plain, and
that it pleased you to command my unworthy self to attend Yesterdays Service, I
will under favor of the Gentleman that last spoke, make a Repetition ab
origin, a little longer than he did, for your satisfactions of this Cause and
our pains. It pleased you to depute six to this service, five attended. The
Sergeant at Law (Sergeant Harris) of whose furtherance we best hoped, deceived
both your and our expectations. The Clerk of the petty Bag, the Clerk of the
Crown and the Clerk of the Parliament attended us. The Clerk of the Parliament
delivered unto us a fair Record containing a Writ sent out sedente Parliamento
(for so are the words) it was for the Knights of Yorkshire and Lancashire, and
this was all he could show; only he said, an old Officer would be sworn, there
were more, but lost by Garth's decease. The Clerk of the Crown dealt with us
two ways, The First by way of experienced Officers, The Second by way of
Precedent. For the First, one Stephen Brown was brought forth before us who
has been an Officer in the Crown-Office these thirty six years: And being
asked if he knew how Warrants were directed, he answered, that in the time of
the Lord Keeper Bacon, he that was Speaker of this House directed them to the
Clerk of the Crown: Being further asked, if they were impugned; he Answered,
No. Being asked, where these Warrants were kept; he said, on the Labels in the
House. The said Clerk showed us sive Precedents and one Order, the rest were
lost by Mr Watson's death, as the other Precedents were by the death of Mr
Garth, the Clerk of the Parliament of the 13th of Queen Elizabeth, when Sir
Christopher Wray was Speaker: As also One Order dated 18th of March 1580. die
Sabbathi, that a Warrant should be directed to the Clerk of the Crown to choose
a new Burgess for Norwich instead of one Beamont, the words whereof were, It is
required of the Knights, Citizens, Burgesses and Barons, etc. As also another
Order dated die Sabbathi 18o Martii 1580. in these words, It is further agreed
upon and resolved by this House, that during the time of sitting of this Court,
there do not at any time any Writ go out for the choosing or returning of any
Knight, Citizen, Burgess or Baron, without the Warrant of this House first
directed for the same to the Clerk of the Crown according to the Ancient
Jurisdiction and Authority of this House in that behalf accustomed. And another
Warrant subscribed Henry Gates and Will. Fleetwood who were Committees in
examination of a Cause touching Henry Bermaker and Anthony Wild, the effect
whereof was, That forasmuch as they were Arrested into the Kings Bench, whereas
we find them privileged as Members of this House, a Warrant was directed to
the Clerk of the Crown for making Writs of Privilege as aforesaid. Dated from
Westminster the sixth day of December. Therefore for mine own opinion and
according to these Precedents, I think they ought to be directed to the Clerk
of the Crown.

Sir George Moore stood up and showed a Precedent dated on Friday the second
day of March 35o Eliz. where a new Writ was to be Awarded out concerning Mr
Fitzherbert, and all Writs of privilege to come from the Chancery; And the
Speaker made a new Warrant to the Lord Keeper to make a new Writ. In the like
case both touching Southwark and Melcombe Regis; for I think the Warrant ought
to be directed to the Lord Keeper.

Mr Pate of the Middle Temple showed that Ratio Legis was Anima Legis; And he
that presents a Precedent without a reason, presents a body without a soul.
There is a difference in Writs; there are Brevia ex gratia speciali and Brevia
cursoria: And therefore when the Warrant has gone from the Speaker to the
Clerk, it has caused the Writs of course by the Lord Keeper.

Mr Secretary Herbert showed how that he with other three by their Commandments
had been with the Lord Keeper whom he found most Honorably to entertain and
receive both him and the rest: And that his Lordship did greatly respect both
the majesty and gravity of this Assembly, and said, that he would be loath to
derogate any thing from either: Notwithstanding he hoped and prayed that if any
further Precedents had improvidently gone from this House, or contrary to the
most ancient usage, that we would now settle our resolution, and stablish and
decree that which might be a sufficient Warrant unto him to put in Execution
our Commands, and also increase the Majesty and Honor of this House, which he
most heartily wished might ever continue. And for my part, thus much I can
assure you, that we cannot wish him to be more Honorable or more agreeable to
this House than we found him.

Henry Doyley of Lincoln's Inn said, Mr Speaker, I take it there is a Precedent
this Parliament which will decide this Controversy. For an Honorable Person
of this House being chosen with my self Burgess for Wallingford, and also
Knight of a Shire, chose to be a Kuight; And a Warrant went from you Mr
Speaker, directed to the Clerk of the Crown for the Election of a new Burgess,
who is since Chosen and Sworn, and is now a Member of this House, Mr Thomas
Fortescue by name.

Mr Flemming said, The Clerk of the Crown is our immediate Officer; he is to be
Attendant between the two Doors of the Upper House and Lower House, when any
Warrant General is required, he is to subscribe it, to certify it, etc. he is
to convey our minds and Messages to the Upper House, etc. Yea this Warrant is
to be directed to him.

Then all cried to the question.

Then Mr Speaker stood up and said, The Question must stand on three parts,
First if the Warrant shall be directed to the Clerk of the Crown; Secondly to
the Lord Keeper; Thirdly, if without any direction.

The House after this Speech was in great murmur and very loud; then stood up
one and said, Mr Speaker, Let the first Question stand, and then all will be at
an end. Then the Speaker said, Shall the first question stand? And all said Yea.

Then he said, All those that will have the Warrant directed to the Clerk of
the Crown cry Yea, and all those that will not, cry No. And the Yeas got it a
little.

Then he asked if he would have this Order entered of Record, and all cried Yea,
Yea.

Thus far out of the private Journal: Now follows some part of the next days
Passages out of the Original Journal Book it self.

On Monday the 16th day of November, Five Bills of no great moment had each of
them one reading; of which the first being the Bill for enabling Edmund
Mollineux Esquire to sell Land for the payment of his Debts; And the last being the
Bill for reformation of abuses used in buying and selling of Spices and other
Merchandises, had each of them their first reading.

Thus far out of the Original Journal Book of the House of Commons; the residue
of this days Passages for the most part is transcribed out of that often
beforementioned private Journal.

Mr Henry Doyley a Barrester of Lincoln's Inn made a Motion and said, Mr
Speaker, I think my self bound in Conscience to certify you of an Infamous
Libel that is newly Printed and spread abroad since the beginning of this
Parliament; Saving your presence, Mr Speaker, It is called An Assembly of
Fools. I desire that the Printer that Printed it may be sent for; he dwells
over against Guildhall-Gate.

The House wondered much at this Motion, and great murmuring there was; At last
the Speaker asked him where the Book was, and where he saw it.

He Answered, In the hands of one Mr. Henry Davies his Clerk of Lincoln's Inn,
but the Clerks name he knew not. The Sergeant upon Consultation was sent for
Mr. Davies and his Man into the Hall. After a while they came up, and notice
being given thereof, the Man only was sent for into the House, who being asked
what was his name; he said it was John Baker: being asked of whom he had the
aforesaid Book; he said of Jeremy Gouge of Cliffords-Inn: being asked how long
he had had it; he Answered three or four days: being asked if he knew it to be
a Libellous and Seditious Book; he Answered that he never knew any such matter
in it: being asked where the Book was; he said at his Masters Chamber. Then the
Sergeant was commanded to take him forth, and to command one of his men to go
with him to Lincoln's Inn to fetch the Book.

Then the Speaker asked if they would have his Master in, but Mr. Doyley stood
up and said, Mr. Davies was a very honest Gentleman, and showed him the Book
first, and wished him to complain unto this House. He wished Mr. Davies might
be stayed till the Book were brought; and if then it pleased them to send for
him into the House, they might, etc. So he was stayed. In the mean time Mr.
Davies his man went to the Chamber for the Book, which after it was brought and
well scanned by the Privy Council, it was found to be a mere Toy, and an old
Book Entitled the Second Part of Jack of Dover, a thing both stale and
Foolish; for which they said Mr. Doyley was well laughed at, and thereby his
credit much impeached in the Opinion of the House. Whereupon Mr. Speaker asked,
if they would have Mr. Davies and his Man brought into the House; And all cried
No: Then if they should be discharged, and all said Yea, Yea.

The Bill for redressing certain inconveniences in the Statute of 21 Hen. 8.
Cap. 13. Entitled An Act against Pluralities of Benefices for taking of Farms
by spiritual men and for Residence, was read the second time and disputed,
whether it should be committed, in manner and form following, viz.

Mr. Dunn spoke against this Bill and said, it was no reason that men of
unequal desert should be equally Beneficed or equalized with the best.

Doctor Crompton amongst many other Speeches wished that Pluralities of Offices
might be taken srom the Laity, and then Pluralities of Benefices from the
Spiritualty. Also in former Ages, he said, Impropriations were given to the
Spiritualty, and then no Pluralities allowed; as also Spiritual men bound by
Ecclesiastical Canons of their own from Marriage, so that they might live with
far less charge than now they do: But having taken from them first the
Impropriations they cannot keep that Hospitality which is required; And next,
Marriage being tolerated among them, they living at great charge both of Wife
and Children, one Benefice of small Cure suffices not.

Sir George Moore said, He thought the Bill most sit to be committed, it being
in the general opinion a good Law, and tending to a good and a religious end;
and such is the iniquity of this Age, that for want of a good Law of this
nature, many Souls do not only languish but perish everlastingly for want of
Spiritual Food. I think therefore, that though there be some imperfections in
the Bill, yet the body and parts of it may be amended to every man's
satisfaction.

Mr. Lock said, Mr. Speaker, I think bare silence is not an exoneration of a
Man's Conscience; the similitude of Offices and Benefices made by the Doctor
does not hold, under favor; for Non est incipiendum cum Laicis, sed
incipiendum a Domo Dei; Therefore if they begin first, we shall follow in
avoiding Pluralities.

Doctor James said, That it had been said, That Pluralities were the cause of
bringing corruption into the Church; but for that, under favor, said he, I
think the contrary, because corruption is commonly where Poverty is; but if
competent living be given to the Minister, I see no reason why just men should
judge there to be corruption. Secondly, It was said, that it would be a means
of Preaching the Word; for that I Answer, that if hope of competent living be
taken away, it will be a means to make the best Wits refuse the study of
Divinity. And therefore an Historian says well, that Sublatis praemiis
corruunt Arts. Consider besides, that in England there are above eight
thousand eight hundred and odd Parish Churches, six hundred of which do but
afford competent living for a Minister; What then shall become of the multitude
of our Learned men? they have no other Preferments unless it be to get some
Deanery, Prebendary or such like, which is no easy matter to do, they being so
few, especially in this Catching Age. To give the best Scholar but as great
proportion as the meanest Artisan, or to give all alike, there is no equality;
for inaequalibus aequalia dare absurdum. And this will breed Poverty in the
greatest Learned, which is the Mother of Contempt, a thing both dangerous and
odious unto Divinity; This must needs enforce Preachers to preach placentia,
which is a thing abhorred even of God himself. A Preacher who is no ordinary
person, ought to have an extraordinary reward; for the Canon says he must be
ad minimum Artium Magister, aut publicus aut idoneus verbi Divini Concionator.

Mr. David Waterhouse said, Mr. Speaker, Because my self am an Officer, I mean
only to speak of the Doctors similitude of Pluralities of Offices. By the
Common Law, an Officer shall forfeit his Office for Non-Attendance; so for a
Benefice the Incumbent shall also forfeit. But after, the Statute came which
made this toleration upon eighteen days absence; so that now if we set this
Statute at liberty again, this shall be no innovation in us, but a renovation
of the Common Law. And I will end only with this Caution to the House, that
commonly the most Ignorant Divines of this Land be double Beneficed.

Mr. Sergeant Harris said, We seem to defend the Privileges and Customs of the
House, but if we proceed to determine of this Bill, Mr. Speaker, we shall not
only infringe a Custom which we have ever observed, viz. to meddle with no
matter that touches her Majesty's Prerogative; but also procure her great
displeasure. Admit we should determine of this matter, yet her Majesty may
grant toleration with a Non obstante. And, Mr. Speaker, the last Parliament may
be a warning to us when the like Bill by us was preferred, and the same not only
rejected, but also her Majesty commanded the Lord Keeper to tell us, that she
hoped we would not hereafter meddle in Cases of this nature so nearly touching
her Prerogative Royal.

Mr. Martin spoke to this effect: I agree with one that said, Learning should
have her Reward; but I say more, that our Souls should have their Spiritual
Food; And I do wish, that Divines may have promotion not only with good
convenience, but also with good abundance. Though I be Zealous, yet I hope to
refrain and restrain my self from that heat, which the heat of my Zeal and love
of my Country drew me into very lately, for which I do not only acknowledge my
self guilty in your Censures, but also crave Pardon of every particular Member
of this House, that heard me, but most especially of him I offended. But
touching this Bill Mr. Speaker, and so he spoke to the Bill, etc.

After this Speech an old Doctor of the Civil Law spoke; but because he was too
long and spoke too low, the House hawk'd and spat and kept a great coil to make
him make an end. Which Speech finished,

Sir Francis Hastings stood up and said, My Masters, I utterly dislike this
strange kind of course in the House, it is the ancient usage that every man
here should speak his Conscience, and that both freely and with attention, yea
though he speak never so absurdly. I beseech you therefore that this may be
amended, and this troubling of any man in his Speech no more used. But to the
matter, Mr. Speaker, I protest that which I shall speak I will utter to you all
out of the Conscience of a Christian, Loyalty of a Subject, and heart of an
Englishman. I know that Distributio Parochiarum est ex jure humano non Divino:
But he that said so much, give me leave to tell him, that Distributio verbi
Divini est ex jure Divino and humano. If then by the distributing and severing
of Benefices to diverse learned men, the Word may be the better distributed unto
the people, and preached, as God be thanked, it has been these forty three
years under her Majesty's happy Government, (the point of whose days I beseech
the Almighty may be prolonged) I see no reason, Mr. Speaker, why we should
doubt of the goodness of this Bill or make any question of the committing
thereof, etc.

Mr. Roger Owen (after particular Answers to diverse particular Objections by
Doctors) showed that a Statute was but privatio communis Juris; And this Act
will make no Innovation, because it repeals only the Proviso and not the Body.
Whereas it was said by a Doctor, that Honos alit arts, and much more to that
purpose; And if you take away the honor and reward, then you take away the
Study it self: For Answer thereunto, Mr. Speaker, I say under favor, that this
Statute takes away no Benefices from the Clergy, but does only better order the
distribution of Benefices among the Clergy. For another Doctor that alleged a
Canon confirmed under the Great Seal of England, I say, under favor, that they
of the Clergy and not we of the Laity are bound thereby; for they are as it
were Bylaws to them, but not to us.

Then the Speaker stood up and put it to the question for the Commitment.
Whereupon it was Ordered by the more Voices that it should be Committed: But
the Committees Names being omitted in the private Journal, they are supplied
out of the Original Journal Book it self, and were as follows, viz. All the
Queens Privy Council and all the Learned Council being Members of this House,
Sir Walter Raleigh, Sir Francis Hastings, Sir Carew Reignolds, Mr. Francis
Bacon and diverse others, who were appointed to meet upon Friday next in the
Exchequer Chamber at two of the Clock in the Afternoon.

Mr. Speaker did lastly this Forenoon move the House to resolve whether they
would sit to Morrow or no, it being the day of her Majesty's most Blessed and
Hereditary Succession to the Crown of England: To which after a little Speech
had, It was agreed by the House, that after the Sermon was done at Westminster,
which would be ended by ten of the Clock, they would sit the residue of the
Forenoon; And this was affirmed to be the ancient Custom.

On Tuesday the 17th day of November, Three Bills of no great moment had each
of them one reading; of which the first being the Bill for the enabling of
Edward Nevill of Berling in the County of Kent, and Sir Henry Nevill Knight his
Son and Heir Apparent, to dispose of certain Copyhold Lands, etc. was read the
first time; And the third being the Bill against unlawful Hunting of Deer or
Conies in the Night time was read the second time, and upon the question of
engrossing was rejected.

Heyward Townsend of Lincoln's Inn Esquire delivered in a Bill to Mr. Speaker,
Entitled An Act to prevent Perjury and Subornation of Perjury, and unnecessary
expenses in Suits of Law. Upon the delivery whereof he said, Mr. Speaker, I
take every man bound in Conscience to remove a little mischief from the
Commonwealth before it take Head and grow to a great inconvenience. This
mischief is ordinary and general, and therefore (though but small) to be
considered and provided for. And if a Heathen Philosopher could admonish us
obstare principiis, I see no reason but men endued with Christianity should be
sensible of the least hurt or sore growing in his Country, either regardless or
respectless. For which purpose a Gentleman well experienced, having found this
grief common to the poorer sort, like a good Subject tendering all the parts of
this Commonwealth, engaged me at my coming into the House this Morning to
offer unto all your considerations this Bill, which it may please you to
entertain with that willingness it is offered. I doubt not but this
inonvenience will quickly be redressed. And thereupon the Bill according to the
desire of the said Mr. Townsend had its first reading.

The Bill for Confirmation of Letters Patents made by King Edward the Sixth
unto Sir Edward Seymour Knight, was upon the second reading committed unto the
Queens Learned Council Members of this House, the Masters of Request, Sir
Robert Wroth, Sir Maurice Barkley and others, who were appointed to meet in the
Committee Chamber of this House upon Friday Morning next.

The Bill for the strengthening of the Grant made for the maintenance and
Government of the House of the Poor called St Bartholomews Hospital, of the
Foundation of King Henry the Eighth, was read the second time and committed
unto all the Queens Learned Council being Members of this House, Mr. Doctor
Caesar, Sir Edward Hobbie, Sir Robert Wroth, Mr. Dr. Bennet and others, who
were appointed to meet upon Saturday next at Lincoln's Inn Hall at two of the
Clock in the Afternoon.

The remainder of this days Passages follows out of the private Journal.

An Act to suppress the Sin of Adultery was read the first time; The substance
whereof was, that if a Woman or Man or both were Convicted of Adultery, he
should lose his Tenancy by Courtesy, and she her Tenancy in Dower.

To which Bill Sergeant Harries stood up and said, Mr. Speaker, by the scope of
this Bill, the determination of this fact must be by two or three blind
Witnesses in the Ecclesiastical Court; which is no reason, that Judges
Ecclesiastical should determine of Laymens Inheritances. Besides, there is
another gross fault in the Bill, for if they be both poor, and have nothing but
Goods, if the man be taken in Adultery, he shall not be punished, because there
is nothing of which he should be Tenant by the Courtesy; But if the Woman be
taken she is to lose the third of the Goods, or if it be in the City by Custom
she loses the half, which is jus inaequale, and not to be admitted by this
House.

Then all the House cried, Away with it.

And the Speaker putting it to the question whether it should be read the
second time, the House gave a great No.

On Wednesday the 18th day of November, Three Bills had each of them one
reading; of which the last being the Bill or Petition of the Cloth-workers was
read the second time and committed unto the Queens Learned Council, Members of
this House, the Burgesses for all the Clothing Towns, the Knights for the
Shires of Somerset, Wiltshire, Berks, Suffolk, Fssex, Kent, Surry and
Hampshire, Mr Francis Moore, Mr Bond, the Citizens for York, Mr Phillipps, Mr
Boyce, Mr Snigg, Sir Percival Heart, Sir Moyle Finch, Sir John Harrintgon, Sir
John Lewson, Sir Francis Darcie, Sir Walter Raleigh, Mr Lieutenant of the
Tower, Mr Dr Caesar, the Knights and Citizens for London, Sir Walter Cope, Sir
Robert Wroth, the Burgesses for all the Port Towns, Mr Hide and Mr. Thomas
Caesar, who were appointed to meet in the Middle Temple Hall upon Monday next
in the Afternoon at two of the Clock.

Sir Francis Hastings brought in the Bill against Swearing from the Committees
(who were appointed on Tuesday the 10th day of November foregoing) and a new
Bill drawn to the same purpose by the said Committee.

The Bill touching repeal of some parts of former Statutes touching Cloth, was
read the second time and committed to the last former Committees for
Cloth-workers, to meet at the same time and place.

Mr. Jones one of the Committees in the Bill touching common Sollicitors,
brought in the Bill amended with some Additions and Alterations: And Mr Boyce
likewise brought in the Bill touching trifling Suits being somewhat amended by
the Committees.

Mr. Francis Moore a Committee in the Bill for confirmation of Grants made to
the Queens Majesty and of Letters Patents made from her Highness to others (who
were appointed on Thursday the 12th day of this Instant November foregoing)
brought in the Bill with two Provisoes and certain Amendments.

The Bill for reformation of many abuses in making of Cloths, was read the
second time and committed to the last former Committees for Cloth-workers to
meet at the same time and place.

Mr. Bacon one of the Committees in the Bill touching process and pleadings in
the Court of Exchequer, makes Report of the travel and meeting of the
Committees; and brought in a new Bill drawn to the same purpose; upon the
referring whereof he spoke as follows, (out of the Private Journal.)

Mr. Speaker, This Bill has been deliberately and judiciously considered of by
the Committees, before whom Mr. Osborn came, who I assure this House, did so
discreetly demean himself and so submissively referred the State of this whole
Office to the Committees, and so well answered in his own defense, that they
would not ransack the Heaps or sound the bottom of former Offenses, but only
have taken away something that was superfluous and needless to the Subject.
Touching the Committees they have reformed part; Yet they have not so nearly
eyed every particular, as if they would pare to the quick an Office of her
Majesty's gift and Patronage. This Bill is both public and private; public
because it is to do good unto the Subject; and private, because it does no
injustice to the particular Officer. The Committees herein have not taxed the
Officer by way of imputation, but removed a task by way of Imposition. I will
not tell you what we have taken away either in quo titulo's or Exchequer
language, but according to the Poet who says, Mitte id quod scio, Dic quod
rogo; I will omit that which you have known, and tell you that you know not and
are to know, and that in familiar terms. And so he told the substance of the
Bill. We found that her Majesty whose eyes are the Candles of our good days,
had made him an Officer by Patent; in which that he might have right, her
Majesty's Learned Council were there in Sentinel to see that her Majesty's
right might not be suppressed. If my memory has failed me in delivering of the
truth of the proceeding and the Committees determination, I desire those that
were present to help and assist me. Here is the Bill. So he called aloud to the
Sergeant of the House and delivered him the Bill to deliver to the Speaker,
which said Bill was read prima vice.

The Amendments and provisions in the Bill for confirmation of Grants made to
the Queens Majesty and of Letters Patents made by her Highness to others, were
twice read, and the Bill Ordered to be engrossed.

Three Bills had each of them one reading; of which the third being the Bill
against wilful absence from Divine Service upon the Sunday, was upon the second
reading committed unto Sir Francis Hastings, Sir Robert Wroth and others; And
the Bill and Committees names were delivered to Sir Robert Wroth, who with the
rest was appointed to meet this Afternoon in the Exchequer Chamber at two of
the Clock.

The Bill touching Cloths and Cloth-workers were delivered to Mr. Snigg one of
the Committees.

On Thursday the 19th day of November, Nine Bills had each of them one reading;
of which the last being the Bill for the enabling of Edward Nevill and Sir
Henry Nevill Knight his Son and Heir apparent, etc. was upon the second reading
committed unto all the Queens Learned Council being of this House, Sir George
Moore, Sir William Wray and others, who were appointed to meet upon Tuesday
next in the Court of Wards at two of the Clock in the Afternoon, and the
Council of all sides to be there to attend the Committees.

The Committees in the Bill for setting of Watches (who were appointed on
Saturday the 7th of this Instant November foregoing to meet this day) are
deferred till Tuesday next in the Court of Wards.

Upon Motion made unto this House, It is declared, that one Roger Buston
Servant, a Solicitor unto..... Langton Esquire Baron of Walton in the County of
Lancaster, who upon credible Report of some Members of this House, is Chosen a
Burgess for the Borough of Newton in the said County of Lancaster, but not as
yet returned by the Clerk of the Crown into this House, has been Arrested in
London during this Session in an Action of Debt, at the Suit and procurement of
one..... Muscle, the same Muscle knowing the said Roger Buston to belong to the
said Baron of Walton; which said Muscle was by Order of this House sent for by
the Sergeant of this House, together with the Officer who made the Arrest, to
Answer unto this House for their said Contempts. And being brought to the Bar
and Charged by Mr. Speaker with their said offense in the name of this whole
House, were heard what they could say for their defense. And after sundry
questions Ordered that the said Roger Buston should have the Privilege of this
House and be discharged of his said Arrest and Imprisonment: And likewise
Ordered that the said Muscle the Procurer, and the Officer that made the said
Arrest, should be both committed Prisoners to the Sergeants Custody for three
days, and pay such charges as shall be Assessed by Mr Speaker unto the said
Buston, besides the Fees of the Sergeant and Clerk.

The Bill for Confirmation of Grants made to her Majesty; and of Letters
Patents made by her Majesty to others was read the third time and passed upon
the question.

Now follow some Passages of this day out of the said private Journal.

Secretary Herbert said, According to your Commandment, Sir Edward Stafford and
my self went to the Lord Keeper, and delivered unto him, that notwithstanding
some Allegations which were alleged on the behalf of his Lordship, our
Resolutions touching the Warrants, upon mature deliberation, and upon search of
Precedents were, that they ought to go and be directed to the Clerk of the
Crown from the Speaker. His Lordship after a small pause Answered, That he now
considered the weightiness of diverse businesses which were in hand, the
Consultation which we were likely to have presently touching the Bill of
Subsidy; that the Enemy the Spaniard was landed in Ireland and the business of
those affairs of great import, as also his own business in the Upper House, and
the short end which was likely to be of this Parliament; And therefore he would
not now stand to make contention, or show his further reasons; but prayed to
certify you all, that he would be most ready and most willing to perform the
desire of this House.

The Bill of Petite Thefts and Larcenies, and the Bill for Confirmation of
Grants made to her Majesty and of Letters Patents made from her Majesty to
others were sent up to the Lords by Sir John Fortescue, Mr. Secretary Herbert
and others.

The Bill to restrain transporation of money out of the Realm of England and to
reform certain abuses in Exchanges was read the second time.

Mr Fettiplace, a Burgess for London, spoke to this Bill, and said, it is to be
thought that the Netherlands having so much use for money, is the Exporter
thereof out of this Realm. The French King made it a Law that no man upon pain
of Death should export money thence. Germany holds the Standard, so does
France, so do we; but the Netherlander only does not, and he only gains of
all three. There be good Statutes already made to this purpose both in the time
of King Rich. II. Hen. III. Hen. IV. Hen. V. and Hen. VI. that no Strangers
should bring Commodities into this Land, but he should bring so much money. He
made a very long Speech touching the manner of Trade by Exchange in Merchants
Language, etc. and concluded with desire of Commitment, and that the Merchants
might be called. And thereupon it was committed to diverse of the Committees who
were appointed to meet this day Seven-night at two of the Clock in the
Afternoon in the Exchequer Chamber.

The Bill or Petition of Theophilus Adams was read the first time.

On Friday the 20th day of November, Seven Bills of no great moment had each of
them one reading; of which the first being the Bill touching the Lordship of
Landostowre alias Landovorowre, and the last being the Bill prohibiting Fairs
and Markets, had each of them their first reading.

Sir Francis Darcy makes Report of the meeting and travel of the Committees in
the Bill touching the coming to Church, and brought in the Bill with two
Provisoes and some Amendments.

The same Amendments being twice read, the Bill upon the question and division
of the House was dashed, viz. with the Yea a hundred thirty seven, and with the
No a hundred and forty.

One Mr William Morris Burgess for Beumaries informed the House that as he was
coming up to London on his way his Man was Arrested at Shrewsbury; whereupon he
told the Sergeant that he was of the Parliament House, and therefore wished him
to discharge his Servant. The Sergeant Answered, that he could not discharge
him, but said, that he would go to the Bailiff with him; to whom when he came,
he likewise declared that he was of the Parliament House, and therefore
required his Servant. To whom the Bailiff Answered, that he could not discharge
him without the consent of the Party that procured the Arrest; To whom he also
went, and he Answered the Sergeant and him saying; Keep him fast, I will not
release him till I be satisfied. Then he told the Creditor, that he was of the
Parliament House, and therefore his Servant was Privileged. Whereunto the
Creditor made this Answer, I care not for that, keep him fast, I will be your
Warrant. I thought good to move the House herein, referring it to your
considerations. And because I am willing that the Privileges of this House may
be known as well far off as here at hand, I thought good to move the same.

Mr Francis Moore said, Mr Speaker, Methinks this Action is very scandalous to
this whole House. And because it is a Case both extraordinary and contemptible,
in my opinion it deserves a most severe and exemplary punishment.

Whereupon all the House cried, To the Tower, to the Tower with them, send for
them, send for them.

Mr Speaker said, It is your Pleasure, the Bailiffs and he that procured the
Arrest and the Sergeant shall be sent for. All cried Yea. Then the Speaker
said, The Sergeant must go down to Shrewsbury; all cried Yea.

The Speaker gave the Clerk a Bill to read, and the House called for the
Exchequer Bill; some said Yea, some said No, and a great Noise there was: At
last Mr Lawrence Hide said, Mr Speaker, to end this Controversy, because the
time is very short, I would move the House to have a very short Bill read
Entitled An Act for the Explanation of the Common Law in certain Cases of
Letters Patents. All the House cried I, I, I.

So after it was read, the question was to be propounded for the committing of
it, and some cried commit it, some ingross it; at length

Mr Spicer Burgess of Warwick stood up and said, Mr Speaker, This Assembly may
be said to be libera men's and libera lingua, therefore freely and faithfully,
that which I know I will speak to this House. This Bill may touch the
Prerogative Royal, which as I learned the last Parliament is so transcendent,
that the..... of the Subject may not aspire thereunto. Far be it therefore from
me that the State and Prerogative Royal of the Prince should be tied by me or
by the Act of any other Subject. First, Let us consider of the word Monopoly
what it is, Monos is Unus, and Polis is Civitas; so then the meaning of the
word is, a restraint of any thing public in a City or Commonwealth to a
private use, and the User called a Monopolitan, quasi cujus privatum lucrum est
urbis and Orbis commune malum. And we may well term this man the Whirlpool of
the Princes profit. Every man has three special Friends, his Goods, his
Kinsfolks and his good Name; these men may have the two first, but not the
last. They are Insidiosa quia dulcia, they are dolosa quia dubia. I speak not,
Mr Speaker, neither repining at her Majesty's Prerogative, or misliking the
reasons of her Grants; but out of grief of heart, to see the Town wherein I
serve pestered and continually vexed by the Substitutes and Vicegerents of these
Monopolitans, who are ever ill-disposed and affected Members. I beseech you
give me leave to prove this unto you by this Argument. Whosoever transgresses
the Royal Commission of her Majesty being granted upon good and Warrantable
Suggestions, and also abuses the Authority and Warrant of her Majesty's
Privy Council being granted unto him for the more favorable Execution of his
Patent; this man is an evil-disposed and dangerous Subject. But that this is
true and has been done by one Person, a Substitute of a Patentee, I will prove
unto you. The Major needs not be proved; the Minor I will thus prove. My self
am Oculatus testis of this Minor, Et talis testis plus valet existens unus quam
auriti december. The Substitutes for Aquavitae and Vinegar came not long since to
the Town where I serve, and presently stayed sale of both these Commodities;
unless the Sellers would compound with them, they must presently to the
Council Table. My self though ignorant, yet not so unskilful, by reason of my
profession, but that I could judge whether their proceedings were according to
their Authority, viewed their Patent, and found they exceeded in three points:
for where the Patent gives Months liberty to the Subject that has any
Aquavitae to sell the same, this Person comes down within two Months and takes
Bond of them to his own use, where he ought to bring them before a Justice of
Peace, and they there to be bound in Recognizance, and after to be returned
into the Exchequer; and so by Usurpation retains Power in his own hands to
kill or save. Thus her Majesty's Commission being transgressed, as a sworn
Servant to her Majesty, I hold my self bound to certify the House thereof; and
also that this Substitute stands Indicted as an obstinate Recusant: Yea when
her Majesty's name has been spoken of and her self prayed for, he has refused
to stir Hat or Lip. My humble Motion therefore is, that we might use some
caution or circumspective care to prevent this ensuing mischief.

Mr Francis Bacon said, the Gentleman that spoke last coasted so for and
against the Bill, that for my own part not well hearing him, I did not
perfectly understand him. I confess the Bill as it is, is in few words, but yet
ponderous and weighty. For the Prerogative Royal of the Prince, for my own part
I ever allowed of it, and it is such as I hope shall never be discussed. The
Queen as she is our Sovereign, has both an enlarging and restraining Power.
For by her Prerogative she may first set at liberty things restrained by
Statute Law or otherwise; and secondly, by her Prerogative she may restrain
things which be at liberty. For the first, she may grant non obstante contrary
to the penal Laws, which truly according to my own Conscience (and so struck
himself on the Breast) are as hateful to the Subject as Monopolies. For the
second, if any man out of his own Wit, industry or endeavor finds out any
thing beneficial for the Commonwealth, or bring in any new Invention, which
every Subject of this Kingdom may use; yet in regard of his pains and travel
therein, her Majesty perhaps is pleased to grant him a Privilege to use the
same only by himself or his Deputies for a certain time. This is one kind of
Monopoly. Sometimes there is a glut of things when they be in excessive
quantity, as perhaps of Corn, and her Majesty gives License of transportation
to one Man; this is another kind of Monopoly. Sometimes there is a scarcity or
a small quantity, and the like is granted also. These and diverse of this nature
have been in Trial both at the Common Pleas upon Actions of Trespass, where if
the Judges do find the Privilege good, and beneficial to the Commonwealth,
they then will allow it; otherwise disallow it: And also I know that her
Majesty her self has given Commandment to her Attorney General to bring diverse
of them since the last Parliament to Trial in the Exchequer, since which time
at least fifteen or sixteen to my knowledge have been repealed, some by her
Majesty's own express Commandment upon Complaint made unto her by Petition, and
some by Quo Warranto in the Exchequer. But Mr Speaker, said he (pointing to the
Bill) this is no Stranger in this place, but a Stranger in this Vestment; the
use has been ever to humble our selves unto her Majesty, and by Petition
desire to have our grievances remedied, especially when the remedy touches her
so nigh in point of Prerogative. All cannot be done at once, neither was it
possible since the last Parliament to repeal all. If her Majesty make a Patent
(or (as we term it) a Monopoly) unto any of her Servants, that must go, and we
cry out of it; but if she grant it to a number of Burgesses or a Corporation,
that must stand, and that forsooth is no Monopoly. I say and I say again, that
we ought not to deal, to judge or meddle with her Majesty's Prerogative. I wish
every man therefore to be careful in this business; And humbly pray this House
to testify with me, that I have discharged my duty in respect of my place in
speaking on her Majesty's behalf; And protest I have delivered my Conscience in
saying that which I have said.

Dr Bennet said, He that will go about to debate her Majesty's Prerogative
Royal, had need walk warily. In respect of a grievance out of the City for
which I come, I think my self bound to speak that now which I had not intended
to speak before; I mean a Monopoly of Salt. It is an old Proverb Sal sapit
omnia; Fire and Water are not more necessary. But for other Monopolies of
Cards, (at which word Sir Walter Raleigh blushed) Dice, Starch and the like,
they are (because Monopolies) I must confess very burtful, though not all alike
hurtful. I know there is a great difference in them; And I think if the abuses
in this Monopoly of Salt were particularized, this would walk in the fore rank.
Now seeing we are come to the means of redress, let us see that it be so
mannerly and handsomely handled, that after a Commitment it may have good
passage.

Mr Lawrence Hide, I confess, Mr Speaker, that I owe duty to God, and Loyalty
to my Prince. And for the Bill it self I made it, and I think I understand it;
And far be it from this heart of mine to think, this tongue to speak, or this
hand to write any thing, either in prejudice or derogation of her Majesty's
Prerogative Royal and the State. But because you shall know that this course is
no new Invention, but long since digested in the Age of our Forefathers above
three hundred Years ago, I will offer to your considerations one Precedent 10
Ed. 3. At what time one John Peach was Arraigned at this Bar in Parliament, for
that he had obtained of the King a Monopoly for Sweet Wines. The Patent after
great advice and dispute adjudged void, and before his face in open Parliament
Cancelled, because he had exacted three shillings and four pence for every Tun
of Wine; himself adjudged to Prison until he had made restitution of all that
ever he had recovered, and not to be delivered till after a Fine of five
hundred pounds paid to the King. This is a Precedent worthy of observation, but
I dare not presume to say worthy the following. And Mr Speaker, as I think it
is no derogation to the Omnipotence of God to say he can do all but evil; So I
think it is no derogation to the Majesty or Person of the Queen to say the like
in some proportion. Yet Mr Speaker, because two Eyes may see more than one, I
humbly pray that there might be a Commitment had of this Bill, lest something
may be therein which may prove the bane and overthrow thereof at the time of
the passing.

Mr Speaker, quoth Sergeant Harris, for ought I see, the House moves to have
this Bill in the nature of a Petition; It must then begin with more
humiliation: And truly Sir, the Bill is good of it self, but the penning of it
is somewhat out of course.

Mr Mountague said, The matter is good and honest, and I like this manner of
proceeding by Bill well enough in this matter. The grievances are great, and I
would note only unto you thus much, that the last Parliament we proceeded by
way of Petition which had no successful effect.

Mr Francis Moore said, Mr Speaker, I know the Queens Prerogative is a thing
curious to be dealt withal, yet all grievances are not comparable. I cannot
utter with my tongue or conceive with my heart the great grievances that the
Town and Country for which I serve, suffers by some of these Monopolies; It
brings the general profit into a private hand, and the end of all is Beggary
and Bondage to the Subjects. We have a Law for the true and faithful currying
of Leather; There is a Patent sets all at liberty, notwithstanding that
Statute. And to what purpose is it to do any thing by Act of Parliament, when
the Queen will undo the same by her Prerogative? Out of the spirit of
humiliation, Mr Speaker, I do speak it, there is no Act of hers that has been
or is more derogatory to her own Majesty, more odious to the Subject, more
dangerous to the Commonwealth than the granting of these Monopolies.

Mr Martin said, I do Speak for a Town that grieves and pines, for a Country
that groaneth and languisheth under the burden of monstrous and unconscionable
Substitutes to the Monopolitans of Starch, Tinn, Fish, Cloth, Oil, Vinegar,
Salt, and I know not what, nay what not? The principallest commodities both of
my Town and Country are engrossed into the hand of those blood-suckers of the
Commonwealth. If a body, Mr Speaker, being let blood, be left still
languishing without any remedy, how can the good estate of that body long
remain? Such is the State of my Town and Country, the Traffic is taken away,
the inward and private Commodities are taken away, and dare not be used without
the License of these Monopolitans. If these blood-suckers be still let alone to
suck up the best and principallest commodities which the earth there has given
us, what shall become of us, from whom the fruits of our own Soil and the
commodities of our own labor, which with the sweat of our brows even up to the
knees in Mire and Dirt, we have labored for, shall be taken by Warrant of
Supreme Authority, which the poor Subjects dare not gainsay?

Mr George Moore said, I make no question but that this bill offers good
matter; And I do wish that the matter may in some sort be prosecuted, and the
Bill rejected. Many grievances have been laid open touching the Monopolics of
Salt; but if we add thereunto peter, then we had hit the grief aright; with
which my Country is perplexed. There be three persons her Majesty, the Patentee
and the Subject; her Majesty the head, the Patentee the hand, and the Subject
the soot. Now here is our Case, the head gives power to the hands, the hand
oppresses the foot, the foot rises against the head. We know the power of her
Majesty cannot be restrained by any Act, why therefore should we thus talk?
Admit we should make this Statute with a Non objtante, yet the Queen may grant
a Patent with a Non objtante, to cross this Non obstante. I think therefore it
agrees more with the gravity and wisdom of this House to proceed with all
humbleness by Petition than Bill.

Mr Wingfield said, I would but put the House in mind of the proceeding we had
in this matter the last Parliament, in the end whereof our Speaker moved her
Majesty by way of Petition, that the griefs touching these Monopolies might be
respected, and the grievances coming of them might be redressed. Her Majesty
answered by the Lord Keeper, that she would take care of these Monopolies and
our griefs should be redressed; if not, she would give us free liberty to
proceed in making a Law the next Parliament. The grief, Mr Speaker, is still
bleeding, and we green under the sore, and are still without remedy. It was my
hap the last Parliament to encounter with the word Prerogative; but as then, so
now I do it with all humility, and wish all happiness both unto it and to her
Majesty. I am indifferent touching our proceeding either by Bill or Petition,
so that therein our grievances may follow, whereby her Majesty may specially
understand them.

Sir Walter Raleigh said, I am urged to speak in two respects; the one because
I find my self touched in particular; the other, in that I take some imputation
of slander to be offered unto her Majesty, I mean by the Gentleman that first
mentioned Tinn (which was Mr Martin) for that being one of the principal
commodities of this Kingdom, and being in Cornwall, it has ever, so long as
there were any, belonged to the Dukes of Cornwall, and they had special Patents
of Privilege. It pleased her Majesty freely to bestow upon me that privilege;
And that Patent being word for word, the very same the Duke's is, and because
by reason of mine Office of Lord Warden of the Stannary, I can sufficiently
inform this House of the State thereof; I will make bold to deliver it unto
you. When the Tinn is taken out of the Mine, and melted and refined, then is
every piece containing one hundred weight sealed with the Duke's Seal. Now I
will tell you, that before the granting of my Patent, whether Tinn were but of
seventeen shillings and so upward to fifty shillings a hundred, yet the Poor
Workmen never had above two shillings the week, finding themselves: But since
my Patent, whosoever will work, may; and buy Tinn at what price soever, they
have four shillings a week truly paid. There is no Poor that will work there,
but may, and have that wages. Notwithstanding, if all others may be repealed, I
will give my consent as freely to the cancelling of this, as any Member of this
House.

Sir Francis Hastings said, It is a special honor to this Assembly to give
freedom of speech to all; And howsoever some have been heretofore troubled, yet
I joy to see so great reformation, that we may speak quietly and be heard
peaceably. Every man has not like sense or judgment, neither is every man's
memory alike: I wish that if any Gentleman that speaks of this or any other
subject as injurious, shall let fall any word amiss or unpleasing, that it may
be attributed rather to hastiness than want of duty. This Speech proceeded in
respect of Sir Walter Raleighs Speech, as also of the great silence after it.

Mr Snigg wished a Committee to devise a course.

Sir Robert Wroth wished a Committee, in which a course might be devised how her
Majesty might know our griefs.

Mr Downland said, As I would be no let or over vehement in any thing, so I am
not sottish or senseless of the common grievance of the Commonwealth. If we
proceed by way of Petition, we can have no more gracious Answer than we had the
last Parliament to our Petitions. But since that Parliament we have no
reformation; And the reason why I think no reformation has been had, is,
because I never heard the cry against Monopolies greater and more vehement.

Mr Johnson said, Mr Speaker, I Will be very short and say only thus much, I
would we were all so happy, that her gracious self had heard but the fifth part
of that, that every one of us has heard this day; I think verily in my Soul
and Conscience we should not be more desirous in having those Monopolies called
in, than she would be earnest therein her self.

The Bill aforesaid for Explanation of the Common Law touching Letters Patents
was after the foregoing several long Arguments Ordered upon the question to be
committed unto all the Privy Council and Learned Council of this House, Sir
Walter Raleigh, Sir Francis Hastings, Sir Edward Stafford, Sir Edward Hobbie,
Sir George Moore, Sir Robert Wroth and others; And the Bill and Committees
names were delivered to Sir Francis Hastings, who with the rest was appointed
to meet to Morrow in this House at two of the Clock in the Afternoon.

On Saturday the 21th day of November. Six Bills had each of them one reading;
of which the first being the Bill for levying of Fines with Proclamations of
Lands within the County of the City of Chester, and the second to reform the
abuse of Tainters, had each of them their first reading.

Mr Francis Moore made Report of the meeting of the Committees of the Bill
touching Sir Edward Seymour, (who were appointed on Tuesday the 17th day of
this instant November foregoing) showed the Amendments in the same, and brought
in the Bill.

Thus far out of the Original Journal Book of the House of Commons: Now follows
one passage of this day touching the Privilege of the House out of the often
before-cited private Journal of the said House.

Sir Edward Hobbie said, A Gentleman a good Member of this House, (Sir John
Gray) was served with a Subpoena in the Chancery ad respondendum the 30th of
November ad sectam Roberti Atkins; if no Order be taken herein, for my own part
I think both the House and the Privileges thereof will grow in contempt. I
wish the Sergeant may be sent for and the Party, and that some exemplary
punishment may be showed.

Mr Doyley said, Mr Speaker, we spend much time which is precious, in disputing
of Privileges and other matters of small importance; for my own part I think
fit no time should be spent herein, but that a Writ of Privilege may be
granted.

Mr Johnson said, Mr Speaker, our own lenity is the cause of this contempt, and
till some special punishment be showed, I think it will not be otherwise.

Thus far out of the aforesaid private Journal: Now follows the residue of the
Passages of this Forenoon out of the Original Journal Book it self.

The Bill against Taintering of Woollen Cloths was read the second time and
committed unto the former Committees in the Bill for Cloths and Clothworkers,
and Ordered that Merchants and Drapers do attend the Committees and be heard
therein as appertains; And Sir Edward Stafford, Mr Fulk Grevill and Mr Barkley
were added to the former Committees.

The Amendments in the Bill touching Sir Edward Seymour Knight Deceased, and
Edward Seymour Esquire were twice read and Ordered with the Bill to be engrossed.

The Bill for the making of an Haven or Key on the North part of Severn was
read the second time, and committed unto the Knights and Burgesses for the
Counties of Devon, Cornwall, Somerset and South Wales, all the Queens Learned
Council, the Batons of the Cinque Ports and others, who were appointed to meet
upon Wednesday next in the Exchequer Chamber at two of the Clock in the
Afternoon.

The Bill for the Assurance of the Jointure of (...) Countess of Bedford was
read the second time, and committed unto all the Queens Learned Council being
Members of this House, Sir Francis Hastings, Sir Edward Hobbie and others, who
were appointed to meet on Wednesday next in the Middle Temple Hall at two of
the Clock in the Afternoon.

The Bill for the better observation of certain Orders in the Exchequer set
down and established by virtue of her Majesty's Privy Seal, was read the second
time, and committed unto the former Committees in the first Bill, and unto all
the Privy Council and Learned Council of her Majesty being Members of this
House, Masters Attorneys of the Duchy and Court of Wards, Mr Francis Bacon, Mr
Francis Moore, Mr Sergeant Harris and others, who were appointed to meet upon
Monday next in the House at two of the Clock in the Afternoon, after a question
first had, whether it should be sitten upon in Committee this Afternoon; and
was upon the division of the House upon the difference of forty six persons, (
viz. with the Yea for this day ninety five, and with the No for Monday a
hundred sixty one) Ordered to be sitten in Committee on Monday next as
aforesaid.

Thus far out of the Original Journal Book of the House of Commons; the residue
which fell out in the Afternoon at the Committee for Monopolies or Patents of
Privilege, whose names see before on Yesterday foregoing, is supplied out of
the private Journal.

Sir Edward Hobbie informed the House of the great abuse of the Patentee for
Salt in his Country, That betwixt Michaelmas and St Andrews Tide, where Salt
(before the Patent) was wont to be sold for sixteen pence a Bushel, it is now
sold for fourteen or fifteen shillings a Bushel; But after the Lord President
had understanding thereof, he committed the Patentee, and caused it to be sold
for sixteen pence as before. This Patent was granted to Sir Thomas Wilkes, and
after to one Smith. To Lyme there is brought every Year above three thousand
Wey of Salt, and every Wey of Salt is since the Patent enhaunced to twenty
shillings, and where the Bushel was wont to be eight pence, it is now sixteen
pence. And I dare boldly say it, if this Patent were called in, there might
well three thousand pound a year be saved in the Ports of Lyme, Boston and
Hull. I speak of white Salt.

Mr Francis Bacon said, The Bill is very injurious and ridiculous; injurious,
in that it takes or rather sweepeth away her Majesty's Prerogative; and
ridiculous, in that there is a Proviso, that this Statute shall not extend to
Grants made to Corporations: that is a Gull to sweeten the Bill withal, it is
only to make Fools fain. All men of the Law know, that a Bill which is only
expository, to expound the Common Law, does enact nothing; neither is any
promise of good therein. And therefore the Proviso in the Statute of 34 Hen. 8.
of Wills, (which is but a Statute expository of the Statute of 32 Hen. 8. of
Wills) touching Sir John Gainsfords Will, was adjudged void. Therefore I think
the Bill very unfit, and our Proceedings to be by Petition.

Mr Solicitor Flemming said, I will briefly give account of all things
touching these Monopolies. Her Majesty in her Provident Care gave Charge unto
Mr Attorney and my Self, that speedy and special Order may be taken for these
Patents; this was in the beginning of Hillary Term last: but you all know the
danger of that time, and what great affairs of importance happened to prevent
these businesses; and since that time nothing could be done for want of leisure.

Sir Robert Wroth said, I would but note, Mr Solicitor, that you were charged
to take Order in Hillary Term last; why not before? there was time enough ever
since the last Parliament. I speak it and I speak it boldly, these Patentees
are worse than ever they were: And I have heard a Gentleman affirm in this
House, that there is a Clause of Revocation in these Patents; if so, what
needed this stir of Scire facias, Quo Warranto and I know not what, when it is
but only to send for the Patentees, and cause a redelivery? There have been
diverse Patents granted since the last Parliament; these are now in being, viz.
The Patents for Currants, Iron, Powder, Cards, Ox-shin Bones, Train Oil,
Transportation of Leather, Lists of Cloth, Ashes, Anniseeds, Vinegar,
Sea-Coals, Steel, Aquavitae, Brushes, Pots, Saltpeter, Lead, Accidences, Oil,
Calamint Stone, Oil of Blubber, Fumathoes or dried Piltchers in the Smoke and
diverse others.

Upon the reading of the Patents aforesaid Mr Hackwell of Lincoln's Inn stood up
and asked thus; Is not Bread there? Bread quoth one, Bread quoth another; this
Voice seems strange quoth another; this Voice seems strange quoth a third: No
quoth Mr Hackwell, if Order be not taken for these, Bread will be there before
the next Parliament.

Mr Heyward Townesend of Lincoln's End said; I seeing the disagreement of the
Committee, and that they would agree upon nothing, made a Motion to this
effect; first to put them in mind of a Petition made the last Parliament, which
though it took no effect, yet we should much wrong her Majesty and forget our
selves, if we should think to speed no better now in the like Case; because
then there was a Commitment for this purpose, and the Committees drew a Speech
which was delivered by the Speaker word for word at the end of the Parliament,
but now we might help that by sending our Speaker presently after such a
Committee and Speech made, with humble Suit not only to repeal all Monopolies
grievous to the Subject, but also that it would please her Majesty to give us
leave to make an Act that they might be of no more force, validity or effect
than they are at the Common Law without the strength of her Prerogative. Which
though we might now do, and the Act being so reasonable we might assure our
selves her Majesty would not delay the passing thereof, yet we her loving
Subjects, etc. would not offer without her privity or consent (the Cause so
nearly touching her Prerogative) or go about to do any such Act. And also that
at the Committee which should make this Speech, every Member of this House
which either found himself, his Town or Country grieved, might put in (in fair
writing) such Exceptions against Monopolies, as he would justify to be true;
And that the Speaker might deliver them with his own hands, because many
obstacles and hindrances might happen.

Mr Francis Bacon after a long Speech concluded thus in the end. Why, you have
the readiest course that possibly can be devised, I would wish no further Order
be taken, but to prefer the wise and discreet Speech made by the Young
Gentleman (even the Youngest in this Assembly) that last spoke. I will tell
you, that even ex ore Infantium and lactantium, the true and most certain
course is propounded unto us. So the House as it should seem agreed thereunto,
and appointed to meet on Monday next post Meridiem, at which time all the
aforesaid matters past.

On Monday the 23th day of November, Three Bills had each of them one reading;
of which the first being the Bill for Confirmation of the Grant of the
Hospitals of Christ, Bridewell and St Thomas the Apostle was read the second
time, and committed to the former Committees (who were appointed on Tuesday the
17th day of this instant November foregoing) and Sir George Moore, Mr Paul, Mr
Edward Moore and Mr Barnham were added to the former Committees, who were
appointed to meet upon Wednesday next in the Exchequer Chamber at two of the
Clock in the Afternoon.

Mr Symnell one of the Committees in the Bill touching Mr Markham, showed the
mind of the Committees to be, and also delivered sundry reasons, that it is a
Bill fit to rest and not to be any further dealt in by this House.

The Bill that Sir Anthony Mayney Knight, and Anthony Mayney his Son may be
enabled to dispose of his Lands, etc. was upon the second reading committed
unto Sir Robert Wroth, Sir Edward Hobbie, Sir George Moore, Sir William Wray,
Sir Moyle Finch, Sir Michaell Sands and others, who were appointed to meet to
Morrow in the Afternoon in the Middle Temple Hall at two of the Clock.

The Bill to reform the abuse of Taintering Cloth was read the second time, and
upon the question Ordered not to be committed, and upon another question
rejected.

The Bill of Monopolies was read, to which Mr Spicer spoke and said, Mr
Speaker, I think it were good this Bill were committed; I am no Apostate, but I
stick to the former faith and opinion that I was of, that by way of Petition
will be our safest course; for it is to no purpose to offer to tie her hands by
Act of Parliament, when she may loosen her self at her pleasure. I think it
were a Course nec gratum, nec tutum. And therefore the best way is to have a
Committee to consider what course shall be proceeded in; for I doubt not but we
be all agreed of the reformation, though not of the manner.

Mr Davies said, God has given that power to absolute Princes which he
attributes to himself, Dixi quod Dii estis. And as Attributes unto them he
has given Majesty, Justice and Mercy; Majesty, in respect of the Honor that
the Subject shows to his Prince; Justice, in respect he can do no wrong,
therefore the Law is 1 Hen. 7. that the King cannot commit a disseizin; Mercy,
in respect he gives leave to Subjects to right themselves by Law: And
therefore in 43 Assis. an Indictment was brought against Bakers and Brewers,
for that by color of License they had broken the Assize; wherefore according
to that Precedent I think it most fit to proceed by Bill not by Petition.

Mr Secretary Cecill said, if there had not been some mistaking or some
confusion in the Committee, I would not now have spoken. The question was of
the most convenient way to reform these grievances of Monopoly: But after
disputation, of the labor we have not received the expected fruit. If every
man shall take leave to speak for the common Subject, I am afraid in these vast
powers of our mind, we shall dispute the project and reformation quite out of
doors. This dispute draws two great things in question; First the Princes
power; Secondly the freedom of Englishmen. I am born an Englishman and am a
Fellow-Member of this House; I would desire to live no day, in which I should
detract from either. I am servant unto the Queen, and before I would speak or
give consent to a Case that should debase her Prerogative or abridge it, I
would wish my tongue cut out of my head. I am sure there were Lawmakers before
there were Laws. One Gentleman went about to possess us, with the Execution of
the Law in an Ancient Record of 5o or 7o Edwardi 3. Likely enough to be true in
that time, when the King was afraid of the Subject. Though this Precedent be a
substance, yet it is not the whole substance of the Parliament. For in former
times; all sat together as well King as Subject, and then it was no prejudice
to his Prerogative to have such a Monopoly examined. If you stand upon Law and
dispute of the Prerogative, hark ye what Bracton says, Praerogativam Nostram
nemo audeat disputare. And for my own part I like not these courses should be
taken. And you Mr Speaker, should perform the charge her Majesty gave unto you
in the beginning of this Parliament, not to receive Bills of this nature; for
her Majesty's ears be open to all grievances, and her hand stretched out to
every man's Petitions. For the matter of access I like it well, so it be first
moved and the way prepared. I had rather all the Patents were destroyed than
her Majesty should lose the hearts of so many Subjects as is pretended. I will
tell you what I think of these Monopolies: I take them to be of three natures,
some of a free nature and good, some void of themselves, some both good and
void. For the first, when the Prince dispenses with a penal Law that is left to
the alteration of Sovereignty, I think it powerful and irrevocable. For the
second, as to grant that which takes from the Subject his Birthright, such men
as desire these kind of Patents, I account them misdoers and wilful and wicked
offenders. Of the third sort is the License for the matter of Cards, etc. And
therefore I think it were fit to have a new Commitment to consider what her
Majesty may grant, what not; what course we shall take, and upon what points.

Mr Doctor Stanhop and Dr Hone were sent from the Lords with a Bill entitled,
An Act for the Uniting of Eye and Dunsden to the Manor of Sunning.

Mr Mountague said, I am loath to speak what I know, lest perhaps I should
displease. The Prerogative Royal is that which is now in question, and which
the Laws of the Land have ever allowed and maintained. Then my motion shall be
but this, That we may be Suitors unto her Majesty, that the Patentees shall
have no other remedies than by the Laws of the Realm they may have; and that
our Act may be accordingly.

Mr Martin said, I think the Common grievance and the Queens Prerogative have
inspired this Gentleman that last spoke (whom for reverence sake I must needs
name, Mr Mountague) to make that motion which he has done. And because the
House seems greatly to applaud it, may it please you Mr Speaker, to put it to
the question, whether that shall be determined of at the Committee. Now the
Committees were, all the Privy Council being Members of this House, and the
Queens Learned Council Members likewise of this House, all the Knights of the
Shires, Sir George Moore, Mr Dr Bennet, Mr Hide, Mr Winch, Sir Charles
Cavendish, Sir Percival Heart, Mr Thinn, Mr. Downhalt, Mr. Martm and diverse
others, together with the Knights and Citizens for London, the Barons of the
Ports, Mr Lieutenant of the Tower and Mr Doctor Caesar, who were appointed to
meet this Afternoon in this House at two of the Clock, to have Conference and
to agree upon some course to be taken touching Patents of Privileges, and to
report unto this House of their resolutions therein accordingly.

The Bill against Pluralities of Benefices had its first reading.

All the Bills committed touching Cloths are appointed to be dealt in to Morrow
in the Afternoon in the Middle Temple Hall.

Mr Moore brought in a Bill drawn by the Committees in the Bill for the
repealing and continuance of the Statutes (whose names see on Thursday the 5th
day of this instant November foregoing.

Thus far of this days Passages out of the Original Journal Book of the House
of Commons.

Post Meridiem.

The Committees for the great business of Monopolies and Patents of Privilege
being met, there was showed amongst them a Note or Catalogue of diverse of them,
and to whom they were granted, which was as follows, only altered in some
places for Order sake.

To Sir Henry Nevill the Patent for Ordnance.

To Sir Jerome Bows the Patent for Glasses.

To Simon Furner the Patent for Lists, Shreds and Horns to be transported.

To Sir Henry Noell the Patent for Stone Pots and Bottles.

To Brian Anusley the Patent for Steel.

To Eliz. Matthewes the Patent for Oil of Blubbers.

To Richard Drake a Patent for Aqua composita and Aquavitae.

To Michaell Stanhop a Patent for Spanish Woolls.

To Thomas Cornwallis the License to keep unlawful Games.

To William Carr a Patent for Brewing of Beer to be transported.

To John Spillman a Patent to make Paper.

To Edward Darcie a Patent for Cards.

To Sir John Packington a Patent for Starch.

To Sir Walter Raleigh a Patent for Tin.

To William Wade Esquire the making of Sulphur, Brimston and Oil.

To James Chambers a License for Tanning.

To William Watkins and James Roberts a License to Print Almanacks.

To Richard Welsh to Print the History of Cornelius and Tacitus.

To John Norden to Print Speculum Britanniae.

To certain Merchants to Traffic.

To William Allin to sow six hundred Acres of ground with Oade.

To Mr Heyle to provide Steel beyond the Seas.

To Mr Robert Alexander for Anniseeds.

To Edward Darcie a Patent for Steel.

To Valentine Harris to sow six hundred Acres with Oade.

To Sir Henry Singer touching the Printing of School-Books.

To Arthur Bassany a License to transport six thousand Calf-Skins.

To Thomas Morley to Print Songs in three parts.

To Sir John Packington for Starch and Ashes.

To Thomas Wight and Bonnam Norton to Print Law Books; and diverse others of no
great moment touching the transportation of Iron and Tin, the sowing of Hemp
and Flax, the gashing of Hydes, the forfeiture of Grigg Mills, the making of
Mathematical Instruments, the making of Saltpeter, the Printing of the Psalms
of David, and touching Fishers, Pouldavies and certain Forfeitures.

These Monopolies were most of them showed to the Committees by Secretary
Cecill, and to have been granted since the sixteenth year of the Queens
Majesty's Reign; for in the seventeenth year of her Reign, he showed that a
Patent was first granted to Robert Sharp to make Spangles and Oes of Gold; And
then in the eighteenth year of her Majesty a Patent was granted to Sir Edward
Dyer to pardon, dispense and reserve all Forfeitures and abuses committed by
Tanners contrary to the Statute. And that the greatest part of the
beforementioned Patents of Privilege or Monopolies had been granted since.
Whereupon after Mr Davies had moved to have these Monopolies proceeded against
by Bill, and Mr Martin had moved to have them rather dealt in by Petition to
her Majesty, and that the House had heard the particular relation of the said
Monopolies, there was nothing done or concluded upon, but a meeting appointed
on Tuesday in the Afternoon.

On Tuesday the 24th day of November the Bill touching Painter-Stainers and
abuses in Painting was read the second time, and committed unto Sir
RobertWroth, Sir George Moore, Mr Maynard, Mr Cope, Mr Doctor Parkins and
others, who were appointed to meet this Afternoon in the Exchequer Chamber at
two of the Clock, and the Bill with the Committees names was delivered to Mr
Pindar one of the same Committees.

The Bill touching the Garbling of Spices was read the second time, and
committed to the last former Committees for Painters, and the Queens Learned
Council were added unto them.

The Bill touching the Lordships of Landoflowre alias Landovorowre was read the
second time, and committed unto the Knights and Burgesses for Wales, the
Burgesses for Hereford, Mr Owen, Mr Philipps and others, who were appointed to
meet to Morrow in the Temple-Church at two of the Clock in the Afternoon, and
the Bill was delivered to Mr Philipps.

The Bill for reformation of abuses used in the Art or Mystery of Imbroidering
was read the second time and rejected, as was also the Bill for Mollineux after
it had been read the second time and put to the question.

Sir Francis Hastings made Report of the meeting of the Committees in the Bill
touching Alehouses (who were appointed on Thursday the 5th day of this instant
November foregoing) with some Amendments in the same.

The Amendments in the Bill touching Alehouses were twice read, and the Bill
Ordered to be engrossed.

Sir Edmund Morgan a Member of this House being served with a Subpoena to
appear in the Chancery this present day, and also Mr Pemerton another Member of
this House likewise served with a Subpoena out of the Chancery at the Suit of
Sir Walter Raleigh and Sir Carew Raleigh, prays the Privilege, which by
Order of this House was granted.

The Bill against blasphemous Swearing was read the second time and committed
to the former Committees in the Bill touching Swearing (who were appointed on
Tuesday the 10th day of this instant November foregoing) and to meet in this
House in the Committee Chamber to Morrow Morning:

The Bill against double payment of Debts upon Shop-Books was read the first
time.

The Bill for the making of Parks of the Impaled Grounds of Noblemen and
Gentlemen was read the second time, and upon the question and division of the
House dashed, with the Yea a hundred and eleven, and with the No a hundred
fifty one.

Thus far of this days Passages out of the Original Journal Book of the House
of Commons.

Upon some loud Confusion in the House touching some private murmur of
Monopolies,

Mr Secretary Cecill said, The Duty I owe and the Zeal to extinguish Monopolies
makes me to speak now, and to satisfy their Opinions that think there shall be
no redress of these Monopolies. Order is attended with these two Handmaids,
Gravity and Zeal; but Zeal with Discretion. I have been (though unworthy) a
Member of this House in six or seven Parliaments, yet never did I see the House
in so great Confusion. I believe there never was in any Parliament a more
tender point handled than the Liberty of the Subject, that when any is
discussing this point, he should be cried and cought down. This is more fit for
a Grammar School than a Court of Parliament. I have been a Counselor of State
this twelve years, yet did I never know it subject to construction of levity
and disorder. Much more ought we to be regardful in so great and grave an
Assembly. Why, we have had Speeches upon Speeches, without either Order or
Discretion. One would have had us proceed by Bill, and see if the Queen would
have denied it: Another, that the Patents should be brought here before us and
cancelled; and this were bravely done. Others would have us to proceed by way
of Petition, which Course doubtless is best; but for the first, and especially
for the second, it is so ridiculous, that I think we should have as bad success
as the Devil himself would have wished in so good a Cause. Why, if idle courses
had been followed, we should have gone forsooth to the Queen with a Petition to
have repealed a Patent of Monopoly of Tabaco Pipes (which Mr Wingfields note
had) and I know not how many conceits: but I wish every man to rest satisfied
till the Committees have brought in their resolutions according to your
Commandments.

On Wednesday the 25th day of November, Three Bills of no great moment had each
of them one reading; of which the last being the Bill for the levying of Fines
in the County and City of Chester was read the second time, and committed unto
all the Queens Learned Council being of this House, the Knights and Burgesses
for the County and City of Chester, Sir John Egerton and others, who were
appointed to meet upon Friday next in the Inner Temple Hall at two of the Clock
in the Afternoon.

Sir Edward Hobbie made Report of the Committees travel in the Bill touching Mr
Nevill, and delivered in the Bill with some Amendments and a Proviso.

The Amendments and Proviso in the Bill for Mr. Nevill were twice read, and
Ordered with the Bill to be engrossed, and not to be read the third time, until
her Majesty's Pleasure be further known, to be signified unto this House by Mr.
Solicitor, Mr. Speaker, or some other thereunto appointed.

The Amendments in the Bill touching trifling Suits were twice read, and with
the Bill Ordered to be engrossed.

The Bill to prevent double payment of Debt upon Shop-Books was read the second
time and committed unto Sir Walter Raleigh, Mr. Beeston, Sir Francis Hastings
and others; and the Bill was delivered to Mr. Beeston, who with the rest was
appointed to meet in the Inner Temple Hall at two of the Clock in the Afternoon
upon Friday next.

The Committees for the Exchequer Bill (who were appointed on Saturday the 21th
day of this instant November foregoing) brought in the Bill with some
Amendments, and after some Speeches therein had, upon the question resolved,
that it should be presently recommitted to be considered of in the Committee
Chamber of this House, and thereunto are appointed Mr. Mountague, Mr. Winch,
Sir Robert Wroth, Mr. Jones, Mr. Martin, Mr. Tate, Mr. Johnson, etc.

Mr. Henry Mountague brought in the Bill touching Process and Pleadings in the
Court of Exchequer, with Report of the Amendments.

The Amendments in the Bill for Orders in the Court of Exchequer were twice
read, and with the Bill Ordered to be engrossed.

Mr. Speaker (after a silence, and every man marvelling why the Speaker stood
up) spoke to this effect.

It pleased her Majesty to command me to attend upon her Yesterday in the
Afternoon, from whom I am to deliver unto you all, her Majesty's most gracious
Message sent by my unworthy Self. She yields you all hearty thanks for your
care and special regard of those things that concern her State, Kingdom, and
consequently our Selves, whose good she had always tendered as her own; for our
speedy resolution in making of so hasty and free a Subsidy, which commonly
succeeded and never went before our Councels; and for our Loyalty: I do assure
you with such and so great Zeal and Affection she uttered and showed the same,
that to express it, our tongues are not able, neither our hearts to conceive
it. It pleased her Majesty to say unto me, that if she had an hundred tongues
she could not express our hearty earty good Wills. And further she said, that
as she had ever held our good most dear, so the last day of our (or her) Life
should witness it; And that the least of her Subjects was not grieved, and she
not touched. She appealed to the Throne of Almighty God, how careful she has
been and will be to defend her People from all Oppressions. She said, that
partly by intimation of her Council, and partly by diverse Petitions that have
been delivered unto her both going to the Chapel and also to walk abroad, she
understood that diverse Patents, which she had granted, were grievous to her
Subjects; and that the Substitutes of the Patentees had used great Oppressions.
But she said, she never assented to grant any thing which was Malum in se. And
if in the abuse of her Grant there be any thing evil (which she took knowledge
there was) she her self would take present Order of reformation. I cannot
express unto you the Apparent Indignation of her Majesty toward these abuses.
She said that her Kingly Prerogative (for so she termed it) was tender; and
therefore desires us not to fear or doubt of her careful reformation; for she
said, that her Commandment was given a little before the late troubles (meaning
the Earl of Essex's matters) but had an unfortunate Event: but that in the
midst of her most great and weighty occasions, she thought upon them. And
that this should not suffice, but that further Order should be taken presently
and not in futuro (for that also was another word which I take it her Majesty
used) and that some should be presently repealed, some suspended, and none put
in Execution, but such as should first have a Trial according to the Law for
the good of the People. Against the abuses her wrath was so incensed, that she
said, that she neither could nor would suffer such to escape with impunity. So
to my unspeakable comfort she has made me the Messenger of this her gracious
Thankfulness and Care. Now we see that the Axe of her Princely Justice is laid
to the Root of the Tree; and so we see her gracious goodness has prevented our
Counsels and Consultations. God make us thankful, and send her long to Reign
amongst us. If through weakness of memory, want of utterance or frailty of my
Self, I have omitted any thing of her Majesty's Commands, I do most humbly
crave Pardon for the same: And do beseech the Honorable Persons which assist
this Chair and were present before her Majesty at the delivery hereof, to
supply and help my imperfections; which joined with my fear have caused me (no
doubt) to forget something which I should have delivered unto you.

After a little pause and silent talking one with another, Mr Secretary Cecill
stood up and said, There needs no supply of the Memory of the Speaker: But
because it pleased him to desire some that be about him to aid his delivery,
and because the rest of my Fellows be silent, I will take upon me to deliver
some thing which I both then heard, and since know. I was present with the rest
of my Fellow Counselors, and the Message was the same that has been told you;
and the cause has not succeeded from any particular course thought upon, but
from private Informations of some particular persons. I have been very
Inquisitive of them and of the Cause, why more importunity was now used than
before, which I am afraid comes by being acquainted with some course of
proceeding in this House. There are no Patents now of force, which shall not
presently be revoked; for what Patent soever is granted, there shall be left to
the overthrow of that Patent, a Liberty agreeable to the Law. There is no
Patent if it be Malum in se, but the Queen was ill apprized in her Grant. But
all to the generality be unacceptable. I take it, there is no Patent whereof
the Execution has not been injurious. Would that they had never been granted.
I hope there shall never be more, (All the House said Amen.) In particular most
of these Patents have been supported by Letters of Assistance from her
Majesty's Privy Council; but whosoever looks upon them shall find, that they
carry no other style, than with relation to the Patent. I dare assure you that
from henceforth there shall be no more granted. They shall all be revoked. But
to whom do they repair with these Letters? to some out-house, to some desolate
Widow, to some simple Cottage, or poor ignorant People, who rather than they
would be troubled and undo themselves by coming up hither, will give any thing
in reason for these Caterpillars satisfaction. The notice of this is now
public, and you will perhaps judge this to be a Tale to serve the time. But I
would have all men to know thus much, that it is no jesting with a Court of
Parliament, neither dares any man (for my own part I dare not) so mock and
abuse all the States of this Kingdom in a matter of this consequence and
importance. I say therefore there shall be a Proclamation general throughout
the Realm to notify her Majesty's resolution in this behalf. And because you
may eat your meat more savourly than you have done, every man shall have Salt
as good cheap as he can either buy it or make it, freely without danger of that
Patent, which shall be presently revoked. The same benefit shall they have
which have cold Stomachs, both for Aquavitae and Aqua composita and the like.
And they that have weak Stomachs, for their satisfaction, shall have Vinegar
and Alegar, and the like set at liberty. Train Oil shall go the same way; Oil
of Blubber shall march in equal rank; Brushes and Bottles endure the like
Judgment. The Patent for Pouldavy, if it be not called in, it shall be Oade;
which as I take it is not restrained either by Law or Statute, but only by
Proclamation (I mean from the former Sowing) though for the saving thereof it
might receive good disputation. Yet for your satisfaction, the Queens Pleasure
is to revoke that Proclamation; only she prays thus much, that when she
comes on Progress to see you in your Countries; she be not driven out of your
Towns by suffering it to infect the Air too near them. Those that desire to go
sprucely in their Ruffs may at less charge than accustomed obtain their wish;
for the Patent for Starch, which has so much been prosecuted, shall now be
repealed; There are other Patents which be considerable, as the Patent of New
Drapery, which shall be suspended and left to the Law; Irish Yarn, a matter
that I am sorry there is no cause of Complaint; for the Salvageness of the
People and the War has frustrated the hope of the Patentee, a Gentleman of
good service and desert, a good Subject to her Majesty, and a good Member of
the Commonwealth, Mr Carmarthen. Notwithstanding it shall be suspended and
left to the Law. The Patent for Calf-Skins and Fells, which was made with a
relation, shall endure the censure of the Law. But I must tell you, there is no
reason that all should be revoked, for the Queen means not to be swept out of
her Prerogative. I say it shall be suspended, if the Law do not Warrant it.
There is another Servant of her Majesty's Mr Onslow, one of her Pensioners, an
honest Gentleman and a faithful Servant, he has the Patent for Steel, which
one Mr Beale once had; this too because of Complaints shall be suspended. There
is another that has the Patent for Leather, Sir Edward Dyer, a Gentleman of
good desert, honest, religious and wise; this was granted unto him thirty years
ago. It crept not in by the new misgovernment of the time: Yet this shall also
be suspended. The Patent for Cards shall be suspended and tryable by the Common
Law. The Patent for Glasses, which though I do least apprehend to be
prejudicial to the public good, yet it is lest to the Law. There is another
Patent for Saltpeter, that has been both accused and slandered; It digs in
every man's House, it annoys the Inhabitant, and generally troubles the
Subject: For this I beseech you be contented. Yet I know I am to blame to
desire it, it being condemned by you in foro Conscientiae; but I assure you it
shall be fully sifted and tried in foro judicii. Her Majesty means to take this
Patent (...) her Self, and advise with her Council touching the same. For I
must tell you the Kingdom is not so well furnished with Powder now as it should
be. But if it be thought fit upon advice to be cancelled; her Majesty commanded
me to tell you, that though she be willing to help the grave Gentleman that
has that Patent, yet out of that abundant desire that she has to give you
complete satisfaction, it shall be repealed. This has come to the Ear of the
Queen, and I have been most earnest to search for the Instrument, and as a
Counselor of State, have done my best endeavor to salve the sore; But I fear
we are not secret within our selves. Then must I needs give you this for a
future Caution, That whatsoever is subject to public expectation cannot be
good, while the Parliament matters are ordinary talk in the Street. I have
heard my self, being in my Coach, these words spoken aloud, [ God prosper those
that further the overthrow of these Monopolies, God send the Prerogative touch
not our Liberty.] I will not wrong any so much as to imagine he was of this
Assembly; Yet let me give you this Note, That the time was never more apt to
disorder and make ill interpretation of good meaning; I think those persons
would be glad that all Sovereignty were converted into Popularity; We being
here, are but the popular branch, and our liberty, the liberty of the Subject:
And the World is apt to slander most especially the Ministers of Government.

Thus much have I spoken to accomplish my duty unto her Majesty, but not to
make any further performance of the well uttered and gravely and truly
delivered Speech of the Speaker. But I must crave your favors a little longer
to make an Apology for my self. I have held the favor of this House as dear as
my Life, and I have been told that I deserved to be taxed Yesterday of the
House. I protest my Zeal to have the business go forward in a right and hopeful
course; and my fear to displease her Majesty by a harsh and rash proceeding
made me so much to lay aside my discretion, that I said it might rather be
termed a School than a Council, or to that effect. But by this Speech if any
think I called him Schoolboy, he both wrongs me and mistakes me. Shall I tell
you what Demosthenes said to the Clamours which the Athenians made, that they
were Pueriles and dignos pueris. And yet that was to a popular State. And I
wish that whatsoever is here spoken may be buried within these Walls. Let us
take Example of the Jewish Synagogue, who would always Sepelire Senatum cum
honor, and not blast their own Follies and Imperfections. If any man in this
House speak wisely, we do him great wrong to interrupt him; if foolishly, let
us hear him out, we shall have the more cause to tax him. And I do heartily
pray that no Member of this House may plus verbis offendere quam consilio
juvare.

Mr Francis Moore said, I must confess Mr Speaker, I moved the House both the
last Parliament and this touching this point, but I never meant (and I hope
this House thinks so) to set limits and bounds to the Prerogative Royal. But
now seeing it has pleased her Majesty of her self, out of the abundance of her
Princely goodness, to set at liberty her Subjects from the thraldom of those
Monopolies, from which there was no Town, City or Country free; I would be bold
in one motion to offer two considerations to this House; The first, that Mr
Speaker might go unto her Majesty to yield her most humble and hearty thanks
and withal to show the joy of her Subjects for their delivery, and their
thankfulness unto her for the same; The other, that where diverse Speeches have
been made extravagantly in this House, which doubtless have been told her
Majesty, and perhaps all ill conceived of by her, I would therefore that Mr
Speaker not only should satisfy her Majesty by way of Apology therein, but also
humbly crave pardon for the same.

Mr. Wingfield said, My heart is not able to conceive the joy which I feel, and
I assure you my Tongue cannot utter the same. If a sentence of Everlasting
happiness had been pronounced unto me, it could not have made me show more
outward joy than now I do, which I cannot refrain to express (and here as I
think he wept) There could nothing have been more acceptable to the Subject
than this Message. And I verily think, if ever any of her Majesty's words be
meritorious before God, this is. I do agree withal my heart in the first part
of the Gentleman's motion that last spoke; but do utterly mislike the latter:
For it is not to be intended, we should have had so good and gracious a
Message, if the truth of some particular Speeches had been delivered unto her.
And now for us to accuse our selves by excusing a fault with which we are not
charged, were a thing in my opinion inconvenient, and unfitting the wisdom of
this House.

Mr. George Moore spoke to the same effect.

Sir Francis Bacon spoke to the same effect also, and in the end concluded
thus, Neseio quid peccati portet haec purgatio.

So it was put to the question and concluded, That thanks should be returned by
the Speaker, and some twelve were named to go with him as a convenient number,
and entreaty made to the Privy Council to obtain liberty to be admitted.

On Thursday the 26th day of November the Bill for the Amendment of the Highway
called Double sole Green in the County of Middlesex was read the first time.

Mr. Fretchvill offered to the consideration of the House a Bill to reform the
abuses in weights and measures, and declared the necessity of reformation
therein, and prays the reading.

Two Bills of no great moment had each of them one reading; of which the second
being the Bill touching Feltmakers was read the second time and committed unto
the Knights and Citizens for London, Sir George Moore, the Knights for
Middlesex and Surrey, Mr. Wiseman and others, who were appointed to meet upon
Saturday next in the Middle Temple Hall at two of the Clock in the Afternoon.

Two Bills had each of them one reading; of which the second being the Bill for
the better furnishing of her Majesty's Navy Royal touching Cordage, was upon
the first reading rejected.

Mr. Doctor Parkins made Report of the meeting of the Committees in the Bill
for the benefit of Merchants, and advancement of her Majesty's Custom; And that
the Committees do think it a Bill in their opinions not to be any more dealt in
by this House for many reasons by him delivered.

The Bill for the grant of four entire Subsidies and eight Fifteenths and
Tenths granted by the Temporalty was read the first time. ( Vide concerning
this Bill on Saturday the 5th day of December next following.)

Mr. Jones one of the Committees in the Bill for Landoveroure (who were
appointed on Tuesday the 24th of this instant November foregoing) certifieth in
the Bill with some Amendments therein by the Committees.

Mr Secretary Cecill said, If I should tell you otherwise than truth in matter
of so great consequence, I should need no other process than my own Conscience;
That to so gracious a Message there was never returned more infinite thanks, we
all are assured. From the Queen I have received a short Answer in these words.
[ You can give me no more thanks for that which I have promised, than I can and
will give you thanks for that which you have already performed] meaning the
Subsides and Fifteenths. So inseparable are the qualities of the Prince and the
Subject: Good for the one and for the other. If by true interpretation of the
Law, Voluntas reputatur pro facto; you shall not need, your good will being
already known, use any actual thanks; neither will she receive any, till by a
more affected consummation she has completed that work: at that time she will
be well pleased to receive your thanks and to return to you her best favors. (
Vide concerning this matter on Saturday the 5th day of December following)

On Friday the 27th day of November four Bills had each of them one reading; of
which the last being the Bill for the enlarging of the Statute of the first
year of her Majesty's Reign touching the breed of Fish, was read the first time
and rejected.

Two Bills of like consequence had each of them one reading; of which the
second being the Bill for the true payment of Tithes within the Walls of the
City of Norwich, was read the second time and committed unto the Citizens for
Norwich, Sir Francis Hastings, Mr Fretchvill, the Knights for Norfolk, Mr John
Hare and others, who were appointed to meet in the Exchequer Chamber at two of
the Clock in the Afternoon.

Sir Francis Hastings offered a new Bill touching resorting to the Church on
Sunday, and prayed the acceptance thereof and the reading.

The Bill for the more diligent resorting to the Church on Sunday had its first
reading.

Thus far of the Passages of this day out of the Original Journal Book of the
House of Commons, the residue is out of the private Journal.

The Speaker stood up and wished the House to advise what they would do with the
Prisoners that served Sir Edmund Morgan and Mr Pemerton with Subpoena's, and
showed that they were ready at the Door to attend.

Mr Tate said, I will be bold to offer two Precedents to this House touching
serving of Subpoena's; yet first let us enter into consideration of the force
of the Privileges we now have. It is manifest, and I think no man doubts,
but that heretofore the Houses of Parliament were both one without division;
and that the United Body of the Parliament had the same Privileges and
Jurisdictions which we now have. And though there be Session or separation of
the United Body, yet the Privileges do remain still entire. For by most
ancient Records of this Realm it may plainly appear, that the same Privileges
serve both Houses. The first Precedent is in King Edward the first his days,
when the Templers had certain Tenants of the Parliament House which were behind
with their Rents, and they made humble Petition to the King, that they might
either distrain their Bodies or Goods for the same. The King as it appears,
Answered, Non videtur honestum quod aliquis de Magno Parliamento nostro
distringatur. So that it seems we are Privileged from all kind of distress
whatsoever. The second is one Pogo de Clare, who did presume to serve a
Citation upon Edmond Earl of Cornwall within Westminster Hall as he was going
to the Parliament House, for which he was sent to the Tower, and made to submit
himself de alto and basso, and a Fine of twenty thousand Marks imposed upon
him, which he truly paid. Besides, because Westminster Hall was within the
Precinct Liberties of the Abbot of Westminster he was Fined a thousand pound
for that contempt: But by Mediation of the Bishop it was remitted to a hundred
pound, which he also truly paid to the Abbot. And our use at this day is not
warranted by ancient course of Precedents; for if a man had been Arrested upon
a Subpoena, upon notice given he should have had a Writ of Privilege, which of
course her Majesty must have allowed. Then he made a long Speech upon
Trewinnard and Skewish's Case 35 Hen. 8. Dyer fol. 55. Pl. 8. and 36 H. 8. 59.
Pl. 17, etc. See the Book at large.

Mr Bretten showed, that a Member of this House (Mr Philips the Lawyer) was
served with a Privy Seal out of the Court of Wards, by one Thomas Deane Servant
to one Mrs Chamberlain a Widow; who when he delivered the Process, being told
it would be taken in evil part by the House, said, he cared not; and that the
House would punish him for it and bring him on his Knees, he Answered, his
Mistress would (...) him out, and she made no doubt but she should find as good
Friends there as he had. Whereupon the House willed that she and her Servant
should be sent for by the Sergeant.

Mr Holcrost showed the House that many Complaints were made, but none
punished; many sent for, but none appeared. There was a matter Complained of by
one Mr Morris a Gentleman that had his Man Arrested at his Heels by the
Sheriffs of Shrewsbury, and nothing was done therein.

Mr Morris said, that after the House had given Order to the Sergeant to go,
he came (said he) unto me to certify him of the Parties and of the
particulars. And what he has since done therein I know not.

Mr Roger Owen said, May it please you Mr Speaker, my self being chosen for the
Shire, think it my part to speak something, seeing the Burgesses for the Town
neglect their duties in not speaking. True it is, that such Order was given
from the House, but the Gentleman Mr Morris and some others being willing to
let me have the Examination of the matter, came before me, and upon Examination
(a wise Examination no doubt, quoth Mr Secretary) I sound that he was no menial
Servant, but only a Servant that brought him part of the way, and was to go no
further with him toward the Parliament. Whereupon I think the Sergeant having
so much notice, stayed.

Mr Brown of Grayes-Inn said, Mr Speaker, it seems this matter is shufled
up, I humbly pray the Sergeant may be heard. And all the House cried I, I.

After three Congies made the Sergeant showed, that he was with Mr Morris, and
that he offered him to send one of his men, but because he was in doubt of
finding them, he desired some part of his Fees, or money for his charges or
Horses, or else he would find Horses, or get one of his fellow Sergeants to go,
because he could not well be spared from this Service; if not, he would for his
more Expedition procure a Pursevant to go with a Warrant under Mr Speaker's
hand, and some of the Honorable of the Council in this House for the more
speedy Passage. All which courses Mr Morris rejected. And I hope the House
meant not I should go or send on my own Purse, or hazard the charge my self.
And therefore I hope this will be sufficient for my discharge. And all the
House cried I, I, I.

So no more was said of that matter, for the Speaker seemed to favor the
cause, and therefore he presently stood up and asked if the House would have
the Prisoners in, which served Sir Edmund Morgan and Mr Pemerton; and by this
shift the former matter was shufled up.

Christopher Kennell and William Mackerells were brought to the Bar, the one
for serving Sir Edmund Morgan with a Subpoena, the other with serving Mr.
Pemerton with the like Writ.

Christopher Kennell said, Mr Speaker, and the rest of this Honorable House, I
am (though poor) a Gentleman born and known to many in this Assembly; This
perhaps may be a cause to aggravate my offense. I hope there is no man that
does not know me, and I am sure there is no man which does know me, but
thinks, I would not wilfully commit such an offense as this is. I have been
sometimes (though unworthy) a Member of this House, and I have seen and known
the Justice of the House in the like Cases: But Mr Speaker, if there be either
honesty or Christianity in me, by the same I do protest that I knew not Sir
Edmund Morgan was of this House of Parliament, which I think he will avouch
himself. And as soon as I heard it, I went to Sir Edmund's Chamber, where I
found him, to reconcile my self and make an Atonement (for that was his word)
with him. As I was doing this, Mr Sergeant came into the Chamber and there
Arrested me; whose Arrest I most willingly obeyed, and do now acknowledge my
self to have offended though not wittingly. May it please you, I have served
her Majesty these eighteen Years in her Wars, and in all my Life I was never
Trespasser in any offense of this or the like nature. I do therefore most
humbly beseech you in your Wisdoms to have consideration of the nature and
circumstances of mine offense, and most willingly I do submit my self to your
Censures.

William Mackerells being a poor simple Fellow could say nothing for himself,
but only that he knew not Mr Pemerton to be of the House, no not for his Life,
if it, etc.

So the Sergeant was commanded to remove them forth.

Mr. Johnson said, Some we Pardon out of Discretion, some out of Commiseration,
I think set all Parliaments together, they will not match this Parliament with
numbers of this nature; only impunity, the Cause.

Sir Edmund Morgan said, The Gentleman (Mr. Speaker) is a Man of good desert,
sort and carriage; and I think if he had known me to have been of this House,
he would not have served me with the Subpoena. Truly he came to my Lodging and
acknowledged his great fault, and prayed me to extenuate it. I protest I think
he did not know I was of the House. And therefore I humbly pray that in regard
of his person and good service done to her Majesty, his offense may be as
freely remitted by the House as it is by me; And that it would please you all
to reserve your Justice to matters of greater importance. Which-Speech was
mavelous well liked of by the House.

Mr Pemerton being asked what he could say, whether William Mackerells knew
him; he Answered, I, and that his men had told him. He said he knew that the
said William was a very Knave, and therefore he would not entreat the favor of
the House, but let him have the Justice of the House. Which Speech was
generally misliked as churlish.

Mr Fleetwood a Counselor of Grayes-Inn showed unto the House that one Holland
a Scrivener by Temple Bar, and his Man had beaten his Servant; And he humbly
prayed they might be sent for. And the question grew upon dispute whether this
were punishable. And after upon a Precedent vouched by Mr Roger Owen of 8 Hen.
4. touching a Knight of the Parliament coming toward the Parliament. And so
agreed they should be sent for. See the whole matter on Saturday next.

Mr Kennell and Mr Mackerells were brought to the Bar, and after their offenses
laid open by the Speaker, he said, it pleased the House to have so favorable
consideration of their offenses, that they should only have three days
Imprisonment in the Custody of the Sergeant and pay him their Fees.

Mr Downald moved the House, first, that that gracious Message which had been
sent from her Majesty might be written in the Books of Records of this House,
(being worthy to be written in Gold) as well as it is written and fixed in the
true heart of every good Subject; Secondly, That the Honorable Assembly of
this House would move her Majesty and be earnest means of speed, lest that
which is now meant indeed may by protraction of time be altered, or perhaps not
so happily effected.

Mr Secretary Cecill said, I promised to be as silent as I could. Among much
Speech of the wise, there wants not much folly, much more in me. I do not speak
because I do dislike the Motion of the Gentleman that last spoke, but to defend
the diligence and grace of the Queen. It is no matter of Toy for a Prince to
notify in public a matter of this weight. Though the Idol of a Monopoly be a
great Monster, yet after two or three days I doubt not but you shall see him
dismembered; And I protest there is not any Soul that lives deserves thanks in
this Cause but our Sovereign. Yesterday the Queen gave Order for a Draught of a
Proclamation, I had it in my hand. You all know, I went even now out of the
House (that was in the middle of Mr Tate's Speech) then I read it, and sent for
him that should deliver it to her hands. Now what needs this new Zeal?

Mr Davies said, Mr Speaker, I stood up before to speak, it is not much I had
to say, only this, That which was delivered unto you from her sacred self, I
think to be Gospel, that is, Glad Tidings; And as the Gospel is registered and
written, so would I have that also; for if ever glad tidings came to the heart
of the Subject, they now come. This is all Sir.

Sir George Moore said, This eating and fretting Disease of Monopolies I have
ever detested with my heart, and the greater the grievance is, the more
inestimable is the grave wisdom of her Majesty in repealing them. And therefore
for us to think we can sufficiently requite the same, it were to hold a Candle
before the Sun to dim the Light. And seeing she in her Clemency and Care to us
has taken the matter in her own hands, I wish the matter may be no more spoke
of, much less proceeded in.

Sir Francis Hastings said, It ought to be written in the Tables of our hearts,
etc.

Mr. Lawrence Hide said, I think the Gentleman that set this Motion on foot,
spoke out of Joy for her Majesty's Grace and Zeal to have performance of her
Promise. In that he wished it might be recorded in Paper here or Parchment, it
is not to be intended, but he meant also in our hearts, which remain no longer
than we live; But Records remain long, and will give a lively memory in Ages to
come. And therefore for that part of his Motion I think it very good, and wish
the Clerk may do it accordingly.

Mr. Comptroller said, I think he that first moved this question, exceedingly
forgot himself, and exceedingly detracted from her Majesty, who I know out of
her abundant love and grace to this House, has taken such speedy course, as
has been delivered by my Fellow Counselor. With that affection she embraces
this House, that in more familiar than Princely sort, it has pleased her to
say, Recommend me to the House with thanks for their promise and care for their
common good.

Mr. Speaker said, My Heart is not able to conceive, nor my Tongue to utter the
Joy I conceived of her Majesty's Gracious and especial Care for our good, etc.
Wherefore as God himself said, Gloriam meam alteri non dabo, so may her Majesty
say, in that she her self will be the only and speedy Agent for performance of
our most humble and most wished desires. Wherefore let us not doubt but as she
has been, so she still will be our most Gracious Sovereign and natural Nursing
Mother unto us. Whose days the Almighty God prolong to all our Comforts. All
said Amen.

On Saturday the 28th day of November, the Bill for the maintenance of Shipping
and increase of Mariners was read the first time.

Sir George Moore one of the Committees in the Bill touching Fines to be levied
in the County of the City of Chester, brought in the Bill amended by the
Committees.

The Amendments in the Bill touching Fines to be levied in the County of the
City of Chester were twice read, and the Bill was Ordered to be engrossed.

The Bill touching draining of Grounds in the Isle of Ely and the Counties of
Cambridge, Huntington, etc. was read the second time and committed unto the
Queens Learned Council being of this House, the Knights and Burgesses for the
Shires named in the Bill, my Lord Clinton and others, who were appointed to
meet upon Tuesday next in the Court of Wards at two of the Clock in the
Afternoon.

Mr. Mountague made Report of the meeting of the Committees in the Bill
touching the Jointure of the Countess of Bedford and Proviso thereunto, which
he brought in with some Amendments.

The Amendments in the Bill for the Jointure of the Countess of Bedford and the
Proviso thereunto annexed, were twice read, and with the Bill Ordered to be
engrossed.

Sir William Wray showed the meeting of the Committees in the Bill touching
Drunkenness with some Amendments.

The Amendments in the Bill touching Drunkenness were twice read, and with the
Bill Ordered to be engrossed.

Two Bills also had each of them one reading; of which the second being the
Bill touching Lands given to Charitable uses, etc. was read the second time,
and committeed to the Committees for repeal of Statutes (whose names see on
Thursday the 5th day of November foregoing) and there were added unto them the
Queens Learned Council being Members of this House, the Masters of Requests,
Sir Edward Stafford, Sir Edward Hobbie and diverse others, and appointed to meet
in the Exchequer Chamber upon Tuesday next at two of the Clock in the
Afternoon. And the Committees to have Authority as well to put into the Bill of
Repeal or in the Bill of continuance of Statutes the former Act made in the
last Parliament touching Lands given to charitable uses, as to deal in this
present Bill, if it shall so seem good unto them.

Mr Secretary declared, that according to the direction of this House, her
Majesty has been informed of the exceeding and inestimable joy and comfort
which this House has received by a Message lately published sent from her
Highness by Mr Speaker; And has been likewise moved to signify her Highnesses
pleasure touching the determination of this House, in appointing Mr. Speaker
with some selected Company of the same to render the most humble and dutiful
thanks of this whole House, for the said most gracious, most princely and
comfortable Message: And her gracious Answer was, That her Majesty being
acquainted with the said desires of this House, did vouchsafe that Mr. Speaker
with forty, fifty or a hundred of this House, such as should thereunto be
appointed, should have access unto her Majesty for the same purpose upon Monday
next in the Afternoon at the Court, and should be all welcome.

Whereupon were appointed the Knights for all the Shires, My Lord Hayward, my
Lord Clinton, all Knights Members of this House, the Citizens and Knights for
London, the Masters of Requests, Mr. Bacon, Mr. Francis Lee, Mr. Dr. Parkins,
Mr. Warcup, Mr. Dr. Bennet, Mr. Dr. James, Mr. Davies, Mr. Martin, and Mr.
Simnel.

Robert Holland Scrivener and Lawrence Brook his Servant were brought to the
Bar, and being charged by Mr. Speaker with their offense against this House in
offering an abuse unto a Member of the same in striking and ill entreating of
Mr. (...) and his servant attending upon him (...) presence; it was upon the
hearing and debating of the matter Ordered upon the question, that the said
Robert Holland and Lawrence Brook his servant should be committed Prisoners to
the Sergeant of this House for the space of five days, and then to be
discharged paying the Fees of the Sergeant and the Clerk.

The Bill that the Lord Marquess of Winchester may dispose of his Lands whereof
he is Tenant in Tail, as other Tenants in Tail by the Laws and Statutes of
the Realm may do, etc. was read the second time and committed unto all the
Privy Council being Members of this House, all the Queen's Learned Council
likewise; Sir Robert Wroth, Sir Fdward Moore, Sir Francis Hastings, Sir Walter
Raleigh and others; and the Bill and Committees names were delivered to Sir
Edward Moore, who with the rest was appointed to meet upon Wednesday next at
two of the Clock in the Afternoon in the Exchequer Chamber.

Christopher Hillyard Esquire returned into this present Parliament a Burgess
for the Borough of Heydon in the County of York, for that he is visited with
sickness and thereby unable to give his Attendance, is licensed by Mr Speaker
to depart home.

Henry Hastings Esquire one of the Knights for the County of Leicester is
licensed by Mr. Speaker for his necessary affairs to depart into his Country,
after having left with the Sergeant ten shillings for the Poor.

On Monday the 30. day of November, Two Bills had each of them one reading; of
which the second being the Bill for repairing and amending of Bridges near the
City of Carlisle in the County of Cumberland was read the first time.

Mr Dr Caesar brought in the Bill touching the making of a Haven or Pier on the
North part of Severn, etc. with some Amendments.

Two Bills also of no great moment had each of them one reading; of which the
first being the Bill touching the Poulterers of London, was read the first time
and rejected.

Mr Dale, one of the Committees in the Bill touching Feltmakers (who were
appointed on Thursday the 26th day of this instant November foregoing) showed
the meeting of the Committees, and brought in the Bill with a Proviso annexed
and some Amendments.

Thus far of the passages of this day out of the Original Journal Book of the
House of Commons: Now follows a certain Message by Sir William Knolls her
Majesty's Comptroller, which he delivered in her Highnesses name unto the
House, out of the private Journal.

Mr. Comptroller said, I am to certify you of her Highness's gladness and
willingness to hear the acceptable News that was delivered unto her from this
House, of our humble and earnest desire all to see her Majesty, and show our
thankfulness. She commanded me to tell you, That the reason of her limitation
of having a convenient number was, that the place whereunto we should come was
not big enough to receive us all; but she says that she is glad that there is
such a Sympathy betwixt her and us; And she is well pleased that this Afternoon
at three of the Clock we should attend her, and without restraint or limit we
may all come and shall be very welcome.

Mr. Barrington made Report of the Travel of the Committees in the Bill against
Blasphemous Swearing (who were appointed on Tuesday the 10th day of this
instant November foregoing) and brought in the Bill with some Amendments.

The Bill for the grant of-four entire Subsidies and eight Fifteenths and
Tenths granted by the Temporalty was read the second time and Ordered to be
engrossed. Vide concerning this Bill on Saturday the 5th day of December next
following.

The Bill to avoid trifling and frivolous Suits in Law was read the third time
and passed upon the question.

The Bill touching Edward Nevill of Birling in the County of Kent, and Sir
Henry Nevill Knight his Son and Heir, was read the third time and passed upon
the question.

The Proviso added to Edward Nevill his Bill was thrice read, and likewise
passed upon the question.

Francis Fortescue Esquire, returned one of the Knights for the County of
Buckingham, is for his necessary affairs licensed by Mr. Speaker to depart into
his own Country.

The greatest part of this Forenoons Passage being thus transcribed out of the
Original Book of the House of Commons; now follows a question only moved by the
Speaker upon the rising of this House, as also his access unto her Majesty in
the Afternoon with diverse of the said House at Whitehall, touching Monopolies
or Patents of Privilege, out of the said private Journal.

The Speaker asked the House, What it was their pleasures he should deliver
unto her Majesty? and Sir Edward Hobbie stood up and said, it was best he
should devise that himself, the whole House would refer it to him, and all said
I, I, I.

In the Afternoon about three of the Clock, some sevenscore of the House met at
the great Chamber before the Council Chamber in Whitehall.

At length the Queen came into the Council Chamber where sitting under the
Cloth of State at the upper end, the Speaker with all the company came in, and
after three low reverences made he spoke to this effect.

MOST Sacred and most gracious Sovereign We your Faithful, Loyal and obedient
Subjects and Commons here present, vouchsafed of your especial goodness (to our
unspeakable comfort) access to your sacred presence, do in all duty and
humbleness come to present that which no words can express, most humble and
thankful acknowledgement of your most gracious Message, and most bounden and
humble thanks for your Majesty's most abundant goodness extended and performed
to us. We cannot say, Most Gracious Sovereign, We have called and been heard,
we have complained and have been helped; though in all duty and thankfulness we
acknowledge, your Sacred Ears are ever open, and ever bowed down to hear us,
and your blessed Hands ever stretched out to relieve us; We acknowledge,
(Sacred Sovereign) in all duty and thankfulness we acknowledge, that before we
call, your preventing Grace and All-deserving Goodness does watch over us for
our good, more ready to give than we can desire, much less deserve. That
Attribute which is most proper unto God, to perform all he promises,
appertains also unto you our Most Gracious Sovereign Queen, of all Truth, of
all Constancy, or all Goodness, never wearied in doing good unto us (the Deeds
themselves do speak) most careful to provide all good things for us, most
gracious, most tender to remove all grievances from us (...) all your Princely
Actions have ever (...), and even now your most gracious published Proclamation
of your own only mere Motion and special Grace for the good of all your People
does witness to us. We come not, Sacred Sovereign, one of ten to render thanks,
and the rest to go away unthankful; but all of us, in all duty and thankfulness
do throw down our selves at the Feet of your Majesty, do praise God and bless
your Majesty. Neither do we present our thanks in words or any outward thing
which can be no sufficient retribution for so great goodness; but in all duty
and thankfulness, prostrate at your Feet, we present our most loyal and
thankful hearts, even the last drop of Blood in our Hearts, and the last spirit
of breath in our Nostrills to be poured out, to be breathed up for your safety.

And after three low Reverences made he with the rest kneeled down, and her
Majesty began thus to answer her Self, viz.

MR Speaker, We have heard your Declaration and perceive your care of our
State, by falling into the consideration of a grateful acknowledgment of such
benefits as you have received; And that your coming is to present thanks unto
us, which I accept with no less Joy than your Loves can have desire to offer
such a Present. I do assure you, that there is no Prince that loves his
Subjects better, or whose Love can countervail our Love; There is no Jewel, be
it of never so rich a prize, which I prefer before this Jewel, I mean your
Love; for I do more esteem it than any Treasure or Riches: for that we know how
to prize, but Love and Thanks I count inestimable. And though God has raised
me High, yet this I count the Glory of my Crown, that I have Reigned with your
Loves. This makes me that I do not so much rejoice that God has made me to be
a Queen, as to be a Queen over so thankful a People. Therefore I have cause to
wish nothing more than to content the Subject, and that is a duty which I owe.
Neither do I desire to live longer days, than that I may see your Prosperity,
and that is my only desire. And as I am that Person that still, (...) God, has
delivered you, so I trust, by the Almighty Power of God, that I still shall be
his Instrument to preserve you from Envy, Peril, Dishonor, Shame, Tyranny and
Oppression, partly by means of your intended helps, which we take very
acceptably, because it manifests the largeness of your Loves, and Loyalties
unto your Sovereign. Of my self I must say this, I never was any greedy,
scraping Grasper, nor a strait fast-holding Prince, nor yet a Waster; My heart
was never set on Worldly Goods, but only for my Subjects good. What you do
bestow on me, I will not hoard it up, but receive it to bestow on you again.
Yea mine own properties I count yours to be expended for your good. Therefore
render unto them from me I beseech you, Mr Speaker, such thanks as you imagine
my Heart yields, but my Tongue cannot express.

Note that all this while they kneeled. Whereupon her Majesty said, Mr Speaker,
I would wish you and the rest to stand up, for I shall yet trouble you with
longer Speech, so they all stood up and she went on in her Speech, saying.

Mr. Speaker, You give me thanks, but I doubt me, I have more cause to thank
you all than you me; And I charge you to thank them of the House of Commons
from me: for had I not received a knowledge from you, I might have fallen into
the Lap of an Error, only for lack of true Information. Since I was Queen, yet
did I never put my Pen to any Grant, but that upon pretext and semblance made
unto me, that it was both good and beneficial to the Subjects in general,
though a private profit to some of my ancient Servants who had deserved well:
But the contrary being found by Experience, I am exceeding beholding to such
Subjects as would move the same at first. And I am not so simple to suppose,
but that there be some of the Lower House whom these grievances never touched;
And for them I think they speak out of Zeal to their Countries, and not out of
Spleen or malevolent Affection, as being Parties grieved; and I take it
exceeding grateful from them, because it gives us to know that no respects or
interesses had moved them, other than the minds they bear to suffer no
diminution of our Honor, and our Subjects Love unto us. The Zeal of which
Affection tending to ease my People and knit their Hearts unto me, I embrace
with a Princely Care; far above all Earthly Treasure I esteem my Peoples Love,
more than which I desire not to merit. That my Grants should be grievous to my
People, and Oppressions to be Privileged under color of our Patents, our
Kingly Dignity shall not suffer it; Yea, when I heard it I could give no rest
to my thoughts until I had reformed it. Shall they think to escape unpunished,
that have thus oppressed you, and have been (...) of their duty, and regardless
of our Honor? No. Mr Speaker, I assure you, were it not more for Conscience
sake, than for any glory or increase of Love, that I desire these Errors,
Troubles, Vexations and Oppressions done by these Varlets and lewd Persons, not
worthy the name of Subjects, should not escape without condign punishment. But
I perceive they dealt with me like Physicians, who ministering a Drug make it
more acceptable by giving it a good Aromatical Savor, or when they give Pills
do gild them all over. I have ever used to set the last Judgment day before
mine Eyes, and so to Rule as I shall be judged to answer before a Higher Judge.
To whose Judgment Seat I do Appeal, that never thought was cherished in my
Heart that tended not to my Peoples good. And now if my Kingly Bounty have been
abused, and my Grants turned to the hurt of my People, contrary to my will and
meaning; or if any in Authority under me, have neglected or perverted what I
have committed to them, I hope God will not lay their Culps and offenses to my
Charge; and though there were danger in repealing our Grants, yet what danger
would not I rather incur for your good, than I would suffer them still to
continue? I know the Title of a King is a Glorious Title; but assure your self,
that the shining glory of Princely Authority has not so dazzled the Eyes of our
understanding, but that we will know and remember, that we also are to yield an
Account of our Actions before the great Judge. To be a King and wear a Crown is
more glorious to them that see it, than it is pleasure to them that bear it.
For my Self, I was never so much enticed with the glorious name of a King, or
Royal Authority of a Queen, as delighted that God has made me this Instrument
to maintain his Truth and Glory, and to defend this Kingdom (as I said) from
Peril, Dishonor, Tyranny and Oppression. There will never Queen sit in my Seat
with more Zeal to my Country, Care to my Subjects, and that will sooner with
willingness yield and venture her Life for your Good and Safety than my Self.
And though you have had and may have many Princes more mighty and wise sitting
in this Seat, yet you never had or shall have any that will be more Careful and
Loving. Should I ascribe any thing to my Self and my Sexly Weakness, I were not
worthy to live then, and of all most unworthy of the mercies I have had from
God, who has ever yet given me a Heart which never yet feared Foreign or home
Enemies. I speak it to give God the praise as a Testimony before you, and not
to attribute any thing unto my self; For I, O Lord, what am I, whom practices
and perils past should not fear! O what can I do (these she spoke with a great
Emphasis) that I should speak for any Glory! God forbid. This Mr Speaker I pray
you deliver unto the House, to (...) heartily recommend me. And so I (...) all
to your best Fortunes, and further Councels. And I pray you Mr. Comptroller,
Mr. Secretary, and you of my Council, that before these Gentlement depart into
their Countries, you bring them all to kiss my Hand.

Thus far out of the aforesaid Journal; Now follows part of the next days
Passages out of the Original Journal Book of the House of Commons.

On Tuesday the first day of December, Three Bills had each of them one
reading; of which the last being the Bill for Inning of certain surrounded
Grounds in the County of Norfolk was read the second time, and committed to the
former Committees for surrounded Grounds in the Counties of Cambridge and
Huntington, and unto Sir Michael Sands, Sir Moile Finch, Mr Oliver Cromwell, Mr
Walter Cradock and others, and the Bill was delivered to Sir Robert Wroth one
of the former Committees, who with the rest was appointed to meet this
Afternoon at two of the Clock in the Court of Wards.

The Amendments in the Bill touching imperfections of a Statute made in the
eighth year of her Majesty's Reign concerning the making of Hats were twice
read, and with the Bill Ordered to be engrossed.

The Amendments in the Bill also against usual and common swearing were twice
read, and the Bill was Ordered to be engrossed.

Upon the reading of the Amendments diverse spoke unto the Bill, two of whose
Speeches are here transcribed out of the private Journal, as also others
relating to other matters.

Mr Gascock spoke and said, Man is made of two parts, a Soul and a Body; And
there are two Governments, the one Imperial, the other Sacerdotal; the first
belonging to the Commonwealth, the second to the Church. Swearing is a thing
moral and touches the Soul, and therefore fitter to be spoken of in a Pulpit
than in a Parliament. If the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the God of
Jacob has sworn, his Plague shall not depart from the House of the Swearers,
why should we not seek to repress this Vice, which brings a Plague, which
breeds Mortality, that breeds Destruction, Desolation, and the utter ruin of
the Commonwealth? If he forbid us to Swear, and we fear not his Commandments,
think you a pain of ten shillings as is here set down, will make us refrain
this iniquity? I may speak of this Bill as a Painter which made a most
Artificial Table of the Waves of the Sea, and another Painter in the same Table
Painted a Tree so lively as possible might be, growing as it were out of the
Sea: There grew a question which was the most curious Workmanship; and the
deciding of the Controversy was referred to a third skilful Painter, who
gavethis Judgment of the Tree, O valde been, sed non hic erat locus. So may I
say of this Bill; It is as hard for this penalty to restrain this Sin, as for
Religion to spring out of the Common Law and to take effect. Aristotle says, a
Man may be Bonus Civis, but not Bonus Vir; And though I abhor the sin, yet I
deny not but a Sinner may be a good Member. Moses when he saw God, could but
see his back parts only, and no Man ever saw more. Why, these Swearers swear by
all his Parts, so perfectly, as though they had seen him all over. Philip King
of France made a Law that the Swearer should be drowned; Another Law was made
that a certain sum should be presently paid as soon as he had Sworn, or else
the Swearer to lose his Head. We use so much Levity in our Law, that we had as
good make no Law, for we give a Penalty, and to be taken upon condition before
a Justice of Peace; Here is wise stuff, first mark what a Justice of Peace is,
and we shall easily find a Gap in our Law. A Justice of Peace is a living
Creature, yet for half a Dozen of Chickens, will dispense with a whole dozen of
penal Statutes. We search and ingross the retail. These be the Basket Justices
of whom the Tale may be verified of a Justice that I know, to whom one of his
poor Neighbors coming, said, Sir, I am very highly rated in the Subsidy Book,
I be seech you to help me. To whom he Answered, I know thee not. Not me Sir,
quoth the Country man? Why your Worship had my Teem and my Oxen such a day, and
I have ever been at your Worships Service; Have you so Sir, quoth the Justice,
I never remembered I had any such matter, no not a Sheeps-Tail. So unless you
offer Sacrifice to the Idol-Justices, of Sheep and Oxen, they know you not. If
a Warrant come from the Lords of the Council to levy a hundred men, he will
levy two hundred, and what with chopping in and choosing out, he will gain a
hundred pounds by the Bargain. Nay if he be to send out a Warrant upon a man's
request to have any fetched in upon suspicion of Felony or the like; he will
write the Warrant himself, and you must put two shillings in his Pocket as his
Clerks Fee, (when God knows he keeps but two or three Hindes) for his better
maintenance. Why we have past here five Bills of Swearing, going to Church,
good Ale, Drunkenness and..... this is as good to them as if you had given them
a Subsidy and two Fifteenths. Only in that point I mislike the Bill, for the
rest I could wish it good passage.

Sir Francis Hastings said (amongst other Speeches to this Bill) That such
Justices were well worthy to be locked up in an Ambery. But he wished that all
might not be censured for one evil, who though he neglected both the care of
Conscience and Country which he should love, yet doubtless many did not so, as
being touched in Conscience to remember that our long Peace should make us
careful to please Him in doing of Justice, that had preserved us, and was the
Author of our Peace, God himself. And thereupon the said Bill was engrossed as
aforesaid.

Mr. Wiseman moved the House to remember two things; one that it had been an
Ancient Custom in Parliament, sometimes to call the House, which as yet was not
done; the other, that whereas heretofore Collection had been used for the Poor,
those which went out of Town, would ask leave of the Speaker and pay their
money.

Sir Edward Hobbie said, The Gentleman that last spoke moved you, but I would
remove you a little further. May it please you, It has been a most laudable
Custom, that some contribution or Collection should be made amongst us in pios
usus; And I humbly pray we do not forget our Parliamental Charity. Every Knight
paid ten shillings, every Burgess five shillings, part of the whole to the
Minister, and part to your Servant here, and part to the Poor, the rest at your
disposals. The last time our Charity ransomed a Prisoner, for the Father's good
desert. The last time Sir Robert Wroth and Mr. Fettiplace were Collectors. It
rests in you either to appoint them or choose others.

Mr. Fettiplace said, It is true, Mr. Speaker, I was Collector the last year,
there was paid out of the money collected, to the Minister ten pound, to the
Sergeant thirty pound, to Sir John Leveson for the redemption of Mr. Fox his
Son that made the Book of Martyrs, thirty pound: There was money given to
Prisons, that is the two Counters, Ludgate and Newgate in London, in Southwark
two, and Westminster one. How old the Custom is I know not; but how good it is
I know. For my own particular, having once undergone that service already, I
humbly pray that it would please you to accept another.

Mr. Tate said, Charity proceeds from Conscience, it breeds obedience to God,
it pleases God; and so went on and spoke for a Town in his Country lately
burnt, that it would please the House to contribute something to the Poors Loss.

The Bill for the assurance of the Jointure of Lucie Countess of Bedford was
read the third time and passed upon the question.

The Bill for Denization of certain persons born beyond the Seas, as also the
Bill for Confirmation of the Grant of King Edward the Sixth to Sir Edward
Seymour Knight, had each of them one reading and passed upon the question, and
with three others were sent up to the Lords by Mr Comptroller, Mr. Secretary
Herbert and others.

Sir Walter Raleigh made Report of the Travel of the Committees in the Bill
touching the payment of Debts upon Shop-Books (who were appointed on Wednesday
the 15th day of November foregoing) and brought in the Bill with some small
Amendments, and prayed the reading thereof.

Mr. Tate likewise brought in the Bill from the Committees touching Sir Anthony
Mayney Knight, with some Amendments and Alterations by the same Committees (who
were appointed on Monday the 23th day of November foregoing.

The Amendments in the Bill touching Sir Anthony Mayney Knight, etc. were twice
read and Ordered to be engrossed.

Mr Davies made Report of the meeting of the Committees in the Bill touching
Painters, and certifieth the Bill with some Amendments.

The Amendments in the Bill touching Shop-Books were twice read, and with the
Bill upon the question and division of the House Ordered to be engrossed, viz.
with the Yea a hundred fifty four, and with the No eighty eight.

These things being thus transcribed out of the Original Journal Book of the
House of Commons, now sollows a Message delivered by the Speaker in her
Majesty's name to the House, out of the private Journal.

Mr Speaker said, First I am by her Majesty's Commission to make Report unto
you of that rotable and excellent Speech which her Majesty delivered. I shall
deliver unto you but a shadow of that substance; but I greatly rejoice, that so
many were there present who are well able to supply to others the true Report
of her Majesty's Speech. It pleased her Majesty to show in what gracious part
she accepted our Loyalties. She said she rejoiced not so much to be a Queen, as
to be a Queen over so thankful a People, and that God had made her a means to
save us from Shame, Tyranny and Oppression. She did accept of our intended
Present, which she said manifested our Love and Loyalty; most graciously
affirming, that she never was any greedy Griper or Fastholder, and what we did
present, she would not hoard it. For the thanks which were yielded for her
great regard of us, she willed me to return her thanks to you most graciously;
and to tell you, that her Heart never inclined to pass any Grant but upon
suggestion that it was for the good of the Subjects: And now that the contrary
has appeared, she took it graciously that the knowledge thereof came from her
Subjects. She ever set the last Judgment before her Eyes, and never thought
arose in her but for the good of her People. If her Grants were abused to their
Hurt against her Will, she hoped God would not lay their Culps and offenses to
her Charge, and the principal Members not touched; And had it not been for
these her good Subjects, she had fallen from Lapse into Error. Those that did
speak she thought spoke not out of spleen or displeasure to the Grants, but to
deliver the grief of their hearts, which above any Earthly Pleasure she
respected. She said she was not allured with the Royal Authority of a King,
neither did she attribute any thing unto her self, but all to the Glory of God.
She said, the Cares and Trouble of a Crown are known only to them that wear it;
and were it not more for Conscience sake than for any desert or want of
disposition in her, these Patentees should not escape without condign
Punishment. She desired not to Reign longer than that her Government and Reign
should be for our good. She said, we well might have a Prince of more wisdom
and sufficiency, but of more Love and Affection we should never have. Her
Majesty delivered a Commandment to Mr Comptroller and Mr Secretary, that the
Gentlemen of the Country should be brought to kiss her Hand before they
departed.

The residue of this days Passages do follow out of the Original Journal Book
of the House of Commons it self, as also part of the next.

The Amendments in the Bill touching Shop-Books were twice read and Ordered to
be engrossed.

The Bill to prevent Perjury and Subornation of Perjury was read the second
time, and committed unto the Queens Learned Council being Members of this
House, Mr Attorneys of the Duchy and the Court of Wards, Sir Moyle Finch, Sir
Anthony Cope, Mr Townsend, Mr Bacon and others; And the Bill was delivered to
Mr Townsend, who with the rest was appointed to meet upon Thursday next at two
of the Clock in the Afternoon in the Middle Temple Hall.

The Bill for charitable uses was delivered to Mr. Barington.

On Wednesday the second day of December, Four Bills of no great moment had
each of them one reading; of which the last being for the Assurance of the
Parsonage and Vicaridge of Rotherstone to Tho. Venables Esquire was read the second
time, and committed unto the Knights and Burgesses for Chester and Cheshire,
the Burgesses for Oxford, Sir Edward Hobbie and others, who were appointed to
meet to Morrow in the Court of Wards, at two of the Clock in the Afternoon.

Mr Moore made Report of the meeting of the Committees in the Bill touching the
Hospitals, and of some Amendments therein.

The Amendments in the Bill for the three Hospitals were twice read, and with
the Bill Ordered to be engrossed.

The Bill for the Amendments of Double Soal green was read the second time, and
committed unto Mr Chancellor of the Exchequer, Sir Robert Wroth, Sir William
Lane and others; and the Bill was delivered to Sir Robert Wroth, who with the
rest was appointed to meet upon Friday next in the Exchequer Chamber at two of
the Clock in the Afternoon.

The Bill to reform abuses used bv the Clerk of the Market was read the second
time, and thereupon Mr Frechevile one of the Knights for Derbyshire spoke unto
it.

In that I speak being least worthy, I hope it will be deemed to proceed from
affection, not presumption. Besides, I have learnt it for a Rule in this House,
it is better to venture Credit than Conscience: There are three things to be
considered in this Bill; the inconveniency, the necessity of the remedy, and
the convenience of the punishment. For the inconveniency, no man but knows it,
who knows the State of his Country. In mine there is nothing more generally
complained of than the inequality of measures; for the rich have two measures,
with the one he buys, and ingrosseth Corn in the Country, that is the greater;
with the other he retails it at home to his poor Neighbors, that is by the
lesser. This is to the great and just complaint of all. So after many other
matters moved upon Statutes, the Bill was committed to Mr Frechvile, Mr
Wiseman, Mr Johnson, Sir George Moore, Sir Robert Wroth, Sir John Egerton, the
Burgesses and Citizens of all Cities and Corporate Towns, the Knights for
Norfolk, Mr Francis Moore, Mr Zachary Lock, Mr Warcup, Mr Simnell, Mr Doyle and
Mr Thomas Caesar, who were appointed to meet upon Saturday next in this House
at two of the Clock in the Afternoon.

The Bill for the more diligent resort to Church upon Sundays was read the
second time, unto which diverse Speeches were had in the House.

Mr Roger Owen said, that he misliked the Bill for two respects; the one for
the Penalty, the other in respect of the Party punishing, that is the Justice.
For the first the Penalty is twelve pence. It is well known that the poorest
Recusant in England ought as well as the rich to pay his twenty pound, and for
want of Lands and Goods his Body is liable; And therefore we shall double
punish him, which is against Law. For the other, touching the Justice, I think
it too great a trouble, and they are ever laden with a number of penal
Statutes, yea a whole Alphabet, as appears by Hussy in the time of Henry the
Seventh. And this is a matter so obvious, that a Justice of Peace his House
will be like a Quarter Sessions with the multitude of these Complaints. I think
also it is an infringement of Magna Charta, for that gives Trial per pares, but
this by two Witnesses before a Justice of the Peace. And by this Statute if a
Justice of Peace come into the Quarter Sessions, and say it is a good Oath,
this is as good as an Indictment: Therefore for my part away with the Bill.

Sir Francis Hastings said, I never in my Life heard Justices of the Peace
taxed before in this sort: for ought I know, Justices of Peace be men of
Quality, Honesty, Experience and Justice. I would ask the Gentleman that last
spoke, but two questions; the first, if he would have any Penalty at all
inflicted; the second, if in the first Statute or in this an easier way for the
levying of this twelve pence. If he deny the first, I know his scope; if the
second, no man but himself will deny it. And to speak so in both, is neither
gravely, religiously nor rightly spoken. And therefore for God, the Queen, and
our Countries sake, I beseech a Commitment.

Mr Carey Raleigh said, The Sabbath is Ordained for four Causes; First, To
meditate on the Omnipotency of God, Secondly, To Assemble us together to give
thanks, Thirdly, That we might be the better enabled to follow our own Affairs,
Fourthly, That we might hallow that day and sanctify the same. King James the
Fourth in the Year 1512. and King James the Sixth in the Year 1579, or 1597.
did erect and ratify a Law, that whosoever kept either Fair or Market upon the
Sabbath, his movables should presently be given to the Poor. Men gathering of
sticks were stoned to Death, because that was thought to be a kind of
Profanation of the Sabbath. In France a Woman refusing to sanctify the
Sabbath, Fire appeared in the Air; this moved her not: it came the second time,
and devoured all that ever she had (only a little Child in the Cradle
excepted.) But to come nearer our selves, in the Year 1583. the House of Paris
Garden by Gods just Judgment fell down as they were at the Bear-baiting the
23th of January on a Sunday, and four hundred persons sorely crushed, yet by
God's Mercy only eight slain outright. I would be an humble Suitor to the
Honorable that sit about the Chair, that this brutish Exercise may be used on
some other day and not upon the Sunday, which I with my heart do wish may be
observed, and doubt not, but great reformation will come if this Bill pass. To
the better effecting whereof, I humbly pray, that if there be imperfections in
it, it may be committed.

Sir George Moore said, I have read that the tongue of a man is so tied in his
mouth, that it will stir, and yet not so tied that it will stir still. It is
tied deep in the Stomach with certain strings which reach to the heart; to this
end I say, that what the heart does offer, the tongue may utter; what the heart
thinks the tongue may speak. This I know to be true, because I find it in the
word of truth, Out of the abundance of the heart the mouth speaks. For the
Gentleman that last spoke and so much inveighed against Justices, it may be it
proceeds out of the corruption of his heart; howsoever I mean not to search it
or answer him; only I turn him to Solomon and mean to answer him with silence.
Without going to Church, doing Christian Duties, we cannot be Religious, and by
Religion we learn both our Duty to God and to the Queen. In doing our Duty to
God we shall be better enabled to do our Duty to our Prince. And the word
binds us, that we should give to God that which is due to God, Et Caesari
quae sunt Caesaris. Amongst many Laws which we have, we have none for
constraint of Gods Service. I say, None, though one were made in primo of this
Queen, because that Law is no Law which takes no force, for Executio Legis,
vita Legis. Then let us not give such cause of Comfort to our Adversaries, that
having drawn a Bill in Question for the service of our God, we should stand so
much in questioning the same. Once a Month coming to Church excuses us from
danger of the Law, but not from the Commandment of God, who says, Thou shall
sanctify the Sabbath day, that is, every Sabbath. This Bill ties the Subject
to so much and no more, which being agreeable with the Law of God, and the Rule
of Policy, I see no reason why we should stand so strictly in giving it a
Commitment.

Mr Bond said, I wish the Sabbath sanctified according to the precise Rules of
Gods Commandment, but I wish that St Augustins Rule may be observed in the
manner, non jubendo, sed docendo, magis monendo quam minando. I like not that
power should be given to the Justices of Peace; for who almost are not grieved
at the luxuriant Authority of Justices of Peace? By the Statute of 1 Edw. 3.
they must be good men and lawful, no maintainers of evil, but moderate in
Execution of Laws; for Magistrates be men, and men have always attending on
them two Ministers Libido and Iracundia; men of this nature do subjugate the
free born Subject. Clerks can do much, Children more, and Wives most. It is
dangerous therefore to give Authority in so dangerous a thing as this is, which
I hold worth your second thoughts, quae solent esse prudentiores. Her Majesty
during all the time of her Reign has been clement, gracious, meek and
merciful, yea choosing rather delinquere, I know not how to term it, in Lenity
and not in Cruelty. But by this Statute there is a constraint to come to divine
service, and for neglect all must pay. Plectentur Achivi, the poor Commonalty,
whose strength and quietness is the strength and quietness of us all, he only
shall be punished, he vexed. For will any think that a Justice of Peace will
contest with as good a man as himself? No, this Age is too wise. I leave it to
this House, whether it stand with Policy, when four Subsidies and eight
Fifteenths be now granted, to bring the poorer sort into greater fear by these
and such like Laws, Malus custos diuturnitatis metus. And in the gracious
Speech which her Majesty lately delivered unto us, she used this, that she
desired to be beloved of her Subjects. It was a wise Speech of a wise Prince,
for an Historian says, Timor excitat in vindictam. Therefore Mr Speaker, I
mislike the Bill in that point touching Justices, and also touching taxation. I
will only say thus much with Panutius in the Nicene Council, Absit quod tam
grave jugum fratribus nostris imponamus.

I am sorry said Mr Comptroller, after sorty three years under her Majesty's
happy government that we shall now dispute or commit a Bill of this nature. And
I would that any voice durst be so bold or desperate as cry, Away with this
Bill. The old Statute gives the penalty, this new only speedier means to levy
it. I much marvel that men will or dare accuse Justices of Peace, Ministers to
her Majesty without whom the Commonwealth cannot be. If this boldness go on,
they will accuse Judges, and lastly the Seat of Justice it self. That all
Justices should be thus generally accused, this is mere Barbarism indeed. When
her Majesty shall have understanding hereof, it will be no content unto her,
and a scandal unto us all.

Mr Glascock said, In that I am taxed to tax Justices of Peace, I am to pray
the House to give me leave to make an Apology for my self. Mr Speaker, I will
not deny that I spoke, and protest it in my conscience, I spoke only of the
inferior sort of Justices, commonly called Basket Justices; against these I
will not speak that I spoke last, but other matter in other Terms. They be like
the wise men of Chaldee, that could never give judgment till they saw the
Entrails of Beasts. Our Statutes penal be like the Beast born in the Morning,
at his full growth at noon, and dead at night: So these Statutes quick in
Execution like a wonder for nine days; so long after, they be at the height;
but by the end of the year, they are carried dead in a Basket to the Justices
House.

Mr. Speaker said, Mr. Glascock, you speak from the matter and purpose, and
this that you have spoken you must justify.

Mr. Martin said, I am rather willing to speak, in that I would willingly have
an end of this matter. I think we all agree upon the substance, that it is fit
the Sabbath should be sanctified. The other matter which is the impediment, I
know it is a grief, but I leave it as matter more fit to be decided at a
Committee, than here. And therefore for the Honor of the Queen and of her
Government, I wish it may be committed without further Argument.

Sir Robert Wroth said, I think the Office of Justice of Peace is too good a
calling for him that exclaims against it, and I think he will never have the
honor to have it. It were good they were named, and that he told who they
were: otherwise honest men will be loath to serve the Queen, when they shall be
slandered without proof. Therefore I would he might answer it at the Bar. And
all said, No, No.

Mr. Johnson said, This Bill is an excellent good Bill; And I have observed in
all the Speeches yet spoken have been interlarded with other matter. The
Gentleman now protests he spoke of Basket Justices; I appeal to the whole
House whether his definition were not general, viz. A Justice of Peace is a
kind of living Creature, that for half a Dozen of Chickens will dispense with a
dozen of penal Statutes. I think it is well known that the Honorable that sit
about the Chair, and all the rest of her Majesty's Privy Council have and do
hold the same place, and this touches them as much as Inferior Justices. And
therefore I humbly pray he may answer it at the Bar, and that it may not be
past over with silence.

Mr Hide said, Every man agrees this Bill has good matter, and we all agree
and consent to the substance, though dissent to the form; some have more wit,
and some have more understanding than others. If they of meaner capacity and
Judgment spoke impertinently, let us not in a spleen straight cry, Away with
the Bill; but let us give it the same favor we give to Bills of far inferior
nature, that is a Commitment; so the Bill was committed to the former
Committees (who were appointed on Wednesday the 18th day of November foregoing)
and to all the Privy Council being of this House, Sir Robert Wroth, Sir Carew
Reignolds, Sir Anthony Cope, Mr. Bond, Mr. Martin, Mr. Hide, Mr. Owen, Mr.
Beeston and Mr. Wimarke, who were appointed to meet to Morrow in the Afternoon
in the Exchequer Chamber at two of the Clock.

Two Bills of no great moment had each of them one reading; of which the second
being the Bill against Victualling Houses, Taverns, etc. was read the third
time; And after many Arguments upon the question dashed.

The Bill against double payment of Debts upon Shop-Books was read the third
time, and Ordered upon the question of Amendment in some few words to be
committed unto Mr. Sergeant Harries and others, and to be put to the question
for passing to Morrow.

Peter Fretchvile Esquire, returned unto this present Parliament one of the
Knights for the County of Derby, for that he is chosen Sheriff of the County
and other his necessary affairs, is licensed by Mr. Speaker to depart home.

Nota, That have it appears that Peter Fretchvile Esquire being a Member of
the House and elected Sheriff of the County of Derby did notwithstanding
continue his place in the same: by which it is apparent that the said places
are not incompetible, but may stand and be together simul and semel in one and
the same Person.

On Thursday the third day of December, Four Bills of no great moment had each
of them one reading; of which the second being the Bill for the strengthening
of the North parts was read the second time, and committed unto all the Privy
Council being Members of this House, the Knights and Burgesses for Cumberland,
Westmerland and Northumberland and others, who were appointed to meet to Morrow
in the Afternoon at two of the Clock in the Exchequer Chamber.

Mr. Davies brought in the Bill touching Garbling of Spices with some
Amendments, which were twice read and the Bill Ordered to be engrossed.

The Bill for the Assurance of the Jointure of the Countess of Sussex was read
the second time, and committed unto the Privy Council being Members of this
House, Mr Sergeant Harries, Sir Walter Raleigh, Sir Robert Wroth and others,
who were appointed to meet this Afternoon in the Exchequer Chamber at two of
the Clock.

The Bill for the Assurance of the Jointure of Rachell the wife of Edward
Nevill of (...) in the County of Kent was read the second time, and committed
unto Sir Edward Hobbie, Sir George Moore, Sir Moyle Finch, Sir John Gray, Mr.
Francis Moore and others, who were appointed to meet this Afternoon at two of
the Clock in the Exchequer Chamber.

The Bill touching the confirmation of the sale of Lands made by Jews late
Lord Mordant deceased, was read the second time and committed unto the former
Committees for the Earl of Sussex, and Mr Attorney of the Wards, Mr Tansield,
Mr Winch and Mr Ludlow who were added unto them.

Mr Mountague moved that such persons as shall prefer and have benefit by any
private Bills may in regard of their said benefits be charged with some
consideration and payment of Money toward the relief of the Poor, which being
assented unto, It was Ordered by the whole House. That such persons as shall
have any private Bills expedited and passed in this House, during this Session
of Parliament only, shall pay toward the relief of the Poor, for every Bill so
passed in this House touching the sale of Lands, ten pound; and likewise for
every Bill for consumation of partiuclar Joyntures the sum of five pound, to be
distributed in such sort as this House shall further appoint.

Upon a motion made by Mr Secretary Cecill that the Charity and Collection made
by the Members of this House for the relief of the Poor (during this present
Session of Parliament) may especially be extended to the comfort of the poor
maimed Soldiers now remaining in and about the City of London, it was most
willlingly and readily assented unto by the whole House.

Mr Dannet Burgess for Yarmouth said, May it please you, Mr Speaker, The duty I
owe to my Sovereign and Country makes me bold to crave your Patience to hear
me. The matter that I shall speak of is twosold, the first concerns the
Honor of the Queen, the second the safety of our Country, two very high points
for me to handle, and require a more eloquent Discourse than I am able to make.
I will use no circumstance or with superfluous matter abuse the time which is
very precious, but to the matter. I have been of the Parliament five or six
times, and I have always observed by this House (and I would willingly be
resolved by the Honorable about the Chair) that all the Wars of her Majesty
are Wars offensive, and I do not hear the contrary: How then winds it that
such a number of her Majesty. Subjects be spoiled, robbed, beaten, wounded,
themselves taken, used with such extreme torture, racked, carried away,
imprisoned, ransomed, sined, and some executed, and all this time no Wars? But
give me leave, for these ten Years, I am sure the Subjects of this Land on the
Seacoast have undergone these Tyrannies, and by whom? even by two base Towns
Dunkirk and Newport. Dunkirk at first began with two Ships and are now
increased to almost twenty. They are at home at Supper, and the next day here
with us. I must needs confess the great charge that I know the Lord Admiral is
at continually by lying ready to take these Pirates. Send to take them, they
straight (...) home: if our Ships return they are straight here again. I dare
boldly say it, they have done England more hurt since they began, than all
France, either in the time of Hen. 8. Edw. 6. or Queen Mary. If it be so that
these two base Towns shall so confront the Power of this Land, I see no reason
why they should be suffered: for it is a great dishonor both unto the Queen
and unto the Kingdom. I have heard many say that the Navies are the Walls of
the Kingdom; but we suffer our Ships still to be destroyed, some to be burnt,
and some to be sunk. We may compare our Seamen to Sheep feeding upon a fair
Mountain, in the midst whereof stands a little Grove full of Wolves: Why Mr
Speaker we are so plagued with them, that they be so bold, as now and then to
take our Harvest-men tardy with Ambuscadoes. I speak with grief, and it was
reported unto me by a Scottish-man, that Duke Allert and the Infanta should
plainly publish, that they would pull down so many of the Walls of England,
that they would easily make an Entry. And it had been better for Seacoast men
to have given the Queen an hundred Subsidies that they had been long since
suppressed. My humble Motion is, that it would please the House to enter into
consideration of these things, for the honor, good and safety both of the
Queen and of the Kingdom.

Mr Peake said, I must needs show unto this House (upon so good an occasion
offered) how grievously the Town of Sandwich (for which I serve) is vexed and
almost undone, insomuch as in that Town there is neither Owner, Master or
Mariner that has not felt it. Her Majesty is continually at Charge, but what
ensues or comes of it, I never yet knew. If in the County of Kent at Shooters
Hill, Gadd's Hill, Baram Down, etc. there should many and ofter Robberies be
committed, and the Justices look not to it, this were but an ill part. Every
day men come home, their Goods and all they have taken away, yea their very
Apparel; and if the Ships might also be carried away, they would do it. This
would be amended and looked into. We had need to cherish this Subject, I think
him to be the best and most necessary Member of the Commonwealth, I mean the
Navigator.

Mr Martin said, I like not these extravagant Speeches in the manner, though I
mislike them not in the matter. They are like to men whose Houses being on Fire
run out into the street like Madmen for getting themselves of help. That that
Cottage of Dunkirk, the flourishing Estate whereof is a dishonor to our
Nation, should so much offend us, when we never offer to suppress them; it is
no marvail. I think there is no man but understands the grief: But I wish that
those who at first propounded to the House this matter, had also laid down some
project, though never so small, of remedy; otherwise such cursory Motions as
these be, cannot be but very distastful to the House.

Mr Lithe said, Within these twelve days one man lost two hundred pound only
by Dunkirkers, who took the same away.

Mr Secretary Cecill said, My Speech shall only tend to advance the Motion of
the Gentleman that spoke first in this point. If we would have remedy, we are
to consider two things; First, That it will be a matter of charge, and
secondly, That there must be a distribution thereof. For the first, I leave it
to you; for the second, it is out of my Element. Withal I must excuse them that
have Authority to remedy this; For unless you would have a continual charge
unto her Majesty by having Ships lying betwixt us and Dunkirk, it is impossible
but that at sometimes these Robberies will be committed. I could very well
agree to bring this Motion to some head, being a matter in mine opinion very
considerable, in a Committee; And all said, I, I, I.

Mr Dannet said, I would only move the House that some Masters of Ships and
Seamen might be sent for to attend at the Committee. Whereupon it was Ordered
to be considered of and referred to Committees, viz. all the Privy Council being
Members of this House, the Queens Learned Council being of this House, Sir
Walter Raleigh, the Burgesses for Ports and Seafaring Towns, the Knights of
the Shires for Maritime Counties, the Masters of Request, Mr Lieutenant of the
Tower, Sir Francis Hastings, Sir Robert Wroth and others, who were appointed to
meet upon Saturday next at two of the Clock in the Afternoon in the Exchequer
Chamber.

The Bill touching Fines within the County of the City of Chester was read the
third time and past upon the question.

Mr Tate said, I would only move the House, that whereas an Information is
exhibited by the Earl of Huntington against a Member of this House, Mr
Belgrave, into the Star Chamber, containing no matter of substance or note
other than matter very dishonorable to this House; therefore I humbly pray, it
may be referred to be considered of by the Committees for the Privileges of the
House, (whose names see on Saturday the 31th day of October foregoing) And all
said I, I, I: and he delivered the Information to the Speaker. Vide December
16. Wednesday.

The Bill for the re-uniting the Manor of Eye and Dunsden to the Manor of
Sunning was read the second time, and committed presently to be considered of
in the Committee Chamber by Mr Solicitor, Sir Francis Bacon and others, and to
have Conference with the Lords touching the same Bill.

The Bill for the Naturalizing of Josepho de Lupo (and others) was read the
second time and Ordered to be engrossed.

The Amendments in the engrossed Bill touching Shop-Books were three times
read, and thereupon much disputed on.

To this Bill Mr Zachary Lock began to speak, who for very fear shook that he
could not proceed, but stood still a while, and at length sat down.

Mr Bacon speaking of this Bill said, that Bills were wont to be committed with
pleasure, but now we would scarce hear them with Patience: The Merchants Books
be springing Books; every year they increase.

Mr Henshaw amongst other Speeches showed, that it was easy to cross a
Merchants Book, which a man might see at all times; but if one should give the
Merchant a Bond, when he had many thrust together, perhaps he would entreat the
Gentleman to come some other time for it, who if he should in the mean time
die, his Executors are without remedy, etc.

Sergeant Harris said, These Merchants Books be like Basingstoak Reckonings,
over night five shillings and six pence, if you pay it; if not, in the Morning
it is grown to a just Noble. This Debt is a sleeping Debt, and will lull Young
Gentlemen into the Merchants Books with the golden Hooks of being trusted by
the Merchant, and his Expectation after his Fathers Decease: These are matters
dangerous, and may prove hurtful; wherefore I think it a good Bill.

Mr John Harris said, Where it is said there can be no wager of Law against a
Merchants Book in London, it is true, but first the Merchant must swear the
Debt.

Mr Thomas Jones said, It is my Chance now to speak something, and that without
Hemming or Hawing. I think this Law is a good Law. Straight reckonings make
long Friends. As far goes the penny as the penny Master. Vigilantibus and non
dormientibus jura subveniunt. Pay the reckoning over night and you shall not be
troubled in the Morning. If ready money be mensura publica, let every man cut
his Coat according to his Cloth. When the old Suit is in the Wane, let him
tarry till his money bring a new Suit in the increase. Therefore I think the
Law to be good, and I wish a good passage.

Mr Hackwell of Lincoln's Inn said, I am a man of that rank and condition, that
I never sell, I seldom buy, and pay ready money, and the safest course this
Bill offers to me for my particular. But the great mischief that will redound
by it to the Commons is that which makes me speak. I am not transported with
such vehemence, but if I may be answered, I Will lay down the Buckler. This Bill
has a good Face and an ill Body. It has a very good Headpiece, I mean the
Title. If I may entreat you to put on a good deal of Patience for a little
time, I will make it somewhat plain. We must lay down the respects of our own
persons, and put on others, and their affections for whom we speak; for they
speak by us. If the matter which is spoken of touches the poor, then think me
a poor man. He that speaks, sometimes he must be a Lawyer, sometimes a Painter,
sometimes a Merchant, sometimes a mean Artificer. Most men desire forbearance;
this Bill destroys it, which tends to the gain and good of the Creditors, and
good also of the Buyer: but seeking to avoid a mischief we fall into an
inconveniency; for the manner is unproportionable and unjust. If the Buyer be
so negligent that he will not care to see himself discharged, must we needs
make a Law to help his Folly? The Proverb is Caveat Emptor. If this Law go
forwards, the Augmentation of Confidence in his ancient habiliments cannot be
preserved. For if it be a hard Year, the poor Artificer which has Wife,
Children and Household, and lives by the sweat of his Brows, cannot live; for he
has no money to buy all by the penny, but perhaps he has Credit, which
perhaps may help his present necessary Estate. Besides, I can teach you all a
trick, how for twelve pence you shall avoid this Statute; And that is, put in
an Original within a Year, and so let it lie Dormant.

After this Motion, the House after four hours Argument and sitting till three
quarters after twelve, was divided; the I's had a hundred fifty one Voices, and
the No's a hundred and two. So the Bill passed by forty nine Voices. Then the No's should have fetched in the Bill and gone out with it, because it was at the
passage of the Bill; but because time was past, and it was very late, and there
were great Commitments this Afternoon, they were dispensed withal.

Nota, That these are Excellent Precedents touching the manner of bringing in a
Bill upon the division of Voices, and withal upon what ground the Ceremony it
self was omitted; to which purpose also there fell out like Precedents on
Friday the 21th day of March in Anno 31 Regin. Fliz. and on Thursday 21. day of
December in Anno 39 Reginae ejusdem.

On Friday the 4th day of December, Three Bills had each of them one reading;
of which the last being the Bill for confirming the Authority and Government of
the Mayor, Sheriffs and Aldermen of the City of I ondon within St Katherine
Christ Church, was read the second time and committed unto the Knights and
Citizens for London, Mr Doctor Caesar, Sir Robert Wroth, Sir Moyle Finch, Sir
George Moore and others, who were appointed to meet upon Monday next in the
Afternoon at two of the Clock in the Doctors Commons.

Mr Calfield made Report of the mecting of the Committees in the Bill for the
Assurance of the Parsonage and Vicaridge of Rotherston, etc. with some
Amendments.

The Amendments in the Bill touchine the Assurance of the Parsonage and
Vicaridge of Rotherston, etc. were twice read, and the Bill was Ordered to be
engrossed.

Sir Robert Wroth reported the meeting of the Committees in the Bill for the
draining of Grounds in the County of Norsolk, and brought in the Bill with some
Amendments.

The Amendments in the Bill touching draining of surrounded Grounds in Norsolk
were twice read, and the Bill was Ordered to be engrossed.

The Bill touching Subornation of Perjury was brought in with some Amendments.

The Amendments in the Bill touching Subornation of Perjury were twice read,
and the Bill Ordered to be engrossed.

The Bill for reformation of abuses in Sheriffs and other inferior Officers
for not executing Writs of Proclamation upon Exigents according to the Statute
of 31 Eliz. was read the second time, and committed unto Mr Solicitor, Mr
Attorney of the Duchy and others, who were appointed to meet upon Monday next
in the Middle Temple Hall, at two of the Clock in the Afternoon.

The Bill touching the making of Fustians within the Realm was read the second
time and committed unto all the Queens Privy Council and Learned Council being
of this House, the Knights and Citizens for London, the Burgesses for Chard,
Colchester and Canterbury, Sir Walter Raleigh, Mr Maynard, Mr Hide, Sir Edward
Hobbie, Sir Francis Darcy, Mr Wiseman and others, who were appointed to meet
upon Thursday next in the Exchequer Chamber at two of the Clock in the
Afternoon.

The Bill prohibiting any Fair or Market to be kept on the Sunday was read the
second time and committed to the former Committees in the Bill touching the
Sabbath day (who were appointed on Wednesday the 4th day of November
foregoing.) And Mr Brown and Mr Doyle were added unto them, who were appointed
to meet to Morrow Morning in the Committee Chamber of this House.

The Bill touching the Lands given to godly and charitable uses was read the
first time.

Mr Doctor Carew and Mr Choppin did bring from the Lords the Bill for the
suppressing of Alchouses and Tipling-Houses.

The Bill for the suppressing of Alehouses and Tipling-Houses was read the
first time.

On Saturday the 5th day of December, Three Bills had each of them one reading;
of which the last being the Bill that Lands in the nature of Gavelkind may
descend according to the Custom of the Common Law, was read the second time,
and committed unto the Queens Learned Council being of this House, Sir Moyle
Finch, Sir Michael Sands, Sir Thomas Fludd, Sir John Lewson and others; who
were appointed to meet upon Monday next in the Morning in the Committee Chamber
of this House.

The Bill for the relief of Theophilus Adams was read the second time, and
committed unto the Knights and Citizens for London, Mr Winch and others, who
were appointed to meet in the Exchequer Chamber upon Monday next at two of the
Clock in the Afternoon.

The Bill for the granting of four entire Subsidies and eight Ffteenths and
Tenths granted by the Temporalty was read the third time and passed upon the
question; And was presently sent up to the Lords by all the Privy Council and
others of this House.

Nota, That whereas in the Parliament which was begun and holden at Westminster
in an. 35 Eliz. Anno Dom. 1592. the Knights, Citizens and Burgesses of the
House of Commons were not drawn without much and long dispute, both amongst
themselves and with the Lords, to yield unto the Grant of three Subsidies and
fix Fifteenths and Tenths (being a greater gift than had ever before been given
unto her Majesty) and that the same was then also assented unto in respect of
the great dangers were newly threatened unto her Majesty from Rome and Spain
with caution and promise nevertheless that it should not be drawn into
Precedent for future times; yet in the next Parliament which ensued in 39
Reginae Anno Dom. 1596. although none of the said imminent dangers which had
been feared in the abovementioned thirty fifth Year of her Majesty's Reign had
to that time come into any real Execution, the House of Commons was
notwithstanding again drawn to yield unto the same proportion of three
Subsidies and six Fifteenths and Tenths, to be paid also unto her Majesty
within a shorter time; And now lastly in this present Parliament in An. 43 and
44 Regin. ejusdem Anno Dom. 1601. the said House was drawn in respect chiefly
of the troubles of Ireland, where the Spaniard had set footing, to present unto
her Highness the extraordinary and great gift of four Subsidies and eight
Fifteenths and Tenths, the Bill whereof did this present Saturday being the
15th day of December pass the House of Commons upon the third reading, and was
presently sent up to the Lords as aforesaid, by whom it was lastly passed also
upon the third reading upon Tuesday the 15th day of this instant December
ensuing.

Mr Boyce made Report of the meeting of the Committees in the Bill for the
Jointure of Rachell Wife of Edward Nevill, etc. (who were appointed on Thursday
the third day of this instant December foregoing) and brought in the Bill with
some Amendments.

The Amendments in the Bill touching the Jointure of Rachell Wife of Edward
Nevill of Birling in the County of Kent were twice read, and the Bill was
Ordered to be engrossed.

Sir Francis Hastings made Report at large of the meeting and travel of the
Committees in the Bill touching coming to Church on the Sunday, being in some
parts amended, delivered in the Bill and prayed the reading thereof.

The Amendments in the Bill touching coming to Church on the Sunday were twice
read, and the Bill was Ordered to be engrossed.

At the Committee in the Afternoon in the House for some course to be had
against Dunkirk,

Mr Fettiplace said, There was remedy three manner of ways; First, There is
transportation of Ordnance, which being carried to the Low Countryman, he
carries it to Dunkirk or to our Enemies, which if it were hindered, doubtless
our Enemies would find want in time; Secondly, The Law of Tonnage and Poundage;
Thirdly, It has been offered to the States, that the Maritime parts might save
themselves freely. And I take it to be a Rule in Policy, we should not yield
that to our Friends, which may be fitting to our Foes.

Mr Wingfield showed the Bill touching Fens, which was exhibited the last
Parliament and past both Houses, but advised upon by her Majesty for some
respects, Entitled An Act for the recovering of three hundred thousand Acres
more or less of Wastes, Marish and Watery Grounds in the Isle of Ely and in the
Counties of Cambridge, Huntington, Northampon, Lincoln, Norfolk and Suffolk. On
the left side on the top of the Bill was written in Roman Letters Soit bail as
Seignieurs; and close to that in another hand, A cest Bill avecque les
amendments and la provision a celle annexes, les Surs sont assentus: under the
Provision annexed to the Act on the left side thereof close to the writing,
Soit bail aux Communes: on the back under the Title aforesaid was written thus
1.

2.

3.

He showed also the Bill for Fens in this Parliament entitled An Act
concerning the draining and recovering from the water of certain overflown
grounds in the County of Norfolk. It was concluded at the Committee, that the
Coast Town-men of the County should meet together in the Afternoon on Monday,
and consider of some course, and relate the same to the Committee again.

On Monday the 7th day of December, Two Bills of no great moment had each of
them one reading; of which the second being the Bill for the relief of poor
Prisoners in Ludgate, was read the first time.

Mr. Sergeant Harries made Report of the meeting of the Committees in the Bill
for the Assurance of the Jointure of the Countess of Sussex (who were appointed
on Thursday the third day of this instant December foregoing) and of some
Amendments and a Proviso added by the Committees.

The Amendments in the Bill with a Proviso touching the Jointure of the
Countess of Sussex were twice read, and with the Bill Ordered to be engrossed.

The Bill for confirmation of the Assurances of the Lands of Sagebury alias
Sedgebury to Samuel Sandyes Esquire and John Harries Gentleman and their Heirs
was read the first time.

Mr Snigg one of the Committees in the three Bills touching Cloths and
Clothiers (who were appointed on Wednesday the 18th day of November foregoing)
declared that by Order and direction of the same Committees he has reduced and
drawn the three said Bills into one Bill reformed in the Abuses committed
amongst Clothiers, and prayed the reading.

The Bill for the true making and working of Woollen Cloths was read the first
time.

Mr Doyle, one of the Committees in the Bill touching Fairs and Markets, not to
be kept on the Sunday (who were appointed on Friday the 4th day of this instant
December foregoing) brought in the Bill with some Amendments added by the
Committees.

The Amendments in the Bill prohibiting Fairs and Markets to be kept on the
Sunday were twice read, and the Bill was Ordered to be engrossed.

The Bill touching the Assize of Fuel was read the second time and committed
unto the Knights and Citizens for London, Sir Jerome Bows, Sir Robert Wroth and
others, who were appointed to meet to Morrow in the Court of Wards at two of
the Clock in the Afternoon.

The Bill touching Charitable uses, etc. was read the second time, and
committed to the former Committees (who were appointed on Saturday the 28th day
of November foregoing) and Mr Sergeant Harries and others were added unto them,
who were appointed to meet this Afternoon in the Exchequer Chamber at two of
the Clock.

Mr Bacon said, I am, Mr. Speaker, to tender unto this House the fruit of the
Committees Labor which tends to the Comfort of the Realm, I mean the Merchant,
which if it quail or fall into a Consumption, the State cannot choose but
shortly be sick of that disease. It is inclining already. A certainty of Gain
is that which this Law provides for, and by policy of Assurance the safety of
Goods assured unto the Merchants. This is the Loadstone that draws him on to
adventure, and to stretch even the very punctilio of his Credit. The Committees
have drawn a new Bill far differing from the old; the first limited power to
the Chancery, this to certain Commissioners by way of Oyer and Terminer; The
first that it should only be there, this that only upon appeal from the
Commissioners it should be there finally arbitrated. But lest it may be thought
for vexation, the Party Appellant must lay it in deposito, etc. and if tried
against him, to pay double Costs and Damages. We thought this course fittest
for two reasons; First because a Suit in Chancery is too long a course, and the
Merchant cannot endure delays; Secondly, because our Courts have not the
knowledge of their Terms, neither can they tell what to say upon their Causes
which be secret in their Science, proceeding out of their experience. I refer
the Bill both old and new to your considerations, wishing good success therein
both for the comfort of the Merchants and performance of our duties. The Act is
Entitled

An Act touching Policies of Assurances used amongst Merchants.

Sir Edward Hobbie said, It was the good pleasure of this House to refer the
consideration of an Information exhibited against a Member of this House one of
the Burgesses for the Town of Leicester, viz. Mr. Belgrave, the scope and
purpose of which Information pretends an abuse to be done to the High Court.
The Gentleman himself was at the Committee, and did acknowledge the substance
of the suggestion, but denied the circumstance. Some of the Committees censured
it to be an enormous fault to invest himself (for so the words of the
Information are) in a blue Coat, but others were of a contrary opinion, because
they were satisfied upon allegations alleged that it was done ad redimendam
vexationem which had been offered to him, and so he thought to right himself
these ways. Besides, I am to inform the House, that this Information was put
in sedente curia, and therefore thought by the Committees to be some disgrace
to the same. And because this Gentleman should not take benefit of this Pardon,
therefore the Information (as I said) is now put in sedente curia, which I wish
the House to note. And because he should be debarred of remedy against the
party, he has therefore caused the same to be exhibited in Mr Attorney
Generals name. May it please the House, because he desires to be heard, and
being now here, that be may speak himself, in that he told the Committees he
had some special matter to deliver unto you; and if he shall be found culpable,
he would most willingly abide your censures. But because other Statutes were to
be read of importance, this was referred over till some other time. Vide
December 17th postea.

An Act for the continuance of diverse Statutes, and repeal of some others was
read the second time.

Mr Francis Moore desired it might be read, as also the Exposition of the
Justices upon the Statute of 39 Eliz. of Rogues, which if it please the House
he thought fit to be annexed to that Statute.

Mr Bacon said, There were never yet any more than two Articuli; the one,
Articuli super Chartas, when the Sword stood in the Commons hands; the other
Articuli Cleri, when the Clergy of the Land bare sway, and that done upon
deliberation and grave advice. I beseech you remember these are done by Judges
and privately perhaps in a Chamber, and shall we presently without scanning or
view, Enact them? It befits not the gravity of this House. And so after a long
Speech dashed it.

The Bill touching payment of Debts upon Shop-Books lately passed in this House
was sent up to the Lords by Mr Comptroller and others.

After sundry Motions and Arguments made against An Act made 39 Reginae Eliz.
touching Lands given to charitable uses, it was upon the question Ordered, that
the said Act should be repealed. And upon another question (whether the said
Act should be repealed in the particular new Bill exhibited this Session of
Parliament, or else in the general Bill touching repeal of Statutes, it was
agreed by the House that it should be repealed in the general Bill of Repeal of
Statutes.

Upon a Motion made by Mr Solicitor for a Conference to be had with the Lords
in the Bill that passed with their Lordships and has been twice read in this
House, Entitled An Act for the reuniting of Eye and Dunsden to the Manor of
Sunning; It is appointed that Mr Comptroller of the Exchequer, Mr Solicitor
and others do meet to Morrow with the Lords at eight of the Clock in the
Morning touching the same Conference.

On Tuesday the 8th day of December the Bill touching Watermen on the River of
Thames was read the second time and committed unto the Knights and Citizens for
London, Sir George Moore, Sir John Lewson and others, who were appointed to
meet this Afternoon in the Exchequer Court at two of the Clock.

Mr Moore, one of the Committees in the Bill touching St Thomas's Hospital made
Report of the travel of the same Committees, and certifieth in the Bill with
some Amendments.

The Amendments in the Bill touching St Bartholomews Hospital was twice read,
and with the Bill Ordered to be engrossed.

The Bill touching Glass-Houses was read the first time and rejected upon the
Question.

Mr Winch one of the Committees in the Bill touching Theophilus Adams (who were
appointed on Saturday the 5th day of this instant December foregoing) brought
in the Bill amended in some parts by the Committees.

The Amendments in the Bill for Theophilus Adams were twice read, and the Bill
Ordered to be engrossed.

Mr John Harris made Report of the meeting of the Committees in the Bill
touching abuses in Sheriffs and other Officers in not executing Proclamations
(who were appointed on Friday the 4th day of this instant December foregoing)
and delivered in the Bill not altered or amended in any point.

The Bill touching abuses in Sheriffs, etc. was Ordered to be engrossed.

Mr Simnell moved this House for some speedy consideration to be had to
restrain the transportation of Iron Ordnance. Whereupon the Bill Entitled An
Act prohibiting transportation of Iron Ordnance beyond the Seas was read the
second time; but before it was committed, there passed many Speeches and
Arguments touching it in the House, being of very great moment.

Sir Edward Hobbie said, I may resemble this to a saying of a Gentleman who
told a story of a skilful Painter that painted a Tree in the Sea so lively,
etc. And the Judgment was, O valde been, sed hic non erat locus: So I say, this
Bill is an Excellent Bill, the matter foul, the request and remedy good and
honest, but this is not our mean of redress. Her Majesty in the late
Proclamation took notice thereof, and no doubt she will redress it. And for us
now to enter again on bringing or allowing Acts against Monopolies, is to
refuse her Majesty's gracious favor, and cleave to our own affections. I think
therefore if we deal therein, Petition will be our only course. This is a
matter of Prerogative, and this is no place.

Mr Fettiplace said, I know her Majesty receives Yearly by Custom for the
transportation of these Ordnance three thousand pound. There be four kinds of
these Ordnance now usually transported; The first a Falkon of the least weight
and bore; the second a Minion, a little heavier and bigger; the third a Sacre,
somewhat greater; the fourth a Demi-Culverin being the greatest. Now Mr
Speaker, they which transport Ordnance do transport in this manner; If it be a
Falkon, she shall have the weight of a Minion, and so if a Sacre the weight of
a Demi-Culverin: the reason hereof is, because when they are brought beyond the
Seas they will new bore them to a greater size, as the Sacre to the
Demi-Culverin bore; Besides, Mr Speaker, eight Tun of Iron Ordnance will make
five Tun of good Iron. And it is now grown so common, that if you would send
Merchandise beyond the Seas in Strangers Bottoms, they will not carry it;
unless you will ballast their Ships and load them with some Ordnance. The
Ordnance be carried to Callais, Embden, Lubeck, Rochell, Breast, St John de
Luce, and other places, and these be Confederates with Spain and Friends with
Dunkirk, so that in helping them we do not only help our Friends, but succor
the Spaniards their Friends and our Enemies. If the Queen would forbid the
transportation of Ordnance but for seven Years, it would breed such a scarcity
to the Spaniard, that we might have him even where we would: Some (no doubt)
the Sea would devour, some would be taken, and the store which he now has,
scattered, and thereby his Force weakened. They have so much Iron in Spain out
of England, that they do ordinarily sell a hundred weight of Iron Ordnance for
seven Ducats and a half Spanish. And if the Spaniard do make it a Capital
matter but to transport a Horse or a Gennet, much more ought we to have a
special care herein, when we shall Arm even our own Enemies against our selves.
I think therefore to proceed by way of a Bill would savor of curbing her
Majesty's Prerogative. But to proceed by way of Petition, it is a safe course
and pleasing, and we ought the rather to be induced thereto, because already we
have found it successful.

Mr Brown said, There is a Law already in the point, and that is in the thirty
third Year of Henry the Eighth Cap. 7. and in the second of Edward the Sixth
Cap. 37. which prohibits the transportation of Gun-Metal. And although Guns
were not then made of Iron, yet now they are, and therefore perhaps you will
say it is out of the Statute. But it was lately adjudged in Worlingtons and
Simpsons Case to be clearly within the very Letter of that Law. And I am sure
Guns be made of Gun-Metal, and whosoever transporteth Guns, transporteth
Gun-Metal; and it is within the danger of that Law. But that which I would move
is only this, that we might be Petitioners to her Majesty to revoke that
Patent, and then Currat Lex, etc.

Sir Walter Raleigh said, I am sure heretofore one Ship of her Majesty's was
able to beat ten Spaniards; but now by reason of our own Ordnance we are hardly
matched one to one. And if the Low Countries should either be subdued by the
Spaniard, or yield unto him upon a Conditional Peace, or shall join in Amity
with the French as we see them daily inclining, I say there is nothing does so
much threaten the conquest of the Kingdom as the transportation of Ordnance.
And therefore I think it a good and speedy course to proceed by way of
Petition, lest we be cut off from our desires, either by the Upper House, or
before by the shortness and sudden ending of the Parliament.

Mr Carey said, We take it for an use in the House, that when any great or
weighty matter or Bill is here handled, we straight say it touches the
Prerogative and must not be meddled withal; And so we that come to do our
Countries good, bereave them of that good help we may justly Administer. Mr
Speaker, Qui vadit plane, vadit sane; Let us lay down our griefs in the
Preamble of our Bill, and make it by way of Petition; And I doubt not but her
Majesty being truly informed of it, will give her Royal Assent.

Mr Secretary Herbert said, The making of Armamentaria is a Regality belonging
only to the power of the King and the Crown of England, and therefore no man
can either cast or transport without License. It stood perhaps with the Policy
of former times to suffer transportation, but as the times alter, so does the
Government. And we doubt it is now very hurtful and prejudicial to the State;
and therefore I am of opinion, that it is very fit this transportation should
be stayed; and I concur only with them which would have it by way of Petition,
and not by Bill.

Mr William Hackwell of Lincoln's Inn said, I know the Authority of the Worthy
Counselor that last spoke will incline you to yield to this Objection; Yet
notwithstanding I beseech you suppose him to be a man of my Condition, or me to
be a man of his sort, so I doubt not but our persons being equalized, the
matter will soon be decided. Where he says, transportation is necessary to aid
our Friends and retain their Alliance; I Answer, That it is the subtilty and
covetousness of our Friends, who finding the inestimable gain and treasure they
have by Ordnance brought from us, do not only desire them for gain, but also to
gain to themselves Confederates, by which means succouring our Friends we aid
our Enemies: For look whatsoever we give them, we deduct from our selves. Now
let us stop this transportation, and that greatly weakens their Forces, by
which means they will never be able to encounter us hand to hand. Our Ordnance
(this precious Jewel of our Realm, worth even all we have) is as familiarly
sold in the Countries of our Confederates as any thing within this Land; but
being stopped, they must be fain to take supply from their Ports to their Ships,
from their Ships to the Field, etc.

Sir Francis Hastings said, How swiftly and sweetly her Majesty apprehends our
late griefs, I think there is no Subject but knows. For us then to deal in a
matter so highly touching her Prerogative, we should give her Majesty just
cause to deny our Proceedings by Bill. I think therefore by laying open our
griefs in a Petition, it will move the heart of her Majesty as much, being a
Case of this consequence, as our first Motion by Mr Speaker has done. And
therefore I am of Opinion there is no way but this way.

Sir George Moore said, It is in vain to dispute of the matter when the manner
is only in question; and as vain to lose the matter by overlong dispute of the
manner. The late experience of her Majesty's Love and Clemency toward us, and
of her Care over us strikes such an awful regard into my heart, that I wholly
dislike this proceeding by Bill, and only do approve our former Motion by way
of Petition.

Mr Hyde said, Mr Speaker, It is doubted by some that this Bill will not pass
by reason of the sudden ending of the Parliament; for that, I think if we give
not too much stop to private Bills, this Bill would quickly pass. And I see no
reason but we may well proceed by Bill, and not touch her Majesty's
Prerogative; for her Majesty is not more careful and watchful of her
Prerogative than the noble Princes of Famous Memory King Henry the Eighth her
Father, and King Edward the Sixth her Brother were. Then there was no doubt or
mention of the Prerogative: And therefore I think our surest and soundest
course is by way of Bill, etc.

Mr Comptroller said, I wish we should deal in such manner as we may have our
desire; and that I think, we shall sooner obtain in speaking unto the Queen by
way of Petition, than in proceeding by way of Bill and Contestation. We must
note that her Self and her Progenitors will not be forced: And I do not hold
this course by way of Bill either to stand with respect or duty.

Mr Swale of the Middle Temple said, I would but move thus much to the House,
if we let slip this Law, and proceed by way of Petition, then is there no Law
to prohibit, but the Law of 33 Hen. 8. and 2d of Edw. 6. And those Laws give so
small a remedy, that it is no recompense to the loss of the thing.

Mr Sergeant Harris said, It has been thought that the former Statutes do not
stretch to Ordnance made of Iron; But may it please the House to commit the
Bill, there shall be showed to the Committees four or five Precedents and late
Judgments, that Iron Guns come within this Law.

Mr Solicitor Flemming said, The Gentleman that spoke last said very true, for
it was lately in Matchivells Case in the Exchequer.

So the Bill was committed to all the Privy Council, and all the Queens Learned
Council being of this House, Sir Walter Raleigh, the Knights and Citizens of
London, Sir Francis Hastings, Mr Grevill, Sir Robert Wroth, Sir Robert Mansell,
Sir Richard Knightley, Sir George Moore and diverse others, who were appointed
to meet in this House at two of the Clock in the Afternoon.

Then followed a dispute touching the Information against Mr Belgrave a Member
of the same.

Mr Belgrave said, Mr. Speaker, Modesty forbids me to speak in my own Case that
so nearly concerns me, but necessity urges me to appeal to this High Court.
True it is, there was an Information exhibited against me in the Star Chamber
by an Honorable Person of the Upper House (the Earl of Huntington) in the name
of Mr. Attorney General, for a Misdemeanor committed to this High Court; the
substance of that Information I confess, yet I am to be an humble Suitor unto
this House, whether an Information is to be exhibited (this House sitting)
against any Member thereof. And for my own part I do submit my self to abide
such Censure as this House shall in their Wisdoms think convenient.

Sir George Moore said, viewing the Information, I find the words to be against
the High Court of Parliament, which is as well the Upper House as this House;
and therefore I wish there might be a Conference with the Lords herein. Now
this House is but part, and a Member of the Parliament, and therefore we solely
cannot proceed.

Mr. Sergeant Harris said, In the 36th of Hen. 8. when Ferris Case was, who was
a Member of this House, did not we proceed without any Conference with the
Lords? Here might be libera suffragin, and no man of this House to be chosen by
any Friends or Mediation of any great Man, neither ought we to be tied by any
Blue Coat in the World. But as our Persons are Privileged, so should our
Speeches be; And therefore I see no reason to confer with the Lords when we may
proceed our selves.

Sir Edward Hobbie said, If the Case were but plain of it self, I should be of
the Gentleman's mind that last spoke: but I am given to understand, and also
desire so to inform the House, that this Information was put into the
Star Chamber by some kind of Order from the Lords, and therefore very
convenient a Conference should be had.

Sir Francis Hastings said (who was Brother to the Earl of Huntington) To enter
into consideration of this Cause by Report (and otherwise I cannot) I know no
man but respects the Honorable Person himself, and for this Gentleman (Mr.
Belgrave) I ever took him, and so do, to be a man of very good Carriage: To
condemn him, I do not mean: but I humbly pray that a course for his Honor may
be taken, and the matter so handled, that the Honor of the Person may be
saved, the Gentleman freed from further offense, and this Cause ended with good
Conclusion. And I protest I am not privy to the Prosecution.

Mr. Dale said, Id possumus quod jure possumus; and therefore resting in doubt
herein, the safest course is a Conference.

Mr. Tate said, It is not good to utter things suddenly in great matters. Our
dispute may seem to have this end, either to incur the dangers of our
Privilege by not regarding this Cause, or to pry too near into her Majesty's
Prerogative by examining Informations exhibited into the Star Chamber.
Wherefore I think we ought to be Petitioners, ( Nota verbum Petitioners) or at
least to show our griefs to the Lords; and if by any Order from them (as was
alleged) this Information was put in, methinks in reason a Conference were
good to examine the Cause, and inform this House truly thereof.

Mr. Skipwith the Pentioner said, If I knew or did think that any wrong were
offered to the Earl of Huntington, I would rather be a Petitioner for this
Gentleman to him, than I would be a Protector of him against him. I knew Mr.
Belgrave writ his Letter to my Lord, and that it pleased his Honor to Answer
him; and that he offered to follow his Honor in that sort as is fitting for a
Gentleman of his worth, and rather his Honor than any man in England. This I
take it may satisfy the House for Answer to the first part of the Information,
which contains a dishonor offered to the Earl. For the second, which is
deceiving of the Burgesses, I do Answer this House, They were both willing and
worthy to be deceived. I know they had given their Voices, and desired Mr
Belgrave to take it. For the wrong to this Court, I hope this Court has wisdom
enough to right it selt without any course to be taken in the Star Chamber: yet
by your favor, I may say thus much, that if we should punish him for coming
indirectly into this place, we should punish three parts of this House; for
none ought to be chosen but those that be resident, and sworn Burgesses of the
Town.

Sir Robert Wroth said, This matter needs not so much dispute. There is a
Precedent in this House to this point; in the last Year of Queen Mary, between
Pleddall and Pleddall. It pleased the Lords of the Star Chamber, sedente
Parliamento, to bind the one at the Suit of the other to appear twelve days
after the Parliament; and this adjudged to be an infringement of the Liberties.

Mr Davies said, The Information savours more of wit than malice; And therefore
I think, upon Conference with the Lords the matter may be brought to good end.
I therefore humbly pray it may be put to the question, and that the Bill may be
sent for out of the Star Chamber.

Mr Carey said, I take it, Mr Speaker, the course has been, that if the House
be desirous to see any Record, you (Mr. Speaker) should send a Warrant to the
Lord Keeper to grant forth a Certiorari to have the Record. If by this means
this Information be brought into this House, upon view thereof perhaps this
matter of dispute would take end.

Sir Francis Hastings offered to speak again in this matter; But Mr. Bacon
interrupted him, and told him it was against the course. To which he Answered,
he was old enough to know when and how often to speak. To which Mr. Bacon
replied, it was no matter, but he needed not to be so hot in an ill cause. To
which Sir Francis replied, in several matters of debate a man may speak often.
So, I take it, is the Order. He (pointing to Mr. Bacon) talk of Heat: He tell
you, If I be so hot as he was Yesterday, then put me out of the House. The only
thing that I would say is this, I wish a Conference may be had with the Lord,
because the matter may be brought to some Friendly end; for God knows what may
lie in the Deck till after the Parliament: And I suspect it the more, because
the Information and no Process issued forth.

Mr. Grevill said, I with that in our Conference we do not neglect our
Privileges, and that we may be means of mediation, etc.

So the House appointed these Members following to have Conference with the
Lords, viz.

All the Privy Council being Members of this House, Sir Walter Raleigh, Sir
Francis Hastings, Mr. Fulke Grevill, the Masters of Request, Sir Edward Hobbie,
Sir Robert Wroth, Sir Francis Darcte, Sir George Moore, Sir John Gray, Mr.
Barrington, Mr. Tate, Mr. Martin and Mr. Skipwith, to meet upon Thursday next
at eight of the Clock in the Morning.

These names being thus transcribed out of the Original Journal Book of the
House of Commons, another passage of this day does here follow out of a Private
Journal of that House.

Mr. Speaker said, I am to certify you from the Lords of a great disorder
committed by the Pages and Servants as well of the Lords themselves, as of your
Servants and Attendants, so that not only abuse is offered, but weapons and
blood drawn. For remedy whereof the Lords have given strait Commandment that
their Servants keep peaceable and quiet Order, and that neither their Pages,
Attendants or Servants do stand upon the Stairs or nearer the House than the
Stair foot. They desire that every Member of this House would do the like to
their Servants, and so expressly to charge and command them. And I would move
you that you would be pleased the Sergeant might go forth and signify so much
from you unto the Company without.

Mr. Wiseman said, The disorder Mr. Speaker speaks of, is now grown so great,
that a man dare not go down the Stairs without a Conductor.

So the Sergeant went and delivered the Message, and the abuse was well
reformed.

Mr. Davies made Report of the meeting and travel of the Committees in the Bill
touching Gavelkind Lands, and brought in the Bill with some Amendments.

On Wednesday the 9th day of December the Bill touching the Assurance of
certain Manors, etc. to Samuel Sandys and John Harries Gent. was committed
unto Sir George Moore, Sir Stephen Soame, Mr Henry Mountague, Mr Tho. Caesar,
Mr Trevor, Mr Egcock, Mr Jo. Harries, the Kts and Citizens for Worcester and
Mr. Pawle, who were appointed to meet in the Middle Temple Hall at two of the
Clock in the Afternoon of this present day.

The Amendments in the Bill touching Gavelkind Land were twice read, and with
the Bill Ordered to be engrossed.

The Amendments in the Bill touching a Key or Harbor to be made on the North
parts of the River of Severn were twice read, and with the Bill Ordered to be
engrossed.

The Bill for maintenance of Ships and increase of Sea-saring men was read the
second time and committed unto the Queens Learned Council being of this House,
Sir Walter Raleigh, Sir Robert Wroth, the Knights and Citizens for London, the
Burgesses of all the Port Towns, Mr. Trevor and others, who were appointed to
meet this Afternoon in the Exchequer Chamber at two of the Clock; And the Bill
and Committees names were delivered to Sir Walter Raleigh.

Mr. Moore made Report of the meeting of the Committees in the Bill touching
Cree Church, and brought in the Bill with some Amendments.

The Amendments in the Bill touching Cree Church were twice read, and the Bill
was Ordered to be engrossed.

The Bill for the making and working of Woollen Cloths was read the second
time, and committed unto the former Committees for Woollen Cloths (who were
appointed to meet November 23. and on Wednesday the 18th day of November
foregoing) and appointed now to meet to Morrow in the Afternoon in the
Exchequer Chamber at two of the Clock.

Another Bill also touching the Government of some Northern Counties was read
the first time.

The Points to be considered of in the continuance of Statutes were read, and
offered still to dispute, whether the Statute of Tillage should be continued.

Mr Johnson said, In the time of Dearth when we made this Statute, it was not
considered that the hand of God was upon us; And now Corn is cheap; if too
cheap, the Husbandman is undone, whom we must provide for, for he is the Staple
man of the Kingdom. And so after many Arguments he concluded the Statute to be
repealed.

Mr. Bacon said, The old commendation of Italy by the Poet was, Potens viris
atque ubere gleba; and it stands not with the policy of the State, that the
wealth of the Kingdom should be engrossed into a few Graziers hands. And if you
will put in so many Provisoes as be desired, you will make it useless. The
Husbandman is a strong and hardy man, the good footman, which is a chief
observation of good Warriers, etc. So he concluded the Statute not to be
repealed.

Sir Walter Raleigh said, I think this Law fit to be repealed; for many poor
men are not able to find seed to sow so much as they are bound to plough, which
they must do, or incur the Penalty of the Law. Besides, all Nations abound with
Corn. France offered the Queen to serve Ireland with Corn for sixteen shillings
a quarter, which is but two shillings the bushel; if we should sell it so here,
the Ploughman would be beggered. The Low Country man and the Hollander, which
never sows Corn, has by his industry such plenty that they will serve other
Nations. The Spaniard who often wants Corn, had we never so much plenty, will
not be beholding to the English man for it, neither to the Low Country men, nor
to France, but will fetch it even of the very Barbarian. And therefore I think
the best course is to set it at liberty, and leave every man free, which is the
desire of a true English man.

Mr. Secretary Cecill said, I do not dwell in the Country, I am not acquainted
with the Plough: But I think that whosoever does not maintain the Plough,
destroys this Kingdom. There were the last Parliament great Arguments in this
point; and after a deliberate disputation, the passage of this Bill concluded.
My Motion therefore shall be, that this Law may not be repealed, except former
Laws may be in force and revived. Say that a Glut of Corn should be, have we
not sufficient remedy by transportation, which is allowable by the Policy of
all Nations? I cannot be induced or guided from this opinion upon Government of
former Statutes; I am sure when Warrants go from the Council for levying of men
in the Countries, and the Certificates be returned unto us again, we find the
greatest part of them to be Ploughmen. And excepting Sir Thomas Moore's Utopia,
or some such feigned Commonwealth, you shall never find but the Ploughman is
chiefly provided for: The neglect whereof will not only bring a general but a
particular damage to every man. If in Edward the First his time a Law was made
for the maintenance of the Fry of Fish, and in Henry the Sevenths time for
preservation of the Eggs of Wild-Fowl; shall we now throw away a Law of far
more consequence and import? If we debar Tillage, we give scope to the
Depopulator; And then if the poor being thrust out of their Houses go to dwell
with others, straight we catch them with the Statute of Inmates; if they wander
abroad, they are within the danger of the Statute of the Poor to be whipped. So
by this means undo this Statute, and you endanger many thousands. Posterior
dies discipulus prioris. If former times have made us wise to make a Law, let
these latter times warn us to preserve so good a Law.

Mr Serlbie desired that the County of Northumberland might be exempted out of
the Statute, because it was so nigh Scotland, and their Country was so infected
with the Plague, that not only whole Families but even whole Villages have been
swept away with that calamity, etc. And so he made a long Speech to that effect.

Sergeant Yelverton and Mr Dr Carey came from the Lords to desire that the
Conference touching Leters Patents might be prolonged till Friday Morning at
eight of the Clock, which was assented unto.

It was put to the question, whether the Bill of Tillage should be committed,
and most said I, I, I. Then whether Northumberland should be exempted (upon Mr
Serlebies Motion) and all said I, I, I.

Another matter which the Committees in the continuance of Statutes doubted of
was, whether Mr Dormers Proviso should be put into the Bill of Tillage made
Anno 39 Regin. Eliz.

Mr Davies said, May it please you, Mr Speaker, the Gentleman is at the Door
ready to attend with his Council, to satisfy the House. May it please the
House to hear him, and all said I, I, I.

Mr Dodderidge of Council with Mr Dormer who came with him spoke and said, Mr
Speaker, It pleased her Majesty to license Mr Dormer under her Letters Patents,
with a Non obstante this Statute, to enclose three hundred Acres of ground; and
he humbly prays the House to accept and admit of this Proviso for the saving
of his Letters Patents; the rather for these reasons; First, In respect the
ground enclosed is a small quantity; Secondly, The Country is apt for Pasture
not for Tillage; Thirdly, The ground is a kind of a Marish Ground and too moist
and soft and altogether unapt for Tillage; Fourthly, In that her Majesty has
granted her Letters Patents, and that they concern her Prerogative, that this
House, etc. So he delivered the Proviso and Mr Dormer his Letters Patents, and
went forth.

Mr Sergeant Harries said, Ubi non est ordo, ibi est confusio. Mr. Speaker,
diverse Gentlemen stand before the Door, which breeds a confused sound when the
question is propounded. May it please every man to take his place, that is both
a seemly and ancient Custom. Which they all did accordingly.

Mr. Speaker said, I will put it to the question, Whether this Proviso shall be
received. Whereupon it was twice put to the question, and the I, I, I. were the
greater both the times, but the No's would needs have the House divided. So the
Door being set open and no man offering to go forth, Mr. Martin said:

Mr. Speaker, I have observed it, that ever this Parliament, the No's upon
division of the House have carried it. The reason whereof as I conceive is,
because diverse are loath to go forth for losing of their places, and many that
cry I, will sit still with the No. I therefore do but move this unto the House,
that all those that have given their I, I, would according to their Consciences
go forth, and for my part (said he) I Will begin.

Sir Walter Raleigh rose up to Answer him; but Mr. Comptroller, Sir John
Fortescue, and all the House seeing them, rose in a hurry to go forth, and did
not hear him. Whereupon himself and Mr. Secretary, it seemed, being of the
No's, took some displeasure, as may appear by the Speeches after.

The House being divided upon Mr. Dormers Proviso aforesaid, the I, I, I. were
a hundred seventy six, the No's a hundred thirty four; so that the I, I, I. got
it by forty four Voices.

Now after the House was set quiet,

Mr. Secretary (...) said, I am glad to see the Parliament so full, which
toward the end used to grow thin; And therefore I think it convenient we agree
upon some good Orders. The Reputation of this House has ever been religiously
maintained by Order and Government, but now Error has so crept in amongst us,
that we know not what is Order and what is disorder. The Gentleman that last
spoke (meaning Mr. Martin) first brake Order; for after the question put and
the House agreed to be divided, he spoke perswadingly to draw those out of the
House which perhaps meant it not. Besides, he laid an imputation upon the
House, that according to their Consciences men would not so much as remove out
of their place: But I think there is no man here so fantastical, that though
they be for the Bill, yet for their places sake, they will not alter their
rooms. For this House is a House of Gravity, Conscience and Religion. I think
it therefore fit he should Answer this imputation at the Bar. We have all this
Parliament been against Monopolies, now we our selves protect one: But I see
that men which have desired to be popular without the House for speaking
against Monopolies, do also labor to be private within. But that I regard not.
This I know, that good sums of money have been offered for the furtherance of
this Proviso; but now it is past. I would now move you, that because we have
spent some superfluous time in this Division, and because the affairs of this
Parliament cannot possibly be dispatched so soon as the Parliament must end,
because of the performance of that gift which we have given unto her Majesty,
which is nothing if it come not in due time, therefore that the House would be
pleased after this day to sit in the Afternoons, for we consume our time now in
unnecessary disputations.

Mr. Comptroller said, I think that notwithstanding any thing that has been
last said, howsoever our Orders have been heretofore broken, yet the Gentleman
that spoke, Mr. Martin, brake no Order of this House by speaking, for the House
favored him with silence, and therefore admitted to him liberty of Speech.
That hi Speech was neither persuasive or offered any imputation to this House,
I neither perceive it nor conceive it so; for it was only a Caution to the
House, that former Orders were broken, and therefore now to be amended. And
surely for not removing out of places, I have heard fault found before this
time, and therefore the Gentleman is not now to be taxed. That this should be a
Monopoly I can see no reason, for it has been agreed that her Majesty may
dispense with any penal Law, and that is no Monopoly, no more is this. And I am
not of his mind that so great sums have been offered, the quantity of Land
being but little, and his cause both good and just. And I protest for my part,
I neither knew nor have heard of any. For the last Motion, which was the best,
to sit twice a day, I do concur with him, and will be ready as a Member of this
House to give my Attendance.

Sir Walter Raleigh said, I thought I had deserved of the House to have been
heard to speak as well as he that spoke before the division of the House; And
in that I offered to speak and was not heard, I had wrong. For him that last
spoke, he spoke out of Honor and not out of Judgment. Notwithstanding, I think
it a Monopoly, and the Speech to be both persuasion, and to lay a great
imputation upon the House. And this is all I would have said before.

Mr. Martin offered to speak, and asked the Speaker if he might Answer.

The House said I, I, I.

No, quoth Mr. Secretary, you must stand at the Bar.

The Cry of the House was, No.

Then Mr Secretary wished it might be put to the question, First, Whether he
should speak or no; And so it was, and not twenty said No.

Then it was put to the question whether he should speak at the Bar:

And Mr Brown the Lawyer stood up and said, Mr Speaker, par in parem non habet
imperium, we are all Members of one Body, and one cannot judge of another.

So it being put to the question, there were not above twelve I, I, that he
should stand at the Bar.

Whereupon standing in his place he showed the Cause of his Speech to have been
only for the Order of the House, and not out of any persuasive meaning that he
had; for he protested that he knew neither the man nor the matter.

Sir Walter Raleigh made Report of the travel of the Committees in the Bill
touching Iron Ordnance, and showed, that they have drawn a new Bill to that
purpose, and delivered in the old and the new.

On Thursday the 10th day of December the Bill touching Silk-Weavers, etc. was
read the second time and committed unto the Knights and Citizens for London,
the Citizens for York, Bristoll, Norwich and Canterbury, Mr. Barrington, Mr
Johnson and others, who were appointed to meet this Afternoon in the Exchequer
Chamber.

Mr Johnson a Committee in the Bill for Assize of Fuel brought in the Bill
amended in some parts by the Committees, and delivered it in.

The Amendments in the Bill touching the Assize of Fuel were twice read, and
the Bill was Ordered to be engrossed.

The Bill touching the taking away of Gavelkind Custom in Kent was read the
third time.

Mr Francis Moore said, He thought the Bill a very idle and frivolous Bill, and
injurious; for if a Man take a Wise, by the Custom she shall have the Moiety:
but now if we make it go according to the Common Law, she shall have but the
third part. So if the Father commit a Felony and be Hanged, the Son shall not
lose his Inheritance because the Custom is, The Father to the Bough, the Son to
the Plough; which at Common Law he shall lose.

Mr Sergeant Harris said, I think this Bill a very good Bill, for it defeats a
Custom which was first devised as a punishment and plague unto the Country. For
when the Conqueror came in, the reason of this Custom was to make a decay of
the great Houses of the ancient Britains. For if a Man of eight hundred pound
per Annum had had eight Children, it must be divided into eight parts; And then
if these also had Children, subdivided again usque in non quantum: whereas if
it had gone to one by the Common Law, it would still have flourished, etc.

Mr Bois among many reasons showed, that it would in Kent be a great loss to
the Queen of her Subsidy; for by reason of these Sub-divisions there were many
ten pound men. And whosoever knows the State of our Country shall find more by
under ten pound men than above come to the Queen. And now if these being
divided in several hands should now go according to the Common Law, this would
make the Queen a great loser.

Being put to the question, the No was the greater, yet the I, I, I. would
needs go forth; and upon division it appeared the I, I, I. were sixty seven,
and the No a hundred thirty eight, and so the Bill was rejected.

The Bill for suppressing of Alehouses and Tipling-Houses was read the second
time, and upon the question for committing dashed.

Mr Francis Moore offered a Proviso to the House, and showed that he was of
Council, and standing Fee with the Corporation of Vintners in London: and
showed that they were an ancient Corporation, and had ever used by force of
diverse Charters of Kings of this Realm to sell Wines; and now by this Bill all
was inhibited: And therefore, etc. which was received.

Mr. Johnson said, If this Bill should pass, it would breed a great confusion
of Government; for by this Law the Justices of the County might enter into the
liberty of any Corporation, and license sale of Wine and Beer. Besides, he must
be licensed by four Justices, perhaps there be not four Justices in a
Corporation, admitting power were not given to the Foreign Justice. Now when
these four Justices have enabled him by this Law, they have not power upon his
misbehaviour to put him down, and so very insufficient and impossible to be
mended.

Sir Robert Wroth said, The Bill is that no man shall sell, etc. but he must be
allowed in the Quarter Sessions by four Justices, and what pain and charge this
will be to a poor man to go with some of his Neighbors twenty or thirty Miles
for a License, and what a monstrous trouble to all the Justices, I refer to
your considerations, etc. and so the Bill was dashed, as is aforesaid.

Mr. Speaker showed her Majesty's Pleasure to be, that this House should
proceed in all convenient speedy course of dispatching the businesses at this
time fit to be dealt in, for that her Majesty purposes shortly to end this
present Session of Parliament.

This Message being thus transcribed out of the Original Journal Book of the
House of Commons, now follows the residue of the Passages of this Forenoon out
of a private Journal.

Sir Edward Hobbie said, We attended the Lords this Morning touching the
Information against Mr. Belgrave, and in the end concluded, That forasmuch as
it concerned their Lordships as well as our Privileges, they desired some time
to consult, and will send us word of their resolutions. Vide December the 16th
Wednesday ensuing.

Doctor Stanhop and Doctor Hone brought a Bill from the Lords Entitled An Act
for establishing of the remainder of certain Lands of Andrew Kettleby Esquire to
Francis Kettleby, and so they departed.

Then the questions upon the continuance of Statutes were offered to be read,
but the House called for the Bill of Ordnance; yet the Clerk fell to read the
questions, but the House still cried upon Ordnance.

At length Mr. Carey stood up and said, In the Roman Senate the Consul always
appointed what should be read, what not; so may our Speaker, whose place is a
Consuls place: if he err or do not his duty sitting to his place, we may remove
him. And there have been Precedents. But to appoint what business shall be
handled, in my opinion we cannot. At which Speech some hissed.

Mr. Wiseman said, I reverence Mr. Speaker in his place, but I take great
difference between the old Roman Consuls and him. Ours is a Municipial
Government, and we know our own Grievances better than Mr. Speaker: And
therefore fit every man alternis vicibus should have those Acts called for he
conceives most necessary. All said I, I, I.

Mr. Hackwell said, I wish nothing may be done but with consent, that breeds
the best Concordance; my desire is, the Bill of Ordnance should be read. If you
Mr. Speaker do not think so, I humbly pray it may be put to the question.

Mr. Martin and Mr. Francis Moore stood up, but Mr. Martin first, one would not
yield to the other, and great calling there was, till at length Mr. Comptroller
stood up and said, I am sorry to see this confusion in this House; it were
better we used more silence, and kept better Order. Yesterday you Ordered the
continuance of Statutes should be read; now in an humor you cry Ordnance,
Ordnance. I pray you that which we first decree let us stick to, and not do and
undo upon every idle Motion.

Mr. Secretary Cecill said, I will speak shortly, because it best becomes me;
neither will I trouble your Patience long, because the time permits it not. It
is a Maxim, praestat otiosum esse quam nihil agere. I wish the Bill for
continuance of Statutes may be read; and that agrees with the Precedent Order
of this House, and more with the gravity thereof: yet because the spirit of
contradiction mav no more trouble us, I beseech you let the Bill of Ordnance be
read, and that is the House desire.

An Act against transportation of Iron Ordnance, Gun-Metal and Shot was read
the first time.

Sir Robert Wroth informed the House that a Ship is now upon the River ready to
go away Laden with thirty six pieces of Ordnance.

Post Meridient.

After Dinner (the House now sitting as in the Forenoon) the Amendments in the
Bill to confirm the Assurance of the Manors or Farms of Sagebury alias
Sadgbury to Samuel Sands Esquire and John Harris Gent. and their Heirs, were twice
read, and the Bill was Ordered to be engrossed.

Sir Edward Hobbie moved, that where one Bird a Servant of his has been
Arrested in London at the Suit of one Woolley, his said Servant might have the
Privilege of the House: Whereupon it is Ordered that the said Woolley and the
Sergeant that made the Arrest be sent for by the Sergeant of this House to
Answer unto this House for their said contempt.

The Fishmongers of London were heard with their Council touching a Proviso to
be added to a former Act made in the year of her Majesty for increase of
Mariners and maintenance of the Navigation.

The Proviso for the Fishmongers to be added to the Statute of continuances was
twice read, and committed to the Committees for continuance of Statutes to be
allowed or rejected as shall be further thought sit.

The Bill for continuance of Statutes committed to all the Queens Learned
Council being Members of this House, Sir Walter Raleigh, Sir Francis Hastings,
Sir Robert Wroth and others, who were appointed to meet in the Court of Wards
at two of the Clock in the Afternoon.

The Bill for the relief of the Poor was read the second time and committed
unto Mr Comptroller, Sir Robert Wroth, Sir Francis Darcie, Mr. Francis Bacon,
Mr. Lieutenant of the Tower and others, who were appointed to meet to Morrow in
the Afternoon at two of the Clock in the Court of Wards.

Mr Ireby made Report of the meeting of the Committees in the Bill for draining
certain surrounded grounds in the County of Sussolk, (who were appointed on
Saturday the 28th day of November foregoing) and showed that the Committees
have thought fit to draw a new Bill to that purpose, and so delivers in the
old and the new.

Mr. Winch moved, that according to the resolution of the Committee in the Bill
against transportation of Iron Ordnance, the House should proceed both by Bill
and also by Petition unto her Majesty; which being debated, It was resolved,
that those of the Privy Council being Members of this House should move her
Majesty in the name of this House in that behalf.

The New Bill against transportation of Gun-Metal, Ordnance and Iron Shot was
read the second time, and committed unto all the Privy Council Members of this
House, Sir Walter Raleigh, Sir Robert Wroth, Sir Francis Darcie and others, who
were appointed to meet upon Saturday next in the Afternoon at two of the Clock
in the Court of Wards.

Oliver Cromwell Esquire returned this present Parliament Knight for the County
of Huntington, is for his necessary occasions of business licensed by Mr.
Speaker to depart.

On Friday the 11th day of December the Bill comprehending and containing the
maintenance of good and profitable Arts and Trades for the Commonwealth was
delivered by Mr. Johnson, (who was desired to put the same into the House by
Mr. George Brook Brother to the Lord Cobham) the effect of it was, that every
man which had or could invent any Art or Trade, should for his life monopolize
the same to his own use, or he that could add to or refine the same should do
the like.

Mr. Fettiplare showed, That the Bill was unprofitable and not good for diverse
reasons. First it was too general, because it speaks as well of Arts
invented, as to be invented. Secondly, the Bill shows not that they will be
profitable for the Commonwealth; whatsoever they be, this Bill allows. For
diverse Arts have been devised in London, that that shall be wrought with one
man, which would not heretofore be done with forty: This is unprofitable,
because it sets not the poor and many hands on work. Thirdly, it will breed
confusion; because if but a little addition be made by another, a new License
is granted to this man; And now if to that addition another shall add, that
will be in infinitum, and so confusion. Whereupon he concluded, that he for his
part thought fit the Bill should be quashed, and diverse cried, Away with it.

Another said, I wish that the Bill might be read again and considered because
we allowed of these kind of Patents once this Parliament, namely in the License
for making Tinn by Mills out of the Old Rubbish in Cornwall, upon the motion of
Sir Walter Raleigh; And this Bill desires no more in effect. Next for the
incertainty, upon the consideration of the Bill by some few Committees the same
might be amended. Besides, he that has invented any Art or Trade, it is reason
he should have some privilege, because it would be an encouragement to others,
and Nemo naseitur Artisex. No man would come to that perfection upon the first
knowledge of it, as being taught by the first Inventor for a season. Also the
proposition of the Gentleman that last spoke, did not hold in all Arts, that it
is unprofitable that the work of many should be done by one; for it is
profitable for the Commonwealth, if Water may be brought to ever man's House for
ten shillings value, where it would not be done with ten pound cost, as by the
Water-work device in London. So of Iron Mills the Low Countries, and of the
Corn Mills upon the Thames. So of shooting and charging of Ordnance and
Fireworks and the like. And generally of all Arts, Trades and Sciences which
cannot be done by Poor but by Persons judicious and of Skill, and those that
have a more natural inclination to come to perfection in these things than
every base Beggar. For his last proposition, I say that Non est confusio in
certa scientia, etc.

Mr Snigg said, The Author of the Bill perhaps was a Sugarman, for he has the
word Refiners of Arts, etc.

So it was put to the question for to be read the second time; And all said No.
But when the Speaker said, all those that will have the Bill read the second
time say I, Sir Richard Knightly said No aloud; at whch the House laughed, and
not one said I, I.

Three Bills had each of them one reading; of which the last being the Bill
touching the recovering of certain surrounded grounds in the County of Norfolk
was read the third time, and passed upon the question.

Mr Sergeant Harries a Committee in the Bill touching Silk-Weavers, brought in
the Bill with some Amendments.

The Amendments in the Bill touching Silk-Weavers being twice read, the Bill
was Ordered to be engrossed.

The Bill that the Land of Edward Lucas Gentleman shall be liable to the
payment of certain Legacies, was read the second time, and committed unto Sir
John Cutts, Sir John Cotton, Mr Attorney of the Wards and others, who were
appointed to meet to Morrow in the Afternoon in the Court of Wards at two of
the Clock.

Two Bills also had each of them one reading; of which the second being the
Bill for the Assurance of the Jointure of Rachell Wife of Edward Nevill of
Birling in the County of Kent, was read the third time and passed upon the
question.

Mr Sergeant Yelverton and Mr Dr Swale coming from their Lordships, declared
that their Lordships are ready for Conference according to the former
appointment in the Bill concerning Letters Patents; as also touching a Paper
delivered unto their Lordships containing an Information against Mr Belgrave a
Member of this House in the Court of Star Chamber.

It is Ordered that the Copy of Information exhibited into the Star Chamber
against Mr Belgrave a Member of this House, which was sent down from the Lords
unto this House this day, shall be forthwith examined with the Record, and
amended where it shall differ, and be certified under the Clerks hand of the
Star Chamber to be a true Copy. Vide concerning this business of Mr Belgrave on
Thursday the third day, Monday the 7th day, Tuesday the 8th day and on Thursday
the 10th day of this instant December ber foregoing, as also on December the 16th
Wednesday ensuing.

Four Bills were sent up to the Lords by Mr Secretary Cecill and others; of
which one was the Bill for recovering of certain surrounded Grounds in the
County of Norfolk, etc.

Mr Brown a Committee in the Bill touching repairing of the Bridges near
Carlisle, brought in the Bill with some Amendments.

The Amendments in the Bill touching the repairing of the Bridges near Carlisle
were twice read, and the Bill was Ordered to be engrossed.

The Additions in the Bill touching the Assize of Fuel were twice read, and
with the Bill Ordered to be engrossed.

Two Bills also had each of them one reading; of which the second being the
Bill for relief of Soldiers and Mariners was read the second time, and
committed unto Mr Secretary Cecill, Sir Francis Hastings and others, who were
appointed to meet at the time and place before appointed for relief of the poor.

Thus far of these foregoing passages out of the Original Journal Book or the
House of Commons; Now follow some remembrances of that which was agitated at a
certain Committee of both Houses in the Painted Chamber this Forenoon out of a
Private Journal.

The Lords Committees (who were appointed to have Conference with the
Committees of the House of Commons in the Bill touching Letters Patents, etc.)
being set in the Painted Chamber, Mr. Secretary Cecill with the residue of the
Committees of the said House repaired unto them, where Mr Secretary going to
the Upper end of the Table spoke to this effect. That if their Lordships had
already concluded what to do in the Bill for Patents, then they had no
Commission to proceed; and if they had altered the Bill in any Point with
Amendments, they also had no Commission: But if their Lordships had done
neither, but only were desirous to be resolved of any doubt which they in their
wisdoms conceived, and would willingly thereabout confer with them, they would
most willingly accomplish their Lordships desire, for they had sufficient
warrant from the House.

The Lord Buckhurst Lord Treasurer after a little whispering with the Lords
together, answered, That he would not have us preoccupate their judgments with
a Speech both strange, improper and preposterous, with other words, etc.

Mr Secretary said, He could not answer his Lordship nor the rest without Order
from the other Committees; And therefore prayed they might confer together:
which was granted. So they went forth into an outward room and there conferred
what Speech or Answer to make; and so after they returned again, and Mr.
Secretary said, My Lords, We of the Lower House are very sorry your Lordships
should any way conceive otherwise than well of our Speech and good intent. Your
Lordships termed our Speech (for so I may say, because I spoke in the name and
behalf of the Committees) strange, improper and preposterous. My Lords, I think
it not strange, for it is not unknown of your Lordships that we be all Members
of one Body, and as we cannot be without your Lordships, so your Lordships
cannot be without us; And when we are desirous, it pleases your Lordships out
of your favor to vouchsafe us a Conference; so when you be willing, it
pleases us out of the desire we have to be observant, to yield thereunto:
Neither have your Lordships been more forward to gratify us with your favors,
than we of the Lower House have been willing to further your Honors desires
with our best furtherance. And therefore my Lords, it is no strange thing to
have a Conference, neither our Speech strange because it tended to draw us to
some particular point of Conference. For the Epithet improper, I am to tell
your Lordships, that I delivered no more than I was commanded, nor no less than
I was required. And therefore by your Lordships favor, no Cause it should
deserve the title of impropriety. And I take it, by your Lordships favor, it
was not preposterous: for my Lords, the first matter we took should be handled,
was the doubts which we imagined your Lordships had conceived of the Bill; and
if your Lordships had ought else conceived, I thought fit to show your
Lordships that we then came without Commission. So my Lords, I hope I have made
it appear, that the Speech was neither strange, improper nor preposterous. But
we of the Lower House who be here Committees, do beseech your Lordships that
you would not conceive otherwise of us than we deserve; And your Lordships
shall find us ever ready in all dutiful Service as coadjuting Members of one
United Body the House of Parliament. So after withdrawing of themselves a
little from the Table, the Lords hummed and whispered, and at length calling us,

The Lord Treasurer said, The Lords were satisfied with our Answer, and very
glad they found us so conformable; by which they doubted not but we should well
agree for the Conference, whereby the Bill might have the better passage.

Mr Secretary Answered, That he was very glad their Lordships did conceive
aright of them; And that the Committees, because they were many and would not
be troublesome with multiplicity of Speech, had chosen for their Speakers to
satisfy their Honors, Mr Bacon, Mr Sergeant Harris, Mr Francis Moore, Mr
Henry Mountague, Mr Philipps and Mr Boice. So the Lords called Mr Attorney
General for them, who having spoken a while on the one side, and been Answered
by Sergeant Harris on the other side, the Conference or meeting of the said
Committees brake up imperfectly, and was further deferred till the next Morning.

The Passages of this Afternoon do now follow out of the Original Journal Book
of the House of Commons in manner and form following.

Post Meridiem.

Three Bills had each of them one reading; of which the second being the Bill
to prevent Perjury and Subornation of Perjury was read the third time, and
passed upon the question.

Mr Mountague a Committee in the Bill touching Soldiers and others, certified
in the Bill with some Amendments, whereof he prayed the reading.

The Amendments in the Bill for relief of Soldiers and Mariners were twice
read, and the Bill was Ordered to be engrossed.

The Bill touching Policies of Assurances used amongst Merchants was read the
second time, and committed unto Sir Walter Raleigh, Mr Doctor Caesar, Sir
Francis Bacon, Sir Stephen Soame and others; And the Bill was delivered to Sir
Francis Bacon, who with the rest was appointed to meet to Morrow in the
Afternoon in the Court of Wards at two of the Clock.

The Bill touching Hat-Makers was read the third time, and upon the question
and division of the House passed, with the Yea ninety three, and with the No
forty six.

John Yakesley Esquire returned into this present Parliament one of the Burgesses
for the Town of Cambridge, is for his necessary affairs licensed by Mr. Speaker
to depart.

Upon Motion made by Sergeant Harris, that Anthony Curwin Servant Attendant
upon William Huddleston Esquire a Member of this House, has been Arrested into the
Counter in the Poultrey in London, at the Suit of one Matthew a Chyrurgeon; It
is Ordered, that the Sergeant that made the said Arrest and the said Matthew
should be sent for to answer in this House for their said contempt, as
appertains.

Mr Adam and Listers Council are appointed to be heard to Morrow.

On Saturday the 12th day of December the Bill to avoid the stealing of Cattle
was read the second time and committed unto Sir George Moore, Mr. Maynard, Mr.
Brown and others, who were appointed to meet upon Tuesday next in the
Middle Temple Hall at two of the Clock in the Afternoon.

Two Bills had each of them one reading; of which the second being the Bill for
Confirmation of the Manor of Sagebury alias Sadgbury unto John Harris and
Samuel Sandys Gent. was read the third time and passed upon the question.

Some part of this Forenoons Passages does now next follow out of private
Journals.

An Act for redress of certain abuses used in Painting was read the third time.

It was moved by Sir George Moore and some others, that the Bill might be let
slip, and the Cause referred to the Lord Mayor of London, because it concerned a
Controversy between the Painters and Plaisterers of London.

To which Mr Davies Answered, That the last Parliament this Bill should have
past this House, but it was referred as is now desired, and Bonds made by the
Plaisterers for performance of the Orders to be set down by the Lord Mayor; yet
all will do no good: Wherefore, Mr Speaker, I think it good to be put to the
question.

Sir Stephen Soame desired that my Lord Mayor might not be troubled with them,
etc. but that it might be put to the question, and it seemed likely to go
against the Painters. But Mr Heyward Townsend as it was putting to the question
stood up, and showed, that in the Statute of 25 Ed. 3. Cap. 3. Plaisterers were
not then so called but Dawbers and Mudwall-Makers, who had for their Wages by
the day three pence, and their Knave three half pence (for so was his Labourer
called) they so continued till King Henry the Sevenths time, who brought into
England with him out of France certain men that used Plaster of Paris about
the Kings Sieling and Walls, whose Statute Laborers these Dawbers were. These
Statute Laborers learned in short time the use of Plaster of Paris, and did
it for the King, who increased to be many: then suing to the King for his
Favor to Incorporate them, he did fulfill their desire, Incorporating them by
the name of Gipsarium, which was for Clay and Mud, alias Morter-Makers, An. 16
Hen. 7. being no Freemen for all their Corporation, they obtained the Kings
Letters in their favor to Sir William Remmington the Lord Mayor of London and
the Aldermen, to allow them Freemen, which was granted; at what time came in
four of them paying ten shillings a piece for their Freedoms: And in three
years after that manner came in to the number of twenty, but they paid four
pound a piece for their Freedom. They renewed their Patent in King Henry the
Eighths time, and called themselves Plaisterers alias Morter-Makers, for the
use of Loam and Lyme. They made an humble Petition and Supplication after this
to Sir John Monday then Lord Mayor and to the Aldermen, to grant them
Ordinances for the better Rule and Government of their Company, in these words,
viz. We the good Folks of Plaisterers in London of Plaster and Loam of the
said City, for redress of certain abuses of Lath-Plaister and Loam wrought in
the said Craft, etc. and had allowed unto them search for their Company for the
use of Lath, Loam and Lyme. In all their Corporations at no time had they the
word Colors, neither yet in their Ordinances. For all they were incorporated
by the name of Plaisterers, yet in all King Henry the Eighths time they were
called Dawbers, as appears in the Accounts of the Chamber of London, paid to
such and such Dawbers for so many days so much, and to their Laborers so much.
The Plaisterers never laid any Color upon any of the Kings Houses, nor in the
Sheriffs of London, but this Year. They wore no Livery or Clothing in the
seventeenth of King Henry the Eighth. They have been suffered to lay Alehouse
Colors as red Lead and Oaker with such like, and now intrude themselves to all
Colors; Thus they take not only their own work but Painting also, and leave
nothing to do for the Painter. Painters and Stainers were two several Companies
in King Edward the Thirds time; one for Painting of Posts and all Timber-Work,
and the other for Staining and Painting of Cloth of great continuance. The two
several Companies were joined both into one by their own consents, and by the
consents of the Lord Mayor and Court of Aldermen of the City the nineteenth
year of King Edward the Fourth. The Painters had Orders allowed them for the
use of Oil and Colors, especially named in King Henry the Fourths time, from
the Lord Mayor and City. Painters cannot work without Colors, their only
mixture being Oil and Size, which the Plaisterers do now usurp and intrude
into. Painters have her Majesty's Letters Patents dated the twenty fourth year
of Elizabeth, forbidding any Artificer the use of Colors and Oil or Size,
after the manner of Painting, but only such as have been or shall be
Apprentice, namely with a Painter, seven years at the least. And where the
Plaisterers object, that the Painters do abridge other Companies of their
Colors, that is most apparently untrue; for Goldsmiths do use Colors, but not
after the manner of Painting, and work without Oil or size. Book Binders use
Colors, but neither with Oil or Size. So Cutlers use Varnishing and Gilding;
So Glaziers use Colors with nealing in the Oven; Bricklayers use Colors, but
neither with Oil or Size; And Joiners do use Varnish. Workmanship and Skill is
the gift of God, and not one in ten proves a Workman; yet it is requisite,
that all such as have been brought up all the days of their Life in a Trade,
and cannot attain to the Excellency of Skill that is required, should live by
the baser part of their Science, when they cannot attain the better, which is
in working in Oil and Size those Flats, Posts and Windows, etc. If Plaisterers
may be suffered to Paint, Workmanship in Painting will decay; for no Workman
will keep an Apprentice four or five years to practice and not able to get one
penny, unless he might now get something toward his Meat and Drink in laying
of Oil Colors, as on Posts. And experience teaches us now, that among the
number of three hundred there are not twelve sufficient Workmen to be found in
London. Yet one of these (such was his Poverty) was fain for his relief to Wife
and Children to wear upon the Lord Mayors Day a Blue Gown and red Cap, and to
carry a Torch (he being fifty years old.) One man will lay and paint more
Colors in a day than ten men can grind, which grinding of Colors shall be the
relief of two or three hundred poor men, that cannot attain Workmanship, and
that is taken away by Plaisterers, and the poor men both Painters, their Wives
and Children go a begging for want of work. Besides, Painting of Cloths is
decayed, and not an hundred Yards of new Painted Cloth made in a Year here by
reason of so much Painted Flanders pieces brought from thence; so as the
Painters have nothing to live on, but laying of Oil Colors on Posts, Windows,
etc. It is a curious Art and requires a good Eye, and a steadfast Hand, which
the infirmity of Age decays quickly, and then Painters beg. Plaisterers take
money from the Highest Personages to the meanest Cottagers, whose Walls must
needs be made: Painters take money but of a few for their delight. Painters
give to the Plaisterers six kind of Colors commonly used (as the Bill
imports) to be laid with Size and not with Oil; and for every twenty
shillings earned with Oil Colors, there is ten pound earned with Size Colors,
being every man's money. These Walls thus curiously painted in former Ages, the
Arms so Artificially drawn, the Imagry so perfectly done, do witness our
Forefathers care in cherishing this Art of Painting, etc. So I think the Bill
very reasonable and fit to pass; And thereupon the Bill passed upon the
question.

The residue of this Forenoons Passages do hereafter follow out of the Original
Journal Book of the House of Commons.

Two Bills had each of them one reading; of which the first touching garbling
of Spices was read the third time, and passed upon the question and division of
the House, with the difference of fifty four Voices, viz. with the Yea ninety
five, with the No forty one.

Mr Attorney General and Mr Doctor Carew coming from the Lords unto this House
do signify, that their Lordships are ready for Conference with the Committees
of this House appointed to have Conference with their said Lordships in the
Bill touching Confirmation of Grants and Letters Patents, etc.

The four Bills last past were sent up to the Lords by Mr Secretary Cecill and
others.

The Bill touching the Prisoners in Ludgate was read the second time, and
committed unto all the Queens Learned Council being of this House, the Master
of Requests, Sir Stephen Soame, Mr Philips and others, who were appointed to
meet this Afternoon at the Committee Chamber of this House at two of the Clock
in the Afternoon.

The Bill to redress misimployment of Lands, Goods and Stocks of money
heretofore given to certain charitable uses, was upon the second reading
committed to the former Committees (who were appointed on Saturday the 28th day
of November foregoing) and unto Sir Edward Stanhop, Mr Maynard, Mr Harris and
others, who were appointed to meet in the Committee Chamber of this House at
two of the Clock this Afternoon.

Mr Brown a Committee in the Bill against transportation of Iron Ordnance
declared the travel of the Committees, and delivered in the Bill with some
Amendments.

The Amendments in the Bill against transportation of Ordnance, etc. was twice
read, and the Bill was Ordered to be engrossed.

Sir Francis Darcie a Committee in the Bill touching relief of Maimed Soldiers
and Mariners, declared the Addition of some few words unto the same by the
Committees, viz. [do not exceed or be under] and in another place these words,
viz. [and be under] which being twice read the Bill was Ordered to be engrossed.

Post Meridiem.

The Bill touching the establishing of the remainder of certain Lands unto
Kettlebie was read the second time and committed unto Mr Comptroller, Mr
Secretary Cecill and others, who were appointed to meet in the Court of Wards
upon Monday next in the Morning at eight of the Clock.

The Bill for the more diligent coming to Church on the Sunday, was read the
third time.

To which several Speeches were made as follows.

Mr Bond said, This Bill as it is now engrossed, much differs from the first
which was here presented, which I the better like of. Notwithstanding, in my
opinion, the Bill is altogether needless, and diverse reasons move me to think
it both inconvenient and unnecessary. Every evil in a State is not to be met
with in a Law; and as it is in natural, so it is in politic Bodies, that
sometimes the remedy is worse than the disease. And therefore particular Laws
against particular offenses induce novelty, and in novelty contempt. Hippodamus
Milesius offered to reward any man bountifully which could invent a good and
new Law: But Aristotle condemns that Policy, and the best Orator Demosthenes
condemns that State which will admit of any Innovation, although it be good
in it self. If this Bill passes, there will be two imputations happen to the
State, which Wisdom wills us both to forsee and shun: The first an Infamy to
our Ministers, that our Adversaries may say, this is the fruit of your labor
to have Preached away your Audience out of the Church; The second no less but
rather a greater imputation upon our Archbisnops and other Ecclesiastical
Governors, that they be either remiss in their Authority, or else that their
Prerogative has not so much power as a twelve penny Fine. And doubtless these
imputations cannot be avoided, if we give the Jesuits such head, scope and
comfort as they in their Writings do greedily apprehend. I do, Mr Speaker,
conceive great difference betwixt primo Eliz. when time was, and this Law of 44
Eliz. as now it is. Then the People were newly taken from Massing and
Superstition; Now they are planted in truth, and rooted in Religion. The light
did then scarce appear unto them, which now shines with glorious Beams upon
our Teachers and Ecclesiastical Judges. And as the malice of the Adversary was
only against them in the beginning, so is it stretched forth to put down, and
flameth like a consuming Fire to devour our Doctrine. These reasons aforesaid
were the Groundwork of Osorius's Foundation in his Epistle unto her Majesty,
to give advantage to speak evil. I will give but a reason or two more and so an
end. Suppose that a neglector of Church Service comes to the Sessions there to
be Examined, alleging an excuse; many businesses so concern the doer not to be
known, that to speak truth would be his undoing, and to speak untruth would be
a wound unto his Conscience; And to say his business, were a mere mockery; and
to say an untruth, an apparent danger. If this Law may stand for a Law,
methinks I foresee what breach of Charity will happen. Say there be forty in a
Town absent, the Churchwarden presents some and not others: It will be
objected unto him, wherefore should I be presented and not he? why my Wife, my
Son, my Servant, my Friend, not his, etc. Will not this be a great breach to
Unity and Peace? Just prosecution will be infinitely cumbersome, and partial
connivance subject to quarrel. Notwithstanding this Statute we leave power to
the Ecclesiastical Judge whose course is to proceed to Excommunication, and so
an Excommunicato capiendo must be had. This is as great a charge as the
Indictment in the Statute of primo. In this Statute a Witness or two must be
brought to the Sessions, he must be presented to the Grand Jury and so
Indicted; This will cost five shillings, a noble or ten shillings, which is as
much as the charge in the first Statute. So because this Bill is slanderous to
the Clergy, slanderous to the State, repugnant to Charity and Crambe recocta, I
humbly pray it may receive the like entertainment the former Bill had, viz. to
be rejected.

Sir Francis Hastings said, I shall speak upon great disadvantage; I perceive
this Member of our House has taken studied pains to disturb the passage of
this Bill. To which I shall not so well answer, because I shall not so well
carry away the particulars of this politic, but not Religious discourse. If it
be Religion to be obedient at pleasure, if I could be Zealous to day, and cold
to Morrow, I could subscribe to all that he has said. We connot do a more
acceptable thing to God or a more dutiful service to the State, than bring men
to fear God. Religion and Policy may well stand together: But as that policy is
most detestable which has not Religion to warrant it, so is that Religion most
happy which has policy to back and maintain it. I know the Jesuits and Priests
be out of square, and be at a Jarr amongst themselves: I pray God it be not to
make a breach among us, who be yet in Unity. Wit well applied is a profitable
thing; but ill applied, dangerous, in whomsoever does abuse it. There is no man
of sense and Religion, but thinks that be is far from Religion (pointing at
Mr Bond) that made the Speech. First, he said it would be an imputation to our
Ministers. That Speech was both absurd in Judgment and slanderous in uttering;
as though by the Ministers of the word we were loath to hear of our Sins or
reconcile our selves to God. The second, That it was an imputation on
Archbishops, Bishops, etc. I am so far from blaming their Government, that I
renounce that Position. I am very sorry, that the strength of their Authority
stretches not so far as I could wish it in this point. But methinks this Law
should rather be a credit to the Ministry, that now we having gone to Church
these forty three Years our selves, are so fervent in Religion, that we desire
also that others may do the like. I beseech you give me leave to wipe away a
grievance, which it seems the Gentleman that last spoke imputes unto me. He
has made a Protestation, that he is no Papist: I appeal to you all if I said
he was. And I say he is no Puritan if he be not a Papist; for if there be ever
a Puritan in England, it is a Papist. I learned of Dr Humfrey who was sometimes
my Tutor, a division of four sorts of Puritans; First, The Catholic which
holds that a man cannot sin after Baptism; Secondly, The Papist, which is such
a Merit-monger, that he would not only save himself by his own Merits, but by
the Merits of others also; A third sort are the Brownists or Family of Love, a
Sect too well known in England, I would they had never so been; The fourth and
last sort are your Evangelical Puritans, which insist wholly upon Scriptures as
upon a sure ground; And of these I would we had many more than we now have.

It was showed by Dr Bennet upon occasion of Speech of the multitude of
Recusants, that there were thirteen hundred, nay fifteen hundred Recusants in
Yorkshire, which he vouched upon his Credit were presented both in the
Ecclesiastical Court and before the Council at York.

So after diverse Speeches and Arguments it was put to the question, whether the
Bill should be engrossed, and the greater number could not be discerned.
Whereupon Sir Robert Wroth showed, that he had a Proviso ready engrossed, the
substance whereof was, That if any man came eight times a Year to the Church,
and said the usual Divine-Service twice every Sunday and Holyday in his House,
with his whole Family, that should be a sufficient dispensation. This was
utterly misliked: yet diverse which were desirous to overthrow the Bill went
forth with the Proviso, because they would have it joined with the Bill to
overthrow it. Whereupon the House was divided, and upon division it appeared
thus, The I, I, I were a hundred twenty six, the No were eighty five. So the
Proviso past. Then it was put to the Question for the Bill, but then diverse
reasons were showed, Mr Bonds two reasons of prejudice to Ministers and the
Clergy, and the danger by breach of Charity; That the Information was a thing
contrary to Magna Charta, That there might be a Conviction without enquiry.

Sir Walter Raleigh showed, that all the Churchwardens of every Shire must
come to the Assizes to give Information to the Grand Jary; say then there be a
hundred and twenty Parishes in a Shire, there must now come extraordinary two
hundred and forty Churchwardens: And say that but two in a Parish offend in a
quarter of a Year, that makes four hundred and eighty persons with the
Offenders to appear; what great multitudes this will bring together, what
quarrelling and danger may happen, besides giving Authority to a mean
Churchwarden, how prejudicial this may be, etc. with diverse other reasons
against it. As also some Ambiguities and Equivocations therein; The Proviso
newly added being a plain Toleration from coming to Church; and that the Parson
could not present or constrain any if they said Service at home. So it was put
to the question thrice together, and because the truth could not be discerned,
the House was again divided, and the I, I, I went forth and were a hundred and
five, and the No's within a hundred and six. So they got it by one Voice, and
the I, I, I lost; but then the I, I, I said they had Mr Speakers, which would
make it even. And then it grew to a question, whether he had a Voice. Sir
Edward Hobbie who was of the I, I, I side, said, that when her Majesty had
given us leave to chufe our Speaker, she gave us leave to choose one out of our
own number and not a Stranger, a Citizen of London and a Member; and therefore
he has a Voice. To which it was answered by Sir Walter Ralergh, and confirmed
by the Speaker himself, that he was foreclosed of his Voice by taking that
place, which it had pleased them to impose upon him; and that he was to be
indifferent for both Parties: And withal showed, that by the Order of the House
the Bill was lost.

Mr Bowyer, Secretary to the old Lord Treasurer Buckhurst, said, Mr Speaker, I
think it not lost, for there has been foul and great abuse offered in this
matter. A Gentleman that would willingly go sorth according to his Conscience,
was pulled back: Though I much reverence my Masters of the Temple, and am bound
to our Benchers of the Middle Temple, yet if it will please the House and you
Mr Speaker to command me to name him, I will. The greatest Voice said no, yet
Mr Secretary Cecill willed him to name him, and he said, it was Mr Dale of the
Middle Temple.

Sir Walter Raleigh said, why if it please you, it is a small matter to pull
one by the Sleeve, for so have I done my self ostentimes. (And great loud
Speech, and stir there was in the House.)

Mr Comptroller (after silence) said, We have been often troubled by a
Physician (meaning Mr Bond) and he has been spoken against. He troubled us
with Aristotle and other Books; if he had stayed there, it had been well: but I
think we had need of Physicians to stay our Heads and cool our heats and
humors, not fitting a Court of Parliament; for it is a most intolerable
disorder. I think the offense is a heinous offense, both against God, and this
Assembly. For the first, in that every man is to go according to his Conscience
and not by compulsion; And for the other Gentleman Sir Walter Raleigh, that
said he had often done the like, I think he may be ashamed of it; for large is
his Conscience, if in a matter of so great consequence he will be drawn either
forwards or backwards by the Sleeve; And I think it so heinous, that he
deserves to Answer it at the Bar (meaning Mr Dale, but because Sir Walter
Raleigh was last named, it was taken to be meant of him.)

Mr Secretary Cecill said, I am sorry to see this Disorder, and little do you
know how for disorder the Parliament is taxed, I am sorry I cannot say
slandered. I had hoped as this Parliament began gravely and with Judgment, so
we should have ended modestly, and at least with discretion. I protest I have a
Libel in my Pocket against the Proceedings of this Parliament. The offense
which the Gentleman that last spoke, spoke of, I confess is great and
punishable; And this I wish may be inflicted on him, that he whose Voice may be
drawn either forwards or backwards by the Sleeve, like a Dog in a string, may
be no more of this House; And I wish for his Credits sake he would not. But
that it should be so great to be called to the Bar, I see no reason, neither do
I know why any in this House should speak so imperiously as to have a Gentleman
of his place and quality (pointing to Sir Walter Raleigh) called to the Bar, I
see no reason for it: For the matter it self, the No's were a hundred and six,
and the I, I, I a hundred and five, the Speaker has no Voice; and though I am
sorry to say it, yet I must needs confess lost it is, and farewell it.

There was another Gentleman, a No, pulled out as well as the other was kept
in, and therefore it had happened even howsoever; for Mr Edward Jones and Mr
Barker pulled out Lyonell Ducket.

The residue of this Afternoons Passages and part of the next day do now next
follow out of the Original Journal Book of the House of Commons it self, viz.

Mr Doctor Carew and Mr Doctor Hone did bring from the Lords two Bills passed
with their Lordships; of which the first was the Bill concerning Captains,
Soldiers, Mariners and other the Queens Services in the Wars.

Mr Sergeant Yelverton and Mr Doctor Hone being come from the Lords do declare,
that their Lordships do desire another Conference between the Committees of
this House and the Committees of their Lordships, which they do appoint to be
upon Monday next at the fore-appointed hour and place; And that the former
Committees (who were appointed on Thursday the 12th day of November foregoing)
or others whom this House shall thereunto appoint, may have Authority from the
House to conclude and resolve upon the Bill lately passed from this House unto
their Lordships, viz. the Bill for Confirmation of Grants and Letters Patents,
etc. which was by the House Ordered and agreed unto accordingly.

On Monday the 14th day of December, Two Bills had each of them one reading; of
which the second being the Bill touching Cosening Bankrupts was read the first
time, and upon the question and division of the House Ordered not to be read
any more, with the Yea thirty five, with the No forty five.

Two Bills also had each of them one reading; of which the second being the
Bill for the draining of certain surrounded grounds, etc. had its second
reading, and was delivered to the former Committees (who were appointed on
Tuesday the first day of this instant December foregoing) to meet in the
Exchequer Chamber this Afternoon at two of the Clock.

The Bill touching Denizens, (after some questions and Arguments whether
Matthew de Quester should pass and be inserted among the rest) being thrice
read, it was passed upon the question.

Mr Moore made Report of the meeting of the Committees in the Bill for
continuance, repeal and explanation of certain Statutes, and delivered in the
Bill with some Additions and Provisoes.

The Amendments, Additions and Provisoes in the Bill for continuance, repeal
and explanation of Statutes was twice read.

Provisoes for Dover-Haven in the Bill for continuance and repeal of Statutes
were twice read, and committed unto Mr Comptroller, Sir Walter Raleigh, Mr
Snigg, Sir John Lewson and others.

Mr Francis Bacon made Report of the travel of the Committees in the Bill
touching Policies of Assurances, and brought in the Bill with some Amendments,
and prayed the reading thereof.

The Amendments in the Bill touching Policies of Assurances used amongst
Merchants were twice read; and with the Bill Ordered to be engrossed.

Mr Doctor Swale and Mr Coppin did bring from the Lords the two Bills formerly
passed in this House, the one Entitled An Act touching Orders in the Exchequer
with a Proviso added to the same by their Lordships likewise passed with the
Lords, and another touching the Jointure of Lucie Countess of Bedford with
certain Amendments and two Provisoes added.

Three Bills had each of them one reading; of which the first being the Bill
for the Repeal of An Act made in the fourteenth Year of her Majesty's Reign
touching the reforming the length of Kersies was read the second time, and
committed unto Sir George Moore, Sir Edward Moore, Mr Kingsmell, Mr Popham, the
Burgesses of Clothing Towns, and others, who were appointed to meet this
Afternoon at two of the Clock in the Exchequer Court.

The Two Bills last passed were sent to the Lords by Mr Secretary Cecill and
others the Committees appointed to have Conference with the Lords this
Afternoon.

Mr Philipps, one of the Committees in the Bill against misimploying of Lands,
Stocks and Stores given to Charitable Uses, brought in the Bill with some
Amendments added by the Committees, of which he praveth the reading.

The Amendments in the Bill against misimploying of Lands, Stocks and Stores of
Money given to Charitable Uses were twice read, and the Bill Ordered to be
engrossed.

The Proviso that came from the Lords in the Bill touching Orders in the Court
of Exchequer was twice had, and committed presently to be considered of by Mr
Solicitor and Mr Winch in the Committee Chamber of this House.

The Bill for the repairing of two Bridges near the City of Carlisle in the
Country of Cumberland, was read the third time and passed upon the question.

Two Bills also had each of them their third reading, and passed upon the
question; of which the first was the Bill concerning the Assize of Fuel.

Thus far out of the Original Journal Book of the House of Commons; now follow
the passages touching the Arrest of a Servant of a Member of the same, out of a
private Journal.

Mr Davies moved the House and showed, that a Servant of Mr. Huddleston (Knight
for Cumberland) being some twelve Months since hurt in the Hand, went unto one
Matthews a Surgeon by Fleet-Bridge, who for ten pounds undertook the Cure;
the man gave him a Bill of ten pound for the said (...), which he the said
Matthews could not perform without leaving a great scar, and withal a little
(...) in his hand: notwithstanding he paid the Surgeon eight pound. But upon
what suggestion I know not, Matthews has sued Mr. Huddleston's man for the
whole ten pound and Arrested him upon an Execution into the Counter. The man
told him he was Mr. Huddlestons Servant, and that his Master was a Member of
this House and a Knight of a Shire, and that he was thereby privileged from
Arrests, and wished to be discharged; but Matthews and the Sergeant answered
him, they cared not for his Master nor for the privilege, and said that he was
not privileged from an Execution. And so being carried to the Counter, he told
the like there to the Clerks, who affirmed likewise that privileges could not
extend to Executions, and therefore would not discharge him. And therefore I
pray in the behalf of the Gentleman, that both Matthews and the Clerks and
Sergeant may be sent for. And so they were Ordered to appear to Morrow in the
Afternoon.

The Bill touching Captains, Soldiers and Mariners, and other her Majesty's
Services in the Wars, was read the first time.

Post Meridiem.

Sir Robert Wroth, a Committee in the Bill for Relief of the Poor, brought in
the Bill with the Amendments, and a Proviso added by the Committees.

The Proviso and Amendments in the Bill for the relief of the Poor, were twice
read, and the Bill was Ordered to be engrossed.

Two Bills had each of them their third reading; of which the second being the
Bill for the confirming the Authority and Government of the Mayor, Sheriffs and
Aldermen of London within St Katherin's Christ Church, was upon the question of
Amendments in the Bill and the division of the House dashed with the difference
of forty three voices, viz. with the Yea forty nine, and with the No eighty six.

The Bill touching matters in Policies of Assurances was read the third time,
and passed upon the question.

Mr. Wirgfield, a Committee in the Bill touching the draining of surrounded
Grounds in the Counties of Cambridge, Huntington, Northampton, Suffolk and
Norsolk, etc. brought in the Bill with some Amendments and a Proviso added by
the Committees, and prayed the reading thereof.

The Amendments and Proviso in the Bill touching draining of surrounded Grounds
in the Counties of Cambridge, Huntington, Northhampton, etc. were twice read,
and the Bill was Ordered to be engrossed.

The Bill for the more peaceable Government of the Counties of Cumberland,
Northumberland and Westmerland with the Bishopric of Durham was read the
second time, and committed unto all the Privy Council being Members of this
House, the Knights of Cumberland, Northumberland and Westmerland, and others,
who were appointed to meet to Morrow in the Morning in the Committee Chamber of
this House.

On Tuesday the 15th day of December, Four Bills had each of them one reading;
of which the last being the Bill for avoiding of idleness and setting the Poor
on work, was read the second time, and upon the question for committing or
engrossing dashed.

Mr. Dr. Stanhop and Mr. Dr. Hone did bring from the Lords a Bill that passed
in this House entitled An Act for the making of an Harbor or Key on the North
parts of Devon in the River of Severn, for the safeguard of men and Shipping,
etc. with the Amendment of one word to be put out, viz. the word Free.

The Amendment brought down from the Lords in the Bill touching a Harbor or
Key to be made, etc. was thrice read and assented unto by the House, and so
passed upon the question.

Two Bills also had each of them one reading; of which the last being the Bill
for the relief of Theophilus Adams, etc. was read the third time, and after
Council heard on all parts, dashed upon the question.

Sir Edward Hobbie a Committee in the Bill touching Kettlebie and Kettlcbie,
showed the travel of the Committees in framing of a new Bill by consent of
Parties, and so delivered in both the old and new.

The Bill for ending and appeasing of all Controversies, matters and debates
between Francis Kettlebie on the one part, and Andrew Kettlebie and Jane his
Wife of the other part, was twice read, and committed unto Mr Solicitor, Sir
Edward Hobbie, Sir Francis Hastings, Sir Edward Stafford and others, who were
appointed to meet and consider presently in the Committee Chamber of this House.

The Bill for continuance and Repeal of Statutes was read the third time, and
passed upon the question.

After many Arguments and Speeches had for admittance of a Proviso for Mr.
Dormer in the Bill of Continuance of Statutes, it was upon the question and
division of the House dashed with the difference of thirty five Voices, viz.
with the Yea a hundred and eleven, and with the No a hundred forty six.

The Amendments added by the Committees in the Bill touching Kettlebie and
Kettlebie were twice read, and with the Bill Ordered to be engrossed.

Robert Drew Esquire returned one of the Burgesses for the Borough of Vizes in the
County of Wilts, is for his necessary and important affairs licensed by Mr.
Speaker to depart.

Post Meridiem.

The Amendments in the Bill touching the true making and working of
Woollen-Cloths were twice read, and the Bill was Ordered to be engrossed.

Anthony Matthew a Surgeon being brought to the Bar, and charged by Mr.
Speaker with his contempt against the Liberties and Privileges of this House,
and the Members of the same, in causing Anthony Curwin Servant Attendant upon
Mr. Huddleston a Member of this House to be Arrested into the Counter in the
Poultry in London, which Anthony Matthew being asked what he could allege for
his defense herein, Answered and affirmed that he did not know that the said
Curwin did belong to any Member of this House, and he most humbly submitting
himself unto the censure of this House, was after sundry Speeches therein had,
discharged paying his Fees to the Sergeant and Clerk.

And upon the question it was resolved that the said Anthony Curwin should have
Privilege.

Sir John Cutts a Committee in the Bill touching Flowerdew and Lucas made
Report of the meeting of the Committees, and of some Amendments added by them
unto the Bill, which he prays may be read.

Two Bills had each of them one reading; of which the first being the Bill
against transportation of Iron Ordnance, etc. was read the third time, and
passed upon the question.

The Eight Bills last past were sent up to the Lords by Mr. Secretary Cecill,
Mr. Comptroller and others.

The Amendments in the Bill touching Lucas and Flowerdew were thrice read, and
with the Bill Ordered to be engrossed.

Mr Moore made Report of sundry meetings and Conferences had by the Committees
of this House with the Lords Committees in the Bill touching Confirmation of
Grants and Letters Patents, and showed their Agreements with their said
Lordships.

Two Bills lastly had each of them one reading; of which the second being the
Bill for the better Government of the Counties of Cumberland, Northumberland,
Westmerland and the Bishopric of Durham, was read the third time and passed
upon the question.

The Passages of the day foregoing and this instant Wednesday following are
wholly transcribed out of the Original Journal Book.

On Wednesday the 16th day of December the Bill for the changing of the
Sirname-of Waller into the name of Debden was read the first time.

Mr Henshaw brought in the Bill with some Additions to the same from the
Committees, viz. The Bill touching the length of Kersies.

The Amendments or Additions in the Bill touching the length of Kersies were
twice read, and the Bill was Ordered to be engrossed.

Eight Bills had each of them their third reading and passed upon the question,
and were sent up to the Lords by Mr Secretary Cecill and others; of which the
two last were, one for the true working of Woollen-Cloths, and the other for
the necessary relief of Soldiers and Mariners.

Mr Sergeant Yelverton and Mr Doctor Hone did bring from the Lords the Act for
Confirmation of the Subsidies of the Clergy and the Original Grants under the
Archbishops Seal.

The Amendments that came from the Lords in the Bill for Assurance of the
Jointure of the Countess of Bedford, with the Provisoes annexed, were thrice
read and passed upon the question.

The Bill for the maintenance of the Navy and increase of the Navigation was
read the first time.

Mr Comptroller, Sir Walter Raleigh, Mr Lieutenant of the Tower and others,
were appointed to have Conference with the Lords touching some Amendments or
Addition to be had in the Proviso sent from the Lords unto this House, to the
Bill before passed in this House touching Orders to be kept in the Court of
Exchequer.

Post Meridiem.

Mr Attorney General and Mr. Doctor Stanhop did bring from the Lords a Bill
before passed in this House, viz. touching Confirmation of Grants and Letters
Patents, etc. And did declare that the Lords Committees and the Committees
appointed by this House have most courteously had sundry Conferences together
in the same as one entire body, and agreed upon some Amendments in the same.

The Bill touching Captains, Soldiers and Mariners, and other the Queens
Services in the Wars, was read the second time, and upon the question and
division of the House Ordered not to be committed, viz. with the Yea forty
eight, with the No eighty one. And upon another question dashed.

The Bill for the confirmation of the Subsidy of the Clergy was read three
times and passed upon the question.

The Proviso added to the Bill for Orders to be had in the Court of Exchequer
was thrice read and passed upon the question.

On Thursday the 17th day of December, Two Bills of no great moment had each of
them one reading; of which the first being the Bill touching Printers and
Printing was read the second time, and committed unto the Knights and Citizens
of London, Mr. Lieutenant of the Tower, Mr. Moore and others, who were
appointed to meet to Morrow in the Afternoon in the Exchequer Chamber at two of
the Clock.

The Bill for the Explanation of the Statute of Limitation of prescription to
Rent-Charges was read the second time and committed unto Mr. Sergeant Harris,
Mr. Moore and others, who were appointed to meet upon Saturday next in the
Afternoon in the Exchequer Chamber at two of the Clock.

The latter Proviso touching the Bishop of Cartisle was read the second time.

The Bill with the Amendments for the Countess of Bedfords Jointure, and the
Bill with the Proviso added by the Lords touching Orders in the Court of
Exchequer were sent to the Lords by Sir Walter Raleigh and others.

The Bill touching Fines within ancient Demesne was read the second time, and
committed unto Sir Walter Raleigh, Mr. Sergeant Harris and others, who were
appointed to meet this Afternoon in the Court of Wards at two of the Clock.

Sir Edward Hobbie moved, that such Members of this House as shall be sent from
this House unto the Lords with the Bill for Confirmation of the Subsidy of the
Clergy, may by direction of this House recommend unto their Lordships the Bill
against transportation of Iron Ordnance, with request of their Lordships good
furtherance to the passage of the same.

The Amendments and Provisoes in the Bill touching Confirmation of Grants made
to her Majesty and of Letters Patents from her Majesty to others, were read the
third time and passed upon the question.

Sir Robert Wroth moved, that an Order may be set down how the Collection made
in this House for relief of the poor may be distributed. Whereupon it is
Ordered, that the Soldiers now remaining about the City of London shall be
relieved out of the money Collected of the Members of this House in such sort
as to the Officers thereunto appointed shall be thought fit.

The Officers appointed for the distribution of the Collection are Sir Robert
Wroth, Mr. Fettiplace, Mr. Wade, Sir Francis Darcie, Mr. Trevor and Mr. Brown;
And that they join with the Officers in like case appointed by the Lords.

Two Bills also had each of them one reading; of which the second being the
Bill for Explanation of a certain branch of An Act made in the twenty eighth
year of her Majesty touching Recusants, was read the second time, and
committed, but no time or place appointed for the meeting.

Mr. Belgrave moved, That whereas an Information has been Exhibited into the
Court of Star Chamber in the name of Mr. Attorney General against him, upon
suggestion that he should offer abuse unto this House, humbly prayed that he
may be Ordered and censored by this House, if it shall so fall out and seem sit
unto this House upon further Examination to be had therein. Vide plus post
Meridiem.

Mr. Secretary Cecill declared her Majesty's Pleasure to be that her Highness
purposes God willing to Dissolve this Assembly of Parliament to Morrow.

Post Meridiem.

The Bill for the changing of the Surname of the Wallers into the Surname of
the Debdens was read the second time.

Mr. Sergeant Telverion and Mr. Doctor Hone did bring from the Lords a Bill
Entitled An Act for reformation of deceits in Auditors and their Clerks in
making untrue particulars. And also they do declare, that whereas the Lords
have received some Bills from this House which their Lordships do think to
expedite, and shall need perhaps some small Amendments, therefore they do
desire that this House may sit somewhat longer than they purposed before, for
the final perfecting and consummating of the same.

The Bill for reformation of Deceits in Auditors and their Clerks in making
untrue particulars, was read twice, and committed unto Mr Secretary Cecill, Mr.
Comptroller, Sir Walter Raleigh and others, who were appointed to consider
presently in the Court of Wards upon the said Bill. And after some short space
of time and Conference therein had, it was after their return into this House
thought meet the said Committees should confer with the Lords therein, and
afterward report the same unto this House.

The Bill touching Brewers, etc. was read the second time and committed to the
Burgesses of Southwark.

The Bill touching unlawful sized Bread, and the Bill touching buyers of Butter
and Cheese were each of them read the second time, and committed to the former
Committees.

The Bill also against using of false Dice was read the first time.

Mr Attorney General and Mr Dr Hone did bring from the Lords a Bill that before
passed this House, entitled An Act touching the draining of certain surrounded
Grounds in the Counties of Huntington, Cambridge, Lincoln, Northampton, Suffolk
and Norfolk amended, and with some additions of more Counties, viz. Sussex,
Essex, Kent and the Bishopric of Durham.

The Amendments in the Bill touching surrounded Grounds were thrice read, and
Ordered upon the question to be inserted into the same, and so the Bill passed.

The draught of an Order touching Mr. Belgrave was once read, and committed to
be considered of presently in the Committee Chamber by Sir Edward Stafford, Mr.
Henry Mountague, Mr. Brown, Mr. Doyley, Sir Francis Darcie, Sir John Cotton and
Sir John Gray.

The Draught of an Order, considered of and brought in by the Committees, was
read, and Ordered by the House upon the question to be entered as the Act of the
House, viz.

Whereas one George Belgrave in the County of Leicester Esquire, a Member of
this House, has made complaint of an Information exhibited against him into
the Court of Star Chamber pretending an abuse in the highest matters, as are
those which do concern the most Honorable and High Court of Parliament, and
has appealed unto this House for that the Information was filed sedente Curia;
And whereas the House did refer to the Committees for Returns and Privileges
the Examination of the Cause alleged in the Information, and the substance
thereof having been related unto this House; This House thereupon did upon the
question again moved and largely debated, pronounce and declare the said George
Belgrave to be free in their Judgments from any abuse offered to this House,
and that he is not to be molested for any such imputation; And have resolved,
that this shall be entered as An Act of this House. Vide de ista materia Dec. 3.
Dec. 7. Dec. 8. Dec. 10. and Dec. 11. antea.

The Bill to restrain Butchers in and about the City of London from buying,
etc. And the Bill touching Practitioners in Physic were each of them read the
second time and committed as before to the former Committees for Brewers.

The Bill touching the shipping of Coals near Newcastle was read the second
time, and committed with the rest to the former Committees, but no mention of
time or place.

The Bill for redress of abuses in taking of Pawns and the appointing of a
Lumbard was read the second time and committed as abovesaid.

To Morrow at eight of the Clock in the Morning those that were nominated by
this House to distribute the Money collected for the relief of the Poor, and
likewise those appointed by the Lords, are appointed to be at the Sessions
House in the Old Bailey to take Order for the said distribution.

Upon a motion made by Mr. Fettiplace, the names of such as have not paid
toward the relief of the Poor and maimed Soldiers were read, which were about
forty four.

On Friday the 18th day of December, as the Speaker was coming to the House in
the Morning, the Pardon was delivered unto him, which he took and delivered
unto the House, which they sent back again because it was not brought according
to course.

The Collection for the Clerk of twelve pence a piece according to Mr.
Wingfield's motion yesterday, was made and amounted to about twenty five pound.

Mr. Bowyer Secretary to the Lord Treasurer sitting in the Middle of the House
on the left side as you come in next to Mr. Skipwith of Lincolns Inn, swooned
upon a sudden and was again recovered within a quarter of an hour. It was said
he had a spice of the Falling Sickness. He was carried forth of the House by
the Sergeant of the same, and three of his men into the outer Room. It was
strange to hear the diversity of opinions touching this accident, some saying
it was Malum omen, others that it was Bonum omen, etc. But as God will, so be
it.

Thus far of this days passages out of private Journals: some other business of
this day does now follow out of the Original Journal Book of the House of
Commons it self, viz.

Mr. Attorney General and Mr. Doctor Stanhop did bring from the Lords unto this
House two Acts, one Entitled An Act of the Queens Majesty's most gracious
general and free Pardon, and another Act for the granting of four entire
Subsidies and eight Fifteenths and Tenths granted by the Temporalty before
passed in this House.

Mr. Secretary Cecill made Report of the meeting and travel of the Committees
in the Bill that came from the Lords Yesterday, Entitled An Act for
reformation of deceits in Auditors and their Clerks in making untrue
particulars; and that for the errors in the form of digestion of the same, it
is thought not fit in the opinion of the Committees to be any further dealt in
at this time, and so resolved of in the Conference had with the Lords.

Mr Hackwell made a Motion that the Speaker might say something touching the
transportation of Ordnance, that seeing the Bill in the Lower House is fallen
into an everlasting sleep, and that we knew not thereof before this day, he
could not be blamed for that which he could not have spoken before this time;
but nothing was replied or done.

The Subsidy of the Clergy was sent in a Roll according to the usual Acts, to
which Sir Edward Hobbie took Exceptions, because it was not sent in a long Skin
of Parchment under the Queens Hand and Seal. So it was sent back again, and
then the other sent.

On Saturday the 19th day of December about nine of the Clock the House came
together, this day being appointed to be the last day of the Parliament.

Mr Speaker moved the House to know their Pleasures if they should Adjourn the
House till one of the Clock, which was assented unto: yet as they were rising,

Mr Herbert Croft said, Mr Speaker, though perhaps my Motion may seem
unseasonable at this present, yet I beseech the House consider with me a Speech
made Yesterday that consisted of four parts, the scope whereof (it being Mr
Hackwell's Speech) lays open the dangerous mischiefs that come by
transportation of Ordnance, and that due reformation thereof may be had for
restraint of private transporting; I would only put the House in mind, and you
also Mr Speaker, that the Gentleman which Yesterday moved it, desired that Mr
Speaker might say something thereof to her Majesty in his Speech to be
inserted. Which I do again desire the more earnestly, because our Bill is
fallen (as he said) into an Everlasting sleep, and we have now no remedy but by
her Majesty.

Mr Speaker said, If it please you, upon the Motion of the Gentleman made
Yesterday, I mean to say something therein, both for your satisfaction and
performance of my duty; And therefore this matter shall need no further to be
moved. With which the House rested well satisfied, and so arose. But it is to
be noted, that the Speaker said not one word in his Speech to her Majesty
touching that matter, which was greatly murmured at and spoken against amongst
the Burgesses that the House should be so abused, and that nothing was done
therein.

Post Meridiem.

An Act of the Queens Majesty's most gracious, general and free Pardon, was
sent up to the Lords by Mr Secretary Herbert.

The sending up of this Bill of the general Pardon being thus transcribed out
of the Original Journal Book of the House of Commons, the rest of this
Afternoons Passages, as also the Conclusion of the Parliament do now follow.

About one of the Clock diverse Gentlemen met together at the House, whither the
Speaker came, and after the Privy Council: where sitting till past two of the
Clock they went to the Upper House, and stayed there at the Gallery Door above
half an hour, and at length the Door was opened; and the Lords of the Upper
House being all set, and her Majesty under a rich Cloth of State, the Speaker
went to the usual place at the Bar, where after three Reverences made, and the
like done in their times by all the Commons, the said Speaker amongst other
things in his Speech presented her Majesty in the name of the said House with
the Gifts of four Subsidies and eight Fifteenths and Tenths (although he
somewhat mistook the manner of it in the delivery) Unto which the Lord Keeper
having Answered in her Majesty's name with thanks, Dissolved the Parliament,
after her Majesty had given her Royal Assent unto nineteen public Acts and ten
private.

FINIS.
An Alphabetical TABLE Directing to the principal matters contained in the
JOURNAL OF THE House of LORDS.
A.
ABsence of a Peer to be with license from the Prince (whereas of a Commoner,
from that House only.) p. 539. 543. The reason of absence ought to be signified
to the House by one of the Peers, and not by other Information. p. 605 Acts how
passed by the Sovereign. p. 35. Acts of Grace how. ibid. How Acts are
transcribed and certified into the Rolls. ibid. All the Acts at one Session
passed by the Lord Chief Justice by virtue of Letters Patents from the Queen.
p. 389 Addition, Vide Amendment. Adjourn, why the Lords commonly adjourn for
several days at the beginning of a Session. p. 270. The form of Letters
Patents to certain Lords to adjourn the Parliament. p. 317. The Sovercign may
adjourn the Parliament, as well as the Parliament adjourn it self. p. 318. An
Adjournment makes no new Session as a Prorogation does. ibid. The Parliament
adjourned by the Queens Commissioners, without a particular Commission. p. 382
Amendments of Bills by the Lords sent from the Commons, how made. p. 20. They
use to be written in paper. ibid. and p. 26. When a Bill has once passed the
Lords and is sent down to the Commons, if these make additions or amendments
thereof, the Lords upon the return of the Bill read them only, and not the Bill
it self. p. 271. The Lords having engrossed Amendments to a certain Bill in
parchment, the Commons will not allow of them, but return the Bill with the
Amendments, to have these writ in paper. p. 534 A Bill sent from the Commons,
receiving Amendments and Additions in the House of Lords, the Orders of this
House will not permit that the Lords should consent to any alterations of such
Amendments or Additions, by the Commons. p. 537. If one Committee differ from
the rest in some Amendments of a Bill, he may give his reasons of such dissent
to the House, when the Bill is brought in again. p. 603. An Amendment of a
Proviso (added to a Bill in the Upper House) agreed upon by the Committees of
both Houses at a Conference, it is consented unto by the whole Upper House that
the Amendment shall be made in the House of Commons, and be sent up in paper to
the Lords to be by them inserted in the Proviso. p. 616 Answers by the Lord
Keeper given unto Messages sent from the House of Commons, use to be given by
him sitting with his Hat on, and all the Lords keeping their places. p. 439,
440 Apparel, a Bill against buying it without ready money, save by men of such
a degree. p. 69, 70. A Bill to avoid excess in it. p. 112. dashed. p. 134.
Another for not buying wares sold for Apparel without ready money, dashed. p.
188. Another Bill for reformation of excess in Apparel. p. 228. another for the
same p. 424. another having passed the Commons, is rejected by the Lords, and
why. p. 594 Archbishops, a Bill declaring the manner of making and
consecrating of them and other Bishops to be good. p. 108. 110. Archbishop of
Canterbury the first Peer of the Realm. p. 140 Assistants, Vide Committees.
Attach, No Peer to be Attached during the Sessions of Parliament. p. 203. nor
any of their Menial Servants committed to Prison. p. 314. 323. 530, etc. but
other of their servants may. p. 315. two committed close Prisoners to the Fleet
for arresting a Servant of the Lord Chandois. p. 530. another also for
arresting the Archbishop of Canterbury's Servant. p. 532. on what conditions
they have their enlargement. p. 533. A question moved, whether an ordinary
servant of the Queens, being no Parliament Man, be privileged from being
attached in the time of Parliament. p. 603, 604, 606. When a servant of a Peer
is committed to Prison upon Execution, resolved that he shall be brought to the
House, not by issuing out a Writ of privilege of Parliament to the Sheriff,
but by immediate order from the House to the Gentleman Usher or Sergeant at
Arms. p. 605. but the contrary resolved upon search of Precedents, and the Lord
Keeper to make out the Writ. p. 608 Queens Attorney made a Joint-Committee with
the Lords. p. 142 Award: Ordered that if the parties at variance will not enter
into such Bond as is appointed by the House, to stand to the Award of such
Lords as the matter is reserr'd to, they shall be committed to Prison. p. 618
B.
BAbington's Conspiracy, 28 Eliz. a Parliament called thereupon. p. 375 Bacon
(Sir Nicholas) made Lord Keeper 1 Eliz. p. 1. his Speech to the first
Parliament of the Queen in an. 1. of her Reign. p. 11. His Speech to the
Speaker of the House of Commons (in the same Parliament) at his admission. p.
15. and his Reply to the Speakers disabling himself, and to his Petitions. p.
16. His Reply to the Speaker's Speech at the end of this Session. p. 31, 32,
33. His Speech to the Parliament 5 Eliz. p. 59. at the end of the Session. p.
75. and so at the beginning and end of each Session, (during his life) till 23
Eliz. when he was succeeded by Sir Thomas Bromley. p. 226 Baron, Lord Chief
Baron, who is but an Assistant to the Upper House, made a Committee. p. 108,
109 Belgrave (a Member of Parliament) his Case, against whom was preferred a
Bill in the Star Chamber for a misdemeanour against a Peer. p. 612 Bills
usually not spoken to upon the first reading. p. 17. Precedents of the
contrary. ibid. When a Bill has past one House, it is seldom Committed or
Ordered to be Engrossed by the other, and why. ibid. and p. 19, 20. 147, 148.
326. sometimes Committed upon the first reading: Precedents thereof. p. 17, 18,
69. sometimes neither Committed nor Engrossed either upon the first or second
reading. p. 111. the manner of delivering a Bill from the House of Lords to the
House of Commons. p. 19. the manner of passing of a Bill. ibid. Bills of Grace
seldom Committed nor Engrossed, and why. p. 20. sometimes have but one reading.
p. 73. 91. 464. how passed into Acts. p. 116. Bills sometimes (in Queen
Elizabeth's time) not engrossed till the day after the second reading, but now
always on the same day. p. 26, 27. The manner of giving the Royal Assent unto
such Bills as are passed into Acts, and of disallowing those that are not. p.
35. 76. 116. A Bill is sometimes rejected after it has passed the third
reading. p. 271. A Bill passed by the Lords and rejected by the Commons, the
Lords expect an account of the reasons of such rejection. p. 272, 273. Bills of
general pardon, and of Subsidies, not passed into Acts like other Bills. p.
274. 328. When Bills are sent up from the Commons, the Lord Keeper and the rest
of the Lords are to arise from their places, and to go down to the Bar to
receive them. p. 439, 440 Bishops are commanded to reform abuses in Religion.
p. 345. Why their names are placed on the dexter side of the Journal of the
Upper House. p. 422. Vide Popish, and Archbishop. Blood, Vide Restitution in
Blood. Bromley (Sir Thomas) made Lord Chancellor 22 Eliz. p. 226. he died in
April 29 Eliz. p. 419 Lord Burleigh his place in Parliament. p. 543.
C.
CAnterbury, Vide Archbishop. Chancellor, a Bill declaring his Authority and
that of the Lord Keeper to be all one. p. 70. Letters Patents to the Lord Chief
Justice to supply his place when absent. p. 143 A Bill that Chancellors,
Commissaries, etc. shall be Graduates in one University. p. 72 Clergy, Vide
Subsidy. Coaches, a Bill to restrain the excessive use of them within this
Realm, in 43 Eliz. p. 602. Collection of money for the poor usually made
toward the end of a Parliament. p. 616. Commissions to certain Lords to
Prorogue the Parliament. p. 77. 93, 94. 274. Verbal Commission to the Lord
Treasurer to supply the Lord Keepers place. p. 99. A Commission in writing to
the Lord Chief Justice to the same purpose. p. 102. (383.) a revocation of the
same. p. 108. A Commission 35. Lords, or any three of them, to dissolve the
Parliament. p. 275. the like. p. 329. and 389. A Commission to three Lords to
supply the Queens place in the Parliament. 28 and 29 Eliz. p. 377. These Lords
are styled Lords Lieutenants. p. 378. The Parliament cannot be dissolved
without a Commission, unless the Sovereign be present to give the command to
the Lord Keeper, etc. p. 547. Committees, the Judges, Queen's Sergeants, Baron,
etc. made Joint-Committees with the Lords, vide Judges, Sergeant, Baron, etc.
An Order of the House, that a Committee who disallows the Amendments of a Bill,
or something in the body of the Bill it self, may give his reasons to the House
when the Bill is brought in again. p. 603. A Bill may be delivered to the
eldest or youngest Baron of a Committee, or indifferently to any of them. p.
607. 610. Two Committees for two several Bills, made one Committee for both
Bills. p. 607 Common Prayer, vide Uniformity. Conference to be had, before a
Bill passed either House, be rejected by the other. p. 272, 273. 388. Vide the
Table to the Journal of the House of Commons. Contribution of two shillings in
the pound made by the Lords toward the Queens extraordinary charge in defense
of the Realm. p. 387. Contribution made by them for relief of such poor
Soldiers as went begging in the Streets of London. p. 462. An Order that such
Lords as were absent the whole Session should pay double to what others did,
who constantly attended the service of the House; and those that came but
seldom to the House, a third part more. p. 463, 464 Convocation-days, the House
of Lords either sit not, or do little business on them. p. 67 Crown, a Bill
restoring to it the ancient jurisdiction over the State Ecclesiastical and
Spiritual, etc. p. 28
D.
ABill for Denization of Peregrine Berty and Katharine Duchess of Suffolk his
Wife. p. 145. of William Watson. p. 148 Dissolve, vide Commissions. Doctors of
the Civil Law, made Joint-Committees with the Lords. p. 145
E.
EGerton (Sir Thomas) made Lord Keeper 38 Eliz. p. 522. His Speech to the
Parliament 39 and 40 Eliz. p. 524. Q. Elizabeth entered on the Government Nov.
17. ann. Dom. 1558. p. 1. and within nine weeks summons a Parliament, viz. Jan
23. ibid. A Bill in that Parliament to make her inherit able to the late Q.
Anne her Mother. p. 19. she is averse from declaring a Successor. p. 107. 127,
128. Her sharp Speech to the Parliament (in ann. 8 and 9.) for their Petition
to that purpose. p. 116. She remitteth the third payment of a Subsidy, to take
the Parliament off from urging her to declare a Successor. p. 131. Her Pious
Speech at the end of the Session 27. of her Reign. p. 328. In the Parliament 28
and 29 of her Reign (called upon the discovery of Babingtons conspiracy) she
appeared not in person, but gave Commission to three Lords to supply her place,
with the title of Lords Lieutenants. p. 377, 378. Both Houses petition her to
execute the sentence upon Mary Queen of Scots, with her Answer thereto. p. 380,
381, 382. Her Speech at the end of the Parliament in 35 of her Reign. p. 466.
Her great success against the Spaniard set forth in a Speech by the Lord
Keeper. p. 599. Jewels given to her Physicians to poison her. p. 599
G.
GArgrave (Sir Thomas) chosen Speaker to the Commons in the Parliament holden 1
Eliz. p. 15. (and 40.) The manner of his disabling himself to the House first,
and then to the Queen. ibid. His Petitions of course on behalf of the House of
Commons. p. 16. His Speech at the conclusion of the Session. p. 31 Gavelkind
what, and in what places it obtains. p. 272. A Bill to enable the owners of
Gavelkind Lands in the County of Kent to alter the said Custom. p. 533
Gentleman Usher of the House claims right to bring such persons before the
Upper House as are accused of breach of privilege, and says it does not
belong to the Sergeant at Arms. p. 603. He is sent for an ordinary servant of
the Queens committed to the Fleet for debt upon Execution, and for him that
arrested him. p. 605. 607. This not to injure the Sergeant at Arms in his
pretensions to that office. p. 607 Grace, Vide Bills and Acts.
H.
HAtton (Sir Christopher) made Chancellor 29 Eliz. upon the death of Sir Thomas
Bromley. p. 419 Herald at Arms in ordinary to the Queen not to have privilege
from Arrest, on account of the Session of Parliament. p. 608. 611 Hexamshire, a
Bill to annex it to the County of Northumberland, and its Ecclesiastical
Jurisdiction to the Bishopric of Durham (8 and 9 Eliz.) p. 103. but not passed
into an Act till 14 Eliz. p. 200 Horses, a Bill against conveying them into
Scotland 1 Eliz. being a revival of an Act made 23 H. 8. p. 21, 22 Lord
Hunsdon's place in Parliament between the Lord Chandois and the Lord St John of
Bletso. p. 530. 543
I.
Engrossing of a Bill, what. p. 18. Vide Bills. Injunctions to stop proceeding
at Law in Parliament time. p. 21 Judges (who are but assistants to the Upper
House) made Joint Committees with the Lords. p. 67. 71. 99. and so in every
Parliament till 39, 40 Eliz. p. 142. 527. but only to consider of some ordinary
Bill, and which concerned matter of Law; for they were never of such Committees
as were to have Conference with the Commons, p. 423. They have leave from the
Lord Chancellor or Keeper to sit covered in the House, but are always uncovered
at a Committee. p. 527
K.
KEeper, vide Chancellor. Kentish-Street in Southwark, a Bill for the paving of
it, 8 and 9 Eliz. p. 112
L.
THE River Lee, a Bill to bring it to the North-side of London (13 Eliz.) p.
150 Low Country Wars, a voluntary contribution of both Houses toward the
maintaining of them. p. 387
M.
MArry (see the word in the Table to the Journal of the House of Commons) the
Queen Petitioned by the House of Lords to marry, with her Answer. p. 105. 107.
The advice and consent of the Parliament often required for the marrying of the
Kings of England. p. 117, 119. Earl Marshal his place in Parliament is betwixt
the Lord Chamberlain and the Lord Steward. p. 535 Queen Mary died Nov. 17.
1558. in the sixth year of her Reign. p. 1 Mary Queen of Scots, Vide the Table
to the Commons Journal. Mason (Anthony) Esquire Clerk of the Upper House 13 Eliz.
p. 137. He is succeeded by Thomas Smith Esquire, in the Parliament 39 and 40
Eliz. p. 522 Melcomb Regis, Vide Weymouth. Messages sent from the House of
Commons to the Upper House, are received by the Lord Keeper and the rest of the
Lords at the Bar, whither they are to go and meet those that come from the
Commons. p. 539, 540 Mises not to be paid by the Shires of Wales and County
Palatine of Chester when Subsidies are paid, nor the contrary. p. 20 Monopolies
Petitioned against in 39 and 40 Eliz. which the Queen judges an invasion of her
Prerogative. ibid.
N.
A Bill of Naturalization of Gerson Wroth a German. p. 22. of William Sidney
and his Wife, and of Sir John Wingfield and his Lady. p. 462. of Justice Dormer
and George Sheppy. p. 464. of Samuel Saltingstal. p. 488 Newgate, the Keeper of
it committed to the Fleet for not obeying an Order of the Lords for the
bringing of one that was Prisoner there upon Execution and was Servant to a
Peer. p. 608 Duke of Norfolk, a Bill for the confirmation of his marriage with
the Lady Margaret his Wife (1 Eliz) p. 22. and for the assurance of certain
Lands for her Jointure. p. 25 Earl of Nottingham his place in Parliament
betwixt the Earl of Lincoln and Lord Viscount Bindon. p. 543
O.
OBjections against a Bill by the Lords denied to be given in writing to the
Commons till Conference first had. p. 536 Onslow (Richard) chosen Speaker in
the Parliament held 8, and 9 Eliz. his Speeches to the Queen at his
Confirmation. p. 97, 98. at the Dissolution of that Parliament. p. 114, 115
P.
THE Painters having presented a Bill against the Plaisterers which passed not
the Upper House, it is Ordered by that House, that their complaint shall be
heard and adjudged by the Lord Mayor, Recorder, etc. p. 617 Pardon, Vide Bills.
Parliament, which is the first and last day thereof, or of a particular
Session. p. 9. The manner of the Sovereign and Peers sitting in Parliament. p.
10. 59. 96. the manner of setting down the presence of the Peers in the Journal
Book. p. 62 Passing of Bills, Vide Bills. Patents of privilege petitioned
against in the Parliament 39 and 40 Eliz. which the Queen construes to be a
violation of her Prerogative. p. 547 Peers to be of age before they sit in the
House. p. 11. 96. how attired. p. 11. Vide Parliament. Popish Bishops suffered
to sit in the Parliament 1 Eliz. but turned out of their Sees at the end of the
Session. p. 23. How they opposed diverse Bills. ibid. and p. 28. 30. a dispute
betwixt them and some English men come from Geneva. p. 53 Presence of the Peers
how marked. p. 62, and 111. Privilege, Vide Attach. The solemn Procession of
the Queen and House of Lords at the opening of the Parliament 5 Eliz. p. 58.
and 13 Eliz. p. 136 Prorogation, Vide Writ. The Sovereign after a Prorogation
comes not to the Parliament with that solemnity, as is usual at the first
meeting. p. 95. After the end of a Prorogation a new Session begins. p. 318
Provisoes when added by the Lords unto Bills sent up to them from the Commons,
are written in Parchment. p. 26 Proxy, the form of the License from the Queen
to a Peer to make one. p. 3. a Peer (ordinarily) does not make one without such
license. p. 270. The form of making a Proxy, and entering it in the
Journal Book. p. 4. and 8. The nature and use of a Proxy, and the form of
returning them. p. 5. What an absent Peer used to forfeit, if he constituted no
Proxy. p. 6. The form of making a Proxy without license from the Sovereign.
ibid. The form of revoking a Proxy. p. 7. How many Proxies one Peer is capable
of receiving. p. 8, 9. 58. 101. 196. 598. (where (as also p. 314.) is mentioned
an Order of the Lords 2 Car. 1. that from thenceforth no Lord should be capable
of above two Proxies.) A Commoner can constitute no Proxy, and why. p. 9. A
spiritual Lord does not now appoint a Temporal Lord for his Proxy (nor on the
contrary) but formerly they did. p. 58. 378. A Temporal Lord usually
constitutes but one Proxy, and a Spiritual two. p. 101. Yet a Spiritual Lord
sometimes appoints but one, sometimes three. p. 196. 460, 461. and also a
Temporal sometimes two. ibid. Proxies are appointed after a Prorogation, as
well as at the beginning of a Parliament. p. 268. They may be delivered into
the hands of the Clerk as well before the Parliament begin, as after. p. 311.
Why Bishops Proxies are entered before those of, the Temporal Lords. p. 523.
598. In the former part of the Queens Reign they were entered in the Journal
Book with express mention of the several days on which they were returned; but
in the latter part thereof and since, only generally. p. 597 Sergeant
Puckering, Lord Keeper in 35 Eliz. p. 456. His Speech to the Parliament held
that year. p. 457, 458. He dies in 38 Eliz. Anno Domini 1596. p. 522
R.
REading, Vide Bills. Receivors and Tryors of Petitions in the House of Lords,
the manner of entering them in the Journal Book. p. 14, 15 A Bill for
Recognition of the Queens Title to the Crown of England. p. 18 Restitution in
blood of Sir James Crossed, a Bill for it. p. 21. of Sir Henry Gate. ibid. of
John Lord Gray. ibid. of Robert Rudston. ibid. of Henry Howard. p. 22. of the
Sons and Daughters of Edward Lewkenor. p. 25. of Katherine Wife to the Lord
Berkely, and of her Sisters. p. 27. 54, 55. of Gregory Fynes. ibid. of Lord
Dacres of the South. p. 55. of Ann Thomas, Thomas Isely, Thomas Diggs, Thomas
Brook, William Cromer, Cutbert Vaughan, etc. p. 68. of Archbishop Cranmer's
and Lord Husseys Children. p. 69. of Sir Ralph Chamberlain, John Harleston, and
William West, ibid. and p. 70. of Sir Peter Carew and Edward Turner. p. 70. of
Sir Thomas Wyats Children. p. 146. of Henry Brereton Esquire p. 147. of John Lord
Stourton, his Brothers and Sisters. p. 230. (Vid. p. 261, 262.) the Bills
dashed. p. 264, 265. of Henry Lord Norris of Ricaut. p. 231. of Anthony Mayney.
ibid. and 273. of Thomas Howard Son of Thomas Howard Duke of Norfolk. p. 317.
of Sir Thomas Parrot. p. 510
S.
A Saving requisite in every Bill. p. 464 Queens Sergeants though but
Attendants on the House, made Committees. p. 99. 108. Though they are to attend
upon the Upper House as Counselors, yet they have no voice there, but may in
the House of Commons, if Members thereof. p. 249 Sergeant at Arms whether to be
employed to take into custody those that are accused of breach of privilege of
the Upper House, or whether the Gentleman Usher. p. 603. He is ordered to bring
before the House a Lords Servant committed upon an Arrest to Newgate, as also
him that Arrested him, for breach of Privilege. p. 607. This not to injure the
Gentleman Usher's pretensions to that right. ibid. Under- Sheriff of Surrey
committed to Prison for aiding the Arrest of an ordinary Servant of the Queen
in Parliament time. p. 606 Thomas Smith Esquire made Clerk of the House of Lords 39
Eliz. p. 522 Queens Solicitour made a Joint-Committee with the Lords. p. 142.
Being chosen a Member of the House of Commons, he is demanded of them to attend
there, but denied by the Lords. p. 424 Spain's design against England set out
in a Speech by the Lord Keeper. p. 599. See the word in the Table to the
Journal to the House of Commons. Spilman (Francis) Clerk of the House of Lords
in the Parliament 1 Eliz. p. 14. continued in that place in the Parliaments
held 5 Eliz. and 8 and 9 Eliz. but in 13 Eliz. succeeded by Anthony Mason. p.
136 Spiritual Lords, why their Names are set down in the Journal Book before
those of the Temporal. p. 598 Star Chamber days, the Lords seldom sat on
them. p. 67 Bills of Subsidy sent from the Commons seldom altered by the Lords.
p. 69. Subsidies granted by the Clergy always engrossed in Latin, but the
confirmation thereof in Parliament is in English. p. 229. The Subsidy of the
Clergy should be sent to the Commons in a Skin of Parchment under the
Sovereigns band and seal. p. 688. The body of the Grant of the Subsidies of the
Clergy is but once read in the House, but the preface and confirmation of it,
thrice. p. 615. Bills of Subsidy how passed into Acts. p. 274. Three Subsidies
not granted at once before 35 Eliz. and then with a Proviso, that it should not
be drawn into a Precedent: yet the like number were granted the next
Parliament, viz. 39, and 40 Eliz. and four in the next after that, viz. 43
Eliz. p. 547. 615 Succession to the Crown, how many pretended to it in Queen
Elizabeth's time. p. 104 Successor, the Queen Petitioned to declare her
Successor. p. 105 Summon, Vide Writ. Sunday, a Bill (in 43 Eliz.) that Fairs or
Markets shall not be holden thereon. p. 613 Supremacy, a Bill for restoring it
to the Imperial Crown of this Realm, and repealing diverse Statutes to the
contrary, 1 Eliz. p. 21. 23. Many proofs that in the darkest times of Popery
the Kings of England did judge it to belong to them. p. 24
T.
TOnnage and Poundage, a Bill for them I Eliz. p. 19 Trinity Hall in Cambridge,
a Bill for the Incorporation of it. p. 22 Tryors of Petitions, Vide Receivors.
U.
VAcat, what the word means when set before the entrance of the return of a
Proxy. p. 7 A Bill for Uniformity of Common Prayer, etc. passed (1 Eliz.)
though opposed by several. p. 30 Universities, A Bill for the Incorporation of
them (13 Eliz.) p. 149 Voices affirmative and negative when equal in number,
the negative carry it. p. 605 Usher, Vide Gentleman Usher.
W.
LOrd de la Ware his Case, p. 526. his place in Parliament is determined to be
between the Lord Willoughby of Eresby and the Lord Berkeley. p. 528 Warrant,
the form of one to the Lord Chancellor (or Keeper) to issue out Writs for
Summoning a Parliament. p. 2 Weymouth and Melcomb Regis, a Bill for the uniting
of them into one Corporation (13 Eliz.) p. 149 Williams (Tho.) Speaker in the
House of Commons (5 Eliz.) his Speeches to the Queen at his confirmation. p.
63, 64. at the ending of the Session. p. 74. he died before the Session of the
same Parliament 8 and 9 Eliz. p. 95 Writ, the form of the Writ whereby a Peer
is Summoned to Parliament, with its differences in regard of the Temporal and
Spiritual Lords. p. 2. The Writ for Proroguing the Parliament. p. 3. 57. 77.
93. 419.
An Alphabetical TABLE Directing to the principal matters contained in the
JOURNAL OF THE House of COMMONS.
A.
ABsence of a Member from the House through sickness, or his being in service
of Embassage, etc. resolved to be no sufficient cause to remove him. p. 244.
(unless the sickness in all likelihood be irrecoverable. p. 430) the like
resolved, p. 307. but the contrary. p. 281, 282. especially if the absent
Member desire that another may be chosen in his stead. p. 429. Members absent a
whole Session, fired by the House, the Knights 201. the Burgesses, etc. ICl. a
piece. p. 309. Any Member may be absent if he be licensed by Mr Speaker
thereto. (...). Additions may be made by the Commens to the Additions of the
Lords, in any Bill. p. 354. vide Bill. Adjournment of the House by the Queen,
the manner of it. p. 345. In what Cases the Commons are not adjourned by the
Adjournment of the Lords. p. 550, 551. 621, 622. Adultery, a Bill against it
rejected, and why p. 641 Alehouses, a Bill to suppress the multitude of them,
dashed, and why. p. 676 Aliens, a Bill that they shall not sell Foreign Wares
by Retail, with many Speeches pro and contra. p. 503 -- -- -509 Alms given by
the House at the end of one Session, how, much. p. 135. vide Collection.
Alneager of Lancaster to seal the Clothes made there, a Bill to that purpose.
p. 91. Another that Alneagers seals shall be engraved by the Graver of the
Mint. p. 134. but dashed. ibid. Amendments in Bills ought to be writ in paper
(not in parchment) and without any indorsement. p. 573, 574 vide Bill. Answers
in writing to objections sent in writing from the Lords, against any Bill that
has passed the Commons, are read in the House after they have been drawn by the
Committees. p. 583, etc. The Lord Keeper gives Answer to such Messages as are
sent from the Commons, sitting in his place covered, and the Messengers
standing without the Bar. p. 585 Apparel, vide the word in the Table to the
Journal of the House of Lords. Unprofitable Armor, the being obliged to keep
it, adjudged a great grievance. p. 552. The making of Armor is a Regality
belonging to the Crown. p. 671 Arrests, vide Privilege. Art, a Bill that
whosoever invented any profitable Art, or added thereto, should have a Monopoly
of the same for his life, dashed. p. 678. Articuli, how many, and what. p. 670
B.
BArrowists, Vide Brownists. Basset (Richard living in the time of Hen. II.)
what Families descended from his female Coheirs. p. 39 Robert Bell Esquire chosen
Speaker in the Parliament 14 Eliz. p. 205. continued Speaker in the Session 18
Eliz. but died before that in 23 Eliz. p. 277 Mr. Belgrave's Case, who being a
Member of the House of Commons had an Information exhibited against him in the
Star Chamber by the Earl of Huntington. p. 666. 669. 672, 673. 677, 678. An
Order entered as the Act of the House, that he ought not to be molested in that
manner. p. 688. One Bill ought always to be read after the presentment and
allowance of the Speaker, before the House arise. p. 44. 121. etc. though it
has been sometimes omitted through mistake. p. 550. The manner of delivering a
Bill from the Lords to the Commons. p. 45. from the Commons to the Lords. 585.
The manner of passing a Bill in the House of Commons. p. 45. Bills seldom
spoken to till after the second Reading. p. 165. etc. Two Bills (the one
concerning Purveyors, the other the Court of Exchequer) having passed the Lower
House, the Queen forbids any proceeding in them by the Lords, with an account
of what the Commons did in that Case. p. 440. 442. 444. Yet afterward she
gives leave to proceed. p. 446. 448. 450. Two Bills for draining of Marish
Grounds being almost finished, the Queen forbids their being read any more in
the House. p. 594. No Bill to pass without being spoken to. p. 491. Why when a
Bill is put to the question, and there is a division of the House, the No's sit
in their places and the I's go out. p. 505. 573. If the I's exceed the No's,
then the No's are to go out also, to fetch and bring in the Bill again, which
the I's had carried out. p. 573, 574. This ceremony sometimes omitted. p. 574.
667. A Bill having past the Upper House, and being sent down to the Commons is
there allowed and expedited with Additions and Amendments; when it is returned
to the Lords, they must either pass it with those Additions, or reject it
wholly. p. 513. How Amendments, Provisoes or Schedules added by the Lords unto
Bills that have past the Commons, are to be writ, or engrossed and subscribed
respectively, see at large. p. 576, 577. When a Bill is objected against, a
verbal Conference is first to be had, before the reasons of such objecting can
be demanded to be delivered in to that House that had past the Bill. p. 578.
Forty eight several Bills refused by the Queen, in the 39th year of her Reign,
that had passed both Houses. p. 596. An Order that such as shall prefer and
have benefit by any private Bill, shall pay somewhat toward the poor, and how
much. p. 665. Any Member may propose those Bills to be read he judges most
necessary as well as the Speaker. p. 677. Bills that come from the Lords are to
be delivered to the Speaker in the House, and not out of it. p. 688 Boroughs
growing poor, did formerly get license from the Sovereign to be discharged from
the election of Burgesses, because they used to bear their charges, but seldom
so now. p. 80 Sir Henry Bromley, etc. sent to the Fleet, for desiring the Lords
to join in a Petition to the Queen for entailing the Succession of the Crown.
p. 470 Brownists how numerous in 35 Eliz. p. 517. A Bill against them and the
Barrowists, as well as Popish Recusants. ibid. Burgesses, a Bill for the
validity of such as are not resiant, with long arguments thereupon. p. 168,
169, 170, 171. A Burgess that had given Money to be elected, turned out of the
House, and the Corporation fined. p. 182. A Burgess elected for two several
Boroughs, may choose for which he will serve. p. 430. 622. and passim.
C.
CAlling the Names of the Parliament Men (at their first meeting in former
times, different from the present, and the manner of both. p. 39. Since 5 Eliz.
they take the Oath of Supremacy at that time, and since 7 Jac. the Oath of
Allegiance. ibid. and p. 78. They take these Oaths but once in the same
Parliament, though it consist of several Sessions. p. 122, 123 Canons are like
Bylaws to the Clergy, but not to the Laity. p. 640 Cardigan a Burgess Town
since 1 Eliz. p. 628. Whether the Return of the Indenture for choosing a Burgess
ought to be for that Town only, or for it and Aberystwith. ibid. Surgery, a
Bill for the well ordering of such as practice it. p. 571 Church thought to
need reformation in 13 Eliz. p. 157. A Bill for coming to Church and receiving
the Communion, with some Arguments thereupon. p. 177. A Committee of the House
of Commons and some of the Bishops join in a Petition to the Queen for redress
of several enormities in the Church (23 Eliz.) p. 302, 303 Cinque Ports
discharged from payment of Subsidies. p. 406 Clerk of the House his seat in
Parliament. p. 43. He sometimes reads the Prayers. p. 47. Mr. Seymour Clerk in
the Parliaments held 1 Eliz. p. 43. 5 Eliz. p. 84. 8 and 9 Eliz. p. 122. He
took the Oath of Supremacy in that Parliament as the Members did. ibid. Mr.
Fulk Onslow succeeded him in the Parliament 13 Eliz. p. 155. being indisposed,
his place is supplied by a Deputy, who is first to take the Oath usually
administered to the Members. p. 431. 623. The Clerk receives the Money for the
Poor and Minister, of the Members that have leave to go into the Country
sitting the Parliament. p. 565. 568. and passim. The Collection for him in 43
Eliz. amounted to twenty five pound. p. 688 A Collection made in the House for
the present relief of maimed Soldiers (35 Eliz.) with an account of every ones
rate. p. 503. 507. Hereupon a Bill is framed for a continual Contribution to
their relief. p. 503. Collections for the Poor and other uses usually made each
Session, and how much the Members are commonly rated. p. 661 Colleges,
Corruptions in the Masters of them (39 Eliz.) p. 559 Commission to the Lord
Keeper to will the House of Commons to choose a Speaker. p. 120 Commit, the
manner of Committing a Bill. p. 44. It uses to be Committed at the second
Reading ibid. Commonly not Committed when sent from the Lords. p. 47. but
sometimes is when of great moment. ibid. p. 89. 186. never committed till it be
once read at least. p. 476 Committees how chosen. p. 44. Nothing to be
delivered to the House as the Resolve of the Committee, but what the greater
number of the Committees agree upon. p. 298. At least half the number of the
Committees nominated in any Bill are to be present, or else no consultation to
be had. p. 436. Eleven Bills committed to one and the same Committee at the
same time. p. 561. He that speaks against the body of a Bill, cannot be chosen
a committee therein. p. 629. 635. The Knights and Citizens of London dispensed
with in a particular case, and why. p. 634, 635. A Committee may speak either
sitting or standing. p. 630. He that has been a Committee in a Bill, may
afterward speak against the same Bill in the House. p. 635 Common Prayer, a
Bill for the Reformation of the Book of Common Prayer ( 13 Eliz.) with diverse
Arguments thereon. p. 166 House of Commons formerly sat with the Lords. p. 515
Comptroller of the Household (by his place) usually is the first that speaks at
the meeting of a Parliament, and makes the first motion in the House to choose a
Speaker. p. 621 and passim. The Comptroller either alone or with another places
the Speaker Elect in the Chair. p. 79. 621, etc. Communion, Vide Church.
Conference concerning a Bill to be desired only by that House which is
possessed of the Bill. p. 261, 262, 263. How to be managed by those that are
appointed to have it. p. 293. The Lords do always nominate time and place for
Conference. passim. Verbal conference to be had before the reasons of objecting
against any Bill be given in writing. p. 578. Each House is at liberty whether
they will admit of a Conference. p. 352. No Conference to be admitted with the
Lords about the number of Subsidies to be granted. p. 486. 488 Mr Edw. Cook
chosen Speaker in the Parliament 35 Eliz. p. 469. His Speeches at his being
presented to the Queen. p. 459. at the end of the Session. p. 465 Corn may be
carried over Sea when it does not exceed such and such prices. p. 56 John
Crook Esquire chosen Speaker in the Parliament 43 Eliz. p. 621. His Speech to the
Queen at his presentation. p. 600, 601 Cross in Baptism desired to be taken
away in the Parliament held 13 Eliz. p. 157
D.
MEmbers Departing without License, to forfeit their Wages. p. 309 Discipline
in the Church, the Queen petitioned to reform it, (who promises it.) p. 257
Disloyal, Vide Subjects. A Bill against (...) granted by the Arch-(...) several
Arguments thereupon Dunkirk and Newport very much by robbery on their Coasts
(...) of Queen Elizabeth's Reign. p. 665 (...) appointed to consider of means to
(...) and what means were thought (...)
E
AN Earls Son may be a Member of the (...) of Commons. (...) Ecclesiastical,
Vide Religion. (...) A Member Elected and returned for two (...) may choose for
which he will serve. p. 80. (...) and passim. (...) Elections, Resolved that
the House of Commons the only competent Judges, which are daly (...) which not.
p. 396, 397, 398. (...) a message from the Queen, that the Lord Chancellor
ought to examine and judge of Returns, and that it was a thing not belonging to
the House of Commons. p. 392 Queen Elizabeth (Vide the word in the (...) the
Journal of the House of Lords) Reasons why in Conscience she should have a care
of (...) person (argned in 14 Eliz.) p. 211 212. Her excellent Government
commemorated in a Speech by the Chancellor of the Exchequer. p. 244, 245, 246.
the like. p. 285 -- -288. Her most gracious Speech unto the House when they
presented themselves before her in a full body to return her thanks for
recalling sundry Letters Patents of Monopoly. p. 659, 660. She invites them all
to come to (...) her hand at the end of the Session. p. (...) Court of
Exchequer, a Bill concerning (...) and process there. p. 642
F.
FAir, Vide Market. A Fast Day appointed by the House without acquainting the
Queen with it. p. 282, 283. (...) is highly offended at it, upon which the
(...) make their Submission, and desire her (...). p. 283, 284. Fees to be paid
by each Member on several (...) how much. p. 468 Felony, a Member indicted
thereof, to contin (...) Member until convicted. p. (...) Mr Fitzherbert (an
Outlaw, chosen a Member) his case. p. 479, 480, 481. several Speeches
thereupon. p. 514, 515, 516. He is taken for (...) Member, and yet ought not to
have (...), and why. p. (...) Forests, A Bill for the enlargement of the
Authority of the Justices thereof, sent from (...) Lords, dashed by the
Commons, with a Conference thereupon at large. p. 255, 256, 257 Mr Fox (that
writ the Book of Martyrs) his (...) redeemed out of Prison by money collected
in the Parliament. p. 661 French Ambassador, it is thought dangerous to permit
him Audience of the Queen her self, and why. p. 406
G.
SIR Tho. Gargrave chosen Speaker 1 Eliz. Vide the Table to the Journal of the
House of Lords. Gavelkind injurious to great Families, and the policy of the
Conquerours beginning that custom. p. 676. By that Custom the Son shall not
lose his Inheritance, though the Father be Executed for Felony. ibid. A Bill to
take away the Custom, dashed. ibid. Grammar Schools, a Bill to establish good
Orders in them, rejected. p. 570 Guildford School, an Annuity settled upon it.
p. 89
H.
ARthur Hall (a Member of Parliament) committed to the Tower for six Months,
cut off from being a Member, and fined five hundred Marks for publishing a Book
derogatory to the Authority of the House, (with the Case at large) p. 295, 296,
297, 298. He brings a Writ against the Borough of Grantham for his Wages for
serving in several Parliaments as a Burgess thereof, but upon their Appeal to
the House of Commons he remitteth the same. p. 407. 417, 418 Hartlond-Port in
Devon, a Bill for the finishing of it. p. 132 Harwich in Essex returned no
Burgess before 43 Eliz. p. 628 Herrings, the inconvenience of transporting too
great a number of them. p. 562 Hexamshire, a Bill that it shall be of the
County of Northumberland, and parcel of the Bishopric of Durham. p. 134
Hospitality, a Bill for the maintenance of it rejected upon the second reading.
p. 591
I.
A Bill that Impropriations should go to the relief of the poor, twice read but
rejected. p. 561 A Bill against Enclosures ingeniously spoken to by the Member
that brought it in. p. 551 Bills to be Indorsed in their lower part. p. 342.
under the Contents of the Act. p. 562, 563 Informers, a Bill for the better
recovery of costs and damages against them. p. 445. 450 Bills not Engrossed by
the Commons when sent from the Lords. p. 47. 186. Vide the word Bill in the
Table to the Journal of the House of Lords. Inhibition, Vide Privilege.
Journals of Parliament, their use. p. 403 Ireland invaded by the Spaniard in 43
Eliz. under pretense of maintaining the Catholic Cause. p. 623, 624 Jury, no
Member to be put upon a Jury. p. 560 Justices of Peace wittily described and
reflected upon, on occasion of a Bill against common swearing, wherein the
penalty was to be inflicted by the Justice. p. 661. Basket-Justices who. p.
664. The Exposition of the Justices upon the Statute of 39 Eliz. of Rogues, not
thought fit to be enacted in 43 Eliz. and why. p. 670
K.
A Bill that St Katherines shall be a Parish Church. p. 87 A Bill that
Kentish-street in Southwark shall be paved. p. 91. 133 Knights formerly had Mr
instead of Sir prefixed to their names. p. 131 Knights of the Shire, both
according to the Writ and Statute, ought to be commorant within the County. p.
625
L.
LAws adjudged too numerous. p. 473 Letany, Vide Prayers. Liberty of the House
thought to be infringed by the Queen. p. 175. Vide Speech. The Commons reckoned
it a breach of Liberty to have a Conference demanded by the Lords concerning a
Bill under debate in the Lower House. p. 261, 262. Three particulars that are
breaches of Liberty. p. 263 Licenses for absence on special occasions granted
by the Speaker. passim. A Bill against Licenses for Marriage, etc. granted by
the Archbishop of Canterbury, with sundry Arguments thereupon. p. 167. No
Member to depart without License upon pain of forfeiting his Wages, etc. p. 309
Limitation of Succession, the Queen Petitioned for it. p. 82. A Petition to the
same purpose again debated, but not presented, p. 124. 127. for the Queen sent
her Inhibition. p. 128. which yet she revokes. p. 130 London, at what rate the
Citizens thereof were assessed in the Subsidies granted 31 Eliz. p. 496
M.
MArish and Fenny grounds in Norfolk, etc. two Bills for the draining of them
being just a passing, the Queen sends to signify her pleasure to be, that
those two Bills shall not be any further proceeded in. p. 594 Market Day, a
Bill in 43 Eliz. that they shall not be on a Sunday. p. 668 The Queen
Petitioned to Marry (1 Eliz.) p. 45. Her Answer. p. 46. Petitioned a second
time (5 Eliz.) p. 81. Her Answer. p. 75. A Petition to the same purpose debated
a third time, but not presented. p. 124. 127. Petitioned a fourth time (18
Eliz.) p. 265 Marriage-Licences, great abuses thereof complained of in 39 and
40 Eliz. p. 555 Mary Queen of Scots Voted to be proceeded against in the
highest degree of Treason, with several reasons of that Vote, (in 14 Eliz.) p.
207, 208, 209, 210. A Petition to the Queen to proceed Criminally against her.
p. 215. Several Reasons to urge the granting of that Petition. p. 216, 217,
218. An Act passed against her. p. 224. The Queen not satisfied with her Trial
and Attainder, Assembled a Parliament (28 and 29 Eliz.) on purpose to commit to
them the Examination of those proceedings against her. p. 375. and 393. Both
Houses consent that the Sentence pronounced against her was just. p. 379. And
they Petition the Queen, that the Sentence may be Executed. p. 380, 381, 382.
Mr Speaker at the presenting the Petition gives sundry reasons why Execution of
the Sentence should be done. p. 400, 401. The Queens Answer to the Petition. p.
402. Religion, the Queens Person, and Peace of the Realm not to be secured
without such Execution. p. 403, 404, 405, 406. She is Executed 8 Feb. 29 Eliz.
p. 382 Measures, Vide Weight. Melcomb Regis, a Bill for the Fortification of
it. p. 45. It is incorporated into one Borough with Weymouth by the Queens
Letters Patents, but so, that they choose four Burgesses. p. 554 Ministry,
several abuses therein (comprised in sixteen heads) proposed by the Commons to
the Lords to have reformed (27 Eliz.) with the Lords Answer. p. 357... 360
Money, a Bill against the transportation of it out of the Realm, spoken unto.
p. 643. Germany and France held the Standard therein as well as we, but not so
the Dutch. ibid. Several Statutes that no strangers should bring Commodities
into this Realm, but he should bring so much money. ibid. Monopolies reckoned
to be grievous to the subject in 39, 40 Eliz. p. 554. What a Monopoly is. p.
644. Several kinds thereof. ibid. and p. 645. 649. They are generally grievous
to the generality of the subjects. ibid. and p. 646. A precedent wherein
Letters Patents of Monopoly were cancelled in Parliament, etc. p. 645. How
numerous in 43 Eliz. p. 648. 650. A witty Speech of Secretary Cecil's
intimating the Queens resolution to revoke most of them, and suspend the rest.
p. 652, 653. How the House resented this resolution. p. 654. The Queen will not
accept of thanks from the House till she have put her resolution in practice.
ibid. Upon their giving thanks she makes a most gracious and kind Speech unto
them. p. 658, 659. A Conference between the two Houses about the Bill touching
Letters Patents of Monopoly. p. 679
N.
NAmes, Vide Calling. Naturalization, Vide the Table to the Journal of the
House of Lords. Henry Nevil an Accomplice with the Traitor Doctor Parry, the
particulars of their Treason. p. 356 Newport, Vide Dunkirk. Newtown in the
County of Southampton returned no Burgesses till 43 Eliz. p. 626 Norfolk, a
remarkable case as to Flection of Knights for that County. p. 396, 397 Duke of
Norfolk, a general Resolution of the House that he ought to be Executed (14
Eliz.) p. 207. But they did not think sit to Petition the Queen to that
purpose. p. 220
O.
OAth, Vide Supremacy and Calling. An Officer, according to the Common Law,
shall forfeit his Office for Non-attendance. p. 640 Ognel's Case. p. 487 Onflow
(Richard) being the Queens Solicitor General chosen Speaker in the Parl. 8 and
9 Eliz. p. 121 Onslow (Fulk) made Clerk of the Parliament in 13 Eliz. p. 155.
Being sick of an Ague, he Petitions the House to permit his Servant to execute
the place as his Deputy, which is granted. p. 623 Iron Ordnance, a Bill against
the transportation of them in 43 Eliz. well spoken to. p. 670. They were of
four sorts. ibid. How injurious such transportation is to the Commonwealth. p.
671. They come within the Statute of 2 E. 6. against transporting Gunmetal,
though Guns were not then made of Iron. ibid. and p. 672. The House resolve to
proceed (in order to hinder such transportation) both by Petition to the Queen,
and by Bill. p. 677. The Bill past the Commons p. 686. but not the Lords. p.
688. Whereupon a (...) is made that Mr Speaker will at the end (...) Session
mention the grievance to the Queen; (...) Speaker promises be will, but says
not one (...) of it. p. ult. Ostend, how much it concerns England, in whose
hand it is. p. 623 An Outlawed Member Voted to enjoy the privilege of the
House. p. 48. Another continued in the House. p. 294. Whether a person Outlawed
upon Judgment can be elected or stand for a Member, several Speeches pro and
contra. p. 479, 480, 481, 482. The same Question further debated. p. 514, 515,
516. He is reputed a Member, and yet not allowed privilege, and why. p. 518
P.
PAinters and Stainers two Companies in the time of E. 3. but made one in E. 4.
p. 681 Pardon, Bills of general Pardon granted by the Prince pass commonly upon
the first reading. p. 595 Parliament the Common Council of the Realm. p. 432.
The highest Court. p. 434. Both Houses of Parliament at first sat together,
and how they came to separate. p. 515. 655. They are not properly distinct or
divided Houses. ibid. The Counsels and Debates of Parliament ought not to be
divulged. p. 653 Doctor Parry, a Member of the House, committed to the Sergeant
at Arms for contempt, because he gave his negative voice against a Bill
directly, and would not show his Reasons to the House, though he pretended to
have reasons for it. p. 341. He is received again into the House at the Queens
Motion and upon his own Submission. p. 342. but is afterward committed to the
Tower for High Treason, whereupon he is disabled from being a Member of the
House. p. 352. A Motion in the House for a Law to be made for his Execution
after his Conviction, proportioned to his extraordinary Treason. p. 355. The
particulars of the Charge against him. p. 356 Passing a Bill, Vide Bill.
Patents of privilege reputed a grievance, 39, 40 Eliz. p. 554. Letters
Patents, Vide Monopoly. Penal Statutes reckoned too numerous, in 39 Eliz. p.
553. They ought not to be perpetual, but to alter as times alter. p. 622 A Bill
to prevent Perjury (spoken to) p. 641 A Bill that Plaintiffs shall pay the
Defendants their Costs by lying in Prison for want of Bail, if the Action pass
against the Plaintiff. p. 585. not passed, but reserved till another
Parliament. p. 590 Plasterers how called anciently. p. 680. They were first
incorporated in 16 H. 7. by the King, who granted them his Letter to the then
Lord Mayor to make them Freemen. ibid. They ought not to work in Oyl-Colours.
ibid. and p. 681. but may use six kind of Colors with Size. ibid. Pleddals
Case. p. 89. 91 Plumsted-Marsh, a Bill for the Inning of it. p. 87. 134, etc. A
Bill against Pluralities of Benefices, with many Speeches pro and contra. p.
639, 640 Policies of Assurance amongst Merchants, a Bill touching them, with a
Speech thereupon. p. 669 John Popham Esquire the Queens Solicitor General chosen
Speaker 23 Eliz. p. 281 Poor to be relieved out of Impropriations and other
Church Livings, a Bill for that purpose but rejected. p. 561 Popery the
principal root of all the conspiracies against the Queen. p. 394, 395 Popish,
Vide the Table to the Journal of the House of Lords. Prayers read by the Clerk
of the House. p. 47. He that shall come after them (viz. after eight in the
Morning) to pay four pence to the poor man's Box. p. 83. The form of a Prayer to
be used in the House (in the Parl. 39 and 40 Eliz.) p. 551 Precedents bind not
always. p. 494 Prerogative of the Sovereign, how unlimited. p. 644, 645
Privileges of the House of Commons. p. 42, 43. 66. Privilege from Arrests,
etc. granted to the Servants of Members. p. 83. 85. 629. If actually Arrested,
to be set at large by Writ, and upon the Oath of the Member, that he was his
Servant when the Arrest was made. p. 249. If a Servant procure himself to be
Arrested, it is construed contempt of the House. p. 254. One committed to the
Tower for such a contempt. p. 258. If one fraudulently procure himself to be
received for a servant only in Parliament time to escape Arrests, he shall not
have privilege. p. 373. Whether the beating of a Members servant be a breach
of privilege. p. 656. Two committed for five days to the Sergeants Ward for
such an offense. p. 658. Their servants are privileged from Executions. p.
685, 686. Though the privileges of the House be not Petitioned for by the
Speaker at his Confirmation, yet enjoyed by the Members. p. 121, 122. A Member
being Prisoner for debt, has his enlargement during the Session. p. 123.
Whether the Queens Inhibition to dispute of a certain matter, be against the
privilege of the House. p. 128. She revoketh two such Inhibitions. p. 130. No
Member can be removed but by judgment of the House. p. 283. A Member cannot be
served with a Subpoena. p. 347. 655, 656. A person committed to the Sergeant at
Arms for serving a Subpoena on a Member, p. 348, etc. If a Member being served
with a Subpoena, shall put in his Answer to the Bill, he prejudices himself in
his privilege. p. 434, 435. If a Writ of Nisi prius be brought against a
Member to be tried at the Assizes in the Country, the House may direct a
Warrant to the Lord Chancellor to award a Supersedeas. p. 436. A Plaintiff and
Sergeant both committed to the Tower for Arresting a Member upon an Execution.
p. 518, 519. Edward 3. being Petitioned to permit Parliament men's Bodies or
Goods to be distrained, would not permit it. p. 655. A Member has not only
privilege from Arrests during the sitting of the Parliament, but for a
reasonable time before, and how much is a reasonable time. p. 414. He cannot be
put upon a Jury, during the Session of Parliament. p. 560. cannot be disturbed
by way of an Appearance. p. 593. The privileges of the Lords and Commons the
same, and why. p. 655. One fined twenty thousand Marks for serving a Citation
upon a Lord. ibid. A Proviso added by the Lords to a Bill that has past the
Commons, must be engrossed in Parchment, etc. p. 576 Sergeant Puckering chosen
Speaker in the Parliament 27 Eliz. p. 333. Again in the Parliament 28 and 29
Eliz. p. 392. Afterward made Lord Keeper of the Great Seal. p. 456 Purveyors,
Vide Bill.
Q.
A Question having once received a No, cannot be again propounded. p. 488.
After the Question is put, none ought to speak to the matter in debate. p. 675,
676
R.
SIR Walter Raleigh, a Bill for confirmation of Letters Patents to him for the
discovery of foreign Countries. p. 339. 341 Reading, Bills sometimes have a
fourth reading. p. 89, 90. An Order, that after the reading of the first Bill
none depart before the rising of Mr Speaker without his License, under penalty
of paying to the poor man's box four pence. p. 128. A Bill of Recognition for
the Queens title to the Crown (1 Eliz.) p. 47 Record, if the House be desirous
to see any Record, the Speaker sends a Warrant to the Lord Keeper to grant
forth a Certiorari to have it. p. 673 Recorder of London formerly ranked before
the Solicitor General, but not now. p. 338. chosen Speaker in the Parliament 43
Eliz. p. 621 A Bill against Recusants in 35 Eliz. with several Speeches
thereupon. p. 476, 477. The first Bill being laid aside, a new Bill is framed,
and both of them recited. p. 498. Several Speeches unto the new Bill. p. 500.
517 Reformation of Religion desired in 13 Eliz. and seven Bills framed for that
purpose, but all were dashed by the Queen, under pretense of its not belonging
to the Parliament, but to her own Prerogative. p. 184, 185. A command from the
Queen (in 14 Eliz.) that no Bill touching Religion shall be received into the
House, unless first considered of and liked by the Clergy. p. 213. The Queen
commands the Bishops to reform abuses therein, or else threatens to depose
them. p. 328. Sixteen Heads proposed by the Commons to the Lords for
Reformation of Religion. p. 357, 358. Two Bills exhibited to the Parliament 35
Eliz. for reformation of the abuses in Ecclesiastical Courts, but the Queen
will not suffer them to proceed with them. p. 474. 478. She gives them leave
and encouragement in the Parliament of the 39th of her Reign, to reform sundry
gross abuses in the Ecclesiastical Government. p. 557, 558 Reports of matters
between private persons to be made by the Committees in the presence of both
the parties and their Council. p. 213 Restitution in Blood, Vide the Table to
the Journal of the House of Lords. Retail, a Bill that Aliens shall not retail
Foreign Wares, with sundry Speeches pro and contra. p. 505, 506, 507, 508, 509
Returns true or false not to be judged of by the Lord Chancellor, but by the
House of Commons only. p. 396, 397, 398. A Member duly elected and not
returned, what done in that Case. p. 438. 441. If the Name be mistaken in the
Return, the Lord Chancellor will not correct it, but make out a new Writ. p.
490. 495 Russia Merchants, a Bill for their Incorporation (8 and 9 Eliz.) p.
133
S.
SAbbath, a Bill for the more diligent resort to Church thereon, with several
Speeches upon it. p. 663. A notable Speech, why no new penal Law should be made
on that account. p. 682. By annexing a Proviso to the Bill it came to be
dashed. p. 683 Salt, a Patent of Monopoly being granted for it, how much the
price was enhanced. p. 645. 647 A Bill to take away Sanctuary from persons
indebted. p. 121. Westminster Sanctuary not excepted. p. 126. the Bill dashed.
p. 132 A Schedule added by the Lords to a Bill that has past the Commons, must
be engrossed in Parchment, etc. p. 576 Secrecy convenient as to matters debated
in Parliament. p. 432 Sergeant, Vide the Table to the Journal of the House of
Lords. Sergeant at Arms, one committed to him for a slighting joque against the
House. p. 54. He took the Oath of Supremacy in the Parliament held 8 and 9
Eliz. as the Members did. p. 122. Mr Arthur Hall (a Member of the House)
committed to him for setting forth a Book derogatory to the authority of
Parliaments, etc. p. 291. Dr Parry (a Member of the House) committed to his
custody and why. p. 341. A Currier committed to his Custody for saying, The
Curriers could not have justice in the House, etc. p. 366. Several persons
committed to him for presuming to come into the House not being Members. p.
394. 486. 565. and passim. A Motion that the Members should pay him his Fees
before they come into the House. p. 550. One committed to his Ward for
disturbing a Member by way of an Appearance. p. 593. If he be to go into the
Country to fetch any accused for breach of privilege, he may desire part of
his expenses of the Complainant before he begin his Journey. p. 655. Vide the
word Gentleman Usher in the Table to the Journal of the House of Lords.
Servants of Parliament men, Vide Privilege. Mr Seymore Clerk of the Parliament
from 1 to 9 Eliz. p. 43. 122 Sheriffs when and where they may be chosen for
Knights of the Shire, and when and where not. p. 38. 625. One Man formerly
Sheriff of several Counties. p. 39. A Bill that they should be allowed for the
Justices Diets. p. 51. 79. The Queen stops the Bill, saying that she will her
self take order therein. p. 71. 88. A Bill for several Sheriffs in several
Counties. p. 129. 150. A Bill that Sheriffs, Undersheriffs and Bailiffs of
Liberties shall take Oaths, dashed. p. 135. A Member of a Parliament may be
made a Sheriff. p. 336. 355. 665. and on the contrary a Sheriff may be chosen a
Knight of the Shire, but not for the County of which he is Sheriff. p. 436.
624, 625 Shop-Books, a Bill to prevent the double payment of debts upon them,
well spoken to. p. 666, 667 Sidney Colleage in Cambridge upon what occasion
founded. p. 503 Simony, a Bill for prevention of it in presentations to
Benefices (with a speech thereupon) p. 165 Surname altered by an Act of
Parliament. p. 687 George Snagg Sergeant at Law chosen Speaker 31 Eliz. p. 428
Solicitor General chosen Speaker 8 and 9 Eliz. p. 121. again, 35 Eliz. p. 469.
He is to attend in the Upper House, though he be chosen a Member of the House
of Commons, if he be called thereto by her Majesty's Writ before he was elected
a Member. p. 441, 442 Common Solicitors, a Bill against them in 43 Eliz. well
spoken to by him that brought it in. p. 631 Maimed Soldiers, the Money
collected in the Parliament 43 Eliz. chiefly bestowed upon them. p. 665. 687.
Husbandmen make the best Footsouldiers. p. 674 Spain reputed the Author of all
the Treasons and Rebellions in Queen Elizabeth's time. p. 454. Both Houses join
in a Petition to the Queen that she will proclaim War against Spain. ibid.
Several speeches in the Parliament 35 Eliz. containing an history of the
methods the King of Spain used for the Conquest of England. p. 471, 472, 473.
484. He invades Ireland with 4000. in 43 Eliz. p. 623. His pretense is to
defend the Catholic Cause. p. 624 Speak, if two or three offer to speak
together, that party that is going to speak against the last Speaker, is to be
heard first. p. 493. None to be interrupted while he is speaking. p. 633. 640
Speaker of the House of Commons his antiquity. p. 40. After he is nominated, he
uses to uncover himself. p. 549. He is commonly nominated by the Comptroller of
the Household. p. 621. and passim. After Election he is placed in the Chair
either by Mr Comptroller alone, or by him with another. p. 79. 621, etc. Two
Questions concerning the Election of a Speaker proposed and answered. p. 41.
How he is presented to the Sovereign. ibid. Their excusing or disabling of
themselves merely formal or complementive, being sometimes done, sometimes not.
ibid. and p. 42. Their Petitions of course to the King or Queen, after
confirmation. p. 16, 42, 43. 98, etc. He makes his Speech now according to his
own pleasure, but formerly by the directions of the House. p. 42. The story of
Thorp Speaker in an 31 H. 6. p. 56. 516. He is not always present at
Prorogations. p. 119. When the Speaker dies in the interval of a Prorogation,
what method taken to choose a new one. p. 267, 268. 278, 279, 280. The Speaker
is to be presented and allowed, before the House can determine or resolve on
any thing. p. 282. He may speak to a Bill with the leave of the House. p. 515.
He is of that dignity that he is to be commanded by none nor to attend any but
the Sovereign. p. 627. When any new Election is to be made, sitting the
Parliament, he is to direct a Warrant to the Clerk of the Crown, to issue out
the Writ. ibid. and p. 628. A great contest whether such Warrant be to be
directed to the said Clerk, or to the Lord Keeper, but carried for the former.
p. 636, 637, 638, 639. Bills are commonly perused by the Speaker, before thy
are received into the House. p. 637. He has no voice in the passing of a Bill.
p. 683, 684 Liberty of Speech of absolute necessity in Parliaments. p. 236,
237, 238, 239, 240. 259 Star Chamber, a Bill for the better expedition of
Justice in it, with a notable Speech against the Bill. p. 504. A Bill exhibited
therein by a Peer against a Member of the House of Commons, Vide Belgrave ante.
Bill to make Steel in England 8 and 9 Eliz. p. 132 Steward of the Household
administers the Oath of Supremacy to the Members. p. 122. Who is his Deputy of
course. ibid. He may appoint several Deputies, p. 155. 205, etc. The Heirs of
the Lord Stourton restored in blood, with a notable Conference about the Bill
betwixt the two Houses, wherein the liberties of the House of Commons are
asserted. p. 263 Disloyal Subjects, a Bill to reduce them to their due
obedience (35 Eliz.) p. 498. Several Speeches upon it. p. 500. 517 Subpoena not
to be served on a Member. p. 347, 348. 553. 637. What punishment was inflicted
on one for serving such Subpoena. p. 373. Two Members sent to the Lord Keeper
to have the Subpoena revoked. p. 553, 554 Subsidy, the Queen remitteth the
third payment of one. p. 131. Bill of Subsidy when it has passed both Houses,
is to remain in the House of Commons till the end of the Session, and then to
be presented by the Speaker to the Sovereign. p. 309. Subsidies use to be first
offered by the Commons. p. 483. Thought to be against the privilege of the
House for the Lords to join with them therein, or to prescribe to them how much
to give. ibid. and 485, 486. 488. The danger of increasing the number of
Subsidies. p. 494. Three Subsidies not given at one time till 35 Eliz. and then
with caution, that it should not be made a Precedent. p. 569. Yet there were
the same number given. 39, 40 Eliz. and four in 43 Eliz. ib. and. 668. Poor men
commonly higher taxed in the raising of Subsidies than the rich, and how it
comes about. p. 633. Few Justices vated at above eight or ten pound Lands,
whereas according to the Statute they ought to be at twenty. ibid. Subsidies
are of free gift, and cannot be exacted by the Sovereign. ibid. Succession,
Vide Limitation. Two or three Members committed to Prison by the Queen for
desiring the Lords to join with the House of Commons in a Petition to the Queen
to entail the Succession of the Crown. p. 470. Upon a Motion in the House for
Petitioning the Queen for their enlargement, the Courtiers are against it. p.
497 Sunday, Vide Sabbath. Supersedeas to be awarded by the Lord Chancellor to
stop proceedings in a Nisi prius against a Member. p. 436 Supremacy, a Bill for
restoring it to the Crown (1 Eliz.) sent from the Lords, dashed by the Commons.
p. 47. The Oath of Supremacy made 1 Eliz. begun to be taken by the Members of
Parl. 5 Eliz. p. 39. 78 A Member suspended by the Council from sitting in the
House for bringing in a Bill to reform Ceremonies. p. 168. But the suspension
soon taken off. p. 176 Common Swearing, a Bill against it, with a very
ingenious Speech thereupon. p. 660, 661
T.
THree Tenures in England. p. 492 Thorp, Vide Speaker. Changing of Tillage into
pasture prejudicial to the Commonwealth. p. 551. Several Speeches on occasion
of repealing a Statute for the increase of Tillage. p. 674 Tin-Mines in
Cornwall belonged to the Dukes of Cornwall (so long as there were any) by
special Patent. p. 646 Tonnage and Poundage, a Bill for them 1 Eliz. p. 45 A
Bill to make certain offenses Treason, (13 Eliz.) with several Arguments
thereupon. p. 162, 163, 164, 165
U.
A Bill against Vagrants, with some Speeches thereupon. p. 165 Voices in
Parliament ought to be free, without any manner of compulsion. p. 683, 684 A
Bill against Usury, with sundry arguments and speeches thereon. p. 171. ad p.
174
The End of the TABLE.

W.
WAR, Vide Spain. A Bill that Wednesday shall be a Fishday. p. 87. Its benefit
to the Navy and Mariners, and in what places to be observed. p. 372 A Bill
against false Weights and Measures ingeniously spoken to by him that brought it
in. p. 626, 627. Another to the same purpose. p. 662 Welsh tongue, a Bill to
translate the Bible and Service Book into it. p. 72 89 Lord Wentworth Arraigned
for the loss of Calis. p. 54 Peter Wentworth Esquire his notable Speech for the
Liberty of the House. p. 236. ad p. 241. A Committee appointed to examine him
upon it. p. 241. He is sent to the Tower for speaking undutifully of her
Majesty in it. p. 244. Upon her Majesty's pardoning him, he is received into
the House again after above a months imprisonment. p. 259, 260. He is sent to
the Tower again by the Queens Order, in the Parliament 35 Eliz. for desiring
the Lords to join with the Lower House in a Petition to the Queen for entailing
the Succession of the Crown. p. 470 Westminster, Vide Sanctuary. Weymouth and
Melcomb Regis incorporated by the Queens Letters Patents into one Borough, but
so, that they still choose four Burgesses. p. 554. Whispering not permitted in
the House. p. 487 Whitby-haven, a Bill for the re-edifying of it (in 39 Eliz.)
rejected. p. 567 Williams (Thomas) chosen Speaker 5 Eliz. p. 79. Vide the Table
to the Journal of the House of Lords. Winchester, a Bill for the assurance of
certain Lands late parcel of that Bishopric to diverse Patentees of Edw. 6.
with that Bishops opposition to it. p. 50, 51. passed. p. 52 Wray (Christopher)
chosen Speaker 13 Eliz. p. 156 Writ of Summons to the Sheriffs for choosing
Parliament men. p. 37. Some alteration in the present from those of former
times. p. 38, 39
Y.
YArmouth, a Bill for repealing part of its Charter, dashed. p. 562 Sergeant
Yelverton chosen Speaker in the Parliament 39 and 40 Eliz. p. 549, 550. His
more than usual disabling of himself. p. 549. His Speech to the Queen at the
end of the Session. p. 546, 547 York, a Bill for the office of its Town Clerk.
p. 131
The End of the TABLE
A Catalogue of Books Printed for John Starkey Bookseller, at the Mitre in
Fleetstreet near Temple Bar.
DIVINITY.
1. A Discourse of the Freedom of the Will: By Peter Sterry sometime Fellow of
Emmanuel College in Cambridge, in folio.

2. The Jesuits Morals, collected by a Doctor of the College of Sorbon in
Paris, who has faithfully extracted them out of the Jesuits own Books, which
are printed by the permission and approbation of the Superiors of their
Society. Written in French, and exactly translated into English, in folio.

3. The Christians Consolations against the fears of Death; with Prayers and
Meditations sit to prepare all manner of persons for it. Written in French by
the late famous Mr Drelincourt, Minister of the Protestant Church at Charenton
near Paris; and from the twelfth Edition of it much corrected and enlarged by
the Author. Now newly translated into English by Marius a Assigny, in octavo.

4. The Living Temple, or the Notion improved; that A good man is the Temple of
God. By John How M. A. sometimes Fellow of Magdalen College, Oxon. in octavo.

5. A Confutation of the Millenarian Opinion, plainly demonstrating that Christ
will not reign visibly and personally upon earth with the Saints for a thousand
years, either before the day of Judgment, in the day of Judgment, or after it.
By Tho. Hall B. D.

PHYSIC.
6. The Royal Pharmacopoeia, Galenical and Chemical, according to the Practice
of the most Eminent and Learned Physicians of France, and Published with their
several Approbations. By Moses Charras, the Kings Chief Operator in his Royal
Garden of Plants, faithfully Englished. Illustrated with several Copper Plates,
in folio.

7. Basilica Chymica and Praxis Chymiatricae, or Royal and Practical Chemistry;
augmented and enlarged, by John Hartman. To which is added his Treatise of
Signatures of internal things, or a true and lively Anatomy of the greater and
lesser World. As also the Practice of Chemistry of John Hartman, M. D.
Augmented and enlarged by his Son, with considerable Additions; all faithfully
Englished, by a lover of Chemistry.

8. The Complete Chemist, or a New Treatise of Chemistry, teaching by a short
and easy Method all its most necessary Preparations. Written in French by
Christopher Giaser, Apothecary in Ordinary to the French King, and the Duke of
Orleans. And from the fourth Edition Revised and Augmented by the Author. Now
faithfully Englished by a Fellow of the Royal Society. Illustrated with Copper
Plates, in octavo.

9. The Art of Chemistry, as it is now practiced. Written in French by P.
Thybault, Chemist to the French King, and Englished by W. A. Doctor in Physic,
and Fellow of the Royal Society, in octavo.

10. Medicina Instaurata, or a brief Account of the true Grounds and Principles
of the Art of Physic; with the insufficiency of the vulgar way of preparing
Medicines, and the Excellency of such as are made by Chemical Operations. By
Edward Bolnest, Med. Land. in octavo.

11. Aurora Chymica, or a rational way of preparing Animals, Vegetables and
Minerals for a Physical Use; by which preparations they are made most
efficacious, safe and pleasant Medicines, for the preservation of the life of
man. By Edward Bolnest, Med. Reg. Ord. in octavo.

12. The Chirurgions Storehouse, furnished with forty three Tables cut in
Brass, in which are all sorts of Instruments both Ancient and Modern; useful to
the performance of all Manual Operations; with an exact description of every
Instrument, together with one hundred choice Observations of famous Cures
performed, with three Indexes; 1. Of the Instruments. 2. Of Cures performed. 3.
Of things remarkable. Written in Latin by Johannes Scultetus a famous Physician
and Surgeon of Ulme in Suevia: and faithfully Englished by E. B. Dr of
Physic; in octavo.

13. Medicina Statica: or Rules of Health, in eight Sections of Aphorisms.
Originally Written by Sanctorius, Chief Professor of Physic at Padua, in
twelves.

LAW.
14. An Abridgment of diverse Cases and Resolutions of the Common Law,
Alphabetically digested under several Titles. By Henry Rolls Sergeant at Law,
published by the Lord Chief Baron Hales, and approved by all the Judges, in
folio.

15. The Reports of that famous Lawyer Henry Rolls Sergeant at Law, sometime
Chief Justice of the Kings Bench, of diverse Cases in the Law adjudged in the
time of King James; approved by all the Judges, in folio.

16. The Reports of Sir George Crook Knight, in three Volumes, in English:
allowed of by all the Judges. The second Edition, carefully corrected by the
Original, in folio.

17. The History of Gavel-kind, with the Etymology thereof, containing a
Vindication of the Laws of England; together with a short History of Will. the
Conqueror. By Silas Tailor, in quarto.

18. Action upon the Case of Slander, or a Methodical Collection of thousands
of Cases in the Law, of what words are Actionable, and what not. By William
Shepherd Esquire in octava.

19. An Exact Abridgment in English, of the Cases reported by Sir Francis Moor
Knight; with the Resolution of the Points of the Law therein by the Judges. By
Will. Hughes, in octavo.

20. The Touchstone of Wills, Testaments, and Administrations, being a
Compendium of Cases and Resolutions touching the same, carefully collected out
of the Ecclesiastical, Civil, and Canon Laws, as also out of the Customs,
Common Laws, and Statutes of this Kingdom. By G. Meriton, in twelves.

HISTORY.
21. The Voyages and Travels of the Duke of Holstein's Ambassadors into
Moscovy, Tartary, and Persia, begun in the year 1633. and finished in 1639.
containing a Complete History of those Countries: whereunto are added, the
Travels of Mandelslo, from Persia into the East Indies, begun in 1638. and
finished in 1640. The whole Illustrated with diverse accurate Maps and Figures.
Written originally by Adam Olearius, Secretary to the Embassy. Englished by J.
Davies: The second Edition, in folio.

22. The Works of the famous Nicholas Machiavel Citizen and Secretary of
Florence; containing the History of Florence, the Prince, the Original of the
Guelf and Ghibilin, the Life of Castruccio Castracani, the Murder of Vitelli,
etc. By Duke Valentino, the State of France, the State of Germany, the
Discourses on Titus Livius, the Art of War, the Marriage of Belphegor: All from
the true Original newly and faithfully translated into English, in folio.

23. I Ragguagli di Parnasso, or Advertisements from Parnassus, in two
Centuries, with the Politic Touchstone. Written Originally in Italian by that
famous Roman, Trajano Bocalini. Englished by the Earl of Menmouth, in folio.

24. The History of Barbados, St Christophers, Mevis, St Vincents, Antego,
Martinico, Monserret, and the rest of the Caribby Islands, in all twenty eight:
in two Books, containing the Natural and Moral History of those Islands:
Illustrated with diverse pieces of Sculpture, representing the most considerable
Rarities therein described, in folio.

25. The History of the Affairs of Europe in this present Age, but more
particularly of the Republic of Venice. Written in Italian by Battista Nani
Cavalier, and Procurator of St Mark. Englished by Sir Robert Honywood Knight, in
folio.

26. The History of the Turkish Empire from the year 1623. to the year 1677.
Containing the Reigns of the three last Emperors, viz. Sultan Morat, or Amurat
IV. Sultan Ibrahim, and Sultan Mahomet IV. his Son, the XIII. Emperor now
Reigning. By Paul Rycaut Esquire late Consul of Smyrna, in folio.

27. The present State of the Ottoman Empire in three Books; containing the
Maxims of the Turkish Polity, their Religion and Military Discipline:
Illustrated with diverse Figures. Written by Paul Rycant Esquire late Secretary to
the English Ambassador there, now Consul of Smyrna. The fourth Edition, in
octavo.

28. The present State of the Greek and Armenian Churches AnnoChristi 1678.
Written at the Command of His Majesty, by Paul Rycaut Esquire late Consul of
Smyrna, and Fellow of the Royal Society, in octavo.

29. The Memoirs of Philip deComines Lord of Argenton; containing the History
of Lewis XI. and Charles VIII. Kings of France; with the most remarkable
occurrences in their particular Reigns from the year 1464. to 1498. Revised and
Corrected from diverse Manuscripts, and ancient Impressions, by Denis Godfroy,
Counselor and Historiographer to the French King, and from his Edition lately
Printed at Paris, newly translated into English, in octavo.

30. A Relation of Three Embassies, from his Majesty Charles the Second, to the
Great Duke of Muscovy, the King of Sweden, and the King of Denmark, performed
by the Right Honorable the Earl of Carlisle, in the year 1663, and 1664.
Written by an Attendant on the Embassies; in octavo.

31. A Relation of the Siege of Candia, from the first Expedition of the French
Forces, to its Surrender, the 27th of September 1669. Written in French by a
Gentleman who was a Voluntier in that Service, and faithfully Englished, in
octavo.

32. The Present State of Egypt, or a new Relation of a late Voyage into that
Kingdom, performed in the years 1672, and 1673. By F. Vansleb R. D. Wherein you
have an exact and true account of many rare and wonderful particulars of that
Ancient Kingdom. Englished by M. D. B. D. in octavo.

33. The History of the Government of Venice, wherein the Policies, Councils,
Magistrates, and Laws of that State are fully related; and the use of the
Balloting-Box exactly described. Written in the year 1675. by the Sieur Amelott
de la Houscaie, Secretary to the French Ambassador at Venice, in octavo.

34. An Historical and Geographical Description of the great Country and River
of the Amazones in America, with an exact Map thereof. Translated out of
French, in octavo.

35. The Novels of the famous Don Francisco de Quevedo Villegas, Knight of the
Order of St James; whereunto is added, the Marriage of Belphegor, an Italian
Novel: Translated from Machiavel: faithfully Englished, in octavo.

36. The Amors of certain Great Men, and famous Philosophers. Written in
French, and Englished by J. D. in octavo.

37. Deceptio visus, or Seeing and Believing are two things, a pleasant Spanish
History; faithfully translated, in octavo.

38. The History of France, under the Ministry of Cardinal Mazarine, viz. from
the death of King Lewis XIII. to the year 1664. wherein all the Affairs of
State to that time are exactly related. By Benjamin Priolo, and faithfully
Englished by Christopher Wase, Gent. in octavo.

39. The History of the Twelve Caesar's, Emperors of Rome. Written in Latin by
C. Suetonius Tranquillus, newly translated into English, and illustrated with
all the Caesar's Heads in Copperplates, in octavo.

40. The Annals of Love, containing select Histories of the Amors of diverse
Princes Courts, pleasantly related. By a person of Honor, in eight Parts, in
octavo.

41. A new Voyage into the Northern Countries, being a description of the
Manners, Customs, Superstition, Buildings, and Habits of the Norwegians,
Laplanders, Kilops, Borandians, Siberians, Samojedes, Zemblans, and Islanders,
in twelves.

42. The present State of the United Provinces of the Low Countries, as to the
Government, Laws, Forces, Riches, Manners, Customs, Revenue, and Territory of
the Dutch. Collected out of diverse Authors, by W. A. Fellow of the Royal
Society. The second Edition in twelves.

43. The present State of the Princes and Republics of Italy: The second
Edition enlarged, with the manner of Election of Popes, and a Character of
Spain. Written Originally in English; by J. Gailhard, Gent. in twelves.

44. The Policy and Government of the Venetians, both in Civil and Military
Affairs. Written in French by the Sieur de la Hay; and faithfully Englished, in
twelves.

45. The Voyage of Italy, or a complete Journey through Italy: in two Parts,
with the Character of the People, and the Description of the chief Towns,
Churches, Palaces, Villas, Gardens, Pictures, Statues, Antiquities; as also of
the Interest, Government, Riches, Forces, etc. of all the Princes, with
Instructions concerning Travel. By Richard Lassells Gent. who traveled through
Italy five times, as Tutor to several of the English Nobility; Opus Posthumum,
corrected and set forth by his old Friend and Fellow-Traveller S. W. Never
before extant, in twelves.

46. A Relation of the French King's late Expedition into the Spanish
Netherlands, in the years 1667, and 1668. with an Introduction discoursing his
Title thereunto, and an account of the Peace between the two Crowns, made May
2. 1667. Englished by G. H. in twelves.

POETRY and PLAYS.
47. The Works of Sir William Davenant Knight, consisting of those which were
formerly Printed, and those which he designed for the Press. Now published out
of the Author's Original Copies in folio.

48. Andronicus Comnenius, a Tragedy. By John Wilson, in quarto.

49. Heraclius Emperor of the East, a Tragedy. By Lodowic Carlel Esquire in quarto.

50. The Shepherds Paradise, a Pastoral. By Walter Montague Esquire in octavo.

51. Paradise Regained, a Poem in four Books, to which is added Sampson
Agonistes. The Author John Milton, in octavo.

MISCELLANIES.
52. A General Collection of Discourses of the Virtuosi of France, upon
Questions of all sorts of Philosophy, and other Natural Knowledge, made in the
Assembly of the Beaux Esprits at Paris, by the most ingenious Persons of that
Nation. Englished by G. Havers. in two Volumes, in folio.

53. A Justification of the late War against the United Netherlands, in two
Parts, illustrated with several Sculptures, by Henry Stubbs, in quarto.

54. The Complete Gentleman: or Directions for the Education of Youth, as to
their Breeding at home and Traveling abroad. In two Treatises, by J. Gailhard
Gent. who has been Tutor abroad to several of the Nobility and Gentry, in
octavo.

55. The Temperate Man, or the right Way of Preserving Life and Health,
together with Soundness of the Senses, Judgment, and Memory, unto an extreme
Old Age. In three Treatises. The first written by the learned Leonardus
Lessius. The second by Lodowick Cornaro, a Noble Gentleman of Venice. The third
by a famous Italian: faithfully Englished, in twelves.

56. The Golden Calf, in which is handled the most rare and incomparable wonder
of Nature, in transmuting Metals, viz. how the entire substance of Lead was in
one moment transmuted into Gold Obrizon, with an exceeding small Particle of
the true Philosophers Stone, at the Hague in the year 1666. Written in Latin,
by John Frederick Helvetius, Doctor of Medicine at the Hague; and faithfully
Englished, in twelves.

57. Accidence commenced Grammar, and supplied with sufficient Rules; or a new
and easy method for the learning of the Latin Tongue. The Author John Milton,
in twelves.

58. The Rules of Civility, or certain ways of Deportment observed in France
amongst all persons of Quality, upon several occasions; faithfully Englished,
in twelves.

59. The Art of Complaisance, or the means to oblige in Conversation, in
twelves.


