A DIALOGUE AT OXFORD Between A TUTOR AND A GENTLEMAN, Formerly his PUPIL,
Concerning Government.

LONDON, Printed for Rich. Janaway, in Queens-Head Alley in Paternoster Row.
1681.

A DIALOGUE AT OXFORD Between A TUTOR and a GENTLEMAN, Formerly his PUPIL.
Tutor. MY Dear Pupil, you are welcome to Oxford, I am glad to see you remember
your old Friends, and hope you have not forgot those excellent Principles you
learnt from your careful Mother the University.


Pupil. Sir, I can never forget my Friends, nor would willingly act contrary to
such Principles as would be for their Service, and the general good of Mankind.


Tu. Hum! that is well said, if it be well intended; but I do not know what to
make of that expression; for methinks the good of Mankind sounds a little odly
in these Factious and Seditious Times, and I am a little jealous, that the
Coffeehouses and Clubs in London, have taught you to speak another sort of
Language than you did here in the University.


Pu. I must confess, when I left Oxford, I presently lost the Art of disputing
about words, but I Will assure you Sir, I really intend what I speak.


Tu. Prithee then speak plain English, and tell me that you are for the King,
and the Church, and let your Mankind alone.


Pu. Sir, I am very much for the King and the Chnrch, and a little also for the
Rest of the People; for if I should dispose of them out of the way, the Prince
might call me to Account for his Subjects, and you for your hearers.


Tu. You know my meaning well enough; Are you for the Prerogative and
Government in Church and State? As for the People, it is their business to obey
their Superiors, to pay their Tithes, and their Taxes; and, if occasion be, to
Fight for the Glory and Honor of their Prince, and the Church of England.


Pu. And is this all that comes to their share? Indeed a very conscionable
Reckoning; but I have no mind to disturb you at present, and therefore shall
only tell you, that I am heartily for the Prerogative and Government as by Law
Established.


Tu. As by Law Established; why, there is a Dry Bob again; What if there was no
Law?


Pu. Then there would be no Transgression.


Tu. I say, Suppose there were no common or Statute Laws, (as you call them)
yet Government ought to be submitted to as its the Ordinance of God, and of
Divine Right, and consequently Obedience to our Governors is due from us, on
pain of Damnation, without the help of an Act of Parliament.


Pu. Nay Tutor! if we must discourse of these matters, pray let us sit down and
do it soberly; I will allow you that Government in general is the Ordinance of
God, and of Divine Right, for without it, there could be no such things, as
humane Societies in the World, which makes St. Paul in the 13th to the Romans,
affirm as much of all Powers, none excepted, but then as to the kinds or
different species of Government, God Almighty has left no standing Ordinance,
whereby to prefer or command one kind above another, and its absurd to think he
should, except we do Imagine that there ought to be exactly the same frame of
Government throughout the whole World, notwithstanding the variety and
difference, of Climates, of Interests and Inclinations of People in particular
Nations, and that all, who differ from us in their Policies, (as all do more or
less) do therein violate God's Ordinance, which is equally ridiculous and
uncharitable. Therefore the particular kinds of Government, must have another
and lower Fountain to flow from, which can be no other than humane. In short,
the higher Power or Magistracy it self, is God's Ordinance, that it Resides in
one or more, in this or that Family, in such or such a way, is purely from
humane designment; which I conceive to be St. Peter's meaning, when he calls
Magistracy (...), humane Creature: St. Paul calls it God's Ordinance, because
the Power is from God: St. Peter calls it humane, because the specification of
it to this or that Form, is from the Societies of Mankind. And by this time
Good Tutor, I suppose you perceive, that were it not for the particular Laws
and Customs of England, your Jus Divinum would go near to leave our best
Friends in the lurch; for though we should all agree, there ought to be a
Government, yet it is two to one we should not agree, whom, in what, and how far
to Obey. If you have any thing to object, pray let me hear it; for I would
neither lead, nor be led into the least Error in things of so high Concernment.


Tu. My dear Pupil, we are now under the Rose, and you shall be my Confessor,
what you say, seems highly rational, but to tell you the truth, we seldom
trouble our heads with things of this nature, foreseeing that an unlimited and
naked Jus Divinum, is much more for our ease and convenience, and if it would
but go down with the People, we promise our selves from it all the effects of
whatsoever Policy.


Pu. To the honesty of such dealing I shall say nothing, nor can I deny, but
such a civil Superstition, would for some time at least, mightily advance that
Order of men that managed it, and qualify them for the same Grandeur and Power
under all changes of Government; but certainly it leaves the rest of the
Community, both Magistrates and People, in a most precarious and miserable
Condition; for though Magistracy be God's Ordinance, yet if you lay aside the
particular Laws of the Country which determine it, the Exercise of it is no
more confined to one man or Family than another, and whoever happens to get the
Power, by your Rule would have the Right, and so you make no difference between
an Usurper and a lawful Prince, and equally oblige the People in Obedience to
the one as to the other, a Doctrine odious to all good Subjects.


Tu. Pray Sir is there no such thing as a Right of Conquest, and are no People
bound in Conscience to obey him that has that Title?


Pu. I will not put you out of Countenance, by applying your Question to a case
that happened within our own memory, but shall rather desire you to consider
how its possible for force alone, to create a better Title over public
Societies, than it would do in the case of each private man? Suppose then a
Stronger man meets me, and violently throws me upon the ground, is it not
lawful for me to rise again without asking him leave? ay and to trip up his
heels too, whenever I see my opportunity. Apply this to public matters, and
then tell me, whether your mighty Conqueror be not in a hopefal condition, when
Millions of men shall be at perfect Liberty to shake off his Yoke, whenever
they can take him at an advantage. And so long as nothing but bare force
obliges men to a submission, so long will a Right of discharging themselves of
that force continue in the People to the end of the Chapter. But where the
People are not bound by contract to any other Lawful Prince, its then in their
choice, whether they will come into a moral Condition of Subjection to the
Conqueror or no: If they will not, they dye or remain a Free People as to any
moral Obligation. But if on the one side the People be unwilling any longer to
suffer the miseries they are under, or have no Ability to make resistance, and
the Conqueror on the other side, finds his forceable Dominion over them
insecure and uneasy, I say, if upon such Considerations as these, they
mutually agree upon a Contract and Composition of Rule and Subjection upon such
and such terms, the Conqueror now has lost that name, and his Government
thenceforward must be such, as the fundamental Contract makes it to be, and the
Rightful Dominion in the Prince, and Duty of Subjection in the People, will be
so stated and limited, as was concluded upon in the Original Agreement. And I
am persuaded it will appear an uncontrollable Truth in Policy, that the Consent
of a People, either by themselves, or their Ancestors, is the only means
(without special Revelation) whereby Magistracy is conferred on any Person or
Family; neither can God's Ordinance be conveyed, and People engaged in
Conscience any other way.


Tu. I confess, I now begin to think that the Communities of Mankind, have more
to do in these matters than I was aware of; and it is more than probable that
all Government whatever is very much for their sakes.


Pu. To me it seems plain, That the Common Good of Humane Societies, is the
First and Last End of all Government; for nulla potestas datur ad malum; so in
effect says St. Paul, in the 13th. to the Romans (speaking of Rulers) (...),
He is the Minister of God to thee for good. And Salus Populi, etc. has often
been frownd upon, but never answered. And whoever shall Affirm, that the
Absolute Monarchies in Asia, the many limited ones in Europe, together with
multitudes of Aristocracies and Commonwealths now extant in the world, were
constituted by God Almighty, purely out of a partial Regard to those Persons
and Families (inconsiderable in the number to the Rest of Mankind) to whom the
Administration of those Powers is committed, I believe he will find Few of his
mind, and not many that can debase themselves to so mean a Flattery as to own
so senseless a position.


Tu. You have satisfied me, that only Government in general is of Divine Right,
and that the particular Forms and Limitations of it are from humane Compact,
pray now inform me how you suppose our Government here in England first began,
and particularly what you think to be the Form and Essence of it, whereby it
differs from that of other Nations.


Pu. Now you put it hard upon me Tutor, and I dare not undertake to give you
full Satisfaction in so thoughtful a matter, but you shall have more than my
Guess. And how I cannot choose but own the Goodness of Almighty God, in the
Architecture of our Government, whereof I do declare my self so great an
admiror, that whatever more than humane Wisdom had the contrivance of it,
whether done at once, or by degrees found out and perfected, I conceive it
unparalled for exactness of true Policy, in the whole world; Such care for
the Authority of the Monarch; such provision for the Liberty and Property of
the People, and that one may be justly allaid, the other upheld, and yet
consist without Impeachment of each other, that I wonder how our forefathers
in those esteemed rude and unpolisht times, could ever attain to such an
accurate Composure.

First then, Suppose a People compelled to it by the necessity of Conquest, or
agreeing to it by free consent, Nobles and Commons setting over themselves, by
public compact, one chief Magistrate, and resigning up themselves to him and
his Heirs, to be governed by such and such fundamental Laws, whereby the chief
Magistrates power is radically limited to one legal course of exercise.

Secondly, Because in all Governments after-causes will arise, not within the
prospect of humane foresight, requiring additional Laws, pro re nata; and also
because the original frame it self may in some cases stand in need of an
Authentic Interpretation, or would of course and by degrees moulder away and
decay, if not carefully repaired and looked after; suppose them therefore
covenanting with their Prince, that (if there be occasion in order to any of
the aforesaid purposes) there should be conventions of all degrees of men
amongst them, to provide suitable remedies and expedients for all the several
exigencies and diseases of the State; and if at any time there should be need
of new Laws, that the Prince himself should not have the sole power of making
them, but they reserve at first (or afterward it is granted them, which is all
one) an hand of concurrence therein, and that they will be bound by no Laws but
what they join with him in the making of.

Thirdly, Because, though the Nobles may personally convene, yet the Commons,
being so many, cannot all of them come together; it is therefore agreed, that
each County and Corporation shall have power to depute some particular persons
to be instead of the whole, that so the Nobles being present in person, the
Commons by their Deputies, there may be representatively the whole body of the
Kingdom, having Commission by the original constitution to make new Laws, or to
guard and repair the old ones.

Fourthly, Because the causes of their meeting would not be constant and
perpetual, they therefore did not form these Estates to be constantly existent,
but occasionally, yet intentionally, and virtually provided for their meeting
whenever there should be occasion.

Fifthly, Because a Monarchy was intended, therefore as great power (as was
consistent with other parts of the Government) was invested in the Prince, in
order to his better discharging the executive part of the Law; and conculding,
that he who was to govern by Law, and for the furtherance of whose Government
for the good of the people, the new Laws were to be made, would thereby be
engaged to see the convention of these Estates take place, as of right it ought
to do whenever there is occasion; they therefore aptly placed the formal part
of nominating the time of Convention in the executive Power, to be made use of
as the reason of its being lodged there should require.

Sixthly, It being found by experience in process of time, that Princes not
caring to have the maladministration of their Ministers looked into, or to
have any power in act but their own, did therefore take advantage of this their
nomination of time when the Estates should meet, and made use of it seldomer
than need required (an inconvenience, which had it not been provided for, would
have beaten down the Government at once, and utterly defaced the whole frame of
the Constitution); to prevent which, that Tacit principle of having frequent
Parliaments, was literally explained by subsequent Statutes made in the time
of Edward the 3d, and ascertained to the having Annual ones.

And now Sir! when you have made all these suppositions in your mind, I am
confident you have very much of the model and platform of our Government.


Tu. If this he our Constitution, I cannot wonder at your being so much in love
with it; for certainly it provides for all Interests with the greatest Justice
and Equity in the world; and to me it seems evident, that though the
convocating the Estates, and bringing them into existence, has such a formal
dependence on the Kings Writ, as you have declared; yet existing, and when
convocated, they work by an innate Authority, and by the privileges of their
original Institution, their Acts then being not Commissionated like those of
other Courts, but proceeding in conjunction with the Kings, which makes me the
better understand that usual clause in our Acts of Parliament which tells us,
that such and such a thing is enacted, etc. not only by and with the advice of
the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and the Commons in Parliament Assembled, but
also by the Authority of the same -- But you will say, I ought not to comment upon
a Text I have learnt so lately -- therefore pray proceed, for I cannot doubt
but you have yet more to say upon this Subject.


Pu. What would you have more? does not this Scheme of our Government give you
full satisfaction?


Tu. By no means, Sir! except it includes something that is not literally
expressed; for though our Ancestors have taken care, that there shall be frequent
meetings of the Estates, yet if they have not provided for the continuance of
their Sessions when met, that so their coming together may possibly answer its
end, what does all the rest signify? and therefore pray tell me your opinion
in that point.


Pu. Nay, hold a blow there, good Tutor! I had rather you had ask't me all the
hard questions in Euclid; not so much for any difficulty in the solution, as
because it is an ill time of the year to discourse of such matters; therefore I
think we had best stop here -- And yet I find I am a little like Sir Martin,
now my hand is in, I cannot forbear fumbling with the strings, though I don't
care to play out; wherefore I will not promise you an Answer: but when I have
said what I think convenient, if you please you may give your self one. --
there are wise and learned men (and who upon a good occasion may be spoke with)
that do conceive there is a Statute made in the time of Richard the Second, See
the Statute verbatim, with the Clause Roll.
and now in being, though not in Print, which provides, that no Parliament
shall be dismissed till all the Petitions are answered, which I think comes home
to the point; Bills in those days, many times appearing in the form of
Petitions: as not long since we had an excellent Law made, called the Petition
of Right, subsequent to this Statute: and particularly in the Reigns of Henry
the 4th, Henry the 5th, and Henry the 6th, it was usual for Proclamations to be
made in Westminster Hall before the end of every Sessions, that all those that
had any matter to present to the Parliament, should bring it in by such a day;
for otherwise the Parliament at that day would determine. And all this being
bare matter of fact, there can be no other Question about it, but whether it be
so or no.

But for discourse sake, Let Us suppose this Statute, and subsequent practice
all out of doors, and that there is no memorial of Record extant of any such
matter, and then it will be impossible in this or any other like case, to make
a true Judgment, without having recourse to some fixed and standing Rule, which
(in matters of Government, where positive Laws are silent) can be no other than
the fundamental Architecture, and original frame of the Constitution, some
particulars whereof relating to our present discourse, I must be forced to call
over again upon this occasion: you must mind then, that our wisae Ancestors in
modelling our Government, had not only an eye to the Power and Authority of the
Monarch, but also to the Liberties and Properties of the People (things easily
consisting in themselves, and mutually aiding and assisting each other) and
foreseeing that the most exact prudence could not make particular provision for
all occurrences that might happen, and that if time (that great Innovator, as
the Lord Bacon calls it) would of course, and knavery, and folly (by their
influence) by degrees make things worse and worse; and if wisdom and counsel
were not as constantly watchful to make them better and better, the best
founded Government in the world must in tract of time infallibly come to ruin;
they therefore laid it as the Basis of our Policy, that there should be
frequent meetings of the States, to supply all defects, and stop up all
Crannies, or violent Fractions, as they should happen, to the prejudice of the
original Constitution. In the next place, consider what part the Monarch was to
bear in these Conventions, not to have a sole power, but to go in conjunction
with the Nobles and Commons, all acting by the principles and authority of the
first Institution: and what that Learned Prince, King Charles the 1st, says of
Royal Power in general, may be well applied to it in this particular, viz. the
Law is the measure of the Kings Power: and if it be the measure of it, then is
the Power limited by it; and the fundamental Law saying, There shall be
Conventions of the Estates, to encounter and provide against public and
destructive mischiefs whenever they happen; By necessary consequence, a time
for them to meet, and a convenient time of sitting to do something when they
are met, are included, according to the known Rule in your Schools, -- He that
commands a thing to be done, does with the same breath command all such
circumstances, as without which the thing commanded cannot take effect. And
indeed common reason speaks the same: and because time of meeting, and a
convenient time of sitting, are necessary to the very ends and beings of
Parliaments, therefore must the Execution, or bringing them into Act, be lodged
somewhere; and though with the best Decorum and convenience, it fell to the
share of the chief Magistrate to be entrusted with the honorary and formal part
of Summoning and pronouncing the Dissolutions of Parliaments, yet the Law
(which is his rule as well as ours) has plainly enough determined how, and when
he shall do it.

In the last place, the design and wisdom of the first Architects of our
Government, is very apparent, in contriving a Monarchy in the Prince, mixed
with Aristocracy in the House of Peers, and Democracy in the House of Commons,
whereby all the advantages were secured, and inconveniences avoided, which are
ordinarily to be found in simple and uncompounded States: for here is a single
person endued with a sufficiency of Power for Dispatch, and to discharge the
executive part, without danger of a long lasting Tyranny; many Counselors (in
whom the Scripture says there is safety) Nobles and Commons, coming from all
quarters of the Land, as eyewitnesses of the several Exigencies of the State,
and tied up to all imaginable sincerity by their own interest; I say, the
Prince has these to assist and join with him in the Deliberative and
Legislative part, without danger of ambitious Factions, too frequent in simple
Aristocracies; or disordered confusion, which many times happen in simple
Democracies: each of these Estates by the wisdom of our Government moderating
and restraining from excess the Power of the other. Now therefore whatever
shall destroy this Coalition and Mixture, and place the whole balance of all
things in any one of the Powers, can you think it warranted by the Policy of
our Constitution? And whether a single Power choosing whether ever a Parliament
shall sit or no; or if assembled, whether it shall continue a convenient time
to do any thing or no, does not amount to as much, is highly worth your
consideration.


Tu. I remember you told me, that Statutes have been made for the Annual
sitting of Parliaments; suppose that heretofore those Laws were literally put
into execution for several years successively -- Writs went out at the day, the
Counties and Corporations (thinking to build up a Sanctuary for their hopes and
fears) cheerfully neglected their Seeds-time and harvest, and with great charge
and trouble made their Elections, the elected members left their Families and
Estates behind them, and made long pilgrimages in order to attend upon the
public Service; but had scarce ever time to pull off their boots, before they
were dismissed again by a Prorogation or Dissolution; would the true intent of
those Statutes be thus satisfied? And did the Legislators intend nothing more
by them, than that the Lords and Commons should have an opportunity of coming
up to the Parliament House purely for the sake of going down again?


Pu. Upon my word Tutor you are finely come on in a little time; me thinks you
begin to speak warmly of these matters: but a little excess of zeal is natural
to a new convert: or is it because your Pupils are all gone into the Country,
whereas a walk to Heddington, or Shot-over hill, might have served the turn, as
things fell out afterward. Had a Towns-man made such remarks, I should have
thought the cold meat stuck upon his hands, and that he had been out of humor
for the loss of his Boarders. But however the case be with you, good Tutor have
a care of extremes, and by way of Antidote, let me advise you, to resume your
old temper a little, though it be but for discourse-sake and let us hear how you
use to comfort your selves upon such an occasion.


Tu. Very well Sir! I Am very glad you can be so merry; and though your
discourse has made a greater impression upon me than you are aware of, yet for
once I Will comply with your humor, and tell you what we generally say in
vindication of the late and former Dissolutions. To begin therefore with the
last Parliament but one; did it not open with all imaginable expressions of
grace and favor from the King, that any good Subject could desire, either for
the preservation of Religion, his liberty and property at home, or for
supporting our Neighbors and Allies abroad? nay, did not the King invite the
Houses to use all means for their security (excepting only the matter of the
Succession) and when in order to these ends, and for the preservation of
Tangier a supply was ask't, not one penny would be granted.


Pu. I have heard of some general Acts of Pardon, that at first sight make a
great show of Grace and Indemnity, but when a Transgressor comes to look over
the exceptions, he is commonly bilkt in his expectations; and you would do well
to consider, whether the preferring the ordinary course of Succession to the
security of Religion, etc. be not much of the same nature; and I would
willingly learn how it is possible for a zealous Papist to be a good Defender of
the Protestant Faith; but I reserve my self in this point till you give me
farther occasion. As to other matters, pray Sir consider, that we have long
labored under a damnable Popish Plot, and that from Coleman's Papers, and what
witnesses have sworn, it plainly appears that the Conspirators do chiefly rely
upon the French King for the carrying it on to effect. Now Tutor! Money is a
real thing, and will certainly do either good or hurt, expressions may do
neither; and by Parliament-calculation (which by the way I think more
authentic than the Cabals) we can tell the time when a great sum of money
raised to supply extraordinary occasions, was employed to make war upon a
Protestant State, and to advance the Interest of this same French King; and
that another round sum was given for making an Actual War with France, and yet
I have not heard of many men lost in the quarrel; I am sure the then Treasurer
D. must needs think the Monsieur a very sweet-natur'd Gentleman, that was
likely to lend a vast Treasure to his Enemies Flagrante Bello. Therefore pray
let us not run too hard upon the House of Commons, now we know they cannot speak
for themselves; for it is two to one but they saw cause to take care of old
England, before they could come to provide for that hopeful Nursery at Tangier;
and to make our selves stand firm at home, before they could hope to support
our Friends abroad.


Tu. I don't well understand you; but I say, instead of giving the King money,
they plied him with strange Addresses, some say rather like Remonstrances than
Answers to his demands, which no man could think would be as current as money,
nor likely to give the King half so much satisfaction.


Pu. Really Tutor, if by the Constitution of our Government, a Parliament had
only been designed to be a Conduit-Pipe for the Peoples purses to run out at,
your last Objection would be unanswerable, but as the case stands, they are to
give the King Advice as well as Money; ay and to make that Advice Authoritative
and obligatory to the People. And though it is certainly the Duty of all good
Subjects, to consult the King's pleasure in all things that are really for his
Service and the common good of the Nation, yet under Favor I think the house
of Commons (having a Fundamental share in the legislative part, and
Guardianship of the Government) are bound in Conscience to make the public
good their chiefest aim, and if for that end they were forced modestly to
remember the surreptitious gaining of Orders for the continuance of Popish
Officers, the procuring new Commissions for known Papists, the assassinating of
some, and procuring the turning out of other Protestant Magistrates for doing
their duties, the corrupting of Witnesses, and forging fatal crimes against
Protestant Dissenters, the pressing and Admission of the Romish Religion upon a
Protestant State, by persons under a public Character from England; and as the
Sum of all, A popish Influence upon the continuance or Prorogations of
Parliaments. And all this even during the malignity and hellish operation of a
Popish Plot upon us. I say I cannot see, how the necessary remembrance of these
things (especially when done with all possible decency and respect to the King)
should deserve an hard thought, or jealous and suspected name, except you do
believe, that our Lay-Title to our own throats, ought to give way to the Jus
Divinum of the Papists.


Tu. Well! but were there not Arbitrary Orders made, for taking Persons into
Custody, for matters that had no Relation to privileges of Parliament, and
strange illegal Votes, declaring diverse eminent persons to be enemies to the
State, without process of Law, or hearing their defense, or having any proofs
made against them.


Pu. I think it is agreed on all hands, that the House of Commons have Power to
commit and censure such as shall offer any Violence or Injury but to one of
their moenial Servants; so tender is the genius of our Government, of the
Privileges of Parliament, that it puts the punishment of so small and remote
an offense as this into their own hands, without having Recourse to the
ordinary Courts of Justice: And can you imagine, that they have not authority
to punish Crimes, that strike at the very Root and Being of Parliaments
themselves? And whether obstructing, violating and abhorring our undoubted
Rights of Petitioning for a Parliament (at a time when, if ever, there was need
of one) did not directly look that way, I will leave it to your self to judge.

And as to the illegal Votes (as you are pleased to call them) against some
eminent Persons, etc. I pray God those eminent persons themselves have not
drawn you in to such an Objection; for pray Sir how shall it be tried, whether
a Vote of either House be Legal or Illegal in the course of it? Certainly by
nothing but the Law and Course of Parliaments, which under Favor, I think
cannot be determined, designed, or judged of by any other Court or Person out
of Parliament whatever. And if it should, there would be a Circulation in our
Policy, public Justice would run in a wheel, and no cause whatever of this
nature could receive a final and ultimate determination, which I take to be
more than an Answer to all your Objections. Besides in this particular case,
the House of Commons declared their Opinion of these great men, in order to
farther proceedings, had they had time, and herein their Vote was but a
Groundwork for an Impeachment, which would regularly have brought their
Opinion into Judgment, and I would willingly hear a reason, why this first step
of the Process might not be made without foreign proof, the House of Commons, in
cases of Impeachment being in nature of a Grand Jury of the Kingdom, which may
have a self Evidence, and present and proceed upon matters within their own
Knowledge.


Tu. But what can you say to the Votes against Anticipations of the Revenue?


Pu. Much more than I think fit to say at present, and therefore I shall only
put you in mind of the real War with Holland, and statute War with France, and
desire you to consider what Mr. Coleman says upon this Subject, as to the
Occasions of our having or not having Parliaments: But pray Tutor remember,
that you have tied your self up to urge all these things, as causes of the
Dissolutions, and I will appeal to all men of Conversation then in London,
whether the succeeding Dissolution was not generally discoursed of, and
believed through the whole Town, before the passing those Votes, which were
chiefly intended (as an Argument) to persuade the sitting of a Parliament,
during the Distress and Hazards of the Kingdom.


Tu. But how can you justify their Votes, against putting the poenal Laws in
Execution against the Protestant Dissenters, whenas the Judges are bound by
their Oaths to execute the Laws, did they not hereby assume to themselves a
Power of suspending Acts of Parliament?


Pu. Very well Sir! by this, and by Dangerfield's Evidence I dare lay Eight
Pounds a Week, I can spell out your meaning, And --


Tu. Why, how now Pupil, sure you don't think I Am in Earnest.


Pu. I know it, and yet the bare mentioning such an Objection, during our
present circumstances: does naturally make me a little serious; and therefore
pray consider that the sole End of all our Laws, is the public good, which
chiefly consists in the Enjoyment and Preservation of our Government, our
Religion and Properties, and that there has been, and yet is an hellish and
damnable Plot contrived, and carried on by Papists for the subversion of them
all. If then it does appear the Protestant Dissenters are a numerous Party in
the Nation, and have all along made Head against the Conspirators to the Envy
of their Neighbors, and testified their zeal to the Protestant Religion and
Detestation of the Plot, at least equally to any other sort of men (for the
truth of which, I dare appeal to the Common Ingenuity of all sober Churchmen,
and to the malice of the Conspirators themselves, who have put a particular
mark of Honor upon their Integrity, by forging Sham plots and suborning false
Witnesses against them) I say if this be their case, where then is their Crime,
or rather how great was the wisdom, I had almost said Gratitude, of the House
of Commons in Voting -- That it is their Opinion, that the prosecuting
Protestant Dissenters upon the poenal Statutes, is at this time grievous to the
Subject, an Encouragement to Popery, and Dangerous to the Peace of the Kingdom.
And we all know, that most of these cutting Laws, were either new made, or
scoured up and furbished at a time when it was natural to pass from one extreme
to another; but however the Reason of a Law ceasing, is vertually a Repeal of
the Law itself, and yet the House of Commons were so modest as barely to
declare their Opinion pro Tempore, till a legal Provision might be made for
Protestant Dissenters in a Regular and Formal way: its plain they did not
pretend by their single Vote to alter the Laws, for if they had, why then did
they bring in a Bill for Repealing the 35th of Elizabeth, which passing both
Houses, was afterward carefully lost, lest so precious a Jewel might be
wanting upon occasion? But if State-Oaths do critically oblige all that have
taken them, officiously to execute whatever Laws are in being, and at all
times, without any regard to the good or evil that may ensue. I can neither see
how Proclamations to put particular Laws in Execution came first in use, nor
sufficiently admire the good Fortune of persons Reconciled to the Church of
Rome, and of English Priests and Jesuits amongst so many Laws that call them
Traitors.


Tu. No more of that I beseech you; let us now come to the short Lived
Parliament here at Oxford, at the beginning of which, the Houses were Advised,
to make the Laws of the Land their Rule, as the King was Resolved they should
be His; and Liberty was given them to put the Administration of the Government
into protestant hands, in case the Crown should deseend upon a Popish Prince;
and yet the Commons could not forbear falling upon the Succession, though the
King had told them his pleasure in that matter beforehand.


Pu. If Parliaments in their Legislative capacity, were so Tied up to the Laws
in being, as not to have power to Repeal any Old, or make any New ones, how
came we to have any Acts of Parliament at all? or how could they provide
suitable Remedies for the Occurrences that happen in every Age, which was one
main end of their Institution? It Is true indeed, the executive power of the
King is Restrained to Laws already made, as is evident Vi Termini; for there
cannot be an execution of what has not an Actual Existence, and I am confident
this Legal course will at long Run be most for His Majesty's service, whatever
some Bankers may have suggested to the contrary, since the shutting up of the
Exchequer. As to the matter of the Succession, I shall say the less, because
more has been said already both within and without doors, than any one hitherto
has been pleased to answer; and if upon just grounds, the Parliament has power
in a Legislative way, to Attaint any Subject whatsoever of Treason (which cuts
off the Man and Inheritance at one blow) their mercy sure in sparing you Life,
cannot be thought an excess of their power; and that the D. T. succeeding to
the Crown in an ordinary way, is inconsistent with the welfare of the Nation,
is even confessed by the Opposers of the Bill, by their pretending to an
Expedient, which as it was proposed, in my poor Opinion, is the greatest Riddle
in the world. For the giving a solitary and empty Name of King to one man, and
placing the Execution of the Kingly Power in the hands of another, does not
only divide the Office from the person, and consequently Revive that decrved
destinction, between the Natural and Politic Capacity, but strikes at the very
Being of Monarchy it self. For if the naked Style and Title of a King, will
satisfy the Notion of being a Monarch, and all the Authority and Power may be
translated to one other hand, by consequence they may to more than one, or to
many hands, whereby you may have a Monarchy in Name, but in Effect and Reality
an Aristocracy or Commonwealth, and so the Expedient becomes Felo de se, and
supplants that Government it pretends to support.


Tu. Alas poor Monsieur Expedient! why, hark you Pupil, a By-stander would
think you hired me to make objections on purpose that you might answer them;
but what say you to the business of Fitz Harris, and disagreement of the Houses
about it?


Pu. Ay, the business of Fitz Harris, Tutor! hinc illae Lachrimae, now you
touch a sore part indeed, which gives me just occasion to observe and adore the
boundless mercy and goodness of Almighty God, not only in giving warning to
this sinful and ungrateful Nation, of a Damnable Popish Plot against it, but
also in carrying on the Discovery from Time to Time, to the conviction of
Infidelity it self, and eternal Reproach of all that Power and Artifice, that
have been made use of to conceal and suppress it. And now at last in this
business of Fitz Harris, we have (as it were) one Risen from the Dead, to
Preach Belief to Infidels. A known Papist comes in, and tells us he can no
longer bear the Burden of his own Guilty Knowledge, and is therefore forced to
confess, that what the Protestant Witnesses have said, is True, and that Sir
Edmund Eury Godfrey was Murdered by Papists. That the Dutch War, and Black
heath Army had an ill aspect upon the Protestant Interest: He tells us of great
preparations of men and money in Foreign parts, to carry on this cursed Design:
And that Ambassadors from abroad, and Persons of the first Rank of Subjects
here at home, are engaged in the Conspiracy; and who knows but a prudent
management of such a Witness, might produce a Discovery of yet higher
Importance; therefore the House of Commons thought fit to take the Cause of
Fitz Harris into their own hands, and to be Eyewitnesses of his Innocence or
Guilt, as to the Crimes objected against him, that so they might satisfy
themselves, and all the world, in the matter of his Evidence. And if such a
Cause as this (during our present Circumstances) be not fit to be heard in the
Highest Judicatory of the Nation, I shall despair of ever hearing of any that
will not be too little for its cognizance. As to the Debitum Justitiae, or
Right of the Matter, I shall say the less, because some of the Noble Lords
themselves in their late Protestation, have said so much on the Commons side.
But pray consider that the Lords were first in the disagreement; for they
Rejected the Impeachment, without any previous Conference to give or receive
any Reasons (which manner of proceeding in common conversation, is very unusual
amongst good Neighbors) and what followed after in the House of Commons, I
conceive did not in the least exclude them from giving or receiving
satisfaction in the matter in difference, but rather made way for a Conference
in order to it; the good effects whereof would no doubt have been suitable to
the wisdom of both Houses, had they continued longer together.

And now good Tutor, if this be all you have to object, I hope you will not
take Advantage of the Dead, nor make the Venerable Ghost of an House of Commons
stand up in a Sheet, and do Penance in your Churches.


FINIS.

