To all the faithful and suffering Members, in all Holes, Prisons and Gaoles,
for the Word of God, and Testimony of Jesus Christ, with the rest of the
Faithful, wherever scattered upon the face of the earth.
DEar Brethren and Sisters, hear the word of the Lord God: Thus says the Lord,
though you now drink the cup of adversity, and eat the bread of affliction, and
are trampled upon, as though you were not worthy to live upon the earth; yet,
notwithstanding all the fury of Men, you are resolved in the strength of my
Spirit for ever to be deprived of the sweet enjoyment of Wife, Husband, tender
Children, Parents, all outward possessions, liberty and life, before you deny
the testimony of my Name before the Sons of Men: Oh! you dear and tender
Children, who love not your lives unto death this day, that you may finish a
good testimony for the glory of my Name, says the Lord God; Lift up your heads
in the light of my Covenant, and believe in my Name, for I am near unto you,
says the mighty God of safety; and let not any weight or burdens lie upon you,
for I will be more then Husband to Wife, and more then Wife to Husband, or
Parents to Children, or Children to Parents; yea, I will be the Husband of the
Widow, and a Father of the Children who are deprived of their tender Parents
for my Name sake: I will enlarge your borders in the life of my Righteousness:
you that suffer in true innocence will I refresh with the depth of my mercy
yea, I will guard you with the Angels of my presence, and all that devise
mischief against you shall be confounded before the glory of my power, with
which I will keep and preserve you in the word of my patience, and safety in my
presence, says the Lord God: Therefore you dear Children who drink the deepest
in sufferings, think it not hard, for it is my purpose unto you all that has
not any eye to self, but alone seeks my glory in all ye do; I will make you
more and more honorable in the glory of my life, and double my blessings upon
you and yours; for I have beholden your integrity, and my bowels are mightily
moved with compassion toward you; therefore am I arisen for your sakes this
day, to declare unto you, my suffering people, that not a hair of your heads
shall perish, neither shall you be detained in Prisons and desolate holes any
longer then I have determined shall be for your eternal good, and the praise
and glory of my Name for ever: Therefore in my life stand faithful in
resistance of every evil thought, or what ever would cause you to murmr, or
desire any thing, but what you know will advance my praise: And all be subject
to the measure of my light and life, and let not any seek a pre-eminence or
esteem amongst men, neither let self-striving, nor self-serving have power in
any, but in true humility, love and meekness watch one over another, and let
the strong take the weak by the hand, that you may all gently, in meekness,
love and holy fear, dread my Name, and serve one another, that your love may be
manifested unto me (says the Lord your God) and one unto another, in the naked
simplicity of your spirits; then will I make my dwelling with you, and my
dreadful glorious presence, you shall all feel mighty in you and amongst you,
moving you in the exercise of my Spirit, to the renown of my Name, and comfort
of one another, and I will crown you with heavenly blessings, and the glory of
my powerful life, and you shall praise my Name for ever, that ever I made you
my Jewels, and counted you worthy to suffer for the testimony of my Name: for I
will go before you through all the waters and floods of affliction, and I will
appear with you before all the Councils of the sons of men, and my saving power
shall compass you about in the hot furnace of the fiery afflictions; Therefore
trust in my Name, ye my dear Children, and cast all your care upon me; and if
any of you seal your testimony in the word of my patience with your blood, I
will take care of your tender Wives, Children or Parents, for whom your souls
have been poured out unto me for their good. Therefore hear my word which is
sounded unto you from the throne of my grace and eternal glory; rejoice not
too much in Spirits being made subject, but throw down all your Crowns, that
there be not a self-seeking, self serving Spirit in the Family of my people,
but all feel the birth immortal, raised up in the resurrection of my life in
you all, which truly makes Self of no reputation. So that all loftiness be
laid low, and haughtiness in every one truly bowed down, that I the Lord God
in you all, may be loved, obeyed and exalted, who is taking, and will take to
me my great power to exalt the meek upon the earth, and reign over all the
pride of the Children of men; that so my Sons may be brought from far, and my
Daughters from the ends of the earth, in the sight of all people, whom I will
make to confess in subjection to my power, that you are the beloved people of
the most high God, and the righteous Seed whom the Lord has blessed, and no
weapon formed against you shall prosper but come to naught, which will be
hastened for your comfort, and certainly performed according to what is here
declared, to your eternal joy; and you shall assuredly know the mouth of the
Lord has spoken it.

The word of the Lord, as before expressed, came upon me in the Common Gaol in
Warwick, the 13th. of the first Month 1664. which constrained to be given
forth from the Spirit of the Lord, through your Brother and Companion in
tribulation and Kingdom of patience in the Lord Jesus.

William Deusbury.
Send this abroad in the fear of the Lord, to be read amongst the dear
suffering people of the most high God.




