A DIALOGUE BETWEEN Dr. SHERLOCK, the King of FRANCE, the Great TVRK, and Dr.
OATS.
DR. Oats. What a parcel of Rogues are assembled together here? I Will call the
Mobb to gut them.


King of France. Pray Dr. hold; here is a thousand Louis d'ors for thee.


Great Turk. Come, thou lookst like a true Musullman; here is twenty Purses more.


Dr. Oats. You Rascals and Scoundrels, I scorn your Money; but oh! There Is
whiping Dr. Sherlock.


King of France. I and my Ally Sultan, are both come in propriis Personis, to
thank the Master of the Christian Temple for his late Book, which perhaps may
do us more Service than all the Mercenary Pens of France, or than all our
Dragoons and Janissaries. I have now God Almighty's Authority, and an
irresistible Power in Lorrain, Franch Comte, Strasburgh, Treves, Flanders and
Savoy; though I confess, I ravished them away from their legal Owners, contrary
to my own Oaths and sacred Treaties; yet Heaven justifies me by her Oracle Dr.
Sherlock, who proclaims to all the World, that Providence brought these things
to pass, and that God has deputed me his Vicegerent with an uncontrollable
Commission. The Lorrainers and Savoyards must now fight against God, if they
fight against me or for their lawful Dukes.


Great Turk. My Case is the same; this Christian Priest has pleaded my Divine
Authority over the Holy Land, and Christ's Sepulcher: If the Vizier had taken
Vienna in the year 1683, and had swallowed all the Roman Empire, where could
have been the Perfidy, and the Treachery, which Christendom brands us
Mahometans with, and which our Mufti has often thrown in our faces; seeing the
great English Apostle attributes all to Providence, and seals all Success with
the Finger of God Almighty? Upon our Settlement in Germany, the Natives had
been obliged to bear Allegiance to us, and never to restore their Emperor and
Electors.


Dr. Oats. Pox, Catzo; my Brother Dr. stole that School-boy's Notion out of
Lucan; Victrix causa dijs placuit: But yet the great Cato (whom Sir William
Temple might have placed in his immortal Essay of Heroic Virtue) was of
another Opinion, and could by no Flattery nor Promise, be brought to call
Caesar a Ruler. If his Priests had told him, that the Gods had brought all that
about, and that Heaven had Ordained and Commissioned Caesar to be Irresistible
Emperor of Rome, how would his Virtue, and his Constancy, seated on the true
brow of Majesty, have thrown disdain upon those vile Sycophants, and Betrayers
of their Country? Si quis potestatem Populi Romani laeserit, Is morte puniendus.


Dr. Sherlock. Methinks, Gentlemen, you are very merry, and familiar,
considering you are God's Representatives. How came that impudent Dr. of
Divinity into your Company? They are ashamed of him at Dick's, and the Temple
Club, as Mr. Ph. informs me. Et cum nemini obtrudi potest, itur ad Deos.


Dr. Oats. I do not trouble God Almighty half so much as thou do; I never
call him down upon the Stage, to act in all Scenes and Revolutions of State, as
thou do every day: Thou make him always the Harlequin and Scaramouchi of
thy Farces; a King cannot tread the Carpet, but all the Host of Heaven must be
summoned; though thy King is one day Noakes, the next day Lee; one day
Christian, another day Turk, sometimes neither. Now, Brother Doctor, I never
fill my head with these Chimerical, Fairy fancies of things done in Heaven, I
look only upon Men and Things, upon Laws and Compacts; whilst thou, poor man,
dream'st in thy Study, all vapour'd with Hypocondriack Enthusiasm, tickled with
Visions, or else swelled with Envy, Pride or Ambition; I drink Coffee amongst
the Beaux Esprits, mores hominum video and urbes, and hear more truth in one
day from those fellows you call Atheists, than from a 130 Pulpits in a Year;
they all believe in one God, are of no Sect, or Cabal, under no prejudice of
Education or Interest, are neither Jews, Turks, nor Christians, but all
Tamerlanes.


French King. This Pillory-Doctor has the most Wit of the two; I perceive he
has had better Education: However Brother Sultan, the Visionary Doctor is for
our purpose; for he Damns the Huguenots now in Arms against me, all the
Vaudoies, and all the Prince of Orang's Friends, who took up Arms against God's
Authority; but the Devil is in this Doctor, who at the same time runs down my
dear Ally Teckely, and sets up my mortal Enemy Frederick William with God's
Commission; though that is my comfort the Doctor unmans the People of England,
puts them all into Hell, takes away their Arms of Laws, and the Weapons of
their Senate, destroys the basis of their State, Acts of Convention and
Parliament, and sets the Prince up in a floating Enchanted Castle in the Air,
built by Centaurs, Hobgoblin's, Bo's, Nick, etc. As for the Doctor's new
Commission from Heaven that he fastens to the Prince of Orange whether he will
or no, I care not a rush for it; my Friend James will soon cancel that, for he
still retains his Right, and wants nothing but Possession. I Will see next Summer
what 120 Men of War, and 30000 Land-men will do; but then this Divelish Doctor
robs me of all the Glory, and of all the Power; for Providence must do the
feat, and James derive all his Authority from God; no thanks to my Arms, or
Money; and the Doctor curses the People that shall offer to assist his Rightful
Legal James; so that in the main he breaks our heads, and then gives us a
Plaster, and seems resolved to fall like a Cat upon his Feet: Sometimes he
plays the Williamite, but in a fools Coat, sometimes the Jacobite under a
Vizard; sometimes he tells the People it is Damnation to Fight for the Prince of
Orange; then a little while after it is Damnation to Fight against him: 'Twas
Damnation in the Year 88, to Fight against Jemmy; and now it is the same Sin to
fight for him; so that this famous Doctor plays the Merry Andrew with the
World, and like the Powder of Pimper le Pimp, turns up what Trump the Knave of
Clubs calls for.


Dr. Sherlock. You Kings being Heavens Brats, may rail and do what you please;
I Will Swear to Obey you all, if you were ten Thousand; mount the Throne, and you
are as much Jure Divino as I am in the Pulpit; however take heed how you
disgust me; for at one Stroke I can utterly destroy both your selves and your
Governments. Alamanzor, Scanderbeg, and all Sir William Temple's Hero's are but
Pigmies to me; I can command God Almighty to be of what side I please; Heaven
is my Footstool. I Will undertake to make Captain Tom, the most Dreadful, the
most Sovereign, and the most Divine Thing upon Earth.


Dr. Oats. I would only know which way you would confer that Power upon him;
for why should not I convey it as well as you? Will you send it in a Basket as
a Token of your pure Love to absolute Sovereignty, or in a Billet Dieu, or in a
Poulet as I used to do to the Nuns at Salamanca?


Dr. Sherlock. The two Sultans are gone; Sirrah Oats avoid the Room, I Will have
no further Conference with an Anti-Athanasian Doctor.


Dr. Oats. I Will go when I think fit; I believe all Creeds more than your new
coined one of Allegiance; so I dismiss thee with a Speque Metuque Procul hinc,
procul ito, Hoque


FINIS.
Printed in the Year, 1691.


