The Faithful TESTIMONY OF THAT Ancient Servant of the Lord, AND Minister of
the everlasting Gospel William Dewsbery; IN His Books, Epistles and Writings,
Collected and Printed for future SERVICE.

The Righteous shall be had in everlasting Remembrance,

Psalm 112.6. London, Printed and Sold by Andrew Soul, at the Crooked Billet in
Holloway-Lane, Shoreditch: And at the Three-Kyes, in Nags-Head-Court, in
Grace Church Street.

A Testimony Concerning that faithful Servant of the Lord William Dewsbery,
from us who have long known him, and his faithful Travels and Labors and
suffering, in and for the Gospel of Christ.
Precious to the Lord is the death of his Faithful Saints and Servants, who in
their Life time have given up to do his will; and their faithfulness worthy to
be commemorated to Posterity, with those Ancients and worthies of old, who by
their faithfulness obtained a good Report: And since it has pleased God in
this our Age to cause his Gospel-day to appear, and the Son of righteousness to
arise, to expel the darkness of a long night of Apostasy, and the Clouds of
Ignorance that have been over many, and to raise up many living and faithful
Witnesses thereof; some of which have faithfully finished their Testimony, and
fulfilled their Course with Joy, and laid down their Heads in Peace with God,
and entered into that Eternal Rest prepared through Christ Jesus, for the
faithful; among whom this our dear deceased Brother was one whom God raised up
early in the morning of his Glorious day, and made an eminent Instrument in his
Hand for the publication of his mighty Day of Power, preaching Repentance, in
order to the Remission of Sin, and bearing a faithful and universal Testimony
to the free Grace of God to mankind; and the Lord was with him, and prospered
him in his manifold Sufferings, Travels, Labors and Exercises in the Gospel of
Christ, and word of the Ministry, as may be seen in this small Collection of
his several Books, Testimonies and Epistles, herein contained; and many were
made sensible of the benefit of his Labors, Counsels, Admonitions and
Encouragements, to the good and welfare of their Immortal Souls, for the Lord
our God (in whose Dread and Zeal he Labored) did indue him with Faith and
Courage, and great boldness for his Name and Truth; and he published the same in
great plainness, and in the simplicity thereof. To the tender hearted he was
exceeding tender, but to the Stubborn and Lofty he was sharp and plain,
admonishing them, and declaring the righteous Judgment of God against that
state ^aiting and endeavoring with much patience and long-suffering the
recovery of such who through the subtilty of the Enemy have fallen from Truth,
and from the Unity with the People of God; but when any have made it their work
to cause Division and Discord, and to sow Dissension among Brethren, he would
plainly Testify against them, and reject them, and in the Dread of the Lords
Power Thunder out Gods Judgment against their Deceit and Wickedness, as he did
upon such occasion in his last visit to London, a few days before his departure
out of the Body, which he then told some of us was near at hand.

He was a Man religiously concerned for the Honor of God, and had a great care
upon his Spirit, that those that had believed, and made profession of the
Truth, might answer it in a holy and blamless Conversation, which he would
often say could never be done by the largeness of Knowledge, nor strength of
Comprehension, but by a real dying to their Wills and Affections, by the virtue
of the daily Cross; he was also sincerely devoted to maintain Love and Unity
among the People of God* He was fervent and fr^^uent in Prayer to God for the
good of his Church, and for the gathering of People to their true Rest, wherein
we have had true Unity with him, and our Souls, with many more, have been often
refreshed and comforted with him; his many deep Sufferings for the Truth, and
his faithful Travels and Labors in the Gospel are never to be forgotten.

And although the Envy of Wicked and Unreasonable Men was very great, and
fierce against him, especially in those early days of his Travel and Labors;
for the sake whereof he was often Beaten, Stoned and Imprisoned; he neither
feared their Malice, Threats nor Blows, but boldly went forth publishing the
Truth, Testiifyng to that of God in all Consciences; and the Hand of divine
Providence did often deliver him in a wonderful manner out of the hands of the
wicked, for his Names sake.

And finally, having faithfully served out his Generation, and finished his
Sufferings, Testimony and Course with Joy, he has now obtained the Crown
Immortal, and is gone into the everlasting Rest, from all his Labors, and his
Works follow him, with the blessed Reward in the Kingdom of Glory and Peace,
that never shall have End.

George Whitehead, Francis Camfeild, Richard Pinder, Steeven Crisp, Richard
Richardson, James Parkes.

London 19 th 12 th Month, 1689.
ONe remarkable Passage I often remember: About the Year, 1653. upon a
Market Day, at Sedbury in Yorkshire, as W. D. was publishing the Truth at the
Market-Cross, and warning the People to turn from the evil of their ways to the
Grace of God, and to the Light in their Consciences, etc. Some rude Persons
endeavoring with violence to push him down; and setting their Backs against a
high stone Cross, with their hands against him, they pusht down the Cross;
which with the fall broke in pieces, many being about it, yet it missed the
People and little or no hurt was done thereby, whereas, if it had fallen upon
them diverse might have been killed.

This preservation I and diverse more observed then, as a special Providence of
God attending him in his Labor, though I was then but a Youth of sixteen
years-old, or thereabouts, being convinced of Truth above a year before.

G. W.

Concerning our dear Friend and Brother William Dewsbery; the time of his
Owning and Receiving the Truth.
WHen I came out of Darby Dungeon, in the year 1651. I passing through several
Counties, Visiting Friends, I came into Yorkshire, to a place called Balby,
where Thomas Kilham, John Kilham, Richard Farnsworth, and Thomas Aldam came to
me, and were Convinced of God's Truth; so then I passed toward
Sinderhill-Green, where some were Convinced; and so I passed to one Lieutenant
Ropers House, where James Nailer came to see me, where he was Convinced after I
had some Discourse with him; and then Thomas Goodyear came to me, and after I
had declared the Truth to him, he was Convinced, and received the Truth; and I
had Meetings at Lieutenant Ropers, whither several People came, who after they
had heard the Truth declared, received it; and at one evening Meeting there,
William Dewsbery and his Wife came, and heard me declare the Truth, and after
the Meeting, it being a Moonshine Night, I walked out into the Field, and
William Dewsbery and his Wife came to me, from the Meeting, into the Field, and
confessed to the Truth, and received it, and after some time he did testify to
it; and in 1653. he came into the North, into Westmerland, Cumberland and
Lancashire, and declared the Truth both in Steeple Houses and Meetings; and
underwent great Sufferings, Beating, etc. with the rest of Friends for the
Truth and then after was Imprisoned at York, and also at Northampton in 1654.
And when I was brought up a Prisoner to Oliver Cromwell, I got leave of him
that brought me up, to see him in that Prison; and after that he Traveled up
and down a great Part of the Nation, declaring the Truth, and went under great
Sufferings with the rest of Friends, who went in great hazard of their Lives,
declaring the Truth of Christ. And in his latter Days he was long Imprisoned in
Warwick, but after he was set at Liberty, he came to Visit Friends at London,
where he bore a faithful Testimony for Love and Unity, and against the Spirit
of Division; and after went back, and finished his Course, and laid down his
Head at Warwick in Peace with the Lord, in 1688.

George Fox.
London, the 16 th of the 10 th Month 1688.
Here Follows some Expressions of his, amongst a few Friends, near a week
before his Departure this Life.
BEing met together, rising from his Bed in great weakness of Body, he said to
them, my God has yet put in my Heart to bear a Testimony in his Name and
blessed. Truth, and I can never forget the day of his great Power and blessed
Appearance, when he first sent me to Preach his Everlasting Gospel and proclaim
the Day of the Lord, to all the People; and also he confirmed the same by Signs
and Wonders, and particularly, by a Lame Woman, who went on Crutches; where I
with my Dear Brethren, George Fox nnd Richard Farnswarth were cast, and as I
cried mightily unto the Lord in Secret that he would signally Manifest himself
at that time amongst us, and give witness of his Power and presence with us, R.
F. in the Name of the Lord took her by the Hand, and G. F. after spoke to her
in the Power of God, and bid her stand up, and she did, and Immediately walked
straight, having no need of Crutches any more; therefore Friends be faithful,
and trust in the Lord your God, for this I can say, I never since played the
Coward, but joyfully entered Prisons as Palaces, telling mine Enemies to hold
me there as long as they could, and in the Prison House I sung praises to my
God, and esteemed the Bolts and Locks put upon me as Jewels, and in the Name of
the Eternal God I always got the Victory, for they could keep me no longer than
the Determined time of my God, and Friends, this I must once again testify to
you in the Name of the Lord God, that what I saw above thirty Years ago still
rests as a Testimony to leave behind me; That a Dreadful terrible Day is at
hand, and will certainly come to pass; but the Time when I cannot say; but all
put on strength in the Name of the Lord, and Wait to feel his Eternal Power to
preserve you through the Tribulations of these days, that approach very near,
in the sense of which I have often been distressed, and bowed down in Spirit,
with Cries and Tears to my God, for the preservation of his Heritage; and this
I have further to signify, that my departure draws nigh; blessed be my God I
am prepared, I have nothing to do but Dye, and put off this corrupt mortal
Tabernacle, this Flesh that has so many Infirmities, but the Life that dwells
in it, transcends above all, out of the reach of Death Hell and the Grave, and
Immortallity and eternal Life is my Crown, forever and ever; therefore you that
are left behind fear not, nor be discouraged, but go on in the Name and Power
of the Lord, and bear a faithful and living Testimony for him in your day, and
the Lord will prosper his Work in your Hand, and cause his Truth to flourish
and spread abroad, for it shall have the Victory and no Weapon formed against
it shall prosper, the Lord has determined it shall possess the Gates of its
Enemies, and the Glory and the Light thereof shall shine more and more, until
the perfect Day; so concluded in Prayers to the Lord, with servent Breathings
and Supplications for all his People every where, but more especially, for his
dearly beloved Friends, assembled together at the Yearly Meeting at London,
where he had intended to have been, if the Lord had given him Health, his dear
Love was to all Friends that should enquire of him.

He departed this Life, the 17 th of the 4 th Month at Warwick; and was Buried
the 18 th 1688.
This is the Word of the Living God to his Church he has called and chosen out
of the World, 1653
to place his Name into, order, and guide in his pure Wisdom to his praise and
glory, who alone is worthy God over all blessed for ever.
THat in every particular Meeting of Friends, Servants and Children of the most
high God, that there be chosen from among you, one or two who are most grown in
the Power and Life, in the pure discerning in the Truth, to take the care and
charge over the Flock of God in that place; and this is the Word of the living
God to you who are chosen,

To watch over the Flock of God, to whom I commit the charge and care to take
the oversight thereof, not by constraint, but willingly, not for filthy Lucre,
but of a ready mind: I charge and command you in the presence of the living
God, not to rule as Lords over Gods Heritage, but rule in the Power of the
Spirit in all purity, to be Examples to the Flock, and to see that order be
kept in the Church, in constant meeting together, according to the Rule that
has been given forth, once a week, or more if it may be, beside the First Day
Meeting, and to have a general Meeting with other Friends near to you, once in
two or three weeks, as the Lord orders and makes way: Be not slack and
backward, but faithful to the Lord in improving every opportunity for Friends
to meet; and to lay the charge and care of some Friends that is the most grown
in Truth, in every Town where Friends are scattered, to see they meet together
to wait on the Lord three or four hours as the Lord orders, one night or two in
a week, and to watch over one another with a pure single Eye, to see those that
come amongst them walk orderly according to what they profess; and if any walk
disorderly, for them to whom the care and charge is committed, or any other
which discerns them, and is moved to speak to them, to deal plainly with them,
in reproving them, and ministering to the pure in the Conscience, for the
restoring of them; and if they will not reform, acquaint two or three more that
are the most grown in the Truth, or you to whom the charge and care of the
Flock is committed, and you, with the other, that did speak to them in tender
Bowels of love, admonish them, and with plainness of speech minister to the
pure in the Consciences, to raise up the Witness; to judge and cut down the
deceit, that their Souls may be saved, and their Nakedness covered; but if they
still walk in disorder, when the Church is meet together, reprove them openly;
and if they do not still reform, but walk in their Filthiness, when the Church
is met together in the Name of the Lord Jesus Christ, charge them to depart
from amongst you; so cast them out, and not have any union with them, not so
much as to Eat with them, until they repent and turn to the Lord, to walk in
obedience to that which is pure; if they do, then receive them again; but if
they still walk in the Stubberness of their Wills, and not bend to the pure in
their Conscience, keep them forth, that not any filthy Person dwell in the
House of God; then will the blessing of the Lord God be with you: And this is
his Word to you, to see that there be not any in outward Want in the Church,
and that all walk orderly in their Places and Callings, and if any Root of
bitterness spring up in any, which causes Strife in their minds one against
another, as soon as you know of it, call such before you, and examine the
matter strictly, and stand in the Wisdom and Power of God, to guide you to
judge the Cause, and end it in Righteousness; but if the Cause be hard for you
to discern, the measure you are grown to cannot discern betwixt the Parties; I
charge you, and command you in the presence of the living God, not to be hasty
in the Cause come before you, to order it in your doubtful and dark minds, for
what is not of Faith is of Sin, but to send for some that is more grown in
discerning to judge the Cause, and end it in Righteousness; then will Deceit be
judged, and Strife kept out, and the Innocent set free to serve the Lord, and
your union will be in Christ Jesus where you will bring forth Fruit abiding in
him, and through his Blood you shall overcome the World in you, and without,
and shall reign Kings upon the Earth: In the Power of Christ you shall command
the unclean Spirit, in all his appearances within you and without, and he shall
submit to the Power of God in you, dwelling in him who alone is Power, and to
whom all glory belongs for ever: The eternal pure powerful and dreadful Spirit
of the most high God, rest upon you whom he has chosen to watch over his
Flock, and his mighty Power open the pure eternal Eye in you, to discern and
separate between the Precious and Vile, the Holy and the Unholy, and furnish
you with Courage and Boldness, and pure Wisdom to rule in the Power of his
Spirit, to cut down all deceit, 1654
and to wash the Disciples Feet in bowing to the pure in the least appearance,
and ministering to it, to strengthen the desire raised up toward the Name of
the Lord, until Judgment be brought forth into Victory, then will you have
union together in that which is pure eternal begotten of God, who reigns over
all blessed for ever; and Wisdom's justified of her Children.

W. D.
Writ in the Year 1653.
This is the Word of the Lord to thee Oliver Cromwell, called, Lord Protector.
THus says the Lord God of Heaven and Earth to thee, Oliver Cromwell, Why do
thou slight my Counsel, and harden thy Heart against it, which I declare to
thee by my Sons and Daughters, and is witnessed in thy Conscience by my Word in
thee, which called on thee to trust no longer in the Arm of Flesh, nor seek
great things for thy self, as those did I drove out before thee in my Wrath,
and destroyed in my Fury, and the fearfulness of my Displeasure consumed them;
and has given thee power into thy Hand who promised me in the day of thy
Distress, if I would deliver thee in that day, and give the power over all that
stood up against thee, then would thou take away all these Unrighteous Laws,
which is contrary to my Righteous Law in the Conscience, which were made by
those I drove out before thee, that my Children should not be Persecuted any
more by any outward Law; but have free Liberty to declare my mind, as I moved
them by my Spirit; and into thy power I have committed what thou requiredst of
me, that thou might perform thy promises to me? and now I have tried thee,
and in this day of thy Trial, thou have proved unfaithful to me, and to my
People, and no truth have I found in thee in this day, as to perform thy
promise to me; but contrary to them all, have thou improved the power put into
thy Hand, to seek great things for thy self, and have set up thy self in the
pride of thy Heart, to rob me of my glory, in taking upon thee to be Lord
Protector of my People, when contrary to thy fair words and promises, thou by
thy power Establishest those Laws by which my People always were and are
Persecuted, which Laws uphold this filthy and abominable thing in my sight; the
Heads thereof Judge for Rewards, and the Priests Teach for Hire, and thou with
them leanest upon me, and say, Is not the Lord amongst us, no Evil shall
come upon us, as the Wicked Generation did, Mic. 3.11. And those Rebellious
People I destroyed before thee, who made those Laws thou have Established,
contrary to all thy fair words and promises, and to preserve thee in thy
obstinate and wicked walking before me, in setting thy self on high, in seeking
thy own glory; thou trustest to the Arm of Flesh to protect thee in the ways
thou live in, but since thou have abused the power I put into thy Hand, I
have Corrected thee by the Arm of my Power, to let thee see that all the Policy
and Strength of men cannot deliver thee forth of my Hand; and when thou wast
nigh to Destruction, I appeared as I had done in all the times of thy distress,
thy Lord Protector; and in my tender Love to deliver thee by the Arm of my
mighty Power, when none could help thee, that thou might fear me, and lay
thy Crown in the Dust before me, and give glory to my Name, in denying thy
self, and performing thy promise to me, who am a dreadful God, and will not be
robbed of my glory; but since I delivered thee, still like proud Pharaoh
hardenest thy Heart against me, and continuest in thy obstinacy, in upholding
these Unrighteous Laws thou promised me to take away, but instead of performing
thy promises, in taking them away, thou have Established them by thy power, by
which my Children are Persecuted, and the Hands of the Wicked are strengthened
against them; and notwithstanding all thy Wickedness, and Rebellious walking
before me, in love to thy Soul I have preserved thee to this day, and still
does wait upon thee to be Gracious and Merciful to thee, if thou will still
return to my Counsel, and diligently hearken to it, the Light in thy
Conscience, which witnesses against the pride of thy Heart, and loftiness of
thy Spirit, and calls of thee to perform thy promises thou made to me in the
day of thy distress, in speedily taking away the Unrighteous Laws by which my
People are Persecuted, that are guided by my Righteous Law in their Conscience,
that they be no more given up as Sheep to the Slaughter, (for declaring my Word
and Mind to the People) as they have been and are in this Nation, but that they
may have free Liberty, and no more be Persecuted by any outward Law, for
declaring what I make known to them by my Spirit: Which if thou do return to
me, that I may guide thee by my Power, as is declared, then will I heal thy
Backslidings, and deliver thy Soul forth of the Pit of Corruption, and bring it
into my Banqueting House, where thou shall drink of the Rivers of pleasure that
is in my presence, where thy Soul shall be for ever with my dear Children in
the purchased Inheritance that shall never fade away, and this shall be the
Portion of thy Cup. I once more tender to thee, if thou will speedily return
while my Arm is stretched forth in this day of thy Visitation, to embrace thee,
and if thou will not hearken to my Counsel, but like proud Pharaoh still
hardens thy Heart against it, and continue in thy Pride and Obstinacy as thou
have done, know this, my Spirit shall not always strive with thee, but I will
hasten the day of my Righteous Judgments upon thee, and the Arm of Flesh which
thou trusts and leanest upon to uphold thee, and protect thee where thou art,
shall be to thee as the broken Reeds of Egypt, that shall break to pieces, and
Torment and Wound thee; and I will get my glory upon thee, in breaking thee
down in my Wrath and fierce Displeasure, and none shall deliver thee out of my
Hand, which will speedily perfect my Pleasure upon thee, for the time is not
long ere I accomplish what I have spoken, except thou Repent, and thou shall
know thy Destruction is of thy self, and thy Blood shall be upon thy own Head,
and shall confess my Judgments to be true and righteous to all that hear of it,
that they may be warned by thee to fear and walk humbly before me, in the day
that I do this, says the Lord of Hosts.

The Word of the Lord I was commanded by him to writ to thee, and after it was
written, was taken from me, by one Thomas Pentlow called Justice of the Peace,
at the Town called Willby in Northamptonshire; yet notwithstanding in the love
of God to thy Soul, I am again ordered by him to make known his Counsel to
thee, 1655
that thou might not be Ignorant of his mind toward thee, what he has made
known to me, who am a lover of thy Soul, and known to the World by name William
Dewsbery, Prisoner in Northampton Goal, for the Word of God, and Testimony of
Jesus Christ.

From the Common Goal in Northampton the first day of the Tenth Month, 1654.
The Mighty Day of the Lord is coming, in which Christ knocks at the door of
the Heart of Kindreds, Tongues, People and Nations, who desire to know the only
true God, and Jesus Christ whom he has sent, to be the Light of the World, and
Salvation to the Ends of the Earth, to all that obey him; but a stumbling Stone
and a Rock of offense to all that resist his Counsel, whom he will take in
their own Craft, and overturn in their own Devices, to the shame and confusion
of their Faces; but they that believe in him shall never be ashamed. This was
given forth in the common Goal in Northampton, the 7th day of the 11th Month,
1655. by William Dewsbery, there Prisoner for the Word of God and Testimony of
Jesus.
THe mighty day of the Lord is coming to you, People, whose natural Birth and
Generation was in the Northern Islands, whom the Lord of Heaven and Earth has
placed, where he has suffered you to be scattered into Barbados, Virginia,
New England and other Islands there away, and Countries elsewhere, and to every
Kindred, Tongue, and People and Nations, in whom there is desires raised to
know the only true God, and Jesus Christ whom he has sent, to be the Light of
the World, to guide the Feet of those that sat in Darkness, into the Light and
Way of Peace: To you People the mighty Day of the Lord is coming, and in his
Power is appearing amongst you, in raising desires in some of you, toward his
Name, which desires cannot be satisfied with any outward Observations and
Traditions of your Fathers, but above them does your minds rise, in true Hunger
and Thirst toward the living God, for refreshment from his presence; prize the
Love of God to you, in whom he has raised desires toward him, and look not
forth at any that teaches to hearken to the Teachings of Men without, who draw
you to seek Christ and God without, and to come to the knowledge of the Kingdom
of God in outward Observations, with which the knowledge of God comes not; the
Kingdom of God is within, and as the Lightning is from the East to the West, so
is the coming of the Son of Man in his day, whose appearance is within; but you
People in the day of Darkness and Ignorance, that have been over the whole
Earth, have been deceived in looking forth at teachings of Men without, and for
the Kingdom of God to come in outward Observations, that men have set up in
their vain thoughts, Wicked and carnal Imaginations of the Saints condition,
which is Recorded in the Scriptures of Truth, but they not regarding the motion
of the Spirit of God within, which taught and guided the Saints; they are
Strangers to the Saints Life, though they speak great swelling words of the
knowledge of God, and with them deceive the simple, with the enticing words of
Man's Wisdom, and boasting in other Men's Lines made ready to their Hands; but
they themselves are natural bruit Beasts, living without the fear of God, in
Pride, Covetousness, Dissimulation and Hypocrisy, full of self-Love, making
their Bellies their God, delighting their Hearts in the Creature enjoyments and
visible objects, and are Men-Pleasers, having their Persons in admiration, and
them respecting for advantage, and these Men who are Ignorant of the only true
God you have followed, to teach you to come to know God, who has drawn you to
Worship an unknown God in the ignorance of your minds, so have they destroyed
your Souls, and the Souls of many, and you People perish for want of Knowledge,
Hosea 4.6. In being caused to err with the Lies and Lightness of these false
Prophets, which the Lord is against, who run when the Lord never sent them, as
the false Prophet did, when the Lord sent his true Prophet Jeremiah to cry
against them, Ier. 23.32. All People who desire to know the living God, let the
time past be sufficient, you have followed Men who have deceived you, and cease
from them, and turn to the true Prophet whom Moses the Servant of the Lord
declared the Lord God would raise up, Deuteronomy. 18.15. his Elect and Chosen
Servant, to raise up the Tribe of Jacob, and to restore the preserved of
Israel, whom he has also given for a Light to the Gentiles, and to be his
Salvation to the Ends of the Earth, whom Isaiah the Prophet declared the Lord
would raise up to open the Fountain of Life, and Salvation to all that Thirst,
( Isaiah 55.1, 2, 3) and now witnessed with all that hearken to his Counsel,
who calls to every one that Thirsts, Come ye to the Waters, and he that has
no Money, come ye buy and eat, yea, buy Wine and Milk without Money, and
without Price; wherefore do you lay out your Money for that which is not Bread,
and your Labor for that which satisfies not; hearken diligently to me, and
eat that which is good, and let your Souls delight it self in fatness; incline
your Ear, and come unto me, hear, and your Souls shall live, and I will make an
everlasting Covenant with you, even the sure mercies of David; all People no
longer look forth, the glad Tidings of the Gospel of the eternal Salvation is
heard within, in this day of the Lords Mercies, wherein he is teaching his
People himself, as was declared by the Prophet, Isaiah 54.13. and now witnessed
with all the Children of Light, whose minds are turned within, to wait on the
Lord for teaching, and to establish them in the Covenant of Life and Peace, who
is performing his promise to all that wait on him, which he declared by his
Servant the Prophet, Ier. 31.33, 34. This shall be the Covenant that I will
make with the House of Israel, in those days says the Lord, I will put my Law
in their Hearts, and write it in their inward Parts, and will be to them a God,
and they shall be to me a People; and they shall no more teach every Man his
Neighbor, and every Man his Brother, saying, know the Lord, for they shall all
know me, from the least of them to the greatest of them, says the Lord, for I
will be merciful unto their Unrighteousness and their Sins, and their
Iniquities will I remember no more.

Therefore every one that desires to know the only true God, and Jesus Christ
whom he has sent, turn your minds within, and examine your Hearts, search and
try your ways with the Light that Christ Jesus has enlightened you withal,
that shows you in your Hearts what is Sin, that Pride and Covetousness is Sin,
Lying and Swearing is Sin, Dissimulation, Cheating, Couzning is Sin, vain idle
Communication, foollish Jesting and Unbelief is Sin; and these things you know
in your own Consciences to be Sin, by the Righteous Law of God in the Heart,
that reproves you for them in the secret of the Heart and Conscience, there is
your Teacher, the Spirit of the Lord within; which in this mighty day of his
Power, he is pouring his Spirit upon all Flesh, according to his promise
declared by the Prophet, Joel 2.28, 29. And now witnessed with his Sons, and
with his Daughters, who walk in the Light, led and guided by his Spirit within,
which keeps the Conscience void of offense toward God, and toward Man: Every
one diligently hearken to the Counsel of the Lord, the Light that witnesses
for God in the Conscience, give up to be guided by it, then you need no more be
taught of Men, neither shall your Teacher be removed any more into a Corner;
but thine Eye shall see thy Teacher, and thine Ear shall hear a voice behind
thee, saying, This is the Way, walk in it, when thou turns to the right Hand or
to the left, as was declared by Isaiah the Prophet, Isa. 30.20. which is now
witnessed, and that is the living Word of God within, that has raised desires
in you toward God; every one in whom desires is raised, wait in the Light and
Power within, that has raised the desires, and the Lord will then strengthen
and give you power to wait on him in the way of his Judgments, till the Carnal,
Earthly, Sensual minds, which has lead you to delight in Lusts and Pleasures,
and created enjoyments below God, be cut down and slain with the Word of God
within, which is a sharp and two edged Sword, to slay down the first Man, which
is of the Earth earthly, then will you come to witness to be the slain of the
Lord, and the sentence of Death upon the first Man who has lead you from God,
with all the Wisdom Strength and Righteousness you had in him, and in the Power
of the Spirit, you will be brought to the true sense of the Poverty of your
Spirits, to Hunger and Thirst after the Righteousness of God in Christ Jesus
the Light, him to prize and love, and self judge and deny, with his Light, and
in his Light wait to dwell in his Power, you to guide in every Word and Work in
the Light, where your union and fellowship will be with the Father of Light,
who will you keep that faithful in him abide, and dwell in his mighty Power and
Wisdom as he moves thee, witness his mind in his pure Power to the confounding
of the mighty Wise and Prudent men, who is exalted in the wisdom of the World,
and Counsel of their own Hearts, not regarding to be guided by the Counsel of
God, in Christ the Light.

To you, tender Babes and Children of the most high, this is the Word of the
Lord God in whom desires are raised toward his Name; his Counsel mind in you,
and stand faithful in it, according to his Word declared to you, and consult
not with Flesh and Blood; in the Light and Life lift up your Heads, and freely
give up Soul and Body to the Lord God of Heaven and Earth, that he may exhalt
in you the Kingdom of Jesus Christ, to guide you in perfect obedience to his
Righteous Law, written in the Heart, for the exercise of the Conscience toward
God and Man; and fear not Man whose Breath is in his Nostrils, who stands up to
oppose the Lord in this mighty day of his Power, wherein he is exalting Christ
Jesus the Light, to be King for ever. In his Light be faithful to the Lord, and
though you be hailed before Rulers, Governors and Kings, for a Testimony
against them, take no thought what you shall say, but keep within, stand in the
Counsel of God, it shall be given you in the self-same hour; my Heavenly Father
will in you speak, and his Enemies confound before his mighty Power in you; and
the Hearts of the great and mighty Men of the Earth shall fail, and paleness
shall gather into their Faces; the dread of the holy God will be with you, who
faithfully give up to be guided by his Counsel, in the power of his own Spirit;
one shall chase a Thousand, and five put ten Thousand to flight; the Decree is
gone forth, Christ shall be King in Gods time over all the Nations of the
World; and all the powers of the World that him withstand, he will break them
to pieces like a Potters Vessel, so shall they become as Dust before his
Breath, the Mouth of the Lord has spoken it; who is giving the Kingdoms of
this World to his Son, and to you that wait for his appearance, the living
sound is come, that does witness, that not any Weapon formed against him shall
prosper in this day of his appearance in the Hearts of his Saints.

In the presence of the Lord, I charge you stand fast in the Counsel of our
Lord Jesus Christ, the Light in the Conscience, and according to the measure
you have received; be faithful in walking with God in perfect obedience to his
Will, freely giving up your Bodies to finish your Testimony in Sufferings, if
the Lord call you, for it is not given to believe, but to suffer with him, and
they that suffer with him, shall Reign with him, and the Son of Man is perfect
in sufferings; and you that are faithful to the (...), he will lay no more upon
you, then he gives you strength to bear, he will guard you with the Angel of
his presence, and compass you about with Salvation for Walls and Bulwarks, and
you shall know this is to you the Word of the Lord God, the day will declare
it: All people who dwell upon the Earth fear the living God, who has Created
the Heavens and Earth, and the Fountains of Waters; and all turn to the Light
of Christ that witnesses for God in the Conscience, against Sin in its
appearance in the secret of the Heart, and diligently incline your Ear to the
Counsel of Christ the Light, that he may guide you by his Spirit, least through
your disobedience you perish before him, in this mighty day of the Lords Power,
in which he is coming with Fire and Sword to plead with all Flesh, and not any
that transgresses his Righteous Law in their Consciences, shall escape his
Righteous Judgments in this his day, he is bringing down the loftiness of Man,
and the haughtiness of Spirit he is laying low, and is exalting his Son Christ
Jesus to be King, and over all to Rule; the Heathen he will give him for his
Inheritance, and the utmost parts of the Earth for his Possession, and the
Kingdom he will establish to his Son, whose Kingdom is an everlasting Kingdom,
and of his Dominion there shall be no end; therefore let all the Kings and
Princes of this World, mind the Light of Christ to guide them to rule for God,
to break the bonds of Iniquity, and let the oppressed go free, that in all
things they may have an Eye to the glory of God, in obeying the Righteous Law
of God in your Consciences, to do as you would be done unto, in taking up the
daily Cross, to that nature which would hinder for doing Justice, and for
showing Mercy, and (...) humbly with the Lord.

Given forth by the movings of the Spirit of God, in and through his Servant,
W. D.

DEar Friends, Servants and Children of the most high God, whom he has called
and chosen out of the World; be faithful all of you in his Counsel, wait his
Power to guide you in all your Thoughts, Words and Works, in his pure fear in
obedience to his Will* I charge you in his presence, be valiant for your
freedom, in dwelling in the Power of the living God, that he may arm you
against the fiery Darts of the Devil, him to resist in his appearance in all
his Wiles, who goes about like a roaring Lion, to draw you every way, seeking
to get your minds from the pure, to draw into the visible things, your
Affections there to captivate, your Wills to satisfy in created and perishing
Objects, or in the knowledge of the Truth, in the fleshly Wisdom, to feed with
the Swine upon the Husks, the form and image of what you have enjoyed, or what
you see in the vision, what you do not enjoy in the possession, and speak in a
Drunken Spirit words without knowledge, and with them sits a painted Beast, the
will at liberty out of the Cross; and thou whose condition this is, art the
foolish Virgin, turned from the pure Wisdom of God, the Light of Christ that
convinced thee of Sin, and now appearest in the outward formallity, in the
sight of Men, with a Lamp like the wise Virgins, but not dwelling in the Power
of God, wants the Oil of joy and gl^dness in the power of his Love, which the
wise Virgins has in their Lamps, which exercises their Conscience, and keeps
all their affections in order to the Spirit of Truth, which bridles their
Tongues, not to utter words before the Lord, but in true silence wait upon him,
until his Spirit move his mind to declare, from the living Power the Soul
possesses and enjoys in Christ, the Husband of the wise Virgins, whom he moves
his mind to declare, from the living Power the Soul enjoys in true possession,
in Christ who is the Bride the Lambs Wife, who by his Power keeps her Lamp
trimed always, breathing and thirsting for him to manifest his Power to take
away Sin, and renew the Image of God, and the perfect Man to witness in Christ
Jesus the Souls life, to reign in her for ever: And beloved are you that Hunger
and Thirst after Righteousness, for you are the Children of the Kingdom of my
Father, and with you my life is bound up; and to you this is the Word of the
Lord, fear not, lift up your heads and wait in the Light with boldness, in it
look up to Christ your King, he will appear as the Lightning from the East to
the West, and you shall behold him Riding upon the wild Asses Coalt, your
wild nature subjecting it to himself, and skiping over all Mountains, and
leaping over all Hills that has separated you from the presence of God; and
will heal your Infirmities, and satisfy your thirsty Souls, and give you the
end of your hope, the Salvation of your Souls, where you shall sit down with
him in the Kingdom of the Father, to rejoice in the Power of eternal love and
life, which is in his presence for ever and ev^r; and this is the Childrens
Bread that comes down from Heaven: But you foolish Virgins that sits in the
outward form and profession of the Truth, your Lamps are empty of the Power of
God, which should cast down your Wills, and keep them in the daily Cross; so
you are possessed with a dull, sottish, drousie, earthly, careless spirit,
which is weary of waiting upon the Lord in silence, you have no Oil in your
Lamps, you are turned from the Light that would lead you to the Power of God,
which would preserve in the true thirsting, to wait for refreshment that is in
his presence; so you are Imprisoned and Starved for want of Food, while you are
in a silent Meeting amongst the wise Virgins, who feed on the immortal Bread
which comes down from Heaven, the Flesh and Blood of Jesus Christ, which daily
strengthens them in the Power of God, which gathers all their Hearts together
in one, where the union is in the invisible being in silence, rejoicing
together in the Lord; to the Consciences of you foolish Virgins I speak, you
are strangers to the life the wise Virgins enjoyes, though amongst them you
come, your life is in beautifying the outside of the Lamp with words, being
quickly spoken, but the fear of God is not before your Eyes, but your Wills are
out of the Cross, a false joy arises in you, speaking what you do not possess,
priding and glorying in other men's Lines, end contending for Truth, with that
mind that is out of the Truth; and so become Trees blosoming with leaves, but
bears no Fruit, and here your folly is made manifest, while you speak to
others, your selves are under Reproof, in that you are strangers to the life of
God: I charge and command you, silence Flesh, and speak not before the Lord you
foolish ones, that dare to make mention of his Name, while the worker of
Iniquity raigns in you, whom the Lord will destroy, except you repent;
therefore all Friends who make mention of the Name of the living God, examine
your Hearts, search them, and try your ways with the Light that comes from
Christ, with it read your condition in the Book of Conscience, there will you
see how you stand in the presence of the living, pure, holy God, whether in the
state of the foolish Virgins, that is turned from the Light of Christ, that did
convince them of Sin, and so gets into the form of the Truth, but an Enemy to
the Cross, so make Shipwreck of Faith and a good Conscience, etc? or whether
you be in the state of the wise Virgins that loves the Light, and in it to
wait, to dwell in the Power which chastises that nature (which would draw from
the Light, and your Garments defile) daily in the Cross, and there your Souls
is keept pure and chaste, to follow the Lamb where ever he goes, and enters
with him into the rest that is prepared for the People of God, where the
foolish Virgins shall not come, until they from their foolish Wisdom return
into true obedience to the Father of Light, etc.

Dear Children of the Lord God, be valiant, bold and faithful in your measures,
that in the Light, Life and Power of God, you may stand in the day of great
trial, which the Lord will bring upon all you that make mention of his Name;
for power will be given to the Beast, his Horn to exalt even to the host of
Heaven, for the clearing of the Sanctuary of the Lord; then will all foolish
Virgins and painted Beasts that are enemies to the Cross of Christ, who has
defiled the Sanctuary of the living God, in coming before him amongst his
Saints and Children, etc. from amongst them they shall come trembling before
the power of the Beast, when he utters his voice and commands all to Worship
his Image; but then shall all you Children of the most high God, whom he has
called ^o be faithful to him, in his eternal Power rejoice, who will you keep
in that day in rest and peace, in the ancient of days, who will sit to judge in
Righteousness all that withstands the rising of his Glory, and of his Dominion
there shall be no end.

Friends, meet together in the true silence of your Spirits, to wait in the
Light for the unlimited Spirit of the Lord, to manifest his Power in you, to
bruise the Serpents Head in all his appearance in you, to put an end to Sin,
and to bring in everlasting Righteousness, that you in him may grow up in the
pure nature of the most high God, over all blessed for ever, Amen. God almighty
keep you all faithful in his eternal Power in himself, to bear his Name in
Righteousness, that his Name may be written in your Foreheads, that all that
see you may witness you to be of the Righteous Seed that the Lord has Blessed;
his Eternal Power and Presence keep you in the eternal unity of the Spirit, and
bond of Peace, where I am with you, in the unchangable Love and Life, etc.

W. D.
I desire you to let this be Read in your Meetings, with a good understanding,
in the fear of the Lord, for this is the Day I will make separation betwixt the
Wise and the Foolish, between those that fear the Lord, and those that fear him
not, says the Lord God almighty.



ALL Saints and Children of the most high God, abide with God in the calling
whereunto you are called, which call is the measure of Light given unto you,
which witnesses against all the deceitful twisting of the Serpent within you,
and seals up to your Spirits the eternal love of God in the free Covenant of
life in Jesus Christ: All in your measure as you have received of the Lord,
walk faithfully with him, so will you be preserved pure, clean and unblamable
before him, and will be fortified by the Arm of his eternal Power, against all
the deceit, subtilty, windings and twistings of the Serpent within you, and
without you: I charge you all in the presence of the Lord God, to abide with
God in what he has communicated to you, and run not out from the Witness of
the eternal Spirit, that has sealed you up in measure in the Power of his
love: Thou that do run out to speak further then thou witnessest, art a
filthy Drunkard that lavisheth out thy self, without the fear of the Lord; and
so spends and wastes upon thy Lusts, and the plagues and vengance of the Lord is
thy Portion, thou filthy Drunkard; for no Drunkard nor Lustful person shall
inherit the Kingdom of God. All dear Lambs and Children of the Lord abide in
the Witness of the eternal Spirit, which will pass Judgment and bruise the Head
of the Serpent in you; so will you be armed against all the glorious
appearances of the Serpent without, to keep him out of the Scriptures; and the
least of you in the Truth of God, will overturn all Priests, and all the Men of
the World that dwell in their Serpentine Wisdom, and makes a Trade of the
Letter, speaking and disputing of the Saints conditions, as the Devil did about
the Body of Moses, but cannot witness the Scriptures sealed up to their Souls
by the eternal Spirit; now all you that dwell in the Truth, in your measure
will comprehend them to be Houses built upon the Sand, tall Cedars, aspiring up
into the Air, sturdy Oaks that stand in pride of their own conceits, but has
no Root, so let them not speak of the Scriptures, but bring them to the
Witness, to which they can witness of the Scripture; so will the breath of the
eternal Spirit of the living God, speaking in you from the Power of the Lord,
that has sealed his love to your Spirits, raze up the Sandy Foundation, so
will the House, and the sturdy Oaks, and the tall Cedars fall, and the Serpent
in all his windings and twistings his Head will be bruised, and all deceits
overturned, and your Souls preserved pure and clean, and the Name of the Lord
honored, who does accompany the Witness of the Spirit with his own Power, and
abiding in his Power, you shall reign Kings upon the Earth, and the Lord God
almighty be with you all, you Sons and Daughters of the most high God, and
carry you all on in his eternal and mighty Power, faithful unto the end, that
ye may receive the Crown of eternal Glory, which is laid up for you in the Lord
Jesus Christ, and there you will fare well; and I shall remain with you for
ever in the Lord.

W. D.

DEar Friends, meet often together in the Name and fear of the living God, and
take heed of Words; see that the Witness speaks, which will cut down your own
wills, and it will minister to the Witness in others, to the slaying of their
wills; and take heed of watching over one another with an evil Eye, to spy out
one another weakness, and declare it to others, and discover their nakedness;
thou that art here art cursed Ham, and the Wrath of God will be revealed upon
thee, but watch one over another with a pure single Eye, and if thou see the
pure in Bondage in any one by the deceit, whisper thou not behind their back to
others; but let the Witness in thee which sees the deceit, and suffers with the
pure that is pressed down by it, let it declare and witness forth the mind of
the living God against the deceit, and it will cut it down, and the pure holy
Seed will be set at Liberty, and thy Conscience will be kept clean unto the
Lord in discharging thy Duty; and so will thy Captivated Brother or Sister be
restored again forth of the Hand of the Destroyer, and then thou will have
union together in that which is pure for ever in the Lord: And the eternal God
of Power keep you all his dear Children in his pure Wisdom, to walk faithfully
with him, and one with another, and the blessing of the Lord God almighty be
with you all for ever, Amen.

William Deusbery.

MY dear Friends, this is the Word of the Lord to you all whom my Father has
chosen out of the World, in his eternal Love to make known his Power in you,
thus says the Lord to you, Look not back, but Judge that mind with my pure
Word I have Enlightened your Consciences withal, for the exercising of them
toward me, and toward men. And I command you my Children, stand in my pure
Counsel, and look up to me, and I will accompany you with my Power, and will
make the way plain before you, in bringing down that which is untoward in you,
and disobedient to my Will; so my Ways will not be burdensome, and my
Commandments grievous to you my dear Children; and this is my Word to you, Cast
off whatever I have let you see is offensive to my Will, that so your Souls may
rest in the Bosom of my Love, that I may carry you on in the Arms of my eternal
Power, faithful unto the end, and Crown you with glory, which I have laid up
for you in the Lord Jesus; slight not my Counsel, but be valiant and bold for
the glory of my Name, says the Lord God, and be not hasty to utter words
before me, but let your words be few and savory at all times, ministering Grace
to all that hears you, that my Name may be honored in all you my dear
Children, in all your words and actions, then I will accompany you with my
powerful presence, and will make you a terror to all evil doers, One to chase a
Thousand, and Five to put Ten Thousands to flight; so will I get my self a
glorious Name, in the manifestation of my Power in you my Sons and Daughters
who stands faithful in my Counsel, and walks in my Fear; and your Souls shall
be refreshed in the Fountain of my Love in the Lord Jesus, where you shall
reign for ever in my presence.

Meet often together to wait upon me in the fear of my Name, and watch one over
another in love, and I will be with you my dear Children to order you in my
pure Wisdom, to the praise and glory of my great Name, says the Lord God
almighty. Written from the Spirit of the Lord, to be sent abroad amongst
Friends, to be Read at their Meetings.

William Deusbery.

THE DISCOVERY Of the great Enmity of the SERPENT Against the Seed of the
Woman, which witnesses against him where he Rules, both in Rulers, Priests and
People; whose hearts are now made manifest in this great day of the Lords
Power; wherein he is sending his Sons and Daughters in the Power of his Spirit
to run to and fro to declare his Word.
Which Discovers the state of England, who according to her own lusts has
heaped up Teachers to her self that has spoken smooth things to her, calling
her the beautiful Church and Spouse of Christ; but in the day of trial she is
found in Enmity to Christ in his appearance in his Children, and to be in the
estate deluded from the Spirit of Truth, Recorded in 2 Timothy 4.2, 3. Which
cannot endure sound Doctrine, having itching Ears, and turns them away from the
Truth to Fables; and now are Englands Teachers tried she has heaped up to her
self, and their Doctrine proved; and their Ministry made manifest, in the great
Enmity they manifest against Christ, in Persecuting the Bodies of his Saints,
them to destroy whom he has sent to Preach freely his eternal Word; for which
they are Stoned, Beaten and Imprisoned; and many of Englands Teachers, whom she
upholds, stirs up the People so to do: Being deceived, not regarding what is
spoken, that neither Fornicator, nor Idolater, nor an Adulterer, nor
Effeminate, nor Abuser of themselves with mankind, nor Covetous, nor Drunkards,
nor Revellers, nor Extortioners, shall Inherit the Kingdom of God, 1 Cor. 6.9,
10.

A true Testimony of him the World knows by name, William Deusbery, and in
scorn called Quaker; who has been by them Imprisoned in York, Darby, Leicester
and Northampton, where he is now kept in the common Goal, for the Word of God
and Testimony of Jesus Christ.

Also his Call to the Ministry of the everlasting Gospel, by the still voice of
the Spirit of God, and his mighty Power destroying with the flaming* Sword the
disobedient, that would not stand in his Counsel, and causing the Soul to
submit to his Counsel, the Light that comes from Christ, in it to wait on him
to open the Seals of the Book, and make known the mystery of eternal life to
the Soul, the Scripture testifies is in Christ, the Truth of it to know as it
is in Jesus.

The Word of the Lord to all in England, whom the Lord has betrusted with
Power, from the highest to the lowest, to see the peace be kept, and to judge
the Cause of the People with righteous Judgments.

With a Lamentation over all in England, who oppose Christ in his spiritual
appearance, and so slight the day of your Visitation to your own Destruction.

From the common Goal in Northampton the 25 th day of the 4 th Month 1655. Oh,
People in England!
AM I become your Enemy, because I tell you the truth, and deal plainly with
you in declaring the mind of the Lord unto you? which in the eternal riches of
his Love he has made known unto me, by the Word of God and Testimony of Jesus
Christ, for which Word and Testimony I suffer outward Bonds and Persecutions,
as my Lord and Master did; who was called a Blasphemer, Beelzebub, the Prince of
Devils, by the high Priests, who cried to the unjust Magistrates to deliver him
up into their hands, that their Persecuting Murdering spirits that thirsted
after his Blood, might be satisfied; which the unjust men in Authority to do
them a pleasure, in satisfying their wills abused their power, and delivered
him up; and though they proved not any thing against him, they put him to
Death, calling him a Blasphemer; and he sealed his Testimony with his Blood:
And all my holy Brethren, Prophets and Apostles were called Blasphemers,
Heretics, Seducers and Deluders by the false Prophets, Highpriests and
Pharisees then; who professed the Name of God in words, but denied him in their
practices, and Persecuted his Children, who were guided by his Word, under the
names formerly written; as I and my Brethren are now Persecuted by the same
Generation, which profess God and Christ in words, but denying him in their
practices, living in Pride and Pleasures, Envy and Murder; every way
Persecuting and seeking to destroy the Bodies of the Saints of the most high
God, where the righteous Seed is raised up, which witnesses against their
unrighteous practices, and discovers them in their secret hypocrisy, which is
hid under their voluntary humility, which causes them to appear what they are,
and manifests what was hid in their Hearts under their fair coverings of
outward Forms and Profession of Religion, which they now manifest forth by
their Fruit, whose Children they are, in obedience to their father the Devil,
who was a Persecuter and a Murderer from the Beginning, whose works they now
do that profess Christ in words, but denies to be guided by his Spirit; for his
Spirit is no Persecuter; and so are they made manifest (in what they do) to all
that have Eyes to see, that they are strangers to Christ, while they continue
in Cain's nature persecuting the righteous Seed without a cause, as he did, and
does in this Nation; both in the North of it; and in other Prisons in several
places of it, there has been cast into them the Saints and Children of the
most high God, for obeying his Will, in witnessing forth his eternal Word that
he has made manifest in them: And no breach of any National Law proved against
them, but a Popish Law made in Queen Mary's Reign, which some has suffered
under; and many other of the Saints and Children of the most high God, they
have Persecuted and cast into Prisons, and not the breach of any National Law
proved against them; but in the pride and envy of their Hearts do they
Persecute the Innocent, to satisfy their own wills; as I am a witness against
them who have Persecuted me, and cast me into Prison under the name of a
Seducer (as they say,) for the Seducing of the People of this Nation, and for
suspicion of Blasphemy, and breaking of the public Peace, in dispersing
Principles ^ontrary to the truth of the Gospel, and Peace of the Nation; and
not any Accuser appeared to my face, to prove what they charge against me, as
is formerly written, either by the Law of God, or the Law of the Nation, but
the Serpent in whom he rules, has manifest his enmity against me, whom the
Lord has redeemed from the Earth; and sent to Preach the everlasting Gospel to
those that dwell upon the Earth; and to witness against the wickedness of the
dark World, that the deeds thereof are evil; for which Testimony the World that
hates the Light that comes from Christ, whom they ever Persecuted, to fulfill
the measure of their fathers Iniquities, has me and my Brethren Persecuted
under the names as formerly written; charging me with making Tumults, and
breaking the public Peace, for walking in obedience to the Spirit of Christ,
which guided all ^e sent to preach his Gospel, to run to and fro as I have done
in thee, oh England, that knowledge may be increased, as is recorded in the
Scripture of Truth, Dan. 12.4. And is according to the commands of Christ; Go
your ways, behold I send you forth as Lambs among Wolves, carry neither Purse
nor Scrip, nor Shoes, and salute no man by the way, and into what City ye
enter, and they receive you, eat such things as is set before you, Luke 10.
verse. 3, 4, and 8. But beware of men, for they will deliver you up to their
Counsel, and they will scourge you in their Synagogues, and you shall be
brought before Governors and Kings for my Names sake, but he that endures unto
the end, shall be saved, Mat. 10. verse. 17, 18, and 22.

According as it is written, the wicked World that always did as they now do,
persecute the Messengers of Jesus Christ, who to them were and are sent to
witness against them in their Markets and Meeting-places, that their deeds are
evil; which the Children of this Generation, that are strangers to the leadings
of the Spirit of Truth, calls them that are guided by the Spirit to walk
according to the Scripture, makers of Tumults, movers of Sedition, breakers of
the public Peace, as the unrighteous Generation did, who Persecuted Christ and
his Apostles, whose practice was to declare the mind of God in their
Synagogues and Markets, as the Ministers of Christ do now: And they found him
in the Temple, sitting in the midst of the Doctors, both hearing and asking
them Questions, Luke 2.46. When Jesus came to Nazareth where he had been
brought up, and as his custom was, he went into the Synagogue on the Sabbath
day, and as he was declaring the Word of eternal life to the People, all they
in the Synagogue, when they heard these things he spoke were filled with wrath,
and rose up and thrust him out of the City, and led him to the brow of the Hill
(whereon the City was built) that they might cast him down headlong; but he
passed through the midst of them, and went his way, Luke 4.16, 28, 29, 30. And
Paul an Apostle of Jesus Christ, not of man; neither by man, but by Jesus
Christ and God the Father, who raised him from the Dead, Gal. 1.1. He was a
chosen Vessel unto the Lord, to bear his Name amongst the Gentiles, and Kings,
and the Children of Israel, Acts 9.15. It was his practice to go to and fro to
preach the Word of eternal life, to the people in their Synagogues and Markets,
as the Ministers of Christ do. When Paul and Silas came to Thessalonica, where
was a Synagogue of the Jews, Paul as his manner was went unto them, and three
Sabbath days reasoned with them out of the Scriptures, Acts 1^.1, 2. When Paul
went unto Athens his Spirit stirred in him, when he saw the whole City given
to Idolatry, therefore disputed he in the Synagogue with the Jews, and with the
devout persons, and in the Markets daily with them that met with him: Then
certain of the Philosophers of the Epicureans and of the Stoics encountered
him, and some said, what will this Babbler say, other some, he seems to be a
setter forth of strange Gods; because he Preached unto them Jesus and the
Resurrection, Acts 17.16, 17, 18.

And all my Brethren this day with me, that witnesses Christ Jesus risen from
the Dead, and are sent to Preach Christ the Resurrection, who has enlightened
every one that is come into the World; that all may in his Light that from him
comes, that shows them Sin; wait for his Power to cleanse them from Sin, and
raise them out of the fallen and dead estate, by the power of his Resurrection,
to live in pure obedience to God.

We are by those the World call their Ministers and Teachers, withstood as
Iannes and Iambres withstood Moses. But the Lord is making them daily manifest,
that all shall see their folly, and by them be no more deceived, 2 Timothy 3.8, 9.
And as the Heathen Philosophers, before written, encountered Paul, so has these
men encountered with us, as before written, for witnessing Jesus the
Resurrection, and the true Light that enlightneth every one that comes into the
World.

And as Tertullus the Heathen Orator accused Paul before Felix, Acts 24.1, 5.
We have found this man a pestilent fellow, and mover of Sedition amongst all
the Jews throughout the World, and a Ringleader of the Sect of the Nazarens.
The same spirit that was in the Heathen Orator Tertullus, that lead him to
accuse Paul before Felix, did Edward Bowls, whom the people of the World call
Minister, and Teaches in the high place in York, manifest to be in him, who
never had spoken to me, when he by that dark spirit was lead to give in an
Information against me; and at the time when it was expected I should have the
privilege of the Law, (that Thieves and Murderers had) by it to be Tried, and
my Accusers to appear face to face; the said Edward Bowls did not appear to
prove against me what was written in the Information; neither a perfect Copy
of it would he or they that had it in keeping, give to me when it was demanded,
least their works of darkness should be brought to light; but what was brought
to light when it was demanded of Edward Bowls: This is a perfect Copy that he
wrote with his own hand, as follows: It is informed that one William
Deusbery, a Ringleader of the Persons calle^ Quakers, goes up and down the
Country of York, and is now in the West Riding thereof, dispersing Principles
prejuditical to the truth of the Gospel, and peace of the Commonwealth: It is
therefore desired, that seeing no man is allowed publicly to exercise his
gifts to a particular Congregation unless he be first tried and approved; that
the said William Deusbery may not be permitted to go up and down from place to
place Teaching, until he receive Approbation of some Persons, who shall be
thought fit to judge how agreeable his Principle are to Tru^^ and Peace.

This is the substance of what I delivered into Mr Payler; but the particular
words I cannot exactly remember, but I believe they do not any thing
considerably vary from this Paper.

E. B.




This man whom Edward Bowls calls Mr Payler, was the Foreman of the
Grand Jury, to whom he delivered the Information against me, that they might
deliver it to Hugh Windham, who sat Judge of Life and Death, at the general
Assizes holden at York, about the time of the thirteenth and fourteenth days
of the first Month called March, 1653. Upon the sight of the Information given
in against me, the Judge granted a Warrant in the open Court to the men that
was in Commission to do justice in Yorkshire, to apprehend me.

Which after that time, I being at a place called Tholthorp, about ten Miles
from York, in the North Riding thereof; and many of the Servants of the living
God with me waiting on him, his Power to manifest to his glory; and while we
were together, there came one George Mann in great rage two several times, with
an Iron Fork to satisfy his blood-thirsty mind; the Lord with his Power did
him chain, and prevented his bloody intents; to satisfy his will on me, he
went to Thomas Dickeson, who was at a place called Kirby-Hall in Yorkshire; and
he accused me (as Thomas Dickeson said before him) that I said I was Christ,
upon which accusation he granted forth a Warrant on the twenty sixth day of the
second Month called April: And on the twenty seventh day, I being with the
Children of the Lord, (at Crake,) John Lockwood called high Constable
apprehended me with the Warrant before mentioned, and the day being far spent,
he said to the Friends with me, if they would engage for my appearance the next
day, he would show me that favor that I should stay with them that night; (I
replied these words) that not any man should engage for me, neither desire I
favor at the hands of men, if thou have power over the body, do with it what
thou have power: Then John Lockwood said, the day is far spent, I shall not go
with thee to the Justice to night, until to morrow stay at thy Friends House.
Reply, if thou say I shall stay here, if the Lord please I shall be ready to go
with thee, where he gives thee power to have me; so he went away, and said he
would send for me the next day; and in the night season many of the Lords
Servants and Children was with me waiting on him, who is worthy to be waited
on, for he is good to the Souls that wait on him, and to the Souls that seek
him; when much of the night was spent, the Inhabitants of Crake in great rage
and fury came to the Doors and Windows of the House, like the Inhabitants of
wicked Sodom, crying and rushing at the Doors, and said they would have me
forth, to dispose of me according to their wills, for I should not be there;
and John Lockwood high Constable, so called, who said I should be there until
the next day, yet to do the people a pleasure he contrary to his word came in,
and took me forth, and had me into the Streets, where the people shouted with a
loud voice, as they had me to and fro, from one House to another (where they
sold Ale) till the people in one House let them in, and there they set two men
to watch over me until the next day, which was the twenty eighth day of the
Month before written; on which day they had me before Thomas Dickeson, who
granted forth the Warrant for me to be brought before him, and did me examine,
and it was manifest before him, that what I was accused of in the Warrant, (and
the day the Warrant mentioned my being in that place) was false, for I had not
been in that place that day, neither could they prove any such words spoken by
me, as I was accused of; and when he had nothing against me in that Warrant,
then he did commit me to Prison, by a Warrant that he said, Judge Windham
granted forth at the general Assize, before written, which Warrant I never saw.

A True Copy of the Mittimus, as follows.

North Riding of Yorkshire.
To the Sheriffs of the said County of York, and to the Keeper of the Goal of
the Castle of York.
WHereas there was a Warrant directed for the Apprehending of William Deusbery
of Stanly, for the seducing the People of this Nation, from Judge Windham the
last Assizes; and he being brought before me, and refuses to find Surety to be
of good Behavior, and to appear at the next Assize, to be holden for the said
County, to answer the premises: You are hereby required to receive into your
custody the said William Deusbury, and him safely to keep, until he shall be
delivered by due course of Law. Given under my Hand and Seal the 28th day of
April 1654.

Thomas Dickeson.


According to his command, as aforesaid, I was had to York Castle, and there
kept Prisoner until the general Assize, which was holden about the 22d day of
the 5th month called July, in the year above written, and there Hugh Windham
did sit Judge of Life and Death, who at the Assizes before mentioned, which was
in the first Month called March, gave order to apprehend me, and according to
his order it was done; and he coming to judge the Cause between me and my
Accusers, it was pressed on him by some Friends of the Truth (for the Truths
sake) that I might have the benefit as those had that were arraigned for
Felony and Murder, to be brought before him, and the people of the Country,
and there my Accusers to appear face to face to prove their Accusation, that I
mighr suffer according to Law, if I had transgressed it; otherwise that I might
by it be cleared before the Country of the Lies and Aspersions and false
Accusations they had publicly charged me withal; his promise was, I should be
brought before him, and have a fair Trial at Law, as others Prisoners had; but
he was not faithful to do as he had said, before him I was not brought at that
time, nor any Trial had; but at the end of the Assizes cleared me by
Proclamation, and sent me a Liberato (as they call it) to pass away.

Into Prison I was cast, as formerly written, the 28th day of the second Month
(called April,) and there was kept until the Twenty fourth day of the fifth
Month (called July) and then was turned forth, as is formerly written, without
any Trial or Law to me read why they had kept me in Prison that time: So for
the Truths sake, to that of God in every ones Conscience I this day lay before:
He that has an Eye to see let him see.

Which after the Lord, by the Arm of his mighty Power had me set at liberty out
of the hands of those unreasonable men; I journyed as I was led by his Spirit
to declare his Word in Cleveland, and other parts in Yorkshire,
Nottinghamshire, and so to Darby, and as I was declaring the Word of the Lord
to the Consciences of the Inhabitants of Darby, there came two men and laid
hold on me, and had me before the men who were in Commission to have done
justice, who there did sit at the General Sessions holden at the Town, about
the twenty fourth day of the sixth Month, called August, 1654.

When I before them was brought, the first Question to me by them propounded
was; In whose presence ^oest thou now stand? (the answer to them was) In the
presence of the everlasting God; the men called Justices replied with these
words, Iaylor take him away, put him in Prison for disturbing the Court, which
was done at their Command; into Prison I was put, and when the day was spent,
Thomas Youll, called the Mayor of Darby, sent for me, and when I came before
him, he asked me, What I came to do? the answer to him, I came to declare the
Word of the Lord to the Consciences of the Inhabitants of Darby; the Mayor
replied, Will thou go out of the Town? answer to him, When the Lord orders me
to go forth, then I shall go, till then I shall stay; then Thomas Youll, the
Mayor, commanded the man to put me into Prison again, which was done; the next
day, about the nineth hour, came William Bold, one of the Mayors Officers, and
said to me, if thou will go forth of the Town, and in it no more come, I will
open the Doors for thee to come forth; the answer to him, Out of the Town I
shall not go, until I am ordered of the Lord; and if thou openest the Door,
forth of the Prison I shall not come, till the man that said he had authority
to put me in, come by the same authority and take me out; then away the man did
go, and afterward did come, and the man who is named John Slalous, who put me
in Prison, opened the Door, and took me by the Arm, and put me forth in much
wrath, and delivered me to the other man, whose name is before written, who
said he had order to put me forth of the Town, which he did, and strictly
charged me to depart out of their Coasts, with many threatenings what should be
done to me, if in the Town again I returned; but the words of vain man was not
regarded, into the Town I returned, and there did stay till I was free in my
Spirit to depart from thence.

Then I jour^^yed to Leicester, and was there the first day of the week, which
was the third day of the seventh Month (called September,) And with me was many
people, to whom the word of the Lord was declared; and after the Testimony of
Jesus was finished to them, I went into the high place of the Town, which the
people of the dark World calls their Church, and after the man they call their
Minister had done, the Word of eternal life was declared to the Consciences of
the people, who did hear with much attention, until two men came to me, and
said they had order from Edmund Johnson, called Mayor to take me away, and with
violence drew me forth, and had me before the said Edmund Johnson, who
commanded his officers to put me in Prison before he did me examine, which was
done; and the next day the man that put me in Prison brought me forth before
the Mayor, and William Billers another of the Rulers of the Town, who did me
examine; and not finding any thing against me, commanded Robert Brewin, Keeper
of the common Goal, to put me out of the Town, and strictly charged me to
depart forth of their Coasts, with many threatenings what they would do if I
again into the Town did come; but the threatenings of man was not regarded, into
the Town I did return, in obedience to the command of the Lord, to finish the
Testimony of Jesus, I was to witness to the Consciences of the Inhabitants of
the Town of Leicester.

Then in obedience to the Spirit of Truth, I journyed into Northamptonshire,
and in a Town called Wellingborrow, and there aways many did receive the word
of Life with much gladness of heart: And at a time as I was going along the
Street in that Town, near the House of Thomas Andrews, whom the people of the
the World call their Teacher; he to me did speak these words, Give over
deceiving the people, least the Plagues of God fall upon thee; the answer to
him was, if thou say I deceive the people, make it appear wherein I deceive
them; he replied, thou tells them there is no original Sin; I required of him,
did thou hear me say so? to that he made no answer; then these words was to
him declared, thou must either prove what thou accusest me of, or own thy
condemnation upon thy false Accusation; he fled away, and did make no answer.
About the time which was near three weeks after, I was ordered of the Lord to
return again to Wellingborrow, and hearing there was a Meeting in the
Steeple-house where Thomas Andrews was, who had me falsely accused, as is
formerly written, for the Truths sake into the Steeple-house I did go, and in
silence did stand till the man, called their Teacher, had done; then I declared
the word of the Lord to the people, who did hear peaceably, and afterward I
spoke in particular to Thomas Andrews, to prove what he had ^alsly accused me
of, in saying I deceived the people, and there make it manifest before the
people, or to own his condemnation upon his false accusation, but to what was
required no answer he did make, but away fled: Then Henry Smith who in that
Town dwells, out of the Steeple-house haled me into the yard, where the Truth
to the people was declared, who did here stand peaceably to hear, till William
Baw, called high Constable, did take hold on me, and had me away into the
Marketplace amongst the people; and said he would bring evidence against me
for Blasphemy; so he had me as Prisoner to and fro in the Marketplace, with so
doing he made disturbance among the people; but when he could not prove what he
had falsely accused me with, he let me go; who at that present time went from
amongst the people to a Friends house, and came no more forth amongst the
people in the Market that day.

The next day being the twenty eighth of the tenth Month (called December)
Richard Dennit being Constable of Wellingborow came to the Friends House where
I was, and took me forth by virtue of a Warrant that had no name, but for one
who is commonly called Quaker, and had me with it before Thomas Pentlow, called
Justice, at Wilby in Northamptonshire, who did me examine, but would not read
me any Law I had transgressed, but made a Mittimus and sent me to the common
Goal in Northampton, on the twenty nineth day of the tenth Month called
December, 1654. A Copy of the Mittimus I was denied by John Snart Keeper of the
Goal; and also the men that were in Commission to do Justice, when it was of
them desired in open Court, at the general Sessions holden at Northampton, the
tenth day of the eleventh Month, by those whose names are John Clark, John
Parker, called Sergeant at Law, George Benson, John Mansil, John Brown, who
there did sit in Commission to have judged the Cause in righteousness between
me and mine Accusers; but when the Mittimus was read where the charge against
me was written, not any appeared to prove what the Blasphemy was, for which
they committed me to Prison in suspicion of; neither they to me read any Law
that any thing charged against me had it transgrest; but again to Prison did me
commit, to answer at the Assizes holden at Northampton, the tenth and twelfth
day of the first Month called March 1654. And three times I was there brought
before Matthew Hail who did sit Judge of Life and Death, to answer what might
be objected against me; and the last time I before him was brought, Hugh
Windham was with him, who then was in Commission with him, to have judged the
Cause in righteousness, between me and my Accusers; and though not any Accuser
appeared against me, to prove me the transgressor of any Law; neither would
these that sat to judge my Cause, any Law to me read, that any evidence given
in against me, was the transgression of; but they me committed to Prison, where
I had been amongst those arraigned for Felony and Murder: So under all these
Lies and Aspertions, false Accusations I suffer, and instead of being cleared
of them, (when I was brought before those that were in Commission, to judge
with righteous judgment) more Accusations were laid upon me by them, which was
done by I. Parker at the general Sessions before written; and Hugh Windham at
the general Assizes, before mentioned, which both did accuse me in the open
Court, before the people, that I was a Seducer; and when I required them to
make manifest wherein I did seduce any, they would not answer to what then was
required, and a Copy of the ground of the Evidence they pretend they have
against me, they denied to be given me, in all places where they have proceeded
against me, as is formerly written, least their works of darkness should come
to light, and their folly made manifest, and Truth cleared of the Lies and
false Accusations, with which they blind the Eyes of many, and cause them to
stumble at the ways of Truth, in speaking evil of the things they know not, as
is manifest in what is written.

So for the Truths sake I bear Testimony of, and it to clear from all Lies and
Aspersions cast upon it, which has caused the simple to stumble at the way of
Truth, and that they no longer be turned aside by the lying spirit, who every
way seeks to murder and destroy the Truth from the Earth, in Persecuting the
Bodies of the Saints, and shutting them up in Prison, under the names of
Blasphemers, Deceivers, Seducers and Disturbers of the Peace, so make Lies
their refuge, as that Persecuting spirit ever did in all Ages. To stop the
lying Mouth, and for the Simple sake that desire, in the truth of their Hearts
to know the leadings of the Spirit of Truth, in the way to know the only true
God, I here publicly declare to the Inhabitants of England, and to all that
dwell upon the Earth, what I was in the fallen estate, and how the Lord raised
me up by the arm of his mighty Power, and carried me on through the great work
of regeneration, that all may know the Truth; I am sent to bear Testimony to
the Consciences of those that dwell upon the Earth, and is not any Seducing,
nor contrary to the Truth of the Gospel, but is according to the Truth, as it
is in Jesus, He that has an Eye to see let him see, and an E^re to hear let
him hear.

The first Birth.
Psalm. 51.5.
I Was conceived in Sin, and brought forth in Iniquity, and in that state lived
and delighted in pride and pleasures, lightness and vanity, as all do in that
nature, until I was about eight Years of Age, though before that time, when I
did live in vanity, the Light in my Conscience did witness against me, and
caused some trouble in me, but I departed from the Light, and so followed the
counsel of my own Heart, that lead me into vanity, to live without the fear of
God: And about the time when I was eight Years of Age, of my natural birth; the
Word of the Lord came unto me, Isa. 43.7. Mat. 12.36.
I created thee for my glory, an account thou must give to me for all thy words
and actions done in the Body, which word enlightened my Heart, and opened the
Book of Conscience in me, where all was written I had done in the Body ever
since I had any remembrance, 2 Cor. 5.10.
and when I had read my condition, how I had lived without God who created me
for his glory; Isa. 43.7.
the Word of the Lord then came unto me, Shall the Axe boast it self against
him that heweth therewith, or shall the Saw magnify it self against him that
shakes it? Isa. 10.15.
as if the Staff should shake it self against him that lifts it up, or as if
the Staff should lift up it self, as if it were no Wood; and by the Power of
the Word of the Lord that spoke in me, my understanding was enlightened, and my
Conscience bore witness, that it was my condition; I had lifted up my self
against the living God, Isa. 43.7.
in living without his fear, who created me to live in obedience to him, but I
had lived in disobedience to him until that day; so deep sorrow seized upon
me, and I knew not what to do that I might get acquaintance with the God of my
Life, who created me for his own praise and glory; I^a. 43.7.
then I ceased from my vain conversation which I had lived in, and began to
read the Scriptures, and Books, and mourn and pray to a God I knew not where he
was, but expected him without, looking up toward the Firmament, where my
carnal imaginations told me he was, and as I had heard those the World calls
Ministers, whom I went to hear, whose words did witness with my carnal
imagination of God, they said he was above the Skies, calling it Heaven; but I
felt the hand of the Lord within me, executing justice upon the wicked in me,
Luke. 17.20. Genesis 3.24.
and what way ever I turned to seek him in observations, thither the flaming
Sword turned, which was placed against me, to keep the way of the Tree Life,
Rev. 20.11, 12.
and execute the righteous justice of God upon me, So I stood before the Throne
of the Lamb, reading in my mournful estate, the sentence of condemnation that
passed upon me from the glory of his presence, and in this condemned estate I
continued, and through the ignorance (where God was, what his Worship was) I
strove to satisfy his justice in outward observations, Luke. 17.20.
imitating what the Saints did, sometimes in Fasting and Praying, Acts 10.30.
which was the practice of Cornelius, and others of the Saints of the most high
God, Dan. 10.21.
as I found recorded in the Scripture of Truth: But notwithstanding all my
strict walking in observations, in which I was seeking the Kingdom of God, Luke
17.20. Genesis 3.24.
I found him not, but the flaming Sword cut me down; so my sorrow increased,
for I found none in my condition that I could declare it to.

Then it pleased the Lord to order my Friends in the flesh to put me to keep
the Sheep, where I was retired from company, so my mind was kept in my
mournful estate, where my great ease was in mourning to a God I knew not,
Psalm. 22.21.
nor none could tell me where I should get acquaintance with him, in the place
where I was in the outward, being in a Town called Allathorp, nigh Pocklington
in Yorkshire; but hearing of a people about Leeds that walked more strictly in
profession of the name of God then any did where I was, I had no rest in my
spirit till my Parents, in the flesh, sent me thither to be an Apprentice, not
regarding what Calling, so I might be amongst those that feared the living God,
Psalm. 3.16. Heb. 22.21. Isa. 43.7.
that I might be acquainted with the God of my life, who had created me for
himself, and the desires the Lord raised up in me were answered, when I was
thirteen years old of my natural birth I was bound an Apprentice to a
Cloath-maker in a Town called Holdbeck near Leeds; and as I hard, so it was,
there was much speaking of God, which they called preaching, and professing him
in words from the letter of the Scripture what the Saints had spoken forth, so
intimating the Saints practice in their carnal wisdom, seeking the Kingdom of
God in outward observations, Luke. 17.20. Psalm. 66, ^6.
as I had done before I came there; but when I met with none that could tell me
what God had done for their souls, in redeeming them from the body of sin,
which I groaned under, Romans 7.24. Luke 17.20.
and separated me from the presence of God, though I walked strictly with them
in their outward observations, running to hear one man after another, which
they called Ministers, yet I found no rest nor peace to my weary soul, Genesis
3.24.
but the flaming sword, the righteous Law of God, cried in me for a perfect
fulfilling of the Law of God, and did meet with me wherever I was, that I
could find no peace in that worship of God the world has set up, as in
receiving the bread and wine, which they told me was the seals of the Covenant,
which was long ere I durst receive it, Psalm. 51.3.
because I saw not my self prepared; 1 Cor. 11.28, 29.
for the evil of my heart stood before me, and when I was to receive it, I
sought the Lord to keep me by his Power that I might receive it worthily, and
when I did receive it, my desire was the Lord would seal up his love to my
Soul, but I found nothing sealed up to my soul with it: John 15* 27. Luke 22.2.
Ephesians. 4.30. 1 Cor. 10.16, 17. Phil. 3.15. Ephesians. 5.11. 1 John 1.6. Ephesians. 5.13.
Then much fear seized upon my soul for a long time after; and Judas Condition
was cast into my mind, until it were showed that the seal of the Covenant was
the spirit of Christ, and no outward Element; and the supper was the body and
blood of Christ, which the world does not know, nor I at that time, but was
made to wait for the manifestation of it to me: Then I durst join no more wi^^
the world in that practice; nor in their practice in singing David's conditions,
which they called Psalms; for the light in my Conscience let me see the evil of
my heart, that I was not in David's condition; the sense of which stopped my
mouth, and while they were singing, I did mourn and weep for want of the pure
spirit that David had, James 5.13.
that caused him to sing, neither could I apply the promises which they told me
belonged to me, for I found no promise belonging to that nature, Ephesians. 5.6.
but the wrath of God abode upon me, for my disobeying his Counsel in me, the
Light in my Conscience, (but being ignorant) it was his Counsel I departed from
it, and lent my Ear to those without, that said they spoke from the Mouth of
the Lord, so was deceived, and caused to err by their Lies, that did draw me to
seek the Kingdom of God in observations without, Jer. 23.32. Luke 17.20. Deuteronomy.
30.14. Isa. 30.1. Job 33. from 19, to 22.
but the Word of the Kingdom was in me, and executed the righteous justice of
God upon my adulterous heart, that took counsel, and not at his Mouth, till I
was consumed, and my Body was brought so weak, I was not able to answer the
expectation of him whom the Lord had placed me with, though my Conscience was
clear I did what I was able; and he in his carnal wisdom thought I was in a
Consumption, and was in mind sometimes to have sent me away to my Friends in
the Flesh, and other times he would have the men the World calls Doctors, to
apply some things to my Body for my Recovery, but I was not free to let them,
but once for fear of giving them offense, Jer. 5.25. Isa. 59.2.
for I knew my infirmity was the evil of my heart, that separated me from the
presence of my God, and how to be freed from it none told me; and when I found
no help in outward observations, in Reading, Luke 17.20. Ezekiel. 34.6.
Praying, Hearing or Meditating of what I heard my sorrow and misery was so
great, it constrained me to run to those the World calls Ministers and
Professors, which appeared to me had most acquaintance with God, to ask them
what I might do to be saved, and they spoke smooth things to me, to believe in
the Name of Jesus Christ, Acts 2.37. 2 Cor. 13* 5.
and to apply the promises, but that he was to be found within me none told me,
which added to my sorrow, telling me to believe in Christ, I knew not where he
was; then at that time did the Wars begin in this Nation, and mine Eyes being
still abroad to do something in outward observations for my life; Luke 17.20.
Judge. 5.23.
the men called Ministers cried, Curse ye Meroz, because they went not forth to
help the Lord against the mighty: Then I was willing to give my body to death,
in obedience to my God, to free my soul from (...), that I might escape the
Wrath I lay under (...) get acquaintance with him; I joined with that little
Remnant which said, they fought for the Gospel, but when I was amongst them, I
found as much ignorance of the Gospel, as was in those I had been with, none
told me what the Gospel was, but the Letter, which is the outward Testimony and
Declaration of the Gospel, which is Christ, who is the Glad-tydings to Sinners;
but they called the Letter the Gospel, as I had heard before, so I found no
rest to my Soul amongst them: Then I heard there was in Scotland a reformed
Church, whom they said walked in the fear of the Lord; I journyed into that
Country, and to Edenbrough, where I found nothing but formallity, their
Teachers calling to the people to seek the Kingdom of Heaven in outward
observations, as I had heard in England: Then I returned back to England again,
and went amongst those that called themselves the Church of Christ, who are
called by the name Anabaptists, and Independants, who was setting up a more
glorious Image in outward observations, and said they were the Children of God;
but I could not join with them, for the Testimony of his Love my Soul wanted:
And then the Lord discovered to me, that his Love could not be attained in any
thing I could do, in any of these outward observations; so in all these my
turnings in my carnal wisdom, seeking the Kingdom of God in observations
without, thither the flaming Sword turned, which kept the way of the Tree of
Life, and fenced me from it, and cut me down, and rent all my Fig-leave
Coverings, and destroyed that mind that looked out to seek the Kingdom of
Heaven in observations, or to hearken any more to hear the Word of the Lord
from (...). Then my mind was turned within, by the Power of the Lord, to wait
in his Counsel, the Light in my Conscience, to hear what the Lord would say:
And the Word of the Lord came unto me, and said, Put up thy Sword into thy
Scabard, if my Kingdom were of this World, then would my Children Fight; Mat.
26.52, 53.
Know thou not that if I need I could have twelve legions of Angels from my
Father; which Word enlightened my Heart, and discovered the mystery of iniquity,
and that the Kingdom of Christ was within; Luke 17.21.
and the Enemies was within, and was spiritual, and my Weapons against them
must be spiritual, the Power of God: 2 Cor. 10.4, 5. Mat. 26.53.
Then I could no longer Fight with a carnal Weapon, against a carnal Man; for
the Letter, which man in his carnal wisdom, called the Gospel, and had deceived
me; but then the Lord discovered to me the deceits of all these men in England,
that were seeking the Kingdom of Heaven in outward observations; Luke 17.20.
Rev. 19.15.
and the Messenger of the Covenant, forth of his Mouth proceeded the two-edged
Sword, with which he slays his Enemies, cut me down, and caused me to yield in
obedience, Mat. 26.52.
to put up my carnal Sword into the Scabard, and to leave the Army.

Isa. 26.8.
Then I returned to my outward (Habitation and) Calling I had in the World, and
there labored with my Hands, my mind being turned within, to wait upon the
Lord in the way of his judgments; and this I witness, the Administration of
Moses, in which Cain is banished, Genesis 4.14. Romans 9.13. Exodus 29.
Esau reprobated, Pharaoh plagued, the first born of Egypt slain, and my will
brought in subjection, for the Lord to do with me what his will was, if he
condemned me he might, and if he saved me it was his free Love; Ephesians. 25.8.9.
Jonah 2.2. Isa. 9.6, 7.
and in this condemned estate I lay crying in the depth of misery, without any
hopes of deliverance by any thing I could do to pacify the Wrath of God, till
the Administration of the Prophets, that witnessed to my Soul there was free
redemption laid up for me in the Lord Jesus, and by the power of the Word of
their Testimony, there was a secret hope raised up in me, Lam. 3.26 John 5.35^.
to wait for his coming; there I waited till the Administration of John; and I
witness, that of all that is born of a Woman, there is none greater then John,
for he is a burning and a shining Light, who discovered more of the mystery of
iniquity in me, in his Administration, and the sense of my condition was more
manifest, and the cry of my condemned Soul was great, and could not be
satisfied, but breathed and thirsted after Christ, Mat. 5.6. Ephesians. 2.13. Mat.
24.27.
to say me freely through his Blood, or I perished for ever, and in this
condemned estate I lay waiting for the coming of Christ Jesus, who in the
appointed time of the Father appeared to my Soul, as the Lightnings from the
East to the West, and my dead Soul heard his voice, John 5.25.
and by his voice was made to live, who created me to a lively hope, and sealed
me up in the everlasting Covenant of life, Ephesians. 2.13.
with his Blood; then I witnessed the wages of Sin and Death, 1 Pet. 1.3.
and the Gift of God eternal Life, through Jesus Christ my Lord; Isa. 55.3.
and I witnessed according to Testimony of Scripture, Rom, 5.14
Death raigns over all from Adam to Moses, Mat. 11* 13, and.12.
and Moses until the Prophets, and the Prophets until John, and from this day
the Kingdom of Heaven suffers violence, and the violent take it by force; there
is no rest to the Soul till Christ be manifest, and this the Scripture
witnesses; and I witness these Scriptures fulfilled in me, in the year
according to the acco^t, 1645.

Rev. 19.15. Mat. 2.13. Rev. 11.7.8, 9.
The Witnesses that stood before the God of the Earth, and had power to plague
the Earth; having finished their Testimony, the Beast ascends out of the
bottomless Pit, and makes War against them, and kills them, and their dead
Bodies lay in the Streets of the great City, spiritual Sodom, and Egypt, where
our Lord was Crucified; and this Scripture was fulfilled in me, in the year
according to account, 1648.

Rev. 11.10. Mat. 24.15. Dan. 11.31.
Then Kindreds, Tongues, and the Nations of the Earthmade merry over the
Witnesses; and I see the abomination that makes desolate, which is spoken of
by Daniel the Prophet, standing in the holy place where it ought not; and then
was I led by the Spirit into the Wilderness, and tempted of the Devil, that the
Scripture might be fulfiled, Luke 4.1.

In that day and hour of temptation, which was in the time, as the lines
following gives Testimony, I witnessed these Scriptures fulfilled in me, of
Paul's condition, wherein he complained as I then did, Rom, 7.19, 20, 22, 23, 24.
who found a Law in my members, Warring against the Law of my mind, that when
I would do good, evil was present with me; the sense of which caused me to cry,
Oh wretched man that I am! who shall deliver me from the body of this Death?
And as I was crying to the Lord to free me from the burden I groaned under; 2
Cor. 12.9.
the Word of the Lord came unto me saying, My Grace is sufficient for thee, I
will deliver thee; and by the power of this Word I was armed with Patience to
wait in his Counsel, groaning under the body of Sin in the day and hour of
temptation, until it pleased the Lord to manifest his Power to free me, which
was in the year according to the account, 1651. Romans 7.24. Rev. 11.11.


The Spirit of Life from God entered into the Witnesses, and they stood upon
their Feet, then great fear fell upon all that saw them; and the Temple of God
was opened in Heaven, and I saw in the Temple the Ark of his Testament, and
there were Lightnings, Voices, Verse 19*
Thunder, Earthquakes, and great Hail: then mystery Babylon the great, Rev.
17.5. Rev. 18.3.5, 6, 7, 8.
the Mother of Harlots, and the Abomination of the Earth, which made all
Nations drunk with the Wine of the Wrath of her Fornication, she was discovered
in me, and God remembered her when the mighty day of the Lords power was
manifest upon her, 2 The^. 1.7, 8.
Jesus Christ was revealed from Heaven in flaming fire, pouring vials of wrath
upon her, and rendering vengeance upon all in me that knew him not (and
disobeyed his Gospel) and purged away the filthy nature (that did me imbondage)
with the Spirit of judgment, Isa. 4.4.
and with the Spirit of burning, so through the righteous Law of life in Christ
Jesus, I was made free, Romans 8.2.
and am from the body of Sin and Death; and through these great tribulations,
my Garments is washed and made white in the Blood of the Lamb, Rev. 7.14. Rev.
22.14. Rev. 21.27. Mat. 5.6. Rev. 22.2, 5. John 3.3. Rev. 20.6.
who has led me through the Gates of the City, into the new Jerusalem, where
there is nothing enters that works abomination, or makes a lie, but what is
written in the Lambs book of Life, where my Soul now feeds upon the Tree of
Life, which I had so long hungered and thirsted after, that stands in the
Paradise of God, where there is no more curse not night, but the Lord God and
the Lamb is my Light and Life for ever and ever; I witness I am regenerated and
born again of the immortal Seed, and has partaked on the first Resurrection,
on whom the second Death has no power.

And this I declare to all the Inhabitants in England, and all that dwell upon
the Earth, John 6.45. Isa. 54.13.
that God alone is the Teacher of his People, and has given to every one a
measure of Grace, Mat. 25.15. John 1.19. Ephesians. 5.13. Titus 2.11.
which is the Light that comes from Christ, that checks and reproves for Sin,
in the secrets of the Heart and Conscience; and all that wait in that Light
which comes from Christ (which is the free Grace of God) for the Power of Jesus
Christ to destroy Sin, and to guide them in obedience to the Light, so shall
they come to know the only true God and Father of Light in Christ Jesus, John
17.3. John 14.6.
who is the way to him: And this I witness to all the Sons of men, that the
knowledge of eternal Life I came not to by the Letter of the Scripture, nor
hearing men speak of the Name of God; I came to the true knowledge of the
Scripture, and the eternal rest, (they testify it in Christ) by the
Inspiration of the Spirit of Jesus Christ, John 5.39. Job 32.8. Rev. 5.3, 4, 5.
the Lion of the Tribe of Judah, who alone is found worthy to open the Seals of
the Book; and I witness none else can, Ephesians. 1.13.
for he alone opened the Seals of the Book in me, and sealed it up to my Soul
by the Testimony of his own Spirit, according to his own promise, Isa. 8.16.
Jer. 31.33, 34. Ezekiel. 36.24, 25, 26, 27, 28. Neb. 8.10, 11, 12. Isa. 54.13.
I will bind up the Testimony, and seal the Law, amongst my Disciples, and I
will write my Law in their Hearts, and put my Spirit in their inward parts, and
they shall not depart from me; neither shall they need to teach every man his
Neighbor, and every man his Brother, for all shall know me, from the least of
them to the greatest, for I will be merciful to their Unrighteousness, and
their Sins and Iniquities will I remember no more; and all my Childern shall be
taught of me, says the Lord God, and great shall be the peace of my Children;
and ^his here declared the Scriptures witness, and I witness the Scriptures
fulfilled in me; praises, praises, Rev. 29.1. Rev. 5.13.
Hallelujah and eternal praises be unto the Lord God almighty, who has taken
unto thee thy great Power to sit upon thy Throne, and to the Lamb for evermore.

It being charged on me my Imprisonment to be just until I give a reason of the
hope of my calling, and that I am unwilling so to do: To stop the lying Mouth
of the false Accusers, and to clear the Truth from the lies laid on it, as is
before written, and in love to the Souls of the People, Gal. 1 15, 16.
that they the Truth may know as it is in Jesus; Here I have declared the work
of the mighty God in revealing his Son in me, who led me on my journey through
the dark World, Rev. 7.14.
where I passed through great tribulations, as formerly written, until I came
to the end of the World, John 5.19. Mat. 6.22.
over it to rejoice in the Power of my God (1 Cor. 10.11. upon whom the ends of
the World are come) whom the whole World that lies in wickedness, hates and
persecutes; but to the pure single Eye, that is not of the World, I lay this
before which is written, that all which it minds may see the Truth I bear
Testimony of is not any Popish Tenet (though I was questioned concerning them
at the general Assizes holden at Northampton, the tenth and twelfth days of
the first Month, called March, 1654.) neither is it Seducing, Rev. 14.6.
nor Blasphemy, nor prejudicial to the Truth of the Gospel, or peace of the
Nation, but according to the truth of the everlasting Gospel, and sound peace
of the Nation, for which Testimony I am still kept in Bonds in the common Goal
in Northampton, numbered amongst the Transgressors, Isa. 53.12.
in the low Prison with these arraigned for Felony and Murder, waiting in
rest and peace, till the Sufferings of the righteous Seed be fulfilled: And all
you that are Enemies to the Truth of God, persecuting it under the names, as
formerly written, calling the preaching of the Truth seducing, this I declare
and confess unto you in the presence of God, after the Way you call Seducing do
I worship the Lord God of my Fathers, and witness fulfilled what is written in
the Law and the Prophets; Act 24.14.
he that can receive me let him.

W. D.
Dear Friends whose minds are turned to the effectual Light that comes from
Christ, all mind your own measure, and be content in what the Lord has
committed to you; with the Light judge that which would draw your minds to look
forth at others conditions, and in impatiency to covet what the Lord has given
to them, before it be manifest to you; be faithful every one in your own
measure, and in patience wait in the Light for the unlimitted Spirit of Christ
your Life, to open the Seals of the Book, and make known unto you the mystery
of eternal Life, which he will daily reveal in you that are faithful in your
own measures to follow the Lord in what he makes manifest to you whom he has
called into his Vineyard at the nineth and eleventh hour; be faithful to the
Lord in walking in obedience to him in the Light; he will make a short work in
the Earth for his Seeds sake, and your Reward shall be Rest and Peace in the
presence of God in Christ, with those that came into the Vineyard the 3d and
6th hour, and labored the heat of the day; God almighty be with you his chosen
Servants and Children, and all in your measure keep in his eternal power bold,
valiant and faithful unto the end, and crown you with eternal glory in Christ,
one Judge, Lord and King, God over all blessed forever, Amen.



To all you that Rule in England, from the highest to the lowest, whom the Lord
has entrusted with power, to see the Peace be kept, and to judge the Cause of
the People: He has given you Power their Causes to judge with Righteous
Judgment, the Evildoers to Punish, and the Righteous set Free out of the
Hands of those that oppress them.
This is the Word of the Lord God to you;
THat you lend not your Ears to the counsel of your own Hearts, or to the
counsel of any without you, that tempt you to draw your minds from the pure
Counsel of God, which is the Light that comes from Christ Jesus, and calls on
you in your Consciences, to judge with Righteous Judgment, as you will
eternally answer before the pure powerful dreadful God; take heed of abusing
your power he has entrusted you with, in establishing any Law which is
contrary to Scripture, and the righteous Law of God in the Conscience, as those
did whom the Lord drove out, and destroyed before you in his wrath, and
overturned in his fierce displeasure, which if you uphold those Laws they made
in their will, or any other which is contrary to the righteous Law of God in
the Conscience, and rule according to those Laws; and exercise the power
committed to you to bind the Laws upon the Consciences of the Children of the
Lord, whom he has chosen out of the world, and made them his Jewels to fear an
Oath, in obedience to the righteous Law, which says, Swear not at all; which
if you by these unrighteous Laws take advantage against the righteous Seed
concerning the Law of their God, them to ensnare under your power, that you on
them may satisfy your wills: This I declare to you from the eternal God of
Heaven and Earth, it is hard for you to kick against the pricks; for what is
done to his people he takes it as done to himself, and better a Millstone were
hanged about your neck, and you cast into the Sea, says Christ, then to offend
one of these little ones that believes in his Name, and obeys his Command, who
says, Swear not at all; and now is manifesting his power in his People, that
all them may know between those that Swear, and them that fear an Oath, which
if you them that fear an Oath oppress: this know^ the Lord God will plead their
Cause, as he did the Cause of all his people in all Ages, and destroyed those
that oppressed them; as in the time of Pharaoh, and in the time of
Nebuchadnezar, and in the time of Hamon, in the reign of King Ahasuerus, and in
the time of King Herod, whom he smote in his righteous Judgments* and consumed
him with Worms, Acts 12.23. for persecuting his people, and robbing him of his
glory, the righteous justice of God he manifested upon the Enemies of his
People, is left upon record you to fore-warn, that you touch not his chosen
anointed People, nor do his Prophets no harm, for whose sakes he Kings rebukes,
and all that oppress them, as is recorded in Scripture of truth: And you Rulers
of England who promised to the Lord God, if he would deliver those that
oppressed his people into your hands, and give you power over them, you would
take away all Laws that burdened the Consciences of his people, and they
should have free liberty to worship him in Spirit and in Truth according to his
Law written in their own hearts; and according to your desires the Lord
appeared while you in his counsel stood, and gave all into your power
according to the desires of your own hearts; and now is the time of your trial
wherein the Lord is trying you all this day whom he has put power into your
hands, which if you now forget the Lord God, who appeared to you when you were
little in your own eyes in the day of your distress, and deny to perform your
Promises you made to the Lord when he delivered you out of the hands of those
that sought your lives; but contrary to all your Promises abuse your Power you
are entrusted with, to build up again what you seemed to destroy, which cost
the price of so much blood, in establishing Laws which are contrary to
Scripture, and the righteous Law of God in the Conscience, and by them think to
scatter the power of the holy people, and to weary out the Saints of tlle most
high God, in turning Judgment backward, and keeping Justice afar of, that Truth
falls in the Streets, and Equity cannot enter, so he that departs from Evil
makes himself a prey to your wills, and the Lord God sees it, and is
displeased with you, that there is no Judgment for his People: Therefore to you
this is the Word of the Lord, that abuse your power, you are entrusted with, in
perverting judgment, as before-written; thus says the Lord God, The Pit you
dig for my people ye shall fall into it your selves, and my people I will
deliver by the Arm of my mighty power, and according to your deeds I will to
you repay, and recompense fury and vengeance to you my Adversaries, and will
you sweep away with the Beesom of my wrath, except you repent, and your blood
shall be upon your own heads, and you shall not escape, but come to your End,
and none shall help you: He that has an Ear to hear let him hear.

And be forewarned now in this day of your Visitation, wherein the Lord has
to you sent, you to forewarn of the evil that is a coming upon you, that you
may speedily to him return, and lay your Crowns in the dust, at the Feet of
Jesus, Sions King, and in his Counsel stand; which is the Light in the
Conscience, that in you witnesses against every vain thought, and wicked
imaginations, and in the Light wait his Power you to guide to perform your
Promises, and to take away all Laws contrary to Scripture, and the righteous
Law of God in the Conscience, that the righteous Law of God may be your Guide,
which is the Guide of all the Children of God; then will the Lord God of Heaven
and Earth be with you, and with the Arm of his mighty Power destroy all that
Plot or rise up against you, before whom he will make the unrighteous Powers of
the Earth to shake, if you abide faithful in his Counsel, and will make you a
terror to the Evildoers, and a praise to them that do well, and will bring
you into the eternal Peace and Rest he has prepared for his People; but if you
reject his Counsel, and cast his righteous Law behind your backs, as you have
done, and follow the counsel of your own hearts; all that have an Eye to see,
read and understand, Prove. 29.1. He that has been often reproved, and
hardens his Neck shall suddenly be destroyed, and that without remedy: And in
that Day I shall be clear of your blood, who in love to your Souls has not hid
the Counsel of God from you, which he has made known to me, that you may be
left without excuse in the day of the Lords Anger, when he does perform what he
has spoken: Then shall I be remembered whom the World knows by Name William
Deusbery, and by some of you that profess to minister justice cast into Prison,
and there kept in the common Goal in Northampton, for the Word of God and
Testimony of Jesus Christ.

From the Goal in Northampton, the 25 th day of the 4 th Month, 1655.
O England, England! over all in thee I lament, who Persecutes the Sons and
Daughters of the most high God, he has to thee sent, thee to forewarn of the
evil day that is coming upon thee.
O That thou in this day of thy Visitation did know the things belonging to thy
Peace; which the living God tenders to thee in this day of his mercy, wherein
he waits on thee, to be gracious unto thee, and to make thee the glory of all
the Nations of the World, and in all thy Straits for thee appeared, and in his
mighty Power has destroyed all that did secretly Plot and Rise up against
thee, to establish unrighteous Laws, and them bind upon the Consciences of
those that feared the Lord, in thee, and walked humbly before him, according to
the measure of Light received; and now has he appeared in the day of his
mighty Power, in thee, O England, to exalt the Kingdom of Christ in the Hearts
of his Saints, and has sent them to Preach his everlasting Gospel in thee, to
turn the minds of the People from Darkness to Light, which comes from Christ,
in it to wait for his Power, to guide out of all Sin and Uncleaness, into union
and fellowship with the Father of Light; which many of you People in England
seemed to desire above all things, and content to give up your lives to
withstand them that did appear to bind any unrighteous Law upon you, and by it
to take advantage against you concerning the Law of God, which you professed to
love, and to delight in your liberty in it, more then in your nearest and
dearest Relation, or Life, or any outward enjoyment; and all you in that day,
who were faithful to the Lord, according to the measure of Light manifest in
you, the Lord God did appear for you, and in his mighty Power has scattered
those that stood up in enmity against you, to bind Laws upon your Consciences,
which is contrary to Scripture, and the righteous Law of God in the Heart; and
the Lord has given you power over all those your Enemies, and now have you
free liberty, which they cannot take from you, to worship God in Spirit and in
Truth, according to the desires you seemed to manifest, in the day you cried to
the Lord, when you were in distress; and now is the Lord come to visit you in
his tender mercy, and has sent his Ministers to Preach his eternal Word,
freely without Money or Price, in season and out of season, to reprove, rebuke,
exhort, with all long-suffering and doctrine, which many of you People in
England, who promised the Lord to worship him in Spirit and Truth, now his
counsel reject, and turns to the Teachers you have heaped up to your selves,
according to your own Lusts, who cries Peace, Peace to you in what you do,
while you put into their Mouths; and now is the time come to the fulfilling the
Scripture in you, who have itching Ears, and cannot endure sound Doctrine, but
turns from it to Fables, which if you continue in your careless minds,
slighting this day of your Visitation, and not like to retain God in your
knowledge, God will give you up to reprobate minds, that profess you know God,
but in works deny him, being abominable and disobedient, and to every good work
reprobate, upon whom the Lord will get his glory in his righteous judgments,
and if the Lord in his everlasting love had not left a Seed in thee, O England,
thou with all thy Teachers whom thou have heaped up according to thy own Lusts,
would have become as Sodom, but for his own Seed sake, whom he has blessed, he
will do good to the Inhabitants of England, who stand faithfully in his
Counsel, to be guided by his Power, and will scatter all those that stand in
opposition to his righteous Seed, Christ, whom he is exalting in the Hearts of
his elect and chosen People in England, to rule for ever, over all that stand
in enmity to him, this is the day the mighty God is giving all power unto his
Son Jesus, to whom every knee shall bow; and all you proud, stubborn,
self-willed, lofty ones that hate the Light of Christ in you, that witnesses
against Sin in the secret of the Heart and Conscience, and it reject, and deny
to be guided by it, but turn to the counsel of your own Hearts, and the
Teachers you have heaped up according to your Lusts, and with them sits at ease
in the Flesh, and turns the Grace of God into wontonness, and forgets the
loving kindness of the Lord, who delivered you by the Arm of his mighty Power
when Enemies compassed you on every side, and gave you your lives for a prey,
when they were nigh unto Death; and now you abuse your liberty, to walk with
your Teachers according to your Lusts, and with them commit this filthy and
abominable thing in the Land, the Priests to Teach for Hire, and the Prophets
they divine for Money, and you People love to have it so, but what will you do
in the end thereof, which day you put afar off, and do not regard, but that you
shall not be ignorant of the mind of the Lord, and left without excuse, in the
mighty day of the Lords anger, who has sent his Servants and Children early
and late, to fore-warn you of the evil day that is coming upon you, if you do
not speedily repent, and turn to the Lord, but slight this day of your
Visitation, then shall the things now belonging to your Peace be hid from your
Eyes, and your end shall be according to the Word of the Lord I declare to you;
Thus says the Lord, All these my Enemies, that will not that I shall Rule over
them, bring them hither, and slay them before me; and this is your portion you
Enemies of Christ, that hate his Counsel, as before written, he will you
consume with the Breath of his Mouth, and the brightness of his coming, which
will over-take you that sit at ease in the Flesh, as a Thief in the night, and
in flames of Fire will render vengeance on you that disobey his Gospel, and
will give to every one of you according to the works done in the Body, and you
shall not escape from Isreal's Judge, Sions King, who will all his people
deliver, and you proud lofty Ones bring under by his mighty Power, to the
praise and glory of his righteous justice, who alone is worthy, God over all
blessed for ever, Amen.

Remember you are warned in your life time, and prize this day of your
Visitation, while the Lord in patience and long-sufferance waits to be gracious
and merciful to you, if you speedily return to his Counsel, which is the Light
of Christ in your Consciences, that shows you Sin, and wait in it for his
Power, to lead you to Repentance, and to cleanse you from Sin, and in the
straight way of self-denial, and the daily Cross, you to guide in obedience to
the Father of Light, then will the Lord God be merciful to you, and heal your
backslidings, and love you freely, and blot out your Transgressions for his
name sake, which if you will have none of his Counsel, but it reject, as you
have done, and still commit this filthy and abominable thing in the Land, the
Priests to teach for Hire, and the Prophets to divine for Money, which is the
practice of your Teachers, you have heaped up to your selves according to your
Lusts, and love to have it so; then your Portion you must own, what the Lord
has spoken he will perform, and you and your Teachers shall reap the fruit of
your doings, according as is declared, and in that day I shall be remembered
when you lie upon the Bed of sorrow, who is clear of all your Blood; who perish
through your disobedience in that I have not hid the Counsel of God, from
neither Rulers, Priests nor People.

And to the Light of Christ in all your Consciences, I clear my Conscience in
the presence of the living, pure and dreadful God, who will perform according
to his Words, and the condemnation of the Evildoers slumbers not, the Lord
will cleanse the Land of you, and not any that rejects Christ the corner Stone
shall Rule in England, for the Lord will make it the glory of all the Nations
of the World, notwithstanding all that oppose him, his own work he will carry
on in it, by the Arm of his mighty Power will he exalt Christ Jesus, to be King
in it, to Rule the People according to his righteous Law; and all that will not
his Laws obey, and their Crowns lay down at his Feet, and to him their Knee bow
in perfect obedience to his righteous Law written in the Heart and Conscience,
he will you break in pieces, with his rod of Iron, and dash in sunder like a
Potters Vessel, and not any shall escape that does evil, and bring the Curse
upon the Earth which the Lord is making as the Garden of Eden, the Mouth of the
Lord of hosts has spoken it, he that can receive it let him, and has an Ear
to hear let him hear: And whether you People in England hear or forbear, in
your Consciences I shall be for ever manifest; and you shall eternally witness
the Truth I have declared, is to you the Word of the Lord God, the day will
declare it.

William Deusbery.

A TRUE TESTIMONY OF What was done concerning the Servants of the Lord, At the
General Assizes, holden at NORTHAMPTON THE One and twentieth day of the fifth
Month 1655.
Where Edward Atkins sat Judge of Life and Death, before whom was brought
William Deusbery, Joseph Storr, Henry Williamson, John Whitehead, Marmaduke
Storr, Thomas Cocket and Francis Ellington, whom the World in scorn calls
Quakers, who have been and is in Bonds for the Truths sake; and as near as
remembered, the substance of what the Judge (who made a Goal Delivery of all the
Transgressors of the Law) did express to the Servants of the Lord, that was
brought Prisoners before him, whom no breach of Law was proved against* and
also as near as remembered, here is declared the substance of what the Servants
of the Lord did express, so long as they were permitted to declare the Truth,
which did stop the Mouth of all that did object any thing against it; and
though the Judge could not gainsay the Truth declared by them, nor Read them a
Law that they had transgressed, yet were they not suffered to have the benefit
of the Law that Murderers and Felons had, that their Accusers might appear
face to face, and they have a Trial, and speak for themselves, to clear the
Truth from false Accusations, cast upon it and them, but we are again committed
to Prison, as the following Lines make manifest.

With a true Discovery of the Persecution of John Huckin, Michael P^tt^s^^, and
Thomas Goodayre, who is Imprisoned in Northampton* for the Truth^ sake, wherein
the great enmity that is in Thomas Andrews, Priest of W^llin^orrow, and Thomas
Pentlow of Wilby c,alled Justice, and also of the Magistrates of Northampton
made manifest

Also the Word of the Lord to the Rulers and Judges, and all that Plot against
the righteous Seed, the World in scorn calls Q^akers.

ABout the time of the eleventh hour, of the one and twentieth day of the fifth
Month, the Jailer called William Deusbery, Joseph Storr, Henry Williamson, John
Whitehead, Marmaduke Storr, Thomas Cocket, and Francis Ellington, and he set
them all together at the Bar before the Court; the Judge looked upon them, and
after a little silence, said to the Jailer, Are these Prisoners? the Jailer
answered, yea, my Lord; the Judge said to the Jailer, do you use to bring
Prisoners before the Court in this manner? you deserve to be Fined ten Pound
for bringing them before the Court covered; the Jailer answered, if you command
me, I shall take off their Hats; then the Judge gave command, and the Goalers
Man took them off, which being done, the Judge having knowledge given, which
was William Deusbery, spoke to him as follows.

Judge Atkins said to William Deusbery; what art thou here for?

William Deusbery answered, The Mittimus will express what I was committed for,
but a Copy of it I am denied by the Keeper of the Goal.

I. A. What is thy name?


W. D. Unknown to the World.


I. A. Let us hear what that name is that the World knows not.


W. D. It is known in the Light, and not any can know it, but him that has it;
but the name the World knows me by is William Deusbery.


I. A. What Countryman art thou?


W. D. Of the Land of Canaan.


I. A. That is afar off.


W. D. Nay it is near, for all that dwell in God, is in the holy City, new
Jerusalem, which comes down from Heaven, where the Souls is in rest, and enjoys
the love of God in Jesus Christ, in whom the union is with the Father of Light.


I. A. That is true, but are you ashamed of your Country, is it a
disparagement for you to be born in England?


W. D. Nay for the Truths sake I am free to declare according to the Knowledge
of the World, my natural Birth was in Yorkshire, nine Miles from York, toward
Hull.


I. A. You pretend to be extraordinary Men, and to have an extraordinary
Knowledge of God.


W. D. We witness the Work of Regeneration to be an extraordinary Work, wrought
in us by the Spirit of God.


I. A. But the Apostles wrought with their Hands in their Callings.


W. D. They had Callings in the World, some were Fishermen, Paul a Tent-maker,
but when they were called to the Ministry of Christ, they left their Callings
to follow Christ, where he led them by his Spirit to Preach the Word; and I had
a Calling in the World, as they had, and in it did abide, until the Father
revealed his Son in me, and called me from my Calling I had in the World, to
Preach the eternal Word he had made known to me, in the great Work of
Regeneration.


I. A. Why did thou not abide in thy own Country, and Teach People in them
Parts?


W. D. There I did stay until I was called from thence to go where I was led by
the Spirit of the Lord, and as many as are led by the Spirit of God, are the
Sons and Daughters of God, and they that have not the Spirit of Christ are none
of his.


I. A. You say well; for we must in charity conclude that every one in this
place has the Spirit of God in them, but how do you know that you are guided
by the Spirit of God?


W. D. They that have the Spirit of God are known by their fruits, and he that
believes in Jesus Christ, and is guided by his Spirit, has the witness in
himself.


I. A. That is true; yet, notwithstanding, I see by your carriage, that what my
Brother Hails did at the last Assizes, in requiring Bonds for your good
behavior, he might justly do it, for you are against Magistrates and Ministers.


W. D. Make that manifest, wherein we are against them.


I. A. Said to Robert Guy, Clark of the Peace, What have you against these men?


R. Guy, Here is an Information given in upon Oath, by Mr Robert Beeton, that
William Deusbury on the twenty nineth of December 1654. did go into the Church
in Wellingborrow, and stood with his Hat on in the time of Sermon and Prayer,
and after the Minister had done he spoke these words, The Priests preach for
hire, and the People love to have it so: But what will you do in the end
thereof? with other railing words, which made disturbance amongst the people.


I. A. What have you against Storr and Williamson? (not any one spoke openly
against them) I shall take course that those that have disturbed the Ministers,
before I go forth of the Town, that they shall be indicted.


W. D. It is the Liberty of the Law of this Nation, that any which is brought
Prisoner before those that sits to judge their Cause, may speak for themselves,
the truth to witness against the false information given in against them; and
that Liberty I take, to manifest the ground and cause of my going into the
Steeple-house at Wellingborrow. As I was going in the Street, Thomas Andrews
(called Minister of that Town) called to me with these words, Give over
deceiving the People, lest the Plagues of God fall on thee* I replied these
words, Do thou say, I deceive the People? make it manifest wherein I deceive
them: Thomas Andrews said, Thou said there is not any Original Sin; I
replied, Did thou hear me say so? to which he would not answer, but fled
away; I being falsely accused by Thomas Andrews, afterward, when he was met
with the People at the Steeple-house, I went into it for the Truth sake, and
after he had done, I propounded the Question to him, that he would prove there
before the people what he had openly accused me of, in saying, that I said
there was no Original Sin, but he would not answer; but in silence fled away,
and what I here declare that I did, is not any breach of the Law of this Nation.


I. A. But in that you are found wandering in the Country, you break the Law,
for there is an ancient old Law, that if any did go from their dwellings to
travel in the Country without a Certificate from some Justice, they were to be
taken as wandering Person.


W. D. If there be any such Law, read it to us, and if there be such a Law in
thy Conscience, thou know it is contrary to the Scriptures, for the Apostles
and Ministers of Christ went to and fro in the Country, Preaching the Word of
eternal Life, and there were added to the Church daily such as should be saved,
and the number of the Saints and Brethren were daily increased, and the Law
that is in force in this Nation, does allow all that professes Faith in Jesus
Christ, to have free Liberty to walk in the Faith, which is according to
Scripture.


I. A. Thou have an eloquent tongue and thou art proud of it.


W. D. Pride I deny, but the Truth I witness, which will judge Pride, and
torment all that live in it, until it be destroyed. The Judge would not speak
any more words to him known by name William Deusbury, who as they say was
committed to Prison, upon suspicion of Blasphemy, where he has been kept above
twenty nine weeks, and has appeared at the general Sessions, and two general
Assizes, where not any Accuser has appeared to his face, neither was any Law
ever read to him that he has transgressed.


I. A. Said to Joseph Storr, is thy name Joseph Storr?


I. S. Said, yea.


I. A. What art thou here for?


I. S. I have been nine and twenty weeks in Prison, amongst those Arraigned for
Fe^ony and Murder, and know not for what cause I was Imprisoned, and never any
Accuser appeared to my face, to prove me the Transgressor of any Law, and I
desire that my Accusers may appear to my face, that I may have a Trial
according to Law, for Judge Hailes promised at the last Assizes, if I would
appear at this Assizes my Accusers should appear to my face, but a Trial was
denied, and he not any further examined, or suffered to speak.


I. A. Which is Williamson? What have you against him? John Brown in Commission
to do justice (who did cast him into Prison) whispered with the Judge, and they
said no more to him, though he has been kept twenty week in Prison, and now
has appeared at two Assizes, and none appeared to prove him the Transgressor
of any Law.


I. A. Said to John Whitehead, Is thy name Whitehead?


I. W. Yea, I am so called; and not any further was he examined, though he
demanded the liberty the Law of the Nation allowed, that he might be heard
speak, and have a Trial, which was denied him, though he has been kept
eighteen weeks in Prison, and has appeared at two general Sessions, and not
any Accuser did there appear to prove him the Transgressor of any Law.


I. A. Common Fame is a good Accuser, (though not a good Tryer) yet I am
satisfied from what I have heard to continue you in Prison, unless you will lay
in Bond to be of good Behavior, and appear at the next Assizes, for you are by
common fame accused to be a dangerous People, and Breakers of the public Peace.


I. W. So the People of God by the common fame of the World) was in all Ages
everywhere spoken against, and accused to be Disturbers of their peace, as
Paul was accused to be a mover of Sedition through the whole World.


I. A. Said to Marmaduke Storr, Is your name Marmaduke Storr?


M. S. My name is so called: Then the Judge turned to speak to Francis
Ellington, and seemed to be unwilling to hear Marmaduke Storr speak, yet he
said, I desire to have my Trial according to Law, for I was taken in my
Journey, and imprisoned, from the management of about seven score pounds in the
year, and have never yet forfeited my Liberty, but appeared in serving the
Commonwealth in its greatest straits, for which they are indebted to me about
two hundred pounds, as my Commission Debenter and Claim upon Record will make
appear.

His Cause was no further examined, though he was committed in his Journey as a
Vagabond, when he came to relieve his Brother Ioseph's want, who had been a
eleven weeks in Prison, and he was going into Staffordshire to renew the taking
again of his Farm, which was out within seven days, and he has been eighteen
weeks in Prison, and has before appeared at two general Sessions, where there
was no Accusation read, nor any appeared to prove him the breaker of any known
Law, neither by Word or Action.


I. A. Which is Ellington?


F. E. I am so called.


I. A. What are you here for?


F. E. I was in Bonds fifteen weeks for my appearance at the general Sessions;
and when I appeared there, no Accuser appeared to my face, nor no Evidence was
read against me, to prove me the Breaker of any Law; and there I was committed
by those called Justices to the Goal, where I have been kept in the Dungeon
these thirteen weeks, amongst those arraigned for Felony and Murder, and has
been taken from my outward Habitation, which is at Wellingborrow, within seven
miles of this place, and have been deprived of my outward Calling, which I
lived in, and from my Wife and five small Children, and ^o am deprived of the
benefit of the Law of this Nation, which no Felon or Murderer that is here is
deprived of, for they have liberty to speak for themselves, and to have a fair
Trial according to Law, which is denied to us.


The Judge said to Robert Guy, Clark of the Peace, Where is your Evidence
against these men? Rob. Guy, This Ellington is a receiver of these men, and
here is a Letter he writ to a Justice of Peace, wherein he does accuse the
Justice of doing injustice in committing of Deusbery and Storr to Prison.


I. A. Why do you trouble us with that which there is no matter of Fact in? I
much wonder you should trouble a Judge of the Assizes with such small things,
and not end them in your own Sessions, for we come hither to determine greater
matters.


I. A. Mr Ellington, I have a great love to you, being a man that lives in this
Country, will you enter Bond for your good Behavior, to appear at next
Assizes?


F. E. I am of no evil behavior, neither to this day has any thing been
proved against me concerning it, and if it yet can be proved by any one man
here, that I have been of evil behavior, or have broken any Law of this
Nation, I am here present to answer it, and to give in Bonds for my liberty.


I. A. You have transgressed the Law in that you came to the Bar with your
heads covered, because it is a contempt to Authority.


F. E. There is no Law in this Nation requires any such thing, as putting off
the Hat; if there be any, I desire it may be read, that so before the Country I
may be convinced by the Law, before Bonds be required.


I. A. I shall deal favorably with you, for I shall take your own Bond to
appear at the next Assizes.


F. E. First prove me a Transgressor of the Law, for the righteous Law of God
says, Where there is no Law, there is no Transgression; and there is no Law in
England that requires the putting off the Hat; therefore it is not a
Transgression: therefore I desire that I may have the benefit of an English
man, which is not denied to any Felon here amongst us, for I have to this day
stood always faithful to the Commonwealth, and have not forfeited my liberty,
but have hazarded my life and estate to procure Freedom, which now I am
deprived of.


I. A. If you will not put in Bond for your Behavior, which I think is very
reasonable, take him away.


F. E. For my behavior, if there be any here that can accuse me, I would have
you Country men to speak, any of you, if not, let all the poor people in
Wellingborrow, and the Towns there-abouts, and the poor in Nothamton, which I
have for these fifteen or sixteen years employed in Carding, Spinning, Dying,
and Weaving of Wool, speak what my behavior has been toward them, or
others: For, I have (until they cast me into Prison) employed more poor people
in work about Wool, then any one man in this Country does; yet,
notwthstanding what I have done, and do, may not I have the benefit of the Law,
as all Malefactors here have.


I. A. Jailer, Take him away.


Judge said to Thomas Cocket, Is your name Cocket?

Thomas Cocket said, yea. And he spoke to John Mansell, and John Brown, that
committed him to Prison, and sat on the Bench with the Judge, What have you to
accuse me of? I am here ready to answer the Law; but they would not answer him
a word, neither did they, or any other, openly accuse him of any thing, and
though he has been kept in Prison fourteen weeks, and has appeared at two
general Sessions, and at these Assizes where not any Accuser appeared to his
face or evidence read to prove him the transgressor of any Law, the Judge would
not examine his Case, nor hear him speak, but commanded the Jailer to take them
all away, two or three times, and would not let them speak for themselves.

Yet Marmaduke Storr said to the people, take notice all people, how we are
deprived of the privilege and liberty that the Law of this Nation allows, in
that we may not be heard speak, and have a legal Trial, which is granted to
Felons and Murderers.

Then they were withdrawn, and he who is called William Deusbury, turned to
the Court, and spoke as follows to the Judge: With what measure thou meetest
to us, it will be measured to thee again; and the Lord God of Heaven and Earth
will judge between thee and us, and will give unto thee, and every one of you,
according to the works you have done, and in that day you shall know whai is
now declared is the Truth; the Lord has spoken it, in whom we trust, and he
will us deliver.

Soon after the Court did rise, and the Jailer took them away, whose names are
formerly written, to Prison again, where he says, they must be kept until the
next Assizes, if they will not enter Bond for their good behavior and
appearance at the next Assizes, though not any evil behavior has been proved
against any of them, by the Law of this Nation, neither when they were
committed to Prison, from the time when they have been brought forth at the
general Sessions and Assizes, as what has been formerly written, makes
manifest; and at the general Sessions holden the fourteenth day of the fourth
Month, John Whitehead, Marmaduke Storr and Thomas Cocket, was by those that
then sat in Commission to do Justice, sentenced to be kept in the house of
Correction, and there to be wrought hard, and not to have any meat brought to
them, which those called Justice at that time said, was their due Punished,
according to Law, as Vagabonds, and notwithstanding fix weeks after, they were
thus sentenced, (which they said was their punishment prescribed by Law) they
brought them forth at the Assizes, in order to a further Trial, and alleged
nothing against them; but they were again committed to Prison amongst the
servants of the Lord, whose names are before written, which were brought before
Judge Atkins, who did not read any Law to them they had transgresed, but in the
open Court said, that common fame did repute them to be dangerous persons, and
said that common fame was a good Accuser, but not a good Trier, yet all that he
tried their Cause with, was the common fame, for not any legal Trial they had,
least the enmity and injustice of those that committed them should have been
brought to light; and tho he made a Jail-delivery of all Murderers and Felons
that had transgressed the Law, yet those he could not find had transgressed the
Law, by any thing that could be informed against them, because they were evil
spoken of, tho not any evil proved against them, but according to the common
fame of the people, Judge Atkins sentenced them to Prison again, where they are
to be, as he says, until the next Assizes; and their Friends and acquaintance
are not suffered to see them, or to speak with them, so in this day the
Scripture is fulfilled, as it was in former times, by those that judged the
righteous Seed by the common fame of the people, who cried release unto us
Barrabas, and Crucify Jesus, and though Pilate could not read any Law that
Jesus had transgressed, and in his Conscience knew that he was a just man, yet
to do the people a pleasure, he harkened to their common fame, which was, that
he would deliver him up to be Crucified, and Pilate contrary to the Light in
his own Conscience, delivered him up to them to be Crucified, Luke 23.22, 23,
24, 25. and now in this day is the same righteous Seed, the Lord has blessed,
Jesus the Son of the living God, persecuted in his Saints, whose bodies are
cast into Prison, by those that judge for man, acc^^ding to the common fame of
the people, who ever persecuted Christ the Lord of life, that says, in as much
as you have done it to the least of these my Brethren, you have done it unto
me, Mat. 25, 40

The Discovery of the Persecution of John Huchin and Michael Patteson.
JOhn Huchin, being moved of the Lord the twenty fourth day of the fourth
Month, being the first day of the week, to go to the Steeple-house in
Wellinborrow; where the Priest Thomas Andrews, and the people were meet
together, he there peaceably standing in silence, the Priest commanded those he
called Officers to take him forth of the Steeple-house, which was done at his
command, before half of the Sermon (as its called) was ended, and by one Henry
Henfnan, called Churchwarden, was he had forth to an Alehouse, and set watch
over him, until the Priest had done; then the Constable sent to tell him, that
if he would not come at their Steeple-house in the afternoon, that he should be
set free, he replied that he should not make such a promise to them, for he
knew not what the Will of the Lord was to do with him, but after a season they
let him go: And about nine days after, Thomas Fox Constable, came to his
Masters shop, where he was working, and took him forth without showing any
Warrant or order for his so doing, and carried him before Thomas Pentlow called
Justice, and though not any evidence came against him that he speak one word in
the Steeple-house, or made any disturbance there, yet the said Thomas Pentlow,
did send him to the common Goal in Northamton.

Michael Petteson, living in the Town before written, being moved of the Lord
the first day of the week, being the first day of the fifth Month, to go into
the Steeple house in Wellingborrow, and there in silence stood peaceably, until
the Priest Tho. Andrews had done, and people going away, then he was moved of
the lord, to ask Thomas Andrews this question; Friend, can thou witness this
to be the Word of the Lord that thou have spoken here before the people; but
the Priest, instead of answering to the question, he commanded the Officers to
take him away, and then John Brown Constable took him forth and had him to an
Alehouse, and set watch over him, and the next day the Constable abovesaid,
carried him with the other Friend, before written, before Thomas Pentlow
aforesaid, without showing him any Warrant; and when he was brought before him,
no Accuser appeared to prove that he had transgressed any Law, neither did he
read him any Law that he had transgressed, but the Priest, Thomas Andrews,
sitting by Thomas Pentlow, did move that a Mittimus might be made to send him
and the other Friend to the House of Correction, for he said the Goal was not
Punishment enough for them, but Thomas Pentlow not answering him in that, did
make a Mittimus and sent them to the common Goal in Northampton, where they are
for a Testimony against the unreasonable proceedings of these unreasonable Men,
in patience waiting until the Lord deliver them by the Arm of his mighty Power.

This is said before that of God in all Consciences, that all may judge what
Spirit guides these Men, that has proceeded against those two before
mentioned; for while they lived in Pride, Pleasure, Scornfulness, foolish
jesting, and mocking, spending whole nights and days in running after Fiddlers,
Dancing, and spending their precious time in Wantonness and Vanity; the one of
them above Twenty two Years, and the other above eighteen Years, and all the
time that they lived in Vanity, they did go to the Steeple-house (which the
Priest calls a Church) and he did own them as his hearers, and did not speak to
any to hinder them, or to take them away; but after the Lord, in the riches of
his love, sent the Messengers of his Truth, whom the World in scorn call
Quakers, whom they did hear the fourth day of the tenth Month, 1654. that Word
which they then heard delivered, was to them Power and Life, that did their
Understandings enlighten, and Consciences awaken, wherein they did read in the
Book of Conscience the evil of their doings until that time, they see they had
lived without the fear of God, and the power of the Spirit, which showed them
the evil of their Hearts, constrained them to depart from it, and to wait on
the Power of the Lord, to guide them in obedience to the measure of Light
received, and in obedience to the Light and Power of God, they were moved to go
into the Steeple-house, as before written, and though one of them spoke not one
word, and the other Propounded but one question to the Priest after he had
done, which is not the breach of any Law of this Nation, yet notwithstanding
they cast them into Prison, as what is before written makes manifest; He that
has an Eye to see, let him see, and an Ear to hear, let him hear.

A Discovery of the Ground and Manner of the Persecution of Thomas Goodayre,
who is Imprisoned in Northampton, by the Magistrates of that Town.
UPon the thirteenth day of the fifth Month, in the Year 1655. he was moved of
the Lord to come to Northampton, to visit some of his Friends, which were cast
into Prison there, by the Magistrates of that County, and when he came there,
he went to the Prison door, but could not be suffered to see his Friends; for
the Jailer had received order from those called Justices, that none should come
at them who are in scorn called Quakers, which he went to visit; and as he was
going from thence along the Streets of that Town, he met the Mayor, and several
others, some of which are called Aldermen, and he was moved to speak to them
these words, or to this effect; Men, see what is the fruits of the Ministry of
this Nation, and what it has brought forth, for Persecution and Wickedness
abounds; and he declared, that those who say they are Christian Magistrates,
and do Persecute the Innocent, are Heathens, and know not God; and he told them
that they could not produce one Scripture to prove that ever any Christian
Magistrate did Persecute any Man, as those had done that cast his Friends in
Prison; then one of them called an Alderman, stroke off his Hat in the Street,
and said, he would learn him better manners, then to stand and talk before the
Mayor with his Hat on; and some of them spoke to the Mayor to bind him to good
Behavior, and the Mayor and the Aldermen consented together, and required
Sureties for his good Behavior, or else they said he should go to Prison, but
he told them, that he was bound to good Behavior by the righteous Law of God;
and he refusing to find Sureties, they did immediately send him forth of the
Streets to Prison, without Mittimus or further Examination, and did not make
known to him any National Law that he had transgressed, neither has he to this
day had any further Examination or Trial* but is content to rest in the Will of
God, in whom his confidence is, who will deliver him out of the Hands of all
wicked and unreasonable Men.

TO all you Rulers and Judges of the Earth, who combine together against the
Lord, and against his Anointed, and lay your Plots in the deep, and fetch your
counsel out of the bottomless Pit, that you may ensnare the righteous Seed,
whom the World in scorn calls Quakers, who in love to your Souls, do you warn
(as you will eternally answer before the Lord God of Heaven and Earth) to give
over Plotting against the Righteous, and inventing evil devices against the
Innocent, for in the eternal Light you are seen, and in your secret works of
darkness you are discovered; and all you that will not take warning now when
the Lord calls you to turn to his Light, but his Counsel rejects, and continue
in the evil of your doings; To you this is the Word of the Lord, All your Plots
and Counsels shall not prosper against the Righteous, for he that sits in
Heaven does laugh, the Lord shall have you in derision; for not any Plot shall
prevail against Israel, nor unrighteous Counsel stand before Zions King, who
will break you with the rod of Iron, and dash you in pieces like a Potters
Vessel, that plots against him to oppose him in his appearance; (In the Hearts
of his Saints) for in what you do to the least of those, you do it to me,
(says Christ) and better a Millstone were hanged about your Neck, and you cast
into the bottom of the Sea, than to offend the least of those that believe in
my Name. From the Spirit of the Lord that will not always strive with Man, you
are once more warned, now while you have time prize it, and turn to the Light
of Christ in your Consciences, which lets you see the secret evil of your
Hearts* and wait in the Light for the Power of Christ, to destroy the plotting,
wicked inventing mind, and to guide you in the strait and narrow way of
self-denial, and the daily Cross, in perfect obedience to the Law of God, least
you perish in your disobedience; for the Lord God of Israel is arising in
mighty Power to plead the Cause of his persecuted oppressed People, and to
scatter all their Enemies that plot against them, as Dust before the Wind; for
they that plot against the People of God, and for them digs a Pit, shall fall
into it themselves; for not any Weapon formed against them shall prosper; for
all shall know the mighty God is with Israel his People, and that the King of
eternal glory dwells in Mount-Sion, who is the strength of his people, and of
his Dominion there shall be no end; and in that day all both high and low, rich
and poor, that slight the comfort of the Lord, and continue in enmity against
him, and his appearance in the Hearts of his Saints, then will you know what
has been and is declared to you, from the righteous Seed, is to you the Word
of the Lord God; He that has an Ear to hear, let him hear.

Witnessed by the righteous Seed, whom the World in scorn calls Quakers, who
are in the common Goal in Northampton, for the Truths sake.
REad with understanding in the fear of the Lord, this is the Word of the Lord
to you: Dear Friends, Servants and Children of the most high God, whom he has
called out of the World, be faithful all of you in his Counsel, to wait for his
Power, you to guide in all your thoughts, words and works, in his pure fear, in
obedience to his Will; I charge you in the presence of God, be valiant for your
freedom in your dwelling in the Power of God, that he may be your Arm against
the fiery Darts of the Devil, him to resist in his appearance, in all his
Wiles, who goes about like a roaring Lion to devour you, every way seeking to
get into you, your minds from the pure to draw into the vibsile things, your
affections there to captivate, your wills to satisfy in created and perishing
objects, as in the knowledge of the Truth, in the fleshly wisdom to feed with
the Swine upon the Husk, the Form and Image of what you have enjoyed, or of
what you see in the Light and Vision, and does not enjoy it in the Possession,
but spoke in the airy drunken spirit Words without knowledge; with them sits
decked a painted Beast above the Cross, and thou whose condition this is, art
the foolish Virgin that appears in the ou^ward formality, in the sight of Men,
with a Lamp like the wise Virgin, but not dwelling in the Power of God, wants
the Oil of joy and gladness, in the power of his love, which the wise Virgins
have in their Lamps, that dwell in the pure Light and Power of God, which keeps
all the affections in order to the Spirit of Truth, and bridles the Tongue not
to utter words before the Lord, but in the silence on him to wait, till his
Spirit move, his mind to declare from the living Power, what the Soul possesses
and enjoys in Christ the Husband of the wise Virgin, who is the Bride the Lambs
Wife; I charge and command you all in the presence of the living God, who make
mention of his Name, examine your Hearts, search them, and try your ways with
the Light that comes from Christ, which will discover all your conditions in
the Book of Concience, there you will see how you stand in the presence of God,
wherein the state of the foolish Virgin, in the airy Spirit, feeding upon words
spoken in the Light and Vi^ion, there boasting in pride of what thou possessest
not, and through the subtilty of the Devil is turned from the pure Power, to
flee the Cross, and so make Shipwreck of Faith and a good Conscience; or
whether you be in the state of the wise Virgin, that in the pure Light waits
and dwells in the Power, which chastises that which would your Garments
defile, keep daily in the Cross, and then the Soul is kept pure and clean, to
follow the Lamb with boldness whithersoever he goes, and enters with him into
the rest prepared for the People of God, where thou the foolish Virgin shall
not come, until thou from thy folly and fleshly wisdom return to the pure
Light, with it to judge, and in it to wait for his Power, Christ Jesus the
Fountain of wisdom, thee to guide in faithful obedience to the Father of Light.
All dear Children of the Lord, be valiant, bold and faithful, that in the pure
Light, Power and Life of God, you may all stand in the day of trial, which the
Lord will bring upon you all that make mention of his Name, for power shall be
given to the Beast, his Horn to exalt even to the host of Heaven, for the
cleansing of the Sanctuary, that all painted Beasts that are enemies to the
Cross, that has defiled the Sanctuary of the living God, in coming before him,
amongst his Saints and Children; for from among them shall they come, trembling
before the power of the Beast, when he utters his voice for all to come to his
Image him to worship, then shall all you Children of the most high God, whom he
has called and chosen to be faithful to him, in his eternal Power rejoice, who
will you all keep in that day, in rest and peace in the ancient of days, who
shall sit to judge the Beast and the Whore, their Kingdom to break down and
destroy, in his eternal judgment for evermore, and will Rule over them by the
Arm of his mighty Power, and of his Dominion there shall be no end, for to him
it belongs forevermore. Meet often together in the fear of the Lord, his Power
to manifest in you, to his praise who is worthy forever, Amen. I charge and
command all in the presence of the Lord God, who make mention of his Name, that
you speak not at any time to any in your own will, or to one another, or to any
without or to exhort them when you are guilty of the same thing, in the exalted
Spirit out of the Cross; be silent thou Fool, first judge thy self with the
Light, and in the Power dwell, to cast the Beam out of thy own Eye, and that
thy own House be kept in order, then will thou see clearly to take out the Mote
out of thy Brothers Eye, and how to exhort others, how to walk in order to the
Spirit of Truth, and watch over one another with a single Eye. All you that
fear the Name of the Lord, in tender love bear one another Burdens, and
exhort one another, to build up one another, in your most holy Faith; God
almighty be with you, all his faithful Servants and Children, and in his
eternal Power keep you in himself, that in him you may grow up in his pure
nature, to bear his Name in righteousness, that his Image may be written in
your Foreheads, that all that sees you may know you to be the righteous Seed
the Lord has blessed; his eternal Power preserve you and keep you, and build
you up in the purity of the Spirit, and bond of Peace, where I am with you in
the eternal unity, and in the unchangable Love and Life.

William Deusbery.
From Northampton Goal the 19 th of the 3 d Month, 1655.
A TRUE PROPHECY OF THE Mighty Day of the Lord.
Which is coming, and is appeared in the North of England, and is arising
toward the South; and shall overspread this Nation, and all Nations of the
World.

WHEREIN The Lord is redeeming Sion forth of her long inthral'd Captivity in
Babylons Kingdom, where she has been scattered in the cloudy and dark day,
into Forms and Observations, and there kept by the Priests, and Teachers of the
World, who ran when God never sent them.

Now is the Lord appearing in this day of his mighty Power, to gather his elect
together, out of all Forms and Observations, Kindreds, Tongues and Nations; and
is making up his Jewels, his mighty Host, and exalting Jesus Christ to be King
of Kings, to lead his Army he has raised up in the North of England; and is
marched toward the South, in the mighty power of the living Word of God, which
is sharp as a two-edged Sword, to cut down High and Low, Rich and Poor, Priests
and People; and all the Powers of darkness in the Land, and all the World over,
that are fruitless Trees that cumbers the ground, defiles the Flesh, and walks
in disobedience to the righteous Law of God, the pure Light in the Conscience;
For who falls on this Stone shall be broken, but on whom it falls shall be
ground to Powder: So shall this Nation, and all the Nations of the World be
Conquered; and the Victory witnessed, neither by Sword nor Spear* but by the
Spirit of the Lord.

A Word from the Lord to all the Inhabitants of England, Rulers, Priests and
People, to haste to meet the Lord with speedy Repentance, and returning within,
to hearken diligently to his Counsel, the pure Light of Christ in your
Conscience, to be guided by his Power, else you shall perish in your
gain-sayings; For if his anger be kindled a little, blessed are all they that
trust in him.

O England, who lies in the fallen and lost estate, separated from the true and
living God, by thine Iniquities, Hos, 14.1
notwithstanding all thy Profession of his Name, in outward Forms and
Observations; Repent, Repent, and turn unto the Lord God Almighty, who waits on
thee to be gracious unto thee, and to make thee the glory of all the Nations of
the World, Isa. 30.18.
if thou will diligently hearken unto his Counsel, the Light that is in the
Conscience of every one, to wait in it upon the Lord God, John 1.9.
that he may guide thee by his Power.

And this I have to declare unto thee from the Lord, which he has made known
unto me, concerning thee, O England, certain years ago, when the everlasting
Covenant of Life was confirmed unto my Soul in the Lord Jesus Christ, Isa. 55.3.
that I should go with the ransomed of the Lord unto Sion: Cap. 35.10.
I enquired of my God, to manifest unto me where Sion was, that I might return
thither to worship him in Spirit and Truth; John 4.24.
there being so many confused cries in thee, O England, who professes to
worship the only true God, some saying, Lo here is Christ, in the Presbyterian
practice, so called; and the Independants, so called, cries, Lo he is here; and
the Anabaptists, so called, saying, Lo he is here; and others in outward Forms
saying, He is here, according as Christ foretold, that the time would come when
they shall say, Lo here is Christ, and lo there; as it is fulfilled in thee;
but Christ says, Believe them not, look not forth, Luke 24.23.27.
for the Kingdom of Heaven is within: And as the Lightning that shines out of
the one part under Heaven, and shines unto the other part under Heaven, even
so shall the Son of Man be in his day: And this I witness, and while I was
waiting on my God, to make known unto me where Sion was, the Word of the Lord
came unto me with witness to my spirit, that Christ was not divided, and that
there was no rent in his Garment, 1 Cor. 1.3. Zach. 14.9.
For the Lord is one and his People one; and that all thy outward Forms of
Worship, O England, where thou art waiting for Christ in Observations, is
contrary to his Will; for Christ says, The Kingdom of God is not in
Observations, neither shall they say, lo here, or lo there, for behold the
Kingdom of God is within you: Luke 17.20, 21.
And that all thy strict observing of thy outward Forms, is but imitating the
Saints practices, in thy babylonish and heathenish Wisdom, so there is nothing
but confusion in thee; and that all thy outward Forms is the outward Court,
Rev. 11.1, 2.
which is without the Temple, that the Angel was not to measure, for it is
given unto the Gentiles, and the holy City shall they tread under foot; and
this was made known unto me from the Lord my God, to be the estate and
condition thou stoodst, and do stand in, O England, in all thy outward Forms
and Observations; Having a Form of Godliness, but denying the Power thereof: 2 Timothy 3.5.
So under all thy profession, is most cruel oppression, every one oppressing
one another, according unto their power, from the highest unto the lowest; so
that the cry of the oppressed Seed within the Hearts of thy Inhabiters, O
England, and those that are oppressed in outward oppressions in thee, Jam. 5.4.
has entered into thr Ears of the Lord God of Sabbath, and he is coming in
Power to set the oppressed free, and to bring them to Sion; Isa. 58.6. Jer.
3.14.
which in the eternal Riches of his Love he made known to me where Sion was,
according unto the desires he had raised up in my Heart; and the Word of the
Lord came unto me, saying, I will gather my People out of all Forms and
Observations, Rev. 5.9. Rev. 7.9. Ezekiel. 34.13.
and out of all Kindreds, Tongues and Nations, and I will pour my Spirit upon
them, and purge away their filth with the Spirit of Judgment and of Burning;
and I will write my Law in their Hearts, and put my Spirit in their inward
Parts, Jer. 31.33. Zech. 14.9.
and they shall not depart from me; but shall be bound up in union with me, in
the free Covenant of Life in the Lord Jesus, and one with another, in the one
Spirit, so shall the Lord be one, and his People one; and this is Sion, the
City of the living God, to whom all the promises of the Lord are, according
unto the Scripture of Truth, wherein they need not to Teach every Man his
Neighbor, Dan. 10.21. Heb. 8.10, 11, 12.
and every Man his Brother, saying, Know the Lord, for all shall know me from
the least unto the greatest, for I will be merciful unto their unrighteousness,
and their Sins and Iniquities will I remember no more.

And this is the holy City, the New Jerusalem, which John bare witness of,
wherein there is no Temple, for the Lord God Almighty and the Lamb are the
Temple of it: Rev. 21.2, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27.
And the City had no need of the Sun, neither of the Moon to shine in it, for
the glory of God does lighten it, and the Lamb is the Light thereof: And the
Nations of them that are saved, shall walk in the Light of it; and the Kings of
the Earth do bring their glory and honor unto it; and the Gates of it are not
shut at all by day, for there shall be no night there; and there shall in no
wise enter into it any thing that defiles, neither that works abomination, or
makes a lie, but they that are written in the Lambs Book of Life, John 4.24.
and all that walk in the Light of Christ within; which Light exercises the
Conscience, and leads into the holy City, the New Jerusalem, where the true
Worshippers of the Father are, who worship him in Spirit and in Truth, Rev.
22.5. 1 These. 1.1.
and are come out of the night, and need no Candle, neither light of the Sun,
for the Lord God gives them light, and they shall reign forever and ever: And
this is the true Church in God, Sion, which shall become the praise of the
whole Earth, and from whence the Law shall go forth, according unto the promise
of the Lord, and the Word of the Lord from Jerusalem; Isa. 2.3.
Then shall Righteousness run down with a mighty stream, and Oppression shall
cease.

And this glory of the Lord which he has made known unto me, shall be made
manifest to the Inhabiters of England, if you will hearken diligently to the
Counsel of the Lord, which is the Light in your Consciences, and in it wait on
the Lord to be guided by his Power; I waited in the Counsel of my God, in the
Calling where I was placed, until the Year 1652. and in the eighth Month of the
Year, as it is accounted of men, the Word of the Lord came unto me saying, The
Leaders of my People causes them to err, Isa. 9.16.
in drawing them from the Light in their Consciences, which leads to the
anointing within, which the Father has sent to be their Teacher (which would
lead them into all Truth) to seek the Kingdom of God in Observations, 1 John
2.27.
where it is not to be found: Luke 17.20.
So my People perish for want of Bread: Freely thou have received, freely give,
and minister; and what I have made known unto thee in secret, declare openly.
Which Word constrained me by the Power of it to leave my Wife and Children, and
to run to and fro to declare to Souls where their Teacher is, Has. 4.6.
the Light in their Consciences, which the Lord has given unto every one a
measure to profit withal, for the exercise of the Conscience toward God and
Men, Dan. 10.4. Rev. 7.17.
and waiting in the Light for the Power of Christ; he would lead them up to the
living Fountains of Water, where their Souls would find refreshment in the
presence of the Lord, and their Bread should be sure, Isa. 35.10.
and their Water never fail, as the Lord has made manifest to my Soul; and to
worship him in Truth at New Jerusalem, Rev. 5.13.
to sing Hallelujahs and Praises among the redeemed Sons and Daughters of God,
in the beauty of holiness, unto the Lord God that sits upon the Throne, and to
the Lamb for evermore.

To you Rulers of England, whose names will be honorable, if you will honor
the Lord in obeying his Counsel, which is the Light in your Consciences, that
he may guide you in all your ways, to you I am moved to write: Thus says the
Lord God Almighty, I will overturn, Ezekiel. 21.27.
overturn, overturn until I have given it unto him whose right it is; as you
have seen the Power of the Lord manifest on many that were in the place where
you are, who all professed the Name of Christ, but they would not obey his
Counsel, the Light in their Consciences, Jer. 9.13, 14.
but walked after the counsel of their own Hearts, and improved their power for
their own ends, and dissembled with God and the Country, but our righteous God
has overturned them, Dan. 12.2.
to their everlasting shame and contempt.

Now if you will not obey the Light in your Consciences to rule in the Power of
the Spirit, Isa. 58.6.
to break every Yoke of unrighteousness, and put every filthy and abominable
thing out of the sight of the Lord, that the oppressed may be set free* Rev.
13.16.
but you will cause both small and great to worship the Image of the Beast in
forcing them to obey the Heathenish and Unrighteous Laws made by
Nebuchadnezar's nature proud flesh, who set up himself a King, to oppress all
under his power, and set up whom he would to Rule and Reign with him over
others in Tyranny, Cruelty and Oppression in all unrighteousness; which Beast
received a deadly wound with a Sword, by the little Horn spoken of in Daniel,
Dan. 7.8.
before whom three Horns fell; and the Horn had Eyes to see what they should
do, the Light in their Consciences, and a Mouth which speaks great things,
what they would do for the glory of God, whose look was more stout then their
Fellows: ver. 20.21.
I beheld the same Horn made War with the Saints of the most high God, and
prevailed against them, as it is fufilled. Many of them have been Persecuted,
and some cast into Prison by their power; and this is the Beast that had power
to give Life to the Image, Rev. 13.15.
that the Image of the Beast should both speak and cause, that as many as would
not Worship the Image of the Beast should be killed; and this is fulfilled,
that when the Beast received his deadly wound, with the Sword of the righteous
Justice of God, then did the other Beast, which was the power that Reigned
after him, give life to the Image of the Beast, that the Image of the Beast
spoke; and this was fulfilled in giving power to the unrighteous Laws, where
the Priests, and unrighteous Lawyers and Judges, that Judge for Rewards, that
as many as would not worship the Beast, Mica. 3.11.
in obeying the will of proud flesh, must be Killed, cast into Prison, and
there Starve, and be broken to pieces, and by the power of proud
Nebuchadnezar's nature, must be cast into places, some into close Prison by the
wrath of proud flesh, Rev. 13.17.
and must neither Buy nor Sell, to have any benefit of the Law, but he that
has the mark of the Beast, and the number of his Name; Here is the Patience
and Faith of the Saints. Dan. 12.9.13. Rev. 13.18.
And you Saints of the most high God, stand in his Will; for these words are
sealed up, until the time of the end; and you shall stand in the Lot at the end
of the days, Here is Wisdom: Let him that has understanding count the number
of the Beast, for it is the number of a Man, and his number is six Hundred
threescore and six. Now if you hold up this glorious Image, which was set up by
Nebuchadnezar's nature, Dan. 3.3.
proud flesh, in human wisdom, which that Image spoken of in Daniel, was but a
tipe and figure of this, which now shines gloriously in Forms and Observations,
and deny the Life and Power of Jesus Christ; you will be found to be the
strength and glory of this great Image: And this I declare unto you from the
eternal God of Power, Dan. 2.40.
You shall be overturned, as all that have gone before you, which have set up
this great Image, and caused all both small and great to bow down and worship
it: Rev. 14.16.
The Stone cut out of the Mountain without Hand, shall smite this glorious
Image, and break it to pieces, and it shall become like the Chaff of the Summer
Threshing-Floor, and the Wind shall carry it away, Dan. 2.34.35.
and no place shall be found for it; and the Stone that smites the Image shall
become a great Mountain, and shall fill the whole Earth. O be valiant for the
Truth upon Earth, Mic. 3.10, 11.
ye Rulers of England, and give over building up Sion with Blood, and Jerusalem
with Iniquity, as it has been in this Nation, by all that upheld this Image,
which the Lord has overturned, and cast out before you, Mic. 3.11*
and is still held up by you: The Heads thereof judge for Reward, and the
Priests teach for Hire, and the Prophets thereof divine for Money; yet will
they lean upon the Lord, and say, Is not the Lord amongst us? no evil can come
upon us.

O prize your time, and stand steadfast in the Counsel of the Lord, the Light
in your Consciences, hearken unto it, let it alone guide you in all your
Counsel, that Christ may be Head in you all; then will the glory of God be the
end of all your undertakings, and you will remove this filthy and abominable
thing out of the sight of the Lord, the Judges that judge for Rewards, and the
Lawyers that plead for Money, and the Priests that teach for Hire; Exodus 18.23.
and set over the People to judge their Causes, Men fearing God, and hateing
Covetousness, to judge their Causes without Rewards, Isa. 5.51.
and that the People may be taught freely, without Money or Price, Mat. 10.8.
by the free Spirit of Christ in the Hearts of his Saints, who cannot but
declare freely, as we have freely received: Pro. 8.13.
Then will the mighty Power of God go along with you in all your ways, Pro. 1.7.
if you will stand in his Counsel, and walk in his fear, to depart from all
evil, which is the beginning of Wisdom, and your names will become a sweet
savor through the power of the Lord among his Saints, as all the names of the
Righteous are; and you shall partake of the glory of the Lord, which he is
manifesting to his chosen People in this Nation, which he has chosen to make
known his Power, in exalting the Kingdom of Jesus Christ, and will make it the
glory of all the Nations in the World, and the mighty God of Power will be unto
us Salvation for Walls and Bulwarks, Isa. 26, 1. Mich, 4.4.
and we shall sit under our Vines and Fig Trees, and none shall make us afraid:
And this shall be the Portion of your Cup, if you will deny your selves, and
diligently hearken to the Counsel of the Lord, the Light in your Consciences,
to which I speak, which shall eternally witness the Truth declared unto you,
For the Mouth of the Lord of Hosts has spoken it, who has raised up his own
Seed in his People in this Nation, which cannot cleave to this great Image,
which was set up by those that were in the place where you are, Dan. 2.43.
which the Lord has overturned, and cast out in his Indignation, and is not
yet taken away by you, and while you uphold it, the anger of the Lord is
kindled against you; There is no peace to the Wicked, says my God.

This is the day that the God of Heaven will set up his own Kingdom, Dar. 2.44*
which shall never be destroyed; and the Kingdom shall not be left unto other
people, but shall stand for ever and ever. Here I have cleared my Conscience,
in declaring unto you what my God has made known unto me concerning you and
the Nation, which shall shortly come to pass: He that has an Eye to see, let
him see; and he that has an Ear to hear, let him hear.

To all you unrighteous Judges, Mic. 3.10.11.
that judge for Rewards, and Lawyers that plead for Money, who devour the
Creation, and set people at variance, destroy many Families, and delight in
unrighteousness; and to all Oppressors, Pro. 6.19.
high and low, who grind the faces of the Poor, and causes them to groan under
your Cruelty and Oppression, 2 These. 2.12.
hear the Word of the Lord.

Thus says the Lord God, Howl and Weep for the misery which is coming upon
you, Jam. 5.1, 2.
for the cry of the Oppressed has entered into the Ears of the Lord, and he is
coming to render vengeance upon you, and set the Oppressed free: For the rust
of your Money and Gold shall eat your Flesh, as it were Fire, for you have
heaped up Treasures for the last day; Isa. 58.6.
and ye shall be cut down, ye fruitless Trees, that cumber the ground, and cast
into the Lake, for it is the place prepared for you, and for all fearful and
unbelieving; and the Abominable, and Murderers, and Whoremongers, Jam. 5.3.
and Sorcerers, Idolaters, and all Liars shall have their part in the Lake
which burns with Fire and Brimstone, Luke 13.7. Rev. 21.8.
which is the second Death. Repent, Repent, now while you have time, Isa. 55.3.
put away the evil of your doings, turn to the Lord, and hearken diligently
unto his Counsel, John 3.19.
the Light in your Consciences, which lets you see the evil of your doings;
loving the Light, and giving your selves up to be guided by it, it will lead
you to Life; hating it, and disobeying it, it is your Condemna^ion: This is the
day of your visitation, prize it, least you perish in the mighty day of the
Lords anger, which will speedily come upon the Children of disobedience: Joel.
2.1.
To the pure Light in your Consciences I speak, which witnesses against the
evil of your doings, and will witness me eternally, when the Book of Conscience
is opened.

Howl and Weep all you that live in pride and pleasure, and Drunkenness,
Gluttony, Lust and Uncleanness, Lightness and Vanity, idle Communication,
foolish Jesting and Laughter, which is madness and folly; cursed Speaking,
Lying, Couzening, Cheating, Swearing, for which cause the Land mourns; you live
without the fear of God, Eating and Drinking and rising up to Play, to please
your selves, your Belly is your God, your end is Destruction, who mind Earthly
things; Luke 13.7.
hear the Word of the Lord, and fear ye fruitless Trees, which cumber the
ground, and defile the Flesh, the Lord will cut you down and cast you into
Hell, For the Wicked shall be turned into Hell, and all that forget God; and
this is your Portion in the estate that you are in; own it, for the Mouth of
the Lord has spoken it; Without are Dogs, and Sorcerers, and Whoremongers, and
Murderers, and Idolaters, and whosoever loves and makes a Lie shall have their
part in the Lake which burns with Fire and Brimstone, Rev. 22.15.
which is the second Death.

Repent, Repent, and prize your time, and turn unto the Lord, and mind the pure
Light in your Consciences, which lets you see the evil of your Hearts; loving
it, and obeying it, it will lead you forth out of all unrighteousness, Tit.
2.11, 12.
to eternal Life; hating it, and disobeying it, it is your Condemnation: This
is the day of your Visitation, prize it, least you perish in the day of the
Lords anger, John 3.19.
which is coming upon the Children of disobedience in this Nation, and
elsewhere; for the Lord will make the Earth as the Garden of Eden, Isa. 51.3.
and has begun his great and strange Work in this Nation, and is making up his
Jewels, and gathering his Wheat into his Garner, Mal. 3.17.
Sons and Daughters up unto himself; and will bundle up you Tares, and cut down
you fruitless Trees, Luke 13.7.
and cast you into the place prepared for you, who defile the flesh, cumber the
ground, and walk contrary to the righteous Law of God, the pure Light in your
Consciences, to which Light I speak, which will eternally witness me, when the
Book of Conscience is opened.

To all you who have professed your selves to be the Ministers of Christ, and
walk contrary to the Doctrine of Christ, in having the chiefest places in the
Assemblies, standing praying in the Synogogues, Mat. 23.5, 6, 7.
and having uppermost rooms at Feasts, Greetings in the Markets, and of men
called Masters, as the Scribes and Pharisees did, which Christ cried Woe
against; Isa. 56.10, 11.
and every one of you seeking your gain from your Quarters, as the false
Prophets did, when the Lord sent Isaiah the true Prophet to cry against them.

And you hold up the horrible filthy thing committed in the Land, in bearing
rule by your Means, as the false Prophets did, when the Lord sent Jeremiah the
true Prophet to cry against them.

Jer. 3.30, 31.
And you seek for the Fleece, and cloth your self with the Wool, and feed with
the Fat, and make a prey of the People, as the false Prophets did, which the
Lord sent Ezekiel the true Prophet to cry against, Thus says the Lord, Ezekiel.
34.2, 3,
I will require my Flock at their Hands, and cause them to cease from feeding
my Flock; neither shall the Shepherds feed themselves any more, for I will
deliver my Flock from their Mouths, that they may not be meat for them. Now is
the Lord gathering his People from under your Power, which you have made a prey
of; and you make the People to err, and bite with your Teeth, Mic. 3.5.
as the false Prophets did, when the Lord sent Micah the true Prophet to cry
out against them; and you cry Peace, as they did, and he that puts not into
your Mouths, you even prepare War against him; and this is fulfilled by your
going to Law with poor People, for your Wages; and others in raising
Persecution against every one that will not obey you in your vain Traditions,
^er. 23.30.
wherein you steal every one the Word of the Lord from his Neighbor, in taking
a part of Scripture, and adding unto it your wisdom, and so speak of the Saints
conditions, which you cannot witness fulfilled in your selves; a false vision,
a divination and deceit of your own Heart, Jer. 1.14.
and so causes the People to err by your Lies, and by your Lightness, as the
false Prophets did, when the Lord sent Jeremiah the true Prophet, who knew the
Word of the Lord to be as a Fire and a Hammer, to cry against them; and all the
Saints that know the Word of the Lord, Jer. 23.29
knows it to be a Fire and a Hammer in them, in transforming them by its power,
From under the powers of Darkness, into the glorious Light and Liberty of the
Sons of God. See you how you dawb up the People with untempered mortar, seeming
Vanities, divining Lies unto them, saying, Ezekiel. 13.10, 11.
Thus says the Lord, as you may find it written in such a place of Scripture,
which was spoken by the Lord in them which gave it forth: And thus you steal
the Saints words to speak of, when as the Lord never spoke by you; as the false
Prophets did, when the Lord sent Ezekiel to cry against them; Jer. 23.32
and now he has raised up his Sons and Daughters, who obey his Counsel, to cry
against you: And this I declare unto you from the Lord, Mic. 3.6, 7
Night shall be upon you, that you shall have no Vision, but shall be ashamed
and confounded; yea, you shall all cover your Lips, for there shall be no
answer of God.

Woe, woe unto you, you Murderers of Souls, whose Blood has cried unto the Lord
God Almighty, and he is coming in Power to require their Blood at your Hands,
Mat. 23, 13.
who have shut the Kingdom of Heaven against Men, as the Scribes and Pharisees
your Forefathers did, in telling people, The Light of Christ, which
enlighteneth every Man's Conscience, Job. 1.9.
in which Light he is to wait for the Power of Christ to guide him out of every
evil way, to walk in Purity and Holiness, without which no Man shall see the
Lord, You tell them it is the Light of a natural Conscience; He. 12.14.
and you will not enter into the Kingdom your selves, to be guided by the Light
in your Consciences, which would lead you into the Kingdom, Mat. 23.13.
nor suffer them that are entering in, to enter in; and here you shut all from
the Kingdom of Heaven, which is within them, in drawing them from the Light in
their Consciences, which would lead them unto the Word of Faith, which is in
their Hearts, 1 John 2.20.27.
the anointing of the Father, wherein they need not to teach one another, but
as the Anointing teaches, which is in Truth, and is no Lie, which all the
Children of the Lord are witnesses of in their measures, who walk in the Light,
and see your deceits, how you Murder and Destroy Souls for Money, to maintain
you in Pride and Pleasure, though the Light in your Consciences cry against you
for your practices, John 3.19, 20, 21,
but you hate it, and will not obey it; but to it I speak, which will witness
me eternally, when the Book of Conscience is opened to your Condemnation, who
shut all people out of the Kingdom of God, which is within them, in turning
them aside from the Light in their Consciences, which the Lord has given unto
every one a measure, to guide them into the Kingdom: Mat. 25.15.
And then you make a prey of them, in telling them they must wait for the
Kingdom of God in Observations, which you call Ordinances, which you have set
up in your imaginations of the Saints Conditions, which is Recorded in the
Scripture of Truth: Dan. 10.21.
Some of you say, Lo here is Christ, in the Presbiterian practice; and says
another, Lo he is here, in the Independent practice; and the Anabaptist says,
Lo he is here; and others that walk in outward Observations say, Lo he is here,
according as Christ foretold, that such would come that would say, Lo here is
Christ, Lo there is Christ, as it is fulfilled in you, who draw people to seek
the Kingdom of God in outward Obsevations; Mat. 24.23.
but says Christ, Believe them not, for the Kingdom of God comes not with
Observations; for as the Lightning comes out of the East, and shines unto the
West, so shall the coming of the Son of Man be: And this I witness; Mat. 24.27.
but you turn them from the Light in the Conscience, which would lead them into
the Kingdom, to look forth at the glorious Image you have set up in outward
Observations, and they must pay you so much a Year for it, as will maintain you
in Pride and Pleasure, to be Masters among the Sons of Men; and so you Worship
the works of your own Hands, offering up Sacrifice to an unknown God, whom you
ignorantly Worship, having no Scripture for many things you do.

There is no Scripture for your Call into the Ministry of the Gospel of Christ,
1 Cor. 1.26, 27.
by human Wisdom; nor for your making Bargains with the People for so much a
Year. Act. 20.33


There is no Scripture for your sprinkling Water on the Face of a Child, Mat.
10.8.
calling it Baptism.

There is no Scripture for your stealing the Saints Words, Jer. 23.30.
in taking a part of Scripture, and adding to it your wisdom, tearing it in
sunder, in Doctrines, Reasons, Uses, Helps, Motives, according unto the fancies
of your Brains.

There is no Scripture for your particular Houses that you have to creep into,
where none must come but your selves, and whom you please to declare your
Sermon, as you call it, which is a divination of your own Hearts, one day after
another, one year after another.

There is no Scripture for your putting David's words into the Mouths of poor
ignorant People, to sing praises unto the Lord; Psa. 131.1.
as O Lord, I am not puffed in mind; I have no scornful eye; I water my Couch
with my tears; all the night make I my Bed to swim; all my Bones do tremble:
When they cannot witness these Conditions, Psa. 6.6. Psalm. 119.120.
and so cause them to Blaspheme the Name of God, and when the Light in their
Consciences cries against them, for Lying in the presence of God, and
Blaspheming his great and glorious Name: You tell them it is the Light of a
natural Conscience, Mat. 23.13.
and so murders their Souls in shutting them out of the Kingdom of God, as the
Scribes and Pharisees, and all the false Prophets did, that denied Christ to be
the Light, who enlightens every one that comes into the World: John 1.9.
And here you are found to be among the false Prophets, Scribes and Pharisees,
walking in their ways, and every Tree is known by its Fruits, which all the
Prophets walked in the Light, Mat. 7.20.
and Christ that was the Light, cried Woe against; and you are all turned out of
the way, in rejecting the Cornerstone, Christ, which enlightens the Conscience
of every one, to guide them unto him, as the false Builders did; John 1.9.
and go in the way of Cain, to Murder, and greedily run after the error of
Balaam, who loved the Wages of unrighteousness: Jude, 11.
So as a Troop of Robbers wait for a Man, so do you company of Priests Murder
in the way by consent, as the Priests did when the Lord sent Hosea the true
Prophet to cry against them; Hos. 6.9.
for you commit Lewdness, in turning every one from the Light in their
Consciences, Mat. 25.15
which the Lord has given unto every one a measure, according unto their
ability, to guide them up into the Kingdom of God; and you turn them aside to
seek the Kingdom in Observations, hearkening unto the dark inventions of your
Brains, in adding your Wisdom unto the Testimony of Christ; Rev. 22.18
and this is your Portion, the Plagues written in the Book will be added upon
you. Here I have cleared my Conscience, dealing plainly with you, declaring
unto you where you are, as the Lord has made known unto me, that you may be
without excuse in the mighty day of the Lord, which will speedily come upon
you, wherein you shall give account for the Blood of Souls that have been shut
out of the Kingdom, and destroyed by you: To the Light in every one of your
Consciences I speak, which shall eternally witness me, when the Book of
Conscience is opened.

Repent, Repent, and give over deceiving the People, and destroying their
Souls, Psalm. 2.12.
and haste, haste to meet the Lord, in returning within, to be guided by his
Counsel, the Light in your Consciences, which you have rejected, least ye
perish in your gainsaying: Kiss the Son, in obeying his Counsel, the Light in
your Conscience, that lets you see the evil of your doings, least you perish in
the way; for if his anger be kindled a little, blessed are all they that trust
in him.

To all you who have set up a finer Image in Gospel Ordinances, as you call
them, under the Forms of Independent and Anabaptist, and say, you are the
Saints whom the Lord has chosen, and have only right to the best of the
Creatures, to Eat of the Fat, and be Clothed with the finest of the Wool, Ezekiel.
34.2, 3.
and make merry with the Creatures, Gal. 5.13.
and live in pleasure; and when the Light in your Conscience cries against you,
to Use your Liberty, Mat. 5.48.
but not as an occasion to the Flesh; to make no provision for the Flesh, to
satisfy it, and the lusts thereof; but you must be Perfect, as your heavenly
Father is Perfect: Romans 7.23
You regard it not, but hearken unto the counsel of your own Hearts, which draw
you to look at the words of Paul, where he says, I find a Law in my members
warring against the Law of my mind; so ye wrest the Scripture to your own
destruction, for your encouragement to live in the Flesh, and say none must be
free from the body of Sin while he is here in the body: And thus you deceive
your selves, and all whom you draw from the Light in your Conscience, Ezekiel.
18.20.
which cries for a perfect fulfilling of the Law of God within; for the Soul
that sins, it shall dye: Though Paul did complain of a body of Sin, it was
in his growth, Romans 7.24.
and it was his burden, which made him cry O wretched Man that I am, who shall
deliver me? And he witnessed it put off; The Law of the Spirit of Life in
Christ Jesus, has made me free from the Law of Sin and Death; for Christ is
made manifest, to destroy the work of the Devil, Romans 8.2.
and not to destroy the Law; to save Man from the condemning power of the Law,
while he lives in transgression of it; 1 Jo. 3.8.
for the Law has power over the fleshly Man, Romans 7.1.
so long as he lives: But he came to fulfill the Law, and all the Saints bear
witness of it in their measure; some witness it fulfilled, others wait,
following the Lamb daily in the Cross, till they come to the fulfilling of it,
Romans 8.3.4.
that the righteousness of the Law may be fulfilled in us, who walk not after
the Flesh, but after the Spirit.

Therefore mind the Light in your Consciences, diligently hearken unto it, and
it will smite your glorious Image of Forms and Observations, and break it to
pieces, and will rend off all your glorious Coverings of your outward
Profession, and will let you see, the Woe. is unto them that are covered; Is^.
30.1.
and not with the Spirit of the Lord. To the Light in your Consciences I speak,
Romans 6.6.
which will eternally witness me, if you hearken unto it, to be guided by it,
you will never find rest in outward Forms and Observations, but in putting off
the body of Sin, Romans 8.4
through the obedience of the Spirit, that the righteousness of the Law may be
fulfilled in (...), in walking no more after the Flesh, but after the Spirit,
Gal. 5.24.
For they that are Christ's, have crucified the Flesh with the Affections and
Lusts; and the body is dead in regard of Sin, but the Spirit is alive unto
Righteousness: Romans 8.10
And this you must witness, or else all your Religion is vain, and your Souls
will perish.

To you Inhabiters of England, Rev. 17.4*
How long will you drink of the Cup of Abominations, the Wine of the
Fornication of the Whore, which has made you Drunk, and all Nations, Isa. 55.2.
to lay out your Money for that which is not Bread, to the Merchants of
Babylon, who fill unto you the Cup of Abominations, in drawing you from the
Light in your Consciences, which is given unto every one of you a measure, to
guide you up to God, Luke 17.20, 21.
to seek for the Kingdom of God in Observations; and Christ says it is not in
Observations, but within; so they keep you in Captivity, in Babylons Kingdom,
under the power of Sin, Hell, and Death.

To every particular Inhabiter of England I write: Come out of Babylon, Rev.
18.4
all Forms, and Observations, and Traditions, which are set up by the will of
Man: Now is Babylon come in remembrance before God, Revel. 18.23, 24.
and the vials of wrath must be poured upon her, and upon her Merchants, for by
their Sorceries are you Inhabitants of England, and all Nations deceived; and
in her is found the Blood of the Prophets and Saints, and of all that were
slain upon the Earth: Haste, haste, come out of her, Rev. 18.4.
least you partake with her in her Sins, and so partake with her in her
Punishment, which will speedily come upon her, for the Mouth of the Lord of
Hosts has spoken it: return within every one in particular; examine your
Hearts, and mind the Light in your Conscience, and it will always let you see
where your Hearts are, and what they delight in; for it is the Heart the Lord
requires, he will no longer be Worshipped in Words, John 4.24.
Forms, and Observations, but in Spirit and in Truth, and in sincerity in the
inward part: Therefore every one be faithful in taking heed to the Light in
your Consciences, which the Lord has given to every one a measure to profit
withal, for the exercise of the Conscience toward God and Men; Mat. 25.15.
in minding your watch, to wait in the Light in measure, it will bring to
Judgment all the powers of darkness in you; and the righteous Law of God will
cry through your earthly and carnal Hearts, till Judgment be brought forth into
Victory, Isa. 42.2.
and your wills will be brought in subjection unto the Will of God, to wait on
him for refreshment from his presence, who satisfies the hungry with good
things: And take heed of consulting with Flesh and Blood, Luke 1.53.
for that leads into Pride and Disobedience, into Hell and Destruction; mind
the Light in your Conscience, which is the sure word of Prophecy, that you
cannot be deceived, taking heed unto it, 2 Pet. 1.19.
as unto a light that shines in a dark place, until the day dawn, and the
Day Star arise in your Hearts; diligently hearken unto it, and you shall eat
that which is good, and your Soul shall delight it self in Fatness: There is
your Teacher within you, Isa. 55.2.3.
the Light in your Consciences; John 3.19.
loving it and obeying it, is your Life; hating it and disobeying it, is your
condemnation: To that pure Light in your Consciences I speak, which will
eternally witness me, when the Book of Conscience is opened in you: Now you
have time, prize it, in waiting on the Lord in the Light, to make your Calling
and Election sure, in putting off the old Man and his deeds, and putting on the
Lord Jesus Christ in righteousness and holiness, 2 Pet. 1.10.
without which no Man shall see the Lord; in so doing you shall escape the
Wrath of God, which is coming upon the Children of disobedience in this Nation,
Isa. 51.3.
and else where; for the Lord will make the Earth as the Garden of Eden, and
has begun his great and strange Work in this Nation, Joel. 2.3.
which shall make the Ears of them that hear to tingle, 1 Sa. 3.11.
wherein he is exalting the Kingdom of the Lord Jesus, which Kingdom shall
break down all the Kingdoms of the World, Dan. 2.55.
and shall fill the whole Earth; For the mighty day of the Lord is coming, that
shall burn as an Oven, Mal. 4.3.
and all you that are Proud, and all you that do wickedly shall be Stubble, and
the day that comes shall burn you up, Verse 4.
says the Lord of Hosts, and it shall leave of you neither Root nor Branch.
But unto you that fear the Name of the Lord, shall the Sun of Righteousness
arise with healing in his Wings; and ye shall go forth and grow as Calves of
the Stall: Verse 3
And ye shall tread down the Wicked, and they shall be as Ashes under the soles
of your Feet, in this day that I do this says the Lord: Wherein he is now
gathering his Elect together, his scattered Sheep, Mat. 24.31. Ezekiel, 34.12.
that have been scattered in the cloudy and dark day, and will bring them from
the People, and gather them from the Countries, and will bring them to their
own Land, and I will fe^d them upon a good Pasture, and upon the high Mountains
of Israel shall their Fold be, and there shall they lie in a good Fold, and in
a fat Pasture shall they feed upon the Mountains of Israel; Verse 13 Verse 29.
and I will raise up for them a Plant of renomn, and they shall no more be
consumed with hunger in the Land, neither bear the shame of the Heathen any
more, but they shall dwell safely, and none shall make them afraid: Thus shall
you know that I the Lord your God am with you, and that the House of Israel is
my People, Verse 30.
says the Lord God.

England, here I have cleared my Conscience, in declaring to thee what the Lord
has made known to me, of his love and mercy he will manifest to thee, if thou will hearken diligently to his Counsel, Isa. 33.2.
the Light which is in the Conscience of every one, and wait upon him to be
guided by his Power; and all you that disobey the righteous Law of God, the
Light in your Conscience, you shall be swept away with the Beesom of his Wrath,
and your place shall be no more, for the Mouth of the Lord of Hosts has spoken
it; John 3.20.
and whether you hear or forbear, I am clear of the Blood of all Men, Act. 2.25
in making known to you what the Lord has revealed to me, he that can receive
it, let him.

W. D.

A Word from the LORD.
TO all Saints and Children of the most high God, whom he has called and
chosen out of the World and all their Customs, Fashions, Worships, Forms,
'Observations and Traditions, which are set up by the will of Man, 1 Pet. 2.9.
to wait upon him in the Light, the Counsel of Jesus Christ, Isa. 55.2.
the Captain of our Salvation; every one in your measure stand valiant
Soldiers, and be not discouraged, neither at the Enemy within nor without,
lift up your Heads, and behold your King Jesus Christ, who is present with you,
to dash in pieces and destroy all your Enemies for you: Stand faithful in his
Counsel, Isa. 13, 9
and walk in his Power, every one in your measure; and be bold in the Lord, for
you are the Army of the Lord God Almighty, Joel 2.2, 3.
his mighty Host, whom he has chosen out of the World, to make known his
eternal Power in, to sound out his eternal and powerful Word, which shall make
the Ears of all the Inhabitants of the Earth that hear, to tingle; and at the
sound and hearing thereof shall their Hearts fail, 1 Samuel 3.11.
and paleness shall gather into all Faces in the mighty day of the Lords Power,
which is begun in this Nation, Joel 2.4, 6.7, 8, 10, 11.
wherein he is exalting the Kingdom of Jesus Christ our King, Rev. 17.14.
who is riding on in his Majesty and mighty Power, conquering all the powers of
the Earth, in the Hearts of his Saints; and will overturn and dash in pieces
all the Powers in this Nation, and all the World over, that will not submit to
his Scepter, to be guided by his Counsel, the pure Law of God, which is the
Light in the Conscience: Now is he coming with Ten Thousands of his Saints, to
Judge the World, and to give to every one according to their deeds; and the
Kingdoms and Dominions, and the greatness of the Kingdoms under the whole
Heavens, Jde. 14.15.
shall be given to the Saints of the most high God, Dan. 7.27.
and all Nations shall serve and obey him: Rejoice, rejoice, ye Saints and
Children of the most high God, stand fast in the Counsel of Jesus Christ, the
Light in you, and walk in his Power, and you shall walk as Kings upon the
Earth, and shall sing the new Song that none can sing, but the Hundred forty
four Thousand, Rev. 5.9. and 14.3. and 19.6. and 5.13.
and all whose minds are redeemed from the Earth, who stand before the Throne
of God day and night singing Hallelujahs and Praises to the Lord God
omnipotent, who is taking to him his great Power to sit upon his Throne, and to
the Lamb for evermore.

From the Spirit of the Lord, Written by one whose name in the Flesh is William
Deusbery, called Quaker with the People of the World, who live in their
perishing nature.

CHRIST EXALTED, 1656
AND Alone worthy to open the Seals of the Book. And the Scriptures owned in
their place.
A true Testimony of him, as is manifested, in Answer to a Book, Entitled, The
Quakers Apostasy, from the perfect Rule of Scriptures. Given forth by John
Timson, of Great Bowden in Leicestershire.

And the Deceits and Blasphemies he charges upon the Quakers, is turned upon
his own Head, and he found guilty of what he reproaches them with, in what is
written for the simples sake, and Truth to clear from false Accusations and
Lies cast upon it.

And the Ten QVERIES he says he vindicateth, and would Print but four of them,
they are all published, with the Answers that he charges to be confused, dark
and deceitful, that the Answers may witness for themselves against what is
charged upon them.

He that has an understanding in the Light, read and judge.

Search the Scciptures, for in them ye think ye have eternal life, and they are
they which testify of me. And ye will not come to me, that ye might have life,

John 5.39, 40. Jesus says unto him, I am the Way, and the Truth, and the
Life, no man comes unto the Father, but by me,

John 14.6.
John Timson,
THE Book thou has Printed, is seen with the Light that returned an Answer to
thy first Queries; and for the Truths sake, and it to clear, from the Lies,
Slanders, and Aspersions cast upon it, in the Light here is writ, to witness
against the falsehood and untruth, which thou have charged us withal, that
answers thy Queries, which to that of God in all Consciences, who it minds,
will give them to discern, that what thou have charged against the People, who
in scorn are called Quakers, is false, and on thee is returned, as the Lines
following make manifest, wherein is writ what thou have charged them withal,
and to clear the Truth, an Answer thereunto is returned.

In thy Preface as thou calls it, which thou presents to the Reader, thou have
not much of it expressed, before thou begins falsely to accuse us, charging us
with drawing People aside, and intangling them with dark Diabolical snares, etc.

And thou say, the Answers thou received to thy ten Queries, were so obscure,
deceitful, and confused, that it constrained thee to Reply. To which thou
say, an Answer thou have received, etc. And has now undertaken to give the
sense of what thou understands, of what is writ to thee, and has given it
forth publicly to the World, that we have accused thee of slanders, in things
that are too gross in plainness of speech to publish to the World, etc.

Reply. Dark diabolical snares we deny, the Word of the Lord God we witness,
which was in the beginning, which Word is Life, and the Life is the Light of
Men, John 1.1.4. Which word we Preach to turn the minds of People from darkness
to light; from the power of Satan to the living God* Acts 26.18. in the light
of his living Word, which discovers the thoughts and intents of the Heart, Heb.
4.12. to wait in his Light, on him for power, to lead out of all the ways of
darkness, into union with the Father of Life, in Christ the Light, who in him
walk, there is no occasion of stumbling, Ioh. 2.10. but who deny to be guided
by his Spirit is none of his, Romans 8.9. but in darkness walk and stumble at
noonday; and it is truth we declare, as it is Recorded in the Scripture of
Truth, he that can receive it let him; and for thy charging the Answer to be
obscure, deceitful, and confused, seeing the deceit in thee has published that
they are deceitful, and could not publish them to make manifest what the deceit
is, and some of them which thou have published, thou have both added and
diminished; for the Truths sake, the Queries with their Answers is published,
that the Answer may witness for it self, against the falsehood thou have charged
on it; he that has an Eye to see, let him see.

And for thy giving thy sense of what thou understands of our writing, and
says we accuse thee of slandering, etc.

Reply. Thy sense thou gives of our words with thy dark understanding, we deny,
and slandering we deny, it is thy own practice, proved to thy Face, by thy own
words, as follows.

2. In thy second false Accusation thou say, that we judge our Novices, and
all others besides our selves incapable to receive some of our Principles, as
yet, and therefore we study to darken the sense, by subtle glozing,
equivocating expressions, and shuffles.

Reply. Thy false Accusation we deny, we do not judge Novices besides our
selves incapable to receive our Principles; we know Christ the true Light has
enlighted every one that comes into the World, and the Gospel we Preach, is to
turn the minds of People from Darkness to Light, and who it minds, it will give
them an understanding, the principle of pure Religion to know, Christ the Light
in whom we stand clear of thy Slanders; in this Light we plainly speak, as
moved of him, and do not study to darken the sense of our words, as thou do
falsely accuse us, the Lord is Judge between thee and us.

3. The third Accusation charging us with damnable Heresies, etc. And further
thou say, what thou have charged us withal, is upon such rational grounds,
that thou art sure we are convinced, in the seceret of our Hearts and
Consciences, that thou Lies not: In the presence of God I charge thee to be a
Liar, in the Slanders and Lies before written, what follows will make thee
more manifest; thou say, we frequently judge Men by the Light which gave
forth the Scripture, even while we are opposing the authority of Scriptures, as
they are the only Rule of knowing God, and Jesus Christ whom he has sent, etc.

Reply. Thy charge is false, in saying we oppose the authority of Scriptures,
which Christ the Light, who gave forth the Scripture, who spoke as one having
authority, and not as the Scribes, Mat. 7.29. and the Scripture is a true
Testimony of him, who is the Way to the Father, none knows the Father but the
Son, and he to whom the Son reveals him, Mat. 11.27. So thou in the Light art
seen to be guilty of what thou chargest us withal, in denying Christ the Light
within, to be the Authority of Scriptures, and the perfect Rule of Faith and
Obedience; therefore let Flesh be silent, and the lying Mouth be stopped, for
Christ we own, which was before the Scriptures, and is the authority of them,
for when he spoke them forth, he spoke as one having authority, and according
as Christ speaks of the Scriptures, we them own in their place, a true
Testimony of him, John 5.39.40. who is the Way, the Truth, and the Life, and no
Man comes to the Father, but by him, John 14.6.

So none oomes to the knowledge of the Father by reading the Scriptures, though
they think to find Life there, they shall not, if they come not to Christ, of
whom they testify, and in whom the Life is, who says, Search the Scriptures,
for in them ye think to have eternal Life, and they are they which testify of
me; and he reproves all who will not come to him, that they may have life. So
what thou chargest us withal, thou art the Man that denies the authority of
Scriptures, and found guilty of slandering the Children of Light, as what is
written makes manifest, and what as follows will make thee more manifest, to
all that have Eyes to see the many Falsehoods and Lies thou have begun the Book
withal, in that thou calls the Preface to the Reader; so out of thy own Mouth
thou art Condemned.

4. The fourth Accusation, thou say, we are so drunk with Delusion and
Impudency, that we will rather charge the Scripture with deceit, then question
our own deceitful Hearts.

Reply. In the presence of God we witness against thee, we own the Scripture to
be the Scripture of Truth, and do not charge the Scripture with deceit, but
with the Light of Christ that gave forth the Scriptures, and discovers the
deceit of the Heart, with which Light we judge the deceit of the Heart, and
witness against thee in the Light, which makes known to us the Scripture in the
Truth, as it is in Jesus Christ the Light, God is our witness.

5. The fifth false Accusation, thou say, we write and speak the Language of
Scripture, as if we were for it, and is not, which is rank Hypocrisy, and done
of purpose to deceive.

Reply. We in the Light speak as moved of the Lord, 2 Pet. 1.21. whose Language
is according to Scripture; and doing any thing in Hypocrisy we deny, or to
deceive any, the Lord is our witness, who will rebuke the lying spirit, and
stop thy lying Mouth.

6. The sixth false Accusation, thou say we boast, that we are as perfect as
Christ that dyed at Jerusalem.

Reply. Thy charge is false, boasting we deny, or any Perfection that is of
self; our Righteousness, without Christ, is as a filthy Ragg, and a menstruous
Cloth; Christ our Righteousness, who is the true Light, That lights every one
that comes into the World, John 1.9. we witness him the same Christ, as was in
that Body that suffered at Jerusalem; and every one of the Children of Light in
the measure of growth in him, the same mind is in them, that was in Christ
Jesus, Phil. 2.5. who is the brightness of the Fathers glory, Heb. 1.3.

7. The seventh false Accusation, thou say we say, that he that trusts in
Christ that dyed at Jerusalem, for Salvation, shall be deceived.

Reply. This Charge is false as the other, in the presence of God we witness
against thee, no other Christ we bear Testimony of, to be the Salvation of lost
Man and Woman, but that Christ according to Scripture Testimony, who was born
of the Virgin, and made a good Confession before Pilate, and suffered at
Jerusalem, and rose again the third day, and ascended into Heaven, and sits
at the right Hand of God; and this Christ we witness the true Light, Who
lights every one that comes into the World, and says, I stand at the Door
and knock, who opens, I will come into him, and Sup with him, and he with me,
Rev. 3.20. and we witness him faithful; And as many as receives him, to them he
gives power to become the Sons of God; and this is the condemnation of all,
because they believe not in him, John 12.

8. The eight false Accusation, thou say we reproach Christ's Institutions and
holy Ordinances, with the odium of Men's Traditions, outward Observations,
inconsistant with Gods Kingdom, and compares them to Nebuchadnezar's great
Idol, etc.

Reply. Thy Charge is false, Christ's Institutions, and holy Ordinances, we own
in the Dispensation of time they were to be continued, and what is now in this
Dispensation of time, known in the administration of his Spirit we own; but who
upholds any Idolatry in observing any thing by Tradition, and not guided by the
Spirit of Christ, and so walk contrary to the perfect Law of God in the
Conscience; and though their words be never so glorious in outward appearance,
in crying the Ordinances of Christ, while they deny to be guided by Christ,
they are no Ordinances of Christ, but an Image, set up in the proud exalted
nature, which Nebuchadnezar set up his Image in, which with the Power of God
shall be thrown down, and thou with the rest of the Idol Worshippers shall be
broken to pieces, and Lies shall not save thee; for the Lord will exalt his
Name, and his Children that observe his holy Ordinances shall reign in his
spiritual Power, that preserves them, therein to observe the movings of his
Spirit, which does lead to worship the Father in Spirit and Truth, according to
Scripture Testimony, John 4.23, 24.

And when thou John Timson have presented thy false Accusations and Lies to the
Reader, in the Preface of thy Book, that they might receive the Falsehoods, and
Lies that are written therein, and these Lies and Slanders, which are here laid
before thee, and witnessed against, in the answer thereto returned will
sufficiently prove to thy face, and be manifest to that of God in every ones
Conscience, that thou have spoken unadvisedly with thy Lips, when thou say
thou Lies not, and all these Lies found in thy Mouth; given forth publickely
for all to read; and thou declares to the Reader, that the Lord knows, what
diligence and tenderness of Bowels, thou have had to prepare it for them, etc.

Reply. Blush, for shame, O vain Man, to appeal to the Lords knowledge of thy
diligence and tenderness of Bowels, to prepare so many Lies and Falsehoods for
People to read, thou shall certainly know that the Lord takes notice of thee,
and he will lay thee open, and make thee manifest, and Lies shall not cover
thee, nor be thy refuge, Isa. 28.17. when our God will clear his Truth, and thy
Tongue, and all others, that rise up against him, shall fall in Judgment, the
day shall declare it.

Further, thou goes on, saying, as for those persons that have answered me, who
have charged me with bringing sorth many Lies and Slanders, and have made a
noise thereof, as if I was some carnal lying wretch, that matters not what I
write.

Reply. To that of God in every ones Conscience I appeal, that Lies proceed
from a carnal wretched Heart, and the Lord is making thee manifest, who would
make Lies thy refuge; which with the Light thou art seen, and thy Lies turned
upon thee, that in the Light thou may be read what thou art; and in the Light
our Books are known, and no such thing is in our Books as thou falsely charges
us with, and would make People believe is written therein, in giving the sense
of our words in thy dark mind; and for the Simples sake, an answer is returned,
to clear the Truth of God, in what he has given out by his Spirit, both in
word and writing, and whether thou will receive it, yea, or nay, thou shall
know, and all others, that Christ is the Authority of the Scripture, and when
he spoke them forth, he spoke as one having Authority, and not as a Scribe; and
who in his Light walk, cannot be persuaded to turn from him, by any Lies and
Reproaches thou can cast upon them, who say we are wholly turned from the
Truth, which against thee witness it is not so, let God be Judge and in his day
make manifest what we are, in whose Will we rest, as moved of him to witness
against the Falsehoods, thou have further charged upon us in what follows.

Thou have not done justly nor honestly in that thou have not Printed the
Questions, as given forth by thee, and Answers as returned by us, and in an
answer to what is of thee required, to prove the Charge thou chargest us
withal, in thy Reply to the Answer to the first Question, and the false
Accusations, Lies and Slanders is not proved in all thou have writ.

The one Baptism we own Ephesians. 4.5. and the Watch in the Church we own, in the
Spirit of life, which in order does keep, in obedience to the pure God, who is
the God of order, and not of confusion, but keeps his Children in himself
purely to live, according to what is professed.

Further, thou go on and queries, what proof would we have, is it not our
own profane Language, both in Papers and Conference; it is no news to hear
most of their Way dispute against water Baptism, the Lords Supper, a settled
fixed Ministry over particular Churches; and queries, further, what Quakers
administer water Baptism, the Lords Supper, and constantly watches over a
particular Flock? or else for shame (thou say) we must own the Charge, and
confess our Sin, in telling the World these are thy lying Slanders.

Reply. Profane Language we deny, and Shadows and Figures we witness done
away, the Substance being come, water Baptism was in its time a Figure of the
Substance, as John witnesses, to whom that Dispensation was committed, Mat.
3.11. I indeed Baptize with Water unto Repentance, but he that comes after me
is mightier then I, whose Shoes I am not worthy to bear, he shall Baptize you
with the Holy Ghost, and with Fire. And John's Baptism we deny to be in force,
he did decrease, and Christ must increase, whose Baptism we own, according as
is Recorded in the Scripture of Truth, and since he ascended, there is no
Scripture does witness his sending any to Baptize with Water; Paul, who was
sent after he ascended, what he did in the liberty given him, his liberty he
knew, when he circumcised Timothy, and Baptized Crispus, and Gaius, and the
Household of Stephanus, besides I know not that I Baptized any other, says
Paul, for Christ sent me not to Baptize, but to Preach the Gospel, not with
wisdom of words, least the Cross of Christ should be of none effect, 1 Cor.
1.16, 17. And John who bore record of the Word of God, and Testimony of Jesus
Christ, Rev. 14.6. says, I saw an Angel in the midst of Heaven, having the
everlasting Gospel, to Preach to them that dwell in the Earth and to every
Nation, and Kindred, Tongue and People; John did not say, he did fly through
the midst of Heaven, Preaching the everlasting Gospel, and Baptizing with
Water, we know John was faithful in his Testimony of Jesus Christ; who is now
revealed, and the Angel is come, and the Gospel Preached, and the Shadows done
away.

And Bread and Wine were the Supper of the Lord, in the Dispensation of time, a
Figure of his Death, which were fulfilled, when he had suffered and rose again,
and now he is known to stand at the Door and knock, if any Man hear my voice,
and open the Door, I will come in and Sup with him, and he with me, says
Christ, Rev. 3.20. And we being many are one Bread, and one Body, etc. 1 Cor.
10.17. and know the Wine renewed in our Fathers Kingdom, Christ the Substance
we now witness; Shadows and Figures done away, he that can receive it let him.

And the Churches set up by the will of Man we deny; and the fixed Ministry set
up over them by the will of Man, that watch for the Fleece, bear rule by their
means, and seeks their gain from their Quarter* these we deny, Jeremiah 5.31.
and Isaiah 56.11.

And those in scorn called Quakers, do watch over the Flock of God, every one
as the Lord them calls; and not for filthy Lucre, as the Priests that bear Rule
by their means do, neither by constraint, but of a ready mind, 1 Pet. 5.2. in
obedience to the Spirit of the Lord, as he them move; and thy Slanders thou
have not yet proved, our Consciences do witness it, that what thou have accused
us with is a Lie, and not the Truth.

And thou further says, that William Deusbery in a lying Paper, as thou calls
it, which is entitled A true Prophecy of the mighty Day of the Lord, already
risen in the North of England, etc. In which Paper he makes it his work, to
slander the Ordinances of Gospel worship, under the notion of outward
Observations, which Christ's Kingdom comes not in, Luke 17.20. and thus he
accounts of all the Ordinances and Institutions, prescribed by Christ himself,
in the Apostolical Churches; and accounts all the strict observing of outward
Forms of worship, is but imitating the Saints practices, in their Babilonish
and Heathenish wisdom; all these outward Forms are the outward Court, without
the Temple, Page 1.2.

Reply. The Lie will be found in thy own Mouth, in calling that a lying Paper,
a true Prophecy it is of the mighty day of the Lord; and for thy saying William
Deusbery makes it his work, etc. as before written, thy Charge is false, and
the Truth is witnessed against vain Man, who in his dark mind seeks the Kingdom
of God in Observations, where it comes not, Luke 17.20. neither shall men say
Lo here, or lo there, he called by name, as before written, does witness they
are not the Ordinances of Christ, according as is declared of them, they will
be found and made manifest, to the shame and confusion of their Faces who in
their own wisdom imitates the Saints practices in Forms, which they did
practice in Life and Power, in the Dispensation of time they served their
Generation, in the manifestation of the Spirit, according to the Will of God.

And whereas thou say in Page 4. it is more clear, that he profanely
compares the holy Ordinances and Institutions of the Lord to that great Image
set up by Nebuchadnezars proud nature, spoken of by Daniel, and that that Image
was but a Tipe and Figure of this which now shines gloriously in Forms and
Observations.

And thou say, that in his speaking to the Anabaptists and Independents, he
tells them they have set up a finer Image in the Gospel Ordinances (as they
call them) and what other Ordinances (thou say) does these or you set up, but
what was practiced in the Apostolical Churches; thus you may see how this
Impostor, does reproach the holy things of God.

Reply. Blush for shame, who say William Dewsberry compares the holy
Ordinances and Institutions of our Lord to that great Image, etc. Holy
Ordinances, and Institutions of the Lord is not rhere expressed by him, where
thou say he then so compares; he witnesses against the Image you have set up
in your minds, of the Truth as you conceive where you are in confusion that
does you divide into Forms and Observations, as before written, to look for the
Kingdom of God to come; and though you call them the Ordinances of Christ, you
denying Christ the Light you to guide in the daily cross, you are in the same
nature wherein Nebuchadnazar cast the Lord Servants into the fiery Furnace,
because they witnessed against his Image, so do you who walk in your
imaginations and deny Christ the Light, cause the Servants of the Lord that
walk in the Life, and cannot bow to your Image but witness against it, to be
haled out of your Meeting Places, beaten, stoned, whipped, stockt, imprisoned,
which are the fruits of Nebuchadnez^rs nature, as is manifest this day amongst
those against whom he witnesses and who is the Impostor and reproaches the
holy things of God, the fruit makes manifest; he that has an Eye to see let
him see.

And further thou say that he in the height of his insolent rashness and
madness, says thus, The Word of the Lord came unto me saying, I will gather my
Peopel out of all Forms and Observations, and out of all Kindreds, Tongues and
Nations, and I will pour out my Spirit upon them. And this thou say he writes
in a different Character, as if it were all Scripture, by this you may see is
proved what I have accused them with, in denying the Ordinances, and
Administrations of the Gospel Churches, true, and yet this impudent Liar tells
me, its a lying slander, they would render me a Liar, for telling them the
Truth, but it seems they can rather, and with more ease deny the Accusation
then prove themselves Saints, and stand to it; thus when they are pincht they
will say and unsay, and any thing to evade.

Rashness and Madness is thy own, in speaking evil of that thou know not,
the day will declare, the Lord will gather his People together, according as
its declared, Revelations 5.9. And the Lie and false Accus^tion will still rest
on thee, for charging William Deusbery, as before written, and the impudent
Liar he will not be found, when the Lord will separate between the precious and
the vile, then shall it be known who walk in outward Forms and deny Christ the
Light, and those that live in the Light, Life and Power of Christ, them to lead
in the daily cross, which keeps them in a pure Life, and holy Conversation, and
thy false Accusations does not us pinch, neither do we any thing to evade, but
witness the Truth, against thy false Accusations, and in patience do finish our
Testimony in sufferings, and all with us that in the Light walk, are in the
Ordinances of the Gospel Church and witness the everlasting Gospel, where all
types, shadows and figures are done away, which thou so much cries up; and the
Lord will throw thee and all down, and a day of tribulation shall come upon
thee, and thou shall not escape, except thou repent.

And whereas thou revilest us for saying that the Spirit is the only rule of
Faith and Life, Ioh. 16.13. which thou say that promise was made directly to
the twelve.

Reply, Who art thou that limits the holy One, the promise of his Spirit is to
all who wait on him in the manifestation of his Spirit, according to the
Testimony of Scripture, 1 Cor. 2.7, 8, 9. the manifestation of his Spirit is
given to every one to profit withal; for to one is given by the Spirit the Word
of Wisdom, to another the Word of Knowledge, by the same Spirit; to another
Faith, by the same Spirit; to another the Gifts of Healing, by the same Spirit,
etc.

And for thy unsavory words which in reproach calls us proud Worms that vilify
and diminish from the Scripture, etc.

Reply, Pride is thy own, we do not vilify nor diminish the Scriptues, we
witness them a true Testimony of Christ the Life, and who in his Light walk
know the Truth of the Scriptures, as it is in Jesus, Ephesians. 4.201.

And whereas thou say in confession to what was declared to thee, that Abel,
Enoch, and Noah, had Faith before the Scriptures were written, to which thou
quotes Heb. 1.1. God who at sundry times, and in diverse manners spoke in times
past unto the Fathers by the Prophets, has in these last days spoken to us by
his Son; and thou say before there was any thing committed to writing, the
Lord did more visibly reveal his Will by Voice, Visions, Angels, etc. But since
he has committed his whole Will unto writing by the Prophets, and Apostles,
these former manners are ceased; and thou say, to look for the same
discoveries still, by Voice, Vision or Inspiration, is madness we run into.

Reply, Thou vain Man, who dare to say, the Lord has ceased making himself
known to his People, by Voice, Vision or Inspiration; holy men of God did
speak, and do speak, as Inspired by the Spirit of God, and moved by the Holy
Ghost, 2 Pet. 1.21. And the Lord has promised in the latter days, I will pour
out my Spirit upon all Flesh, Joel 2.28, 29. Acts 2.17, 18. Ier. 31.33, 34.
Heb. 8.9, 10, 11. Isa. 54.^3.

All the Children of the Lord, who are led by his Spirit, does witness these
Scriptures fulfilled, and knows the Lord is faithful according to his
promise, who will recompense into thy Bosom thy just reward, for speaking evil
of his Truth* and whilst thou deniest the manifestation of his Spirit, which
the Lord manifests to his People, as is Recorded in the Scripture of Truth, thy
pride and confusion thou have made manifest, and neither know Moses Ministry
nor the Apostles, which thou in a busy mind speaks of, in thy dark
understanding, which leads thee to fill thy Book with false Accusations, as in
thy 10th Page where thou say, we do not make any clear difference, between
the outward Declaration, and the Word of Faith.

Reply, For the Simples sake, as we have declared the Truth, we do declare it,
which is witnessed with all the Children of Light, the Word of Faith is in the
Heart, and in the Mouth, and who are guided by it, their Hearts are kept pure;
Faith purifies the Heart, Acts 15.9. whether they have the outward Declaration
yea, or nay; and they that have the outward Declaration, and though they read
it, if they mind not the Word which is Life and Light, which gave forth the
Scriptures, they do not live according to the Scripture; for they are without
Faith, who are not guided by the Word; Faith comes not by a bare reading, the
outward Declaration, Faith is the gift of God, Ephesians. 2.8. given to his Children,
who diligently hearken to his Word, which is Life, and the Life is the Light of
Men.

And for thy charging us with contradictions, confused Nonsense, bitter
Censures and Shuffles, and how notorious false it is, wherein we say, that not
any do know the Scriptures by the outward Declaration.

Reply, To the Light of Christ in all Consciences we appeal, let the Righteous
judge, a natural Man knows not the things that are of God, (though he read the
outward Declaration) for they are spiritually discerned, 1. Cor. 2 14. and none
is found worthy to open the Seals of the Book, but the Lion of the Tribe of
Judah, etc. Rev 5.3.5. and then thou deniest Gods speaking to his People, by
Voice, Vision or Inspiration, and say, they run into madness that expect any
such thing; here thou art found in the Contradictions, confused Nonsense,
bitter Censures and Shuffles, and notorious* Falsehoods, which thou have fasly
charged us withal, and it is turned upon thy own Head, and proved out of thy
own Mouth, that while thou art making a show in words, to maintain the
Scripture Authority, thou deniest both the Dispensation of the Spirit of God,
in Christ the Light, and the Scriptures which bare Testimony of him, as is
manifest in the Reply to what thou have writ in the Sixth and Eighth pages.

And whereas thou in the Eleventh Page callst us deceivers, and says to those
thou callst thy Friends, we have them abused by the deceit and cheats of our
own Hearts, etc.

Reply, Deceit and Cheats thou art proved to be in, and what thou endeavors to
do in the deceit of thy Heart, against the Truth, thou will see thy hope fail
thee, and not a Blessing, but a Curse upon thy endeavors; which to thy Face is
proved, in what is before written, to be contrary to the Dispensation of the
Spirit, and Scripture, for which the terror of the Lord shall take hold on
thee, for thy uttering words without knowledge, and speaking evil of the things
thou know not, as in the Twelth Page.

And whereas thou appeal'st to them thou callst thy Friends, how their Hearts
have been heated and warmed by Power of the Word and Sacraments, etc. Which is
now in contempt and reproach, by those that seduce you: Which thou chargest
upon us, and ^aist thou have clearly discovered our Slanders, Shifts, and
Shuffles, and our reproaching the Ordinances, and Institutions of our Lord, as
Heathenish, by comparing them to that great Image of that Heathen King, Dan.
3.3. And how we deny the Scripture to be a perfect Rule of knowing God,
believing in him, and living unto him; and reproach thee to be a lying
Slanderer, for charging us with that which is an apparent Truth, as thou say
thou have proved by our lying Papers; and that we have reproached thee falsely,
and the Lies are returned upon our own Heads, whilst thou say we witness our
selves Perfect, and without Sin, and have entered the new Jerusalem, into which
none shall enter that make a Lie, etc.

Reply, Them thou callst thy Friends, who are in the Light, with all the
Children of the Light, do witness, that their Hearts were never warmed in
Sacraments, no such words is found in Scripture; and thou that art pleading for
the Authority of Scripture, is with the Light of Christ in all his Saints
denied, and thy Sacraments, which is not found in Scripture; and in the Light
thou art clearly seen, the Slanders, Shifts, and Shufflels are thy own, as is
manifest in the Answer to the same Reproach, and Accusations, in the Second and
Third Pages of thy Book; and what we witness is according to Scripture, which
we own, and in many things thou have writ, as before is manifest by thy own
words, the Scripture thon deniest; so on whose Head the falsehood remains, to
the Children of Light is made manifest, and the day will further declare it,
wherein Christ our King shall be exalted over all, in whom our perfection and
cleansing from Sin is, and leads us into new Jerusalem, into which nothing
ente^s that works Abomination, or makes a Lie, but who enter therein are led by
the Spirit of Christ, in whose Mouth is found no guile, he that has an Ear to
hear, let him h^ar,

And whereas thou say to some of them thou callst thy Friends, some of you
have heard William Deusbery say of himself, that he was as Perfect as that
Christ that died at Jerusalem; this is witnessed by one of Credit and Fidelity
amongst your selves; I forbear his name: In Deusbery's new Brith he thus
witnesses of himself.

Reply, Thy Spirit in the Light is seen, who have published what thou have
received from a nameless Author, and thy Accusation is false, which thou have
published to the World, there were never any heard William Deusbery say of
himself, that he was as Perfect as that Christ that died at Jerusalem, and that
thou callst his new Birth will be a witness against thee; there is no such word
expressed by him, as thou say this nameless Author has related of him. In the
presence of God he (called William Deusbery) does witness that self is
imperfect, and self Righteousness as a filthy Ragg, and a menstruous Cloth,
etc. Isa 64.6. And he does witness Christ Jesus the true Light, which lights
every own that comes into the World, John 1.9. which discovers the imperfection
and filthiness of self, with all its righteousness; and his Perfection is in
Christ, the Light, which he does witness, the same Christ and no other, but he
which suffered at Jerusalem, who is the brightness of his Fathers glory, etc.
Heb. 1.3. 13.8. Which he thou falsely accusest, as before written, which all the
Children of Light do witness, the Righteousness of God in Christ the Light, 2
Cor. 5.21. which for the Simples sake the Truth is witnessed forth in the
presence of God, which the Lord will clear, from the Lies and Slanders cast
upon it, and he shall be known what he is, whom you call a proud polluted Worm,
that dare exalt himself to a Perfection equal with God, which are thy own
words, and what thou have gathered up from others who falsely accuse as thou
do, which words was not spoken by him, thou callst a proud polluted Worm, who
can bear thy Revilings, but for the Truths sake, that the Simple do not
stumble, at the Way of Truth, does witness against thy false Accusations, and
Revilings, which thou have filled thy Book withal.

As in the 14th and 15th Pages, Speaking to them thou callst Friends* whom thou
say is seduced, and thou declares that those whom thou chargest with seducing
them, does reach them to cease from all Religious Duties of commanded Worship,
without scruple or check of Conscience, before they can enjoy God, or be taught
immediately what to do, first put out the true Light, and Power of Conscience,
to do his Office, by despising the means of enlightening, and convincing it to
act in the Soul, and then resolves to follow the immediate Commands of
Conscience, without questioning the Author of those Laws at all.

Reply, Thy Accusation is false, we do not teach any to ceafe from all
religious duties of commanded worship, neither put out the true Light, we teach
all to be obdient to the commands of God, who says, this is my beloved Son, in
whom I am well-pleased, hear him, Mat. 17.5. And we bear Testimony of him that
he is the true Light that lights every one that comes into the World, Ioh.
1.9. and convinces the World of Sin, Righteousness and Judgment, Ioh. 16.8. and
he alone commands in the Conscience for God, and is the Author of the prefect
Law, handed in the hand of a Mediator, to whom we exhort all to be subject, and
in whom all the Children of Light walk, Col. 2.6.

And for thy expressing, a depth of deceit and delusion, which thou chargest
upon us, which is found in thy self, who has made Lies thy refuge to slander
the Innocent, which is further manifest in thy 16th Page.

Thou fayst we take no notice of Scripture authority, as if they were
altogether out of date, which false Accusation is witnessed against in what is
returned in answer to the preface of thy Book.

And in the 17th and 18th Pages thou chargest us with impudent foreheads, to
make a show of one thing, and intend another, purposely minded to deceive, and
yet they tell us often that as they write so they mean, and speak the Truth in
plainness, most horrible hypocrisy and deceit, which nothing but a lying and a
knavish Head, dare go about to excuse, etc.

And all those unsavory words as before written, wherein thou say we have
discovered to purpose the deceit of our answer, in saying the Revelations of
Christ are according to Scripture, and where the new Covenant is witnest, the
Law is written in the Heart, and the Witness and Testimony of Jesus within
bearing witness with our Spirits, that we are Sons of God.

Reply, Doing any thing of purpose to deceive, through Hypocrisy or Knavish
Heads, we deny, and in the presence of God we speak the Truth in pla^^ness, and
do witness there is no deceit in saying, the Revelations of Christ are
according to Scripture, and all in the new Covenant do know, the Law of God
written in their Hearts, and the Witness or Testimony of Jesus within, 1 John
5.10. bearing witness with their Spirits, that they are the Children of God
Romans 8.16. and this declared is neither deceitful nor knavish, which is the
unsavory words thou chargest on us, let the Truth of God in all Consciences
judge, to whom they belong, the Scriptures we are not against, they bear
Testimony of Christ the Light, whom we witness the way to the Father, Mat. 11
27. None knows the Father but the Son, and he to whom the Son will reveal him;
by the revelation of the Spirit of God, is the things of God known to his
People, 1 Cor. 2.9, 10, 13. Romans 8.11, 16. according as is recorded we witness
the Scriptures fulfilled in Christ the Light who is our Life, Col. 3.3, 4.

And whereas thou queries, did ever any read of the Law and Testimony in the
Heart, and that the Law and Testimony in the Heart, is the Law of the new
Covenant?

Reply, Who has read the Scripture in the fear of God, has read what the Lord
has promised as declared, Isa. 8.16. Bind up the Testimony, seal the Law,
among my Disciples, and Ier. 31.33. This shall be the Covenant I will make with
the House of Israel, in those days says the Lord, I will put my Laws in their
inward parts, and write it in their Hearts, Heb 8.10, 11, 12. and the Law
written in the Heart we witness, and the Lord faithful in performing according
to his Promise in the new Covenant.

And thou go on in Page 19 and 20, calling us Impostors and Pervertors of
the new Covenant, and to be in Idle proud Fancies, and itching Humors of our
own Brains in our Apostate Condition.

Reply, We in the Light can bear thy reproach, and have witnessed the Truth
that it may stand a witness against thy revilings, and in the Lord we rest, who
will make manifest, whether thou or we be the Pervertors of the new Covenant,
and guilty of what thou chargest us with.

And whereas thou in the 22d Page says, that William Deusbery tells us, that
the mighty day of the Lord is appeared in the North of England, and is rising
toward the South, and shall overspread this Nation, and all the Nations of
the World, etc. what the man's fancy and design is in bruiting and making such a
noise of the appearance of the mighty day of the Lord, judge ye; I am sure he
has sufficiently discovered his own folly, in blazing abroad such Dreams of
his own lying Heart, etc.

Reply, In thy 2d Page thou have enlarged thy self concerning that Book,
calling it a lying Paper, etc. and the Truth is witnessed in answer to thy
charge, and this in answer to what is here written, Fancies, Bruitishness,
Folly Dreams, and Lies, William Deusbery denies, the Truth he has declared, as
the Lord has him moved, in Faithfulness to the Souls of all People, that they
be not found the sloathful Servants, putting the Day of the Lord afar off, in
this his Day wherein the Hour of his righteous Judgment is come, ( Rev. 14.7.)
to all that wait on him, the Truth is declared, that all men may prepare in the
Light the Lord to meet, and no longer in sloathfulness remain, least he come
upon them as a Thief in the Night* and if the Day of the Lord do not arise over
all the World, and the Kingdoms of the World became the Kingdoms of our Lord
and his Christ, and the Lord perform not as is declared, then say the Lord has
not spoken by me who is known to the World by name William Deusbery.

And in the 22d Page thou say, we have set our selves in the Throne of Christ
judging the whole World.

Reply, Thy Accusation is false, self we deny, to Christ we are subject, who
sits on his Throne, and is come and coming in his Saints to judge the World,
Jude 14, 15. 1 Cor. 6.2. and 2.5.

And in the 23th page thou say, why do not we command the Dead to rise, and
appear before us? and many other unsavory words are there expressed.

Reply, A wicked and Adulterous Generation shall seek after a sign, and there
shall no sign be given it, but the sign of the Prophet Jonah, Mat. 16.4.

And whereas thou chargest Howgill and Borough (as thou callst them) with
pernicious Blasphemous Opinions.

Reply, Thy Accusation is false, they are faithful Men, serving their
Generation in the Light, Ministers of Christ, in whom is witnessed the Godhead
dwelling Bodily, Col. 2.9. and in him we are one in God, they that join to the
Lord are one Spirit, 1 Cor. 6.17. he that can receive it let him.

And whereas thou in the 29th Page say, that the Revelations of Christ, that
are according to Scripture, are either Texts of Scripture, expressed, or
rational Deductions, Consequences and Conclusions, that naturally flow from
particular passages of Scriptures, and not any other Revelations can be pleaded
for a Rule.

Reply, Thy dark mind is shut out from knowing the Revelations of Christ, and
though thou say that answer that was returned to these words was not to
purpose* it stands a witness against thee, and will be found to purpose in the
Light, when thy reward thou shall have, for all thy unsavory words expressed in
thy Book.

And in the 33th Page, where thou falsely accuses us, that we will allow of no
Laws of God nor Scripture, but the Revelations and Edicts of our own bewitched
Hearts, etc. And when thou have reviled us with false Accusation, as before
written, thou beseechest those thou callst* thy dear Friends to be serious in
their Thoughts of what thou have written, in discovering our deceits and
blasphemies, denying the Rule that all things are to be tried by, and make
themselves the absolute rule, and we must not question what they say, though it
be never so insolent, and to be abhorred of all sober Christians, etc.

Reply, Thou have brazened thy Face, to slander the Truth of God, with Lies and
Blasphemies, which is the Foundation of all Heresy, and there thou art found,
and thy Accusation is false; Christ the Rule that all things is to be tried by,
we own, and deny our selves, and to the Light of Christ in all Consciences we
appeal, whether thou or we deny the Rule, thou that say the Revelations of
Christ are either Texts of Scripture expressed, or rational Deductions,
Consequences, etc. as before written, or we who witness Christ the true Light,
revealed by the F^ther (...) knows the Father but the Son, and he to whom* the
Son will reveal him, Mat. 1^.27. Luke 10* 22. Let all that are in Christ with
sobriety in the Light judge.

And for the rest of thy Slanders in the 37^^ and 38th Pages, where thou say,
these miserable Worms un-Covenant themselves, and un-Christ themselves, as if
they cared not for Grace and Mercy, in standing before God, denying the
Scripture, etc. And in the 40th Page thou say, of those in scorn called
Quakers, thou can safely say they deny the benefit that comes to the Church by
Christ's suffering in that Flesh, that he received from the Virgin Mary; or
else deny it to b^ a real Body of Flesh, and so make it but a Type, and a
Figure of Christ in the Saint, who are his true real Body, which he now suffers
in, and by his suffering makes satisfaction for them, making the Death of the
Cross of none effect.

Reply, The miserable Worms that un-Covenant themselves, and un-Christ
themselves, who denies Christ the Light, thou art found to be one, who in thy
dark mind art working Abomination, and making Lies, which thou have published
to the World in thy Books, and thy place thou may read, ^s is Recorded, Rev.
21.27. And the rest of thy Accusations, Recorded in the 40th Page, we witness
against, and for the Simple sake, declare as follows, that benefit came to
the Church by Christ's suffering, in that Body God gave, which was born of the
Virgin Mary; and with one Offering has Christ perfected for ever, them that
are Sanctified, Heb. 10.14. And these are his Saints in whom he is now
revealed, who are his Body, Ephesians. 1.23. which now suffered by thee, and all that
are of the Murdering Generation, who bore false witness against Christ, when he
was in that Body which they Crucified at Jerusalem, and thou have manifest thy
self to be of the same Murdering Generation, who has publish^^ to the World
thy false witness against the Innocent, to perfect thy evil intent, toward the
Body of Christ, if the Lord prevent thee not; but thou shall know the Lord
faithful, that thou and all that forms your Tongues against him, shall fall in
judgment, Isa. 54.17.

And what is charged upon thee in Answer to thy Reply, to the Answer to the
third Question, that thou sets at naught the Corner Stone, and prefers the
Testimony of him before him, limitting the eternal Son of God, as thou have in
what is Printed in the 55. Page, where thou speakst of the Scripture, that they
are designed of God, to be the only Instrument and Vessel of his Spirit, to
convey the knowledge of Christ, as Redeemer to lost Man, and without them
Christ is not known at all, to any saving ends.

Reply, Who art thou that dare thus utter Words without knowledge, Christ is
known where the Father reveals him, to be the Souls Life, whether they have
the Scripture yea, or nay, according to the Will of God, he makes known his
mind to his People, who wait upon him in his fear, and the secrets of the Lord
are with those that fear him, Psalm. 25.14. And the Spirit of the Lord is
witness with our spirits, that we are the Children of God: O Man repent, least
the Lord cut thee off, and thou perish in thy gain-sayings.

And further thou have written in Reply, to what was returned in Answer to the
Question before mentioned, the most of thy false Accusations are answered, in
what was returned to the former part of the Book, and all thy false Accusations
and Reproaches denied with the Light, and for the Simples sake, there is
returned in Answer to thy Questions which thou have propounded.

1. Qu. Where read we of a perfect Law of God, in the Heart; and where is it
made the Rule and Ground of the Saints Obedience?

Ans. the Law of God is perfect, Psalm. 19.7. and is the Rule to which the
Saints are to walk in obedience to, and to be guided by, Psalm. 119.12. and the
Law to be in the Heart is proved, Psalm. 40.8. I delight to do thy will O God;
yea, thy Law is within my Heart.

2. Qu. Whether the Law in the Heart be under another Covenant, distinct from
the perfect Law of God declared in Scripture?

3. Qu. What we are to understand by the Law of God in the Heart, which is
the same with Scripture, whether the 10th Commandments written in Tables of
Stone only, or all those positive Precepts of Gospel Worship and Obedience
conjoined with them also?

Ans. To thy 2d and 3d Questions; in the old Covenant, the Law was written
in Tables of Stone, which Law having a shadovv of good things to come, and
not the very Image of the things, can never with those Sacrifices which they
offered Year by Year continually, make the comers thereunto perfect, Heb. 10.1.
And when he came, who says, Lo I come to ^o thy will* O God, he takes
away the first that ^e may establish the second, ver. 9. by which will we
are sanctified through the offering of the Body of Jesus Christ once for all,
ver. 10. and by one Offering he has perfected forever them, that are
sanctified, whereof the holy Ghost is a Witness to us, as he said before, This
is the Covenant that I will make with them, says the Lord, I will put my Laws
in their Hearts, and in their Minds will I write them, ver. 14, 15, 16. Ier.
31.33.

4. Qu. Whether the Law in the Heart, without the use of Scriptures, make any
Evangelical discoveries of the Person, Natures, and Offices of Christ, as he is
Redeemer of lost Man?

Ans. Thy feigned Words we wave, the Truth we witness, the Law in the Heart
witnessed in the New Covenant, Christ is known to be King of Kings, and Lord of
Lords, 1 Timothy 6.15. And the faithful High Priest, Heb. 2.17. and 3.1. and 4.15.
and 5.6. and 7.26. and 10.21. who has made us Kings and Priests to God and his
Father, etc. Rev. 1.6.

5. Qu. Whether all shall be saved, that have the Law of God written in their
Hearts, by virtue of the New Covenant, or any be saved that live to Years of
discretion, that know not Christ, as the Scriptures testify of him, in order
to his coming to the World to save sinners?

Ans. All are saved, who are guided by the righteous Law of the Spirit of Life
in Christ, which sets them free from the Law of Sin and Death, Romans 8.2. And
what Years soever any live unto, they have no discretion to know Christ, as the
Scriptures testify of him, but they who in his Light wait upon him, to be
guided by him; for who has not the Spirit of Christ, is none of his, Romans 8.9.

And for the rest of thy Aspersions, and Revilings thou have writ, calling us
Deceivers, that fear the Authority of man, or else we would deny Christ,
himself.

Reply, Christ we do not deny, but him we own, who respects no Man's Person,
Romans 2.11. and in him no fear of Man is, and we in him Reign over thee* and all
the authority of the power of Darkness, that stands in opposition to Christ,
the Son of God, to whom every Knee must bow, Phil. 2.10. the day shall declare
it.

And in what thou have replied, to the Answer to the fourth Question, which
thou chargest to be untrue, to say, That Man in the fall, as he stands in the
state of corrupt nature, has not therein any Light without Christ, to do any
thing acceptable to God, etc. Which thou go about to prove the contrary, and
say there is the Light and use of reason and understanding faculties, though
corrupted.

And further thou says, This Light of corrupt reason, as before expressed,
presents to the conscience good and evil, etc.

Reply, In the Light thou art seen to be in the corrupt Fountain, from whence
all these corrupt words has come, which thou have Printed in thy Book, and thy
words are not true. Corrupt reason of Man does not present to the Conscience
things good and evil; a corrupt Tree cannot bring forth good Fruit, Mat. 7.18.
There is nothing makes manifest Darkness but Light, Ephesians. 5.15. which all men
in the Fall is gone from, out of the way, and there is none that does good, no
not one, Romans 3.9, 10, 11. etc. And the natural Man receives not the things
that are of God, nor can he know them, because they are Spiritually discerned,
1. Cor. 12.14. And all the Righteousness of Man in this state, is as a filthy
Rag, and a menstruous Cloth, Isa. 64.6. And this is the state of Man in
corrupt Nature: And the Light that convinces Man of this dark and corrupt
Estate he is in* is the Light of Christ that convinces the World of Sin,
Righteousness, and Judgment, John 16.8. So we that were sometimes Darkness, are
now Light in the Lord, Ephesians. 5.8. And who walk in the Light, there is no
occasion of stumbling. ^ John* 2.10.

And whereas thou say, Thou know we Lie, as thou have made it manifest.

Reply, It is not so, thou have not yet made manifest and Lie that we have
spoken, by any truth thou have declared.

And thou go on, as in thy 89th Page, thou say, The rational Soul of Man
corrupted, is called the Candle of the Lord, which we invent to be Christ,
which is false, we deny that the corrupt Soul of Man is the Candle of the Lord,
or Christ.

And further, thou say, It was thy intended work to go through all the Answers
to the ten Questions, but for want of thy Paper, which thou say we detained
from thee, contrary to our Promise.

In which thou say not true, for the promise was to thee, thou should have a
Copy of thy Paper, which thou sent to us, when it was ready for thee, which was
not then written, neither was any time set down of thy having it, and as way
was made, a Copy, according to our promise, came to thy Hands.

And in the close of thy Book, thou go on a^ thou begun, saying, we deny
Scripture, as to the (...) were intended, and reproach the Ordinances of the
Lord Jesus, which the Scriptures Teach, under the (...) of Heathe^ish Worships,
etc. which is (...) to* in the Truth declared; a witness to stand against all
the Reproaches, that thou have cast upon the Truth of the living God, and the
God thou art pleading for, cannot crown thee with honor, in the day wherein
the living God will exalt his Son, and clear the Innocence of his People, then
shall the God whose worship thou art defending, be confounded, and Confusion
and Shame shall stop thy Mouth; and if this come not to pass as declared, then
say the Lord has not spoken by me.

And in that thou call'st thy Postscript, in the end of thy Book, the things
therein thou falsely accusest us with, and calls them the Rocks which we are to
manifest how we shall escape, which is clearly made manifest, in what is
written in answer to thy Book: Only this, where thou say, we make no
difference between the visible professing Church, and the Pagan World, all may
be saved alike, if they will, etc.

Reply, They that make a visible Profession of Christ, and deny to walk in the
Light of his Spirit, are of the World that lies in Wickedness, 1 John 5.19.
Mat. 7.21. as well as them thou call'st the Pagan World; and not any can be
saved by what they do in their own wills, all that is done in that nature is
abomination to God as is plain in to Answer what thou have writ in Page 70. It
is not of him that wills, nor of him that runs, but of God that shows
mercy, Romans 9.16. which he makes manifest in the riches of his Grace, in Christ
the Light, who leads all that obey him, in the strait way of self-denial, and
the daily Cross, in obedience to the Will of God, which is our sanctification:
And he that sanctifies, and they that are sanctified are one, Heb. 2.4 1 These.
4.31. He that can receive it let him.

For the Truths sake, that the Simple be not turned out of the way by the false
Accusations, Reproaches, and Aspertions thou have cast upon it, what is before
written in Answer to thee, the Truth does clear; and the Answer to thy ten
Questions, which thou chargest to be deceitful, that they may witness for
themselves, against what thou have cast upon them, that all that desire to know
the Truth, may them read. The Questions and Answers are as follows.

1. Qu. Whether the writings of the Scriptures, are a Declaration of the holy
Will and Mind of God, that necessarily oblige the Servants of God, that profess
him, to believe and observe whatever is revealed therein, to be believed and
done; and whether the Scripture alone be a perfect Rule of Faith and Life unto
all of years amongst us, yea or nay?

Ans. The Scriptures is a true Declaration of the things believed amongst the
Saints, and a true Testimony of Jesus Christ but not any do them know, neither
can believe what is written therein, only by the outward Declaration and
Testimony of Scripture, but by the Word of Faith, which is in the Heart, and in
the Mouth, which is the Word of Faith which we Preach, Romans 10.7, 8.

2. Qu. Whether any other Revelations and Observations, not to be found in the
Scripture, be binding to the Consciences of those Persons that have the benefit
of the Scripture, or whether such Revelation or Dictates within a Man's Heart
and Soul, be as binding to the Conscience, and to be urged to a Man's self, or
others, as the Scriptures are?

Ans. The Revelations of Jesus Christ, is according to Scripture, which
Revelation binds up the Testimony, and Seals the Law in the Hearts of his
Disciples; and what Dictates is in the Conscience or Heart of Man, contrary to
the Law and Testimony, is not to be regarded, but disowned and judged with the
Light which comes from Christ, the Saints Life, who guides them in a pure Life,
and holy Conversation, according to Scripture, Isa. 8.20.

3. Qu. Whether any thing besides the Scripture, is constituted of the blessed
God, to reveal Christ as Redeemer and Savior, to the Spirit of miserable lost
Man, to bring Man, unto happiness; or whether corrupt Man without the knowledge
of Scripture, may ordinarily attain unto Salvation, yea or nay?

Ans. No Man can come to the Son any other way, but whom the Father draws by
the power of his unlimited Spirit; and never any shall know the Father, but he
to whom the Son reveals him; and he that thinks to attain the way to eternal
Life by reading the Letter of the Scripture, and regards not the Light that
comes from Christ, that witnesses for God in the secret of the Heart and
Conscience, he deceives himself, for the mystery of eternal Life is Sealed up
in the sealed Book, from all the Sons and Daughters of Men; and none shall ever
know it by the outward Testimony of Scripture, but by the Inspiration of the
Spirit of Jesus Christ, the Lion of the Tribe of Judah, who is found worthy to
open the Seals of the Book, And is the Way, the Truth, and the Life, to all
that in his Light wait; his Power them to guide, in faithful obedience to the
righteous and perfect Law of God, written in the Heart, for the exercise of the
Conscience* which keeps them void of offense toward God, and toward Men,
according to Testimony of Scripture, Acts ^4.1^. and 23.1.

4. (...) Light of Conscie^^^ which is (...) Fall, be the remains (...)
Beliques les^ of the first Adam, in reference to the Covenant of works; or
whether her common to all, from the Redemption of the second Adam, as flowing
from the Covenant of Grace, or how else? I desire you would clearly express
your thoughts in this.

Ans. Man in the fallen estate has not any Light, as the remains of the first
Adam, in him, to guide him to do any thing well-pleasing to God, as he stand in
the state of corrupt Nature; for all his Righteousness is as ^ilthy Rags, and
as a menstruous Cloth, the Light that convinces Man and Woman of the evil of
their Hearts, and discovers the filthiness of all their own Righteousness, is
the Light that comes from Christ, the true Light that lights every Man that
comes into the World, John 1.9. And this Light is not common to Man by nature,
it is the great gift of God, his Grace that has appeared, and teaches all,
that are guided by it, to deny all Ungodliness, and worldly Lusts, and to live
Godlily and Soberly in this present evil World; and all that walk contrary to
the Light, this is their Condemnation, the Light, John 3.19.

5. Qu. Whether the end of God in giving and continuing this ^ind of Light to
all Men in the World, was not to be (...) and c^rb to the exorbitant lusts of
so corrupt (...) as Man, and so made subserviant to God in the Government of
the World, in order to the peace and continuance of the same, and to leave all
without excuse. Or what beside this the end of God was, that this kind of Light
should be minded and improued according to the power of Man by what he is from
Creation (...) or Redemption, in order to eternal happiness* and the (...) this
Light in all Men, shall be the only condemnation of the World. Or whether this
Light be the Gospel, or Christ, or his Spirit, or whether it be a Light either
equal with, or inferior to, or of a different kind with the Scriptures?

Ans. The Light which comes from Christ is given of God, to guide the Creature
out of its own strength and power, to Christ the mighty Power, and Wisdom of
God, the Creature to guide with Moderation, in the use of all Creatures, and to
order and govern the Creation to the Praise and Glory of God: And this Light is
of the pure Nature of God, and leads to Christ the Everlasting Gospel. And this
is the condemnation of the World that hate the Light which comes from Christ,
because they believe not in him, John 1.8.

6. Qu. Whether the Light of Conscience, the Light of Scripture, the Light of
Providence, the Light of Grace, ought no^ to be pressed upon all, to reform them,
and draw them up to a higher pitch of Christian Obedience, according to the
written Word of the Lord?

Ans. Thou by all who are in the Light is seen to be in thy Wisdom, querying
after many Lights, but (...) is formerly written, in answer to thy 4th.
Question, there is but one true Light, Christ, who lights every one that
comes into the World* and all his Ministers turns the Minds of People from
Darkness to Christ the true Light, in it to want on him for his Power to
destroy the Power of Satan, and to lead in the strait narrow way of self-denial
and the daily Cross, which is the way into the Kingdom of God, who ever will be
my Disciple, (says Christ) be must deny himself, and take up his Cross daily,
and follow me, Luke 19.23.

7. Qu. Whether a Sinner condemned by the Law, is made just before God, unto
Eternal Life, by an inherent Power within, or work of Sanctification; or
whether by the Satisfaction, and Suffering of Christ in Man's nature, and
behalf, rested on by Faith?

Ans. The Creature whose Conscience is awakened by the Light, the Righteous Law
of God in the Heart, which shows it its sinful state, and stands condemned
before the Throne of God for disobeying the Light, shall never be justified by
any self-Righteousness, for it is uncleanness in the Sight of God, for
justification is through Faith in the Lord Jesus, but this Faith, which lays
hold on Christ for justification, is not attained by any Power the Creature
has of its self, neither can any know it, who receive honor one of another,
John 5.44. How can ye believe who receive honor one of another, and seek not
the Honor that comes from God only; Faith is the Gift of God, given to the
Children of Light, who wait in the Light on the Lord, in the way of his
Judgments, Isa. 26.8. till judgment be brought forth into Victory, that the
Creature be brought into true Poverty of Spirit, forever to perish, without
free Redemption in the Lord Jesus, which the Father in his appointed time
reveals the Son to the Soul, that stands condemned before him, and by the Arm
of his mighty Power, creates it to a lively Hope, and he that has this Hope in
him purifieth himself, even as he is pure; so whom he justifies he
sanctifies, and he that says he is justified, and lives in Sin, deceives
himself; for Faith purifieth the Heart, and purges the Conscience from dead
Works to (...) witnessed in the (...) of Scripture. Heb. 9.14.

8. Qu. Whither the Person or Essence of Christ^ or his Spirit dwell^ in any
upon Earth, or whether by his Gifts and Graces only; or whether all those that
have Christ in them* must forsake all outward teaching of Men; and (...) the
Scripture be but a dead Letter, and of no use, otherwise then Christ within
does witness unto them?

Answ. He that knows not Christ to be in him is a Reprobate, for he that has
not the Spirit of Christ is (...) of his, and he that is guided by the Spirit
of Christ, needs not any teaching of Man* (for you shall not need to teach one
another, for all my Children shall be taught of me, says the Lord God) and the
Scripture is but a killing letter, but of use in its place; a Testimony of
Christ, but not any knows Christ by it, for Christ is known by the Light of his
Spirit, which gave forth the Scriptures, and all that are guided by his Spirit
knows the Scripture in the Truth as it is in Jesus Ephesians. 4.21.

9. Qu. Whether the conversion that was wrought upon, the Souls of many, under
the ordinary outward Ministry of the Word, in our public Assemblies, turning
Men from Darkness to Light, from profaneness to true Godliness be true unto
Salvation; and whether those that have been thus converted were in the state of
Salvation before they joined themselves unto your Society; or whether can none
be converted, and saved, that never came under, nor gave their assent to the
dispensation of your way; and how you will justify yours to be in the true and
good old way, that all have and shall be s^v^d in? you may do well to make it
out by some evident dem^nstration*

Answ. Who can witness a true conversion by the Power of the Spirit of God, in
turning their minds from Darkness to Light, that comes from Christ, and in his
Light wait to receive the sentence of Death in themselves, to destroy all
self-confidence in any thing below Christ, and in the state of Death to wait
till that they hear the voice of the Son of God, and by his Power were raised
up to a living hope in Christ to walk; who throw his Blood do witness their
Garment^ w^shed and made white, to reign Kings and Priests upon the Earth for
ever, to Worship the Father in Spirit and Truth; and who ever can witness this
conversion, whether it were beg^n when they frequented your Public Assemblies,
or absented from them, this conversion we own, who it can witness, and of our
way they are, and will to us come, and all shall know the Truth we witness is
the good old way that all Souls that came to God walked in Christ the Way the
Truth and the Life, the ancient of days, which was before time, but manifest in
time in all the Children of Light, who does them lead in the narrow way of
self-denial, and the daily Cross, with him to enter through the strait Gate,
into the holy City, new Jerusalem, where the soul has union with the Father of
Light, and beholds his Face, and his Name is written in their Foreheads, and
there is no Night there, neither need of Candle, nor light of the Sun, for the
Lord God gives them Light, and they shall reign forever and ever, Rev. 22.5.

10. Qu. Whether any of your Way attain unto Perfection in this Life, that they
can truly say, that they do all that God commands, without failing, either in
matter or manner of obedience, no not in thought, word and deed; and whether
the Persons of any stand just before God, that are not thus perfect?

Answ. All that are in the Way we are in, which is Christ the Way to the
Father, in whom all in their measure are pressing on to the fullness of stature
in Christ the perfect Man, and who in him is grown to the fullness of stature,
in his Power does stand, which does them guide, that in their Mouths is found
no guile, for they are without fault before the Throne of God, Rev. 14.5.

THE MIGHTY DAY OF the LORD, is Coming.
In which Christ is exalting King upon the holy Hill of Sion, over all the
World to Reign, who in this Day of the Lord knocks at the door of the Heart of
Jew and Gentile, Kindreds, Tongues, People and Nations, who desire to know the
only true God, and Christ Jesus whom he has sent to be the Light of the World,
and Salvation to the ends of the Earth, to all that obey him; but a Stone of
stumbling and a Rock of offense to all that reject his Counsel, whom he will
take in their own Crafts, and overturn in their own Devices, to the shame and
confusion of their Faces; but they that believe in him, shall never be ashamed.

The Word of the Lord to all the faithful scattered in the World, that in the
Counsel of the Lord stands, to strengthen the desires raised toward his Name,
them to give Victory over the World.

A Warning to all that dwell upon the Earth, and to the Kings, Princes, and
Rulers in the World, to submit to Christ the Light of the World, least they
perish in the day of his fierce wrath, when the Hearts of all that disobey him,
do fall before him.

From the common Goal in Northampton, the 7th day of the 11th Month 1655. Given
forth by him the World knows by name, William Deusbery at the writing of this,
Prisoner for the Word of God, and Testimony of Jesus Christ. You People,
WHose Natural Birth and Generation were in the Northren Islands, whom the Lord
God of Heaven and Earth has placed, where he has suffered you to be scattered
into Barbados, Virginia, New England, and other Islands there-aways, and
Countries elsewhere; and to every Kindred, Tongues, People and Nations, in whom
there is Desires raised to know, the only true God, and Jesus Christ whom he
has sent to be the Light of the World, to guide the Feet of those that have
sat in Darkness, in the Light and Ways of Righteousness and Peace.

TO you the mighty Day of the Lord is coming, and in his Power is appearing
amongst you, in raising Desires in some of you toward his Name; which Desires
cannot be satisfied with any outward Observations and Traditions of your
Fathers; but above them does your minds raise, in true Hunger and Thirst
toward the living God, for refreshment from his Presence: Prize the Love of
God to you, in whom he has raised Desires toward him; and look not forth at
any that teaches you to hearken to the Teachings of Men without, who draws you
to seek Christ and God without, and to come to the knowledge of the Kingdom of
God in outward Observations, with which the the Kingdom of God comes not, the
Kingdom of God is within; and as the Lightning is from the East to the West, so
is the coming of the Son of Man in his Day, whose appearance is within.

But you People, in the Day of Darkness and Ignorance, that have been over the
whole Earth, have been deceived in looking forth at Teachings of Men without,
and for the Kingdom of God to come in outward Observations, that Men have set
up in their vain Thoughts, wicked and carnal Imaginations of the Saints
conditions, which is Recorded in the Scriptures of Truth; but they not
regarding the motions of the Spirit of God within, which taught and guided the
Saints; they are Strangers to the Saints Life, though they speak great swelling
words of the Knowledge of God, and with them deceive the Simple, with the
enticing words of Man's Wisdom, and boasting in other Men's Lines made ready to
their Hands; but they themselves are as natural bruit Beasts, living without
the fear of God, in Pride, Covetousness, Dissimulation, and Hypocrisy, full of
self-Love making their Bellies their God, delighting their Hearts in the
Creature enjoyments, and visible Objects, and are men-Pleasers, having their
Person in Admiration, and them respecting for Advantage. And these Men who are
ignorant of the only true God, you have followed, to Teach you to know God, who
has drawn you to worship an unknown God, in the ignorance of your minds, so
have they destroyed the Souls of many, and you People perish for want of
Knowledge, Hoseah, 4.6. in being caused to err with the Lies and Lightness of
these false Prophets, which the Lord is against, who run when the Lord never
sent them, as the false Prophets did, when the Lord sent his true Prophet,
Jeremiah, to cry against them, Ier. 23.32. All People who desire to know the
living God, let the time past be sufficient, you have followed Men, who have
deceived you; and cease from them, and turn to the true Prophet, whom Moses the
Servant of the Lord, declared, the Lord God would raise up Deuteronomy. 18.15. his
elect and chosen Servant, to raise up the Tribes of Jacob, and to restore the
preserved of Israel, whom he has also given for a Light to the Gentiles, and
to be his Salvation to the ends of the Earth, whom Isaiah the Prophet declared
the Lord would raise up to open the Fountain of Life and Salvation to all that
thirst, Isa. 55.1, 2, 3. and now witnessed with all that hearken to his
Counsel, who calls, He every one that thirsts, come ye to the Waters; and
(...) that has no Money, come ye, buy, and eat; yea, buy Wine and Milk without
Money, and without Price. Wherefore do you lay out your Money for that which is
not Bread, and your Labor for that which satisfies not? Hearken diligently to
me, and eat that which is good, and let your Soul delight it self in fatness.
Incline your Ear, and ^^me unto me, hear, and your Souls shall live, and I will
make an everlasting Covenant with you, even the sure mercies of David. All
People, no longer look forth, the glad tidings of the Gospel of eternal
Salvation is heard within, in this day of the Lords Mercy wherein he is
^^^ching his People himself, as was declared by the ^rophet, Isa 54.13. and now
witnessed with all the Children of Light, whose Minds are turned within to wait
on the Lord for Teaching, to establish them in the Covenant of Life and Peace,
who is performing his Promise to all that wait on him* which he declared by his
Servant the Prophet, Ier. 31* 33, 34. This shall be the Covenant I will make
with the House of Israel, After those days, says the Lord, I will put my Law
in their Hearts, and write it in their inward Parts, and will be to them a God,
and they shall (...) ad^ they shall no more teach every M^n his (...) and every
Man his Brother, saying, ^^ow the Lord* for they shall all know me from the
least of them, to the greatest of (...), says the Lord; for I will be
merciful to their ^^^ighteousness, and their Sin, and their Iniquity will I
^^^ember no more.

Therefore every one that desires to know the only true God, and Christ Jesus
whom he has sent. Turn your minds within, and examine your Hearts, search and
try your ways with the Light Christ Jesus has enlighted you withal, that shows
you in your Hearts what is Sin; that Pride and Covetousness is Sin; Lying,
Swearing, is Sin; Dissimulation, Cheating, Co^sning, is Sin; vain idle
communications, foolish Jesting, and Unbelief, is Sin; and these things you
know in your Consciences to be Sin, by the righteous Law of God in the Heart,
that reproves you for them in the secret of the Heart and Conscience, there is
your Teacher, the Spirit of the Lord within, which in this Mighty Day of his
Power, he is pouring his Spirit upon all Flesh, according to his promise,
declared by the Prophet, Joel. 2.28, 29. and now witnessed with his Sons and
Daughters, who walk in the Light, led and guided by his Spirit within, which
keeps the Conscience void of offense toward God, and toward Men. Every one
diligently hearken to the Counsel of the Lord, the Light that witnesses for God
in the Conscience, give up to be guided by it; th^n you need no more to be
taught of Man, neither shall your Teacher be removed any more into a Corner,
but thine Eye shall see thy Teacher, and thine Ear shall hear a Voice behind
thee, saying, This is the way, walk in it, when thou turns to the right Hand or
to the left, as was declared by Isaiah the Prophet, Isa. 30.20. which is now
witnessed, and that is the living Word of God within, that has raised desires
in you toward God; every one in whom desires is raised, wait in the Light and
Power within, that has raised the desires, and the Lord will them strengthen,
and give you Power to wait on him in the way of his Judgments, till the carnal,
earthly, sensual Mind, which has led you to delight in lusts and pleasures,
and created enjoyments below God, be cut down, and slain with the Word of God
within, which is as sharp as a two-edged Sword to slay down the first man,
which is of the Earth earthly; then will you come to witness to be the slain of
the Lord, and the sentence of Death upon the first Man who has led you from
God, with all the Wisdom, Strength and Righteousness you have had in him, and
in the Power of the Spirit, you will be brought to the true sense of the
poverty of your Spirits, to hunger and thirst after the Righteousness of God in
Christ Jesus the Light, him to prize, and love, and self-judge, and deny with
his Light, and in his Light wait to dwell in his Power, you to guide in every
word and work in the Light, where your union and fellowship will be with the
Father of Light, who will you keep (that faithful in him abide and dwell) in his
mighty Power and Wisdom, as he ye move to witness his mind in his pure Power,
to the confounding of the mighty, wise, and prudent Men, who is exalted in the
Wisdom of the World, and counsel of their own Hearts, not regarding to be
guided by the Counsel of God in Christ the Light.

To you tender Babes and Children of the most High, this is the Word of the
Lord God, in whom desires is raised toward his Name; his Counsel, mind in you,
and stand Faithful in it, according to his Word declared to you, and consult
not with Flesh and Blood; but in the Light and Life lift up your Heads, and
freely give up Soul and Body to the Lord God of Heaven and Earth, that he the
Kingdom of Jesus Christ may exalt in you, to guide you in perfect Obedience to
his righteous Law written in the Heart for the exercise of the Conscience
toward God and Men; and fear not Man, whose breath is in his nostrils, who
stands up to oppose the Lord in this mighty Day of his Power, wherein he is
exalting Christ Jesus the Light to be King for ever in his Light; be faithful
to the Lord, and though you be haled before Rulers, Governors and Kings for a
Testimony against them, take no thought what you shall say, but keep within,
staid in the Counsel of God, it will be given you in the self-same hour, my
Heavenly Father will in you speak, and his Enemies confound before his mighty
Power in you, and the Hearts of the great and mighty Men of the Earth shall
fail, and paleness shall gather into their Faces, the dread of the holy God
will be with you, who faithfully give up to be guided by his Counsel in the
Power of his Spirit: one shall chase a Thousand, and five put ten thousand to
Flight: the decree is gone forth, Christ shall be King over all the Nations of
the World, and all the Powers of the World, that him withstand, he will break
them with his iron rod, and dash them in pieces like a potters Vessel, so shall
they become as dust before his breath, the Mouth of the Lord has spoken it,
who is giving the Kingdoms of the World to his Son, and to you that wait for
his apperance, the living ^ound is come, that does witness that not any weapon
formed against him shall prosper, in this day of his appearance in the Hearts
of his Saints.

In the presence of the Lord, I you Warn and Charge, stand fast in the Counsel
of the Lord Jesus Christ, the Light in the Conscience, and according to the
measure you have received, be faithful in walking with God in perfect obedience
to his Will; freely giving up your Bodies to finish your Testimony in
sufferings, if the Lord call you; for it is not given only to believe in him,
but to suffer with him, and they that suffer with him, shall Reign with him,
and the Son of Man is perfect in sufferings; and you that are faithful to the
Lord, he will lay no more upon you, then he gives you strength to bear; with
the Angel of his presence he will you guard, and campass you about with
Salvation for Walls and Bulwarks, and you shall know this is to you the Word of
the Lord God; The Day will declare it.

ALL People who dwell upon the Earth, from the highest to the lowest, fear the
most high and living God, who has Created Heaven and Earth, and the Fountains
of Waters; and all return to his Counsel, the Light of Christ that witnesses
for God in the Conscience, against Sin in its appearance in the secret of the
Heart, and diligently incline your Ear to the Counsel of Christ the Light, that
he may guide you by his Spirit, least through your disobedience you perish
before him, in this mighty Day of the Lords Power, in which he is coming with
Fire and Sword to plead with all Flesh; and not any that transgresses his
righteous Law in the Conscience shall escape his righteous Judgment in this his
Day. He is bringing down the loftiness of Man, and the haughtiness of his
Spirit laying low, and exalting his Son Christ Jesus to be King, over all to
Rule, The Heathen he will give him for his Inheritance, and the uttermost Parts
of the Earth for his Possession, and the Kingdom he will establish to his Son,
whose Kingdom is an everlasting Kingdom, and of his Dominion there shall be no
end. Come down ye Kings, Princes and Rulers in the World, who in the Throne sit
in Pride, exalted to rule in your Wills contrary to the pure perfect Law of
God, the Light of Christ in your Consciences, to which you must come and own
your Condemnation for your Pride and Disobedience, and to his Counsel, the
Light in your Consciences, return in subjection to Christ the Son of God, and
at his Feet your Crowns lay down, and Honors in the Dust before him, and wait
on him in his Counsel, the Light, that he may guide you by his Spirit, in the
fear of God, to walk humbly before him in your Places, to Rule for God, to
break the Bonds of iniquity, and let the Oppressed go free, that the glory of
the most high God, alone you seek, and not great things for your selves, as you
have done, and in this day of darkness, while you have lived without the fear
of God, not regarding to be guided by his pure perfect Law, the Light of Christ
in the Conscience; let the time past be sufficient, you have lived to your
selves without God in the World; and with all diligence obey the Word of the
Lord, which is to you declared in this day of your Visitation, wherein the Lord
tenders eternal Salvation to you, in Christ the Light, in whom the Father is
well pleased with all that obey him, which if you be obedient to Christ, and
wait on him to guide you by his Counsel, the Light, he will you lead in the
strait and narrow way of self-denial, and daily Cross, into the holy City, new
Jerusalem, the Light of which all Nations that are saved walk therein, and the
Kings of the Earth shall bring their Glory and Honor unto it, where your Souls
will be refreshed, with the living mercies of God, in Christ the Light, to
praise him for ever in the beauty of Holiness, but if you his Counsel reject,
and walk in Pride, self-Love, delighting your Hearts in the glory of the World,
and the pleasures therein, and so slight this day of your Visitation, then the
things belonging to your Peace will be hid from your Eyes, and sudden
Destruction, as a Whirlwind, shall overtake you; for Sions King, whom you
disobey, will break you with his Rod of Iron, and dash you to pieces like a
Potters Vessel, and you shall be cut down and slain with the Sword that
proceeds out of the Mouth of him, whose Name is called the Word of God. Now
while you have time, to him submit, and kiss the Son, in obeying his Counsel,
the Light in the Conscience, least you perish in the way; for if his anger be
kindled a little, Blessed are all they that trust in him: Remember you are
warned in your Lifetime, he that has an Ear to hear let him hear: The
Kingdoms of this World are become the Kingdoms of our Lord, and of his Christ,
and he shall Reign for ever and ever, Rev. 11.15. He that can receive it let
him.

Dear Friends,
BRethren, and Sisters in the Eternal Light of Christ Jesus, whom my Heavenly
Father has gathered you to wait upon him, that you might be the holy
Presthood, and Righteousness of God in Christ Jesus; every one in particular,
mind your calling in the Light, and watch diligently in the Light, the Life, to
feel a raising you up in the pure being with God in Christ, your Souls to
delight in the pure Fellowship with the Father, in the Lord Jesus, and one with
another in him; that in the Measure of life in Christ, your Souls be kept free
at Liberty in him, the shame to despise, and the Cross to take up in Obedience
to the movings of the Spirit, of Life, which you will all know the movings of
the Life, it overcomes the Soul into it self, and seals up its own Testimony to
all that wait in the Fear of the Lord with diligence in the Measure of Light:
All in singleness of Heart wait upon God, that the Life in every one of you in
particular exercise you, in singleness in the service of the Lord, in what he
calls you unto, to his praise; and know the Seed of God in you all, to keep you
Faithful up to God, that in him you grow in the living union to reign over all,
in the Light and Life for ever; and all of you in the Fear of the Lord God,
wait for an understanding that the Seed of God you may know, and the movings of
the Life in it, that not any abuse the Liberty, and in the dark mind take upon
you to utter words before the Lord; in his presence, I lay it upon you, let his
dread be upon you, that in his fear you be preserved all low to wait in the
Light and Life, that in it you grow in unity, and in the Power and dread of God
keep out the dead airy spirit that utters words out of the Life, and brings in
a dead formality, which burdens the Seed of God.

My dear Brethren and Sisters, in the Life of my God and your God, that are
faithful to him, I beseech you all in the tender Bowels in the Lord Jesus
Christ, mind your union with the righteous Seed in you all; that the Cross be
laid to the Ground of all evil, and his Seed over you reign, and in you, and
through you Minister as you are called of God, to the building up one another in
the Life and Power; that the dark airy spirit be kept forth from amongst you,
and death with its formality broken down, and kept out with the Life, you will
all enjoy in the righteous Seed of Christ the Light over all God blessed
forever; that in you not any thing of God be oppressed, but in freedom serve him,
Amen.

God Almighty in the Life you all keep up faithful, him to serve in answering
his witness in all your Consciences, that you may your Generation serve
according to his will and finish your course with Joy. W. D.
London, the 9 th of the 2d Month, 1657.
Dear Friends,
BRethen and Sisters in the Light and Life in Christ, whom my Heavenly Father
has gathered forth of the World, to make known in you his Eternal Power and
Wisdom that he may be known to be the Everlasting God, who is come down to
dwell with the Sons and Daughters of Men; this to you is the Word of the Lord,
prize the mercy of the Lord, who has plucked you as Brands out of the Fire,
and looked upon you in the day when you were in your Blood, and no Eye to pity
you, then did he stretch out the Hand of his Power, and in the Light has
gathered you, and counted you worthy to be first Fruits in Christ, to wait upon
him to receive of the eternal riches, of the Treasure of the Kingdom of Heaven
forever; let the mercy of the Lord God be a Seal upon you, to constrain you all
humbly to walk in his pure fear, faithfully to answer the Light of Christ in
faithfulness what is made known unto you, and when you have done the will of
God, in Obedience to what you are called to in the outward; watch in the Light
the Power of God, you in his fear low in your minds to keep, that the Enemy
that will attempt to lead to boast of what is done, be judged down and reigned
over and you preserved, kept safe in your Tents, in your pure dwellings in the
Power of the Lord God, and there wait, God to keep you in a pure understanding,
his Seed to know, that you to it be joined, and raised in it over the
unrighteous Seed, to reign in all its appearances to trample upon it in the
Power of the righteous Seed, the Lord has blessed; all watch, watch, watch
diligently, and wait Wisdom to receive to separate between the holy and the
unholy in you all, that the movings of the Life in the Light you all know, and
in the movings of the Life in the Light for that Wisdom of God to guide you, in
the pure Knowledge of the service he calls unto, so will God seal unto you, his
counsel, and his secrets he will not hide, but reveal to you that fear him, and
you will have the Presence of the Lord accompanying you in his pure service, in
the presence of the (...); 1675
I lay it upon you all wa^^ to (...) is the (...) of God, as is made manifest
to you in the Light, that not any of you, who make mention of the Name of the
pure God, lend an ear to the Enemy that will draw* your Hearts from the pure
fear, and wanting in the Life to form in your minds, the similitude and
liken^ss of (...) Truth, and lead you in a dead formality and to abuse the
movings of the Life which you have felt, in putting new Wine into the old
Bottles, there will (...) arise in its strength, and lead you in rashness to
spe^k of that you see and do not possess; for the Bottle will burst and spill
the new Wine; and from t^^s ground is all rashness, in uttering words out of
Go^s Wisdom, and hard speeches in judging out of the Knowledge of God, and this
with the Light into Condemnation must come.

In the fear of the Lord God, wait the living wisdom to guide you, and quench
not any movings of the Spirit; I lay it upon you, wait the Lord to Seal unto
you his mind, that in his movings you may answer his Will, which the Light will
guide you to know the intent of every motion in word and in works, that in it
you stand approved in the Integrity of your Hearts to God; every one in
particular there faithful to be found in the Power of God, that in all the
movings of the Spirit of Life, the earthly wisdom be judged out, with all its
Reasonings and Consultings, that you all may know that new Man in Christ, in
which the new Bottle is witnessed, that preserves the new Wine, which is
committed to you in the Kingdom of God, your Souls to refresh and make glad in
his presence, to minister it forth in his living Power and Wisdom, to refresh
the Weary, Burdened, and Oppressed Soul, with the comfort of the Spirit of
Life, in which your Souls are made glad in God, so will you all come to the
pure ministry in the Life, which in the measure will overcome in its self,
which you will all feel; and as you are moved of God be faithful, strangle not
the Birth, neither quench the movings; and in the presence of the Lord I warn
you, wait for an understanding in the Life, you to lead, neither to add nor
diminish, so will Death with all its Formality be kept out of you, and from
amongst you; let none burden the Seed, with an airy dead spirit, in the Form,
out of the Life: All wait in the Life, to be kept every one in particular in
your own Habitations, with God in the Life to dwell, and as moved in the
overcoming Power and Life in you, let no thoughts hinder the Life for declaring
it self, who are overcome with the Power of it, in any Service which you are
called unto, to the building up one another, or witnessing to the World, then
will the presence of the Lord God be felt within you, and amongst you, to guide
you all in his Wisdom, to his praise; and to be tender one over another, and
know your union one with another, and in it bear one another Burdens, and in
the tender Bowels of Love, in the movings in the Life, judge out all strife,
all disorderly Spirits, who would Rule amongst you; and build up one another in
your most holy Faith, that in it you grow, in the unity of the Spirit, and bond
of Peace, in Christ to stand over all deceit in its appearance within and
without, over it to Reign in the Dominion of the Spirit of Life, you in him all
faithful to keep unto the end, so the dread of the Lord God you will feel
compassing you about, and make you terrible as an Army with Banners; before one
of you that is in the Resurrection and Life in Christ, shall a Thousand flee,
and Five put Ten Thousand to ^light; for you in the Life are the Host of
Heaven, before whom the Nations shall shake, and the Inhabitants of the Ear^h
shall tremble and before the Power which preserves you in the Life, faithful
until the Sufferings of the righteous Seed be fulfilled, shall the Hearts of
all the whole World fail, in the day that the Lord God will make you manifest
in the Eyes of all People, you are his Jewels who faithful in his Li^e abide,
he will Crown you with eternal Dominion, in his Life to Reign over all the
powers of Darkness within and without, that in the unity in the Life you grow
up together in his presence, to delight to praise his Name for evermore; the
everlasting Power of God guide you in a pure understand in his Life up in
himself, to serve your Generation according o his Will, in faithfulness unto
the end* Amen.

The Decree is gone forth over all the World, Christ Jesus shall be King,
blessed are all they that bow d^wn in obedience to his Light; all that disobey
and withstand shall fall down before him, until the Kingdoms of this World
become the Kingdom of our Lord, and of his Christ, and he shall Reign for ever
and ever, the Mouth of the Lord has spoken it. W. D.
Given forth the 22 d of the 3 d Month 1657. in Kent.
SInce my last from the Lands-end in Cornwel, dated the 17th of the 7th Month,
great were the service of my God, in that Country; on the 27th day being the
first day of the week, I was at a Meeting at Humphry Lowers, a Man that had
been a Justice, which was near the High Sheriffs of the County, who was wicked
against the Truth of our God, it were said he threatened to break the Meeting,
which in the Power of my God I did stand, which Chained him, that the Meeting
continued precious in the Lord: The 29th of the Month I was at a Meeting at
Lanceston, after the Meeting I Journied into Devonshire, as the Lord had let me
see I should meet with a storm in the outward, in the Country, or near it; that
day it was manifest, I was stayed with certain Men in a Town called Torrenton,
and a guard of Men with Halberts set over me, then brought before the Mayor and
other Justices, who were some of them very cruel and wicked against the Truth
of God, and did deal very rudely with me; they in great wrath took my Hat off
my Head, and threw it on the ground, and committed me to Prison, where I was
two nights, and near three days, and was many times brought before them, who
did charge me very strictly to be a Jesuit that was come from beyond the Sea;
they read unto me many new Laws, as to proceed against me as a Vagabond, which
then the Lord reigned over them, as in that he set me free; then they read to
me the Oath of Abjuration, and said I must take it, which was denied, and the
Truth declared against it, the Pope, and all Idolatry; the second day at night
they brought me forth (and they would know how I came to be a Minister of
Christ) much being spoken to it in my Examination, the day before; as of my
coming from my Wife and Children, to Preach the Word of eternal Life through
the Countries into Cornwell; in answer to their questions, I was free in the
Lord to declare to them how I came to be a Minister of Christ, which cut them
to their Hearts, that one Justice wept, and the Justices Clark said, if thou
had spoke thus much before, here had not been this to have done: Then I did
speak in answer to what was propounded, but they would not hear: Then some of
them stormed against me for my Hat, and sent me to Prison again; many times I
was brought before them, to see if they could ensnare me, in the wisdom of God,
I stood innocent. They made a Mittimus to send me to the common Goal at Exeter;
some of them would not have me to go, but he that had the chief rule said to
me, thou shall not see my Face any more, until thou art before the Judge the
next Assizes at Exeter; I answered, do what thou have power, my Innocence will
plead for me; I was had again to Prison, and the Mittimus given, I lay on the
Prison Floor, without straw, or any thing; on the Second day of the eighth
Month, I was brought before them, my God had then pleaded my Cause, and changed
the Heart of Man, which failed in them; when I was brought before them, the Man
that said I should see his Face no more, until I was before the Judge at
Exeter, he pulled the Mittimus in pieces before my Face, and said to me, thou
art free: So did my God set me free out of the Hands of unreasonable Men,
according to his promise he made to me, Praises to the Name of my God for ever.
1658
The first day after, I was at a Meeting in Summersetshire; the 4th day being
the 7th of the sa^e Month, at a Meeting where, as they said, were near a
Thousand; the next day I was with T* Salthouse and the rest in Prison with him
at night, with many Friends; the next day at a Meeting in Wilshire; on the 11th
day, being the first day of the week, there was a Meeting, where it was said,
there might be two Thousand: My God was mighty in his Power to the glory of his
Name; If God will I may be at Justice Cripse's in Gloustershire the next third
day, and at Slettingford, twelve Miles from Bristol, the fourth day; if
God-will I may be at Bristol the sixth, or the first day, being the 18th of
this Month, further then, as my freedom is in my moving in the Lord; the
presence of God keep you with me in his Life, and all the Elect, faithful to
the end, Amen.

W. D.

Dear Friends,
IN the Name of the Lord Jesus Christ walk, to reign over all contrary to the
Light, that in the Light, and glory of God you may all shine forth, living
Witnesses of the Name of the everlasting, holy, pure God, who has looked on
you in his tender love, to gather you in the Everlasting Power of God, to stand
against all deceit; blessed are you tha^ are faithful, in obeying the Light of
Christ, to fo^low him in the Cross, and straight way of self-denial; you are my
Brethren and Sisters, in the Lord Jesus our Captain, over all he will Crown
you, with his Almighty Power, to stand in Faith and Patience to follow him,
until every tongue that lifts up it self against you, shall fall in Judgment,
withal that stumble at Christ Jesus our Life and Light, who will gather a large
People to himself; in that Country many shall come in, that is yet wandering
upon the Mountains, where they find no rest; Blessed are all you that abide,
and walk faithful with the Lord, whom he has called, and chosen in the Light,
to be the first Fruits; what ever arises contrary to the Light, within or
without, watch to the Light you will descern, stay your Hearts on the Lord, in
the Light, holding fast your Confidence in the Lord, he will deliver you forth
of all contrary to the Light, and cause you to rejoice in the daily Cross, to
the crucifying you to the World, and the World to you, and over the World will
cause you to rejoice withal its pomps and glory, and evil therein; you shall
over it stand in the Power of God, to his Praise and Glory, even so be it with
you all in the Almighty Power of God, in whom my Soul salutes you that
faithfully walk, humbly before the Lord, in Obedience to his Counsel, the Light.

DEar Lambs, called in the Light to lie down in the safe Fold of rest, in
Christ our life, in the tender bowels of love in him I beseech you, that you be
faithful in meeting together, in the Name of the Lord Jesus Christ, and
diligently watch to know your own measure of Grace in Christ, him to feel in
you to judge your thoughts, and every vain Imagination that over them you may
reign, and delight in the refreshing of his presence, and all take heed of many
words, at all times let them be few, but what is from the savory Spirit of
Life, in Christ the Light, in him the blessing of the Lord rest on you all for
evermore; there to farewell with me in the everlasting love of the Father in
Christ the Light, Amen.

W. D.
Given forth the 24 th of the 7 th Month 1658* at Leeth near Edenborough,
Scotland. Let Copies of this carefully be written, and sent to the Churches,
when they are met together in the Fear of God, to be read amongst them.



Dear Friends,
BRethren and Sisters, called in the Light to feel the Power of Almighty God,
burying self in the Death, and raising up his own immortal Birth of himself in
all your Hearts, which hungereth and thirsts after his Righteousness, and
cannot be satisfied but in the Light of the Countenance of the Eternal God of
Heaven; Grace and Peace be multiplied to you all, in the Name of the Lord Jesus
Christ, the Light, etc. This to you all is the Word of the Lord God, to watch
diligently to the Light, that you may see all the workings of the Enemy, who
would draw you from the Light, and as the Lord discove^eth him, judge him in
all his appearances with the Light, that you may be kept out of all his
Temptations, that the Power of God you may all feel guiding of you, that not
any receive the knowledge of the Truth in the wrong ground, as many have done;
who have received the knowledge of the Truth, 1659
and for want of the watch to the Light, the false birth in them raises its
self, with what is known, and received in the day of tenderness, and so has
run out in a drunken hard Spirit, spending the Talent upon the lust, out of
Gods fear, so has grieved the Spirit of the Lord, and burdened his dear
People, and hear is the ground of all that came out with us, and go from us,
and are not of us, who in the day of their coming forth were tender, and at
that time God manifested himself in measure, but not watching to the Light, the
Enemy entered, and the false birth rise in its strength, and enriched it self
with Gods gift, then the Swine got the Pearl, and turned again and all to rend;
so here is the ground of strife that has been or ever shall be, with all that
came out in the acknowledgment of Truth, and flee the true Judgment of God,
from his witness in their own particulars, and through his People in whom he
dwells: All dear Children of God, who love the Light, prize the Mercy of the
everlasting Father of Light, who has counted you worthy to wait upon him;
watch, watch, to the Light, that the Judgment of the Lord may pass upon the
first Man, which is of the Earth, that he may truly be buried into the one
Baptism, into the death, that the birth Immortal you may feel generated in you
by the working of the Immortal Word, the true Birth, which makes self of no
reputation, which humbles self in the Cross, and Thirsts and Hungers in you
for the presence of the Lord, or otherwise you cannot live; fear you not, you
Children of my Father, lift up your Heads in the Light of the Lord, for the
Bowels of the God of Heaven earns toward you, stay your Hearts upon him in the
Light, and the Lord will rebuke the furious Enemy of your peace; he will not
break the bruised Reed, neither will he quench the smoking Flax, until he has
brought Judgment forth into Victory; so let not any of you be bowed down any
longer, but all arise, arise in the Light of the Lord God, hold fast your
confidence in the measure of the Light of Jesus, and the Enemy of your peace he
will rebuke, and all unbelief and deceit he will throw down, and raise you in
the strength of his own Life, to delight in the strait way of self-denial, and
the daily Cross, where the Immortal Babe will receive the Crown, of the Glory
of the Lord, and in the light of his Countenance shall be refreshed forever;
therefore all that come to witness the least measure, the freedom of the
Immortal birth of God in you, stand fast in the Liberty, you have received in
God, and be not entangled again with the Spirit of Bondage, judge the evil One
in the least appearance, that he enter not, and the Lord God preserve you, in
his pure Habitation, in his Light and Life, and in the fear of the Lord God
meet diligently when the Lord orders you to appoint your Meetings, the time and
place; it is upon me from the Lord to lay it upon you, to cast all excuses
aside, and to meet as near as may be at the time appointed, that you may not be
a burden one to another, as some has been, who has come one a long time
after another, that when some have come, others have been pretty clear before
the Lord to depart, this has grieved the Spirit of our God, and the Meetings
have not been so profitable as would have been, because of this carelessness in
the behalf of the Lord; I warn, and charge you all in his presence, that not
any of you let any thing of the Earth, or self, enter upon you, to hinder your
diligent walking, and meeting with the Lords People at the time ordered by you,
in the Light; and when you meet, let your Hearts in the Light be single unto
God, wait to receive his gift in the inspiring of his Spirit, that there be no
Eye one toward another, in expectation of any thing from one another, as to
draw your minds from the Light in your own particulars, but all single to God,
wait to be kept in the Light, that he may give you an expected end, according
to your desires; and when the Lord ministers in you any gift, watch that the
true birth possess it, that so the false birth, that would pride it self in
Gods gift, and sacrifice upon the Mountains in the exalted mind; may be kept
down in every one of you, in the Fear of the Lord, when thou receivest the
gift, wait to make thy Peace with thy Brother, in feeling the word of
reconciliation with God in Christ guiding thee to sacrifice upon the Altar; and
what gift soever thou receivest of the Lord in the Power of his eternal Word,
whether Praises, Prophecy or Exhortation, I am commanded of the God of Heaven
to lay it upon you, that thou quench not his Spirit, but bring thy gift unto
Gods Altar, and in the strength of his Life in the Light, Sacrifice unto him,
so shall thy Talent be Increased, and the Babes shall be refreshed: And dear
People of God, be tender over the least breathings of Gods Spirit in one
another, and all wait to be clothed with a healing spirit, in the Covenant of
Light in the Lord Jesus; let the strong bear the Burdens of the weak, that you
may all grow in unity in the spiritual Birth, born in the everlasting day of
Light, that in the day determined of God, wherein your Faith must be tried, you
may all stand, born of the Seed, which the Power of Hell and Death cannot
touch, nor make dismayed, that the Lamb of God be over all born in you to reign
in dominion, you to guide in the Light, to bear forth your Testimony in
faithfulness to the praise and Glory of the most high God, who called for all
to prepare in his strength, that you might be freely given up in the day he had
determined; and let not any be discouraged, for the day is the Lords; be bold,
be bold you Children of the most high God, fear not Man whose Breath is in his
Nostrils, God will rebuke him in the height of his Pride, and will dash and
abase him as he did Nebuchadnezar, when he boasted himself against the God of
Israel; so all be bowed in the Light, and believe, and walk with God: from the
God of Heaven I declare all the wrath of the powers of the Earth shall not
perish one Hair of the Head of all the Saints, but which shall be to the Glory
of his Name; and the Comfort of all his People; all be faithful, and none halt
before the Lord whatever arise, for now is the day of separation between the
precious and the Vile, the Wise and the Foolish; so look not at thy own
strength, dear Babe, for whatever God calls thee to, at the present time, his
mighty Power will arise, and will cause thee to rejoice in finishing thy
Testimony to his Glory.

Blessed, Blessed are all you who are called and chosen and faithful unto
death, you shall receive the Crown of eternal Life, to sing Praise and
Hallalujah unto the most high God over all blessed forever; God Almighty keep
you in the Power of the endless Life, faithful unto the end, Amen.

Let this be read amongst Friends with understanding in the Fear of God. W. D.
Given forth at London the 10 th 11 th Month. 1659.
TO ALL NATIONS, 1660
KINDREDS, LANGUAGES, TONGUES, and PEOPLE, WITH YOUR Princes, and Rulers, And
all People from the Highest to the Lowest.
Thus to you is the Word of the Lord God,
FEar God, and give glory to him, for the hour of his Judgments is come, and
his dreadful terrible Day will come speedily upon all Nations and People;
therefore Worship him that made Heaven and Earth, and the Sea, and the
Fountains of Water, and them upholds by the Word of his Power; let his Fear and
Dread be upon you all: People, see what acquaintance and union you have with
him; he is a God that will not be mocked, who is now coming in his pure
dreadful Majesty, and glorious Almighty Power, to break down and dash in pieces
like a Potters Vessel all People from the highest to the lowest, from the
Prince on the Throne, to the Beggar on the Dunghill, in and amongst all Nations,
Kindreds, Languages, Tongues, and People, who put the Day of the Lord God afar
off, and live without the knowledge o^ the only true God in this World,
serving an unknown God in the ignorance of your minds, and in Traditions;
worshipping ^ou know not what, and walking every one in your own ways, doing
your own works, which leads to satisfy the flesh in the lusts thereof: All
which is abomination to the only true and ever living God, to whom you must
give an account for every idle word, and all your deeds done in the Body.

All people upon the face of the Earth, let the time past be sufficient, you
have lived without the Knowledge of the only true God; in this day the living
God visits you with a day of Visitation of mercy, to declare his Counsel to
you, that you may corn to the knowledge of him; be warned to depart from the
evil of your ways, and hearken diligently to the only true God, who waits upon
you to be gracious unto you, whose Grace has appeared unto all men, which is
the Light Christ Jesus the Son of God has lighted you with, that discovers
unto you the secret evil of your Hearts and Consciences; in the fear of the
living God, search your Hearts with the Light, which is the Counsel of God,
that convinces you in your Hearts and Consciences, that Lying is a Sin,
Swearing is a Sin, Covetousness a Sin, Pride a Sin, Drunkenness a Sin, and
Gluttony a Sin, Whoredom and Uncleanness a Sin, Cozening, Cheating and
Dissimulations are Sins; Tyranny, Cruelty, and Oppression, and Murder are Sin^
(...) which forementioned cries to the God of Heaven for Vengeance, which if
you do not walk in obedience to the Grace of God, the Light, which discovers
them, to guide you out of them: As the Lord God destroyed the old World, who
received not his Counsel, so will the Lord God of Heaven and Earth, break in
upon all you People, scattered in all Nations, Kindreds, Tongues and Languages;
for his eternal Decree is gone over you all, who walk in your wicked ways, he
will break you down, and dash you in pieces, and you shall become an abhorring
to all flesh: Therefore prize your time while God preserves you, for the Day of
your Visitation is come* wherein the God of Heaven visits you, and exhorts you
in the power of his Spirit to return to him, which if you diligently hearken to
his Counsel, the Light, which shows you your evil ways, and convinces you
of your Sins, as before written, and wait on him in the Light, to lead you out
of all Idolatry, and every sinful and evil way; then will the only true God
give you power over your sinful and unclean nature, and he will teach you his
Ways, and lead you in the Paths of Righteousness, and save you out of all your
Idolatrous ways you have walked in, and will establish you in eternal Rest and
Peace, with all his Children that walk in obedience to his Counsel, the Light,
which convinces of Sin in the secrets of your Hearts and Consciences; in which
Light he is gathering of his People out of all Nations, Kindred, Languages, and
Tongues, and People, into his own Kingdom, in the Light with him to walk, who
is now establishing his Kingdom in the Earth, which Kingdom shall break down
all other Kingdoms, and their Dominion take away, and destroy to the end.

Then shall the everlasting God be known in the Earth, to destroy the Image
(that will not submit to him) and to establish all those that walk in the
Light, in his everlasting Kingdom to dwell, and there to praise his Name alone,
who is worthy over all, God blessed for ever.

Hear and Fear all Nations, Kindreds, Tongues, Languages, and People, Repent
and Turn to the only true God, in hearkening diligently to his Counsel, the
Light, that convinces of Sin in the secrets of your Hearts and Consciences,
that ye be not cut off in the dreadful and terrible Day of the fierce Wrath of
the everliving God, wherein he will destroy all Idolatry out of the Earth, and
perform according to his Word here to you declared, and none of you shall
escape, which disobey his Counsel, the Light, and you shall certainly know the
Mouth of the Lord has spoken it, what he will bring upon all Nations.

Remember you are warned in your Lifetime, in this Day of your Visitation, if
you slight it, your destruction is of your selves, and your Blood is upon your
own Heads.

From the Righteous Seed, of whom it is written, It shall be no more said, the
Lord lives that brought us forth of the Land of Egypt; but the Lord lives
that has raised up his Seed, and brought it forth of the North-Countrey,

Jer. 23.7, 8. Forth of the Northren Country, called England, from the Seed of
God there risen, that shall spread over all the Nations of the World. W. D.

Dear Friends and Brethren,
CAlled and Chosen of God, to wait upon him in his Light, every one in
particular feel the Power and Life of God, exercising you in his Service,
whatever he calls unto, when the Lord fills the Heart of any of you with his
Presence, and in his Life moves thee, quench not the Spirit, I am commanded to
lay it upon thee, whosoever thou art, from the least to the highest growth.

All, dear Friends, wait to be kept in the Bond of the Spirit, obedient to its
motions, to cease and stay when it moves not, as well as to begin any exercise
when it moves: And dear and tender little Babes, as well as strong Men, retain
the pure in every particular, and let not any thing straiten you, when God
moves: And thou faithful Babe, though thou stutter and stammer forth a few
words in the dread of the Lord, they are accepted; and all that are strong
serve the weak in strengthening them, and wait in wisdom, to give place to the
motion of the Spirit in them, that it may have time to bring forth what God
has given: And dear Brethren, feed the Lambs, and loose the Tongue of the
Dumb, that Praises may arise in and amongst you all, to the glory of God, that
in him you may be a wellspring of Life one to another, in the Power of the
endless Love of God, in which the Lord God keep you all.

W. D.
From York Tower, the 10 th day of she 12 th Month, 1660
Dear Brethren and Sisters,
IN the Church of the first born, of the royal Seed of the most high God,
grace, mercy and peace be multiplied in and amongst you, to whom God revealed
what he determined, and is now manifesting, that every one in the Light and
Life of God might stand single, out and over the snares of those whom God lays
aside, as the broken Reeds of Egypt, that his own Name might be trusted in, and
his mighty Arm alone seen and felt, in leading and preserving his People to his
glory, as witnessed this day, blessed be the God of our strength and safety.

ALL dear and chosen Vessels of God, whether in Bonds or out of Bonds,

This is to you the Word of the everlasting God, in the everlasting Light and
Life, stay your Minds, and lift up your Heads, and be strong in the Name of the
Lord, and fear not the Wrath of Man, for it is limited, and shall turn to the
praise of God forever, who is making up his Jewels this day, and gathering his
Wheat in^o his Garner, and the Sheep of his Pasture into the safety of his
Power, that he may lead them, and save them with his outstretched Arm, to the
confounding of the Heathen that know not God.

DEar Friends, gird up the Loins of your minds, and in the Faith and Patience
in Jesus stand still in the Light, and see the Salvation of God this day, who
has caused the Mountains and Hills that withstood his glorious arising to melt
like Wax, and to vanish as the untimely Fruit; he has divided the Waters, and
turned them on heaps, and has made way through them for the ransomed ones to
walk in his service where he has called; he has made the weak as strong as
David, before whom the uncircumcised has fallen, that has resisted the God of
Israel.

DEar Friends, let the Love of God constrain you to trust in him, and feel the
Birth of the Seed of God born up over all, to eat and feed of the Bread of
Life, that out of time and place, and over all visibles you may live and
rejoice over all hardships that would appear, and wrath that arises; all keep
the word of Faith in the Power of God, the Mountains shall fall before you,
more and more, and you shall tread down the Pride of the perverse and froward
Generation, in the patience and dominion of God forever; and let the strong
bear the Burden of the weak, that all in the unity of the Spirit, in the Power
of the Love of God grow up an holy Preisthood, offering up the Souls and Bodies
a living Sacrifice, in faithful Obedience to do the will of God.

In whose Name it is declared unto you, Dear Friends, in vain is it for Man to
strive to limit the holy one of Israel, or his Spirit in his People for if they
were as the Sand upon the Sea shore that seek to oppress and destroy you that
love God more then any thing in the World, yea then Life it self; fear not,
comfort your selves in the Light of his Countenance, for he will arise and
scatter in his wrath, as dust before the wind, all those that resist his
Spirit, and his righteousness will he establish in the Earth for ever.

And O Sion thy God reigns and thou shall seethy Enemies come bending to the
soles of thy Feet, and thy renown which shall go more and more over the Earth,
thy leaves shall heal the Nations, which shall walk in thy Light, and you shall
be known in all the Earth to be the City of the most high God, yea the
righteous Seed which the Lord has blessed, when the Faces of thine Enemies
shall be covered with shame, the Mouth of the Lord of Hosts has spoken it.

Let this be sent abroad amongst Friends with understanding in the Fear of God.
W. D.
York Tower the 19th 12th Mounth, 1660.
Dear Brethren,
ANd Suffering Members, dwelling in the Power and Life; glad your Hearts in the
unlimited Power of God, that in his strength you reign over all the Powers of
Darkness, in your keeping the word of Patience, in the Lord Jesus, who will
plead your cause in his righteous Judgments, when he will clear your Innocence
in the Faees of all his Enemies, to your eternal comfort, and the Glory of his
Name forever; lift up your Heads, this is the day that has been proclaimed in
your Ears, which our God hastes to finish, and cut short in righteousness for
his Name sake; the mighty God of Power keep you faithful to the end, Amen.

W. D.
19th 12th month. 1660.
DEar faithful Friends in God, 1661
who has known the day in your Travels, that not any thing has been dear to
you, not Life it self, that you might enjoy the Light of the Countenance of
God, which he has now manifested in the everlasting Covenant of his Light in
Christ, which now constrains, in the Power of our Royal Life, born of the
noble Seed, to stand out, over and above all flattering Tongues, and all
threatings and wrath of Men, which will be more and more manifest, before this
day of trial be over; and what wrath ever the Lord suffers to arise in the
Powers of the Earth, without he moves, do not any seek to stop it, let God have
the glory, the wrath of Man turns to the praise of God, and the remainder he
will restrain, while the royal Babes in Meekness and Patience stand still, and
gives glory to God in faithful obedience, with Life to Death, if the Lord call
for it, who has blessed the labor of all he called into the Vineyard of God,
in whom my Bowels is enlarged, in the strength of the Life I have received of
the Father: Oh, feel me, for I am with you, filled with joy in the Lord, that
his royal Birth is brought forth, and the Captive set free, the Tongue of the
Dumb loosed, and the living Power of God raised, to offer up living praises on
the holy Altar of God, in the Asemblies of his Saints: Oh, lift up your Heads;
be glad in the strength of the Lord, in this day of gathering the good ripe
Fruit in the Vineyard of the Lord; now does the Vines abound with Virtue,
laden with Clusters of the purest Grapes full ripe, which drops abundantly with
the Wine renewed in the Kingdom of the Father: Oh, fill your Cups, be not
straightened in your Spirits to receive of the fullness of God, in whom I am
constrained to say unto you in the Light, drink, drink abundantly, let the
Thirst of the immortal Birth earnestly in the Light reach forth it self, to
draw more and more the infinite Life, that it may comprehend you in the Power
of it self, that in its strength your Hearts may be set free over all below,
and your Spirit in the Light and Life, raised in the Heavenly Harmony, to
praise and glorify the Name of the Lord in eternal unity, to the astonishment
of all that know not God, whose Hearts shall fail before the Life of God, which
keeps all that abide in it, with what ever he gives, low in his fear, that
neither Heights nor Depths, Tribulations or Distress, Persecution or Famine, or
Nakedness, Peril or Sword, Life nor Death* things present, nor things to come,
can never separate the royal Birth from its faithful obedience to Christ Jesus
the Light, and dwell out of time and place, and over all Creature enjoyments,
in the unlimitted Power to guide, that your words be few and savory at all
times, whether in Bonds, or out of Bonds, to minister Grace to the Hearers, and
be tender affectionate one toward another, in the pure chaste Love of God, all
to lie down together in the eternal unity, one in the fullness, in the most high
God over all, blessed for ever.

Farewell, your Brother W. D.
From the Tower in York, the 25 th of the first Month, 1661.
Let this go abroad amongst all the afflicted and wounded in Spirit, with care
send this to them.
DEar Child which Cries over all the World, and beyond all the Pleasure, Pomp,
and Vanity therein, for the enjoyment of the Light and Countenance of God, fear
thou not, neither be thou discouraged, because of the violent assaults of the
Enemy, who seeks to draw thee into the carnal reasonings of thy Spirit, and in
it to kindle a fire to thy self, and caus^s thee to walk in the Light of the
sparks that thou have kindled, (and this thou have at the hand of the Lord in
thy going from his Counsel) thou lies down in sorrow, few knows thy great
distress, but to the Lord it is known, and them that has walked in the same
Paths.

Oh, thou Dear, and afflicted Soul who lives in the deep sense of the working
of the evil one in thy mind, and many times is ready to say, Never was any like
unto me, neither any Sorrow like unto my Sorrow; and in this Languishing,
Disparing, Morning of thy Soul, all things is made bitter to thee, as the
waters of Marah; thus art thou driven from all comfort, as a Child without a
Father, and a desolate Widow without a Husband, and as a Stranger that no Eye
pitieth, (in thy apprehension) sometimes saying in thy Heart, in the heat of
the temptation, and the Fire thou have kindled.

Oh, that I had been any Creature but what I am, or if it were the will of the
Lord that he would shorten my days, that I might not be any longer on Harth to
Sin against him; for in thy own ^ence, and feeling, thou walking in the sparks
thou have kindled, in carnal reasonings, thou descerns not any thing but Wrath,
Horror, Misery and Distress on every side, and great languishings, secretly
crying out in thy Heart; Oh, that I were alone in the Wilderness, or in any
Cave, or Den in the Earth, that I might never see nor hear any of the Sons of
Men any more, but in the secret retiredness, even Roar and Mourn out my days
until I dye.

Oh, thou Child of the morning of the pure eternal day of the God of Israel,
hearken no longer to the Enemy, who says, there has none traviled where thou
art, nor none drunk of the Cup that thou art drinking; he is a Liar who goes
about to destroy thy precious Soul; In the Word of the Lord God, I declare unto
thee, I drunk the same Cup, with my faithful Friends, who are born of the royal
Seed, every one in their measure have traveled in the same path, and has
endured the same temptations, and walked in the Light of the same sparks, and
layn down in Sorrow, in the sense of the same misery, as thou mourns under this
day.

No longer lend an ear unto the Enemy, and the thoughts of thy Heart, arise,
arise in the Light of the Covenant, and stay thy Heart, and the Lord God he
will throw down the Enemy of thy peace, destroy the carnal reasonings of thy
mind, put out the Fire that thou ha^t kindled, and he will deliver thee forth
of the horrible Pit, and set thy Feet upon the Rock of Ages, and thou shall
tread down the Enemy of thy Soul, in the sensible feeling of the Bowels of the
love of the Father, who will manifest himself, to be a Father to the Fatherless
in thee, and a Husband to that mournful Widow, and a comfort to that Immortal
Babe that mourned in thee, in the uprightness of thy Heart, to do the will of
the living God; so in the Power of his might stay thy Heart, and tread upon all
Doubts, Fears, dispairing Thoughts, Questionings, Reasonings, Musings,
Imaginations, and Consultings; arise over them all in the Light in Christ, he
will lead thee into the Banqueting House of the pleasure of our God, where thou
shall sit down with me, and all the redeemed of my Father, who are born of the
immortal Seed, and have passed through great Tribulations, and have washed our
Garments, and made them white in the Blood of the Lamb; therefore do we now
stand before the Throne of God, praising him Day and Night in his holy Temple;
and this shall be the Portion of thy Cup, if thou diligently hearken to the
Counsel of the Lord, which calls thee to trust in him, he will embrace thee in
the Arm of his Love, and thou shall praise his Name forever.

God Almighty in his Light and Life raise up thy Soul, and establish thy Heart
in his Counsel, steadfastly to wait his Power to lead thee, (in the Cross) out
of all unbelief, and cause thee to lie down at rest, in obedience to his will,
where thou shall drink the Cap of the Salvation of God forever, Farewell. W. D.
From the Spirit of the Lord, given forth in York Castle the 23 d of the 3 d
Month, 1661.
Oh King, hear the Word of the Lord God, which came unto me about the sixth
hour in the morning of the 20th day of the third Month, 1661. Thus says the
Lord through his Servant.
OH, fear and dread the Name of the eternal God, who has Created and Preserved
thee, by the Arm of his mighty Power, and saved thee in the hollow of his Hand,
in the day of thy great Distress, when he Corrected that Family, and all the
Nation, that they might walk humbly before him; and who did humble themselves
before him, his Presence did appear with them, but when they departed from the
lowliness of his Spirit, and promised fair things, and did not perform in the
uprightness of their Hearts, according to their words, though they were never
so Invincible, for Strength, and clothed with Policy and Wisdom of this World,
the Lord has, and w^ll break them down by the Arm of his mighty Power, and
catches them in their own Craft, and overthrows them in their own Devices, and
not any can deliver themselves out of his mighty Hand, he breaks them as the
Pot-sherds of the Earth, and makes their Names rot and perish among Men, and
stink in the Nostrils of the upright in Heart; thus he sets up to try Man if he
will give him glory of his Works, and when he kicks against him, his Maker, he
breaks him down in his Wrath, and overthrows him in his fierce Displeasure;:
And this is the Work of the mighty God, who has preserved thee in safty,
whilst Destruction and Calamity was on every side, that now thou have seen a
Cloud of Witnesses before thine Eyes; that in this day thou art set on the
Throne, wherein he is trying and proving of thee, that thou may, by what thou
have seen, dread his Name, and wait in his Counsel, the Light of his Spirit,
which is his Law in thy Heart and Conscience, that lets thee see thou art but
Dust; and if thou watch unto it, and wait upon him in it, thou will see the
secret evil of thine Heart, which if thou look up to him in the Light of his
Spirit, and in the uprightness of thine Heart judge the evil in thee with his
Light, and in it wait on him to be guided in the true lowliness and humility of
his Spirit, to seek alone his glory, and nothing for thy self, but wait upon
him, to be an Instrument in his Hand, that he may govern and order thee in all
his ways; then will he enlighten thy understanding, and seal unto thee his
secret Counsel, and give thee to see through all that profess his Name, and
know him not, and what his true Worship is; and he will let thee see what is
Idolatry, and what is the Worship which his presence shall accompany all that
are found faithful therein, and which he will defend with his Power against all
opposers, and none shall prosper that devise mischief against them that are
faithful to him, in this his Worship which is declared to thee, to be pure
obedience to his Spirit, which cleanses the Heart, and purifies the
Conscience; and this is his Worship he has determined in his unchangeable and
heavenly Decree to establish in the Earth, and over all Nations it shall stand,
he will scatter all as Dust, that seek to oppress his People, and resist the
rising of his glory, and thou shall certainly know the Mouth of the Lord of
Hosts has spoken it: Which if thou turn thy mind within, to his Counsel in
thee, and in dilligent* watchfulness incline thine Ear to his pure Spirit, that
calls for Righteousness in thy Heart and Conscience, and be obedient with
boldness to walk in the strait way of the daily Cross, and deny the evil that
accompanies the day, and answer his requirings, what he makes known unto thee;
then will he guard thee with the Power of his heavenly and dreadful Presence,
and will make thee a terror to evil doers, that a Liar or an Unclean person
shall not be found in thy House, nor any worker of Iniquity shall be able to
stand before thee, he will Cloth thee with Wisdom, and thou shall be able to
Judge all Causes that is brought before thee in Righteousness; then will thou
put away all Sports, Plays, Pastimes, Drunkenness, Uncleanness, and whatever
grieveth his Spirit, forth of thy sight, and cleanse the Land of it, through
thy faithful walking with God, who has made thee a Son of Affliction from thy
Youth, that thou might learn to fear his Name, which if thou do, he will make
thee a Terror to all Nations round about, that devise mischief against thee;
the Angels of his presence will pitch their Tents about thee, thou standing in
his Counsel, and giving Liberty to his Sons and Daughters, as he moves them by
his Spirit, to walk in his Service, who is the mighty God that requires this
of thee, that thou do not lay a Bond upon the Spirits of his People, in matters
of Worship, as to force all to one Uniformity; for thou have seen before thine
Eyes, that the Kings and Princes of this Wo^ld, that have sought so to do, have
brought much innocent Blood upon them who have been seeking by their outward
Power, to establish Sion with Blood, and Jerusalem with Iniquity; thus has his
People been Slain from day to day, in the Nations that have been building
Babel, in whom is found the Blood of the Saints and Martyrs of Jesus, and all
that is Slain upon the Earth, for whose sake he is now risen, to plead the
Cause of those that fear him, and walk humbly before him.

And this he requires of thee, in all things to mind his Law in thy Heart, to
do unto others as thou would be done unto, if thou wast in their places, and
they in thine; and let mercy be found in thy Hands to all people (as thou have
found mercy at the Hands of the Lord) yea, to thy Enemies, and in what thou
may, live in Peace with all Men; and in all thy undertakings seek not thy
self, let the glory of God be the Object of thy mind, and wait to feel his Hand
leading thee in what thou do, which if thou stand in his Counsel, to do as
he requires of thee, to mind thy Place, and to keep the people in Peace, and
punish Sin and Wickedness, and give free Liberty for the Lord, with his Spirit
to Rule in the Consciences of his people, as he orders them, to meet in his
fear, and witness forth his mind where he leads them, without restraint; and no
more be given like Lambs to the Slaughter, and driven to Prison like Sheep to
the Fold; but to have free Liberty in their peaceable lives to serve him their
God; then will he raise his Name in thy Fathers House, and make thee a nursing
Father unto his People, and thou shall partake of the Blessings with them that
fear him, and all the World shall be amazed to hear of his dreadful appearance,
for his people that obey his Spirit in this Nation, which shall convince both
Jew and Gentile, that the mighty God is risen to manifest his Power to them
that fear him in this Nation, and these Northren Countries; and the day is very
near wherein it shall be no more said, the Lord lives that brought up the
Children of Israel out of the Land of Egypt, but the Lord lives that brought
up and led the Seed of the House of Israel out of the North-Country.

Oh, King, let his goodness constrain thee, and all in thy Family, to humble
your selves before him; what could he have done for thee more then he has
done? has he not been thy relief in thy greatest straits? now let his goodness
engage thee to answer what he requires of thee, then will he make thee one of
the number of his Elect and Chosen, and thy days will be ful^ of gladness, and
thy Soul shall live forever in the Kingdom of glory with all the redeemed, who
are led with his Spirit; but if thou reject his counsel, his law in thy Heart,
and not regard his Spirit in thy inward parts, but hearken to the counsel of
thy own Heart, and the wit and policy of the spirit of this World, and so set
up thy self on high, and rob God of his Glory, and give up his people as they
have been to be pulled out of their peaceable Meetings, and haled to and fro,
as Sheep that are slaying all the day long in tumults distresses, afflictions,
stonings, stripes, prisons and death, and set up proud covetous Men that know
not God, to be Teachers in the Land, which draw people into Idolatry,
worshipping they know not what; so the Blind leading the Blind they both fall
into great wickedness, which grieveth the Spirit of God, and the liberty which
is given to Plays, Sports, and Pastimes, which draw people into drunkenness,
uncleanness, and great abomination; and if they be not reformed by thee, but
suffered to go on as they have been, this will be thy portion as he has
multiplied on thee his mercies to astonishment of the people and Nations round
about; so will he stretch out the Arm of his Power against thee, and get
himself the glory, in his mighty Judgments, which shall be revealed in the
great and terrible day of his fierce wrath, wherein he will cleanse the Land of
all that rob him of his glory and reject his counsel, the Light of his Spirit
in their Consciences, and thou shall certainly know, the Mouth of the Lord has
spoken it through his Servant, which in faithfulness to thy Soul, oh King, has
not hid the Counsel of God from thee, but greatly desires thy eternal welfare,
and in patience waits, that Righteousness may be established in the Earth, who
is known by name William Deusbery, Prisoner at the date hereof, in the common
Goal at York, for the Word of God, and the Testimony of Jesus Christ.

But before this could be sent unto thee with a private and safe Hand, I was
set at Liberty, with some other of my Brethren, by thy late Proclamation, which
we own as an Act of Justice; now if thou let Bonds be laid no more upon the
Consciences of the people of God, but as before written, they may serve their
God in free liberty of his Spirit; thou will then find a hiding place in this
terrible day of Vengeance, which will be manifest in England, and so to the
astonishment of all the World, for not any Man that lives contrary to God, but
he shall roar under the heavy Judgments of the fiery wrath of the Lamb of God,
whom the Father will reveal in Flames, rendering Vengeance upon all that know
him not, and obey not the Gospel of Jesus Christ; for God will make England as
the Garden of Eden, and Wickedness shall not reign therein; then shall it be a
blessing to all Nations, and thou shall know assuredly he is faithful and true,
who has revealed these things to his Servant, that desires thy everlasting
felicity and happiness in thy obedience to Christ Jesus the Light, who lights
every Man that comes into the World, and now is the Father revealing him to
Judge every one according to the deeds done in the Body, etc.

W. D.

Dear Friends and Sisters,
BOrn of the birth of the immortal Seed of the most high God, who has not any
Life but in his presence, nor refreshment but in the Light of his Countenance,
you are the Children of the dayspring which is from on high; lift up you Heads
in the Light of the everlasting Covenant, in it feel the drawings of the love
of the Father, whose Bowels earns toward you, who has remembered you in all
your Ret^rements, Mournings, Cries and Tears, in the days when you were weeping
and seeking the Lord your God, seeking the way to Sion, with your Faces
thitherwards; now in the acceptable day of the Lord, in the Light has he
gathered you, that you might satisfy the thirst of your Souls, and the hunger
of you Spirits, in the Ocean and Fountain of Life which is opened for you all
to drink; yea drink abundantly of the infinite Mercies of the Eternal God, oh,
feel the earnings of his Bowels, that when you were Enemies, he gave his only
Son for you, and now he spreads his Arms forth in this day of acceptance to
embrace every Prodigal, and set free every Captive, and purge every Conscience,
and wash every Garment of those that cannot live but in his pure Life: Oh, the
strength of the Bowels and Mercies of the God of all Compassions, who has
resisted the proud, and given Grace to the Humble, who has opened his Ear to
the Cry of the Poor, and has heard the Groans of the Needy, and has prepared
his Table, and richly furnished it with the fatness of his House, that all that
cannot live without him, may in his Light return, and wait upon him and he will
embrace you in the Marriage union, in Christ Jesus, in whom he will Cloth you
with the wedding Garment of his own righteousness; in the power of his love you
all his dear Children to sit down, and eat and drink the Flesh and Blood of
Jesus Christ, which will fill you with virtue, and cause you to grow fruitful
Branches in the Vineyard of God, in whom the Father will crown you with the
Glory of his pure Li^e, and cloth you with the Garment of Innocence, and
beautify you with the excellency of his Majesty, to grow in eternal Unity, to
finish your Testimony in faithfulness to the Lord God, in his Light over all,
blessed forever.

And all you chosen Jewels of the Lord, whom he has made up in this his
powerful Day, to stand living Witnesses of his glorious Name, in the sight of
all People and Nations of the World, whom the Lord calls to bear your Testimony
in the glorious Resurrection of his Life, which he has raised up in (...)* in
his Light, as moved of the Lord; arise in his (...) every one to clear your
Spirits with boldness in his Innocent Life; let no difficulty stand before you;
in the Majesty of the Power of God tread down Satan under your feet, that
would let or hinder any of you that are truly constrained of the Lord to
declare his Name in any Country, Nation or Island, where the Lord God leads,
for the mighty God will prosper you that retain the sense of your poverty as in
self, that his powerful Life may stream forth in the glory of his own
brightness, to the enlightening of the People that have sat in Darkness, that in
the path of Life they may walk to the Praise of the Mighty God.

And all you called of God, from the least to the highest growth, wait in the
Power of the endless Life of the most high, to cover you in it; be valiant to
keep your Meetings in the Name of the Lord, that every one may feel the streams
of the Fountain of Virtue in Christ the Light, refreshing you all, and filling
you his Vessels with the Virtue of his heavenly Life: And when the Living God
fills you with the overcoming Power of his Love, and moves any of you, in the
broken Heart, and contrition of Spirit to offer up the Sacrifice of Prayer or
Praises, or any other exercise in the Congregation of his holy People: This is
laid upon me in the Name of the Lord, to lay it upon thee whoseever thou art,
that thou quench not his Spirit; let the Lord God glorify his name through
thee; let not thy mind look out from the Lord, as to mind the presence of any
of his there, for streightning of thee in thy obedience to God, and in thy
faithfulness thy Talent shall be increased; so look not at thy weakness, but at
Gods strength, and at thy clearness before the Lord, and this in the Name of
the Lord I lay upon every particular Soul, to wait in singleness, for the Lord
to exercise thee with clearness in his sight, in every motion and breathing of
thy Spirit, in the measure life received of God, for he is come to silence all
Flesh, and set Israel free; in the strength of his Life to deliver his
Captives, and to cause the Fetters to fall off that which has been bound, to
lift up the Head which has been bowed down in Israel, and to loose the Tongue
of the Dumb, to cause the Mouths of the Babes to praise him, and the Tongues of
the Sucklings to speak forth his wonderful works: So arise, you that have
groaned, for a day of freedom; and you that have been as Vessels ready to burst
for want of venting, and have said in your Hearts, I fear I shall not be born;
so have thou gone in mournfulness of thy spirit, as a child disobedient to thy
God, but let it be so no more, least thy Talent be taken from thee.

So all Children keep your Eye with God, and with clearness answer him in every
motion in his everlasting Power, then will the Lord cause his Light to shine in
the brightness of his glory, which will stop all forward and dry Spirits, which
is hasty to utter words before the Lord; so will Israel be full of virtue, and
the Churches be covered with the glory of the most high, in the savory Life
which shall reign forever; and in it be tender one over another, to restore one
another in the Spirit of meekness, let your Bowels be enlarged to the poor, and
let your Compassions flow to the helpless and the needy, whether in the inward
of the outward man, and the God of all Compassions cloth you with the Garment
of his virtue, to his Praise and Glory.

And all you valiant Vessels, and Ancients in Israel, how have you refreshed
the Children of the most high God in your travells, in the strength of the
Almighty, in the gathering the great multitudes of the Israelites of our God,
to behold his glory in the Light of the Son; all put on the excellent Garment
of the feeling virtue more and more, that by pure Judgments, the healing tender
Spirit, be placed in Israel, that if any that comes forth with us be struck
with the Adversary, that would weaken them from walking in the Path of life:
Oh, you Ancients in Israel, who were willing to lay down your lives to gather
them to the Light, in that Life feel your bowels open to support them in the
hour of Temptation, and draw them in the pure Judgment which is surrounded with
Mercy, so will the excellency of the Glory of God be your Crown, which to my
great comfort, in measure, I feel set upon your heads this day, that so the
tender bowels of the true Shephard may abound in you, who leaves the ninety and
nine; to seek the lost and strayed of the House of Israel, who shall praise the
Lord to see the Ancient of days sitting amidst and amongst the Ancients of
Israel, clothing all with his meek, low, tender healing restoring Spirit, so
will the judgment committed to you be pure, and establishing Sion in her pure
holiness and freedom, then will few be lost or scatered in the Israel of God,
and the Children will be bold to speak forth the mind of the Lord in prayer or
praises, or what exercise they are called unto in the presence of his People;
and you who have traveled for the freedom of Sion's Children, which will
become as a Family of Prophets, every one prophesying one by one, as the Lord
gives utterance; and the Ancient of days governing you, and all his Israel, to
judge in righeousness, in which the Spirits of the Prophets is subject to the
Prophets in this day of the freedom of Sion, whom the Lord is exalting over all
in his heavenly dominion, to reign to his praise forever.

And all you Saints in Light, what tribulation soever arises in the Earth, as
for the Testimony whereunto we are called of God, look not forth from the Lords
Power in you, but every one abide in your Tents, in the measure of his powerful
Life, and you will feel the Ancient of days in and with every one of you, to
lead you on in the Testimony whereunto you are called in the Light, with
boldness to endure the trial, till you all have finished that whereunto you are
called in Christ the Light, who is come in his Saints to judge the World, and
to break down the wickedness thereof with the Breath of his Mouth, and the
Brightness of his coming in his heavenly Authority to clear his Peoples
Innocence, in all he calls unto, to the confounding of the unrighteous
Generation, whom he will tread upon as Mortar, and bring to naught whatever
will not have his righteous Life to reign; for the Kingdom of this World shall
become the Kingdom of our Lord, and of his Christ; and he shall break the
battle out of the Earth; his Government shall be over all, and of his Dominion
shall be no end, the Mouth of the Lord of Hosts has spoken it through his
Servant, who remains your Brother, and Companion, in Tribulation in the Kingdom
and Patience of Jesus Christ.

W. D.
Given forth the 8 th Month, in Newgate Prison, 1661.
DEar Children of the most high God, dwell in his eternal Power, to keep your
Habitation in the Light, to stand over, above, and atop of all that is contrary
to the Will of God; in the living Faith tread down Satan under your feet,
trample upon him as the Valiant Lambs of the Lord, that in his holy Mountain
you may dwell together, in his eternal powerful Dominion Reign over all that
would vail you from the full enjoyment of the Life of God; and in the strength
of the Son of God, walk together in his pure Life, comfort one another in
bearing the Burdens of the Weak, and gently leading them in the Power of God,
that they may sit down in the holy Mountain of God, with them that have
overcome in the Name of the Lord Jesus, to offer up an acceptable Sacrifice in
the pure operating Life, in the strength of the Power and Wisdom of God, to
stand out of all dead Formality, in the Life to feel the Lord Rule in you, and
amongst you, to guide you in his Wisdom, that if any Simple heart, through
weakness, should utter words out of the savory Life, in what you may, bear it
in the Meeting, and after speak to them, to restore them with the Spirit of
meekness, that so in Love and Unity you all may grow in the Wisdom of the
Father, as dear Children in all things, doing to one another as you would be
done unto, in singleness of Heart in the sight of God, freely Ministering
according to your Ability, both to the inward and outward Man, to the Re^ief of
your Brethren and Sisters that are in need, that God may take pleasure to dwell
in the midst of you, to fill you all with his comfortable Presence, to his
Praise and Glory for ever.

W. D.
Newgate Prison London, the 13 th day of the 12 th Month, 1661.
Dear Brethren and Sisters,
BOrn of the Birth of the Morning of the powerful Day of God, abide in the
powerful Life, satisfy your Souls with the fullness of the Presence of God, in
your faithful watchfulness in his Light, let no Dalilah allure you from his
fear, least the Philistine bind you, and the Uncircumcised come over you, to
the sorrow of your Hearts: In the Light and Life of God arise, let no stain
come upon you, let the Righteous Garment of the Son of the Day cover you, and
in the glory of his Light and Life you all walk and shine in the glory of the
brightness of the Father of everlasting Mercy, Comfort and eternal Salvation,
to you his dear Children, that dread and fear before him, and delight your
Hearts alone in him; keep your Meetings in his Power, that in it you be all
bound up in his Life, his virtue to feel in the strength of his Love, filling
every one of you, that in the overflowings you may refresh one another, that in
the unity in the powerful Life, you grow to the eternal praise and glory of the
powerful God of Virtue; that his Name be magnified in and amongst you, over all
God blessed for ever; his powerful presence more and more fill you, and
overcome you, that the strength of his Love and Wisdom may govern you, and
build you up in the Life of Love, Farewell.

Let Copies of this be sent all abroad in the Meetings of the Church of the
living God. W. D.
Given forth the 28 th of the 6 th Month 1661. at Beckrins Park in
Bedfordshire.
Dear beloved Friends,
OF the noble Seed, born of the Birth of the excellent Life in Christ the Son
of the most high God, in his Eternal Power wait to keep your estate with God,
in the measure of his Life, to feel his Almighty presence leading through every
condition, to the establishing the Soul in his eternal Wisdom, to walk with
him, that not any take their flight in the Winter, nor on the Sabbath day, but
in the amidst of the Winter Storms (whether in the inward or outward Man, or
both) seek not to flee in the least measure, from the Light and Power of the
Lord, to get any ease, but as it is handed in God; for woe to them that take
their flight in the Winter, or on the Sabbath day: And when you are in the
Winter, or in the Sabbath, does the Enemy work to get entertainment, to cause
you to flee from the leading Power of God; which if he prevails in the Winter,
your flight is into Unbelief, and Dispairing thoughts, Hardships and
Difficulties, to cause you to Faint, and draw back to Perdition: But all dear
faithful Vessels of the Lord, to whom his Power is known, in the Light (all of
you) wait on the Lord, in the middst of the stormy Winter, the Lord has, and
will keep you in the Word of his Patience, in which he has made you his chosen
Jewels, to stand in his mighty Power, which has caused his Renown to sound
over the Earth, in leading of you even unto Blood, others to the spoiling of
their Goods, some Imprisoned even until Death, in the meekness and patience of
the Lamb of God, who in tender Bowels has remembered you, and answered the
Cries and Supplications of his people, that have been poured forth in the
behalf of you faithful Sufferers, for the Name of the Lord, who in measure has
caused the fierce Winter storms, in the outward (many times) to cease, that a
Sabbath of rest, in measure, you may come to enjoy, etc.

Dear chosen renownable Children of the most high God, which not any Winter
storms could move from your stedfastness in the Lord: This is laid upon me to
write to you, that all diligently watch to the Light of the Lord, that the
Enemy do not enter with his Temptations, as to cause any to take your flight on
the Sabbath day, into security, which will draw into a customary Formality, and
into an easeful mind, that will vail and darken the understanding, and cause
dryness and barrenness in the inward Man; which will quench the first Love, and
cause the Innocent to suffer, and bring a greater exercise, then all the storms
that have been endured from the hard-hearted Children of Men, etc.

In the Name of the Lord, all stand armed against the subtle Enemy of your
Souls Peace, with the Light judge him, in the Power of God trample and tread
down Satan under your Feet; that in the pure humble Spirit of Life in Christ,
you all be kept and grow in unity in the depths of the Love of the Father, that
his Virtue and Life abound in you, to bind you up in eternal oneness with
himself, and one another, to serve the Lord with singleness of Heart, in
faithful obedience in the Cross, that the Crown of the glorious Dominion may
rest upon you, to the glory of the Name of the Lord for ever.

Farewell, your Brother W. D.
Given forth in Newgate Prison, London, the 11 th day of the 12 th Month, 1661.
Dear beloved Brethren and Sisters,
BOrn of the noble Birth of the God of our strength, in whom my Soul rests with
you in the Life of God; oh, let us in true humility be glad in him, and strong
in the Power of his Love and Life, in these trying days to keep our
Habitations in God, that in our faithfulness to him, comfort may flow to all
the Babes, Lambs and Children of our Father, through all who know his loving
kindness abounding, in the secrecy of the depth of his Love, in the new
Covenant of Light, which stands in his own faithfulness; all that wait in his
fear will feel your strength renewed from day to day, in the Resurrection of
his Glory, Power and Dominion, with him to dwell and reign over self, and tread
down Satan under your Feet, in the Unfathamab^e depth of the Love and Life in
God, that his own Virtue may stream it self into every Vessel more and more, to
make these transcendant excellencies to appear to be of God, in the brightness
of his glory to shine forth in the strength of his Incomprehensible Love, and
tender feeling Compassions, to the strengthening the weak and feeble minded, and
enlivening that which is ready to die, that in the feeling enjoyed Life in
Christ, the Babes and Children of the Lord be raised in eternal unity, to grow
up in the Heavenly Dominion of the Lord God of our Righteousness, him to obey
with boldness in the strait way of self-denial, and daily Cross, in
faithfulness unto the end; and watch one over another with a single Eye,
building up one another in the holy Faith, opening your Hearts in the free
Spirit of God, to them that are in need, that ye may bear the Image of the
Heavenly Father, who relieveth the Hungry, and eases the Burdened, and makes
glad in refreshing his in the time of need, giving liberally, and upbraideth
not; even so be it with you in the Name of the Lord, says your Brother and
Companion in the Lord Jesus Christ:

Farewell. W. D.
Given forth in Newgate Prison, London, the 16 th day of the 12 th Month, 1661.
Dear suffering Brethren,
ANd Companions in the Tribulations and Kingdom of Patience in Christ Jesus, in
him Watch and Pray, and believe in his Name, that you may keep the Word of his
Patience, in the Will of God quietly lie down in your present Sufferings, for
the Word of God and Testimony of Jesus Christ, who numbers the days of your
Sufferings, and when they are accomplished, will plead the Cause of his People
in the day he will be revealed in flames of Fire, rendering Vengeance upon all
that know him not, and obey not the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ; then shall
your Innocence with all the Elect be cleared, in the sight of all people, and
you shall shine as the Morning Stars in the Power of God, to enlighten the
people of the Nations, through the brightness of the glory of God that shall
rest upon you, to the gathering the Brethren from far, and the Sisters from the
ends of the Earth, who shall bless the Name of the Lord for ever, for you that
endure in faithfulness unto the end, the Crown of glory shall rest upon you,
forever.

The eternal God in his everlasting Power keep you in the deep Life of his Son,
in unity to finish your Testimony to his Glory: Farewell, W. D.
Given forth in Newgate Prison, London, the 13 th day of the 12 th Month, 1661.
Dear Lambs keep in the unity, in the Life and Power of God, and let your words
be few.

W. D.



Dear Friends,
THe Eternal God of rest and peace is amongst you, in him Rule over all that
would draw from the everlasting Power and peace in God, his peace be with you
in his Light, Power and Life, to establish you, that in the first love you grow
in unity, and in it reign to the endless praises and glory of the God of peace
and the comfort of one another forever.

Even so be it with you, says my Soul, in the Name of the Lord. Farewell, W. D.
London, Newgate Prison the 12 th day of the 12 th Month, 1661.
Dear Brethren, and chosen Vessels of my Father,
HOw do you comfort my Heart in your faithful obedience to the God of our
Salvation; lift up your Heads you blessed Lambs of the holy God, dwell in his
love, and delight your Hearts in the Light of his Countenance continually, and
in the Life of the Lord let your love abound one toward another, that in the
strength thereof you may comfort one another in these trying days, and with the
Light judge every thought that would streighten you* for drinking in the
fullness of the virtue of God, that so you may all fill your Hearts with
gladness, and keep the word of his patience, till the time determined God will
work your deliverance, with all his Elect, to his praise and glory forever.
Fare you well; your Brother,

W. D.
25 th day 11 th Month 1661.
Dear Brethren,
GReat is the charge that is committed to you, as to your watchfulness over
your own Hearts, and the great people amongst whom you are placed; Oh, you
Brethren, walk in the unity in the Life of God, it will be the great comfort of
them chosen Jewels of God in that place; the strength of the Life and Love of
God will wait to cover you, it will flow through you in the unity as a River,
to water the Garden of God, and cause it to grow full of the fruit of the
Spirit, which is Love, Joy, Goodness, Peace against which their is no Law; so
shall your names be honorable in Israel, and many shall bless and praise the
Name of the Lord for your watchfulness, meekness and lowliness, and tender love
in the Power of God, to build the decayed Walls of Sion, and repair her
desolate places, to the rejoycings of all that love the Lord our God.

His Powerful Presence be with you and bind you up as one in his Life in all
your undertakings for the comfort of Sion; and the Blessing of the Almighty God
be with you, and rest upon you, to his Glory forever. Your Brother, W. D.
From Newgate Prison the 5 th day of the 9 th month, 1661. This was writ and
directed to several Friends in Bristol.



Dear Friends in God,
ALL in the measure abide, that in the unlimitted power and life in his Kingdom
you stand to keep your dominion in his heavenly authority, these trying days,
wherein Husband is called to forsake Wife, Wife Husband, Parents Children, and
Children Parents, and other Creature-enjoyments for the Testimony of the Name
of the Lord: so all you Families of God, that are, or shall be called to bear
your Testimony, prize the mercy of the Lord, who has made you his chosen
Jewels, and the first fruits amongst many Brethren, to fulfill the measure of
the sufferings that is yet behind; in the name and power of the Lord Jesus
arise, whether Husband, Wife, Parents or Children, in bonds or out of bonds,
and take to you the sharp threshing Instrument, which is the Power of God, that
you may thresh inwardly all the Mountains of thoughts, fears or unbelief,
representation of all hardships, and every desire and imagination that would
draw from a peaceable rest in God in the Name of the Lord; I lay it upon you,
be valiant for your Freedom, and with the powerful Instrument of God thresh and
bruise down the Mountains as chaff and dust, and thresh upon the head of the
great red Dragon, the old Serpent, the Devil, and spare him not, and be not
afraid of encountering, for mighty is the Lord that has called you to conquer
him; so keep his head under with the threshing Instrument bruise down and keep
under all that would disquiet you, or draw you from your rest, that so in peace
in Christ you all may abide, in a pure resignation to the will of the Father,
that in the Habitation of peace in his Kingdom, you in his dominion reign over,
above and atop of all below the Light, so will your joy flow as a River, your
triumph and dominion in the authority of God, over all the Mountains of this
World, within and without, in the Mountain of the holy Life in Christ to reign,
admire and sound out (in the low mind and holy fear) the new song with
triumph, over the Devil and his Angels, and the accuser of the Brethren, which
you will see cast down, and you shall tread upon him, and bruise him under (and
all that would join with him) with the sharp threshing Instrument, the mighty
Power of God which you have received in Christ the Light, and in all things you
do one for another, let love abound in the Innocent Life in God, doing as you
would be done unto, in the sight of God; and you that are servants in Families,
which be in sufferings, I lay it upon you, be faithful that the good savor of
God be found amongst you, to the praise of the Lord; and you that are out of
bonds, in what you may, be assistant every way (as the Wisdom of God leads)
bearing one another burdens, to fulfill the Law of Christ who is taking to him
his great Power to reign forever, even the strength of the mighty God be with
you, and lift up all your Heads in his Authority to stand, and to keep the word
of his Patience, to finish your Testimony to the praise and glory of his Name,
over all blessed forever, of whose Dominion there is no end, in which you dear
Lambs may feel me, and read me in the Life, which is hid from the World, but
known to you in the secrets of God, where our eternal Joy and Triumph is for
ever; whatever becomes of the outward Man, in the Will of God farewell -- yea,
farewell in the Name of the Lord.

W. D.
Given forth in Newgate Prison, London, the 3 d day of the 1 st Month, 1661,
62.
Dear and chosen Vessels,
IN the Birth Immortal, which in you breathes through, over and above all the
Pomp, Pride, and Pleasure of the World, to enjoy the fullness of Life in Christ,
who lives forever; with the Light of the Lord judge all your own thoughts and
desires, which would draw from the Light, that in the Life of God, you reign
over all Doubts, Fears, Cares, Representations of evil, and hardships which
would look you in the Face in this trying day, which is now manifest to the
sight of all people that fear the Lord; all take heed of consulting with Flesh
and Blood, or suffering an evil Spy to go forth in the reach of your Sense,
reason, to foresee how you may pass through such trials as may appear to your
Sense; if you hearken to these reasonings, you go from the Light, and so will
be weakened in your spiritual Travel, as Israel was in the days of old. So all
dear Lambs, and chosen Vessels in the Light of the Lord wait to receive his
strength, to tread down every motion that is out of the Life of the voice of
Christ, the high Priest over the household of God, you all hear and feel, who
says, in his Light believe in the Name of the Lord, and you shall see his
mighty Works brought to pass, while you stand still in Obedience and Peace with
the Lord, and he will clear your Innocence, and smite the Hearts of them that
devise mischief against you; so shall you behold the Lord in his glory,
pleading your Cause with the raighty of the Earth, whom he will make to
confess, and say, it is in vain to afflict a People whom the Lord supports, or
to destroy whom the Lord God will save; for as it has been proclaimed in your
Ears, certainly it shall come to pass; the Lord will try all, that they may be
known who are born of him, for whom God will appear to carry through with joy
whatever he calls unto, and by his mighty Arm will bring deliverance unto us,
who cannot handle Sword nor Spear, neither trust in the Arm of Flesh, but in
the spiritual Power and Life in the Light, which he will exalt over all
contrary to him, so will he make his Name famous in the Earth, because of his
glory which he will reveal to cover the Earth, as the Waters cover the Sea; and
all ungodliness will be buried in the deep, and sink as a Stone to the bottom
thereof, and never rise aga^n over the Just; but the Righteous shall rejoice
that the Lord reigns, their Strength and Life blessed for ever: So all
Brethren and Sisters, lift up your Heads in the valiant Spirit of the Lamb,
which bears all things, and endures all things, 1662
that in his Light, Life and Power every particular reign over whatever is
contrary to him, and rest in peace in a faithful resignation to the heavenly
Will of the Lord; and in his Name meet, and his presence you will feel in the
midst of you, who will not suffer one hair of your Heads to perish, but which
is for his glory; and as you abide faithful to him for the eternal comfort of
our Souls for ever: so in Faith and Patience in the Power of the Lord, all in
your own measures received of God stand, stand still all in the pure unity with
the Lord, and with one another in his living Dominion rest in peace, God will
give you an answer of all your Prayers and Tears, an expected end in refreshing
your Souls with his Light, and Power and Life forever, in whom you shall sit
under your own Vines, and never more shall any make you afraid; the Mouth of
the Lord has spoken it, through your Brother in the Tribulation and Kingdom of
Patience in Christ:

Farewell. W. D.
From York Castle the 4 th of the 9 th Month, 1662.
Dear Lambs and Babes,
LIft up your Heads in the Light and Life of God, that you may keep the Word of
his patience, which will carry you up, over and above all the affl^ctions you
meet withal in this present World, for the Lord is dear over you, and your
lives are precious in his sight, who has called you to witness forth his
glorious Truth this day, through Tribulations and Afflictions to enter the
Kingdom: Oh, be bold and valiant in the Patience of the Lamb, and in the love
of his own Life, feel his virtue filling you, that in the eternal unity you may
grow Pillars in his Temple unmovable, to bear your faithful Testimony, to the
astonishment of the Enemies of Sion, and the praise and glory of the God of our
Strength, Life and Righteousness over all, who Reigns and Rules for ever;
and the God of Life bless, preserve and keep you in Unity and Love, over all in
his Life to Reign to his glory for ever:

Farewell; W. D.
From York Castle the 2 d of the 7 th Month, 1662.
Dear Suffering Brethren,
FOR the Testimony of the Name of the Lord, the strength of the Almighty God is
with you, and the eternal Crown of glory shall rest upon your Heads, that in
your faithful Obedience refreshes the Flock of the living God: Oh, lift up
your Heads you chosen Vessels, in the Light of the Lord arise up in his
Strength, and Reign over every thought, and whatever would streighten you of
drinking in of the fullness of the virtue of God, that you may always be fall
of the Power of the Spirit, to water the Plants, and build up the Feeble in
mind, and speak a word in due season to the Weary and Oppressed in Spirit, that
the Blind may see, and the Lame walk, and the tongue of the Dumb loosed, to
praise the Name of the Lord in the Assembly of his People, that the glory of
the Lord may be spread abroad, in and through you his chosen Vessels, whom the
Lord has called to be the First Fruits amongst many Brethren.

The eternal glory of the Lord rest upon you, and cover you, says your Brother
and Companion in the Name of the Lord.

W. D.
From York Castle the 21 th day of the 8 th Month, 1662.
Dear beloved Brethren and Sisters,
IN the eternal love of the Lord Jesus, Oh, my dear beloved ones, love the Lord
Jesus, and delight your Hearts in his Light, Power and Life of our beloved, who
has chosen you in his eternal love, to make known his everlasting Salvation in
the sight of all people, that he may get himself a Name over all, in carrying
you in your faithful Testimony, to the astonishment of all that know not God;
and exalting his glorious Name over all, and spreading his renown to the ends
of the Earth: Oh, be valiant my beloved Friends, in resisting the thoughts of
your own Hearts, that in the eternal depth of the love of God in Christ you
grow and abound, to the eternal comfort of one another, and the glory and
praise of God over all blessed for ever and ever; in which Farewell.

W. D.
York Castle the 17 th of the 1 st Month, 1662, 63.
To all the Faithful in CHRIST, Who Have stood in his Counsel the Light, to be
led in the Footsteps of the Flock of the Companions, and to all that profess
the Light of Christ to be their Guide: To you I write these following Lines, to
be seriously weighed, in the weighty and ponderous Spirit, wherein you may
discern a Discovery of a false Birth, in some, that came forth with us, as to
own the Light, in their Judgments, and go forth from us, in rejecting the
stroke of the pure judgments of God, through the working of the mystery of
iniquity, and so become as the untimely Birth, that does not see the Sun in his
glory, nor the beauty of Sion (who has passed through death un^o life) in her
comely unity in the Spirit and bond of peace: He that can receive it, let him,
n^w in the cool of ^he day, when Counsel may be hearkened unto, and rightly
understood in the Truth, as it is in Jesus.
DEar Friends, called and chosen of God, in the Eternal Light and Power of the
most high, who have been, and are his living Witnesses from the beginning of
the dawning of his powerful and glorious day of his dreadful appearance, which
has caused the Earth to shake, and the Keepers of the House to tremble in this
day of your visitation from on high. And all you that in true watch^ulness wait
on the Lord, in the measure of his life, you are sensible of what he did, has
done, and does, in the ordering of his dear and tender Children, as in the
subjection both of the inward and outward Man, in every exercise of the Spirit,
as in exhortation, prayer or praises, which the most high God has and does
accompany with his blessed presence, in which he has made all (that has kept
their Habitations in the powerful life of the first Love) to stand as Saviors
upon Mount Sion, to gather the scattered of Israel, and to bring again the
dispersed of Jacob: And this is the work of all that are truly sent of the Lord
to labor in his Vineyard, who seeks not their own things, neither sets up, nor
serves themselves with what the Lord has given unto them, but alone seeks the
glory of God, and serves him with uprightness of Heart, in the exercise of all
the Gifts and riches of his Grace, with which he has clothed them, to the
perfecting of his Praise and Glory, and the comfort of his Heritage forever:
therefore do they shine as the Stars in the Firmament of Heaven, in turning
many Souls to Righteousness, in which they enter into the heavenly Habitation
of the most high God; where it is known the Lord to be one, and his Name one,
and there alone stands the union of all the flock of the Companions, who have
been truly baptized and buried with Christ in his Death, where we could not
cover our naked Souls with a Fig-leaf Garment of our own works, or with any
self-created gesture, or posture of the outward Man, but in true obedience to
the Light, 1663
waiting in the sense of our misery, crying out of the great Deep to the God of
mercy, who in his appointed time, in his tender compassions he casts the Skirts
of his Garment over us, and said unto us, live: In which Life we in eternal
unity bear our Testimony to all the World in the Light of his Covenant, sitting
and feeding together at his Table, clothed with the wedding Garment, where
there never was, no^ ever shall be any rent, but eternal harmonious joyful
unity, in the everlasting felicity, where every Child of this Inheritance (as
moved of the Lord) casts in their Mite, in the returns of his Spirit, offering
up the Sacrifice of high praises to the most high God over all, blessed forever.

Dear and tender Friends; This arises in my Heart to exhort all that are
convinced of the Truth, that every one with diligent watchfulness search your
own Hearts with the Light, and in it know your own estates, and seriously know
your own conditions, and that you may certainly understand what Spirits you are
on, and to have the seal of the Spirit of God demonstrating to you in full
assurance; that you walk with him, in true self-denial, according to your
measures in uprightness of Heart with all the flock of the Companions, as
before written, then will the Lord give you a sound and perfect judgment, to
weigh and try all Spirits, and taste the breath from whence the words proceed,
and not to lay your Hands hastily upon any, whatever they pretend, but in that
which tries and weighs your own spirits, in coolness and singleness of Heart,
try and taste what Spirits they are on that comes amongst you in this day,
wherein many comes forth with us as to the owning of the Truth in their
judgments, and regulates the outward Man in some outward gestures like to the
Children of the Truth; and some have felt the stroke of the Judgment of the
Lord, which has caused them to forsake some things which formerly they
delighted in, and in some measure of Zeal have born a Testimony to the Light,
enduring both stripes and imprisonment, both in this Nation, and some beyond
the Seas, while they stood in the Fear of the Lord, who for his Names sake has
delivered them from the Winter Storms that they suffered under; but they for
want of watchfulness, the Mystery of Iniquity has wrought and drawn them from
the Light into the pride of their Hearts, to deck themselves with the jewels
and gifts of the Spirit God gave unto them when they were humble before him;
but they departing from the redeeming judgment of God, the Beast gets the
deadly wound healed again, and instead of giving glory to God for their
deliverance, they in this time of some measure of rest, take their flight on
the Sabbath day, upon the Mountains of their high Imaginations, and Sacrifices
upon the high places, and does not regard to make their peace with Christ in
them, their Elder Brother, and so to bring their gift to the Altar, in the
humble meek Spirit which gathers into unity, and answers to the witness in
every Conscience; but though they pretend zeal and Obedience to God, in what
they do; they being gone from the Light, they neither regard the Glory of God,
nor the good of his People; for all that they now do, is wrought in a
self-serving Spirit, where they enter into the mysterious working of the deceit
of their Hearts, to set up, and cover themselves with a voluntary humility, and
feigned love, gathering all the eloquent and inticeing words of man's wisdom,
with which they make a flourish in a discoursative spirit, speaking high words
of that they never did know, to get entrance upon the affection of the tender
hearted ones, that are afraid to judge any but themselves, with others that
look more at high words, then to feel from whence they came, or to know the end
for what they are spoken; and these they seek to overcome with their subtle
enticing words, to draw them into singularity, and self-separation, that they
may set them up with admiration, and to carry on their own Interest, they make
use of those they overcome, to seek all occasions with themselves to speak
evil, some both by writing and printing, against those that God has raised up
to keep their Habitation, and to stand unmovable upon the Foundation Christ the
Light, to discern and judge their subtle, crafty, wicked proceedings, and to
lay them open, that they be such as intrude into a Ministry, and runs when God
never sent them, therefore they do not profit the people at all, for they go
not in at the Door, which is the Light to be led in conformity to Christ in his
suffering and Death, so come they to be ignorant of the saving gathering word
of eternal Life, because they in self-strivings climb up over the true judgment
of God, and in pride and fleshly wisdom pretends to enjoyments of high things,
in a self-boasting spirit, some saying in their Hearts, as it is written, I
see, and know, and am rich, and want nothing, when they are blind, and
miserable, and naked, and wants all things, and must come again to the Light,
to b^y eye salve of Christ that they may see, and raiment to cover them, or
else their nakedness will forever appear. For this birth which is generated in
the My^tery of Iniquity (as before written) it cannot live but in singularity
and self-separation, setting up self some times in visible Forms, Gestures and
Postures, to be seen distinct from others, as Clouds tossed to and fro, to whom
is reserved the blackness of darkness forever, except they repent: for God will
make the Womb of this Births Conception to be the Grave whence again it shall
return, and there to be buried to its eternal consummation, the Mouth of the
Lord has spoken it, through his Servant that has and does labor day and
night, according to the ability of the Grace I have received of the Lord, for
the restoration of all those that have been in danger of destruction, through
the snares and working of the Enemy (as before written.) And amongst many, some
hearked to counsel, and have been again restored in obedience to the Light; but
who rejected the counsel of God through his Servants, and desperately goes on
in a self-serving spirit, (though often reproved) they harden their necks,
destruction has, does, and will come upon them, and that without remedy.

Oh! How did my Bowels earn for the preservation of I. P. in what I could to
have drawn and separated him from that spirit which gave forth the paper that
propagated the keeping on the Hat in prayer, and reflected judgment upon those
that called upon the Name of the Lord with their Heads uncovered: but after
much counselling of him in tender love, to have stopped that paper from going
abroad; but he would not be separated from that spirit that gave it forth. Then
I cleared my Conscience in the Word of the Lord, which now (in my freedom in
God) I declare to the Children of Sion, what the eternal judgment was, that did
arise in my Heart, in words to this purpose. John, ^f then propagate what thou
have written in this paper, thou will wound more Hearts, and cause more trouble
of spirit amongst the tender hearted People of the Lord, then when the
temptation entered dear I. N. who deeply suffered, but the Lord restored him
again by true repentance: And as to my particular, it is not my nature to be
found striving with thee, or any upon the Earth; but having declared the Truth
to thee, I will return to my rest in the Lord, and let every birth live the
length of its day, and time manifest what is born of God; for that Spirit that
stands up in self-striving, will weary it felf, and dye, and end in the Earth.
And this will certainly come to pass upon all that do not diligently wait in
the Light, to judge the outgoings of their minds, and to be lead in true
self-denial, which is the Footsteps* where the Flocks of the Companions
delight to walk, every one serving one another in love, seeking to restore one
another with the Spirit of love and meekness, forth of what any have done,
through the violence of Temptation or weakness.

Oh! Dear Friends, feel the earning Bowels of the Lord through me to you all,
in which I beseech you, that what has come to pass in this day of great trial,
and hour of Temptation, you may all (in dear love to the Lord of Life) return
to his Light, to feel his Power restoring into a true understanding with him to
walk, in true self-denial, where you will feel his Presence, filling your
Hearts, and binding you up in eternal Unity of the Spirit, and bond of Peace;
every one forgetting all things that are behind, and not any one stand up in
self-striving, but in the tender bro^herly love informing the Judgments of one
another in the Light and Power of the endless life, and in it submit to the low
estate of one another, serving one another in love, which is the washing one
another feet; and here is Christ and his Disciples in eternal unity, and
powerful Dominion, against whom, every tongue lifted up shall fall in Judgment,
and every weapon formed shall not prosper, but come to naught, for the Mountain
of the Lords House shall be more and more set upon the top of the Mountains,
and established over all the Hills, and all the faithful shall more and more
(in eternal unity) praise and magnify his Name, in the beauty of holiness, who
sits upon the throne, and lives and reigns forever and ever.

And dear chosen Vessels, who has known, and do abide and keep your state
with God in the perfecting power manifest in your inward man, which truly
buries self in the death, and has raised you up, and sent you forth in the
Resurrection and power of the endless Life, which seeks not any thing, but to
glorify the Lord in all your travels, and undertakings, wherever the Lord
calls you.

Oh, you blessed amongst the people; what can be said of the goodness of the
Lord, that has been and will be more and more manifest to you, whose care and
burdens, labors and travels is known to the Lord, and your reward is with him
forever. Dear Brethren, though great be the wrath that withstands the work of
our God, which wrath works openly and mysteriously to lay burdens upon the
innocent, and to add affliction unto the afflicted. In the Word of the Lord
that arises in my Heart, I declare they shall but weary themselves, and all
their hopes shall fail them, and their expectations shall come to naught, who
wait for evil concerning you who love the Lord better then your lives, and
delight to wait to feel his Power at all times, leading and ordering in the
limits and bonds of the Spirit of the Lord, etc. I know there is of you my
Brethren, that need not be written unto in lines of this nature, but to all who
has, or may have their mouths opened in the true motion of the Spirit of God,
and has not yet overcome and escaped the danger* where many have received loss
as before written, with a godly jealousy over you, in tender bowels I beseech
you watch and pray, that in the Light and Power of God you always be kept; And
when any motion of the Spirit of the Lord arises in you, to exercise the Gift
God has given you; first search your Hearts, and see that you be at peace with
Christ in you, your elder Brother, that in the sense of your peaceable union
with him, your Hearts be truly broken, and your Spirits truly humbled and
abased before the Throne of his glory, in which power bring your gifts to his
Altar, and keep within the bounds of the Spirit, then shall your Sacrifices
(whether it be Exhortation, Prayer or Praises answer the witness of God in all
his People, and God will accept of your faithfulness in the returns of his own
Spirit to his glory forever: And whatever the Lord does in you or with you,
rejoice not over much in Spirits being made subject, but rather rejoice in the
power that keeps self in the Death, that your names you always behold written
in the Lambs Book of Life; then will you be full of virtue, as branches in the
Vine of Gods righteousness, whose leaf shall never wither; but you shall be
always Faithful, and your leaf shall be for the healing of the Nations; and an
Eternal Judgment shall rest and abide in you, in the pure discerning of all the
unstable wandering Spirits, that are as before written, which is the Stars that
the great Dragon draws after him from the heavenly Light, and throws them down
again to the Earth, because (through pride) they kept not their estate in the
meek humble Spirit of the Lord of Glory.

Oh* my dear Brethren in the unity and bonds of the meek humble Spirit of our
God, my Soul blesses the Name of the Lord for you, and your faithfulness is as
marrow to the bones of the feeble, and as sinews to the loins of the weak;
therefore let us in the true motion of the meek peaceable Spirit of the
almighty God, go on in his service, and let us wrestle with the most high, in
the prevaling power of his own Spirit, for the bringing again the captivity of
Sion, that they that have mourned before our God with us in years past, may be
restored and brought from the Mountains (where they are scattered) into the
Light and Fold of rest, with us to lie down in the Shephards Tent, where we
find safety in the heat of the day, and in the hollow of his hand, he will keep
us, until the indignation be over past.

Therefore you valiants amongst the people, who in the meek humble Spirit
shines as the Angels of Glory; every one be faithful in the power of the most
high God? in whom you shall stand as Saviors upon Mount Sion, in your living
Testimony which causes the dead to hear the living Voice, the Lame to Walk,
the Blind to See, the Dumb to Speak forth the high Praises of the mighty God,
which shall cause the Ears of them that know not God to tingle, and the Hearts
of the righteous to rejoice, and forever glorify the Name of the Lord, that
has kept you humble, little and low as to self, but mighty, powerful,
prevailing, in the pure, peaceable, eternal Dominion of which there is no end,

Where my Soul rests, who has now given forth what has for some time lain
upon me, to clear my Conscience to all that ever have tasted in any Measure of
the good Word of God, and the Power of the World to come, that they may
certainly know whether they abide in the Vine of Gods Righteousness, yea, or
ndy, Therefore, Let them that has an Eye to see, let them see; or an Ear to
hear, let them hear; or an Heart to understand, let them understand what the
Spirit says to the Churches, in the eternal Judgment and Word of Truth, through

Your Brother and Fellow Laborer in the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ:
Farewell; W. D.
Send this with care abroad to be read in the Fear of God in the Assemblies of
the Church of the first Born.



The Word of the Lord, to his beloved City, New Jerusalem, come from God,
clothed with the excellency of the Glory of his Love; and is the Bride, the
Lambs Wife, with the flowings of the tender compassionate Bowels of the Lord
Jesus, to all the Mourners in Sion, and the Afflicted desolate People, who wait
for his coming as for the Morning, and has not satisfaction in any thing, but
in the enjoyment of his sweet and comfortable Presence.
OH Jerusalem, thou beloved amongst the People, who art become the beautiful
Bride the Lambs Wife; Oh, how did he seek thee in the day of thy Divorcement,
when thou wast weeping in the barren Wilderness, as a desolate Widow, who had
not any to comfort thee, when thy greatest Mournings and breakings of Heart
were thy greatest comfort? And the more thou drunk the Tears that was shed for
the want of him, was thy greatest satisfaction: Oh, the weary days thou had
upon the Earth, because thy Languishing Soul knew not where to meet with thy
beloved, neither did thou know how to walk in the steps of the Flock of thy
Companions, who was comforted with his Presence, whom thy Soul wanted; then was
he near unto thee (though thou knew it not) enlivening the desires that were
toward his Name: And in the acceptable day he sent forth whom he had ordained,
to declare unto thee the glory of his Love, in the Light of his own Life, in
which he has covered thee this day, as with a Wedding Garment, and in it thou
appearest comely in his sight, and acceptable in his Presence. And for thy
sake, oh, Jerusalem, thou City of the Living God, what has been endured? How
many Innocent Lambs have suffered, its hard to be expressed, to bring
gald-tidings unto thee of him whom thy Soul thirsts after? How have the
Striplings sent out in Gods Authority run to and fro in the Earth, willing to
spend, and be spent in all services of Love, to persuade thee to forsake all
that has entangled thy mind, and hindered thee from the innocent Life of thy
Beloved. Thy mighty Men, with many of the Sons and Daughters of glory, have
sealed their living Testimony with their Blood, in the patience and sufferings
of the Lamb of God, that thou may be affected with the excellency of the
glory of him whom thy Soul desires.

And now the Lord God requires of every particular Son and Daughter of Sion,
To Watch and Pray, that not any enter into Temptation; and all that have any
stain upon their Garments, come to the Fountain which is opened for Judah and
Jerusalem to wash in, which is the Heartbreaking love of God manifest in the
Light of the Covenant, and sealed up to the Soul in the Blood of Jesus.

Oh, come away, come away, out of all your thoughts, desires, doubts, and
unbelief, which would turn you aside from the enjoyment of the dear love of God
in Christ Jesus; Let not any stand afar off, because of your Littleness,
Lameness, Blindness, Weakness, and Infirmities, who cannot live at Peace, until
you be healed with the Blood of the Lamb.

Arise, arise, you necessitated people, in the Light of the Lord, give up to
the drawing Spirit of Life in the Light of Jesus Christ, he will carry thee
(that cannot go) in the Arms of his Compassions; he will cause the Lame to
walk; and thou that art sensible of thy Blindness, to recover thy sight; yea,
he will heal thee of all thy Infirmities, who in the Light waits as a little
Child to be ordered and guided in the washing and sanctifying Spirit of the
Lord Jesus, who is become a Husband to the desolate Widow, and a repairer of
the Breaches, and a restorer of the desolate Places, in whom the Fatherless
has found mercy this day, for his Names sake.

Oh! what shall I say of the unspeakable Love of God in Christ Jesus the
Husband of the Bride, the Lambs Wife? Oh, ye Sons of the glorious day, read,
and feel in the deep tastes of the unsearchable Love. And you Handmaids of
Glory, drink of the inexpressible Ocean, which flows in the Light over all
opposition. This is the Son of the Fathers Love, who has been a Man of
sorrows, and acquainted with griefs, He was Wounded for our Transgressions, and
by his Stripes are we healed, and this is the Work of the Lord: Let all Crowns
be thrown down before him, for he alone shall have all the glory, besides him
there is no other: Therefore in the measure of him* let every Son, Daughter,
and Servant of God watch, and diligently hearken to his Counsel; and what ever
the natural Man most inclines to, when the Temptation besets you, judge your
selves, look up to the Lord, and resist the Devil with boldness in the first
assault, and the Lord God will give you Dominion over him, and the Bond of
Iniquity shall not have power over you; and in his holy Authority, every one
stand in Dominion upon the Head of the first Man, with all his excellency and
glory, that in the perfect freedom every particular Reign, in the measure of
the Light, over every thought and desire that is contrary to the Will of God,
that in his eternal Will, you Sons and Daughters of the most high, you all
dwell in the holy Faith, which will evidence to you beyond your sight, and will
Arm you against all the fiery Darts of the Devil: And you shall tread down
Satan under your Feet, and in the triumphing Dominion, through the Blood of
the Lamb, and Word of your Testimony, you shall overcome, and continually drink
of the Rivers of pleasures, which is the presence of the Lord Jesus, our Light,
Life and Righteouness for ever; for he is become our Husband, and we are as the
Wife of his Bosom, in the delight of his glorious Love; Let the Mourners in
Sion rejoice, and the afflicted among the people be glad, and fear the Lord.
And let not any say, the Lord regards me not, who desires Salvation in
uprightness of Heart; for what ever thou hungers and thirsts for in his Life,
thou art the Heir of it, and the Lord will satisfy thy Hunger with his
refreshings for his Name sake: And this is the Portion of them that are least
in their own Eyes amongst the people, the Lord has spoken it.

And all you Inhabitants of the City of the great God, whom the Lord has
prospered in your living Testimony, in what he has called unto, blessed be the
Lord God for you who retain the sensibility of your nothingness in self, and so
become poor with the poorest, and Weak with the weakest, and truly makes self
of no reputation, but humbles it to the Cross, and does not serve self, but the
Lord and his people, with all his Gifts and Ornaments, with which he has
adorned you, because of the savor of this Ointment which you have in Christ,
causes the Souls of all the upright in Heart to praise the Lord for you: Oh,
your steadfast valiant unwearied Travels, Labors and Sufferings for the Lord,
causes the Hearts of his People to be enlarged with Hallelujahs, and high
Praises in the holy Assembles of his Saints, you know your reward is with you;
and woe to them that devise mischief against you whom the Lord has blessed.

Oh, Sions Children, from the least to the greatest, love the Lord Jesus
Christ, and let not a thought of the Heart have any power that would draw from
the Light, Life, and Love of the Lord Jesus; let the day of the Resurrection
arise upon you, which will set your Souls in perfect love, above all Unbelief
and Infidelity: Oh, drink, drink, drink to the full satisfaction of your Souls,
of the Cup of his Salvation, for it is freely handed to all that love him, and
thirsts for his Mercies, and trample and tread down the self-working spirit,
that all be bound down in silence, and kept in the Death that would move in any
exercise, to utter words rashly before the Lord; but in the Resurrection,
Light, Power, Life, and innocent Birth enter the Kingdom, and Reign in the
Dominion thereof. Oh, here my dear Friends, let us comfort and consolate our
Souls together, for this is our beloved, and we have waited for him, and now is
he come with power and great glory, to deliver his Captives, and establish them
in his glorious freedom, where the evil one shall not prevail against them; and
to Marry the Soul unto himself, who has waited for him as for the Morning; and
all in the Marriage union, feel his Power abounding to lead in the daily Cross,
to stand over all that would draw from the sweet union, that is in the
footsteps of the Flock of his Companions, who walk in the Light; and stir up
the gift of God in you, in all faithful obedience, to meet together in true
watchfulness, to wait in the Light: And as your Hearts are filled with the
Heavenly Power of the Lord, and broken in the sense of the overcomings of his
Life, and moved in the forciable strength thereof, in any exercise in your
Families, or in the Assemblies of his People; quench not the Spirit of the
Lord, but be obedient, and keep within the bounds of a broken Heart, and a
contrite Spirit, which is a Sacrifice acceptable in his presence: And all feel
the love of God enlarging your Hearts one to another, that the strong may bear
the Burden of the weak, and in the pure Life of love, you may grow fruitful
Plants in the Vineyard which God's Right Hand has Planted, etc.

And as for our little Sister (which is scattered amongst the people in the
Nations) that has no Breast of Consolation, her broken Cisterns has failed
her: What shall we do, in this day she shall be spoken for, which is come upon
us, though at present she cannot draw near, but Mourns at a distance, and Cries
in secret for want of the enjoyment of the God of our Sa^vation? Oh, let your
Bowels open to her, and let your Hearts breath unto the Lord, that he may seal
his Counsel unto her, and cause her to walk in the Light of the Lord with us,
whom he has raised to be the first Fruits amongst many Brethren, to bear his
glorious Testimony over and above the Heads of all the wrath of the Children of
Men, that withstands the Appearance of God, who will cause them to bow before
his Glory; in the day he will clear the Innocence of his beloved people, which
shall smite the Hearts of them that know him not, neither by Sword, nor Spear,
nor strength of the Arm of Flesh, but with the breath of his Mouth, and the
brightness of his coming, which shall spread his Fame over the Nations, to
gather our Brethren from far, and Sisters from the ends of the Earth; yea, the
mighty shall bow to his Scepter, and the Nations that are saved shall walk in
his Light, with us, whom he has made as dear unto himself as the Apple of his
Eye; and though a Woman may forget her sucking Child, yet the Lord will not
forget any that fear him; but he will lead through all Tribulations with Joy in
his heavenly Power, until we have finished our Course with gladness, to the
glory of the Name of the Lord forever. And this is the Portion, and the Lot of
thy Inheritance, thou beautiful Bride, the Lambs Wife, against whom every
Tongue that is lifted up shall fall into Judgment, and the Weapons formed
against thee shall not prosper; for the Lord has made thee a burdensome Stone
to the Nations, and the praise of the whole Earth; and the desires of the
people shall be to the Name of the most high God, who dwells in the amidst of
thee, and has displayed his Banner of Love over thee, and has turned his fury
away from thee, and never any more shall thou want the fresh Springs of Life,
who loves the Light, and bathes thy Soul in the Ocean of his inexpressible
Mercies: The Lord will keep thee in the safety of his Power and the Gates of
Hell shall not prevail against any of the Sons and Daughters, who wa^^ in the
Light of thy City, O Jerusalem, in whom there is no more Curse; but the Throne
of God, and of the Lamb is in thee, and his Servants does serve him, and they
do see his Face, and his Name is written in their Foreheads, and there is no
Night there, neither need of Candle, nor Light of the Sun, for the Lord God
gives them Light, and they do Reign forever, as the Lord has spoken

Through your Brother and Companion in the Tribulation and Kingdom of Patience
in the Lord Jesus, W. D.
Given forth in York Castle, the 19 th of the 1 st Month, 1663. Let this be
sent abroad to be read, in the fear of the Lord, in the holy Assemblies of the
Church of the first born, where she is scattered to the ends of the Earth.



The Breathings of Life To God's Spiritual Israel, Through A faithful Follower
of the Lamb, in the Regeneration and Kingdom of Patience and Tribulation; and
now a Sufferer in Bonds for the Testimony of the Lord Jesus, known to the World
by the Name of William Deusbury.
DEar Children, and Chosen Vessels of the Eternal Everliving God, whom he has
plucked as Brands out of the Fire, and has manifested his heavenly powerful
operating Spirit to lead you in his holy fear, to wait upon him in the way of
his Judgments, which has buried and (...) in the Death, that you could not
find any Comfort or Satisfaction unto your hungry thirsty S^^ls, but in lying
down, in true subjection to the Judgments of the Lord, manifest in the Light,
until the Lord broke in upon you (when your wills were subjected) with his
tender love and bowels of free mercy, which caused the Dead to live, the Lame
to walk, the Deaf to hear, and the Dumb to speak forth the wonders of the Lord.

Oh you dear Companions, in the Tribulations, and Patience of Jesus, when I
remember you, my heart is broken, and as a man overcome, with the Compassions
of the Lords love that flows out toward you; in which my Soul exhorts you to
dread the Lord, and fear continually before the heavenly Majesty of our God,
and be faithful upon your watch that the Enemy which you know goes abroad as a
roaring Lion to devour you, that he may be trampled upon, and never get
Entrance, to stain your pure Garments, which you know never could be washed but
in the blood of the Lamb: And all take heed of giving way in the least measure,
to what you know would entangle you in any bondage, do not rely upon your own
strength, though you have and do reign in the glorious dominion standing in the
Light, yet if there be the least harkening to the Enemy to tamper with him,
though you may think you may be able to subject the disposition of nature he
works upon, if he draw you from the Light you will be ensnared, and distress
and sorrow will come upon you as an Armed man, and under Gods Judgments you
must lie, until the Lord raise you up again in the renewings of his mercy, in
the Light of his own Covenant.

Therefore, dear Children, of the Immortal birth, I cannot but say once more
unto you, Watch, watch, with all circumspection and diligence, stand faithful
upon your watch, that in the Light of the Lord the eye of discerning be kept
open in you, that you may discern the Mysterious workings of the subtle Enemy
of your souls peace: And take heed of taking any liberty to your selves in any
thing but what you know stands approved in the Light, Power and Life, which
has so freely manifested it self in regenerating and renewing you in the
spirit of your minds, let your souls continually prize the Light, and the
Sin-condemning power to love it above all things, that you may stand in the
Marriage-union, in the power which destroys the works of the Devil, and keeps
the Soul in pure freedom to walk with the Lord, rejoicing in the daily Cross,
where Self is crucified, and the Soul set free, in the pure Liberty, in the
love and life of the most High, to magnify and praise his name, in the beauty
of holiness, forever and ever.

Oh beloved ones! look not at Self, nor at any storm or tempest that arises
through temptation or trials of what nature soever, as to vail you from
beholding of the lovely countenance of Jesus the beloved of our Souls: Oh lift
up your heads all that love the Light; for the Lord our God, in the bowels of
everlasting compassions will draw near you more and more; and he will carry his
tender Lambs in his Arms, and the dear suckling Babes at the Breasts of his
Consolation; and to cause his young men in Christ to rejoice in the purity of
his nature, and the Handmaids and Daughters of Glory to triumph in his
Comeliness, with which he will cover them that love the Light and his pure
nature better then their lives: the aged among his people he will cloth them
with Wisdom, and the grave, solid, ponderous, weighty Spirit shall more and
more possess the Ancients among his Children; a pure perfect eternal Judgment,
he has placed in the midst of thee, oh Sion, that shall keep forth, and bind
the ravenous ones, for it shall be as a wall, for the preservation of his
lovely City Jerusalem, and great is and shall be the encreasings of God upon
all thy Inhabitants, that abhor self, and love the Light, and delights to walk
in faithfulness up to the requirings of the Lord in this his dreadful day,
wherein he is purging his Sanctuary through great sufferings according to the
word of the Lord as has been declared, let no discouragement be upon your
Spirits, for the mighty Jehovah is with every particular Babe of his Kingdom,
and dear and precious is your lives in the sight of the Lord: a Woman may
forget her sucking Child, but the Lord will not forget you that trust in his
Mercies; and though the Cup look bitter, which many has to drink in this
trying day, fear not, you beloved People, but stand approved in the Light of
Jesus, and whatever you meet withal, his presence will accompany you, in
sweetning your passage daily more and more, for his bowels earns abundantly to
you, who in the holy resolution in his heavenly Power, is freely given up to do
and suffer whatever the pleasure of the Lord is, that he may glorify his Name
in the Earth, in disposing of you to the eternal renown of his Name forever.

Oh you dear Babes of the holy Seed, abide in your safe dwelling, in the Light
over all fear of what ever man can do, for the determination of God is, not any
more wrath shall have power, then shall turn to his praise, for the Lord has
given his Angels charge over you, and they pitch their Tents continually about
you, and in vain it is for man to strive to afflict you whom the Lord will
save, or to destroy whom the Lord will preserve; Therefore be glad, oh Sion, in
thy God this day, and let thy Inhabitants, oh Jerusalem, shine forth in the
glory of the Heavenly power of the most high God, who dwells in the middst of
thee, for the day of thy deliverance he is hastening, and to make inquisition
for the Blood of thy tender Children, who has sufferred spoylings of their
Goods, and many Stripes, Prisons, Afflictions, and Death for the Word of God,
and Testimony of Jesus Christ: Therefore in the Word of his Patience, every one
stand in your several conditions, gird up in the Light, the mind to the Lord
unmovable in his streng^h to bear your Testimonies, the strong leading the
weak by the Hand, that all in the gentle sweet leading Spirit of Life, in
eternal Unity live and walk in the heavenly Authority, in peace and
faithfulness until death, where the Crown of eternal glory shall be your
reward, in the power of his everlasting dominion to Praise and Magnify his
Name with Hallelujahs and high praises in the beauty of his Life forever and
for evermore, Amen.

And further this arises in my Heart, dear beloved vessels, where^oever God
has placed you in the Earth (whatever appears amongst the Children of men) in
the Light of Christ stand still and dwell in your peaceable rest forever, that
to the witness of God in every Conscience we may be manifest to be the Children
of the eternal God of Peace; in whom is our diligent watchings, and waitings
upon our God, to order us in his Power and Wis^om, in our peaceable lives to be
a blessing to all the Inhabitants of the Land of our Nativity, from the highest
to the love in what we may, to persuade them to walk in the Fear of the Lord,
that they may escape in the day of terrible wrath, which the mighty God will
manifest in the day of his dreadful vengeance upon the ungodly, that so by our
conversation in Christ, the measure of God in all their Consciences may
testify for us, that in us the peaceable holy Seed is raised which the Lord
has blessed, and in which we know that neither height, nor depth,
principalities nor powers, things present, nor things to come, prisons,
nakedness, peril or sword, life nor death can never separate us from the sweet
refreshing, Life and Peace we have together in Christ the Righteousness,
Strength and Dominion forever.

In whom Rests the Soul of your Brother in the word of his Patience with you;
Farewell; W. D.
Warwick Goal the 8 th of the 11 th Month, 1663.
The Word of the Lord to Sion the New Jerusalem, the Bride the Lambs Wife, the
E^cellency of all the Glory that is amongst the People; though she be now in
deep Sufferings, in fullness of time God will clear the Innocence of her
Children; and all the Nations of the Earth shall call her the Blessed of the
Lord; yea, the holy City, in whom the Lord dwells, to manifest his Glory upon
the Earth amongst the Children of men forever.
O Sion, who is brought forth in the beautiful and glorious Birth of the
morning of the Day of the Almighty God, thou Jerusalem, the Bride, the Lambs
Wife; O what Tongue can express of what is felt in the heavenly Treasures and
Fullness of the Most High, who watches over thee for good, and not for evil, in
this day of thy great Trial, wherein Judgment is begun at the House of God,
that he may prove you to be his People, in the sight of the Nations, and
manifest his mighty Power for your deliverance in the presence of the People,
to the astonishment of all the proud and stout-hearted among the Children of
men. In the ability of the strength of the Lord I declare his Word to thy
tender Children, O Sion, whom the Lord God beholds, how you are compassed about
with the ravenous Beasts of the field, and given up by the Children of men, for
to be laid waste, and to race up the Foundation of your strength if it were
possible; that so the pure and living Worship of God in the Spirit, may not be
known in the Earth.

O dear and tender Children of the Immortal Birth, which makes Self of no
reputation, whom the Lord has called and chosen to be his living Witnesses
upon the Earth, to bear Testimony of his great and glorious Name amongst the
People; fear not Man whose breath is in his nostrils, neither regard evil
tidings of what men intend to do with you: O be faithful upon your watch, that
you may stand in a good Authority in the Light and Life over all the appearance
of evil in the Inward-man, that would draw your minds from staidness in the
Power of the Lord God, that so the evil spy of the mind may never have Power,
that would run forth in the reach of your reason, to judge of what will come to
pass in the sensitive part, and so cause ^0ainting and feebleness of mind,
through the dark Judgment, which is out of the Light and Power of God; as the
evil Spies did in the days of old, who brought evil tidings of the good Land:
Therefore all you Servants of the Most High God, stand fast in his Counsel, who
says, I am God All-sufficient, walk before me, and be ye perfect, in that to
reign over all, what ever is contrary to the will of God, that so in the free
resignation of your wills, with all that you have and are, you may be a living
Sacrifice upon his Altar, with singleness of Heart, standing approved before
the Throne of his Glory, with boldness and holy con^idence, without the least
doubting or wavering of mind, but that the Lord will go before you, and with
joy and gladness of Heart carry you through, what ever he has determined, to
the perfecting his Praise and Glory of his Name forever.

And dear Friends in God, you are not ignorant of the tender Love of our
Father, who in the Authority of his own Spirit, sent to proclaim this day of
trial in your Ears certain Years ago, that every Child might look up to the
Power of the Lord, to be prepared to meet him in the day determined, which now
is manifest in the sight of all People that love the Lord; To whom I declare in
the Authority of the same Spirit and Life, that your deliverance is sealed in
the Eternal and Unchangeable Decree of the Most High God; let all the power of
darkness do what they are permitted, fear not you chosen Vessels, for not any
more of the wra^h of man shall have power, then you shall have ability in God's
Sufficiency to rejoice, triumph, praise and magnify the Name of the Lord,
through and over all the wrath of Man, all your days, until your Change come,
and for ever when time shall be no more; and God will be the God of your
Families and tender Children, who never did not will forsake the Righteous,
neither suffer their Seed to beg their bread.

Therefore lift up your heads in the Power of the Lord, you chosen Vessels, for
you shall prevail and overcome through the Blood of the Lamb, and the Word of
your Testimony, and no more shall love your lives to death, that you may do and
suffer whatever the pleasure of the Lord is, who was made perfect in suffering,
and did go before us unto the Father, and ^ow is come again to receive us unto
himself; therefore all in the Light behold Him, behold Him, who ascended over
all the power of Hell, and Death, and Darkness, who now in like manner is
descended, whose coming we behold in the Clouds with Power and great Glory.
Therefore dear Children of the Lord, with the Light judge whatever would cloud
or vail you from beholding his glorious Appearance, so shall you reign over all
the evil attendances of the mind; though they be never so strong or many, you
shall in the Power of the Lord trample upon them in the Name of Jesus; whose
coming is in the Clouds, to deliver every Lamb forth of the evil that assaults
the mind, through the Manifestion of his Appearance; For as the Lightning is
from the East unto the West, so is the Appearance of the Son of Man; and as the
Serpent was lift up in the Wilderness, so is the Son of Man lifted up in this
his Day. O let your Eyes be all fixed on him, and your Hearts steadfastly
believing in his Name, without wavering, though the Devil tempt, and all the
Power of Darkness do what it can, in the meek Life of Jesus you shall trample
upon the head of the old Serpent, and reign in the powerful Authority over all
the Enemies within and without forever.

And as to the Clouds that arise outwardl^ from Men, who lay their Plots in the
deep, and fetch their Counsel out of the bottomless Pit, etc. I be^^^ch you all
in the Bowels of love, consult not with Fle^^ and Blood, but walk close with
the Lord as at other times; as our Brethren, Daniel, Shadrach, Meshach and
Ab^^nego did in the days of old, for whom the Lord appeared through all the
clouds and power of darkness, to the confounding the pride of Babylon in that
Age and Generation, etc. And certainly the Royal Birth of the Immortal Seed,
which makes Self of no reputation, shall see Christ coming through all the
Clouds, with Power and great Glory, and in as great Majesty as ever since the
World was made, for the Deliverance of his own Birth, that seeks not any thing
but to glorify his Name, with the loss of all, Life it self, if the Lord
requires it at their Hands, to seal the Testimony of their peaceable and holy
Conversation in Christ Jesus, which is in meeting, watching and waiting, to
receive the Heavenly Vision. And dear beloved Children, steadfastly believe in
the Name of the Lord, that the Birth of the one pure Will may be raised into
its Dominion in you all, that the Father may fill you with his sanctifying
Word; and when you are sweetly refreshed, take heed of being hasty to utter
words before the Lord, but sink down into the Eternal Power, and as it
overcomes you with the forcible Power, and moves in you to make mention of the
Name of the Lord, whether in Exhortation, Prayer, or Praises, O take heed of
quenching the motion of the Spirit, but give freely up to the Power of the
Lord, to order you in his own Will and Wisdom, what he will manifest through
you, that so you in true Obedience cast your Mi^e into the Treasury of God, and
give the Lord his own with advantage, which proceeds from a broken Heart and a
contrite Spirit, which our God will not despise, but will enlarge our Borders
for our Faithfulness, that so all the Assemblies of the Lord's People, may be
as the Assemblies of Prophets of the Most High, freely offering up to him the
Fruit of his own Vineyard, in the holy return of Praises, Praises, in the pure
Demonstration and Power of his own Spirit, that the everlasting Praise and
Glory of the Name of the God of our Consolation may be exalted over all, who is
established in his pure peaceable Kingdom in the Hearts of his People, and of
his Dominion there is no end; For the Heathen shall be given Him for his
Inheritance, and the utmost ends of the Earth for his Possession; Swords shall
be beaten into Plow-shares, and Spears into Pruning Hooks, for he will break
the battle out of the Earth, who is God over all to rule and reign forever and
ever; Princes shall be in love with Him, and the Mighty of the Earth shall
submit unto Him, and all the Nations that are saved, shall walk in his Light,
and call him Blessed, who was dead, but now alive, calling to all People to
come, and believe in his Name, that Eternal Life may abide in them forever. But
all that reject his Counsel, the Light, to be led in the strait way of
self-denial, their Blood will be manifest to be on their own Heads, in the day
of the fierce wrath, when he will be revealed in Flames of Fire, rendering his
eternal Vengeance upon all that know him not, and obey not the Gospel of our
Lord Jesus Christ, etc.

Therefore does the Word of the Lord sound through me, in the heavenly
Proclamation to all the Children of Light, with all whose Faces are set toward
Sion; Stand fast in the Faith, and in the Light, come boldly to the Throne of
Grace, where the Fountain of the fullness of the great refreshings you will
enjoy, that you may buy Wine and Milk without Money, or without Price: O come
away, come away, in this day of your Invitation, wherein the Spirit and the
Bride says, Come; and every one that it hears, says, Come; and every one
that is athirst, Come; and every one that will, Come; come and drink, drink of
the Fountain of the Water of Life freely, that by the virtue thereof the Weary
and Heavy-laden may be eased, and all your putrified Wounds cleansed, and all
the Issues of Blood healed, and all the stains of the Garment washed, that all
the bowed-down heads may be lifted up, and the Soul that has been as a
desolate Widow, and as a stranger without a dwelling in God, and as a Child
without a Father, now in your faithful Obedienee to the Light, the Lord will
manifest himself to be the Husband of the desolate Widow, and an Entertainer of
the Sranger, and with him the Fatherless shall find Mercy; which shall cause
the Lame to leap as an Heart, the Blind to See, the Dumb to Speak forth the high
Praises of the most high God, whose Mountain is, and shall be more and more set
up atop of the Mountains, and established above all the Hills, and all Nations
shall flock to the Mountain of the Lords House, in Obedience to our God, who is
taking to him his great Power, to manifest himself to be the safety of them
that trust in his Name, whom he will hide in the hollow of his Hand, as in a
munition of Rocks, to the confounding the Enemies of Sion, and staining the
pride of the glory of all Flesh, who shall vail and bow before him, and confess
to the glory of his Majestical Power, That there is not any GOD like to him in
whom we trust, and who will plead our Cause, and answer our Expectation,
according to his own Determination.

Therefore dear Servants of the most High, let not any of us be weary in
well-doing; and above all things love the Lord Jesus, yea, love the Lord Jesus
Christ; and in his perfect Light. Thought and Will, all in stedfastness and
staidness of mind, keep your Habitations, in perfect Peace, that the Birth of
the one, pure, holy Will may rule and reign over all that stands in the will of
Man, that so high Praises, Praises, may wait upon the Lord in Sion, and
Hallelujahs in Heavenly Harmony may be sounded within the Gates of Jerusalem;
who is made this day a Burdensome Stone to the Nations, but is and shall be
more and more the Praise of the whole Earth forever, and it shall be known more
and more: Assuredly the Mouth of the Lord has spoken it, through your dear and
loving Brother, who blesses and praises the Name of the Lord for you all who
love the Lord Jesus Christ, and seek his glory alone, and nothing for self in
all that you do and suffer upon the account of the Testimony you bear, in
profession of his Truth, in the sight of all People: O blessed, blessed are
you, you Self-denying-People! for what is before expressed, is your Inheritance
forever and ever: In which fare you well, fare you well, says my Soul, in the
Name of the Lord.

And all dear Friends, be dear and tender over the weak, and all that has
strayed forth of the Footsteps of the Flock of the Companions, in what you
can, draw them, and gather them in the Bowels of tender love, that the
scattered may be gathered into the Unity, to lie down with us in the pure Rest,
to the praise and glory of God forever.

W. D.

To all the Faithful and Suffering Members in all Holes, Prisons and Goals, for
the Word of God and Testimony of Jesus Christ; with the rest of the Faithful
wherever scattered upon the Face of the Ear^h.
Dear Brethren and Sisters;
HEar the Word of the Lord, thus says the Lord, Though you now drink the Cup
of Adversity, and eat the Bread of Affliction, and are trampled upon, as though
you were not worthy to live upon the Earth, yet notwithstanding all the Fury of
Men, you are resolved in the strength of my Spirit forever to be deprived of
the sweet enjoyments of Wife, Husband, tender Children, Parents, and outward
Possessions, Liberty and Life, before you deny the Testimony of my Name before
the Sons of Men. Oh! you dear and tender Children, who love not your Lives unto
Death this day, that you may finish a good Testimony for the Glory of my Name,
says the Lord God; lift up your Heads in the Light of my Covenant, and believe
in my Name, for I am near unto you, says the mighty God of Safety; and let not
any weight or burden lie upon you; for I will be more than Husband to Wife,
and more than Wife to Husband, or Parents to Children, or Children to Parents;
yea, I will be a Husband to the Widow, and a Father to the Children who are
deprived of their tender Parents for my Name sake: I will enlarge your Borders
in the Life of my Righteousness; you that suffer in true Innocence, will I
refresh with the depth of my Mercies; yea, I will guard you with the Angel of
my presence, and all that devise Mischief against you shall be confounded
before the Glory of my Power, with which I will keep and preserve you in the
Word of my Patience, and Safety, in my Presence, says the Lord God.

Therefore you dear Children, who drink the deepest in Sufferings, think it not
hard, for it is my purpose unto you all that have not any Eye to Self, but
alone seek my Glory in all you do, I will make you more and more Honorable in
the Glory of my Life, and double my Bl^ssings upon you and yours; for I have
^eheld your Integrity, and my Bowels are mightily moved with Compassion toward
you; therefore am I risen for your sakes this day, to declare unto you, my
suffering People, That not an Hair of your Head shall perish, neither shall you
be detained in Prisons and desolate Holes any longer than I have determined
shall be for your eternal Good, and the Glory of my Name forever; Therefore in
my Life stand faithful, in resistance of every evil Thought, or whatever would
cause you to murmer, or desire any thing but what you know will advance the
Glory of my Name, and the Exaltation of my Truth, over all that rises up
against it in your being truly subject to the measure of my Light and Life,
that will not let any seek a Pre-eminence or esteem amongst Men; neither let
Self-striving nor Self-serving have power in any; but in true Humility, Love
and Meekness watch one over another; and let the strong take the weak by the
Hand, that you may all gently in Love, 1664
Meekness and holy Fear dread my Name, and serve one another, that your Love
may be manifest unto me, says the Lord your God, and one unto another in the
naked simplicity of your Spirits, then will I make my Dwelling amongst you, and
with you; and my dreadful and glorious Presence you shall all feel mightily in
you and amongst you, moving in the exercise of my Spirit, to the Renown of my
Name and the Comfort of one another, and I will Crown you with heavenly
Blessings, and the Glory of my Powerful Life; and you shall praise my Name
forever that I made you my Jewels, and counted you worthy to suffer for the
Testimony of my Name. I will go before you through all the Waters and Floods of
Afflictions; and I will appear with you before all the Counsels of the Sons of
Men; and my saving Power shall compass you about in your hot and sharp
Afflictions, all you who have your Confidence alone in me, the LORD your GOD.
Therefore trust in my Name, ye my dear Children, and cast all your care upon
me; And if any of you joyfully suffer the Spoiling of your Goods, I will supply
with what is needful for you and yours: And if any of you seal your Testimony
in the Word of my Patience with your Blood, I will take care of your tender
Wives and Children or Parents, for whom your Souls have been poured forth in
Prayers unto me for their good,

Therefore hear my Word which is sounded unto you from the Throne of my Grace
and eternal Glory; Rejoice not too much in Spirits being made subject, but
throw down your Crowns before me, that there be not a Self-seeking,
Self-serving Spirit in the Family of my People; but all feel the Birth Immortal
raised up in the Resurrection of my Life in you all, which truly makes Self of
no Reputation, so that all Loftiness be laid low, and all Haughtiness bowed
down in every one, that I the Lord God in you all may be loved, obeyed, and
exalted; who is taking, and will take to me my great Power, to exalt the Meek
upon the Earth, and reign over all the Pride of the Children of men (that is
exalted above my Witness in their Conscience) that so my Sons may be brought
from far, and my Daughters from the ends of the Earth, in the sight of all
People whom I will make to confess, in Subjection to my Power, That you are the
beloved People of the most high God, and of the righteous Seed which the Lord
has Blessed, and not any Weapon formed against you shall prosper, but come to
naught, which will be hastened for your Comforts, and certainly performed
according to what is here declared, to your Eternal Joy; and you shall
assuredly know the Mouth of the Lord has spoken it.

The Word of the Lord, before expressed, came to me in the Prisonhouse in
Warwick, the 13 th day of the first Month, 1664. which constrained me to send
it to be read amongst you, dear faithful and suffering People of the Almighty
God, in whom I remain your Brother and Companion in Tribulation and Kingdom of
Patience in the Lord Jesus Christ. W. D.

Oh thou beloved Seed of God in London, Hartford, Bristol, Redding, and
Colchester, with all in other Places where the Power of Hell, and Darkness is
begun to make War in the fierceness of his Wrath, and great Fury, as though he
would destroy and utterly lay waste.
ALL you dear Children born again of the Royal Seed, who is raised up in the
Power of the most High to bear the Name of the Lord in the Earth, and to shine
forth in the lively Image of his own Nature amongst the People; in your loving
the Lord Jesus better then all the World, and the created objects, and
enjoyments therein, and in this day of your great Trial you are found faithful,
in the Name of the Lord to withstand all the Power of Hell and Darkness, and to
make War in Righteousness neither with Sword nor Spear, but in the Word of the
Patience of the Lamb of God, who overcame, and was made perfect in sufferings.

Oh you chosen Vessels, whom the Lord ^ath counted worthy to stand in the heat
of the Trial, in the excellent noble Life to bear your Testimony, with the
hazard of the loss of your estates, and Liberty, even to Banishment, yea to lay
down your lives if the Lord require it at your Hands, to the comforting and
encouraging of all your dear Brethren, whose eyes are upon you, and their
Prayers and Breathings to the Lord for you, that he may carry you on with
boldness, and sweeten your Passage, until in faithfulness you have finished
what is determied of the Lord in drinking of this Cop he is handing unto you,
that he may make you manifest to be his dear and chosen Jewels, to the
perfecting of the praise and glory of the Name of our God over all blessed
forever.

Oh you valiant Brethren, and beloved Sisters clothed with the excellency of
the glory of the incomprehensible God, lift up your Heads in the Name of the
Lord, trample upon all the fear of Man, and upon a^l the Representations of
hardships, of parting with dear and tender Wife or loving Husband, or with your
dear and tender Children, which lies near to the Hearts of loving Parents.

Oh how does the compassion of a Father flow forth toward them, and the
earning of the Bowels of a tender and loving Mother toward the dear and tender
Children, when the Trial looks in the Face of being separated from them, and to
see their Faces no more.

Dear chosen Vessels of the most high God, let not any of these things enter
into you, as to trouble or weaken your Testimony for the Lord, who has
commanded me to write unto you to cast your care upon the Lord, and be faithful
in standing approved before him in your faithful Testimony, he will be more
then Wife to Husband, or Husband to Wife, or Parents to Children or Children to
Parents [yea] he will instruct our Children with his Spirit, and teach them his
Fear, though they should be in the Hands of their Enemies: so that our Children
shall not want the thing that is good for them: The Lord has sealed his
Counsel to me which I here declare unto you Parents of tender Children, whose
Trial is known to the Lord in these things, etc.

Oh feel the Seed of Abraham in its Dominion in you, which is the Bride, the
Lamb's Wife, and in true love to him does offer up the dearest Isaac into the
Will of God, that a perfect Sacrifice our God may have, Soul, Body and all that
we have in this day: He has called us to be the first Fruits unto the Lamb,
and in our Testimony in this our Trial we are called to preach to all Nations,
Kindred, Tongues, and People in their own Language; for the Witness in all
their Consciences will feel us, and give them to understand that we are not of
this World: but are the Redeemed of the Lord, whom he has called in the
Patience of the Lamb to suffer; for to gather the Seed that is scattered in the
Earth, that our Brethren may be brought from far, and our Sisters from the
outmost parts of the World, who cannot come until we have drunk this Cup, of
which I was sent to declare to you in years past; and now to your comfort I
declare, when it is finished according to the pleasure of the Lord; which he is
hastening, and will cut short in righteousness for the Seed sake; then woe, woe
to the Enemies of Sion, for our God will plague them, and cause them to cast
all their glory down before him, and they shall come bending to the soles of
the Feet of his People, and shall con^ess that you are the Children of the most
high God, the righteous seed which the Lord has blessed; and this certainly
will come to pass, the Mouth of the Lord has spoken it.

Through your Brother and Companion in the Tribulation and Patience of the Lord
Jesus, Farewell W. D.
Given forth in the the County Goal of Warwick, the 26 th of the 6 th Month,
1664.
1665
This for Dear Friends in London, and them that are Aboard the Ship, in order to
Transportation; or elsewhere all abarod.
DEAR and Valiant Children of the most High, your faithful standing in the meek
Spirit, to bear your Testimony for the Lord, in what he calls you unto, is a
sweet perfume in the Presence of the Lord, and a great refreshing to the Hearts
of his People; Therefore, abide in the pure meek Spirit, and receive your
blessed reward, you faithful Lambs, the blessed Crown of Glory is yours
forever; Oh feel the earning of Bowels toward you, and the breakings of Heart
that is before the Lord for you; Oh can we remember you, and not our Eyes water
with Tears, in compassionating of you in the simpathizing Spirit that indears,
and unites us one unto another in our God, to whom my Soul breaths. Oh Lord
sweeten the passage of thy People, and make their Cups pleasant thou suffers to
be given them to drink, that thy mighty Power may be manifest in all them that
love not their lives to death, to do thy will this day; and plead their cause
in hastening their deliverance, to the confounding of all Sions Enemies, and
the renown of thy great Name forever and ever.

Dear Brethren and Sisters in the meek Spirit of our God, my Life goes and
abides with you, with the forcible love of the whole Church of the first born;
Oh lift up your Heads, and let not the fear of the Sickness, or any
Representation of any Evil enter you, but all in staidness in the Light, Life,
Thought and Will of God, which is perfect in it self; and abiding, as is
written, God will keep every one of you in perfect peace all your days in every
condition, and will keep you in sweet peace and unity one with another to the
praise and glory of the Name of our God, whose presence is with you, and will
sweeten your passage in whatever you are to go through to the Praise and Glory
of the Name of the Lord forever, who will arise more and more, and plead our
Cause in the sight of a mighty People, whom he will make to con^ess that you
that are faithful, are the Children of the most High God, the righteous Seed
that the Lord has blessed, and it will be well every way with all the faithful
and suffering People, and the blessing of God shall be upon us and our Children
forever that love the Lord Jesus this day. And the hundred forty four Thousand
shall stand upon Mount Sion, where some of the number is already established;
and they shall sing the new Song, that not any shall learn but those that are
redeemed from the Earth, who shall make the Ears of all the Enemies of God to
tingle, and their Hearts shall fail, and paleness gather into their Faces, for
dreadful will be the vengeance of the Lord upon Sions Enemies, and great
fearfulness shall surprise them; they shall run to and fro like Vagabonds as
Cain did, and not know where to hide their Heads, for where ever they are the
Lord will find them out and banish them from place to place, until he has
gotten his glory upon them, in laying all low that withstands his arising, for
he will dash the potsheards of the Earth to pieces, and they shall lament and
cry out, and gnaw their Tongues for pain, when you faithful beloved, ever
honorable Children, that endure unto the end, shall Shout and Sing Praises and
Magnify the Lord, and say, Oh how righteous are thy Judgments, Oh thou King of
Saints; for thou have pleaded our cause and turned our Sorrows into everlasting
Joy, and have over-thrown all thy Enemies that withstand the rising of thy
Glory, that a door may be opened to gather our Brethren from far, and our
Sisters from the ends of the Earth: Therefore will we Sing of thy Goodness with
Praises, Praises, Hallelujahs, and high Praises, for thou art worthy over all
forever and ever, Amen.

My dear Companions with me Salutes you all in the dearest love of our God,
where neither Sea nor Land can separate; but in the bowels of love will we
embrace one another in the chaste Life where no Vulters Eye can behold our Joy
and Felicity in the Lord our God; In whom fare you we^l, fare you well says
the Soul of your dear Brother in the Name of the Lord forever, both you that
are for Transportation, and you that stand in a faithful Testimony in that City
where the Lord has sent his destroying Angel to execute the pleasure of his
will.

And in the tender Bowels of the Love of God, I desire you all [in this Gloomy
Dismal Dark Day that is come upon that City] put you on the shie^d of Faith, and
in the Light of the Covenant stand single before the Lord to be clothed with
the Garment of Eternal Salvation, that you may reign over all fearfulness and
unbelief, that every particular may stand as Saviors on Mount Sion in the
amidst of a desolate People, for this is the Harvest of the great God in that
City wherein he is Reaping, Threshing and Winnowing the Chaff from the Wheat,
and making a short work in the Earth for his Seed sake, and many that shall
have their lives given them for a prey shall receive the Word of Eternal Life
in that City, and great shall be the number who shall submit to the Government
of Christ, and they shall bless the Lord; for you that love not your lives to
death, for the Glory of God and gathering the Sons and Daughters of Men to the
Knowledge of God, by your holy lives and sweet walking in all holiness of
Conversation: Oh blessed be the day that ever you were born, yea my Soul
Glorifies God for you, that ever you had a being, you faithful Lambs in the
City of London, and else where scattered according to the Will God; Though you
now drink a Cup of great Affliction, the day of Eternal Joy is sprung up to
thee, which none can take away, an eternal Freedom shall be unto thee, Oh Sion;
Kings shall come unto thee, and Princes to the rising of this thy Glorious Day,
and all thy Enemies shall fall before thee, and thou shall be the Glory over
all the Earth, and the chosen Diadem in the Hand of thy God amongst the People,
who shall as much love thee as they now hate thee, and esteem of thee as they
now despise thee; for thou, Oh Sion, art the Plant of the Lord, the Tree of
Righteousness, in whom is the virtue of the mighty God of Heaven, and the leaf
of thy Tree shall heal the Nations, and put an end to all their distractions,
the Mouth of the Lord has spoken it

Through one that dwells within thy Gates thou Glorious and Beautiful Sion,
Church of the first Born, the Beloved Bride the Lambs Wife forever: Blessings,
Glory, and Praises, Hallelujahs, Eternal Honor and Renown be unto thy God and
King, who reigns in thee and is exalting his Kingdom over all the Kingdoms of
this World, and of his Dominion there shall be no end. W. D.
From the Common Goal in Warwick, the 12 th of the 6 th Meneth, 1665.
For the dear Daughters of Sion whom the Lord has or shall suffer, their dear
and tender Husbands to be separated from them beyond the Seas, or elsewhere,
for the Testimony of the Lord Jesus Christ.
DEar Handmaids of Glory, whom the Lord has counted worthy to part with your
dear and tender and beloved Husbands, for the Name of the Lord; assuredly many
puts their Shoulders to help to bear the Burden of your Trials this day: O the
Tears and breakings of Heart, that is poured forth before the Lord for your
dear Husbands, and you and your tender Children, you are Families of many
prayers, and assuredly shall be known to be Families, of many Mercies; O dear
Daughters of Sion be content with your Cup handed forth to you this day, and
bless the Name of the Lord, that you are accounted worthy to be the first
Fruits among the beloved Daughters: What could the Lord do more for you, then
to count you worthy to suffer in this nature to give you such blessed Husbands,
that are set as glorious Lights in the face of all People? Dear, chosen,
beloved Daughters of Sion, let it be seen you love the Lord Jesus more then
your dear Husbands, and stand over the affectionate Part, and solace your Souls
in the Love and Life of the Lord Jesus, your eternal and beloved Husband and
Comforter of your real Husbands, and will make us all to rejoice in whatever he
calls us unto, we diligently watching, and judging our selves and resting in
the Light and Will of God, in which the Lord establish you, you de^r beloved
Daughters of Sion, for whom breathes the Soul of your dear Brother daily to the
Lord, to strengthen you and your dear Husbands, and all that love the Lord
Jesus Christ;

In whom fare you well. W. D.
Warwick common Gaol the 10 th of the 8 th Month, 1664.
For my dear honorable Brethren, who are or may be sentenced to be Transported
to the Isles beyond the Sea, for the Testimony of the Name of the Lord Jesus.
MY dear Friends, in the suffering of the Lamb, who lives and reigns forever
and ever, and shall overcome all his Enemies, in the day determined that all
his Enemies shall bow under the Soles of his Feet, then shall all that oppress
you call you the blessed of the Lord forever: O, my dear Brethren, lift up your
Heads in the Light and Life of Jesus, for whom you suffer; abide in his Light;
reign over your thoughts of either Wife or Children, or whatever would trouble
your minds, for giving up freely in this your Testimony: O you valiants among
the People, the first Fruits, and the leading Champions, the Lord is with you,
and Thousands and ten Thousands shall bless the Name of the Lord for your
faithful Testimony, which shall sound over Nations, to the gathering the
People, and bringing in our little Sister who has no Breasts to feel the
Consolation of the life of our Beloved, for whom we suffer this day: O, my dear
Brethren, triumph, trimuph, in the face of all your Enemies, it shall be well
with you wheresoever the Lord suffers you to be carried; and as to your tender
Wives and Children, the Lord has said to my Soul, it shall be well with them,
the blessing of the Lord shall rest upon them forever and ever; and with you,
to the comfort of the Isles that wait for his Law; therefore in the peaceable
power of the Lord go on, you chosen Brethren of the suffering seed which the
Lord has blessed; O happy men that ever you were born; and blessed be the day
that ever the Lord called you in his Power to stand faithful in what the Lord
requires of you, in which living Testimony you stream through the whole Body,
as a River of Oil, and virtuous refreshings, whose memorial shall never
perish, but preach to Ages and Generations, to the Glory of the Name of our God
forever.

O go on with gladness, with trimuph, for it is to bring in the Seed from all
the ends of the Earth, that our Brethren may come from far, and Sisters from
the end of the World: O mighty God, cover thy faithful Servants with thy
glorious Power, and cause them and their Families to rejoice in thy disposing
of them forever and ever, Amen.

My Life in the suffering Spirit go with you in the Name of the Lord forever;
my dear Companions in these bonds Salute you in the Love of the Lord. Farewell.
W. D.
From the Common Gaol of Worwick, the ^0 th of the 8 th Month, 1665.
The Word of the Lord to all Children born again of the Immortal Seed as the
Salutation of the Bowels of the unlimitted Love of the Father, flowing forth to
you in the forcible Power of his own Life, through your Brother and Companion in
Tribulation, and Kingdom of Patience in the Lord Jesus Christ.
DEar and honorable Brethren and Sisters, Oh how does my Soul bless the Name
of the Lord for you, who stands faithful to God in your living Testimony for
him, in the pure, meek, peaceable Spirit of our Lord Jesus, with the hazard of
the loss of all outward substance; dear and tender Wife, and Children, and
beloved Husband, and tender Children, to be rent from their dear beloved
Parents, and also with the hazard of your Liberty, and Transportation out of
your Native Country, and not at all love your lives to death to seal your
Testimony with your Blood, in the Word of his Patience, if the Lord require it
at your Hands; and when you have done the Will of God, in what is before
written, your love is so large to the Lord Jesus, that you abhor, loath and
detest, and trample upon every appearance of the arrogant, self-prid^ng, and
self-inriching boasting Spirit, in what you have done, or suffered for the
Testimony of the Truth of our God, and in true watchfulness, and pure
attendancy to the Light and Counsel of the Lord Jesus, you are always kept in a
true sensibility of your own nothingness, clothed with the Garment of
everlasting humility, where you sit at the feet of Jesus, as Mary did, choosing
the good part that shall never be taken away, casting your Garments of all
self-righteousness upon the ground, that Jesus may tread upon them, and the
cumbred disposition of Martha, that would complain of the innocent Life, or
that would have any eye to self, and rob him of his Glory; and for this you
Children of the most high, is your daily waiting, that the Lord Jesus may take
you up into him, and cause you to rejoice, and sing Hosanah to the highest, and
to bless him that comes in the Name of the Lord, to cover you with his own
righteousness, and marry you to himself, as his chosen and beloved Bride, in
his own faithfulness, and give you perfect Victory in overcoming through the
Blood of the Lamb, and the word of your faithful Testimony, in the pure, meek,
holy, healing Spirit of the Lord our righteousness, in whom you shall be as
Pillars in the Temple of our God, and shall go no more forth, but shall grow as
Trees of Righteousness in the amidst of the Street of the City of our God,
bringing forth acceptable Fruit to him in due season, and your Leaves shall be
for the healing of the Nations, wherever the Lord suffers you, to be cast for
the Testimony of his glorious Name; yea, the Prisoners of hope will be
refreshed at the sound of your coming, and the Mourners will rejoice in your
arising, for the Tongue of the learned shall be given unto you all in your
measure, to speak a word in due season to every condition, for you and all the
Companions, that can read and understand in the true experience, your state as
here written shall stand as Saviors upon Mount Sion, which can never be
removed, because yo^ have not any eye to self, in what ever you do, but it is
your delight to be ordered by the holy Spirit of the Lord Jesus, and in your
resignation into his pure will, you shall be translated more and more, into the
angelical glory, and by your holy conversations, words, and works, which has
the love of God stamped upon them, you become Preachers of the mind of God, to
the Nations, and as ministering Angels, shall reap in his harvest, to the
gathering our Brethren from far, and our Sisters from the ends of the Earth,
and all the Nations shall confess, that you are the Children of the most high
God, the righteous Seed; whom the Lord has blessed and the Hearts of the
People shall be changed, in the day determined, by the Power of the mighty God,
who turns the Hearts of men as a River of Water, and the People of the Nations
in the Earth, shall more strive in their fervent desires for you suffering
Innocent Lambs to live amongst them, then they now str^ve and endeavor to send
you away from them, the Mouth of the Lord of Hosts has spoken it, through your
Brother in the Lord Jesus, whose life has been of no esteem to serve you with
my faithful Brethren, who in true self-denial, through the almighty Power of
God, endured the heat of the day, that you might be gathered and established,
to endure the trials which were of the Lord determined, of which I was sent in
years past to proclaim in your Ears, and in the same word which speaks through
me to you, of which neither jot nor tittle shall fall to the ground, till all
be fulfilled I declare to you this day. Therefore dear and honourab^e Brethren
and Sisters, from the highest growth, to the lowest stature in Jesus, let not
any consult with Flesh and Blood, but all in the perfect Light and Life of
Jesus, lift up your Heads, that your Souls may be inlivened with his quickening
virtue, in that eternal Hunger which nothing can satisfy, but the Lord of
Glory in this day of separation, between the precious and the vile, between the
true birth and the false birth, as it was in the days of old, when they
confessed unto him, and followed him beyond the Seas; but when the Lord said,
Except ye eat my Flesh, and drink my Blood, you have no Life in you; All that
were the false birth, that stood as the highway ground, stony and thorny
ground Hearers, foolish Virgins, that had no Oil in their Lamps, they said,
this is an hard saying, and who can bear it? and they went back and left the
Lord of Life, and followed no further: Then the Lord said to the Children born
of the true birth, will you go away also? They answered, nay, thou have the
words of eternal Life, and whither shall we go? Oh, dear Child, can thou
leave the Father that begot thee? or can thou ^eed of any thing, but the
bread he has prepared for thee? Though thou may be beset, and compassed
about as Bees with the Enemies of thy Souls peace, that would hinder thee from
walking with thy God, yet can they keep thee from him; nay assuredly, thou
hangest upon him, as a Child upon a Father. Though thou be as a little Babe,
thou abhors all things that would hinder thee from following the Lord: Thou
say of thy riches of this World; thou shall be no snare to me, and to the
tender Wife, weep not for me, give me up, for I must forsake thee when the Lord
requires me, neither regards the Cries and Tears of the mournful Children, thou
comfortest them in what thou may, but thou freely leavest them for the Glory
of thy God; and thus is it with Wife concerning tender Husband, and Children
concerning their dear Parents, in this day of rending one from another.
Assuredy I cannot but commiserate your condition, and simpathize with you,
being sensible of the earnings of Bowels whilst I have been drinking this cup
for many years. And now, Oh ye Babes, born of the royal birth, you are the
chosen Jewels, let no care be upon your Hearts for any thing in this World, for
you seeking Gods Kingdom, and the Righteousness thereof, you shall have all
satisfaction in the fullness of the Love of God, though separated one from
another: and let none of your Eyes look out at any that deny the Lord of Life
before Men, who in the profession of his Name, came forth with us, and goes
forth from us, because they are not of us; for as I have proclaimed in your
Ears, many years ago, so I proclaim it again, in the word of his faithfulness,
who lives for ever, That all that profess the Light and Name of Jesus, and
has an Eye to self in what they do, and does not follow him with a single
Heart in his work of Regeneration, before the trying day be over, they will
deny him and wither, as though they had never made mention of him; but all you
Lambs that fear and dread the Name of the Lord, and freely gives up to be
governed by his powerful Spirit, and in the least measure wait in the Light,
self to be buried down under this Judgment, and your Souls raised in the
Resurrection of Jesus, and born again of the Seed of God, which cannot depart
from him, but must follow him, let the power of darkness over all the Face of
the Earth do what it is permitted, Oh the beholding of you, Children of the
immortal birth, it is known to the Lord, the earning of Bowels, in the meltings
and breakings of my Heart, and I am streamed into you as a River, in the
unexpressible unlimited love and Life of my God, and your God, where feel and
taste, and let us solace in the invisible in-dwelling love of a tender Father,
where no vulterous Eye can behold, nor any venomous Be^st shall enter, to sting
the beloved Babes begotten of the Father any more.

And dearly beloved Brethren and Sisters, where ever the Lord orders you, watch
diligently, that in the sweet reserved Spirit, in the heavenly Wisdom you walk
together, in the loving, meek holy Spirit of the Lord Jesus, and in the nearest
fellowship, and familiarity with any one, watch to the Light to be covered
always with his Spirit of Sanctification, that you may stand before the Throne
of the Lamb, with the pure Garment of his own righteousness, to the Glory of
his great Name forever: And in all your words and works, be tender over one
another in love, in what you may, and the strong bearing the burden of the
weak, that the holy, meek, lowly, healing Spirit of our Lord Jesus Christ, may
rule in you all, binding up your Hearts together in the eternal unity of the
Spirit, and bond of Peace, where ever the Lord orders any of you his faithful
Children, that you with us, and we with you, may be as Sinews to the Loins,
and Marrow to the Bones of one another, in the meek lowly Spirit of Christ our
Head, and Life, that in him we all may be manifest to the whole World, to be
the Children of the most High God; through the aboundings of his virtue in and
amongst us, who are born again, and is the Church of the first born, the pure
Bride of the Lamb of God, who abhors to live in any thing, that is not of his
nature, and in sincerity of Heart have given up our names to him, and in his
Glorious Majestical cominion tramples upon all false births, feigned,
self-creating, self-serving Spirits, who are gone from the Innocent Life, and
make to themselves Pleasant pictures, in a voluntary humility, and smooth words
and gestures, and outward appearances, to enter the affectionate part; and
betray the Innocent as with a Kiss, but in the trial of the day that is come
upon all pleasant things, and pleasant pictures, they are found serving
themselves, and Iudases to the Innocent Life, of those that are regenerated, by
the Power of the most High, and redeemed from the Earth, therefore to you that
stand girt up in the Light, Thought and Will of God, to reign over all the
pollutions of this World, I write as to my Honorable Brethren, and Sisters,
desiring you all to resign to the faithfulness of God, that his al-sufficiency
may preserve you, out and over all the clouding thoughts of your own Hearts,
that in the pure discerning, you may taste and weigh all Spirits, of what
nature they are, in what Nation, Country or Island soever you are ordered to
go, and lay not your Hands hastily upon any, neither regard their feigned
smooth words and behavior, but in the Life of the Lord Jesus, wait, that he
may give you Ability, in his pure Wisdom to make your passage, in the invisible
entrance, through all outward appearances, to try and taste what they are
inwardly to God, in the measure of the Heart searching Spirit you have received
of the Father, that so you may all be kept, and preserved, in the entire union,
in the sincere Life to reign over all false births, in the dominion to walk
with the Lord, and one toward another, in the eternal, in^xpressible,
unlimitted, pure, holy chaste Love of our Father in the Lord Jesus, who in his
unlimitted Love laid down his Life for us, and with his Blood has redeemed,
washed, and cleansed us, that we might have access to the Throne of his Glory
continually, to offer up the living Sacrifice of Halelujahs and high Praises,
Glory and Honor unto the Lord God, and to the Lamb that sits upon the Throne,
our Light, Life, Strength and Righteousness, Joy, Peace, Tranquillity, and
everlasting Felicity over all God blessed forever, of whose dominion there is
no end.

And in his Glorious Powerful Resurrection, and Dominion, keep your state with
God, that his tender Bowels may be enlarged in you, to all where you feel any
true breathings, and heavenly desires, toward the Name of the Lord, though in
some outward things they may differ, let not that shut up your Bowels, but in
the openings of the Spirit of the Lord, in what you may, Minister to the
enlivening of that in them, which the Lord has begotten to hunger for him; Oh
I beseech you ease my Heart in this matter, for I am in travel, till all that
hunger for the righteousness of God, under what denomination soever, be all
gathered to the Light of Jesus, there to receive an understanding to feel the
Spirit of the Lord, make a separation in condemning sin in the Flesh, and
quickening in Spirit, in the Resurrection, in the Powerful Life in Christ, that
so our little Sister, that has no Breast, scattered among Languages, Tongues
and People in the Nations* by your sweet, and holy Conversations in the meek,
lowly, and loving chaste Spirit, of the Lord Jesus, may be gathered in the
Light and Life of jesus, with us to sit down at the table of our God, to drink
continually the Cup of Salvation, in which work, O my God, bless thy Servants
with thy prosperous presence, where ever thou sends them; and all you chosen
Lambs, comfort my Heart, in what my Soul desires in this thing, that as in the
pure discerning of the Spirit of the Holy God, you trample and reign over the
greatest subtilty which in the Mystery of iniquity transforms it self, as is
before written, that so you may in the service of Love in the meek healing
compassinate Spirit of Jesus, gather all the tender hearted forth of all Sects,
Forms, and Opinions, with all that has strayed from the footsteps of the
Flock of the Companions, in the Light of the Lord with us to walk, in
faithfulness all their days, until their change come, that if it be possible,
that not any may be lost, who hunger after righteousness, and has their Faces
set toward Sion, That so in the heavenly Harmony, all that have truly sought
the Face of God, may in his pure Light, Life and Dominion, walk together with
us, in the unlimitted Bowels of Love in the Lord Jesus, to the confounding of
all Sion's Enemies, who in the time determined of our God, shall come bending
to the Soles of the Feet of the afflicted suffering Lambs of my Father, who
Love the Lord better then your Lives, and your Neighbor as your self; yea, and
they that withstand you shall in the day determined of God, confess it is in
vain for any to strive, to bring to pass their evil intents, upon a People
beloved of God, whom he will carry through by his Almighty Power, and save with
the Arm of his Salvation; for every Tongue lifted up against you shall fall in
judgment, and all Weapons formed against you shall not prosper, but come to
naught, and you shall see the mighty salvation of God for your joy, which the
Lord will hasten more and more, to the astonishment of all that withstand the
rising of his Glory, and you shall certainly know, this is to you the Word of
the Lord God, declared through your Brother, and Companion in the Tribulation,
and Kingdom of Patience in the Lord Jesus Christ. Farewell.

W. D.
From the Common Goal in Warwick, sent forth at the command of the Lord, the 8
th of the 3 th Mo^eth, 1665. Blessed are they that overcomes through the Blood
of the Lamb, and the word of their Testimony, and love their lives no more to
Death.



The Discovery of Man's return to his first Estate, by the Operation of the
Power of God, in the great work of Regeneration. And a Word to the Back-slider,
who has tasted of the good Word of God, and the Powers of the World to come,
and has turned from the Grace of God, into wantonness, and gone back into
spiritual Sodom and Egypt, where our Lord is crucified.
Also, a discovery of mystery Babylon, and her Merchants. And a word to the
hard-hearted unbelieving Jews, Professors who profess Christ in words, but
stumble at his Light in their Consciences, to their own Destruction. With a
Word to all Saints, who have set their Faces toward Sion, to seek the Lord
their God, and to those that are waiting therein to worship him in Spirit and
Truth. And a Word of Consolation, unto the traveling Child; that yet sits in
Darkness, being deeply afflicted, and wounded in Spirit, through ignorance of
Salvation in the New Covenant, in Christ Jesus the Light.
All Men and Women, behold, and see in what Estate you were Created. Genesis 1.26,
27.


ANd God said, let us make Man in our Image, God created Man in his own Image,
and in the Image of God created he Him, Male and Female created he them.

And the Lord God took the man and put him in the Garden of Eden to dress, and
keep it: and the Lord God Commanded the Man* saying, Genesis 2.15* 16, 17.
of every Tree in the Garden thou may freely eat, but of the Tree of
knowledge of good and evil thou shall not eat of it; for in the day thou eatest
thereof thou shall surely dye the death.

The Serpent was more subtle then any beast of the Field, Genesis 3*1.10.
which the Lord God had made, he said unto the Woman, ye shall not surely die;
for God does know that in the day you eat thereof, your Eyes shall be opened,
and ye shall be as Gods knowing good and evil.

And when the Woman saw the Tree was good for food, and that it was pleasant
unto the Eyes, and a Tree to be desired to make one wise; she took the Fruit
thereof, and did eat, and gave also to her Husband with her, and he did eat.

And the Eyes of them both were opened, and they knew that they were naked, and
they sewed fig leaves together, and made them aprons.

And they heard the Voice of the Lord God walking in the Garden in the cool of
the day, and Adam and his Wife hid themselves from the Presence of the Lord
among the Trees of the Garden: and the Lord God called unto Adam, and said unto
him, where art thou?

And he said, I heard thy voice in the Garden, and was afraid; and because I
was naked, I hid my self. And he said, who told thee that thou wast naked? have
thou eaten of the Tree whereof I commanded thee that thou should not eat?
and the Man said, the Woman, whom thou gave to be with me, she gave me of the
Tree, and I did eat.

And the Lord God said unto the woman, what is this that thou have done? the
woman said the Serpent beguiled me and I did eat.

And the Lord God said unto the Serpent, because thou have done this, thou art
cursed above all Cattle, and above every Beast of the Field; upon thy Belley
shall thou go, and Dust shall thou eat all the Days of thy Life.

And I will put Enmity betwixt thee and the Woman, and between thy Seed, and
her Seed; it shall bruise thy Head, and thou shall bruise his Heel.

And the Lord God said, Behold this Man is become as one of us, Genesis 3.22.23,
24,.
to know good and evil; and now lest he put forth his Hand and take also of the
Tree of Life, and eat, and live forever; therefore the Lord God sent him forth
from the Garden of Eden, to till the ground from whence he was taken. And he
drove out the Man, and placed at the East of the Garden of Eden Cherubims, Rev.
2.5.
and a flaming Sword, which turned every way to keep the way of the Tree of
Life.

Every Man and Women, behold and see how you are fallen from the estate and
condition you were created in; Genesis 1.26, 27.
you were created in the Image of God to delight alone in him, but you are
fallen in obeying the counsel of the Serpent, Genesis 3.24.
and are driven out of the Presence of God into the Earth, and there your minds
are feeding upon the dust of the Earth, created o^jects which will perish; some
delight in Father and Mother, some in Wife and Children, some in Houfe and
Lands, some in Money and Gold, Luke 14.26. Mat. 10.37 Ephesians. 4.5. Eccl. 2.3. Jer.
9.33. Joh. 5.44.
some in Meats and Drinks, some in Raiment, what they shall put on, some in
Lusts and Pleasures, in Wantonness, vain idle Communication, foolish Jesting
and Laughter, which is Madness and Folly and some in Honor and Preferments in
this World, wherein their Hearts are lifted up in Pride and Exaltation above
others whom they have power over, not considering how you are driven out from
the Presence of the Lord, wherein you were placed in the beginning: 1 Cor. 3.6.
and some there are that feed upon the letter of the Scripture, conprehending
God and Christ in their Wisdom from what the Saints of the most high God had
spoke forth from the Life they enjoyed in Christ Jesus, Col. 1.27.
which was in them the hope of their Glory, and Man in his Serpentine Wisdom
steals the Saints words into his understanding, Jer. 23.30. Cor. 9.26.23.
and never knows the Life and Power thereof in himself, and so speaks a
divination of his own Brain, a Riddle to his own Heart, and while he speaks to
others, himself is a Cast-way.

Every Man and Woman in particular, deal justly with your Hearts, and see where
your Hearts are, and what they delight in, for in some of these created objects
you delight in, and feed upon, if you cannot witness your change by the Eternal
and Powerful Word of Truth; Genesis 3.24* Mat. 25.19. Gal. 15.19.20.21.
for into the Earth you are driven from the Presence of God, and these are the
Fruits which spring forth of the Earth, which is in your Hearts, Self-love,
Pride, Covetousness, Anger, Revenge, Hastiness, Frowardness, Backbiting,
hard-Heartedness, Cruelty and Oppression, Lust and Uncleanness, Drunkenness,
Impatiency and Unbelief, and you are fenced out from coming to the Tree of
Life, with Cherubims and the flaming Sword, which turns every way to keep the
Tree of Life. Genesis 3.24.
So every one see what you can witness of your return again unto God from
whence you are separated by the Disobedience and evil of your Hearts, and see
what is the Ground of the hope of your callings, and by what Power you are
acted in your Obedience unto God, Ephesians. 5.13.
whether by the Power of the first Adam, or by the Power of the Second; for if
thou upon the Convincement of the evil of thy ways, do not wait in the Light,
which is in thy Conscience, that convinces thee of the evil of thy doings, for
Power from the Lord to guide thee forth of the evil, which the Light discovers,
which would guide thee into the Kingdom of God, Luke 17.20.
but thou runnest out into the Wisdom of the first Adam, to seek the Kingdom of
God in outward Forms, and Observations, according as thou comprehendest of the
Saints practices, and thou imitatest their practices in thy Wisdom, and though
thou walkst never so strictly in these outward Forms, Genesis 3.7. Mat. 9.16.17.
Genesis 1.14. to 19.
thou art alive in the first Adam sewing fig leaves together to cover thy
nakedness, a piece of new cloth in an old Garment, thou art putting new Wine
into old Bottles, and art building up a Tower to get up to God in thy
heathenish and Babylonish Wisdom, and confusion will come upon thee; in the day
when the Lord comes to look for Fruit, thou will be found a fruitless Tree that
cumbers the Ground; Cain, with his offering up Sacrifice unto God in thy first
nature, Genesis 5. Genesis 27.34, 38. Heb. 12.17. Genesis 12.9, 10. 2 Pet. 1.19 20.
Esau seeking the Birthright with Tears, who shall never find it, and all the
Fruit that is raised in thee is from Hagar the Bondwoman, and thou have thy
end for thy self in all that thou do which is thy Hire, which thou expectest
in the end, life, for thy Labor, and Obedience, and thou regards not the Glory
of the Lord, and his Fear is not before thine Eyes; therefore every Man and
Woman, deal justly with your own Hearts, under what name or title soever thou
be, whether thou be a Teacher of others, or a Professor of what thou
comprehendest to be Truth from the Testimony the Saints gave forth, from the
Life and Power of Christ that was in them, and thou expectest Life in thy
outward Forms and Observations, and mindest not to be guided by the Light which
is of Christ in thy own Conscience, which Light guided the Saints that gave
forth the Scriptures, and while thou disobeyest that Light, profess what thou will, thou art in the fall, Genesis 4.1, 11, 12. Genesis 21.1. Gal. 4.30.
first Adam is yet alive in thee, Cain is not yet banished, nor Esau
reprobated, nor the Bondwoman and her Son cast out; which are all figures and
types of the first nature, which is yet alive in thee, and thy will is thy
guide, and thy Heart is in the Earth, Rev. 18.3.
notwithstanding all thy profession, and thou art a painted beast made drunk
with the Wine of the wrath of the Whore, which is thy Wisdom, which comprehends
that which thou never did know manifest in it self, and sits decked as a well
favored Harlot, above the Cross of Christ, thou will be found a Thief and a
Robber, John. 10.1.
who comes not in by the Door Jesus Christ, but climbs up some other way; and
thus far went the Scribes and Pharisees, and the young Man, who had kept the
Commandments from his youth, Mat. 10.20, 21.
but when he should have sold all for Christ, he went away sorrowful: And thus
far went Paul when he persecuted Jesus Christ, according to the Law he walked
blameless, and all thy strict walking to get Life in Observations according to
the Letter, Phil. 3.5.6.
is striving again to get to the Tree of Life by thy own power, who art fenced
out with Cherubims, and a flaming Sword, Genesis 3.24.
which turns every way to keep the way of the Tree of Life; And if thou never
saw thy self fenced out from the Presence of God, notwithstanding all thy
righteousness in observations, thou art not come so near God, Gen 2.7. Romans
5.4. Mat. 11.12.13.
as to see the flaming Sword, which is placed to meet thee, in every way thou
turnest to get life in thy own power, and to cut thee down, and kill thee, that
Christ may be thy life; thou art alive in the first Adam, and art in the death,
for death reigns over all from Adam to Moses, and Moses is until the Prophets,
and the Prophets till, John, and John until Christ, and if thou can not
witness that thou art come to Moses, Joh. 1.6, to 9. and 26 27. ver. Mat.
7.13.14.
profess what thou will, thou have not set thy Face toward God, nor one step
in the strait and narrow way to Eternal Life, but art going the broad way to
destruction, whatever thou be, whether a Teacher, of others, or a Professor of
what thou comprehendest to be Truth from the Letter of the Scripture, under
what Form, Name, or Title soever thou be, thou art a dead Man, and a dead
Woman, and the wrath of God abides on thee, though thou see it not, Romans 7.9.
There Paul witnesses, I was alive without the Law once, John 1.9. Ephesians. 2.1, 2,
3.
but when the Commandment came, sin revived, and I dyed. Friends, every one in
particular, deal justly with your Hearts, see what you can witness of your
death with Christ, by the powerful word of Truth, which enlightens the
Conscience, and condemns sin in the flesh, for every one would ascend with
Christ to be partakers of the Life and Glory with him, Romans 8.3. Joh. 3.36. 1
Pet. 2.8. Gal. 3.27. Romans 6.3. to. 8. Romans 8.17. 2 Timothy 2.11.12. Joh. 5.25.
but he becomes a stumbling Stone to be Baptized with him into his sufferings
and death, and this thou must witness before ever thou come to sit with him in
Heavenly Places; for it is they, and they alone that shall reign with him, who
suffer with him, and they that are dead with him shall live with him; it is the
dead that hears the Voice of the Son of God, and they that hear shall live;
arise thou that sleep in the dust of the Earth, securely in thy earthly
serpentine Wisdom, thy mind feeding upon the dust of the Earth, Ephesians. 5.14.
created objects which will perish; arise, stand up to Judgment, that Christ
may give thee Life: Mi^h. 6.1.
this is required of thee, O Man, to do justly, love mercy, and to walk humbly
with thy God; examine thy Heart, and deal justly with thy own Soul: John 1.9.
and 8.12. and, 9.5.
There is a Light in thy Conscience, which Light is of Christ, minding it, it
will let thee see the mystery of Iniquity that lodges in thy Heart, which is
deceitful, and desperately wicked; and this Light in thy Conscience, which
discovers unto thee the evil of thy Heart, is of the eternal Word of God, Jer.
17.6. Ephesians. 5.13
and was from the beginning, according as it is written in the outward
Testimony of the Truth.

In the beginning was the Word, John 1.2, 3.3, 5,
and the Word was with God, and the Word is God, and the same was in the
beginning with God, all things were made by him, and without him was not any
thing made that was made; Rev. 20.12, 13.
in him was Life, and the Life was the Light of men, and the Light shines in
Darkness, and the Darkness comprehends it not: Every one arise out of your
earthly wi^dom, and mind the Light in thy Conscience, and wait on the Power of
the Lord in it, and it will bring thee to Judgment before the Throne of the
Lamb* where the righteous Law will be opened in thy heart, that will cry
through thy earthly heart for Righteousness and Judgment; 2 Cor. 5.10. Mat.
12.^6.
and the Book will be opened in thee, where thou shall see all written that
thou have done in the Body, and shall give an account for every idle word, and
receive thy reward for what thou have done; and thy reward is Wrath and
Condemnation, which will pass upon thee from the Presence of the Lamb, for thy
disobedience and breaking of the righteous Law, Jam. 2.10*
which must be fulfilled, and what way soever thou turnest to get Life in
outward Forms and Observations, the flaming Sword, which is the righteous Law,
that goes out of the Mouth of the Lamb, it will turn every way, and meet thee,
and cut thee down, and cast thee into Hell, where there is Weeping and Wailing
for want of the presence of God, and thou can do nothing to pacify the Wrath
of God, which is gone out against thee: Now would thou hide thy self, Gen
3.8, 9, 10. Genesis 3.7.
as Adam did, when he appears in thy Heart, thy Fig-leafed Garment of Prayers,
Tears, Forms, outward Observations according unto thy comprehension of the
Letter, will not cover thy Nakedness; it served to cover the Nakedness from the
sight of Men; but now when the Lord appears in thy Heart, thou can not stand
before him; now comes Cain in thee to be driven from the Face of God, Genesis
4.12, 13, 14. Genesis 27.34, 38. Heb. 12.17. Genesis 21.10. Rev. 19.15. Romans 3.6, to
8. 2 Timothy 2.11, 12.
to be a Fugative and a Vagabond in the Earth, notwithstanding all his
Sacrifice; and Esau in thee Rep^obated, never to have the Blessing, though he
seek it with Tears; and the bond Woman and her Son cast out, and the first Adam
now slain, with the sharp Sword that goes out of the Mouth of the Lamb; and
art made to give up thy Soul to God, whose it is, to do with thee what he will,
if he destroy thee forever, he may; and if he save thee from eternal Death, it
is his free Love; now art thou Baptized with Christ, into his Sufferings and
Death, where thou lie sealed down under the eternal Judgment of God; and
there perishes for ever, for any power or help thou have in thy self; and this
is the Administration of Moses, Mat. 18.11. Luke 19.10.
where thou lie condemned for ever, under the righteous Law, without any help
or hope, until the Administration of the Prophets, that prophecy of a Christ,
that has satisfied the righteous Law of God for thee, who art lost and
condemned under the power of the Law of Moses* and now there is a secret hope
raised up in thy Soul, and thou look up from under the condemning power of
Moses for a Savior, and the Prophets are until John, and of all that were born
of Women there was not one greater than John, Luke 16.16, 17. Mat. 11.11. Joh.
5.35.
for he is a burning and shining Light, that lets thee see the filthiness of
thy Heart, and the Law shines in its purity to condemn the earthly Man in thee,
but he streghthens the hope in thee that was raised up by the Prophets, to see
the beauty and excellency of Jesus Christ, which ravishes thy lost condemned
Soul, that thou art willing to sell all for him, the Scripture now being
fulfilled in thee who witness this, From the days of John even until now, Mat.
1.12. Luke 3.5.
the Kingdom of God suffers violence, and the violent take it by force; now is
every Mountain and Hill laid low in thee, and crooked ways made strait, and the
rough way in thee made smooth, and thou waitst in the Wilderness, and lost
condition of thy self, for the Salvation of God, to be manifest to thee in
Jesus Christ; 2 Pet. 2.10. Luke 17.24. John 5.25.
and in the appointed time of the Father, the Son of Man comes to thy Soul as a
Thief in the Night, as the lightning from the East to the West, so is his
appearance in thee, and causes thy dead Soul to hear his Voice, which witnesses
to it eternal Life freely through his own Blood, and thy Soul hears his Voice,
and by the Word of his Power is made to live and art sealed up by the holy
Spirit of Promise, the Spirit of God bearing witness, with thy Spirit, that
thou art his Child: now come thou to witness the second Adam to be a
quickening Spirit, and Isaac the promised Seed to be heir for ever: Romans 8.16
and that the wages of sin is death, but the Gift of God is Eternal Life: 1
Cor. 14.45. Romans 6.23 Ephesians. 2.5, 8, 9, 10.
and that by Grace thou art saved, through Faith, in the Lord Jesus, not of
works least any should boast, and he that has hope in him purifies himself as
he is pure, and the Love of Christ constrains thee now, who can witness this
work of Regeneration manifest in thee, to follow him whithersoever he goes, 1 John 3.3. 2 Cor. 3.14. Tit. 3.5.
no more to obey him for Life as thou did, when thou wast without seeking him
in Forms and Observations, but now the Love and Life thou enjoyest in Christ
Jesus constrain^ thee to deny thy self, and take up thy cross daily and follow
him. Luke 9.13.24.
Now art thou come into the beginning, to live in the Lord, guided by the
powerful word of Faith, Joh. 4.1. to 5.
the Light that shines in thy Heart, which is the Light of the City New
Jerusalem, to which thou art come to Worship the Father in Spirit and Truth;
and all that are come to walk in the Light of the City New Jerusalem, are the
true Israel of God, that are taught of God, Joh. 23.24 Isa. 54.13. Heb. 8.10,
11, 12. Ezekiel. 36.24, 25, 26, 27, 28. Jer. 31.33.34.
to whom the New and everlasting Covenant is made, according to the promise of
the Lord; This is the Covenant I will make with the House of Israel, and with
the House of Judah, after those days, says the Lord, I will put my Law in
their inward parts, and write it in their Hearts, and I will be to them a God,
and they shall be to me a People, and they shall teach no more every man his
Neighbor, and every man his Brother, saying, know the Lord, for they shall all
know me from the least of them to the greatest of them. I will be merciful unto
their unrighteousness, and their sins and their iniquities will I remember no
more, and in this City there is no need of the Sun* neither of the Moon to
shine in it, which are borrowed Lights, outward Dispensations, and teachings of
men, Rev. 21.23.24, 25, and 27, v.
for the Glory of the Lord God does lighten it, and the Lamb is the Light
thereof, and the Nations of them that are saved shall walk in the Light of it,
and the Kings of the Earth bring their Glory and honor unto it; and there
shall in no wise enter into it any thing that defiles, neither whatsoever
works abomination, or makes a lie, but they which are written in the Lambs
Book of Life; and the Gates of it shall not be shut at all by day, for there
shall be no night there, for the Lord God gives them Light, and they shall
reign for ever and ever. Halelujah to the Highest.

To all revolted Souls who have departed from the Counsel of the Lord, and are
made drunk with the Wine of the wrath of the Fornication of the Whore, Rev. 8.3.
bewitched with the Mother of Withcraft to return into Spiritual Sodom and
Egypt, where our Lord is Crucified.
WHoever thou art in whom the righteous Law of God, Rev. 20.8.
Jesus Christ the Light in thee has cried through thy earthly Heart, for
righteousness and judgment, Mat. 12.39.
and there thou did stand arraigned before the Throne of the Lamb, where the
Book was opened in thee, and written therein, all the deeds thou have done in
the body, and the sentance of wrath and judgment passed out of the Mouth of
the Lamb on thee for every idle word, and all that thou have done, and in this
thy condemned Estate, thou runnedst too and fro to hide thee from the wrath of
the Lamb, Genesis 3.24.
in reforming thy ways, and strictly observing what thou wast convinced of to
be the Will of God; but what way soever thou turnedst in thy Obedience toward
God, to get Life, thither the flaming Sword turned that proceeded out of the
Mouth of the Lamb, and cut thee down and cast thee into a Hell, Rev. 19.15.
who^e thou layest weeping and wailing under the wrath of God, sealed down
under his eternal judgment for evermore, for any help or power thou had in
thy sel^, until Jesus Christ manifested eternal Love and Mercy freely to thy
poor lost condemned Soul, and raised thee up to a lively hope, and sealed thee
up in the Covenant of Life with his own Blood; Now after the witnesses has
sealed up their Testimony, the Beast which is thy will, that ascends out of the
bottomless pit of thy deceived Heart, which is deceitful and desperately
wicked, has made War against the Witnesses; and slain them, and they lie dead
in the spiritual City of Sodom and Egypt, Rev. 11.7, 8. Jer. 17.19
where our Lord is Crucified, and thou art made Drunk with the Wine of the
Wrath of the Fornication of the Whore, and bewitched with her Witch-Crafts, who
now tells thee, whom he loves he loves to the end; and to the Pure all things
are pure, thou art no more under the Law, but under Grace, and all things are
alike, that when thou disobeyest the pure Law, which once had power over thee,
and it witnesses against thee secretly, crying in thy Heart, use thy liberty,
but nor as an occasion to the Flesh, thou regardest not the Counsel of the
Lord, Gal. 5.13.
but hearkens to the Mother of Harlots in thee, and causes thee to wrest the
Scriptures to thine own Destruction, and tells thee the Law has no power over
thee, thou art under Grace, it is but the Law in thy members, that Wars against
the Law in thy mind, the acting of the humanity which acts in its place, that
the Grace of God may appear more gloriously; God sees no Sin in thee, for it is
no more thou, but Sin that dwells in thee, and the former misery thou wast in,
under the Wrath of God, for the disobeying of the righteous Law, thou now
treadest under thy Feet, and lies slain in spiritual Sodom and Egypt in thy
Heart, yet not put in Grave, but lies in thy sight, and lets thee see the evil
of thy doings, and vexes and torments thy earthly and carnal Heart in the
amidst of all thy Joy; but the Whore in thee tells thee, that the former
trouble thou wast in, it was through ignorance of God, but now thou art grown
up to a higher stature in Christ, to see nothing but love in whatsoever thou
do, and now thou know nothing but to eat, and to drink, and be merry, for
the Children of the Bride Chamber, cannot mourn while the Bridegroom is with
theus; time was thou did mourn, but it was when the Bridegroom was not with
thee; but now the Winter is past, and Summer come, and singing of Birds is
heard in thy Land, and now wash thy face, and anoint thy Head with Oil, that
thou appear no more before Men, as thou did when thou wast a Pharisee; now to
be a friend to Publicans and Sinners, and become all to all that thou may
win some, and whatever thou do, it is God that acts thee, for thou art not
stronger then he to resist him, and if he would have it other ways, how could
thou hinder it? so it is as it must be, and it cannot be otherwise; thus the
subtle Serpent winds into the mind of Man, and causes him to wrest the
Scriptures to his own destruction to draw back into perdition.

Woe, Prove. 14.14. Heb. 1.13.
woe unto thee thou back-slider in Heart, who chargest God, who is purity it
self, to be the Author of Sin, and the actor of thee in all thy filthy and
unrighteous walking, Heb. 10.38.
and have turned the Grace of God into Wantonness, and take liberty to Sin,
because Gra^e abounds, and make the coming of Christ, (who came to fulfill the
Law) to destroy it, Romans 6.1. Mat. 25, 17, 18.
through the evil of thy Heart, that when the righteous Law cries in thee for
purity, and condemns thee for thy unrighteous walking; then thou pretendst to
fly to the free Grace in Christ, Romans 7.1.
to save thee from the power of the Law, but thou shall find the Law has power
over the fleshly Man as long as he lives; and the fleshly Man that now guides
thee, is under the Law until it be destroyed through Faith in Christ Jesus;
Mat. 15.17, 18.
For he came not to destroy the Law, but to fufil it, and the Saints witness
it, though thou wrest the words of Paul (when he declared his condition before
he came to the fullness of stature in Christ) to thy own Destruction. Romans 7.23
Romans 6.16. To. 7.25. ver. 5.
I see a Law in my Members, warring against the Law of my Mind, and brings me
into Captivity, into the Law of Sin, which is in my Members; but he gave not up
himself to be a Servant of Sin, as thou do, it was his burden that made him
to cry, Oh, wretched Man that I am, who will deliver me from this body of
Death? and he waited in the Faith until he was freed, Romans 8.2. For the Law of
the spirit of Life in Christ Jesus, has made me free from the Law of Sin and
Death, that the Righteousness of the Law might be fulfilled in us, who walk not
after the Flesh, but after the Spirit: Luke 9.2.
He witnessed Christ come in him to fulfill the Law, and so do all the Saints
now, according to their growth; some witness the Law fulfilled in them, and
others are waiting in the Faith patiently, following the Lord daily through the
Cross, until the Law be fulfilled: But thou art departed from the Counsel of
the Lord thy God, and causest his Name to be evil spoken of, and have made the
Hearts of his People sad, as they did that the Apostle speaks of, For many
walk, of whom I have told you often, and now tell you, even weeping, that they
are the Enemies of the Cross of Christ, Phil. 3.18.19.
whose end is Destruction, whose God is their Belly, and whose Glory is their
Shame, 2 Pet. 2.19, 20, 21.
who mind earthly things. These Scriptures are fulfilled in thee, which the
Apostle mentions, And while they promise them Liberty, they themselves are the
Servants of Corruption; for of whom a Man is overcome, of the same is he
brought into Bondage, for if after they have escaped the pollutions of the
World, through the knowledge of the Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, they are
again entangled therein, and overcome, the latter end of them is worse^ ^ith
them, then the beginning for it had been better for them not to have known the
way of Righteousness, then after they have known it, ver. 22.
to turn from the Holy Commandment delivered unto them; but it is happened unto
them according to the true Proverb, the Dog is returned to his own Vomit again,
and the Sow that was washed to her wallowing in the Mire. And thou may read
what will be manifest to thee from the Lord.

For if we sin wilfully, Heb. 10.26. to 32. ver.
after we have received the knowledge of the Truth, there remains no more
Sacrifice for Sin, but a certain fearful looking for of Judgment, and fiery
Indignation, which shall devour the Adversaries.

He that despised Moses Law died without Mercy, how much sorer punishment
suppose ye, shall thou be thought worthy of, who have trodden under foot the
Son of God, and have counted the blood of the Coveant wherewith thou wast
sanctified an unholy thing, and have done despite unto the Spirit of Grace; and
we know him that has said, Vengeance belongs unto me, I will recompense says
the Lord: It is a fearful thing to fall into the hands of the living God.

Rev. 2.5.
Remember from whence thou art fallen, and repent, and do thy first work, in
minding that light of Jesus Christ in thee before whom thou once stoodest
condemned for that thou now live in. Prize the time, and give up to be guided
by the counsel of the Lord in thee, the light of thy conscience, Ephesians. 4.13.
that discovers every vain thought, wait on the power that is present with the
light: and it will dash Babylons children against the stones, Psalm. 137.8, 9.
which is Sin in its conception, so will thy carnal mind be brought to the
Cross daily, and thy Heart will be purged with the Spirit of judgment, and the
Spirit of burning; kiss the Son in obeying his Counsel, the Light in thee,
Psalm. 2.11.12.
least thou perish in the way; for if his anger be kindled a little, blessed
are they that trust in him.

The discovery of Mystery Babylon, to all enslaved Captives in Babylons
Kingdom, who are made Drunk with the Wine of the Wrath of he Fornications, Rev.
18.3.
and bewitched through the multitudes of her Enchantments.
FRiends, Babylon is within you, the Mother of Harlots is within you, Rev. 17.5.
and bewitches you through the abundance of her Sorceries; and the Beast is
within you, Rev. 11.7.
that rises out of the bottomless Pit of the deceived Heart, which is
deceitful and desperately wicked; and the Beast which all the World wanders
after, ^er. 17.5. Rev. 13.4.
is your wills, that makes War against the Lamb of God in you, which is the
Light that makes manifest the evil of your Hearts, Joh. 1.9. Ephesians. 5.13. Rev.
17.3. ver. 4.
and your wisdom is the great Whore that sits upon the Beast, that arises out
of the bottomless pit of the deceitful Heart, and she finds out many deceitful
inventions to preserve the beastly will alive, having a golden Cup in her Hand,
full of the Abominations of the Earth, and this golden Cup is your outward
professions, 2 Pet. 1.11
glorious comprehensions and conceivements of God and Christ, imitating what
the Saints did in power, according as they were moved by the operation of the
Spirit of the most high God, and (...) ^mitate the Saints practice by your
wisdom.

There is nothing but confusion in the Kingdom of Babylom; Genesis 11.7, 8, 9.
so come you to be divided into so many particular Forms, as Presbyterians,
Independants, Anabaptists, and diverse others that are in outward worships,
painted over with glorious words, and yet you whose wills guide you, Rev. 17.4.
Mat. 15.19, 20. Genesis 6.5. Genesis 5.19, 20, 21. Prove. 1.7.
are painted Beasts, bewitched with the Mother of Harlots, notwithstanding all
your outward professions and glorious observations, they are but the golden
Cup, and within you are full of the abominations of the Earth, as self-love,
covetousness, lust, and uncleanness, hastiness, frowardness, backbiting,
slandering, hardheartedness, cruelty, and oppresion, grinding the Face of the
Poor, impatiency and unbelief, and the Fear of the Lord is not before your
Eyes, and thus you lie inslaved Captives, in the Kingdom of Babylon, Luke
14.26. Mat. 10.37. Mat. 19.29.
refreshing your Hearts in the Creature enjoyments, which will perish; some in
Father and Mother, some in Wife and Children, some in House and Land, some in
Money and Gold, some in self Wisdom, delighting in themselves, some in Honor
and Preferment in this World, and when there is enjoyment of these visible
Creatures, Jer. 9.23. Joh. 5.44.
then there is content, and when they are taken away there is trouble, the mind
always plodding, Mat. 6.21. Mic. 2.1, 2. Prove. 22.16* Amos 4.1. Hos 2 18.
Revel. 24. rev. 18.13 John 1.9. and 8.12. and 9.5. 1 John 2.27. Luke 17.21, 22.
contriving, and acting every way to get of the Creatures what the Heart lusts
after, and he that gets the most is the highest exalted, so every one is
exalted above another, and there is nothing but Tyranny, Cruelty, and
Oppression among you, you Sons and Daughters of Babylon; And in her was found
the Blood of the Prophets, and of the Saints, and all that were slain upon the
Earth.

The Merchants of Babylon are your Teachers; who draw you from your guide,
which is the pure Light of Christ in you, to seek the Kingdom of God in
Observations, without you, contrary to the mind of Christ, the Kingdom of God
comes not with Observations, neither shall they say, lo here, or lo there, for
behold the Kingdom of God is within you.

But these your Merchants have no Scripture for their Merchandise, which they
sell to you enslaved Captives for so many Hundreds in the Year, and is paid in
the Nation, or elsewhere: For these Observations they tell you, you must
observe, or else you cannot come to the Kingdom of Heaven, though they are
contrary to the Scripture, as they are practiced by them; there is no Scripture
that witnesses their call to the Ministry by humane Wisdom; Not many great,
not many Noble, not many Wise, after the Flesh.

There is no Scripture that any that Jesus Christ sent forth, made a Bargain
with the People for so much a Year, as these do that profess themselves to be
sent of Christ. 1 Cor. 1.26. Mat. 10.8. Gal. 1.11 12. Ma. 10.16. Mat. 10. to
ver. 8.


This is the call of the Ministers of Christ, Paul an Apostle of Jesus Christ,
neither of Man, nor by Man, but by the Revelation of Jesus Christ.

I send you forth, (says Jesus Christ) as Lambs among Wolves, into what Town
or City ye enter, enquire who is Worthy, and if they receive you, there abide,
eating such things as is set before you, the Labourer is Worthy of his Meat,
freely ye have received, freely Minister.

Those whom Jesus Christ commits the Word of eternal Life unto, 2 Cor. 5.14,
19, 20.
and calls them forth to declare it unto others, the love of Jesus Christ,
which is sealed up to their Souls through his own Blood, Act. 21.13.
constrains them to give up themselves to death, in witnessing forth the
eternal Life they enjoy in Christ; as it was, 2 Pe^. 2.15. Jude 11.
it is, the Love of Christ constrains me to Preach the Gospel, says Paul;
But these your Merchants are they which have forsaken the right Way, and are
gone astray, following the way of Balaam the Son of Bezor, who loved the Wages
of unrighteousness.

And as there is no Scripture for their call to the Ministry by their humane
learning, nor making Bargains with the People for so much in the Year; so there
is no Scripture for these Observations they call the Ordinances of God, as they
are practiced by them.

There is no Scripture that Christ or any that he sent forth, did take a Child,
and sprinkled Water on its face, and said in so doing they Baptized it into the
Church of Christ.

Suffer little Children to come unto me, says Christ, and forbid them not,
Mar. 10.14.15. Mat. 19.14.
for of such is the Kingdom of God; for whosoever shall not receive the Kingdom
of God as a little Child, shall not enter therein; he sets the Child as a type
and a figure, to show forth to every one, that they must become as a little
Child, Luke. 18.16, 17.
depending upon the Will of God, before they enter into the Kingdom of God:
Mar. 10.16.
he took them up in his Arms, and put his hands on them, and blessed them, but
that he sprinkled Water on their Faces, and said, He Baptized them into this
Church, th^^e is no such Scripture.

Another Observation your Teachers tell you, you must observe, is hearing these
studied Sermons; in taking a part of Scripture, and adding to it their wisdom,
calls it the Word of God, which is contrary to the Scripture; but they say,
They have Christ for an Example.

There was delivered unto him the Book of the Prophet Isaiah, and when he had
opened the Book, he found where it was written, The Spirit of the Lord is upon
me, because he has anointed me to Preach the Gospel unto the Poor; he has
sent me to heal the Brokenhearted; to Preach deliverance to the Captives; and
recovering the sight of the Blind; and to set at liberty them that are Braised;
to Preach the acceptable year of the Lord: And he closed the Book, and sat
down; and he began to say unto them, This day is the Scripture fulfilled in
your Ears; and all bear him witness, and wondered at the gracious words that
proceeded out of his Mouth, he was the substance of the Prophecy, which was
then fulfilled in him.

This is no ground for any to take the Saints words, and add to it their
wisdom, and call that the Word of God.

The Prophet that has a Dream, let him tell a Dream; he that has my Word, let
him speak my Word faithfully: What is the Chaff to the Wheat? says the Lord:
Is not my Word like a Fire, and like a Hammer, says the Lord, that breaks the
Rocks in pieces? All to whom the Word of the Lord is committed, can witness it
to be as a Fire within them, and as a Hammer that breaks the Rocks in Pieces,
subjecting all in the Heart, under the power of it self, so it alone rules and
guides him, that he is what he speaks, that if he had never seen any thing that
the Saints have declared without him, he had known what is manifest in him; and
he to whom the Word is thus made manifest, is a true Minister of Christ, who is
called to speak the Word faithfully.

But these that call themselves your Teachers, and make Bargains with you for
so much in the Year, Isa. 56.11. Jer. 5.30. Mic. 5.11. Ver. 5. Jer. 23.30.
they never witnessed the Word of the Lord in them, as a Fire, and like a
Hammer that breaks the Rocks in pieces, so they never had any thing to have
spoken of the Lord; but as they have stolen it from the Testimony of the Saints,
so they speak a divination of their own Brain, a Riddle to their own Hearts;
and whilst they speak to others, themselves are Cast-aways.

And the Lord testifies against them, Cor. 9.27.
Behold, I am against the Prophets, says the Lord, that steals my Word every
one from his Neighbor.

Behold I am against the Prophets, says the Lord that use their Tongues, and
say, He says.

Jer. 23.31, 32.
Behold I am against them that Prophecy false Dreams, says the Lord, and to
tell them, and causes my People to err by their Lies, and by their Lightness;
yet I sent them not, nor commanded them; therefore they shall not profit the
People at all, says the Lord: And this fruit is made manifest of the Ministry
that has been in England.

Another Observation your Teachers tells you to observe, which is contrary to
Scripture, as it is practiced by them, in singing of David's Psalms in Meter,
taking David's words, who was a Man after Gods own Heart, and putting words into
the Mouths of poor Ignorant People to sing that which they never knew, and so
causes them to Blaspheme the Name of God, saying, Let us sing to the Praise and
Glory of God, Psalm. 131.1.
as, O Lord I am not puffed in mind, I have no scornful eye, I do not exercise my
self in things that be too high for me: When they never knew any change wrought
in their minds, and so causes the people to Lie. And causing them to sing
David's Prayers, as, O Lord Rebuke me not in thy wrath, Psalm. 38.1, 7.
neither chasten me in thy hot displeasure; for thine Arrows stick fast in me,
and thy Hand presses me sore; for my Iniquities are gone over my Head, as an
heavy Burden, they are too heavy for me to bear; my Wounds stink and are
corrupted, because of my foolishness; I am troubled, I am bowed down greatly, I
go mourning all the day long: And may be none of you in all that place can
witness the Condition, and so Blasphemes the Name of God, who will be
Worshipped in Spirit and Truth; and this is the rule given out from him, If any
be afflicted, let him Pray; if any be merry, let him sing Psalms: And there is
none merry but the ransomed of the Lord, who returns to Sion with joy and
singing. And everlasting joy shall be upon their Heads, and they shall obtain
gladness and joy; and sorrow and sighing flies away.

All People may search the Scriptures, and see how you have been deceived by
your Teachers, who have caused you to seek your lost God in carnal and dead
Observations, which they have not any Scriptures for; all cease from them, for
the Lord complains of them, The leaders of my People causes them to err, says
the Lord of Hosts; and now are these Scriptures fulfilled in these Men, which
the Apostle Prophesied of.

This know also, that in the last days perilous times shall come, for Men
shall be lovers of their own selves, Covetous, Boasters, Proud, Blasphemers,
disobedient to Parents, Unthankful, Unholy: All People see, are not your
Teachers so? Self-lovers, before they come at you, they must know what they
must have: Covetous, Griping for much; and if you will not give them so much as
they can have in another place, they will not come at you; here is Self-love
and Covetousness manifested: without natural affections, Trucebreakers, false
Accusers, Traitors, heady, high-minded, lovers of Pleasures, more then lovers
of God, having a Form of godliness, but denying the power thereof; from such
the Apostles exhorts to turn away. All people behold and see all these
Scriptures are fulfilled in your Teachers, they speak against Pride, and live
in it; against Covetousness, and live in it; they teach by their words to be
natural affectionated one toward another, and they walk contrary, causing poor
people to pay, to maintain them in Pride and high Ranks in the Earth, who can
scarce get Bread for their Bellies, and Clothes for their Backs; yet they
force them to pay them, being void of all natural affections; and they are
Truce Breakers, break^ng all Bonds and Covenants, if they can get more Money in
another place: Thus they show forth to all the World, that they are lovers of
Pleasures more then lovers of God, and have a Form of godliness in words, but
deny the power thereof; from such turn away, for of this sort are they which
creep into Houses, and lead captive silly Women, laden with Sin and diverse
Lusts; these Scriptures are fulfilled in your Teachers, every one has his
particular House to creep into, where none must come but themselves, or whom
they please, which is contrary to the practice of Christ, or any that he sent
forth; they went through the Countries, Towns, Cities, Villages, according as
they were guided by the Spirit of God, to declare what he gave them to speak;
and your Teachers lead silly Women captive, laden with Sin, and led away with
diverse Lusts, ever learning, and never able to come to the knowledge of the
Truth; do not they tell you, to look for Christ's coming in such Observations
as they set up? which is nothing but the invention of their Brains; for Christ
tells you, The Kingdom of God comes not with Observations, but its within you:
But many of them that deny, that the Light in your Consciences, which makes
manifest the evil of your Hearts, is the Kingdom of God, calling it the Light
of a corrupt Conscience; so shuts the Kingdom of Heaven against Men, and will
neither enter in themselves to be guided by the pure Light of the Kingdom of
Christ within them, nor suffer them that are entering in to enter, as the Scribs
and Pharisees did; now as Iannes and Iembres withstood Moses, Rev. 18.11.
so do these Men resist the Truth, Men of Corrupt minds, Reprobate concerning
the Faith, but they shall proceed no farther, for their folly shall be made
manifest to all Men, as theirs also was, and no Man shall buy their Merchandise
any more.

All you enslaved Captives in the Kingdom of Babylon, Why will you lay out your
Money for that which is not Bread; and your Labor for that which satisfies
not? Isa. 55.2.
hearken diligently unto Jesus Christ the Light, that lets you see the evil of
your Hearts, to be guided by it, Ephesians. 2.1^.
and you shall eat that which is good; incline your Ears, says Christ, and
come unto me; hear, and your Souls shall live, Isa. 55.3.
and I will make an everlasting Covenant with you, even the sure mercies of
David: Mind the Call of a powerful and tender Father, in the Lord Jesus, Rev.
18.4. 2 Cor. 6.17, 18.
who calls, Come forth of Babylon my People, and touch no unclean thing, and I
will receive you, and will be a Father unto you, and ye shall be my Sons and
Daughters, says the Lord God Almighty. Friends, prize your times, slight not
the day of the Lords mercy, for he waits to be gracious, Isa. 38.18. Isa. 65.2.
Jer. 3.12. Hos. 14.4. Mica. 6.8. Mal. 6.21. Luke 17.21. To. 8.14. 1 John 6.26.
and says, I stretch forth my Arm all the day long, to a backsliding and
gainsaying People. Every one, mind your conditions, deal justly with your own
Hearts, see what your Hearts has fellowship with, and guides your minds, for
the Kingdom of Christ is within you, it is not in Observations, as your
Teachers tells you; for they deceive you, therefore Christ for-warned us for
looking forth at those which would come in the latter days, Mat. 1^.
that would say, Lo here is Christ, lo there is Christ, as it is in these our
days, some say, Lo here is Christ in the Presbyterian practice; the
Independents say, Mat. 24.32, 36.
He is there; and the Anabaptists say, Lo he is here. But Friends, mind what
Christ says unto you, Luke 17.20, 21. Ephesians. 5.13,
Believe them not, look not forth, the Kingdom of Christ is not in any of
those, nor in any other outward Observations, but (be awarned) the Kingdom of
Christ is in you, Mat. 13.21, 32.3, 33.
and that is the Light that lets you see the evil of your Hearts; and Christ
compares it to a grain of Mustard Seed, the least of all seeds, Zac. 4.19.
and it grows up above all other Herbs, and becomes a Tree that the Fowls of
the air^lodges therein; and he compares it to a little Leaven, Joh. 1.5.
that a Woman took and hid in three measures of Meal, and it leavened the whole
lump: These are earthly Parables and Figgures, which Christ lays down,
speaking to the earthly and carnal Heart of Man, that he may read his condition
within: Therefore despise not the day of small things, but mind the Counsel of
the Lord Jesus, the little Light that shines in thy dark Heart, look upon the
^igures; the Parables; the little Leaven which is hid in three measures of
Meal, Joh. 11.10.6.
it changes the whole lump into the nature of it self; so the little Light that
shines in thy dark Heart, is the powerful word of Faith, Which was in the
beginning, by which all things were created, and without him was nothing made;
this Word is Life, and the Life is the Light of Men, and the Light shines in
darkness, and the darkness comprehends it not; this Light is the word of Faith
the Apostle exhorted to take heed unto, To. 10.7, 8
Say not in thy Heart, who shall ascend up to Heaven to fetch Christ down? or
down into the deep to fetch him up? the Word is n^gh thee, in thy Heart, and in
thy Mouth; and this is the word of Faith which we Preach, the unction of the
holy one given of the Father, so that we need not to teach one another, but as
the anointed teaches us* which is truth and no lie, which is the sure word of
Prophecy, whereunto ye do well to take heed as unto a light shining in a dark
place, until the day dawn, and the Day Star arise in your Hearts.

All people return within; give up your selves freely to be guided by that
Light, that discovers to you the evil of your Hearts; and none be discouraged,
because you see an evil Heart, but prize the Love of God that discovers it to
you, and whatever the Light makes manifest to you to be evil: Wait on the Lord
for power, Pro. 20.22. ^am. 3.25 Isa. 8.17. Mat. 25.21.
and he will give you power to obey, and in being faithful in a little, more
will be communicated from the Lord, so will the righteous Law be set up in your
Hearts, that will cry through your earthly and carnal Hearts for Righteousness
and Judgment, and so will bring you to an account for every idle word, Mat.
12.36. 2 Cor. 5.10. Isa. 57.17.17.
and all deeds done in the body. Look up unto the Lord against whom you have
Sinned, and he will arm you with power to what he lays upon you, with patience
to undergo his Will, until all the powers of the Earth in you be famished, and
slain under his righteous Judgments; then will Judgment be brought forth unto
Victory, that you can no longer live without the loving kindness of your Father
in Christ Jesus.

Now is the Parable fulfilled, the little grain of Mustard Seed grown up above
all Herbs, and the little leaven has leavened the whole lump, and the Prodigal
starved forever, if his Father receive him not freely into his House.

Thou that can witness this condition, stand still in the Will of God, he
will raise up his seed in thee to trust in his Name, and to delight in the
eternal Covenant of Love and Life, he has made with thy Soul in the Lord Jesus
Christ, and will guide thee by the Word of his Power, in a way thou know
not, forth of Babylon (where thou wast an inslaved Captive, under the power of
the filthy Beast, which is thy will, and the Whore the Mother of Witchcrafts,
which is thy wisdom, which enthralled thee under the Powers of darkness, to
satisfy the lusts of thine own Heart, which led thee to destruction) up to
Sion, to live by Faith in the Lord Jesus, which will purify thy Heart, and set
thy Soul free from under the powers of darkness, into the Glorious Liberty of
the Sons of God, where thou shall sing the Songs of Sion, Hallelujahs and
Praises forevermore unto the Lord God, that sits upon the Throne, and to the
Lamb for ever and ever.

W. D.

To all inslaved hard-hearted, Rev. 18.3.
and unbelieving Jews in this Nation, and elsewhere, who are made drunk with
the Wisdom of the Whore, and bewitched through the abundance of Sorceries, to
put the Day of the Lord afar off, looking for Christ's coming in the Spirit, as
the hard-hearted unbelieving Jews in the Letter, did for his coming in the
Flesh, according to the promise; but they limited the Holy One, according to
their carnal wisdom, expected his coming in great Pomp and Glory: and when he
came in that poor despised way, Luke 2.7. Mat. 13.54, 55, 56, 57. Mark. 6.4.
contrary to their expectations, they stumbled at him, and would not own him to
be their Savior, but rose up against him, and put him to Death, Matthew. 27.1.
to verse. 50.
BEhold, you hard-hearted and unbelieving Jews, do you not look for Christ
coming in the Spirit according to his promise, as they did for his coming in
the Flesh? but you limit the Holy One, as they did, expecting Christ to come in
Power and Glory, according to your own fancies; and so put the Day of the Lord
afar off you, in rejecting and despising the Counsel of Jesus Christ the pure
Light in your Consciences, which lets you see every evil thought, word and
action, and cries behind you, This is the way, walk in it: but you disobey the
Light, and hearkens to the counsel of your Hearts, Isa. 30.22.
as the Jews in the Letter did, that put Christ to Death; and so you slay the
Witnesses in Spiritual Sodom and Egypt in your Hearts, where our Lord is
Crucified, Rev. 11.8.
in not regarding the Counsel of Christ, which is that Light that shines in
your dark Hearts, Rev. 3.20.
which knocks at the Door, according to his Word, I stand at the Door and
knock; if any Man hear my Voice, and open the Door, I will come into him, and
will Sup with him, and he with me.

Oh thou enslaved Soul under the power of Babylon in thee, come forth, mind the
Light in thee, which is the sure word of Prophecy, whereunto you do well to
take heed, as unto a light shining in a dark place, until the day dawn, and the
Day Star arise in your Hearts: stand not out against this secret Counsel of
Christ in you, lest you perish in your gain-sayings; for if his anger be
kindled a little, blessed are all they that trust in him. All give up, give up
freely to be guided by the Counsel of the Lord, the Light in you, believing in
his Power that is present with the Light, he will lead you daily through the
Cross, in the straight way of his Sufferings and Death, where the old Man will
be put off with his deeds, and so you shall have right to the Tree of Life, and
shall enter with him through the Gates into the City New Jerusalem, where you
shall have communion with the Father and the Son, and an inheritance with those
that are sanctified in Christ Jesus, and shall reign as Kings upon Earth to the
Praise and Glory of the Riches of the Grace of our Heavenly Father, to whom
alone be all Power, Dominion, Honor and Glory, for ever and ever.

W. D.

A Word from the Lord to all that are waiting on the Lord in Sion: and those
that are weeping, and are seeking the Lord their God, asking the way to Sion
with their Faces thitherwards.
FEar not ye Mourners in Sion, Isa. 61.2. Isa. 30.18. and 20.21 ^ohn 1 9 and
8.12.
the Lord waits on you to be gracious unto you, and though he give you the
Bread of Adversity now, and the Water of Affliction, yet shall not your Teacher
be removed into Corners any more, but your Eyes shall see your Teacher, and
your Ears shall hear a Voice behind you; Ephesians. 513. 1 ^oh. 2.27 Isa. 42.3. Mat.
2.20. Pro. 20.2^
saying, this is the way walk in it, when you turn to the right Hand, or to the
left; therefore every one of you mind the Light, which is of Jesus Christ in
you, that judges the unrighteousness of your Hearts, give up to be guided by
the pure Light in you, which is your Teacher, the Counsel of Jesus Christ, and
it shall bring Judgment forth unto victory, and whatever he makes manifest to
you to be his Will: Wait on the Lord in his Counsel, and he will give you Power
to obey, and when you have obeyed his Will, take heed of departing from the
Counsel of the Lord, which is within you, to hearken to the counsel of your own
Hearts, which will draw your minds to look back at your Obedience, and the
experiences you have passed through, so will the Beast, which received a deadly
wound with the Sword, the righteous Law, Rev. 13.3.
that goes out of the Mouth of the Lamb, in you, his deadly wound will be
healed, and sits a painted Beast above the Cross of Christ, working lying
wonders in your Hearts, and imitating the operation of the Power of God, Rev.
13.11, 12, 13, 15.
who is purifying his Sons and Daughters with the Spirit of Judgment, and the
Spirit of burning, and the Beast in you, that tasted of the Power of God, when
he received his deadly wound under the Justice of God, now can imitate the same
in deceit, and cause Fire to come down from Heaven in the sight of Men, Mat.
13.37.
imitating the operation of the Spirit of burning, and so deceives himself and
all that dwell upon the Earth, he is made manifest to all that dwell in the
Heavenly Light in their Hearts. All Friends mind your watch, for the Adversary
the Devil goes about like a rearing Lion seeking whom he may devour; 1 John
4.1, 2, 3.
abide in the Counsel of the Lord, which is the Light in you, and you will
discern between the Beast, which is Antichrist in his lying wonders, and the
Lamb Jesus Christ, in the operation of his power; so you will come to try the
Sp^rits, whether they be of God, yea or no; all that are guided by the Beast
have their Life in speaking and acting in outward operations what they once
experienced, and what they comprehend to be Truth, speaking that they enjoy
not, and is exalted in pride, the Heart returned into the Earth. But thou that
art guided by the Lamb, the Light in thy Conscience; the righteous Law cries
through thy earthly Heart, and brings it to judgment, and thou can find no
life in the operation of the Power of God, nor in thy obedience, but whilst the
Presence of the Lord is with thee in it; Luke 17.10. Heb. 10.36. Col. 3.2.
Ezekiel. 36.31, 32. 1 Cor. 1.29.31.
and when thou have done the Will of God in obeying what he has made known
unto thee, thou see thy self to be an unprofitable Servant, and have need of
patience, that thou may receive the promise. where thy life is hid with
Christ in God, to save thee freely for his Names sake, or else thou perishest,
and to carry thee on by his mighty Power, or else thou fallest, so thou have
nothing to Glory in but in the Lord.

And as they that are guided by the Beast (which is Antichrist) speak of the
Truth, a riddle to their own Hearts, Re. 22.18.
not knowing the Power and Life of what they speak, adding to the Word of the
Lord, and the plagues and curse of God will be added unto them. But thou that
art guided by the Lamb Jesus Christ, thou know when the Word of the Lord is
committed to thee: Jer. 23.28, 29. 2 Cor. 10.41.
If any have my Word, says the Lord, let him speak my Word faithfully: is not
my Word like a Fire: says the Lord, and like a Hammer that breaks the Rocks
in pieces: Thou can witness the Word of the Lord, to be as a Fire, and as a
Hammer to break the Rocks in pieces in thee, and bring down all in thee in
subjection to its self, and it alone rules in thee: and thou that can witness
the Word of the Lord thus manifest in thee, thou art a true Messenger of the
Lord, let not the deceit stop thy Mouth; for the Word the Lord calls thee to
speak shall perfect his work for which it is sent.

Rev. 14.4, 5.
All Friends stand fast in the Counsel and Will of God, be faithful in following
the Lamb daily through the Cross, and none be discouraged; in Temptations be
content, look up to the Lord to keep you in the Hour of Temptations, Lam. 1.3.
for it is no Sin to be temped, but to yield to the Tempter: and when the Lord
delivers you from the power of the Tempter, watch that your will get not from
under the Cross, ^ut sink down into the Love of God, and every one be content
in what the Lord has made manifest to you, and be faithful according to your
Talents, Mat. 25.20, 21, 22, 23.
and more will be communicated to you; and none look forth at others
conditions, for if you do, the Enemy will cause you to stumble, and you will
come to a loss in your own condition, wait patiently in the Counsel of the
Lord, the Light in you, for he is making a short work in the Earth, Mat. 1.10,
11.
that you that come into the Vineyard at the eleventh Hour shall receive as
much as they that came in at the third Hour, and have Labored in the heat of
the day.

Mat. 21.5.
All ye Children of the Lord lift up your Heads, behold your King riding in
Majesty and Power, upon the wild Ass Colt, which is your wild nature,
subjecting it to himself, Rev. 22.14. Rev. 21.17 Cant. 2.9.
that you may enter with him through the Gates of the City into new Jerusalem,
where there enters nothing that works Abomination, and makes a Lie, but what
is written in the Lambs Book of Life, and there you shall dwell in the
Banqueting House of the Lord forever, feeding upon the Feast of Fat things,
rejoicing in the Eternal Love and Mercy to your Souls, Rev. 17.4. Rev. 19.16.
Rev. 5.9, 10.
in the free Covenant of Life, in the Blood of Christ, who is the Lord of
Lords, and King of Kings, God Blessed forever, who is riding on in Majesty and
in Power, conquering, and to conquer all the powers of darkness in the Hearts
of his Saints, that they may reign as Kings upon the Earth, to the Praise and
Glory of our God, who is taking unto him his great Power, to reign in his
Saints for evermore, to whom alone be all Honor, Glory, Power, and Eternal
Praises for ever.

W. D.

To Richard Thomas at Hartford, for him to communicate to all that are there,
and at London, and elsewhere, as way is made, to be sent to them that are to
be Transported for the Testimony of the Name of the Lord.
DEar Friends, and blessed of the Lord forever; you whom the Lord has chosen
to be the Valiant ones amongst his People, in this your great Trials; oh,
blessed be the Name of the Lord, for you and your dear Wives and Relations,
that gives you up freely, for to bear your Testimony in the face of all People:
Oh, the dear Bowels, who can express, that flow to you, who in your
faithfulness are as a stream of Virtue, to the refreshing all the Heritage of
our God; all take your full delight in his joyful presence; and all in pure
love walk together; the glory of the most high God rest upon you, and your
beloved Families and Children, whom the Lord has blessed you with: And all the
People shall confess in the day determined, that you with the rest of the
faithful, are the righteous Seed that the Lord has blessed, to whom the wicked
shall bend and come under, to the power which is our Life forever, who feel the
Life in the Infallible passage, and secret Salutation in God, where my Soul
embraces you, in the eternal Fountain of love, and takes her solace in the
dear and near Union, where there can be no Separation, but everlasting
fellowship one with another forever; where my Soul goes with you, in the
eternal welfare. Dear Brethren and Sisters, whom my Soul loves, and gives glory
to God that ever you had a being in this World, to glorify the Name of the
Lord in your Generation, with him who remains your Brother,

W. D.
Warwick Common Goal, the 2 d day of the 5 th Month, 1665.
1666
The Word of the Lord to all the Inhabitants in England, from the Highest to the
Lowest, that they mey know his Determination, and so be entreated to break off
from their Sin, in true Obedience unto him, that they may escape in the day of
his dreadful appearance, when no flesh shall stand before him.
TO all Rulers, Teachers and People, in the Nation of England; and to all the
Inhabitants in these Northren Countries, in which the mighty Jehovah Lord God
omnipotent over all, has determined to raise up his righteous Seed, to the
exaltation of the glory of his great Name, to the fulfilling of the Scriptures
of Truth, as is Recorded in Jeremiah the 23. Chap. and 7. and 8. verses, It
shall no more be said, the Lord lives that brought us out of the Land of
Egypt, but shall be said, the Lord lives that has raised his Seed, and
brought it forth of the North Country, and out of all the Nations where it is
scattered; and this I have to declare to you all, in the Authority of the Word
of his Holiness; The Lord will manifest according to the determination and
purpose of his mind, unto a poor people that fear before him, and seek the Lord
with strong cries and tears day and night, that if it be the Pleasure of the
Lord, all the Inhabitants in England and else where in these Northern
Countries, might break off from all the evil of their doings, in a true
resignation to the Light of Jesus, that reproves for sin in the secret of their
Consciences, that so the Lord may turn his fury away, and spare the People of
the Land of our Nativity, that not any be found sealed up to destruction, in
that day wherein it shall be said, Let him that is filthy be filthy still, and
let him that is holy be holy still: Oh sad will it be to them who has neglected
the day of the Visitation of the Lord God to their Souls, and have not their
Consciences washed, and their Hearts purified in the Blood of the Lamb, for
they shall cry, but not be regarded, and call to the Lord, but he will not hear
them, because the Decree of the Lord will be sealed against all that reject the
Counsel of the Lord, and the tenders of his Mercy, and sport away their
precious time in lewd and wicked ways amongst the Workers of Iniquity, whose
condemnation slumbereth not; the Day of Gods Vengeance will come as a Thief in
the night; great destruction will come upon them all, that reject the
Government of the Soul-saving sanctifying Spirit of the Lord Jesus, in this day
he is making up his Jewels, and putting a difference between them that serve
him, and them that serve him not, and between them that swear, and them that
fear an Oath.

Oh what shall I say concerning the People of the Land of my Nativity; Oh my
Bowels, my Bowels are moved within me for her Inhabitants, from the highest to
the lowest, with all in these Northen Countries, and in the tender compassion I
cannot be silent, but in the force of the Spirit of the Lord exhort all, who
yet witness not redemption from their vain conversations; turn, turn, why will
ye die, for the Lord God will not be mocked, he is of purer Eyes then to behold
Iniquity; Oh reject not his Counsel, neither kick at the reproofs of the Lord,
for the day of his Patience will not extend for ever, neither will his Spirit
always strive with man, for he is jealous of his Glory. Oh turn, turn, all
People, and diligently hearken to the Counsel of God, the Light of his own
Spirit, that reproves you secretly in your Hearts and Consciences, and look up
to the Lord with the eye of your minds, in true watchfulness and dependency
upon the Lord, that he may save you from your iniquities, that you may find
peace with God, whatever befall you in these days of great calamity, which is
upon the Face of the Earth: Oh People if you reject God's Counsel and harden
your necks against the reproofs of the Spirit of the Lord. Oh what shall I say
unto you, seeing there is no minding the Fear of the Lord, but every one does
what seems good in your own Eyes: Oh the pity that is to you from one that
cannot help you, but in the sense of your misery, that rejects Gods Mercy,
says in my secret mournings for you; Oh that my Eyes were as a Fountain of
Tears, that I might water thy Altar, Oh Lord, day and night, that if it were
possible thou might be prevailed withal, and change thy purpose concerning
this stiff-necked and hard-hearted People, that reject thy Counsel in the Land
of our Nativity: But notwithstanding all this simpathizing Bowels, as one who
has received favor at thy Hands, Oh Lord, I leave all with thee, spare thy
People, Oh Lord, and enable them to go thorough the trial of the day, and
sweeten their passage, and the Cup they are to drink, who fear before thee, and
tremble at the Word of thy Holiness, even so be it with them, oh Lord.

Once more I cannot but exhort all People, look about you, yea from the highest
to the lowest, and who has not desperately sold themselves to do wickedly,
take a view of the Lords dealings with the People of the Land, how he has
shaked the rods of his many Judgments over the Nation, which did smite upon
many, and they were mown down as grass, which caused many that feared the Lord
to wrestle with him with strong cries day and night, that he would stay the hand
of the destroying Angel, and the Lord heard his poor People, and stayed his
Hand in a great measure, waiting to see if the People of the Land would mend
their ways, and the Rulers therein would give over persecuting, imprisoning,
spoiling and banishing his poor People, who fear before him, and serves him in
uprightness of their Hearts day and night, and dare not disobey him in what he
makes known unto them, though they hazard their Liberty and all enjoyments, yea
life it self, so tender are they over the Glory of the Lord, who has given
them victory over sin, and all selfishness, through the Blood of the Lamb, and
the word of their Testimony, no more to love their lives to death, etc.

But Oh, you Rulers, though God has stayed his Hand in a great measure, that
the sound of mortality is not so loud in the Ears as has been, yet how do you
answer the end of the Lord, seeing that few Prisons in the Nation but the Lords
People are in them, because of the exercise of their pure Consciences toward
the Lord, and other cruel proceedings in rending Husband from Wife, and Wife
from Husband, and Parents from Children, and Children from Parents, and
inhumanely banishing them out of their Native Country: for these things, and
other wicked proceedings, the Hand of the Lord is stretched out still, and the
pale Horse is on his way, passing to and fro in the Nation, and he that rides
thereon is Death, smiting and cuting down with the Sword of Plague and
Pestilence; and if so be you proceed as you have done, in executing these cruel
Laws against the innocent, then will the commission of the Rider of the pale
Horse be enlarged, and what flesh can stand before the pale Horse, seeing the
Rider thereon is Death, as is recorded in the Scriptures of Truth, Rev. 6.8.

Oh my Bowels is moved within me for the calamity that will come upon the
Nation, if you Rulers continue your Persecution, for the day of the Lord
hastens, that they that do wickedly shall be as stubble, and the Maker thereof
shall be as a Spark, and he will blow up the flame in the fierceness of his
wrath; and who can stand in this terrible dreadful day, wherein Christ shall be
revealed in flames, rendering Vengeance on all them that know him not, and obey
not the Gospel of the Lord Jesus Christ, etc.

Further, this I exhort, all mind what you say and do, who has hardened their
Hearts in a boasting Spirit, and said, we see no difference, but these People
we cast in Prison God cuts off in a common Calamity as well as others; the
sense of their sufferings causes many a Cry and Tear to be poured forth before
the Lord, and the mighty God answered and said unto my Soul, I have beholden
the cruelty of Men, how they have stowed my People up in Prisons, and in the
Ship, where the infection was, and them that has been taken away, their Blood
shall be required at their Hands who cast them into Prison, and as to all in
general that fell in the common Calamity that feared my Name, it was to stain
the pride of the glory of all Flesh, as well amongst my People, as others, that
my People might wait in my Light to stand in a true preparation for the day of
their dissolution; therefore I take away my People in my everlasting loving
kindness from the evil to come, but the wicked I cut off in my Fury, and they
shall reap the fruit of their own doings, and this is the substance of what the
Lord has said in taking away his People in this common Calamity; therefore let
the stout-hearted bend, and no more boast themselves in loftiness of their
minds, to see the righteous taken away, for if the judgment begin at the House
of God, and the righteous scarcely be saved, where shall the wicked and ungodly
and Sinners appear; for yet a little while, and the Lord will plead the cause
of his People, with terrible Vengeance he will manifest himself, and the Rod of
the wicked shall nor always lie upon the backs of the righteous, but their long
continued Afflictions will be accomplished in time; therefore you meek, gentle,
and peaceable quiet People, who abhor every appearance of evil, abide in the
Word of Patience, and pray for them that Persecute you, that if it be the Will
of God we may prevail with the Lord, that their Eyes may be opened, and their
Hearts softened, that they may break off from their evil doings, and so escape
the terrible vengeance, as is before written, wherein the Lord will break the
Battle out of the Earth, and establish purity and peace amongst a people called
by his Name; that as they have sown in Sorrow and long-suffering, they shall
reap with Joy, in this great and terrible day of the coming of our Lord, which
is nigh to be revealed, wherein he will say to the wicked that has imprisoned,
and afflicted his People, Go ye cursed into everlasting Fire, prepared for the
Devil and his Angels; and to his righteous Blessed suffering Seed, he will say,
Come you Blessed of my Father, enter into the Kingdom prepared for you before
the Foundation of the Earth was laid; so shall every one reap the fruit of
their doings, whether it be good or evil; according to their deeds, so shall be
their reward from the Lord, who is over all Blessed for ever.

Oh, London, London, yea I say once more you Inhabitants of London, whose lives
was given you for a prey, and you stand as Monuments of Gods Mercy to this day,
while many of your dear Relations, Neighbors, and Acquaintance were cut down,
with him that rid upon the pale Horse; Oh, that you would lay it to Heart, who
are yet living before the Lord, and all turn to the Counsel of the Lord, the
Light and Manifestation of his Spirit in your own Consciences, to guide you in
all fear, and dread of the Eternal God, to wait upon him to feel the opperation
of his holy Spirit, to guide you in all your words, and works, that so you may
be a good savor unto the Lord in your faithful Obedience to the measure of his
Spirit, that so he may take delight in you, and take away the reproach that
has been cast upon you, the Inhabitants of the City of London, etc.

But if you People, in the City of London, do not prize the Mercies of the
Lord, but slight all his kindnesses, and harden your Hearts and not regard the
reproofs of his Spirit, but delight your Hearts in pride, pleasures, pomp,
riches, and glory, in this present World, and with so doing provoke the Eyes of
the Glory of the Great God, Oh then what shall I say unto you Inhabitants of
London, who thus requi^e the Lord, notwithstanding all his Favors, and
boundless Mercies, which he has manifested to you, in the sight of all People
this day, Oh if you do not speedily return to the Lord by repentance, and break
off from all your ungodly ways, in obeying the sin-reproving Spirit of the Lord
God in your own Consciences, I must take up a Lamentation for you, in the sense
of the misery that I feel will come upon you, for the Lord has determined to
bring you down, and if you will not be entreated, to hearken to his Counsel,
the measure of his Spirit in you, to guide you in his holy Fear, that you may
be Heirs of his living Mercies, through your holy Conversations, then will he
come upon you in the fierceness of his Wrath, and break you to pieces, like
Potsherds, and get his Glory over all your Heads, in the Revelation of his
righteous Judgments, wherein the Rider of the pale Horse shall execute the
pleasure of his own will, as he did the last Year, upon thy Inhabitants, Oh
thou City of London, so now art thou warned, through the Constrainments of the
Spirit of the Lord, through him that could have no rest till he signified unto
thee, what is here given forth, what the determination of God is.

Therefore Woe, Woe, unto the Wicked, for it shall go ill with them.

But, Oh blessed be the Faithful Lambs happy are you, dear, precious, and
blessed Vessels, your Faithfulness to God, in your watching, waiting in the
Light of the Son of Righteousness, for whom you have stood as Pillars in the
strength of the Almighty; Ah your tenderness and love to God, and one unto
another in the days of great Calamity that has been amongst you, is recorded
in the Book of Eternal Remembrance of the living God, and in the Hearts of his
Righteous Generation, never to be forgotten. Oh take your Crown of everlasting
Blessings, you innocent Lambs, and Children of Light, in the City of London; Oh
be valiant, and keep your state with God, that his pure saving sanctifying
Spir^t, may guide you all in purity of Life and Conversation, and in the
aboundings of the Pure, Holy Love to God, and one unto another, the mighty
Jehovah will show himself for you; in the day of great Tribulation you shall
rejoy^^, when the wicked shall Howl, yea you shall triumph in the Pure
Dominion of the Lord of Glory, when the wicked shall be turned into Hell, and
all that forget God, the Mouth of the Lord of Hosts has spoken it,

Through your Brother in the Tribulation and Kingdom of Patience of the Lord
Jesus. W. D.
Given forth in Obedience to the Lord, the 10 th of the 3 d Month, 1666.
Blessed are all who are united to God in the Lord Jesus; yea happy are the
People that have the Lord for their God.



A General Epistle, given forth from the Spirit of the Lord, to be Read in his
Fear in the Assemblies of the Church of the Firstborn, gathered in these
Northern-Countries, and in all Countries and Islands wherever the People of
the Lord are scattered over the Face of the Earth.
Dear Friends,
CAlled in the Light of the Lord Jesus to stand living Witnesses for him upon
the Earth amongst the Children of Men: Oh! the Bowels of the Love of the Lord
that is in my Heart to you, that when I was nigh unto death, to the sight of
all that saw me (as to the outward Man) and scarce able to speak, I was
constrained to give forth the substance of what is now sent amongst you, for a
perfect discovery of your conditions, seeing that many are called, and few
chosen; and many convinced that are not converted; therefore are these lines
written, that you may truly know whether you be born again, and redeemed from
the Earth yea or nay. And in order thereunto, let every Man and Woman search
their Hearts with the Light of the Lord, and it will truly manifest whether you
be born again, and so feed upon the Tree of Life; or otherwise you rest in
outward formal conformity to the Tturh, and the heart in the Earth, and that
Spirit will turn against Truth, and has done: And some others are drawn to
delight their Hearts in the Gifts, 1668
Parts, and knowledge which the Lord has given them, more then in the Lord,
the Fountain from whence they come; and so abuse the gift, and feeds upon the
fruit of the Tree of Knowledge, which puffs up, and makes Man wise in his own
eyes, and say in his Heart, I am wise, and rich, sees, and wants nothing; when
they are Blind, miserable, naked, and wants all things; and whatever any
profess, as to the Service of God, that is in this condition, they have an end
to themselves in what they do, which grieveth the Spirit of the Lord, when Men
and Women in a discoursitive Spirit takes upon them to declare the Truth, when
the Lord neither calls them, nor speaks by them; so are the Children born of
the Royal Seed burdened, (for such have turned against the Truth, and the
Children born of it) whom the Lord has and will ease in the day determined,
when all mouths shall be closed in silence, but who are opened by him; and not
any Voice be heard, but his own Spirit speaking in and through his own Children,
born of him, who alone seeks his Glory, and not any thing for themselves which
must be denied. Therefore seeing the Enemies wiles are great and many; let all
dread the Lord, and who have been led astray, wait in the heart-searching
Light, to see the Mystery of Iniquity where it led them forth, and return to
the Light to judge down proud exalted self, which has turned against the
Truth, and bring into true Poverty, and abhoring of self, to wait at the Throne
of Grace, for the Lord to raise you up in the Resurrection which raised up
Jesus from the dead; and in this Life contentious Self is buried in death, and
the true unity is known, where the Lord alone is exalted in purity, joy, love
and peace in all his, from the least to the highest growth, and all Flesh
abased before him, who is worthy of all Obedience, Praise and Glory for ever,
Amen.

And all dear Friends and Brethren that love the Light, and rejoice in the
Judgments of the Lord, to have subtle Self buried in the true Death, that what
gifts of the Spirit soever the Lord gives unto you, and the Enemy tempt you
never so strongly to puff you up in a self-priding spirit, in what you have
received of the Lord; yet his fear is so minded by you, which keeps you in a
true sense of your nothingness* and emptiness in your selves, which causes you
to wait in true self-den^a^, for the daily assistance and renewing of your
strength in the Resurrection of Life in the Lord Jesus; and the more he
manifests his Power with you, the more empty and nothing you appear in your own
Fyes: And so is the true Birth known, which makes Self of no repuration, that
the Lord may be exalted in his unlimitted power, in manifesting himself in the
poverty, emptiness, and nothingness of his people, who are born of him, that
not any Flesh may glory before him, but all in truth to say, the Lord does all
in me, and through me, and the Lord shall have the Glory, and I will sit in the
dust at his feet, with all my Brethren and Sisters, to serve him, and his
People, (through whom we are raised up to sit in the Heavenly places in Christ
Jesus) in what I may, whilst I have a being amongst the Sons of Men, to the
glory of his Name for ever.

And this is the state of the true Disciples of Christ, that cannot feed of the
Fruit of the Tree of Knowledge, although in your Journey and Travels (dear
Vessels of the Lord) you see the Tree of Knowledge to be good, where it stands
in its place, but the Fruit is not good to eat, and feed upon, because
Knowledge puffs up, but Grace makes humble. Therefore dear Brethren and
Sisters born of God, who cannot live in any enjoyment, but as you enjoy the
Life and Presence of God, from whence every good and perfect gift comes.

And dear Lambs, although some of you be in your own Eyes, the meanest amongst
the People of the Lord; yea, at sometimes your Trials is so great, that you are
ready to account your selves unworthy to be numbered amongst the People of the
Lord, and yet you dare not disobey him, neither can you live without his
presence.

Oh, you dear Children of God! lift up your heads over all Temptations and
Accusations of the Enemy, for your Groans and Cries are entered into the Ears of
the Lord God, who in the Bowels of his Love and Mercies does constrain me to
proclaim the day of the tender compassion of the Lord, to all you who are truly
poor in your Spirits: Oh, blessed are you among the Children of Men! for yours
is the Kingdom of God. Therefore be not weary of waiting upon the Lord, for in
his own time he will turn your Sorrows into Joy, and give to you the spirit of
Praises, for the spirit, of Heaviness, as he has done to many who have endured
the like Temptations, Trials, and Sufferings, under which you wait this day for
Deliverance; and the Lord will be the same to you, therefore be of good
comfort, for as the Serpent was lifted up in the Wilderness, so is the Son of
Man lifted up in the Light and Covenant of Life, to heal your Wounds, and save
you from S^n, and to give you Victory over the Enemy in all his appearances; so
that you through Faith in the Name of Christ, make War in Righteousness; and
fighting the good Fight, in keeping the Faith, you will he made more then
Conquerors through his Love that he will shed abroad in your Hearts, which will
cause you to speak of his goodness, and praise his Name for all his Mercies.

And all dear Children of the Lord, who do witness in measure that you* are
truly baptized into his Death, and so are made partakers of his Resurrection,
as is before written, which is the Life that worships him according to his own
Will, and so is truly accepted of him: watch and pray that you may be guided in
the power of his Spirit in all your ways: And be careful, that not any be hasty
to utter words before the Lord; neither suffer any sighs or groans, or any
thing to be heard to pass through you, but as you have the seal of the Spirit of
the Lord, that he requires it of you; this I am commanded to lay as a charge
upon you, that so all Flesh may be truly silent before the Lord, and not any
voice to be heard, but the living Spirit of the Lord speaking in his People;
which you that wait in the fear of the Lord, and minds his leadings, may truly
know, as it is written, so does his Children witness, He that has my Word,
says the Lord, let him speak my Word faithfully; Is not my Word like a Fire,
and a Hammer that breaks the Rocks in pieces: Therefore all mind to feel the
Word of the Lord speaking in you, that the pure burning Life of the Spirit may
be tasted and felt in whatsoever you be exercised in, that so you might be
fully assured it is not your own work, as Man speaking of God, but the Lord
alone uttering his own voice in the forcible power of his own Spirit, in what
you are exercised in, whether it be to pray in Sighs or Groans, or in words, or
to speak in Exhortation or Praises; you are not to quench the Spirit of the
Lord in this his day, that he is come and does appear, in giving diverse gifts
unto his People, in his appearance, as he did amongst his Disciples who waited
at Jerusalem, for the pourings forth of his Spirit from on high; but they that
were strangers to the work of the Spirit, could not taste the Life that spoke
in them; but said, They were mad and full of new Wine, etc. but the Lord
justified them, it being the work of his own Spirit; and although he gave unto
them various gifts, yet all in the unity of himself, in which they sacrifice,
in returning to the Lord his own with advantage, to the glory of his great
Name, as his Children does at this day; blessed be his Name for ever, that
forth of the Mouths of Babes his praise is declared, in their measures, as it
is with those of higher growth in the Lord; and so do the faithful Laborers
reap the Fruit for which they Travel, that all the People of the Lord may be
filled with his Spirit, and in the exercise and leadings thereof, become a Body
of living Ministers, and a Family of Prophets; the strong leading the weak by
the Hand, and in tender Love building up one another in their most holy Faith,
which gives the Victory over the World to Reign in the Heavenly Dominion, which
causes the Children of the most high* in the Authority of the Lord to say to
the greatest Persecutors; Oh man, do what thou have power, the God whom we
serve is able to deliver us out of thy Hand; but if he will not, we are
resolved in his strength to suffer what he permits Man to do; and this is
the holy resolution of all that are Born again, and cannot hide your Heads in
the time of Persecution, because you are Born of the Royal Seed, and have
overcome the beggarly, cowardly, earthly-spirit, through the Blood of the Lamb,
and the Word of your Testimony, and no more to love your lives to Death.

And all dear chosen Vessels of the Lord, seeing he has manifested his Grace
so largely to you; with all diligence be obedient in walking answerably to his
Love and Mercy received, that as living Witnesses for God you may shine forth
in the beauty of Holiness in all your ways; and be careful in keeping your
Meetings at the time appointed, every one endeavoring to be the first at the
Meeting, that so not any give way to a careless spirit, as some have done, and
so come to Meetings when others have been a considerable time together, and so
becomes a burden to the diligent and obedient Servants of the Lord; and so the
Meetings are not so profitable to your comfort, as when you meet diligently at
the time; waiting in the fear of the Lord to feel his sweet Presence, which
will keep you awake in the Life of his own Spirit, to the glory of his Name,
and the comfort of one another, which will cause you to prize the opportunities
God gives to you, not knowing how soon you may be deprived of them, etc.

And be tender one over another, and watch over one another with a pure single
eye; and every one see the Beam cast out of your own Eye, before you go to spy
a Mo^e in others: And if any Brother or Sister offend, you that know, speak to
them privately, in all tenderness, to restore them; and this know, Whoever
turns a Sinner from the error of his ways, saves a Soul from Death, and hides a
multitude of Sins: But if they will not hear, take two or three more, and speak
to them again, in the spirit of meekness, waiting and seeking the Lord for
their recovery; but if they will not hear, but persist in wickedness, then
acquaint the Church, whom the Lord in his Wisdom will order to deal with them
for his own glory.

And in all things you do, I dearly beseech you, do unto others as you would be
done unto your selves, that so you may all, in your measures, stand as Saviors
upon Mount-Sion, to the glory of the Lord in the power of his own Spirit, which
will cause the Whisperer, Bcakbiter, False-accuser, and Talebearer to be
cleansed away, and cast out of the House of the Lord; that so, in the good order
of the Holy Spirit of our God, we may all live, that he alone in his Dominion
may reign in us, and amongst us, whose Government is upon his Shoulders, and
all the Crowns of the Gory of Man cast down at his Feet, that he may be exalted
in ordering every member of the Body in their place and service, to his
everlasting Praise and Glory: Even so, dear Father, carry on thy work in all
the Churches of the Saints, scattered over the face of the Earth, that in the
Eternal unity they may be established in the Lord, being one, and his Name one,
and all the contrary swept away with the Breath of thy Mouth, and brightness of
thy coming; So come Lord Jesus, take to thee thy great Power, and reign in thy
Authority in and amongst thy dear Children to the astonishment of the Nations,
and all people that are not born again, and to the Exaltation of thy own Name
and Kingdom over all, who is worthy to reign, blessed for ever, and of whose
Dominion there is no end.

And all you faithful Laborers in the Gospel of Christ who in true innocence
travel in his Strength, and seeks not any thing for your selves in what you do,
but to Glorify the Lord in establishing his People in the living Unity, in his
own Spirit: Oh, blessed are you amongst the People! my Soul Praises the Lord
for you, and blesses his Name that ever he raised up such a Spirit in you,
that in all the greatest riches of the Spirit God gives to you, yet you remain
truly poor in your selves, and in deep humilty become Servants to his People
for the Lords sake; and being poor you make many rich in that which will abide
fresh and green in the Winter Storms, and will not fade away in the Terrible
Blasts which will come for the trial of his People, and cause all Hearts to
fail, but what is born of his own nature. Oh, dearly beloved Brethren, feel my
Bowels of enlarged love, which flows to you in the Love and Life received and
enjoyed through death, where there is no variableness nor shadow of change.

I remain your Brother, in the Word of his Patience, to endure the Suffering,
according to his determination, with all that love the Lord better then their
lives. W. D.
Warwick, the 14 th of the 10 th Month,
My dear Friends,
IN these trying days be not afraid of what Man can do, whose Breath is in his
Nostrils, and lock up to the al-sufficiency of the Almighty God, to stay your
minds in him, who has counted you worthy to Suffer for him: In all humility
walk faithfully before him unto the end; he is your reward, and will give unto
you a Crown of Life forever, even so be it with you in the Name of the Lord, is
the breathing of my Soul for you whom my Soul loves; and keep your Meetings in
the Authority and Life of the meek and patient Spirit, which wares out, and
overcomes all things that is not of its nature.

Read this in the fear of the Lord amongst Friends. W. D.
Warw^ck, the 5 th of the 3 d Month, 1671.
For my dear Brethren George Whitehead, A. Parker, and Brethren concerned in
the General Meeting.
My dear Brethren,
IN the Love of the Lord my Soul in the endeared Life of God is with you, and
if the Lord had set my face to have been with you, 1673
I should have been present in Body; but I am ordered otherways, having much
upon me while the Door is open; therefore my breathing to the Lord is, that he
may cover you in that Assembly with his Glory and heavenly Wisdom, as I believe
he will to the comfort of his People, that so all Hearts may be gladed, in
feeling his pure Power and heavenly Refreshing in you: My dear Brethren, in the
Light and Life of God, whom my Soul loves and remains,

Your dear Brother in the Unity of the Spirit of our dear Father, who has
called us by his Name, W. D.
Bristol, the 7 th day of the 3 d Month, 1673. My dear Brethren, Friends are
generally in a sweet state with God in this City, and where I have passed, both
to my comfort and yours in the Lord; blessed be his Name forever.



Dear Brother,
IN the Covenant of Life in Christ our head, my Soul salutes thee, and
simpathizeth with thee, in thy exercise in thy Bonds with breathings to the
Lord, to sweeten all our ways, what he calls us unto, with his living
Presence, to the perfecting of his glory forever, Amen. Dear George Fox, I have
been through many Counties in the North Country, and the comfortable Persence
of the Lord did manifest it self in all the Assemblies of his People, to all
our comfort, in him our Head and Life blessed forever: All was very peaceable;
and great Resort, to Friends Meetings, of all sorts of People, and not any
opposition, but all Meetings parted in peace: And it would be too tedious to
mention the names of them that minded their Love to thee, through all the
Counties where I Traveled, but generally all the Ancient Friends in
Cumberland, Northumberland, Byshopprick, and Yorkshire, Darby-shire,
Notingham-shire, Leichestershire, and in this Town desired to have their dear
Love remembered to thee, and the deep sense of thy Labor and Travel is fresh
upon their Spirits, which causes many Prayers to be poured forth before the
Lord, if it be his good Will and Pleasure to give thee strength of Body, and
Liberty to Travel amongst them, to their great comfort, as in the days of old
and years past; but in the Will of our God, our Souls rests with thee in the
Pleasure of our God, in whom I remain

Thy dear Brother, W. D.

A General Epistle. 1675

Dear Friends,
WHom the Lord has in this his Glorious Day visited, and in his Light plucked
as Brands out of the Fire, to wait upon him, that his Great Work of
Regeneration may be perfected in all of you, to your Eternal Comfort, and the
Glory of the Name of our God forever, etc. And my dear Friends, seeing many are
Called, and few Chosen; many Convinced, that are not Converted; and many come
forth with us, and go forth from us, that are not of us, as by sad Experience
has been witnessed, etc. and from the deep Sense of this working of the Enemy,
I am constrained to send this Epistle amongst you, knowing the Kingdom of God
is compared unto Ten Virgins, Five Wise and Five Foolish, who had all Lamps,
and slumbred in the Secure Mind, until they were awakened to enter in with
their Lord, then were the Foolish Virgins made manifest, that though they had
Lamps like the other, yet wanting the Oil, they neither did or could enter,
etc. Oh! dear and tender Friends, let all Dread the Lord, who make mention of
his Name in the Light of Christ; for this Parable is to you, unto whom the Lord
has sent to preach to you and in you the Word of his Kingdom.

And this is upon my Spirit, in the Word of the Lord to you all convinced of
the precious Truth of our God, turly to examine and search your Hearts with the
Light of Christ Jesus, that you may have a certain Knowledge, how it is with
you, and how you escaped the subtle Wiles of the Enemy, which have hindered so
many from the Possession of the Life of Truth; and that you may truly discern,
how the Enemy draws into the Foolish Conceitedness, in the Outside and Formal
Profession of the Truth feeding upon the Knowing Part, and so stops the
Hunger that should reach the Life; and then in an Exaltedness says, I See,
Know, am Clothed, and want Nothing; when they are Blind, Naked, Miserable and
want all things, and this is the State of all the Foolish Virgins, who dwell in
the Outward Court, and place all their Confidence in the Form, and Outside, and
Profession of Truth, and so has lost the Sense of that Heavenly Hunger, which
must possess the Life hid with God, or else it must mourn out its days in
Sorrow. Therefore all dear Friends, watch diligently to the Heart-searching
Light, that this Mystery of Iniquity you may all discern, that so the Enemy may
not prevail against you, to turn you aside, either to the Right Hand or to the
Left, that whatever the Lord has convinced you of to be Evil, you may wait upon
him for Strength, to preserve you out of it, that so you may Answer God's
Witness in the Regulation of your Conversation in the Uprightness of your
Hearts, so you may stand clear before the Lord, that you are willing to do and
suffer whatever the Lord should call you to; and when you have done all this,
then be you watchful to the Heart-searching Light, that the Enemy does not draw
your Minds to place your Confidence in the Work of Righteousness you have done,
as the Ground of your Hope and Calling in Christ, and want Faith in him, and so
cause you to rest in your Services, and so come short of the hidden Life,
enjoyed through Faith in the Light and Life of Christ, our Righteousness. I
beseech you, dear Friends, Wait to know your Passage in this great Mystery,
where the Entrance is into the Straight Gate where all the Foolish Virgins,
though their Lamp in the Outward Profession be never so Glorious, yet through
Pride in their Seize, never entered into this Rest; and here is the
farthest that ever any come, that make a Profession of Truth, that go from us,
and are not of us. So tender Friends, that truly seek God's Glory, and so love
his Light that you are willing to give up Life and all to do his Will; and when
the Enemy would draw you to rest in what you have done and so take the Jewels
of God and play the Harlot, and deck Your Selves; you Drea^ the Lord, and in
his Light you see more Light; and you see, That all that you have done is your
Duty and your reasonable Service which you must do, or otherwise you perish
eternally, and yet your poor Souls in the Light travail on in the Footsteps of
the Flock of the Mournful Companions, who are weeping in Secret, and inwardly
seeking the Lord God, to be Married unto him in that hidden Life which is hid
with Christ in God, and until you enjoy the Marriage-Union, in deep Humiliation
you wait in the Light, for the Lord to create you to a lively Hope in Christ
Jesus, the Second Adam. And you tender Children of my Father, who can
understand in your Heavenly Travail and Exercise of Spirit what is here
written, Lift up your Heads, and stay your Minds in the Light of the Lord
Jesus, which ransacks your Hearts, and does not only keep you in Holiness of
Conversation, but makes you weary of living under the Dominion of your own
Thoughts and Wills: Therefore I beseech you in the Name of the Lord Jesus
Christ; watch to the Heart-searching Light, that discerns your Thoughts and
Intents, and judges your Thoughts, and all Fearfulness and Unbelief; and wait
in the Measure of the Light and Life, that quickens your immortal Souls, and
has begotten heavenly Breathings, Hungerings and Thirstings to eat the Flesh,
and drink the Blood of the Lord Jesus. Oh thou blessed Birth! let not
Streightness be upon thy Spirit; for the Bowels of the almighty God earn
toward thee, which cannot be satisfied with any Thing but the pure Presence of
Christ to reign in thy Heart, and to exercise heavenly Authority in his Throne
in thy Conscience: Oh tender Babe born of the immortal Seed! le^d not thy Ear
to any of thine own Thoughts, Doubts and Unbelief; neither to the Accuser, who
seeks every way to discourage thee, for trusting in the Name of the Lord; but
diligently incline thou thy Ear to the righteous Counsel, which is the Light
and Life: The Lord will satisfy thy Hungry and Thirsty Soul with his
everlasting Loving Kindness in Christ Jesus, and will create thee to a lively
Hope, and marry thee to himself in his own Righteousness, where thou will
receive Dominion to reign over thy own Thoughts, and thy own will, and to walk
in his Strength in the Word of Faith, which will give thee Victory over the
World within and without; so will thy Heart be kept pure, thy Conscience clean,
and thou clothed with the glorious Garment, a meek, low and a quiet Spirit,
and so become the Righteousness of God in Christ Jesus, the second Adam, and
the Lord of Life and Glory; and here is the Dewlling Place of all the Sons and
Daughters of Sion, Citizens of the new Jerusalem, who walk in the Light as he
is in the Light, and so are Partakers of his Divine Nature, and as he is, so
are we in this present World, bearing his Name in his righteous Power, guiding
us in his Light, Thought and Will, which keeps us in the Heavenly Fellowship
with the Father in the Son, and one with another in him.

So all my dear Friends; Brethren and Sisters, who do witness proud ambitious
Self buried in this Heavenly Baptism, in Conformity to Christ in his Death, and
you made alive through Faith in Christ our Light and Life, as you have received
Christ, so walk in him, in all Humility, and godly Fear, and true Watchfulness,
that your own Thoughts Will and Unbelief, have no Dominion over your Spirits;
but every Minute of Time as they appear, through Faith in Christ the perfect
Light and Life, keep your Dominion, and reign over them: And thus in Christ
being victorious over all Self in you, you will reign as Kings, in the
Authority of the glorious Truth of God, over all the Power of Darkness without
you: So whatever you suffer for the Testimony of the Name of Christ, he takes
it as done unto himself; and better a Millstone were hanged about their Necks,
and they cast in to the Sea, then hurt or offend the least of you my Brethren
and Sisters, who are regenerated and born again, and your Confidence is in the
Lord alone: So in all your Sufferings whether spoiling Goods, or imprisonments,
or whatever your Trials be from the Sons of Men that you meet withal for your
Testimony in the Blessed Truth of God; let nothing Discourage you, but judge
all your own Thoughts, and in the Glorious Light and Life in Christ Jesus rest
in Peace, in the pure Contentation within the Gates of Sion, where your Faith
and Patience will so abound in you, that you shall weary out all your
Persecutors, and the Blessing of the A^mighty God will be upon your Families,
who are rent one from another to fulfill the Sufferings of the Body, and you
shall wear your Crowns, who thus patiently wait in a Quiet Mind and Resigned
Will; And in the Word of the Lord I declare it to all you, who suffer
Imprisonment, as is before written, That all the Wrath of the Power of Darkness
shall not be able to keep you an Hour longer then the King of Eternal Glory
has determined for the Renown of his Glorious Truth on Earth, and your Comfort
forever: Therefore let Patience have its perfect work; for, in Peace are we to
Conquer, and in Quietness to Prevail over all that resist the rising of the
King of Glory, who lives in us, who has been Dead, but now Alive; in whose
Life keep your Habitation in the Word of Faith, which is in our Hearts and in
our Mouths, and this is the Word of Faith we preach unto you, and which you are
to contend for against all Evil Attendances, both within and without; for by
this Word of Faith are the Armies tha^ would alienate your Souls from the
Enjoyment of the Lord within you, beaten back and overcome, and the Mouth of
the Roaring Lion stopped, and all the Fiery Darts of the Devil both within you
and without you quenched; therefore, as the Valiants of Christ Jesus, in his
Name and Nature contend for the Faith which is delivered unto us his Saints;
for this is our Victory that overcomes the World, even our Faith, as it was
with our Brethren of old, in Ages past, I have fought a good Fight, I have kept
the Faith, henceforth is laid up for Me a Crown of Eternal Gl^ry: And here i^
our Fellowship with the Father in the Son, and one with another in him: and all
dear Brethren and Sisters, in this Word of Faith keep your Meetings, both
valiantly and faithfully, that so none of you be found forsaking the assembling
of your selves, as the manner of some is, who are out of the Word of Faith; but
as the Lord has counted you worthy to be his Dewlling Place on Earth, and his
Tabernacle amongst the Children of Men; Prize every Opportunity the Lord
affords you to meet together in his Powerful Holy Name, with the Loins of
your Minds girt up with the Word of Faith in you, which will empty you of Self,
and cloth you with the Garment of deep Humility, and fill you with the Riches
of his Everlasting Love and Endless Mercies, for God dwells with the Humble,
but the Proud he beholds afar off: So, without Faith in the Name of Christ, and
a Humble Spirit, the In-dwelling Presence of the King of Eternal Glory you
cannot enjoy: Therefore I charge you in the Name of the Lord, Hearken not to
any Suggestions within you, nor Counsels without you, that would draw you to
slight or forsake meeting together in the Name of the Lord Jesus; but let
every particular Member know your Service in the Body, that by your
Faithfulness others be encouraged to meet with you, to wait in the Light, to
feel the Living Refreshings of the Lord; and when you are refreshed with the
Income of God's sweet Presence, be watchful, that not any utter words rashly
before the Lord, to spend your Talent in a forward Spirit, to satisfy the
Lust, that would appear further then the Lord would have them, as some have
done which has brought them under a great Vail of Darkness, and have lost their
Way, and returned with Sorrow, to the burdening the Hearts of the Righteous;
but Tender Plants, wait to know and truly discern between the Milk of the Word,
and the Words, for the Milk of the Word is a Sweet Stream in the Refreshing, to
the Nourishment of this heavenly Birth, that it may grow thereby; and some the
Enemy has drawn to speak forth that which they in a retired. Silence were to
feed upon, and grow up in its Nature. Therefore, dear Friends, wait in the
Light, that the Word of the Lord may dwell plentifully in you, as it is
written, so are we Witnesses; If any have my Word, let him speak my Word
faithfully; is not my Word like a Fire and a Hammer, that breaks the Rocks in
pieces, which seals up the Testimony God calls unto in the Heart of his
Disciples: Therefore all be very circumspect in this weighty Matter, that
whatever you feel of the Refreshings of God in you, that you do not let any
thing come forth, either in Words or Sounds, or any Noises, but what is brought
forth in the Authority of this Living and Powerful Word; then will the Blessing
of the Lord attend what is brought forth, be it much or little, either in Words
or Hymns, or Joyful Sounds, do not quench it, but answer the Lord in the
Authority of the Word of Eternal Life; and the Sons and Daughters of the Lord,
who are thus exercised, will not burden any, but it will be a Stream of
Refreshing in the Hearts of all the Righteous; thus will every Vessel be
preserved in the Life of Truth, and not go but as the Presence of the Lord goes
before them: Therefore let all dread and fear the Mighty God, who have received
any Gift, to see that the True Birth possess the Gift, which Birth makes Self
of no Reputation, that so the Lord of Life may exercise every one in the
Improvement of their Gift, to the Comfort of his People, and his Eternal Glory,
and none go further then they have Assurance they are called of the Lord, and
his Heavenly Powerful Presence goes before them; so will the Lord bless the
Travel of every Soul, and the Body be kept in the Pure, Sweet, Sea^oned and
Savoury Life, which edifieth the Body in the Love and Life of God, which cannot
be expressed; and all that will not wait thus to be exercised, as is here
written, but go out of their Places, burden the Life, weary the Faithful, and
if they do not give over, and submit to the Government of Christ to reign in
them, and wait in true Silence, that they may speak no more of him but as he
utters his Voice through them; my Soul pitieth them; for they will be as
Wandering Stars, and Darkness will come upon them; therefore be Warned, whose
Consciences witness what is here written to be your Conditions, etc.

And all tender Friends,
be very watchful and careful to keep your Meetings upon all Services on
Truth's Account, both Sons and Daughters, born of God, that there may be no
Confusion, but a sweet Submission to one another in the Light and Life of
Christ Jesus, that as the Lord, has blessed your Meetings and Labor of Love
for the Body's sake, keep your Minds stayed upon the Lord, out of all
Consultings with Flesh and Blood, or any Strivings to appear to be any thing
but what the Lord is in you, to keep you all in Humility, in a pure Subjection
unto Christ, that he may silence all the Councils fo Flesh in you, and keep you
in his holy dread and pure Fear, to receive Wisdom from him, to guide you to
determine all Matters brought before you, so that every one have your Eye to
the Lord, to eye his Glory in all your Words and Works; so will Love abound,
and the Blessing of the Lord will be in the midst of you, to guide you all in
his pure Fear, to do to every one as you would be done unto, and watch over one
another with a Pure Single Eye at all times, that your Single Eye may be to the
Good in one another, and your Tenderness in the Love of God in all Humility to
reach to the Measure of God, to raise it up, and thus will you stand in the
Heavenly Nature Saviors upon Mount Sion, to bring again them that stray, and
so restoring them with the Spirit of Meekness; and here is Christ and his
Desciples Washing one another Feet in all Humility and Heavenly Condescension
(one unto another) the Strong bearing the Burden of the Weak, and gently
leading them forth, out of that which burdens the Pure, into the Light and Path
of Life, where the building up one another is in the most holy Word of Faith,
where we sit together in our Heavenly Places in Christ, where Self is made of
No Reputation, but every one Serving the Lord, casting down our Crowns before
his Throne, and with one accord singing the Songs of the Redeemed from the
Earth; all Glory, all Honor, all Praises, and Thanksgiving Dominion be giving
unto him, who is found worthy to sit upon the Throne in our Consciences, to
feed us with the Br^ad that is sure, and refresh us with the Water that never
^aileth; so we that are many are made one Bread, eating the Flesh of Christ,
and drinking his Blood, where we have Life, and that abundantly, and we
comforted together in our Heavenly Mansions, in our sweet and pure Fellowship
of the Gospel in Christ our Righteousness, who is One, his Name and Nature One
in all his People; and Salvation is unto us for Walls and Bulworks; and here
have we Peace, in this Holy City, New Jerusalem, which the World knows not,
neither can they take it from us; and here is no Strife nor Contention within
her Gates, but we witness the Promise of the Lord fulfilled, I will make
Jerusalem a Quiet Habitation: In this City there is no more Curse, but the Name
and Image of God is written in the Foreheads of them that dwell therein; that
all that have to deal with them, as they mind God's Witness in any Measure,
will confess, These are the People of the Most High God, born of the Righteous
Seed, which the Lord has Blessed. And in this Heavenly Government,
dear Brethren and Sisters, all keep your Meetings, and the blessed Persence of
the Lnrd fill all your Hearts, and enlarge his Love in you and amongst you, to
your mutual Comfort one of another, and the Honor of his Great Name, who is
over all God blessed forever.

So will you, dear Friends and Brethren, comfort the Hearts of all Traveling
Friends and Brethren, who have not loved their Lives, to Death to serve the
Lord, and gather you home into this Heavenly Rest; the very Sense of their
faithful Labors and Travels, seeking nothing for Themselves, but the Honor of
God and your Establishment in this Rest, it takes deep Impression upon my
Heart, both they that have finished, who here did wear the Garments of
Humility, and now the Crown of Eternal Glory; and my dear Brethren that are yet
on this side the Grave, who are laboring in the Service of the Lord, in
Faithfulness, in the Gospel of the Lord Jesus* dear Friends, let your Hearts be
affected as mine is, that the End of their Labors may be answered in your
Faithfulness, in keeping your Meetings according to all the Exhortations, that
you have had through the Faithful Laborers and is expressed in this Epistle,
that you may grow up as an Holy Priesthood, offering up the living and holy
Sacrifice in your faithful Testimony and pure Unity of Spirit and Bond of
Peace, where my Soul is bound up with you in this Heavenly Rest in Christ Jesus
our Light and Life over all exalted in us to Reign, who is worthy forevermore,
in whom I rest;

Your Dear Brother, W. D.
London, the 14 th, of the 11 th Month 1675:
Titus Oates's Certificate concerning William Deusbery and the Quakers. 1678

Mr Whitfeald,
YOurs I Received, in which mentions one Deusbery, his name is William Deusbery
a Quaker, whom you would do well to Discharge: He is no Jesuit, nor like one; I
look upon it to be more discretion, not to meddle with any Protestant Dissenters
in this day; but bend our forces against the common Enemy of the Protestant
Religion, the Papist; And endeavor to win by Arguments those that are
Dissenters from us: Sir, here is a Certificate from some that has known him
these Twenty years and upwards, who are Men of repute in their Generation, and
Protestants: And I pray, did you ever know that there was ever such a
Correspondency betwixt Jesuits and Quakers as might render them suspicious; or
did you ever know any Priests or Jesuits in their Meetings? and there suffered
to Preach, etc.

For I know the Jesuits and the Quakers, and there is such vast difference in
points of Religion, that it is as possible to reconcile Light and Darkness, as
to reconcile them; though they may appear different from us, yet I think they
are no Murderers, as the Papist have been, and are: I have no more, but that I
am yours though unknown,

T. O.
The 13 th of March, 1678, 9.
1680
An Exhortation to all People, to prize their Time, in making their Calling and
Election sure, before they go hence and be no more.
As it has pleased the Lord God in his tender Mercy, in his Heavenly Power in
Christ, to assist his tender Handmaid Mary Sam, and give her full Assurance of
her Eternal Salvation, who lived with her Grandfather William Dewsbury at
Warwick, where he was and is Prisoner for the Testimony of our Lord Jesus
Christ, And there she departed this natural Life when she was the Age of Twelve
Years and sixteen Weeks; and in her Sickness declared to all about her, what
God had done for her Soul. A brif Account whereof Follows.
ALL People, mind the fear of the Lord, who created the Henvens and the Earth,
the Seas and Fountains of Waters, and all turn your Minds to the Light of
Christ Jesus in your own Consciences, that reproves for Sin in the secret of
your Hearts, and this God requires of you all, to search your Hearts thoroughly
with the Light of Christ Jesus which is the true Light that lights every one
that comes into the World, as it is written in the Scriptures of Truth, John
1.9. And as you are faithful to the Light, it will let you see how you have
lived and spent your precious time that is gone over your Heads; then will your
Consciences be awakned with the Light of Christ, and you will be made sensible
of your careless sinful and miserable state and condition that you have lived
in; so will the Lord in great Mercy to your Souls set your sin in order before
you, and the Iniquity of your Heels will compass you about; so will you be made
sensible of your lost and perishing State and Condition, that if the Lord did
not look upon you in his Mercy in the Lord Jesus, to give you strength to
forsake every evil Way, and Repentance for what you have done, you would perish
forever.

So from the deep sense of your own nothingness, and the need of the help of
Christ Jesus the true Light and blessed Savior, to whom you Cry and Pray
continually, That he would perfect his great work of Regeneration, in leading
you in the footsteps of the Tribulated Companions, who go weeping and seeking
the Lord their God, asking the Way to Sion, with their Faces thitherwards, no
more to let your Eyes slumber in peace, nor your Eyelids have rest until you
be assured the Lord is your God, and that he has blotted out your Sins, and
done away your Iniquities for his Name sake, and has accepted of you in his
new and Everlasting Covenant of his Mercy in Christ Jesus, So, you that were
afar off in your Rebellious Nature, of which you are now ashamed, through true
Repentance and Obedience to the Light you are made nigh in the Blood of Christ,
which gives you full assurance of your Eternal Salvation, and purges your
Consciences from dead Works to serve the Living God; and whoever you are that
come to witness this blessed Work of Regeneration wrought in your Hearts, as
before written in your being created to a lively Hope in Christ Jesus, [ Mark]
you are to watch and pray, that in the Exercise and Improvement of this Hope
you may receive Strength to purify your selves as he is Pure; ^o comes all
that are Worshippers of the Father to Worship him in Spirit and in Truth, for
such the Father seeks to Worship him; and these are they whom he Perfects
forever, through the Sanctification of his Spirit: So is this Scripture
fulfilled in you, He that does Truth, brings his Deeds to the Light, that they
may be manifest that they are wrought in God, John 3.21. And these are his
Children who walk in the Light, and have their fellowship with the Father of
Light, in Christ Jesus their blessed Savior, and one with another, in his
humble, meek, pure and blessed Nature, and so becomes his chosen Jewels and
Citizens of Sion, who walk in the Light of the New-Ierusalem, as it is written
in the Scriptures of Truth, The Nations that are saved shall walk in the Light
thereof; And whatever any of you suffer, who are redeemed from the Earth, and
have your Confidence in the Lord alone) Christ takes as done unto himself, as
it is written, Mat. 25.31. to the end of the Chapter, When the Son of Man shall
come in his Glory, and his holy Angels with him, then shall he sit upon the
Throne of his Glory, and divide the Sheep from the Goats; when he has set the
Sheep on the right Hand, and the Goats on the left, then will he say to those
on his Right Hand, Come, you blessed of my Father, inherit the Kingdom prepared
for you from the Foundation of the World; for I was hungry, and you gave me
Meat; thirsty, and you gave me Drink; a stranger* and you took me in; naked and
you clothed me; I was sick, and you visited me; I was in Prison, and you came
unto me. Then shall the Righteous answer him, saying; Lord, when saw we thee
hungry, and fed thee? or thirsty, and gave thee drink? When saw we thee a
stranger, and took thee in? or naked, and clothed thee? or when saw we thee
sick and in Prison, and came unto thee? And the King shall answer and say unto
them, Verily, I say unto you, in as much as you have done it unto one of the
least of these my Brethren, ye have done it unto me. Then shall he say unto
them on the Left Hand, Depart from me, ye Cursed, into Everlasting Fire,
prepared for the Devil and his Angels. He gave them to understand, why they
must depart, they had not done to him, as those at the right Hand had done, as
you may read at large from Verse 41. to the end of the Chapter.

So all may see how Man's destruction is of himself, in not regarding the
Counsel of Christ Jesus, the Light, to guide them in a Humble, Pitiful,
Compassionate, Pure and Blessed Nature, so they go into Everlasting Punishment;
but the Righteouss that are guided by his blessed Spirit (as before written)
they shall go into Life Everlasting, which is the Inheritance of all that walk
in the Light, faithful unto Death, the Crown of Life they shall enjoy forever
and for evermore, as it pleased the Lord to give a full assurance to his tender
Handmaid of her Eternal Salvation, in his blessed Work upon her Spirit, as the
following Lines do manifest.

W. D.

These following Lines are what was expressed by Mary Sam, Daughter to John Sam
of Hutter Congquest in Bedfordshire, who dwelt with her Grandfather William
Dewsbury, at the Sergeants Ward in Warwick, where he was and is Prisoner for
the Testimony of the Lord Jesus Christ.
THe first day of the second Month, 1680. it pleased the Lord to afflict her
with a violent Fever, that brought her very low in a little time, and great
was her exercise of Spirit, as to her Condition and State with God, many times
weeping when ^he was alone: Her Aunt Ione Dewsbury asked her, Why she walked
alone so often in the Garden, when she was well? and why she was so sorrowful?
She answered and said, Dear Aunt, I am troubled in my Conscience for want of a
full assurance of my Eternal Salvation; for not any knows my Exercise, but the
Lord alone what I have gone through since I came to Warwick, it was begun a
little before I came but it was but a little; but since I came to Warwick, this
was my Exercise, I thought I should not live long, and that if I did dye, I did
not know whither my Soul should go; but I hope the Lord will give me
satisfaction before I dye; but its but hope, and though but hope, yet for this
hope my Soul shall praise the Name of the Lord forever. And so she continued
praising the Name of the Lord, and making Melody, with joyful Sounds, many
times in her great Affliction.

The next day some Friends being in the Room with her, She was much opened in
declaring how she had observed the dealings of the Lord with her in time past,
saying, I have been twice in my days nigh unto death, but the Lord in his
tender Mercy prolonged my days, that I might seek his Face in the Light of
Christ, and come to be acquainted with him, before I go hence. And also she
said, If this Distemperdo not abate, I must dye, but my Soul shall go to
Eternal Joy, Eternal, Eternal and Everlasting Life and Peace with my God
forever: Oh! Praises Praises to thy Majesty, Oh, my God! who helps me to go
through with patience, what I am to endure. Then after some time she said,
Friends, we must all go hence one after another, and they that live the longest
know and endure the greatest Sorrow: Therefore, O Lord, if ^it be thy will,
take me to thy self, that my Soul may rest in Peace with thee, and not any one
to see me here any more. Oh! Praises, Praises be unto thy holy Name forever in
thy will being done with me, to take me to thy self, where I shall be in
Heavenly Joy, yea, in Heavenly Joy forever and forevermore. The day following
she desired all to go forth of the Room, for she desired to be alone; and after
a considerable time, when we heard her groan upon her sickbed, her Mother and
Grandfather went to her, then she said unto them, I have now received full
satisfaction of my Eternal Salvation, it is now done, it is now done: And dear
Mother, when thou, or any of my Sisters dye, I desire the Lord may go along
with you; for I am very willing to dye, that the Lord may Glorify his Name
this day, in his will being done with me; And many times would she be praying
to the Lord day and night* O Lord, lay no more upon me, than thou give m^
strength to bear, and go though with patience, that thy Will may be done, that
thy Will may be done (many times together) Oh help me, help me, O my God! that
I may Praise thy holy Name forever. And so continued, very often Praising the
Name of the Lord with joyful Sounds, and singing high Praises to his holy Name
forever and forevermore; she being much spent with lifting up her Voice in high
Praises to God, through fervency of Spirit, and her Body being very weak, her
Grandfather went into the Room, and desired her, to be as still as possibly
she could, and keep her Mind inward, and staid upon the Lord, and see if she
could have a little rest and sleep: She answered, Dear Grandfather, I shall
dye, and I cannot but Praise the Name of the Lord whilst I have a being; I do
not know what to do to Praise his Name enough whilst I live; but whilst there
is Life there is hope; but I do believe it is better for me to dye, than live.
And so continued speaking of the Goodness of the Lord from day to day, which
caused many Tears to fall from the Eyes of them that heard her, Her
Grandfather coming to her, asked her how she did? she said to him and to her
Mother, I have had no rest this night nor to day; I did not know but I should
have dyed this night, but very hardly I tugged through it; but I shall dye to
day, and a Grave shall be made, and my Body put into a Hole, and my Soul shall
go to Heavenly Joy, yea, Heavenly Joy and Everlasting Peace forevermore. Then
she said, Dear Grandfather, I do believe thou will not stay long behind me,
when I am gone. He answered, Dear Granddaughter, I shall (...) fast as the
Lord orders my way. Then she praised the Name of the Lord with high Praises,
and Joyful Sounds for a season, and then desired her Mother, To let her be
taken-up a little time; saying, it may be it will give me some ease. Then they
sent for her Grandfather, who said to her, If this be thy last day, and
thereon thou art to dye, it is not safe for thee to be taken forth of thy Bed:
dear Mary, thou shall have all attendance that is convenient, as to set thee
up, in thy Bed, and to lay thee done again; but to take thee up' we are not
willing to do it. She answered, Well Grandfather, what thou see best for me,
I am willing to have it so. Then her Mother and Aunt set her up in her Bed; she
said, it did refresh her and give her some ease: And as they were ordering what
was to be done about her Bed, she said, Oh! what a great deal of do is here in
ordering the Bed, for one that is upon their Death- Bed. Her Aunt Ione Dewsbury
said, Mary, do thou think thou art upon thy Death Bed? She answered, Yea,
Yea, I am upon my Death Bed, I shall dye to day, and I am very willing to dye,
because I know it is better for me to dye than live. Her Aunt replied, I do
believe it is better for thee to dye than live: She said, Yea, it is well for
me to dye.

Then her Mother said to her, Mary art thou well satisfied in thy leaving me
and thy Sisters, and in thy coming to Warwick to thy Grandfather? She
answered, Yea, Mother, I am very well satisfied, for I saw my way was made so
Clear for my coming to Warwick; and my Grandfather and I have lived so
comfortably together that I am fully satisfied as to my coming to him; and I
have been very well as to any matter of Sickness, until this Sickness came upon
me. And dear Mother, I would have thee remember my love to my dear Sisters,
Relations and Friends; and now I have nothing to do, I have nothing to do. A
Friend answered, Nothing Mary but to dye. Then she said to her Mother, I desire
thee to give me a little clear Posset drink, then I will see if I can have a
little rest and sleep before I dye. When the Posset drink came to her, she took
a little, and desired her Mother to give her a little drink to wash her Mouth.
Then she said to her Mother, I have a swelling behind my Ear, but I would not
have any thing done to it, nor to my sore Throat nor Mouth, for all will be
well enough when I am in my Grave. Then she asked what time a day it was? it
being the latter part of the day, her Grandfather said, the Chimes are going
Four; she said, I thought it had been more; I will see if I can have a little
rest and sleep before I dye, And so she lay still, and had a sweet rest and
sleep; and then she awaked without any Complaint, and in a quiet peaceable
^rame of Spirit laid down her head in peace, when the Clock struck the fifth
hour of the 9th day of the 2d* Month, 1680.

We whose Names are underwritten were Eye and Ear Witnesses of what is before
expressed, as near as could be taken, and does not much vary from what she
declared, as the Substance (though much more sweet and comfortable Expressions
past from her, but for brevity-sake are willing this only to publish) who stood
by her when she drew her last Breath. William Dewsbury, her Grandfather.
Mary Sam, her Mother.
Jone Deusbury, her Aunt.
Hannah Whitthead, a Friend.

Dear Friends,
IN the Light of Christ to wait upon him, to renew you in the Spirit of your
minds, to serve the living God. My dear Friends, mind your Calling, unto which
you are called, to wait in the Light to retain God in your Knowledge, to feel
the work of Regeneration perfected in you, that you may truly learn to take up
the Cross daily, and to feel the heavenly Power manifest it self in the Light,
to raise you up in the Life that makes self of no Reputation; and dries up the
Tongue of the Egyptian Sea; and brings all Flesh to true silence in you
before the Lord, then will not any be hasty to utter words before him, but all
in true Watchfulness and Prayer wait for the heavenly Inspiration of his holy
Spirit, to overcome your spirits, and to sanctify you, in making you obedient
to the Heavenly Government of Christ Jesus in you, who will lead you forth of
your own thoughts and wills, in a humble subjection to his blessed Light, Life,
Thought, and Will, which will order you in all faithfulness, to walk with God
in your Families, to be good Examples by your good Conversation, that so you
may set up a Throne in the Consciences of your Children and Servants, and all
with whom you have to do, in having all your words and works seasoned with the
good savor of the Spirit of the Lord, that he may give you an assurance that
the Church of God is in every particular Family; and that you are his
Dewlling Place amongst the Children of Men; then will the Angels of his
Presence pitch their Tents about you, in the day when this Scripture shall be
fulfilled, as it is written, Pour forth thy Vengeance O Lord upon the Heathen
that know thee not, and upon all the Families that call not upon thy Name.

And dear Friends, be watchful in Prayer always, that you may enjoy the
heavenly Life, to exercise you in all faithfulness, strive to exceed in
Humility and Carefulness; in the Name of the Lord Jesus Christ to meet
together, that he may exercise, guide and order you in all Services, upon the
account of the blessed Truth of our God, that in the meek spiritual Life and
Love, you be subject to serve the Lord, and one another in all love and
tenderness of Heart, in doing unto others as you would have them do unto you;
then will the Lord take delight in you, and make you manifest, to be his chosen
Jewels and Saviors upon Mount Sion, in repairing the Breaches, and restoring
the Desolate, in bringing back again in the Bowels of Love, those that have
been driven away, or turned aside either to the right hand or to the left, in
the hour of Temptation and days of Trial.

Oh, you meek humble minded spirited People of the Almighty God, lift up your
heads, and keep your minds staid upon the Lord, to help you to keep your
Habitations of Peace within the Gates of Sion, where Salvation we have for
Walls and Bulwarks, whose confidence is in the Lord alone, in whom I beseech
you live in the endeared Love of Christ Jesus, who gave his Life to Redeem us
to himself, and gave strength to his Redeemed ones, to forsake Wife and
Children, to give up our lives daily in Tumults, Stripes, Bloodshed, with
cruel Sufferings, both in Prison and when at Liberty, for to bring Enemies out
of enmity in the Light to be in union with God: Oh, be entreated to seek the
Lord, to subject all your minds to this Love of God in Christ Jesus, to rule in
you; then will the desire of my Soul be answered, in your restoring and
gathering to God, as is before written, who will then build you up in the unity
of the Spirit, and bond of Peace, which will enable you with Patience and
meekness, to weary out and overcome whatever is contrary to his pure, peaceable
and blessed nature; the Mouth of the Lord has spoken it.

Through your Brother and Companion in the Kingdom of Patience and Tribulation
in the Lord Jesus Christ. W. D.
Warwick, Goal, the the 10 th day of the 12 th Month 1680.
1682
A General Epistle to be Read in the Fear of God. In and amongst the Assemblies
of his People.
My Dear Friends,
IN the Light of the Lord all Watch and Pray, that you may receive Power
through Faith in the Name of Christ to Reign over your own Thoughts and Wills;
then will you Delight in taking up the Daily Cross to the Mortifying of the
Earthly Members: That your Conversations may be as becomes the Gospel of our
Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, which will make you Manifest to the Witness of
God in every Conscience, that you are the Salt of the Earth; that have kept
your State and Habitation in God, and does retain the Sweet Savoury Spirit of
Life, which Seasons all your Words and Works, and Ministers Grace to all with
whom you have any concern; to the Exalting Gods Blessed Truth over all that
Watch for Evil, which will cause their Eyes to fail, and frustrate their
Expectations for ever, Amen.

And Dea^ Friends, I beseech you be Faithful upon all Accounts, for the Service
of the Blessed Truth of God; to meet together in his Holy Fear, that you may
receive the Holy Inspiration of his Spirit to Exercise you in what Service God,
is pleased to call you unto; whether in Prayer to God, or in Exhortation to
Build up one another in your most Holy Faith; to raise up the Life in all, the
every one that is Overcome with the Powerful and H^avenly Motions, cast their
Mite into Gods Treasury, and give him his own Advantage; so will you feel the
Increase of his Government in you that are Faithful, in the true Measure of
Light and Life; more and more he will give unto you, to the Edifying of one
another in love: So will you become Epistles written in one another Hearts,
with the Pure Spirit of the Living God; which will bind you up in the Unity of
the Spirit, and Bond of Peace; and what Exercise soever is met withal, whilst
you are in the Mortal Body, Pray to the Lord to keep you in the Life of his own
Spirit; that Patience may have its Perfect work, that if you be Smitten on the
one Cheek, turn the other Cheek to the Smitter also; and if you be Reviled,
Revile not again; but in deep Humility and Patience Wait in the Pure, Meek, and
Peaceable Spirit of our Lord Jesus who was made perfect through Sufferings: So
are his Dear and Chosen Jewels, who bear his Name in Righteousness, and have
their Eye to the God of their Help, and their Confidence in the Lord alone.

Oh ye Blessed of the Lord, be Glad in his Name, who will not let any of you
Suffer (whose Confidence is in him alone) any more then he will give Strength
to Bear, and will Sweeten the Cup of your Tribulation with his Blessed
Presence, which will cause your Hearts to Rejoice, and Sing in all your Trials;
and will give you your Portion forever with the Blessed Assembly, that John
Spoke of in the seventh of the Revelations, a number that no man could number,
that had passed through the Great Tribulation, and washed their Garments, and
made them white in the Blood of the Lamb, Therefore are they before the Throne
of God, and serve him day and night in his Holy Templ^* and he that sits on
the Throne shall dwell among them, and Feed them, and lead them to the Living
Fountains of waters, where God will wipe away all Tears of Sorrow from their
Eyes forever.

And this is your Portion, you dear Children of the living God, who in true
Love to him have waited upon him, in the Light of Christ, to be Buried with him
in his Spiritual Baptism, and made conformable to him in his Sufferings and
Death.

And in the deep sense of your present strait, being made Conformable in
Measure to our Lord and Savior; you Cry as he did upon the Cross, my God, my
God, why have thou forsaken me (when he bore the Sins and Transgressions of his
People) Even so do you his Dear Children in your Measure, passing through the
Great Tribulations, being made of the Number of the Slain of the Lord.

Here is first a passing through the Great Tribulation, and to be made of the
Number of the Slain of the Lord; and being truly Humbled into his Blessed Will,
in the deep sense of the poverty of Spirit, there Wait upon the Lord, until he
Create you to a lively Hope, and give you a Possession of his Blessed Life,
that is hid with Christ in God, and so marry you to himself in his own
Righteousness, which he gives you for to be your Wedding Garment.

And now this Love of God constrains you to walk in all Strict Observations
that are Required of you to be done; but no more to Lean upon them for Life,
but have now all your Obediences accepted of God through Faith in the Light,
Life, and Name of Christ, in whom you now are the Righteousness of God for
ever, in giving up freely to be guided by his Spirit in Faithfulness to the end.

Oh you ever blessed and happy People! Who does witness fulfilled in you what
is here written; Lift up your Heads and rejoice in the Lord, and in the
Almighty Power of his Humble, Meek and Pure Spirit, which makes Self of no
Reputation, but through your Obedience to Christ Jesus the true Light, in whom
you come to Witness the Lord to be One, and his Name One; and you that never
had Power to believe in his Name, until he gave you Power to believe; you are
One in the Lord for ever. And here is the Joyful and Eternal Unity with the
Father in the Son, and one with another in the Love of Christ which bought us
with his blood, which the gates of Hell can never Prevail against.

And all you my Ancient Brethren and Sisters, that have Obtained this Blessed
Dominion and Everlasting Inheritance; I Bless God for you, whom I do believe
will take care to answer the Desire of my Soul, as before-written: For the
Comfort of the Young and Tender Babes, for whose sake I had this Concern upon
my Spirit, to lay before them the true Passage into the Footsteps, where the
Tribulated Companions have Traveled that are Married to the Lord of Life, and
have upon them their Wedding Garment, that they may not come Short that are
upon their Travel toward the same Inheritance in Christ the true Light, as
before expressed.

And I dearly beseech you, whom God has Sealed up (with his holy Spirit, to
your full assurance of Gods* Everlasting Love in Christ Jesus) that you Watch
over the tender and tribulated ones; and in what possible can be done, to
strengthen their Faith, that they may come into the heavenly Unity with the
Father in the Son; and sit down with all them that have been made Conformable
to Christ in his Sufferings and Death, that in the heavenly Resurrection;
blessed and everlasting Peace, they may sing Hallelujah, and high Praises to
the Lord their God, over all the wrath that is in the Children of Men; which
will come to an end, and vanish away like Smoke, before you whom the Lord has
called in meekness and Patience to bear his Name in Righteousness, in the Sweet
Savory Spirit of Jesus Christ, over all Blessed forever, Amen. In which the
Lord keep you all, with my Soul, Faithful unto the end, is the Breathings of
the Spirit of your Brother and Companion in the Kingdom of Patience and
Tribulation in the Lord Jesus Christ.

And further I have this to communicate to my Friends and Brethren; that what
has come to pass these late Years, for want of Watchfulness to be Guided by
the Spirit of the Lord: Love has been quenched in many, that Offenses have
entered, and Separation followed; which has deeply wounded my Spirit, who has
endeavored to the utmost of my Power in the Love of God to prevent such
Proceedings; and so have I done in many Years past, in preventing Papers ready
to be Printed, from being Published, that were of a tendency to quench the Love
of one toward another: And when ^effery Bullocks Pape^s were published in
Print, which would appear to the Reader of a tendancy as to the breach of
Unity; (which would cause the Enemies of God to Rejoice; it did so wound my
Spirit, that for many Week, they that saw me did not expect that I would
continue long in the Body: But God in his Mercy restored Strength in his
Appointed time.

And when I did hear that some in the West, did intend to Publish in Print
against some Friends: I bore my Testimony against such proceedings, and told
one that did favor what was intended, that I would have my Hand cut off,
before I would exercise it in such undertakings: And desired him, to speak to
W. R. that he would not proceed in publishing any thing of that nature; for if
he did, it would be a prejudice to Truth, and would produce very sad
Consequences that would follow, and my Spirit would be deeply wounded, as it is
this day, through these Proceedings; that voluntarily through want of Love,
casts away the Judgment, that is given to the People of the Saints of the most
High God (to keep all sweet and savoury amongst us) into the Hands of the
Enemies of God, as an inlet for them to come unto the midst of us, to sit as
Judges and trample upon us.

So to Clear my Conscience of all False Reports cast upon me, as that I have
Encouraged what is brought forth as before written; and to satisfy all Friends
in God, I have Labored according to the Ability God has given me, to prevent
the publishing all things of that Nature, as aforesaid; and have Endeavored
with all concerned, that I could meet with: to have a care of watching for
Evil, lest they provoke one another to wrath, and so quench the love: But
rather look at the good one in another, and in the Love of God Minister, to
preserve them forth of any weakness they did see lay near to attend them; that
so the pure Holy Spirit of Life and Love, that first gathered us into it self,
to be a People in God, and in his blessed Authority to reign over what was, and
is contrary to his blessed Nature, may again restore, (where it is wanting) in
the Universality of its blessed Power, to make up the Breaches, and to restore
the Desolate ones, in causing every one that Professes the Blessed Truth of
God, to love their Neighbor as themselves; and so to do unto all, as they
would have others to do unto them; that so all concerned in the Exercise, in
the Measure of the Grace of God in Christ, (that seeks the peace of his People)
may stand as Saviors upon mount Sion, to the Honor of the Name of the Lord
our God, and the Eternal comfort of all that love not their Lives unto Death,
to serve the Lord, and his dear and chosen People, in the Meek Patient and
Peaceable Spirit of our Lord Jesus Christ.

In which the Lord keep you all with my Soul; that in his pure and Peaceable
Dominion we all Reign, and throw down our Crowns before his Throne, and all
unanimously Sing, all Glory, Honor, Praises, Thanksgiving and Dominion be
given to him, who is found worthy to sit upon his Throne in all our
Consciences, Christ Jesus the true Light, and hope of our Glory, even so be it
with all that Professes his Blessed Truth, Says my Soul in the Name of the
Lord.

W. D.
From Warwick the 8 th day of the 3 d Month 1682.
MY Dear Faithful suffering Brethren and Sisters in Bristol, Gloucester, and
elsewhere, for the Word of God and Testimony of our Lord and Savior Jesus
Christ; Oh lift up your Heads, you Blessed of the Lord, whose days are
prolonged to see this blessed day which was sounded in your Ears above twenty
Years by past, and have counted you worthy to receive this blessed Crown, of
his suffering Spirit, for all you that freely resign to suffer for his Name in
true sincerity, shall reign forever with him in eternal glory; therefore in the
Name of the Lord, I beseech you all, convinced of Gods blessed Truth, do not
lend your Ear to any counsel in you, or without you, that would cause you to
fly Sufferings, and so deny the Suffering Jesus before Men, for if you do, you
know it is written then he will deny you before his Heavenly Father, etc. But
all you chosen Jewels, that so loves the Lord, that you dare but do as Godly
Daniel did, walk with your God as at other times, with the hazard of both
Estate, Liberty and Life. Oh, Blessed, blessed be the day that ever the Lord
Crowned you, with this blessed frame of Spirit in receiving Jesus to be your
guide, even so the Lord keep you, and lead you to the living Fountains of
living Water, which in the Light is always opened in you; give not way to your
own thoughts, but in the Light Judge them down as fast as they appear, then
will you be kept out of the streightness of your own Bowels, in the Heavenly
enlargedness in the Light, Thought and Will of God; whose thoughts are good and
not evil, to give you all an expected end in answering all the desires he has
raised up in you, to do his will: Therefore arise in the pure Peaceable Spirit
of the Lord, cast your care upon him, he will arm you with Patience to endure
the Tribulation which will cause the Beholders to admire, as it is written in
the Scriptures of Truth; Behold the Patience and Faith of the Saints, which
will overcome all that withstand the rising of his Glory; who is the God of our
help over all blessed forever.

Where is the Rest of your tribulated Brother in the Kingdom of Patience in
Christ Jesus. W. D.
Warwick the 17 th of the 5 th Month, 1682.
My Ancient Friend, 1684
Edward Nightingal,
WHom the Lord counted worthy to receive his Blessed Truth, with many in that
City and County, when the Lord sent forth his Servants, and called me to
forsake Wife and Children, and to give up my Life daily into his Will, to
endure Stripes and Bruises in many Tumults, with the rest of my faithful
Brethren, who loved not our Lives to Death for your sakes; to gather thee, and
all that received the Truth, that you might enjoy the Presence of the Lord; and
amongst many others, we counted thee worthy to receive his Servants, that meet
together in the heavenly Unity in the Truth; for which both thou and I, with
many of the Servants of God, was put into Prison, as many of his Servants are
this day, etc. And the blessed Presence of God kept, and does keep them, that
truly fear his Name in sweet Unity and Peace in himself, and one with another,
to their everlasting Comfort, and to the confounding the Enemies of God, to
behold their steadfast standing and entire union, to bear their faithful
Testimony in whatever they were, or are called unto for the Truth of God; which
did not only confound Gods Enemies, but many were Convinced and received the
Truth in the Love of it, in beholding the Unity of faithful Friends, to their
everlasting Comfort, and the Honor of the Name of the Lord forever; which
caused my Soul, with the rest of the faithful Laborers, to praise the Name of
the Lord, in blessing the Travel of our Souls, and giving us to see the Fruit
of our Labor ^n h^s Vineyard, and the Peace and Unity of his People.

But of late I have heard that thou my ancient Friend Edward Nightingal, and
John Cox, with some other in that City, does meet in a Separating spirit from
the rest of Friends in that City, which casts a Stumbling Block in the way of
many: And instead of gathering People to receive the Truth, you scatter and
drive them away; and gives great advantage to them that watch for evil, and is
of a bad savor, and a Wounding of the Spirits of them that truly fear the
Lord: I can truly say that your meeting in that Separating spirit, which is
such an evil savor in the Nation, has been and is more Affliction to me, then
all Persecutions and Imprisonments I have endured unto this day: Therefore I
entreat and beseech thee, my Ancient Friend Edward Nightingal, with all that
meet in the Separation from the rest of Friends in the City, to turn your minds
to the Light of Christ in you, that will let you see you have not done well,
and with it judge that which has led you to Separate from meeting with
Friends; and return to meet with Friends in the City, in the sweet Concord,
Love and Unity, in the Life of the Blessed Truth, as in the days of old and
Years past, of which I am a witness with the rest of faithful Friends, that in
all our Meetings, whether in the Prison, or in the City, we never wanted the
sweet appearance of Christ our Life in us, and amongst us, according to his
Promise, and our Comfort then, and so is it now, with all that meet in his
Name, and Unity with his People, as we did in those days, which was many Years
before the Enemy could get any entrance to make a breach, amongst them that
make Profession of Gods blessed Truth, and to draw some into a self Separation,
as he has done you, and too many elsewhere: For I do assure you it is the work
of the Enemy of your Souls; for you should not have Separated, but have kept
your places amongst Friends; and not have taken offense because Friends see
there might be some service for Truth, in meeting twice on the First Day; it is
very like in that City, some that had a Love to Truth, might get an opportunity
to come to one of the Meetings: It is very much to me, how you let the Enemy
get over you, as to cause you to Separate from Friends; which if you had kept
your places, in meeting with Friends, you in time might have seen a Service in
meeting twice a day as well as they: For you may be sure that Separation
neither restores any to love the Truth, neither gathers any to God, but rather
scatters and drives away some that was gathered in Love to Truth, by the
painful and faithful Laborers that was truly sent of the Lord, as is before
written. Therefore in the earnings of tender Bowels of the Love of God to you,
I once more beseech you, that you in Humiliation wait in the Light of Christ,
he will let you see how the Enemy led you from the Light out of your places,
when you Separated from Meeting with Friends; and in yiedling obedience to the
Light, it will bring you into your places again, to meet with Friends to your
Comfort, and the Honor of the Name of the Lord, according to the Counsel of
the Lord in my Heart, here sent unto you.

But if you reject the Council of the Lord, which in his Love I am moved to
send these Lines unto you; then shall I Lament your Conditions, because of the
evil consequence your Separation will produce to your sorrow, and wounding many
God would not have Wounded; for which you must give an account: And before you
lay down your Heads in peace, you will remember me, who has not hide from you
the Counsel of the Lord.

W. D.
Warwick, the 21 st day of the 11 th Month, 1684.
A General Epistle to Friends, 1686
from that Ancient Servant of Christ William Dewsbury.
MY Dear Friends, and Brethren, who are called forth of the World, and plucked
as Brands out of the Fire, by the Heavenly Power of God, and has Convinced you
of his Everlasting Truth, in the Light of Jesus Christ; My dear Friends, as
have you received the Truth in some measure, watch and pray, and Believe in the
Name of Christ; that his Power you may feel, in the Heavenly Inspiration of his
blessed Spirit, to lay Judgment to the Line, and Righteousness to the Plummet;
that all that is not Obedient to the Light of Christ, may be kept down, and
buried in the Heavenly Baptism, under the Sentence of Death; as it was and is
with all the Children of God, who have received the Sentence of Death in our
selves; that we may have no confidence in our selves, but alone trust in the
Living God, which will keep you all in the sweet seasoned savory Spirit of
Life, in all your Words, Tradings and Dealings amongst the Children of Men;
then will you be manifest and known to all People to be the Salt of the Earth,
who retain the savor of the Heavenly Life, in the Blessed Truth in you, that
every one according to your Measure, may be felt, upon all occasions,
continually streaming forth, in the savoury Spirit of Life, to the Comfort of
your own Families, and the City of God, who over all is Blessed forever.

And my dear Friends, I desire all to be watchful, that not any come short of
what is required of them, both Rulers of Families, and Parents of Children;
while you have a day to be with them, call your Families together to wait upon
the Lord, in the fear of his Name; certainly the Lord will answer the end of
your endeavors in causing the savoury Life to stream through you, to season
your Servants and Children, that the Church of God may be in every pa^ticular
Family and Habitation of his People: Great is the concern upon my Spirit for
the Children of all that profess the blessed Truth of God, that all Parents may
stand i^ their places to bring up their Children in the fear of the Lord, while
they are in their Minority and tender Years, and under their tuishion, not to
be too indulgent to them, in suffering the Spirit of the World to rule in them,
to have their own wills, and to do those things which are not according to the
Truth of God, and to connive at their Children instead of reproving of them,
and crossing the Spirit of the World in them, and causing them to be content
with such things as is according to the Truth of our God; and for want of this
carefulness in Parents, the Spirit of the World is strengthened in their
Children, when it should be kept down by the heavenly Authority and Power that
the Lord has given to their Parents to rule over them, and not to let them
have their own wills satisfied in any thing which is contrary to the Truth of
God; and all in his Wisdom so walk, with such Moderation in all things, as well
as clothed in modest Apparel laying by all Superfluity, that your good Examples
may raise up the witness of God in your Children; and for want of this care in
some Parents, and being too indulgent, and full of lenity to their Children
they grow Rude, Stubborn, Self-willed and Disobedient to their Parents, while
they are under their tuishion, to the wounding of the Hearts of their Parents,
who neglected their duty, as to the Government of their Children in their
tender Years: Therefore I desire and beseech you, in this weighty concern, that
you slight not the oppertunity God gives you, to be in all things a good
Example to all that live with you, both Children and Servants, that by your
godly Conversation, and heavenly Exhortations you raise up the Witness for God
in your Children and Servants, and in exercising the Power God has given to
you, to cross and keep down the evil Nature, while they live with you: And when
your Children grow up, take them to Meetings, and keep your Eyes over them,
that they behave themselves soberly according to your Exhortations; then
encourage them in well-doing, so will the Lord bless your sweet and heavenly
Behavior in your Families, that Servants will bless God that ever it was their
lots to come into your Families, in that their Spirits were sweetly seasoned
with the Truth, by your heavenly Behavior and Care over them, etc. and your
Children will magnify the Name of the Lord for your blessed Care and heavenly
Instructions, and godly Endeavors every way for their good in this World, and
their eternal happiness in the World to come, which will Crown the hoary Heads
of their Parents with Joy, to see their blessed care and endeavors sanctified
to their Children, and to see their Offspring to be made the Offspring and
Children of God; blessed be his Name forever, who hears the Prayers of his
People, who is exercised daily in the heavenly inspiration of his holy Spirit,
to call upon his holy Name, not only for Enemies, but for a blessing upon their
Families, and for all that love the Truth of our God; these are the Families
that are a sweet savor to the Lord, that he guards with the Angel of his
presence, and will make them manifest and known to all People, that they are
his chosen Jewels whom he will preserve in the day when he will pour forth his
Vengence upon the Heathen that know him not, and upon all the Families that
call not upon his Name.

And if any of these Children of these heavenly minded Parents, when they are
from under their tuishion, for want of watchfulness, grow into carelessness, and
turn their backs of the blessed Truth of God, and trample all the care and good
counsel of their Parents under their Feet, to satisfy their own Wills in the
Pride and Vanity of this evil World, to the wounding of the Hearts of their
careful and loving Parents, they will be clear of their Blood, when they shall
reap the fruit of their doings except they Repent.

And all you young and tender People, with others that come among Friends,
through the education of your careful Parents, Masters or Mistrisses you have
been under, I have a concern upon my Spirit to write to you, that you do not
rest in an outward profession of the Truth, by what you have received by
Education, but all watch to the heart searching Light of Christ in you, which
will let you see you must be Regenerated and Born again, and so be made real
and faithful Friends, by the Heavenly inspiration of the powerful Spirit of God
in you, which if you be careful upon your watch, you will see Judgment upon all
in you that is not obedient to the Light of Christ, in whose Light you will see
more Light, that will let you see your great necessity of the enjoyment of the
Life which is hid with Christ in God, which will cause you to pray without
ceasing, that the Lord would enable you to loath and abhor the Pride, Pomp and
Pleasure of this evil World, and to give you assurance of Gods Love to your
Souls; and until you enjoy it in all places of your retirement, you will pour
forth your Supplications with Tears to the Lord, as the blessed and heavenly
Travelers and Companions did and does, who could not find the Kingdom of God
in outward observations, tho none more faithful in observing what is made known
to them to be the Will of God; but the Kingdom of God not consisting in outward
observations, you in the Light press forward, according to your Spiritual
Hunger and Thirst, in true poverty of Spirit, weeping and seeking the Lord your
God, asking the way to Sion, with your Faces thitherward, that you may enjoy
his Salvation for Walls and Bulwarks.

Oh, you blessed Children of the Lord, lift up your Heads, and stay your Minds
upon the Lord, patiently waiting upon him, he will turn your Sorrows into
everlasting rejoicing, and seal you up with the holy Spirit of Promise, and in
the marriage union with himself, and will give you assurance of your eternal
Salvation; then you will certainly know the Kingdom of God to be within you,
and the anointing to teach you, which will enable you to delight in taking up
the Cross daily, in true obedience to the Light of Christ, all the days you
have a being amongst the Children of Men; then will you in the Name of the Lord
(...) upon the Pride, Pomp, Pleasures and Vanity o^ (...) evil World, to the
great Comfort of your dear and careful Parents, Masters and Mistrisses, whose
tuishion you were under in your minority and tender Years, and to all that walk
in the precious Truth of our God over all blessed fo^ever, Amen.

And all dear Friends and Brethren, seeing the Lord who turns the Hearts of
Men as Rivers of Waters, and in his loving kindness so orders those in
Authority, that the Prison Doors were opened once more in our day, to enjoy
Peace and Qu^etness, according to his blessed will, Praises be to his holy Name
for evermore. I have a concern upon my Spirit that all Friends and Brethren
have their Hearts affected as mine is, to live in the sense of the Mercies of
the Lord, and every one, for the time to come, endeavor to prevent the Enemy
in what he has been a doing of late Years, to make dis^union amongst Friends
and Brethren, by public opposi^ion of some, and others not patiently keeping
in their places, has also separated; the differnce being so public, has
caused many a sorrowful Heart, and given cause to the Enemies of God to
rejoice, which has been a greater Exercise and Trouble to me then all the
sharp Persecutions, and Imprisonments I have endured for the Word of God and
Testimony of our Lord Jesus Christ, etc. Therefore, in the Bowels of the Love
of God, I beseech and entreat you all, who have been, or is concerned in what
is before written, let the Love of God so abound that in it all labor for
Peace and Unity, in Christ the Prince of Peace, who in love laid down his Life
for us, when we were Enemies; and called many of his Children in our Age, to
give up their Lives in the hea^ of the Day, Weeks, Months and (...), to gather
Enemies unto the knowledge of, (...) with God; therefore wait for the heavenly
W^sd^m, to bear one with another; that if any who are Conscientious to God, and
Blameless in their Conversations, having a concern upon their Spirit, to
declare in public Assemblys the Truth, to edify the People; I beseech you* in
the love of God, that not any through disaffection show at least any public
opposition; but rather speak to the Party in private, if there be any occasion
for him to be spoken to, so will the Enemy be prevented of casting a stumbling
block in the way of tender spirited People, that comes in love to be Comforted
in the Meeting, and in so doing it will cause Love and Unity to abound amongst
Friends, that in the Love of God* all may be restored that has been scattered,
and brought again into Unity, to meet all together in the Everlasting Truth, to
feel the Healer of Breaches to reign, who is the restorer of the Desolate
exalted in his Kingdom, in all your Hearts, to offe^ up a Peace Offering, in
passing by all Offenses, that have caused Disunion, and to bind you all up in
the Unity of the Spirit, and Bond of Everlasting Peace, to meet all together,
who profess Gods Blessed Truth, to Praise his Holy Name, all as one, and one as
all, while we are here in these mortal Bodies, and forever, when time here
shall be no more, even so be it with you all says my Soul, in the Name of the
Lord, to whom is my Prayers, that all may be accomplished as above written;
until it be so with you I shall remain your exercised Brother, in the Kingdom
of Patience, and Tribulation of our Lord Jesus Christ.

William Dewsbury.

My dear Friends through the sharp Persecutions, that was passed through in the
heat of the day, and many long Imprisonments; being nineteen Years a Prisoner,
in this Town of Warwick, and four of them being kept close Prisoner, it has
pleased God to suffer my Health to be Impaired, that many times I am forced to
rest two or three times, in going to the Meeting in the Town, not being of
ability of Body to travel, as in Years past; I do, in the Love of God, visit
you with this Epistle, desiring it may be carefully read in the Fear of the
Lord, in the Assemblies of his People, that Peace and Eternal Unity may be
amongst you, in the Name of our Lord Jesus Christ, Amen.

Given forth in the movings of the Peaceable Spirit and Word of Reconciliation,
in the Lord Jesus Christ, to whom is my Prayers, that all Convinced may wait to
be made of the number of the Slain of the Lord, and conformable to Christ in
his Death; that they may witness his quickening Power, to raise them up in the
Resurrection of Life, to enter into the Gates of Sion, to dwell in the City of
new Jerusalem, where Peace is within her Gates, and Quietness amongst all that
have their Habitation therein, having Salv^tion for Walls and Bulwarks, and are
the blessed of the Lord, preserved by him, to the Honor of his Name forever,
Amen.

W. D.
Warwick, the 4th of the 10th Month 1686.
These following Epistles were found in Manuscript, without Dates.
To all you proud Priests that dare to add your Wisdom to the Testimony of
Jesus.
KNow this as from him, that he is come to lay open your Deceits, and the
Conjuring deceiving Inventions of your own Brains, which you sell for so much
in the Year, to maintain you in Pride and Lust, for to eat of the Fat, and be
clothed with the finest of the Wool; and so deceive the simple, and lead them
on in Blindness and Darkness, in making people believe the Inventions of their
own Brains, to be the Word of the most high God, as in taking part of the
Testimony of the word Jesus, and add to it the Inventions of their own Wisdoms,
branching it into Doctrines, Reasons, Uses, Helps and Motives, according as
their fancies guides them, and then takes the pure Testimony of Jesus, to prove
the truth of this their Conjuring deceiving Inventions, though the Scripture
tells you, that no Prophecy is of any private Interpretation; for the
Prophecy came not by the will of Man, but holy Men of God spoke as they were
moved by the Holy Ghost; and says John in the Revelations, I saw in the right
Hand of him that sat upon the Throne, a Book written within, and on the back
side sealed with seven Seals: And I saw a strong Angel Proclaiming with a loud
voice, Who is worthy to open the Book, and loose the Seals thereof? and no Man
in Heaven or in Earth, or under the Earth was able to open the Book, or look
thereon; now when John saw that the mystery of Salvation was hid from all
Creatures, he wept much, because none was found worthy to open the Book,
neither to look thereon: And one of the Elders said to John, weep not, behold
the Lion of the Tribe of Judah, of the Root of David, has prevailed to open
the Book, and loose the Seals thereof; and has revealed his mind to his
Servants that obey his Counsel; to him be all Glory, and Honor, and Power for
evermore.

Oh, cease thou vain Man from adding thy Wisdom, in opening the Seals, in
telling poor ignorant people what means the Scriptures, by thy studied Sermons,
and Expositions, which is the Invention of thy own Brains; and putting words
into the Mouths of poor ignorant people, to sing Praises to the most high God;
for there is none can sing but the ransomed of the Lord, and they return to
Sion with joy and singing, and everlasting joy is upon their Heads: And the
Apostle says, If any be Afflicted let him Pray, if any be merry let him sing:
Oh, therefore come down you vain proud Men, that call your Traditions the
Worship of God, and causes the people to err by your Lies, and by your
Lightness; And I sent them not, neither commanded them, therefore they do not
profit this People at all, says the Lord: Hear what the Lord says unto you, I
testify to every Man that hears the words of the Prophecy of this Book; if
any Man add unto these things, God shall add to him the Plagues that are
written therein; and if any Man take away from the words of the Prophecy of
this Book, God shall take away his part out of the Book of Life, and out of the
holy City, and from the things which are written in this Book, and this is your
reward; you add your Wisdom to the Prophecy of this Book, and the Plagues
written in this Book will be added to you; and you take away from the words of
the Prophecy of this Book, in drawing the people from the anointing within
them, which the Father has sent to be their Teacher, according to the
Prophecy of this Book, to seek for the Kingdom of Heaven in carnal
Observations you have set up, contrary to the Prophecy of this Book; and in
the estate you here stand, your names are taken out of the Book of Life, and
out of the holy City, and from the things which are written in this Book:
Repent ye Reprobates, who reject the Counsel of Christ in you, and give over
deceiving the people, and mind the Light in you, that discovers to you the
evil of your Hearts, and give up to be guided by it, least you perish in your
gain sayings, Kiss the Son in obeying his Counsel, which is the Light in you,
least you perish in the way; for if his anger be kindled a little, blessed are
all they that trust in him.

W. D.

Dear Friends,
ANd Children of the living God, mind your watch every one in particular, and
dwell in that which is of God, which is the Light that searches the Hearts, and
discovers the Seed of the Serpent, and its ground and being, and ministers to
the Seed of the Woman, which Seed is Christ, who is the Fountain and Treasure
House, where you shall receive of his Fullness, Wisdom and Power, to stand
against the Serpent in all his appearances, so will his Head be bruised, and
the eternal pure Eye will be opened in you, to know what is to be blessed, and
what is to be accursed; therefore every one in your measures stand faithful in
the Counsel of God, which is the Light, the eternel Witness of his Spirit,
which witnesses against all deceit in its ground where it appears; I charge
you all in the presence of the living God, that you consult not with Flesh and
Blood, nor look not down at the Corruption, as to discou^age you, and cause you
to distrust in the Mercies of the living God; thou that do, thy Condemnation
slumbers not, for the Wrath of God abides on the: All dwell in that which is
pure, stand out of your own wills and thoughts; but keep in that which is of
God, that witnesses against all deceit in its appearances; and all hold fast
your confidence, which is the measure of Faith, which is the Witness of the
eternal Spirit, so will all deceit be kept under, and the Serpents head will be
bruised, and the pure holy Seed of God, the righteous Babe, who works no
Iniquity, and in whose Mouth is found no guile, will be set at liberty, and
raised up to re^gn King over all the Earth, and to do the Will of God, so shall
your Souls enter within this holy City, and you shall have right to the Tree of
Life, feeding on the Feast of fat things, the eternal Riches of the free
Mercies of God, in the free Covenant of Life in the Lord Jesus, and there you
shall rest with the Lord forever; where nothing shall enter that works
Abomination, or makes a Lie, but that which is written in the Lambs Book of
Life; and this is the rest that is prepared for the people of God, where the
workers of Iniquity shall never come.

All dear Friends, join with the Seed of God that works no Iniquity, and take
heed of lending your Ears to the Counsel of the Serpent, that would draw your
minds to look out at Experiences, which you have partaked of in the
Dispensation of the Power of God, in rendering Plagues upon the works of
Iniquity, wherein thou come to witness in the Name of Christ; Miracles
wrought in thee; and Devils cast out; wherein thou wast in Bondage by their
power, and thou who come to witness the Lord ministering to his tender Seed,
in opening to thy Soul the riches of his Love laid up in Christ Jesus, and so
come to Prophecy in the Name of Christ, but not abiding in the Counsel of
the living God, who would destroy the works of Iniquity, and would cast out the
works of Darkness, and would lead through Prophesies and Openings to the
Inheritance in Christ, which will never fade away, but in departing from the
Counsel of the Lord, you are bewitched with the Serpent that tells you, you are
some body now, that has tasted of the Power of God, and secret pride gets in;
and others out of the Prophesies and Openings of what they see, and do not wait
(...) they come to the Possession, and there g^^s in secret Pride, and so
becomes a wandering Sta^, flown up into the Air, and the worker of Iniquity yet
stands, notwithstanding all your experiences that you can witness, Devils cast
out in measure in the Name of Christ, and that you have prophesied in the Name;
he will say unto you, I know you not ye workers of Iniquity; to that in thy
Conscience I speak, lend thine Ear unto it, it will rip thee up, and search thy
Heart, and pass true Judgment upon the Head of the Wicked, and will eternally
witness me, notwithstanding a^l thy experiences: Therefore all dear Friends,
all take heed that none of you come short of your rest, but dwell in the pure
Power of the living God, which judges the Wicked, and casts out Devils;
dwelling in it, it will dispossess the powers of Darkness; and as ^e in his
tender Love appears to the mind, and lets you see into the Inheritance laid
up in Christ, dwelling in the Power you will be kept in the pure fear, not to
avish your selves out to speak of that you possess not, but to wait low in his
Will, where you will be kept in a true sense of your conditions, how the Seed
is oppressed by the worker of Iniquity, and so will be kept by the Power of the
living God, waiting on him in the Faith, until you overcome by the Blood of the
Lamb, and the word of his Testimony, then will the worker of Iniquity be
destroyed and cast out, and the Power and holy Seed of God raised up, which can
work no Iniquity, but stand perfect in the Will of God, and there you enter
into the Rest prepared for you in Christ Jesus, where nothing shall enter that
works Iniquity, and I shall be with you forever in the Lord: And the Lord God
Almighty be with you his dear ^abes and Children, bless, guide, and keep you
all, by his eternal pure power, clear and holy, that you may be a peculiar
People, and holy Priesthood, to give up your Souls and Bodies a living
Sacrifice unto the Lord God Almighty, that he may order you and guide you by
his eternal and pure Wisdom, according to the Counsel of his own Will, and his
Name alone may be honored in you, in his ordering of you, who alone is worthy
of all Honor, Glory, and Power, and Praise for evermore.

W. D.

THis is the Word of the living God to you his dear Children, all be Faithful
on your watch, in the Light, wait to dwell in the Power of the Living dreadful
God, and in it stand armed against self, in all its appeareance, that in the
mighty Power you may tread upon your own Heads, that Christ Jesus may be Head
in you all, that you in him may reign Kings upon the Earth to trample upon the
Earthly Spirit in all its appearances in you, and without you; I charge you and
command you, in the Presence of the Living God, consult not with Flesh and
Blood, which draws into disobedience and unbelief, and fills you full of hard
thoughts of God; I charge you lend not an Ear to that wicked Spirit, but
diligently incline your Ear to the Counsel of Jesus Christ, and in him all walk
faithfully, according to the measure of Light, to answer the charge and care
that is laid upon every one in your measure; and meet often together in the Name
and Power of the Lord, to wait in the silence of your Spirits by his mighty
Power, to Manifest it self in you, and watch one over another with a pure
single Eye, and let no hard thoughts lodge in your Breasts one toward another:
I charge you and command you in the Presence of the living God, judge them out
with the Light, and when you see any draw back, be faithful in ministering to
the pure in them, to raise up ^he Seed to restore them again; and then forgive
one another your offenses, which is done one to another, as Christ Jesus has
forgiven you; and be tender affectioned one toward another, and exhort one
another in love, to the Building up in your most holy Faith, that you all may
rejoice together in the eternal unity, in that which is pure begotten of God;
and God Almighty be with you his dear Babes and Children, and you in it, keep
in the unity of the Spirit and bond of Peace, where I am with you my dear
Hearts, saluting you all in the Bowels of eternal Love.

W. D
This was I moved write the 7 th of the 10 th Month, when I was in
Wellin^gborow in Northamtonshire, where the Lords Work is great in gathering
his Children together there awayes and in Leastershire, and in Buckinghamshire.
Dear Friends,
ANd Children, of the everlasting God, and Father of Light and Life, all in his
Light wait for his living Power to manifest it self in you, to guide you in
every thought word and action in obedience to his will, that you may all shine
forth in the brightness of his Glory, in a pure Conversation, that so you may
every one of you be Lights to the dark World, that they may see your good
Works, and glorify your Heavenly Father, who has in his tender love plucked
you as Brands forth of the Fire, and has looked on you in Mercy and has
counted you worthy to be Witnesses, of his great and glorious Name, for which
sake he has chosen you unto himself, that you might be a People to his praise
and glory; every one of you in your measures to bear his Name in righteousness:
this is the Word of the Lord to you all, that every one of you be Faithful in
your Measure, that as you have received Christ Jesus, so to walk in him, in
giving your selves to him, that he may guide you by his Power. I charge you and
command you all, in the Presence of the living God, to be faithful upon your
watch, and in the pure Light wait, believing in the Name of Jesus Christ to
save you from all hard thoughts of God, and all unrighteousness, and to
establish your Souls in righteousness and peace, where you will all be united
together, in the unity of the Spirit and Bond of Peace: God Almighty be with
you, and in his Eternal Power keep you all bold, valiant and faithful unto the
end, that you may all sit down in the eternal rest prepared for you, in the
Lord Jesus, where I am with you all that are faithful forever, in the Lord
whose Prayers to God is, that not any of you draw back to perdition, but that
you all wait in the Light, believing in the Name Christ Jesus, to the saving of
your Souls: And the power of the dreadful God, rest upon you all, and establish
you in his Love and Life, that you may rejoice forever in his Presence, and
there I am with you in the eternal Unity.

W. D.

Dear Friends,
BE not troubled at the Lords disposing of us in suffering the Devil to cast us
into Prison, for with you we are in the Liberty of the Spirit, in the eternal
unity, which cannot be separated; I have declared to you of the Lords ordring
of us to his Praise and Glory. On the 10th day of the 11th Month, Iofeph Storr,
my fellow Prisoner and I was carried forth of the Prison to the Sessions, which
was holden at Northhamton there was John Parker, that did fine my Brother
Thomas Aldam, and more called Justices, who were in great enmity against the
Truth: But the Witnesses, that had sworn against me, (as they said,) for
Blasphemy, did not appear against me: the Lord smit them with terror, the lying
Spirit durst not appear; then they were confounded in that they charged against
me: And there was many Friends appeared in much boldness for the Truth, one
Justice Crutt, and James Nagill, who is great in the outward, where there
dwellings are, in Bickering Park in Bedfordshire, and one Edward Hackney an
Attorney at Kettency in Northhamtonshire: there had not been above three
Meetings with me; yet the enmity of John Parker, and these with him, required
Bonds-men of me, to be bound for me, for they said I had writ strange Papers to
the Lord Protector: if I would not find Men to be bound for me, I should to
Prison again, I then required of them to read me a Law I had transgressed, but
they would not answer, but called for Bonds-men; I answered, there shall not
any be bound for us: hear is our Bodies, do with them what you have power to
do; they commanded the Jailer to take us away; we were not suffered to speak
any more, but taken and put into Prison, and a Copy of our Mittimus we cannot
have, but was denied both of the Jailer, and of the men called Justices, when
it was demanded of them in the open Court; but the wrath of man turns to the
Praise of God, for the Truth of God was much spread abroad that day, and a
mighty thirst was raised up in the Hearts of many toward the Name of the Lord,
Praises forever be to him, whose ways are past finding out; he takes the wise
in their own Craft, and overturns them in their own Devices, to their
everlasting shame, and contempt; to the Glory of his Name, who alone is worthy,
God over all blessed forever.

W. D.

This is the Word of the Lord to you,
DEar Friends, Servants and Children of the most High God, whom he has called
out of the World, be faithful all of you in his Counsel, to wait his Power to
guide in all your thoughts, words and works in his pure Fear, in Obedience to
his will. I you charge in the Presence of God, be valiant for your Freedom in
your dwelling in the Power of God, he you to Arm against the fiery darts of the
Devil, him to resist in his appearance, in all his wiles, who goes about like a
roaring Lion to devour you, every way seeking to get into you, your minds from
the pure to draw into the visible things, your affections there to captivate,
your wills to satisfy in created and perishing Objects, or in the Knowledge of
the Truth in the fleshly wisdom, to feed with the Swine upon the Husk, the Form
and Image of what you have enjoyed, or of what you see in the Sight and Vision,
and does it not enjoy in the Possession, but speaks in the airy drunken Spirit
words without knowledge, with which you sit decked a painted Beast above the
Cross; and thou whose condition this is, art the foolish Virgin, that appears
in outward formality, in the sight of Men, with a Lamp like unto the wise
Virgin, but not dwelling in the pure Power of God, wants the Oil of Joy and
Gladness, in the Power of his Love, which the wise Virgin has in her Lamp,
that dwells in the pure Light and Power of God, which keeps all the affections
in order to the Spirit of Truth, and bridles the Tongue, not to utter words
before the Lord, but in true silence on him to wait, till his Spirit move his
mind to declare from his living Power what the Soul possesses and enjoys in
Christ, the Husband of the wise Virgin, who is the Bride, the Lambs Wife: I you
all charge and command in the Presence of the living God, who make mention of
his Name, examine your Hearts, search them, and try your ways with the Light
that from Christ comes, with it all read your conditions in the Book of
Conscience, there will you see how you stand in the Presence of God, whether in
the state of the foolish Virgin, that in the airy Spirit feeds on words,
speaking in the Vision and Sight, there boasting in pride of what thou
possessest not, and through the subtilty of the Devil is turned from the pure
Power, to fly the Cross, so makes shipwreck of Faith and a good Conscience, or
you be in the state of the wise Virgins that in this pure Light waits and
dwells in the Power, which chastises that which would your Garments defile,
daily in the Cross, and there your Souls are kept pure and chaste, to follow
the Lamb with boldness wheresoever he goes, and enter with him into the rest
prepared for the people of God, where thou the foolish Virgin shall not come,
until thou from thy foolish wisdom return to the pure Light, thy self with it
to judge, and in it wait for the Power of Christ, the Fountain of Wisdom, thee
to guide in faithful Obedience to the Father of Light.

All dear Children of the Lord be Valiant, Bold and Faithful, that in the pure
Light, Power and Life of God you may all stand in this day of trial, which the
Lord will bring upon you all, that make mention of his Name, for power shall be
given to the Beast, his Horn to exalt, even to the Host of Heaven, for the
cleansing of the Sanctuary, that all painted Beasts, that are Enemies to the
Cross, that has defiled the Sanctuary of the Living God, in coming before him
amongst his Saints and Children, they shall come trembling before the power of
the Beast, when he utters his voice, all to command his Image to worship; then
shall all you Children of the most High God, whom he has called, and chosen to
be faithful to him, in his eternal Power rejoice, who will you all keep in that
day, in rest and peace in the Ancient of days, who shall sit to judge the
Beast, and the Whore, their Kingdom to break down and destroy in his Eternal
Judgment for evermore, and will rule over them by the Arm of his Power, and of
his Dominion there shall be no end, for to him alone it belongs forever, Amen.

Meet often together in the Fear of the Lord, his Power to manifest in you to
his Praise, who is worthy forever, Amen. I charge you and command you all in
the Presence of God, who make mention of his Name, that you speak not at any
time rashly in your wills one to another, or to any without, as to exhort them
when you are guilty of the self-same thing in the exalted Spirit, out of the
Cross; be silent thou Fool, and first judge thy self with the Light, and in the
Power dwell, to cast the moat out of thy own Eye, and that thy own House be
kept in order, then will thou see clearly how to take the beam out of thy
Brothers Eye, and to exhort others how to walk, in order to the Spirit of
Truth, and in the pure single Eye, a^l you that Fear the Lord, watch over one
another, in tender love bear one another* Burdens, exhort one another to the
building up in the most holy faith: God Almighty be with you ^all his faithful
Servants and Children, and in his eternal Power keep you in himself, that in
him you may grow up in his pure nature, to bear his Name in righteousness, that
his Image be written in your Foreheads, that all that see you may know you to
be the righteous Seed the Lord has blessed; and his eternal pure Power
preserve and keep you, bind you up in the unity of the Spirit and bond of
Peace, where I am with you in the Eternal Unity, in the unchangable Love and
Life.

W. D.

Dear Friends,
ANd Friends of God, whose minds are truned to the Light with which Christ
Jesus has enlightened you, in his Light all wait, and with boldness in him in
whom your life is hide, look up to him in his Light, believing in his Name,
which is his Power, to guide you with boldness in every thought, word and work,
in faithful Obedience to the Light, that in it you may shine forth in the
brightness of the glory of his Power, to be manifest to the Consciences of the
Sons and Daughters of men, that you are the Children of the Day, which are come
out of the Night, in the Light, up to Christ to judge the World in his power,
guiding you in a pure Life, and holy Conversation, that men may see your good
works, and glorify your heavenly Father, who has raised you up by the Arm of
his mighty Power, in his Light to be Lights to the Children of the World, that
sit in darkness, to guide them forth of it; in the Light to have union and
fellowship with the Father of Light in Christ, to whom you are come, to be your
Wisdom, and he will establish your Souls in righteousness and peace, that give
up your selves to be guided by him. Dear Friends, Let the love of God that has
plucked you as Brands out of the Fire, and has counted you worthy to be as the
first Fruits of the Lamb, constrain you to be faithful upon your watch, to wait
in the Light of Christ to dwell in his power, that in it you may grow up in his
Life, and pure discerning, to know the Deceit in all appearances, and the Beast
in his lying Wonders, who keeps all in a Form of Truth, that lends an Ear to
him, but out of the Life; but in the Light of Christ you may know him, he leads
into a Form of words, when the Life speaks not, so the Soul does not enjoy what
the Mouth speaks; and the Beast which is the Will is at Liberty, from under the
Yoke, and out of the Cross, painted with the Saints words, and with you sits
decked a painted Beast, above the Cross of Christ, working lying Wonders, in
^^rming Sights and Groans, when the pure Seed of God is not regarded, which is
in Prison, the sighing and groaning of that the Lord hears, and he will deliver
that which Sighs and Groans to him for deliverance, with groans that cannot be
uttered; and the Deceit also will work violently in you whose minds are turned
from the pure Light, to form and immitate the true Power, that did pass through
you from the Life, but being faithful in your watch in the Light of Christ, you
may know him in his deceitful working in the mind, he leads out of the Fear of
God, into a formality, to appear before men, so into Pride and Emulation, which
is to be thrown down, and condemned with the Light of Christ. This is the word
of the living God to you his dear and chosen Children, in the Light all meet
often together, and take heed of lending an Ear to the Adversary, the Devil,
who goes about like a roaring Lion to tear you from the Light, and to Sow the
Seed of Enmity, to watch over one another with an evil Eye, to spy out one
another weakness, and to declare it to others behind their backs, and to lay
open their infirmities, and discover their shame, and uncover their nakedness;
thou who practices this, art turned from the pure Light, into Hams cursed
nature, which the wrath of God is to, and is to be condemned with the Light of
Christ, in which thou must wait, and own the condemnation upon that nature, and
to blind and pluck out that evil Eye, and to open the pure single Eye, to judge
the deceit and guide thee in Obedience to the Light, least thou perish in thy
disobedience.

Dear Friends, in the pure Light, Power and Life dwell, and take heed of
speaking words in the sight and visions of the Truth, when you are not in the
Life and Power; all mind the Union in the Power, which will be manifest in all
that wait in the pure fear, in the silence of your Spirits, in the Light, for
the living Power of Christ to declare it self in you, and even through you, to
the praise of his Name who is worthy; for this is the Word of the most high God
to you his Sons and Daughters, whom he has chosen in his eternal love, to
watch over one another in love, with a single Eye, as over your own Souls; and
if you see any of the Children of Light, through the Subtilty of the Devil
prevailed against, and turned from the Light, take heed of laying open their
infirmities, to discover there Shame, in uncovering there Nakedness to others;
but thou that discovers their conditions, in tender Bowels of love minister to
the pure in the Conscience, to raise up the Witness, to restore them again,
with the Spirit of Meekness, then will thou save their Souls from Death, and
hide a multitude of Sins; and here is Christ and his Disciples serving one
another in love, washing one another Feet, in ministering to the pure, to wash
away, the filthy nature, and bearing one another burdens so fulfilling the
Law of Christ, who did bear the Burden for us; when we were Enemies he died
for us, and in fullness of time has manifested his mighty power in you, in
raising up his Seed, that you might be of the first Fruits in him, to grow
Trees of Righteousness in his Vineyard, to bring forth Fruits to the praise and
glory of his great and glorious Name, who alone is worthy, God Blessed forever.

God Almighty be with you, his dear and chosen Children, and his powerful and
dreadful Spirit accompany you in all your ways, and his eternal Power establish
you in Unity of the Spirit and Bond of Peace, that in it y^u may stand, over
all the World, and the troubles thereof, within you and without you; in his
Power stand fast, and unmovable, in the will of God, where I am present with
you, saluting you in the Bowels of tender love in the eternal Unity. W. D.

Dear, Precious and Beloved Friends,
CAlled in the Light of the Lord to stand living witnesses for God, in the
midst of a crooked, wicked, perverss and untoward Generation: Dear Friends, all
in the Light and pure meek Spirit of the Lord, enter into the Chamber of Rest,
which God has prepared for you in his unlimitted Power to dwell there, to stay
your Minds, and keep your Confidence, and hold fast your Faith, that so the
door may be shut, that not any thing enter which would cause feebleness of
mind, faintness of Spirit, or in the least measure would cause you to stagger
at the promises of the Lord, who has promised he will never leave us, nor
forsake us, that what trial soever any of us be called unto; who love the Lord,
and have given up our names unto him, he will not suffer one hair of our Heads
to perish, but what shall be for the Glory of his Name, and the Comfort of our
Souls forever; as many of us are witnesses of the faithfulness of our God, in
making our passage pleasant through all Trials and Suffering that has been
unto this day, which is now manifesting it self as was proclaimed amongst you
in times past: Therefore I beseech you all, dear Friends, put not the day of
the Lord afar off, for a general Trial will go on all that make mention of the
Name of the Lord, that it may be known who are truly born of God, and who are
not; that so his precious Jewels may be made up, which does and shall more and
more shine forth in the brightness of his Glory, (being established in his
Light, Life, and Love) which the Gates of Hell cannot prevail against, because
the Lord is the strength of all that is born again, and for their sakes he is
making a short work in the Earth, and to hasten his peculiar People through the
Trials, according to the determination of his own will, for the Glory of his
Name, and the eternal Comfort of the righteous Seed which the Lord has
blessed, that so he may establish Peace in the Earth, and Purity and Holiness
amongst the Children of Men, which will be the end of all these Tribulations;
therefore wait in the Faith and Patience, you chosen Vessels of the Lord, an^
be faithful in obedience, as at other times, with the Loins of your minds girt
up to the Lord, in his unlimitted Power to rest, and reign in a quiet still
mind, giving up both Goods and Life f^eely; casting all your care upon the
Lord, who will answer the expectation of his People, and work a mighty
deliverance, neither by Sword nor Spear, but by his own outstretched Arm, in
the day of his dreadful and terrible Vengeance, which he is hastening upon the
Earth, that shall cause all Hearts to fail that know not God; the Wicked shall
confess to his righteous Judgments, and the Righteous shall bow before him, and
the Heathen shall know he is our God, and that we have not trusted in his Name
in vain; for he will judge righteously upon the Earth, and give unto every Man
according to the Deeds done in the Body; then woe, woe, woe to the Proud and
Wicked, it shall go ill with them: Ah, but you dear Suffering Innocent People
of the Lord, lift up your hands and rejoice, for the Lord is dear over you as
the apple of his Eye, and great is the reward of the faithful, it is you shall
reap the Fruit of your doings, and shall rejoice when the Wicked shall Roar and
Howl in the sense of his fierce Wrath, for he will get himself a glorious Name,
in consuming his Enemies with the breath of his Mouth, and the brightness of
his Coming; even so hasten thy Work, O Lord, its the breathing of my Soul, with
all thine, that thy dear Children may be delivered from all their Oppressors,
that in thy Power and Life they all be kept by thee, to the perfecting thy
Glory forever, where is the Rest of your dear Brother,

W. D.

Dear Children of the living God,
LIft up your Heads in the Light of the Covenant of God, and Reign in his Life
and Power, over all that would draw your minds from staidness in his fullness;
and give God a Sacrifice of Soul, Body, and all he has given you; In the word
of his patience to stand valiant, when you are called of God; let not Demas's
nature be obeyed in any, to forsake God, and embrace this present evil World.
Dear Children, as you have received Christ the Light, Life and Power of the
Father, so let us walk in faithfulness, to finish our Course to the Glory of
our God, who is now bringing to pass what he has revealed to his Servants,
that we may shine in the Glory of the Word of Faith and Patience in Jesus
Christ our Life, in whom we do and shall enjoy all things needful, in whatever
is endured for his Name sake. Oh, be bold and valiant in Christ; you in his
Word and Life and Patience shall Reign forever, to br^ng a Blessing upon all
the Earth, the Mouth of the Lord has spoken it, through his Servant

W. D.

My dear beloved Brethren,
ANd blessed Companions in the Tribulations, Kingdom and Patience in the Lord
Jesus, Grace, Mercy and Peace be multiplied in and amongst you, to perfect you
in the Dominion of the Almighty God, to keep the Word of his Patience, in
faithfulness quietly to rest in that Will of God, that the weighty Seed of God
in you stand in pure liberty, to keep you all in the Life and Power of Truth,
that every one of you may have the Seal of the Spirit of God in your own
Hearts, that you suffer for the Word of God and Testimony of Jesus Christ, then
whatever is done to you, he takes it as done unto himself, and will judge your
Cause in Righteousness, to the Confusion of the Faces of them that afflict you
in this his day, wherein he will bring forth his Praises over all the Earth, to
the astonishment of the Nations and People that know not God, etc.

Oh, my dear Friends, the Lord recompense into your Bosoms an Hundred fold for
your faithfu^ness to the Lord, in which you have caused his Renown to sound
over the Land, to the comfort of the Hearts of the Upright; you have largely
consolated and made glad my Heart in these my Bonds, and caused my Soul to
rejoice with high Praises unto my God, in whom I behold the Travel of my Soul,
and am satisfied in my return to the Prisonhouse, bearing the Sheaf with joy.
Stand faithful Witnesses for the Almighty God blessed forever; even the Lord
God of eternal Power, keep you in the savory Life together, in Love and Unity
and Faithfulness unto the end, and in all things your words to be few, and in
the fear of God; So says my Soul in the Name of the Lord, Farewell.

Your dear Brother, W. D.

FRiend, thou who wast in the Place of the Mayor in Terrington, the Thirtieth
day of the seventh Month, with the others that say, with thee, they are in
Commission to do Justice; the day before mentioned, you abused the Power
committed to you, and turned your Swords against the Innocent, whom you wounded
inasmuch as you could: In the fear of God consider, what you have done; is this
the Fruit of your Fasting, and Humbling your selves as you say, when you have
done, to Smite with the Fist of Wickedness, and instead of entertaining
Strangers, you use them so Barbarously, as was made manifest when I was with
you; this is not to Rule for God, an account you must give to the Judge of
Heaven and Earth. Oh, Men, How will you stand in that day, when it shall be
said unto you, I was Sick and in Prison, and you Visited me not; Hungry, and
you gave me no Meat; Naked, and you Clothed me not; a Stranger, and you took me
not in: The day is near, to this account you will be called with the Lord of
Life and Glory; and though you say, When did we see thee in Prison, or a
Stranger, and took thee not in; the answer, to you, as is Recorded in the
Scripture of Truth, Inasmuch as you did it not to the least of those that
Believed in my Name, you did it not to me, says Christ, of whom the Scripture
Testifies. Oh, Men, while you have time prize it, and slight not the day of
God's Mercy, and come unto him, and diligently incline your Ear to his Counsel,
the Light in your Consciences, that lets you see the evil of your Hearts, and
your unjust proceedings against Innocent Men; and wait in the Light that will
show you as is written, that the Lord may give you Repentance unto Life, that
you perish not in the day of his fierce Wrath, wherein he will recompense to
every one according to their Works; then shall the Children of the Lord be
known, and the Worker of Iniquity shall fall before them.

From a lover of your Souls, who desires it to be the Lords Will, it may not be
laid to your Charge, what you have done to him, who writes his Name William
De^sbery.

My Dear Friends,
THat are convinced of the Blessed Truth, all wait in the Light that you may
truly Experience Christ in you, Baptizing you with the Holy Ghost and Fire,
Rendering Vengeance upon all in you that knows him not, and obey not the Gospel
of our Lord Jesus Christ, and so you will come to witness you are of the number
of the slain of the Lord, and conformable to him in his Sufferings and Death;
and you that are in the sense of your miserable and lost estate, wait upon the
Lord, weeping and seeking the Lord your God, asking the way to Sion, with your
Faces thither-wards, until the Lord cause your Souls to hear the Voice of the
Son of God, and they that hear his Voice live, but not in themselves, not to
themselves, but the Life you then live, is Christ in you, and you in him. Oh,
blessed are you that witness what is here written, for you are the true Members
of the Body of Christ, who abhor your selves, and admire the Lord with all his
Saints, in whom he is admired, Oh Praise the Lord all you his dear Children for
his wonderful Works, in leading you in his narrow Way, and through his strait
Gate which so few find; the Lord keep you by his mighty Power, that you may
contend for the Faith, and keep it, which the Lord has Delivered unto you his
Saints, that through Faith you may have Victory over your own Wills, and over
the World, with all the Pomp Pride and Pleasure of it, and so delight in the
daily Cross, to be the well seasoned savory People, in all your Words and
Works, to Glorify our Father which is in Heaven, even so be it with you, is
the Prayers of your ever Loving Brother,

William Dewsbery.
W. D. Desired this to be sent amongst his ancient Friends in Yorkshire, to be
Read in their Meetings.



This which is here written, is to you that say you are in Commission to do
Justice in the County of Northampton; and profess your selves to be Ministers
of Justice, the Evildoers to Punish, and the Oppressed to set Free from under
the power of those that oppress them.
THis the Lord God of Heaven and Earth requires of you, as you will eternally
answer before him, that you faithfully walk according to what you profess, and
judge with righteous Judgment the Causes brought before you, without respect of
Persons; for he that respects Persons commits Sin, and is convinced of the Law
as a Transgressor.

And this is required, that when you are met together, that you cause to be
brought before you, all that has informed against me, who to you is known by
Name William Dewsbury, that it may be proved, what the Blasphemy is, for which
Thomas Pentellow in Wilbey said he sent me unto Prison on suspicion of: And it
is required, that you cause to come before you all that have given evidence
against my Companions in Tribulation, and in the Kingdom and Patience of Jesus
Christ, whom you have cast into Prison with me: Gather together, as is
required, and see if your God whom you served, that lead you to do what you
have done, will appear with you, and justify you in your Actions, and clear
you of Cruelty and Oppression, which if your God cannot clear you, obey him no
longer, as you have done, in abusing your power to hide your Sin; for if you
do, this Scripture will be fulfilled on you, He that hides his Sin shall not
prosper; This is required, that you bring your deeds to the Light, and if they
be contrary to the Light, let the Ancient of days, who gives Judgment to the
Saints of the most High judge you, and your God that leads you to do the Works
of darkness; and while you have time, turn to the Light of Christ that shows
you the secret evil of your Hearts, and wait in the Light on the Lord God, in
the way of his Judgments, that if it be his good pleasure he may give you
Repentance unto Life, least you perish in your Disobedience. But if you abuse
your power, as you have done, in casting into Prison, and there keeping them
that believe in Christ, whom you never yet proved had transgressed any Law, no
more then Pilat could prove against Jesus; then by your Fruit you will prove
your selves to be in the state of Cain, who was a Vagabond, and had no
Habitation and dwelling in the only true God, and so persecuted the Righteous
Seed, as you have done; and if you so continue, no withstanding all reproof
then read your Portion, Proverbs. 29.1. He that has been often reproved, and
hardens his Neck, shall suddenly be Destroyed, and that without remedy, he
that has an Ear to haer, let him hear.

I whom to you am known by the Nam^ before-written, was moved to send this to
you, which Truth you shall know, when the day shall declare you have me
Imprisoned for the Word of God, and Testimony of Jesus Christ. W. D.

Dear Friends and Brethren, 1688

I did not know until this last night, but that I should have been* with you at
the Yearly Meeting, but it pleased the Lord to visit me with my ancient
Distemper which has accompanied me many Years in Prison; and since I was
released; the Distemper was so sharp upon me, as to sense, this last night,
that I did not know I should have lived to see another day; but Crying to the
Lord, he ordered and cleared my way to go into the Country, so I cannot be with
you at this Yearly Meeting, but desire the Lord to assist you with his blessed
Power and heavenly Life, to bring in the scattered ones to their everlasting
Comfort, and his Glory forever, Amen.

And that it may be so with you, is the Prayer of your loving Brother, William
Dwesbury.
London the 30th of the ^th Month, 1688.
An Index.
THe Word of the Living God to his Church, Page 1. The Word of the Lord to
thee, Oliver Cromwell, p. 4. The Mighty Day of the Lord is Coming, page 8. Dear
Friends, Servants and Children of the Most High God, page 16. To all Saints and
Children of the Most High God, page 21. Dear Friends m^et often together, page
23. My Dear Friends, this is the Word of the Lord, page 24. The iscover^y of
the great Enmity of the Serpent, page 26. To all you that rule in England, page
57. A true Testimony from the Prisoners in Northampton, page 67. A true
Prophecy of the Mighty day of the Lord, page 90. Christ Exalted, page 115. The
Mighty Day of the Lord, page 156. Dear Friends, Brethren and Sisters, page 167.
Dear Friends in the Name of the Lord Jesus Christ walk, page 174. To all
Nations, Kindred, Languages, page 181. Several short Epistles, page 185. Let
this go abroad amongst all the afflicted, page 192. O King hear the Word of the
Lord, page 186. Dear Children of the most High, page 1^8. Dear Brethren and
Sisters, born of the Birth, page ^99. Dear beloved Friends of the Noble Seed,
page 200. Several Short Epistles, page 202. To all the Faithful in Christ* page
214 The Word of the Lord to New Jerusalem, page 225. Breathings of Life to Gods
Spiritual Israel, page 233. The Word of the Lord to Sion, page 239. To all the
Faithful in Hol^s, Prisons and Goals, page 247. To the beloved Seed of God in
London, etc. page 251. To Dear Friends in London and on board the Ship for
Transportation, page 254. For the Dear Daughters of Sion, page 259. For my
Honorable Brethren that are to be Transported, page 260. The Word of the Lord
to all Children born again, page 262. The Discovery of man's return to his first
estate, page 272. To all revolted Souls, page 283. The Discovery of Mystery
Babylon, page 288. To all inslaved hard hearted and unbelieving Jews, page 301.
A Word from the Lord to all that are waiting in Sion, page 303. To Richard
Thomas at Hartford, page 308. A Word of the Lord to all the Inhabitants in
England, page 310. A General Epistle, page 319. An Epistle to the General
Meeting, 1673. page 328. An Epistle to G. Fox, at Worcester, page 329. A
general Epistle, page 331. Titus Oates's Cirtificate about William Dewbury,
etc. page 343. A Testimony concerning Mary Sam, W. D's Grandchild* page 344.
An Epistle to Friends, page 353. An Epistle to Friends, page 356. An Epistle to
suffering Friends at Bristol, Gloucester, etc. page 363. An Epistle to Edward
Nightingale, page 365. An Epistle General to Friends, page 369. To all proud
Priests, page 377. An Epistle to Friends, page 380. Several short Epstles, page
385. An Epistle to Friends, page 393. A Letter to the Mayor of Terrington, page
397. An Epistle to all Companions of Tribulations, page 400. A Letter to the
Justices of Northampton, page 401. A Letter to the Yearly Meeting, 1688. page
405.
THE END

