THE DEVIL and the STRUMPET: OR THE Old BAWD Tormented. BEING A True and
Amazing Relation of one Jenny Freeman, of Swan-Alley, in East-Smithfield, who
having been a Lewd, Notorious, and Wicked Liver for many Years, and Bawd to
above 20 young Women, to their utter Ruin. The Devil appeared to her on
Wednesday Night last, in a most frightful Shape, bringing her a Knife to cut
her own Throat; dragging her out of her Bed, and beating her Black and Blue all
over her Body, in a Sad and Dismal manner, leaving her almost Dead in the
place: And at another time standing over her with a flaming Sword, for 3 Hours
together, and then vanished out at the Window in a Flash of Fire. Being a sad
Warning for all Lewd Women, and Wicked Strumpets whatsoever.

Taken from her own Mouth, and Attested by her at her House, in Swan-Alley,
near the May Pole in East-Smithfield, where she now lies in a Sad and Dreadful
Condition.

LONDON: Printed for E. B. near Ludgate.

THE Old Bawd Tormented, etc.
JANE FREEMAN, alias Bristeck, alias Philips, of Swan-Alley, near the May Pole,
in East-Smithfield, having for several years been a Hackney Jilt, till her
Riders thought her not worth throwing their legs over, at last was forced to
take to that hodge podge of Wickedness for the Lucre of base pence, to delude
poor innocent Creatures, to satisfy the Lust of ungrateful Sinners, almost as
bad as her self; and was so dexterous in that part of Devilsim, vulgarly called
a Bawd, that (if I am not Misinformed) in a matter of Seven years time her
Baudship made a shift to ruin above 20 young Virgins, whose Maiden-heads raised
her such vast Contribution-Money, that she soon set up for her self an
invincible Nanny-House, in the dark Entry, at the lower end of Butcher-Row,
where the Trade of Basket-making went on for a considerable time, but at last,
as if the Devil owed her a Shame, for her past Transgressions, what with old
Claps, and new ones on the back of them, her Carcass became so obnoxious to her
Customers, that she was forced to abandon her Palace, and seek shelter under
the Charitable Benevolence of that parish she had done so much damage in, and
in order thereto she was placed in Swan-Alley, where the Devil, her old Friend,
still visits her, though in a more ruder manner than formerly, for about a Month
ago he came to her as she was going to Bed, in the shape of a grim old
Gentleman, with a White-hasted knife in his Hand, making signs to her to cut
her own Throat; but she being affrighted, happened to cry out (which was a
Wonder) Lord have Mercy upon me; at which time, old Nick being amazed at such
an Expression, from such a Faithful Servant, vanished out of the Window, in a
dreadful Flash of Fire; leaving his old Acquaintance in the Dark, to find out
the meaning of his uncivil departure; but as an Earnest of his former kindness,
he left behind him such a horrid Stink of Brimstone and Smoke, that had not her
Nose been well seasoned with the perfumes of the Pox many years before, it had
been enough to have ended her Days by Suffocation.

And in this manner, his Devilship has since appeared to her several times; but
instead of working a Reformation in her, it makes her worse and worse, insomuch
that when any of her Neighbors desired her to send for a Minister to pray by
her, she Curses and Damns in the dreadfullest manner that ever was heard of,
without any Remorse of Conscience for her past Wickedness, the Devil having
hardened her Heart to such a terrible Degree, that all good Counsel is
ineflectual; telling the Ministers that come to visit her, that she has no
business with such black disembling Hypocrites as they are.

But the most amazing appearance the Devil made, was a Wednesday Night last,
about 12 a Clock in the Night, which I had from her own Mouth, viz. she being
in Bed wide awake, saw the Devil stand before her with a Sword drawn, at which
time being very much astonished at his great Saucer Eyes, that Shined like
Fire, she shrunk down under the Clothes, thinking by that means to hide her
self from him, she had no sooner done so, but all the Clothes were pulled off
with such swift Violence, that she thought a Whirlwind had done it, and at the
same time her Devil of a Master took her by the Legs, and dragged her about the
Room for a considerable time, till she thought the Bones of her Body had been
broke in pieces. After which, throwing her with great Violence toward the
Chimney Corner, she lay as Dead fro some time; but at last coming to her self,
and opening her Eyes, she saw to her Amazement the Ghastly Fiend standing over
her with a Flaming Sword, grinning and staring in her Face in a strange and
frightful manner, continuing in that Devilish Posture, from one of the Clock,
till near Four the next Morning, at which time, (to give the Devil his due) he
went up stairs, without giving her any more Disturbance but when the Daylight
appeared, the old Bawd was forced to call to a Woman who lodged in a Garret, to
come down and help her into Bed, having been so Buffetted by Satan, that her
Thighs, Belly, Legs, Arms, head, Shoulders, Hips, Buttocks, and all parts of
her body, were bruised to such a terrible degree, that we was as black as a
Shoe all over; but more especially her Arms and Thighs, where in some places
the very Flesh and Skin was pulled off as if with Pincers, in the sa^^ est
manner as ever Eyes beheld, and every thi^^ in the Room which stood in order
over Night we^^ turned Topsie Turvy, the Chairs which was a^^ ways by the
Bedside were thrown upside down at the Stairs foot, where the Pillow and
Bed-cloath were confusedly tumbled together, and every thin^ disordered in such
a supernatural and unaccountabl^ manner, that none but the Devil himself could
possibly in one Nights time have laid so few things it such a distracted
manner, the very Candlestick^ standing with the great ends upwards contrary to
the order of Nature.

She confessed to me that she had been a v^^ lewd and beastly Woman, and that
she had be^^ the Ruin of several young Women, who otherw^^ might have lived
chaste and modst; and that (...) believed the Devil, whom she had so long been
a Servant to, was now resolved to pay her her Wages; several Charitable
Neighbors, and others, comes daily to see her, to whom she freely imparts the
Particulars Abovementioned, and desires all Kienappers of Virginity to take
Warning by her stinking Fate; for she acknowledged (which I should have told
you of before) that while the Devil stood over her with his infernal VVeapon;
it put her great and small Guts into such horrid disorder with the Fright, that
she was obliged to let go at both Holes, for the ease of her rotten Carcass,
which then was persum'd with such Natural and Artificial Scents, that if the
Devil himself had staid any longer, unless he had lost the Sense of Smelling,
he had run the risk of being Poisoned.

But without Jesting, she is still very strangely haunted with an Infernal
Spirit, as she her self Confesses, and what that Spirit should be but the Devil
himself, I leave those to judge who are his more intimate Acquaintance; as for
this poor Wretch, she has been as great a Whore and Bawd, as perhaps
Tower Hill, Rosemary-Lane, or East-Smithsield ever produced; and it is very well
known those parts of the World have not been very thin of such Cattle:
However, it is hoped some of them by this wicked Woman's dismal Misfortune, may
take warning, and grow better.

For if the Devil, who first deluded them into ^is Snare, by invisible VViles
and alluring Inticements cannot fright them into good Manners, by his ^^gly and
frightful appearance nothing will reclaim ^^ch hardened wretches but a halter,
which is com^only the Consequence of such bruites.

It Is no wonder for such filthy and lustful Prosti^^utes, who having lived to
make up the measure of their Wickedness, to be stung with the Gailt of ^^eir
own plute Consciences, and every moment ^^mented with the thoughts of that
Devil they we so long served; so that from hence we may in^^, that this
Infernal Spirit does appear continual before this naked Woman's Eyes, and that
by supernatural Motion, may cause her body to be ^^'d against the ground, and
receive manifest uses; as several Histories, both Ancient and Modern has given
us plentiful Instances of; but whether the Devil or her own guilty Conscience
does really produce these strange effects, are Queries not yet decided. But
this we are sure of, that she has suffered bodily Affliction; and if we many
credit her own words, which she delivers, not like a person out of her Senses,
that by Divine Permission, the Devil is suffered to torment her in this Life;
in order perhaps to bring her to Repentance when all other means fail.

These are the Comsequences of a vicious and lust full Life, therefore let Youth
and Beauty stan^ upon their Guard, least they are unnappily sed^ced by those
Wicked and Debauched Instrument and consequently share in the same Fate, and
b^ brought to a sorrowful Repentance, under the same Miseries.

Let Whores and Bawds their Lives amen
Least they come to a Wicked end.
FINIS.
Licensed and Entered according to Order.


