THIS FOR Dear Friends IN LONDON, And them that are Aboard the Ship, in order
to Transportation; or else where all abroad.

DEAR and Valiant Children of the most High, your faithful standing in the meek
Spirit, to bear your Testimony for the Lord, in what he calls you unto, is a
sweet perfume in the presence of the Lord, and a great refreshing to the hearts
of his people; Therefore, abide in the pu^e meek Spirit, and receive your
blessed reward you faithful Lambs, the blessed Crown of Glory is yours for
ever; Oh feel the earning of Bowels toward you, and the breakings of heart
that is before the Lord for you; Oh can we remember you, and not our eyes water
with tears, in compassionating of you in the simpathizing Spirit that indears,
and unites us one unto another in our God, to whom my Soul breaths. Oh Lord
sweeten the passage of thy people, and make their Cups pleasant, thou suffers
to be given them to drink, that thy mighty power may be manifest in all them
that love not their lives to death, to do thy will this day; and plead their
cause in bastening their deliverance, to the confounding of all Sions enemies,
and the renown of thy great Name for ever and ever.

Dear Brethren and Sisters in the meek Spirit of our God, my life goes and
abides with you, with the forceable love of the whole Church of the first born;
Oh lift up your heads' and let not the fear of the Sickness or any
Representation of any Evil enter you, but all in staidness in the Light, Life,
thought and will of God which is perfect in it self, and abiding as is written,
God will keep every one of you in perfect peace all your days in every
condition, and will keep you in sweet peace and unity one with another to the
praise and glory of the name of our God, whose presence is with you, and will
sweeten your passage in what ever you are to go through to the praise and glory
of the Name of the Lord for ever, who will arise more and more, and plead our
Cause in the sight of a mighty people, whom he will make to confess that you
that are faithful, are the Children of the most High God, the righteous Seed
that the Lord has blessed, and it will be well every way with all the faithful
and suffering people, and the blessing of God shall be upon us and our Children
for ever that love the Lord Jesus this day. And the hundred forty four
thousands shall stand upon Mount Sion, where some of the number is already
established; and they shall sing the new Songs that not any shall learn but
those that are redeemed from the Earth, who shall make the ears of all the
enemies of God to tingle, and their hearts shall fail, and paleness gather into
their faces, for dreadful will be the vengeance of the Lord upon Sions enemies,
and great fearfulness shall surprise them; they shall run to fro like Vagabonds
as Cain did, and not know where to hide their heads, for where ever they are
the Lord will find them out and banish them from place to place, until he has
gotten his glory upon them, in laying all low that withstands his arising, for
he will dash the potsheards of the Earth to pieces, and they shall lament and
cry out, and gnaw their Tongues for pain, when you faithful, beloved, ever
honorable Children that endure unto the end, shall shout and sing praises and
magnify the Lord, and say, Oh how righteous are thy Judgments, oh thou King of
Saints; for thou have pleaded our cause and turned our sorrows into everlasting
Joy, and have overthrown all thy enemies that withstand the rising of thy
Glory, that a door may be opened to gather our Brethren from far, and our
Sisters from the ends of the Earth: Therefore will we sing of thy Goodness with
Praises, Praises, Hallelujahs, and high Praises, for thou art worthy over all
for ever and ever, Amen.

My dear Companions with me salutes you all in the dearest love of our God,
where neither Sea nor Land can separate; but in the bowels of love will we
embrace one another in the chaste life where no vulterous eye can behold our Joy
and Felicity in the Lord our God; In whom fare you well, fare you well says
the Soul of your dear Brother in the name of the Lord for ever, both you that
are for Transportation, and you that stand in a faithful Testimony in that City
where the Lord has sent his destroying Angel to execute the pleasure of his
will.

And in the tender bowels of the love of God, I desire you all [in this gloomy
dismal dark day that is come upon that City] put you on the shield of Faith, and
in the Light of the Covenant, stand single before the Lord to be clothed with
the garment of Eternal Salvation, that you may reign over all fearfulness and
unbelief, that every particular may stand as saviors on mount Sion in the
midst of a desolate people, for this is the harvest of the great God in that
City wherein he is reaping, threshing and winnowing the chafe from the Wheat,
and making a short work in the earth for his Seed sake, and many that shall
have their lives given them for a prey shall receive the Word of Eternal Life
in that City, and great shall be the number who shall submit to the Government
of Christ, and they shall bless the Lord; for you that love not your lives to
death, for the glory of God and gathering the Sons and Daughters of Men to the
knowledge of God, by your holy lives and sweet walking in all holiness of
Conversation: Oh blessed be the day that ever you were born, yea my Soul
glorifies God for you that ever you had a being you faithful Lambs in the City
of London, and elsewhere scattered according to the will of God; Though you now
drink a Cup of great affliction, the day of Eternal Joy is sprung up to thee,
which none can take away, an eternal freedom shall be unto thee oh Sion; Kings
shall come unto thee, and Princes to the rising of this thy Glorious day, and
all thy Enemies shall fall before thee, and thou shall be the Glory over all
the Earth, and the chosen Diadem in the hand of thy God amongst the people, who
shall as much love thee as they now hate thee, and esteem of thee as they now
despise thee; for thou oh Sion art the Plant of the Lord, the Tree of
Righteousness, in whom is the virtue of the mighty God of Heaven, and the leaf
of thy Tree shall heal the Nations; and put an end to all their distractions,
the mouth of the Lord has spoken it.

Through one that dwells within thy gates thou glorious and beautiful Sion,
Church of the first born, the beloved Bride the Lambs Wife for ever: Blessings,
Glory, and Praises, Halelujahs, eternal honor and renown be unto thy God and
King who reigns in thee, and is exalting his Kingdom over all the Kingdoms of
this world, and of his Dominion there s^all be no end.

From the Common Goal in Warwick the 12 th of the 6. Month, 1665. W. D.

A former Letter not Printed till now.
Oh thou beloved Seed of God in London, Hartford, Bristol, Redding, and
Colchester, with all in other Places where the Power of Hell, and Darkness is
begun to make War in the fierceness of his Wrath, and great Fury, as though he
would destroy and utterly lay wast.

ALL you dear Children born again of the Royal Seed, who is raised up in the
Power of the most High to bear the Name of the Lord in the Earth, and to shine
forth in the lively Image of his own Nature amongst the People; in your loving
the Lord Jesus better then all the World, and and the created objects, and
enjoyments therein, and in this day of your great Trial you are found faithful,
in the Name of the Lord to withstand all the Power of Hell and Darkness, and to
make war in Righteousness neither with Sword nor Spear, but in the Word of the
Patience of the Lamb of God, who overcame and was made perfect in sufferings.

Oh you chosen Vessels, whom the Lord has counted worthy to stand in the heat
of the Trial in the excellent noble life to bear your testimony, with the
hazard of the loss of your estates, and liberty, even to banishment, yea to lay
down your lives if the Lord require it at your hands, to the comforting and
encouraging of all your dear Brethren whose eyes are upon you, and their
Prayers and breathings to the Lord for you; that he may carry you on with
boldness, and sweeten your passage, until in faithfulness you have finished
what is determined of the Lord in drinking of this Cup he is handing unto you,
that he may make you manifest to be his deer and chosen Jewels to the
perfecting of the praise and glory of the Name of our God over all blessed for
ever.

Oh you valiant Brethren, and beloved Sisters clothed with the excellency of
the glory of the incomprehensible God; lift up your Heads in the Name of the
Lord, trample upon all the fear of Man, and upon all the Representation of
hardships, of parting with dear and tender Wife or loving Husband, or with your
dear and tender Children which lies near to the hearts of loving Parents.

Oh how does the compassion of a Father flow forth toward them, and the
yearning of the bowels of a tender and loving Mother, toward the dear and
tender Children, when the Trial looks in the face of being separated from them,
and to see their faces no more.

Dear chosen Vessels of the most high God, let not any of these things enter
into you as to trouble or weaken your Testimony for the Lord, who has
commanded me to write unto you to cast your care upon the Lord, and be faithful
in standing approved before him in your faithful Testimony, he will be more
then Wife to Husband, or Husband to Wife, or Parents to Children, or Children
to Parents [yea] he will instruct our Children with his Spirit, and teach them
his fear, though they should be in the hands of their Enemies: so that our
Children shall not want the thing that is good for them: The Lord has sealed
his Counsel to me which I here declare unto you Parents of tender Children,
whose Trial is known to the Lord in these things, etc.

Oh feel the Seed of Abraham in its Dominion in you, which is the Bride, the
Lamb's Wife, and in true love to him does offer up the dearest Isaac into the
will of God, that a perfect Sacrifice our God may have, soul, body, and all
that we have in this day: he has called us to be the first fruits unto the
Lamb, and in our Testimony in this our Trial we are called to preach to all
Nations, Kindred, Tongues, and People in their own Language; for the Witness
in all their Consciences will feel us, and give them to understand that we are
not of this World: but are the Redeemed of the Lord, whom he has called in the
Patience of the Lamb to suffer; for to gather the Seed that is scattered in the
Earth, that our Brethren may be brought from far, and our Sisters from the
outmost parts of the World, who cannot come until we have drunk this Cup, of
which I was sent to declare to you in years past, and now to your comfort I
declare when it is finished according to the pleasure of the Lord, which he is
hastening and will cut short in righteousness for the seed sake, then woe, woe to
the enemies of Sion, for our God will plague them, and cause them to cast all
their glory down before him, and they shall come bending to the soles of the
feet of his people, and shall confess that you are the Children of the most
high God, the righteous seed which the Lord has blessed; and this certainly
will come to pass, the mouth of the Lord has spoken it.

Given forth in the County Goal of Warwick the 26. day of the 6. Month, 1664.
Through your Brother and companion in the tribulation and patience of the Lord
Jesus, Farewell. W. D.

THE END

