A DIALOGUE BETWEEN Dick and Tom; Concerning the Present Posture of Affairs IN
ENGLAND.

Eone impudentiae ventum est?

Terent. Licensed,

January 18, 1688/9.


LONDON Printed, and are to be Sold by Randal Tailor in Amen-Corner, MDCLXXXIX.

A DIALOGUE BETWEEN Dick and Tom, etc.
Dick. HOnest Tom, well met; faith I Am very glad to see thee; my heart leapt
within me as soon as I encountered thee.


Tom. I know not what you mean by your leaps and counters; you Londoners are so
full of Complements which cost you nothing: but will you give that honest Tom
(as you call him) a Pot of Ale this cold frosty Morning?


Dick. With all my heart -- We are but a little way from the Cock in
Amen-Corner, where I Will give thee such a Cup of Liquor, as shall exceed Darby
and Nottingham.


Tom. Prithee make have then, for I Have a great deal of business to do before I
go out of Town.


Dick. We Are there already, bless us! here is a good Fire too -- Come, heart of
Oak, here is to thee, remembering all our Friends in the Country.


Tom. I Will pledge you heartily, but I Am sure some of our Neighbors have not
recovered the fright they were in the other day.


Dick. What fright, in the name of Wonder?


Tom. Why, there came a couple of Fellows (who had almost killed their Horses
for have) into our Town, and told us the Irish were but twelve Miles from us;
killing Men, Women and Children, which so scared us that in a quarter of an
hour, our Marketplace and Streets were filled, every one appearing in Arms;
the Women with Spits, Fireforks, and such Kitchen Artillery, expecting the Foe,
but none appearing, we went to our homes; yet the Children were so frighted
with the Alarm, that tell them the Irish are a coming, and it scares 'em worse
than Raw-head, and Bloody-bones.


Dick. 'Twas much in that manner with us in the City, which caused so great a
consternation in some timorous people, that they were afraid to go to bed for
several nights, least they should wake in the morning and find their Throats
cut.


Tom. But all this while we are wide of the matter; Prithee tell me a little
News, for I Have a huge mind to know how things go.


Dick. That was a question fit to be asked four months ago; but now it is as
idle as the Fellow that held his Watch in his hand, and asked his Friend what a
Clock 'twas.


Tom. Why, is there no News stirring?


Dick. News stirring -- why, Tom, we have nothing else; we have Gazettes,
Intelligences, Courants, Mircuries, Orange Gazettes, etc. which has so enriched
the Hawkers, that it is believed they will be incorporated, and made one of the
City Companies. Indeed a little after the Padlock Proclamation, News was as
scarce as Rosemary after the great Frost, but now men have liberty of tongue,
as well as liberty of Conscience; it is grown the staple Commodity of the times.


Tom. But still you let me hear none.


Dick. What would thou have me tell thee, that the King is in France, the
Lord Chancellor in the Tower, some Jesuits in Newgate, and --


Tom. No more, no more, -- all this is old News.


Dick. That I knew, for News like Fish stinks in three days: In short, Tom, he
must have better Lungs than I that can tell you the variety of Reports, which
occurr in London in one day.


Tom. I heard Ireland was in sad condition.


Dick. Most certainly, Tyrconnel and his booted Apostles are resolved to live
and die in Defense of Popery; but leaving them to the determination of God's
Providence, and the success of the Prince's Arm's, which will speedily be sent
to reduce them, let us a little conferr Notes about the Present Posture of the
English Affairs.


Tom. Lord! you know I Am no Statesman.


Dick. Nor is every man in a Ship a Pilot, but he that in a Storm dexterously
manages a single Cable, may be as serviceable as he that guides the Rudder.


Tom. If you mention a syllable of Stockerasy, or Mockrasy, I shall not be able
to say a word more.


Dick. Not I sincerely, we will not entangle our discourse with any Inquiries
into the several Modes of Government, but confine our thoughts to the present
Juncture. Give me leave therefore to ask you what you thought of the Complexion
of the Times, before there was the least whisper about the Prince of Orange's
coming into England.


Tom. Why, I thought, as other people did, that Liberty of Conscience was a
good thing; that the King could do no wrong; that notwithstanding some ill
things, the King did not design to Introduce Popery.


Dick. O Credulity, Credulity whither will thou carry men? why, Tom, 'twas that
undid us all, our Grandmother Eve's aptness to believe the Serpent, caused her
to taste the fatal Apple, and all her posterity have caught her distemper.


Tom. Why, you would not have poor country Tom, have as long a head as a
Privy-Councellor?


Dick. But I hope an honester than some of them had. The design to introduce
Popery in this Nation formerly, was carried on with artifice and secrecy, but
now they were so open in their attempts that every project seemed to carry its
countermine a long with it, and it is time to arm, when the general cry is,
Sampson the Philistines are upon thee.


Tom. I read somewhere lately that misfortunes will come, or they will not
come; if they will not come, it is nonsense to trouble our selves about what
will never be; but if they will come, is Misery so lovely an object as to be
met half way? or something to that purpose.


Dick. Excellent Philosophy: but still prevention is no out-of-fashion virtue
-- Had the Protestants in France suspected the Treachery, think you they would
have come to that fatal Wedding in Paris, wherein so many Thousands of them
were butchered?


Tom. No certainly -- but who would have suspected things in England would have
ever come to that pass? indeed the sending the Bishops to the Tower did a
little disgruntle us Country People.


Dick. There Is no Man certainly can think the Garret a safe place to sleep in,
when the Foundation of the House totters: And none but a Man overrun with
Partiality could suppose the Superstructure would long continue, when the
Pillars were taken down. But still you give me no Answer to my Question.


Tom. You Catechize me strangely; these Riddles pose me extremely.


Dick. Shall I give you my Thoughts upon the Matter -- Common Fame has Recorded
us English to be a People extremely jealous and suspicious of our Rights and
Privileges, generally distrustful of our Superiors, and somewhat uneasy under
any sort of Government; but as the Devil is not so ugly as he is painted,
neither is all that part of the Character true; Our Laws and Constitutions we
may without Vanity affirm to be the best in the World, if we respect either the
Honor of the Prince, or the Safety of the People: The former's Prerogative,
and the latter's Privileges, are so determined by Legal Bounds, that while they
so continue there must needs be an admirable Harmony in Government; but when
either of these are stretched beyond their due Limits, the whole is put out of
Frame; but when those of the Long-Robe (I mean the Scandals of it) shall either
by the Frowns or Smiles of their Prince, or by the Allurements of Interest,
give him a Power of Dispensing with Laws, rendering their fellow Subjects just
so many Asses to be led or driven according to the Humor of the Supreme
Governor: He that is of so cold a Temper as not to resent this in some manner,
ought to be ranked with the dullest of Irishmen, a Creature whose Soul serves
only instead of Pepper and Salt to keep his Body from stinking, unworthy the
Title of Man, and unfit for the meanest Conversation.


Tom. Hold, Sir, hold, if my Lord Chief Justice should over-hear you now, he would
lay you up in Lob's Pound for this.


Dick. I should be glad to see his Lordship; I know the Gentlemen of Maudlin
College are uneasy till they have made him some greatful Returns for his last
Visit to them.


Tom. Was not that unlucky Business called, Purging the College?


Dick. Yes: It was a Purge with witness, to void the Bowels, and retain the
Excrements; no doubt but the other Colleges must have undergone the same Course
of Physic, had not the Revolution of time produced a new Scene of things.


Tom. Certainly the Papists were bewitched when they gave his Majesty such
cursed Counsel.


Dick. Without question they were infatuated; but to use your Country Proverb,
They were resolved to make Hay while the Sun shone. I am perfectly lost in
Wonder when I think seriously on this Revolution. To us that know it, it looks
like a Dream, but to Posterity it must certainly seem a Romance; and the
Histories of Don Quixot, or Garagantua will seem the more authentic Relations
of the Two, that all the Politics of several Years last past, should be
unravelled in Three Months; certainly it argues an excess of good Nature, to
have Maudlin College restored, the Bishop of London's Suspension taken off, the
several ancient Charters given again to their respective Corporations, and all
this done on the sudden. Lord! how unconstant a Creature is Man; to Day all
Anger, Fury and Resentment; to Morrow, all Candor, Beniguity, Kindness, Love
and Condescension.


Tom. Why, verily, what you say is true enough; we had as honest a Gentleman
for a Mayor as ever broke a piece of Bread, but upon the new Regulation of our
Town, he was turned out, and a Papist put in his Place; on the sudden our
Charter comes, and then honest Mr. H -- was Mayor again, though it went against
his Stomach to be kicked up and down like a Foot Ball.


Dick. Public Officers (honest Tom) have lately been like Tavern Clocks, made
to strike Eight or Nine when it has been Three or Four in the Morning,
according to the pleasure of the Vintner, who has been sure to get by such
deluded Company. 'Twas a happy time when the Entrance to the Temple of Honor
was only by the Gate of Merit; then Men of Learning, Sense and Integrity, were
thought the sit Companions for a Prince; but now the humble Grin, the
sawning Leer, the Spaniel-like Cringe, are in this Age practiced, as the only
way to Preferment.


Tom. When I was a Schoolboy I heard of one Dogenes, (I think they call him) a
Surly old Cur, that always lived in a Tub. Now had that Coxcomb complemented
Alexander, it is a Thousand Pound to a Cherry-stone, but he had been preferred.


Dick. I will not pretend to Vindicate the Cynick, his Humor was nothing but
his Pride; but believe me, I had rather be honorably poor, than villainously
rich.


Tom. But there is one thing I wonder at, that his Majesty should again retire
after his kind Reception to Whitehall, after his first withdrawing.


Dick. That Is a Catholic Riddle I am not able to fathom; his so sudden
departure occasioned a kind of Interregnum, which the Mobile being sensible of,
committed those Outrages of Rapine and Violence on the Spanish Ambassadors
Residence and Chapel, St. John's, the Franciscans Chapel in
Lincolns-Inn-Fields, Bucklersbury, Lime-street, etc. Though he must be
degenerated from common Humanity, that will justify any such base and
villainous Actions.


Tom. The same was done in several Parts of the Country, on the Houses and
Chapels of Papists, but honest Tom never liked such violent Doings.


Dick. Spoke like thy self. I heartily wish our English Factories beyond Sea do
not suffer severely for the Insolence of a few Rascally Villains: Here, you
know, Revenge magnifies every thing beyond its due proportion; undoubtedly
Relations from England to Foreign Parts will be stuffed with a Thousand
Falsities, and that will be resented as the Act of a whole City, which was only
the Fury of an Ungovernable Rabble.


Tom. But since he has left us, who is our Governor?


Dick. There was a time in Israel when every Man did what was right in his own
Eyes -- But Heaven be praised, it is not so with us, for the Lords Spiritual and
Temporal being assembled did unanimously desire the Prince of Orange to take
upon him the Government Civil and Military, till Matters could be settled in a
Free Convention to meet on the 22d. of January.


Tom. But after all; Who is this Prince of Orange, whose Name makes such a
noise in the World, we Country Polks know no other of him than that he Married
the King's Daughter, when he was Duke of York?


Dick. I will not pretend to give you his Character after the life, you must be
content with some rough Draught. In short, he is descended from the illustrious
House of Nassaw, a name that shines in History; he had all the Education of a
highborn Prince; early he became acquainted with the Rules of Government, and
practiced them with that success, as to be made Stadtholder of Holland. The
Dutch you must know are a people jealous of their Liberties to the last Degree;
and did not the Prince carry it with the highest moderation, that wary people
would soon express their uneasiness under his administration. He is one adorned
with all the Virtues that are requisite to his high Birth and Character; his
Justice is remarkable, his Prudence inimitable, his Temperance extraordinary,
his Courage and Conduct exceed expression; and all his other Virtues which wait
upon these forementioned, are exalted to the highest degree that humane nature
is capable of, in the practice of all which he is so very happy, that his worst
Enemies could never fix a scandal upon him.


Tom. No -- was he not ambitious when he came with an armed Force to Invade
England?


Dick. Hold a little there, good overhasty Tom, we must serve your Question,
as Parsons do their Texts; take it to pieces, and first, for the Ambition you
seem to charge him with --


Tom. Lord, Sir, I am sorry I said that word; I Am afraid you will go and inform
against me; I have a Wife and four small Children, and if you should --


Dick. Prithee, honest Tom, never fear it, what, betray my Friend? I Would cut my
Throat as soon; no, Tom, my design is only to undeceive you. 'Twas not Ambition
brought him hither, but a just Zeal for the Defense of the undermined
Protestant Religion in England, etc. and to call it an Invasion is as great a
piece of Lunacy, as if I should invite a neighbor to defend my house against
suspected Robbers, and when he was entered, to call him the Thief.


Tom. Then was the Prince of O. invited hither?


Dick. Most infallibly; think you else that with a small handful of men (in
comparison of the King's Army) he could have entered England so quietly?


Tom. Why, truly, I think not, but is it true that there are several Roman
Catholics in his Army that came over with him on his design?


Dick. It Is so reported, and by many believed, for let that Church talk of
Unity till the sound of the last Trumpet, they are as envious against one
another, as it is possible, and like Switzers will fight for any that will but
pay them, though it is somewhat difficult to trust them.


Tom. Why, does the French King fight against Roman Catholics?


Dick. Undoubtedly -- his Ambition knows no difference between Catholics and
Protestants, else he would never have fallen out with his Holy Father the Pope,
but let us leave him to the scourge of the Emperor, and return to our former
Discoursed of the Prince of Orange. You have seen, I suppose, all his
Declarations.


Tom. Yes, I have, and read'em; and if he is but as good as his word, then --


Dick. You're still at your ifs; why, has he not given all the demonstrations
imaginable of the sincerity of his intentions, by exposing his Person to the
dangers of Sea and Land, turning out all Popish Officers through the Kingdom,
and that he may not rely wholly upon his own wisdom and conduct, or the advice
of a few, has by his Circular Letters Summoned a Convention to meet this Month
at Westminster, there to debate what is fittest to be done in this critical
Juncture. If these reasons are not convincing to an up-prejudic'd
understanding, let me live all the rest of my life like a fool, and when dead
be buried by Jack Adams.


Tom. I am convinced, yet, but just now you blamed me for my easiness of
belief, and now you chide me for my suspicion.


Dick. Dear Tom, ben't angry, and we shall quickly come to a right
understanding. But prithee, what grease Paper is that you are fumbling between
your Fingers.


Tom. I don't know well what it means; a Woman dropped it just before me, I took
it up and called her to give it her, but either she did not hear me, or if she
did hear me she would not hear me, but went on as fast as she could.


Dick. Let Us see it, Tom.


Tom. There it is, you are more Book-learn'd than I, but I believe it is some
Quack Doctor's-bill, as you call'em.


Dick. Yes, it is a Quack's-Bill, but there are State-Mountebanks, as well as
Pretenders to Physic, and the mischief on it is the latter give a thousand
Bills before they meet with one Patient, but these sort of Bills poison almost
every body that reads 'em.


Tom. For my part I have not read it, but if it be so dangerous as you say,
tear it in pieces out of hand.


Dick. No, No, I have my Antedotes about me; Heaven be praised, I Will engage it
shall do neither of us harm.


Tom. Why, do you understand Physic and Strology?


Dick. To trifle with you no longer, Tom, before I dread it I must tell you
something by way of Preface.


Tom. Proceed then.


Dick. Why, Tom. there are a sort of men in the World that can see farther into
a Millstone than he that pecks it; people of such ready intellingence, they will
tell you the precise Minute that the old Gentleman at Rom cuts his Corns, a
week before he does it. Tell you of Massacres, Devastations, and other
Calamities a long time before they happen, and these are those kind of cattle
that dropped this Bill, whose design is only t amuse and frighten People with
sears and jealousies, of what perhaps will never be; causing them like people
in false alarms of Fire, to break their Necks out at window to a void being
burnt -- The Title on it is -- Considerations proposed to the Electors of the
ensuing Convention (that is the Text,) now let us hear the Application, an Use of
instruction no doubt, Gentlemen, God Almighty has now put it into your hands,
either utterly to ruin, or perpetually to settle three Kingdoms, and with them
the Protestant Religion in general, by the choice you shall make of men to
Represent you in the ensuing Convention, (very good;) you never yet enjoyed
(and perhaps never may again) such another opportunity of making your selves
and your posterity happy; you choice being now absolutely free, without any
force, or hazard, as formerly.


Tom. Why, is not all this very true? methinks the Paper speaks honestly.


Dick. You never heard a Mountebank bawl out upon the Stage -- Gentlemen, here
in this Glass is a most infallible Poison, that will rid you of your lives in
half an hour, but he sincoths you up with, Gentlemen, here is a rich Cordial,
Prepared after the Receipt of the Duke of Florence; a single drop of it in the
mouth of a sick Person, has recovered him, when all Doctors and Friends have
given him over; by this artifice you we drawn in to buy his Poisoned Stuff,
while behind the Curtain he has the pleasure to laugh at you. So it is with this
Paper; you little think what malignity comes after this sweetning Complement:
but I Will read on, and now prepare your Ears for as much Malice as ever was
crowded in a dozen Lines -- Consider, therefore, they ought not to be chosen
that ridiculed the Popish Plot, and promoted several Protestant Sham-ones; that
did what in them by so Surrender your Charter, or which is all one, submit to
the King's Regulation of it: And discountenanced and threatened all that would
not give up the Rights of the City as well as themselves; upbraiding them with
the odious names of Enemies to the Government; that baffled you in your Choice
and Suffrage, and made many worthy Citizens Rioters, for asserting their Rights
therein; that swore illegal Sheriffs, by force of arms; that contrary to the
known Rules of Common-Councils, pretended to repeal all the Proceedings of
twenty years, without so much as reading any act thereof (except the Titles) or
referring them to any Committee, and absolutely refusing the negative question,
though desired, and that in a word, did to the utmost in their sphere endeavor
to promote the arbitrary designs of a Popish Court, to rob all freeborn
Englishmen of their inherent Rights and Privileges (Sir W. P. then Lord Mayor:)
There Is enough for a taste. The next Paragraph relating to Sir P. R -- I omit
that Gentleman, having suffered sufficiently by the Court Party, as the people
call it; now to the Conclusion -- But rather choose such who in the Parliaments
of King Charles the Second, opposed Popery and arbitrary Power, in the face of
Danger, and will now in all probability expose themselves to the greatest
hazards, to establish your Religion, Laws and Liberties -- Here Is a heavy
charge, but as little proved as possible, but granting all to be true, is this
a time, to rip up old stories, while this Libeller little considers how the
Court influenced all those violent proceedings which then happened.


Tom. But, ought not Men to be told of their faults?


Dick. Yes, But not in such a manner; yet without any manner of Reflection,
give me leave to speak it, had some of these criminal Gentlemen, pointed at in
the Libel, been Elected for the City of London, they might perhaps have served
their Country with as much integrity as it is believed the four chosen Members
will do in the present Convention; the City of London, in all public
Transactions, has always been the leading Card, most Corporations following her
Example: but it is the business of some people to sow the Seeds of Dissension,
when there is the greatest occasion for Unity. Men's faults are looked upon with
a Magnifying Glass, while their merits or deserts are seen with the wrong end
of the Prospective; besides, should we once give space for Recriminations, what
Division of Men is safe? The Papist hates to hear of the Irish or French
Massacres, the Roundhead cares not to hear the Exploits of 41 mentioned.


Tom. Nor the violent Churchman of Passive Obedience.


Dick. Very merrily rejoined Tom; but were there a mutual forbearance, and an
extensive Love and Charity, the Times would be much better; what do you think
is the intent and real design of the Paper last mentioned?


Tom. To sow Seeds of Dissension; I make use of your own words, you see I Am
familiar.


Dick. But do you see no further design?


Tom. Not that I can perceive.


Dick. Then I Will tell you, it is undoubtedly designed to undermine the Church of
England.


Tom. How can that be?


Dick. Why, thus; These Gentlemen, and others mentioned, are of the Communion
of that Church, they have done such and such things, trust 'em no more; if they
make the Majority in the Convention, then farewell Liberty of Conscience; and
you will again be plagued with Informers and Constables, to molest you in your
most peaceable Meeting, your Assembling together will be called a Riot, your
Persons dragged to Prisons, and your Goods taken from you, your Families
undone, etc. these are the things you ought to fear; and now it is put into
your hands to prevent them, therefore now or never -- Is not this a fearful
Scene to a timorous fancy? whereas, with the same reason, they may suspect an
Army of French should come cross the Narrow-Seas on Horseback, as any of these
ill-grounded Suspicions.


Toms. Why, Sir, though it is a little smothered, think you the Church of
England has left her persecuting Spirit?


Dick. It Is the highest uncharitableness in the World to charge the whole
Community for the faults of a few: Little do you think that that severe storm
which fell upon the Dissenters in 83 and 84, was occasioned by Popish Councils,
and hatched at the Court; the more pious and wise of the Church, did then, and
do still disclaim such Proceedings; and I durst pawn my Life for it, that this
Age, nor the next, will ever see any such Actions encouraged by the Church of
England; but if Ambition, masked with a pretended holy Zeal for the Glory of
Christ, will still put the Dissenters upon ruining that Church, we may be
supposed (notwithstanding the often retorted Doctrine of Passive Obedience) not
tamely to stand still, and see the Church destroyed second time, by those who
might quietly enjoy the Lioerty of their own Conscience, provided they disturb
not ours; those just fears and suspicions of Popery, are now vanished to that
degree, that the very Name is become a byword, and were we but once united, we
need not fear the most close laid attempts of the Red-Letter'd Tribe.


Tom. I hope we are so.


Dick. I wish so too; but when Papers are dispersed about, tending to the
villifying of the Church of England, and people whisper in Coffee-houses, they
hope to see a Commonwealth again; what must we guess but that the ruin of the
Church is aimed at: Come, come, Tome, these are not the Methods to be taken at
this time of day, the Prince, though Educated a Calvinist, yet retains so great
a veneration for the Church, by his daily Devotions at it, and receiving the
Sacrament in that Communion, which are undeniable proofs of his respect and
love to it, that may convince any impartial understanding of his firm and
sincere Affection for it; yet is he civil to the Dissenters, who Complemented
him in a Body upon his arrival at St. James's, assuring them his Protection;
and no doubt, but a Parliament, when called, will settle Liberty of Conscience
with its due limits; for let me tell you, the late grant by the King, was only
a specious pretense to wheedle you into a tender opinion of the Catholic
Religion, and that a Popish King was not so formidable a Creature; this you we
to enjoy no longer than till things were ripe for execution the Romans making
use of you (pardoning the rudeness of the Comparison) as the Monkey did of the
Cats-foot, only to pull the Chestnut out of the fire; for give the Jesuit but
even ground, and he will quickly throw you: One would think, that a discerning
inquisitive Nation, as ours is, should be no longer gulled with pretenses, but
really see our own Interest; for if it is put into our hands to get wisdom, and
we have no heart to it, it is just with Almighty God to deliver us up to our own
folly, and our Posterity, may with tears, reflect on the happy opportunity lost
by their Forefathers.


Tom. I remember, about four year ago, when the great Turk Besieged Vienna, (by
which you may know I read Gazettes sometimes) 'twas a hot talk in our Country,
whether 'twere not better to live under the Turks, who gave Liberty of
Conscience, than under the Papist, who would allow no such thing --


Dick. By which, I guess you would infer, that your darling Liberty granted
you (though with design) by the Papists, will not be continued by the Church of
England, when the Reins of Government fall into her hands.


Tom. The very same.


Dick. Some persons have been very busy to give you a wrong notion of things;
can the Comparison any ways correspond? is the feigned friendship of the Church
of Rome so indearing, as to make you forget all her former Cruelties? or do the
late severities, said to be done by the Church of England, cause such deep
Impressions in you Memories, as to make you disclaim all friendship with her;
certainly your minds are strangely vitiated to delight more in the designing
smiles of a prostituted Harlot, than in the endearments of a chaste, though
injured Spouse.


Tom. As you say, my Head is filled with notions, you would therefore do me a
singular kindness to inform me what you mean, when you say the Church of
England.


Dick. By the Church of England, I understand that community of Christians
professing the Faith of Christ in these Kingdoms of Great Britain and Ireland,
freed from the dregs of Popish superstition and idolatry; not that I would have
you think it owes its Birth to Henry the Eighth, or is a Religion formed by an
Act of Parliament, but following the methods of the best Fathers and Primitive
Christians -- But of this no more; this Church, so famed for its Piety, Order,
Decency and Discipline, the glory of the Reformed, and envy of the Romish
Religion, was never without its enemies: But not to rip up old stories, or
recriminate what at this day is better forgotten; I will at present confine my
Discourse to her behavior since the Accession of King James the Second to the
Crown.


Tom. Vaith, Sir, your a parlous fellow at History; our Mayor can talk of
nothing but what they did in Queen Elizabeth's days.


Dick. Truly, Tom, I should be glad to add any thing to your knowledge, though
I am sensible 'twould edify much more to talk with you concerning what price
Cattle bear, or how Corn went last Market Day at St. Albans.


Tom. Every thing in its season, as the Woman said when she boiled Thistles
instead of Artichokes.


Dick. Then I Will begin; How industrious the C. of E. was to prevent the Bill of
Exclusion, I presume you are not ignorant: When King Charles the Second died,
and his Brother came to the Throne, all people were big with expectation to see
how the Church of England would behave her self, having a Popish Prince to
govern her, relying upon what he said at his first coming to Council, and his
often repeated promises to maintain her; the Press and Pulpits echoed with
praises of James the Just, but alas how quickly was the Scene changed, and the
swelling hopes of the Church turned into just fears of her Dissolution? the
Bishop of London suspended; Magdalen College illegally taken from the rightful
Possessors; Persons of scandalous Lives, and more scandalous dullness, preferred
to Fellowships and Places in both Universities; a High Commission erected; the
Bishops sent to the Tower, for delivering a Petition, which by abused and
wrested Law must be called a Libel; yet after all ceased she not to go on in
her exemplary Loyalty; but as the Apostle speaks in another ease, was patient
in suffering, continuing instant in Prayer; never heard to complain, but
suffering all with a most Christian Courage, relying wholly on the wise
Providence of that God that never failed to hear her in distress; and the more
to afflict her, endeavors were used to seduce Persons of unwary minds from her
Communion, by Missionaries, whose arts have since been detected by an ingenuous
Pen. Yet after all she triumphs, and lifts up her head in despite of her Foes;
this is that Church of England that stood in the Gap, when Jesuits, Priests,
Mercenary Commissioners, Renegado Bishops, and false Brethren strove to ruin
her, and now she has escaped the Storm, shall she perish in the Harbor? Has
she bravely resisted all the Bombs and Assaults of Rome, shall a Geneva Mine
blow her up? Consider this seriously, Tom; and then I am sure you will be of my
Opinion, that the Dissenters had better peaceably enjoy their Liberty, than by
fomenting Animosities and Jealousies, give an occasion to the common Enemy to
spoil her, and themselves together; for though between themselves they differ
in Circumstantials, yet the word Heretic includes them both; the Popish rage
burning as fiercely against Pinners-Hall, as against Lambeth-Chapel.


Tom. Verily I thought the Church of England, and the Church of Rome differed,
no more than a Chopping-Bill does from a Hatchet.


Dick. That Is thy ignorance, Tom; were you to see the Pomp and Pageantry in the
Worship of the one, and the decent gravity in the Divine Service of the other,
you would quickly be of another Opinion; but of this at another opportunity;
we have a quarter of an hour to spare, and therefore we'll talk of other Matters,
for by this time I believe you are sufficiently convinced, it is not the
Dessenters Interest to quarrel with the Church of England.


Tom. Why, truly, my eyes begin to be opened: But, what do you think of the
Parliament now sitting?


Dick. No, Tom, you mistake, it is a Convention.


Tom. That Is a hard word.


Dick. It Is the same thing in effect, only they cannot make or repeal Laws; the
Kings withdrawing, and leaving the Kingdom in a kind of Inter-regnum; the
Convention is to consider what is to be done in order to the public peace in
this unheard of Conjuncture.


Tom. I know you have a long reach; cannot you guess what they will go about
first? for I long to carry a little News down into the Country with me


Dick. As far as a guess goes Tom, I believe I may serve you; it is believed
that one of their first Enquiries will be of the nature of the Kings leaving
his people, and retiring into the Kingdom of a know Tyrant, which will occasion
a dispute concerning the incumbent duty of a Prince, and the Allegiance of a
Subject; a search will likewise be made into that nice point, the birth of the
Prince of Wales; which, if proved a Forgery, will add much to the lusture of
the House of Modena, and the Society of Jesus; but if found a reality, the
young Gentleman to be sent for over, and Educated in the Protestant Religion: A
time will be likewise appointed for the calling of a Parliament, which it is
believed will be in April next, in order to settle the Grievances of the
Nation, and try the betrayers of their Country, who are now in custody; these
are the most probable Conjectures I can make of what will be done at the
Convention.


Tom. But do you think they will not proclaim a War against France? methinks I Have
such an itching to kill a Monsieur or two. --


Dick. All in good time; they have things of a greater moment to consider; but
that haughty Gentleman, may know in time that his Bourdeaux Claret has not
quite dampt the English Spirits, but there are a Generation of Men alive who
dare make him a bold visit.


Tom. He talks of heading an Army next Spring of about 80000 Men; do you think
it is true?


Dick. Yes, By his Effigies stamped upon his Gold, that is his way of heading an
Army; he has no other methods to take Towns, but by bribes and treachery.


Tom. I heard a report since I came to Town, that the Citizens have sent the
Prince 200000 Pound, that is more than half the Men in our Town are worth.


Dick. Yes, Tom, and are ready to lend him as much more if his occasions
require it; this Money is not given to Priests and Jesuits, for erecting
Monasteries and making Processions, but purely to be employed for the good and
safety of the Nation -- You see, Tom, by the example of our unhappy Prince, how
fatal it is for a King to retract from his Word and Coronation Oath; but why
should I wonder? when the Maxim of theirs, That no Faith is to be kept with
Heretics, was visibly practiced before our eyes; had he been true to those who
placed him on the Throne, he might still have had Te Deum sung at his Chapel
without molestation; but when those Vermin the Jesuits crept into his bosom
with their pernicious Morals, all Vows and Obligations were forgot, and rather
than displease his Ignatian friends, his own quiet, and his Subjects peace,
must be sacrificed; but I fear I have already trespassed too much upon your
patience.


Tom. No, Sir, I could hear you till midnight, but I have outstay'd my time,
and therefore ask leave to bid you God b'w'y'.


Dick. Honest Tom, I wish I had more of thy Company, but if you are in haste,
Farewell.


FINIS.

