THE DEVIL turned QUAKER: OR, The Damnable, Divellish, and accursed Doctrines
and Designs, of these desperate, deluded, and deluding people; called,
QUAKERS: Their damnable Opinions, and horrid Blasphemies; touching the Person
and Deity of our blessed Lord and Savior JESUS CHRIST.

ESPECIALLY, The Divelish Practices, and accursed Blasphemies and Opinions, of
one JAMES NEYLER; a Ring leader of that Sect: Who blasphemously declared
himself to be GOD, and was publicly worshipped as God, by his wicked
Disciples, at BRISTOL: who now lie in Prison, to receive the reward due unto
them for the same.

MATTHEW. 24. 23. There shall arise false Christ's, and false Prophets, and shall
show great Signs and Wonders, but (says our Savior) believe them not.

JUDE 17, 18. Remember the words which were spoken before of the Apostles of
our Lord Jesus Christ; how they told you, there should be Mockers in the last
times, etc.

London, Printed for John Andrews, at the White Lion in the Old Baily. 1656.

The Devil turned Quaker.
1 JOHN 4. 1, 2, 3. Beloved, believe not every spirit, but try the spirits,
whether they are of God; because many false Prophets are gone out into the
world? Hereby know we the Spirit of God, every spirit that confesses that
Jesus Christ is come in the flesh, is of God; and every spirit that confesses
not that Jesus Christ is come in the flesh, is not of God. And this is that
spirit of Antichrist, whereof you have heard that it should come; and even now
according it is come.
IN the last days, says the Apostle, 2 Timothy 3. Perilous times shall come, for
men shall be lovers of their own selves, covetous, boasters, blasphemers,
disobedient to parents, unthankful, unholy, without natural affection,
truce breakers, false accusers, incontinent, fierce despisers of those that are
good, traitors, heady, high-minded, lovers of pleasures more then lovers of
God, having a form of godliness, but denying the power thereof: From such,
says the Apostle in the fifth verse, Turn away.

And that we may the better discern and avoid these seducers, the Apostle sets
them out unto us, as well in their pre^ences and outward actions and carriages,
as by their inward principles and corruptions, as you may see in the sixth,
seventh, and eighth verses: Of this sort, says he, are they that creep into
Houses, and lead captive silly Women laden with sins, led away with diverse
lusts; ever learning, and never able to come to the knowledge of the truth.

In the fix first Verses of this Chapter, the Apostle sets forth unto us,
the practices of these ungodly sinners; and that men might be fore-arm'd
against these seducers, he tells us at the sixth Verse, how we should know them;
Of this sort, says he, are they that creep into Houses, and lead captive silly
Women. Now as James and Iambris withstood Moses, so do these resist the Truth;
Men of corrupt minds, reproba^e concerning the faith. But in the ninth Verse,
says the Apostle, They shall proceed no further; for their folly shall be
manifest unto all men.

Now according to this method of the Apostle, shall I proceed; in setting forth
unto you, the corrupt, horrid, and blasphemous practices, of these ungodly, and
irreligious sinners of our times, known by the name of QUAKERS: First, I shall
discover unto you, by the Lords assistance, their horrid, and of all good
Christians to be abhorred, practices and opinions: In the next place, I shall
endeavor, God willing, to set forth unto you, the Blasphemies, and accursed
delusions, of these monsters of men and enemies of all righteousness, the
QUAKERS; a generation of Vipers, of late, by the power of Satan, sprung up
amongst us: Having done this, I shall by Gods assistance, give you some few
motives and encouragements, to persuade you, in the fear of the Lord, to beware
of these wicked ones, whom the Lord, I hope, will ere long consume with the
breath of his nosthrils, and suddenly scatter them in his wrath, like a mighty
Whirle-winde. Beware of false Prophets, says our Savior. And then lastly,
having discovered unto you the folly, and madness of these Seducers, I shall
conclude all, in a word of advice, to all those that fear the Lord, in these
three Nations; to beware of these wicked and ungodly men; As the Apostle
persuades, in the second Epistle of Peter and the third Chapter: Having before
described such a generation of wicked ones as they are; in the seventeenth
verse, he concludes all, with heavenly advice and admonition, to all that
desire to fear the Lord: Ye therefore beloved, says the Apostle, seeing you
know these things before, beware lest ye also being led away with the error of
the wicked, fall from your own stedfastness; but grow in grace, and in the
knowledge of our Lord and Savior JESUS CHRIST.

And now I begin with the first; The horrid and accursed Principles of these
wicked men: First, they do blasphemously deny God, and our Savior Jesus
Christ, who is God, blessed for ever; impiously and blasphemously saying, God
is in them, and the Light within them, is God; when indeed there is no light at
all in them, but darkness: As the Psalmist says, Their very inward thoughts
are darkness, and blindness of mind; who being past feeling, as the Apostle
says, Have given themselves over to lasciviousness, to commit all uncleanness
with greediness. Its the Devil that is in them, and not God, the Devil he
deludes them, and he reigns and rules in these Children of disobedience; they
are of their father the Devil, and his instruments they are, to delude and
destroy, both their own and other men's souls.

Secondly, they deny the blessed word of God, and despise it; tearing it in
pieces, and refusing to walk according to the rule of it, saying; They have the
Word within them and that there is no need of any other Word, they have it
remembered to them by the Spirit. And this also is a delusion of the Devil; for
as the Apostle says, Tim. 3. 16. All Scripture is given by inspiration, and is
profitable for Doctrine and for Instruction, that the men of God may be
perfect. So likewise 2 Pet. the first Chapter and last Verse; Ye have have a
more sure word of Prophecy, whereunto ye do well to take heed, as unto a light
that shines in dark places.

Thirdly, they are loose and lascivious in their lives and conversations,
despising both Ministry and Magistracy, together with all humane Society;
presumptions are they, as St. Jude says in his Epistle; They are not afraid to
speak evil of Dignities, walking according to the imaginations of their own
base hearts; the good Lord rebuke them, and undeceive them. Ungodly men they
are, as St. Jude says, Turning the grace of God into wantonness, and denying
the Lord God, and our Savior Jesus Christ; leading captive silly Women, laden
with diverse lusts, going naked about the streets, in a most odious and
beastlike manner, belching forth blasphemy against the great God of heaven,
saying, They are commanded to do so. Wels they are, without water, raging waves
of the Sea, foaming out their ow^ shame; trees that are twice dead, plucked up
by the roots: Whose end, as St. Paul says, is to be burned.

Likewise, they cast off the ordinances of Jesus Christ, accounting them as
needless and unnecessary: They have no need, they say, of the Word of God, nor
no need of Prayer; they are above these things, above Ordinances; yea, I may
truly say, they are past grace: For, say they, We may live as we list. They
have no sin in them at all, but whatsoever they do is good, being according to
the light within them, and the motions of the spirit, with which they are
possessed: But miserable wretches as they are, they deceive their own souls* as
St. John says, in the first Chapter of his first Epistle, and the last Verse.
If the spirit within them bid them do any thing, though it be never so wicked,
they say, it is God: The Lord anoint their eyes with the eye salve of his
spirit* and cast out of them this foul unclean spirit, with which they are
possessed; that they may see the evil of their ways, and abhor themselves, and
repent of their Blasphemies; that so the Nation may be no longer deluded by
them.

Secondly, for the practices of these wicked men, how foul are they? and what a
height of wickedness and uncleanness is there amongst the most of them? What
roarings and howlings do they keep when they meet together? alrighting even the
Beasts that hear them, as if God were served by their roaring and howling like
Dogs? What Witchery and Sorcery is there amongst many of them, so that those
that have but come to see them, have been bewitched by them, to follow their
pernicious ways, and so have brought everlasting destruction upon themselves.
As one near to Newbery of late, who ran naked into the Congregation upon the
Lords Day; and after, giving away all his estate which was worth two or three
hundred a year, he ran away in this condition from his wife and children.
Likewise, one near Durham, who had been a great Professor of Religion for a
long time, and a man of good parts, but something given to Novelties; going to
hear these people called Quakers, was presently bewitched by them, that he ran up
and down the Town in a confused manner, crying out very blasphemously; I am the
Way, the Truth, and the Life: and thus he continued for the space of two or
three months, some^imes running naked about the stree^s in the night, being as
he said, so commanded to do, by a voice within him; which voice was the voice
of the Devil, with whom he was really possessed, as he himself has since
confessed, it having pleased God since, to bring him out of the snares of the
Devil, after a most miraculous manner, that others might see and take notice,
and abhor those wicked ways. The Devil having possession of him, he was
sometimes carried forth so violently by the power of Satan, to act and utter
such strange things, that he soon became the chief among them; to the great
grief and sorrow of all his friends, who persuaded him with tears to desist
from those wicked and pernicious ways; but all in vain, for he was still
possessed with this blasphemous opinion, That God was in him, and that what ever
he did was from God; when it was only from the power and delusion the Devil,
as he himself since, has to the glory of God, confessed.

This man being in his bed, the voice within him, spoke unto him as follweth:
That he was CHRIST, and came to live and abide in him; and that he should have
two Angels always to attend upon him. At which, there appeared two in the
likeness of Sparrows, coming down the Chimney, which came and sat upon the
wall by his beds-side, which he conceited were the two Angels spoken of before.
After which, the voice within him began to speak again, in a most wicked
manner, saying, That he was Christ, and was come to dwell in him: all which he
believed. Then upon a sudden was he carried, by a more then ordinary force,
from his bed, and his hand conveyed to a knife which lay in the room: Having
this knife in his hand, the point of it was presently set to his throat, and a
voice heard, saying, Open that I may enter in. At which it pleased God to smite
this man's heart, and by his Almighty power to hold back his hand from cutting
his own throat therewith; and then through the mercy of the Lord to him, he saw
how he was deluded by the Devil, and so flung away the knife, and ever after
forsook and abhorred these wicked and accursed ways, to the great joy and
rejoyeing of all his friends. The truth of this Relation was testified under
his own hand, together with the hands of the Mayor and Minister of the Town,
with several others.

The next I come to speak of, is one James Parnel: Who most blasphemously said
he was Christ and that they should see he could do miracles. And then the Devil
deluded him to fast forty days, and forty nights; which he said he would do,
that so they might see that he was God. He being in prison at Colchester for
his blasphemy, there began his Fast, and for several days he would eat nothing,
and seemed very pleasant: but being narrowly watched that he might eat nothing
privately, and so delude the people, he in less then a fortnights space began
to desire food, which was daily offered him before, if he would have eaten it;
and then being a weary of his fasting, he began to eat, but to little purpose;
for what he eat, went through his body as fast as he eat it, and then when he
would have eaten, it gave him no sustenance; and so in two or three days after,
he died in a most miserable manner, being guilty of his own death.

Like unto him is now one James Nailer, now in prison at Bristol for the like
blasphemies. This man being a principal man amongst the Quakers, was looked
upon by them as their God, all of them owning and receiving for truth what
James Nailer spoke, whose blaspemous opinions are very well known by most men.
This James Nailer taking upon him to be Christ, and by his accursed sect and
followers was so owned and looked upon, yea, and worshipped as Christ. This
blasphemous fellow, did in September last past, ride through the City of
Bristol on Horseback, conducted by others of this wicked sect, who went
bare-headed along by his Horse side; others strowing the way as they went,
blasphemously cried out, Hosanna, Hosanna in the highest, Holy, Holy, the Lord,
the Holy One. Having passed quite through the City in this blasphemous manner,
he took up his Inn, where his wicked Disciples washed his feet, and the women
wiped them with the ha^s of their heads. For which accursed, and abominably
blasphemous practice, he was after committed to prison there, and is now sent
for up to London by the Parliament, to answer for the same, who I hope will
give him the reward of his iniquity. Oh! that wretched sinful men should dare
thus to blaspheme the living God! Children of the Devil they are, and Enemies
of all Righteousness; who have forsaken the right way, and are turned after
vanities.

By the Law of Moses Blasphemers ought to be stoned to death, as it is recorded
in the 24 of Leviticus, verse. 16. He that blasphemeth the Name of the Lord,
shall surely be put to death, and all the Congregation shall stone him. This is
the Law of God delivered by Moses: God will not have such wicked wretches, that
shall dare to blaspheme his holy Name, to go unpunished: and truly, men ought
not to pass it over unpunished; he is accounted a very bad servant, that shall
hear his master abused, and take no notice of it; the Name of God is abused,
and his Honor and Majesty is abused by these wicked wreches, and shall they
not be punished for this! shall one man be punished for speaking ill of
another, and shall not wicked men be punished for blaspheming the great God of
heaven and earth! O I tremble to think what will become of these accursed
wretches, when they shall come to appear before the Lord, to answer for all
their wicked blasphemies. Certainly this is an iniquity, as Job says, Job 31,
10* to be punished by the Judge. And if, as St. Paul sairh, Romans 13. 4 the
Magistrate bears not the sword in vain, but is the Minister of God to execute
wrath upon him that does evil; then certainly, if he let such blasphemies as
these go unpunished, he bears his sword in vain, and is, in stead of being a
terror unto the evil doers, an encouragement of them in their sins, and
thereby bring upon themselves the guilt of other men's sins.

Now then Christians, I hope these things will affright you from these ways,
and cause in you an abhorring both of the opinions and practices of these
wicked ones: O that you would tremble to think of the sad condition of these
men, what will become of them, if they repent not, Hell fire and brimstone
shall be their portion for ever. O Christians, I beseech you for the Lords
sake, read the Epistle of St. Jude and likewise the second Chapter of the
second Epistle of St. Peter, and consider what is there said; compare what is
there written, with our times, see how the opinions and practices of men in our
days agree with these the Apostles there speak of: There were false Prophets,
says the Apostle, even as there shall be false Teachers, who shall bring in
damnable Heresies, denying the Lord that bought them, and bringing upon
themselves swift destruction, If ever there was a time when these things were,
certainly it is now: O how do false Prophets and Teachers abound and increase!
O what horrid blasphemies and accursed opinions are there broached and
practiced among us! The Lord cast out from among us that foul spirit of error
and blasphemy that so much abounds; give a check, O Lord, to Satan, and stop
the current of blasphemy, for thy own Names sake. O Lord arise, and beat down
the power of Satan, and let him no longer reign in the hearts of disobedient
and gain saying people. O do thou turn them, O Lord, from sin and Satan, unto
thee our God; and establish righteousness and truth, and increase the Kingdom
of thy dear son all the world over. O all ye Quakers, Shakers, and Ranters,
what ever you are, that blaspheme the Name of God, and despise his Word, repent
of your blasphemies, and turn to the Lord, who will have mercy upon you; lest
if you persist, the wrath of God be poured forth upon you to destroy you.

Now then consider all of you, and every one of you, and every one that reads
or hears this; Consider, I say, and see the dreadful judgments of God against
such sinners as you are, and repent of your wickedness, and abhor it; break
off your sins by repentance, and look upon Jesus Christ, whom you have pe^rced,
and whose blood you have trampled upon, and despised by your blasphemies.

Which that you may unfeignedly do, the Lord in mercy send out his light and
truth, and scatter all these mists and fogs of error heresy and blasphemy,
that now so much abounds; and bring down the power of Satan, and set up the
Kingdom of Christ; and settle and establish righteousness and truth in the
midst of us; and make us a praise, and the glory of the whole world: Even so
come Lord Jesus, Come quickly.

FINIS.
Courteous Reader,
There are five other very good Christian Books printed, which will by Gods
assistance, direct thee in the way to Heaven, and preserve and establish thee
in the truth. One is called, The Plain man's path to Heaven; a second, Dooms day
at hand; a third, The charitable Christian; a fourth, The Devils Disease; a
fifth, The Black Book of Conscience. All very necessary and seasonable for
these times, and but of two pence price: Sold by John Andrews at the white Lion
in the Old Baily.


