REASONS FOR His Majesty's Passing THE BILL OF EXCLUSION.

IN A LETTER To a FRIEND.



LONDON: Printed for J-W. and sold by Langly Curtis, 1681.

REASONS for His Majesty's Passing The BILL of EXCLUSION.
I Am not ignorant that you have lately heard Reports to my disadvantage,
concerning some matters relating to the Public: and though I flatter my self
(much more I confess from your Partiality to me, than any Merit I can pretend
to) that you do not think the worse of me for them; yet because one cannot be
too sure of what one values so highly, as I do your Esteem, I take the liberty
to give you some account of my Thoughts of the present posture of Affairs, that
if I am not so happy as to continue still in the good opinion you have formerly
had of my firmness to the Public Interest, I may learn at least in what
particular you conceive I have varied from it: Which last, though perhaps less
welcome than the first, will yet be owned as a very great mark of your
Friendship, since I assure my self, you have too much Charity for me to impute
my Errors in this kind to any worse cause than want of Understanding.

I must confess, I have had no great Veneration of late for some Men, who
though extreme zealous in appearance for things of Public Concern, and
particularly for the Bill for Excluding the Duke of York from the Succession to
the Crown, have yet taken such Methods for the obtaining that Bill, as (with
respect to their Popularity) looked to me, as if they had rather wished it
should be denied, than granted.

I mean a sort of men that pass with the Vulgar for very public Spirits, yet
are no otherwise for the Public Good, than as they think it may conduce to
their own private Designs. If matters be not disposed for them to leap into a
great Place, or to be restored to some Office they have formerly enjoyed, and
in which they have discovered Principles far different from what they now
profess: if every one they have a prejudice to be not immediately removed, or
perhaps if they fancy themselves the most likely to head the Rabble, should
things fall into confusion; they will be sure with great appearance of Zeal to
press things of less moment, and which they think will be denied, lest any
thing that really tends to Settlement should be granted; and they are for the
most part gainers by this, for their Vehemence, which proceeds from dark and
hidden causes, seldom fails of being mistaken by the Vulgar for a true and
hearty Love of their Country. I believe His Majesty will find these men
harder, I am sure less necessary to be satisfied, than the Nation: And
therefore I hope you will not wonder if I, who care not much for a great Office
if the Bill of Exclusion do pass, or to be popular with the Rabble if it do
not, cannot heartily concur with all that seems to be aimed at by that sort of
people.

I suppose you have heard which way I have declared my Opinion concerning that
Bill, when I thought it to any purpose: But give me leave (with as little
reflection upon the Causes of the breach of the last Parliament, as the subject
will permit) to tell you, what in my poor judgment may most conduce to the
passing it in the Parliament which is to meet at Oxford. I cannot imagine how
popular Speeches in either House, or angry Votes that are not always backed with
the strongest Reason, much less the Pamphlets that fly about in the Intervals
of Parliament, can signify much to the obtaining this Bill; for to what
purpose are Arguments to the People to prove the necessity of that, which they
are so fully convinced of already?

I should rather think it worthy the Wisdom of the next Parliament, to consider
what Argumens are most likely to prevail with the King himself in this matter;
and instead of such Addresses as carry the least show of Menace in them, which
cannot but be offensive, since to suppose a King capable of Fear, is the worst
Complement can be made him; instead of angry Votes which may alienate the
Hearts of the people yet farther from His Majesty, and make him more averse
from granting their reasonable Desires, and consequently from consenting to
this Bill, to lay before him such Reasons for it, as may convince him that it
is his own particular Interest to pass it.

I do not mention the House of Lords, being too well assured of the Loyalty of
that Noble Assembly, to doubt of their passing any thing for which His Majesty
shows the least Inclination. Taking it then for granted that this Bill only
sticks with His Majesty, no Arguments are of moment to obtain it, but such as
ought to be of weight with Him; and those I conceive to be of this Nature.

One Objection must first be removed: for since Kings, of all Men living, ought
to have the greatest regard to Justice, we must not suppose that His Majesty
can ever consent to this Bill, till he be satisfied of the Justice of it. I
shall therefore endeavor to prove, not only that it is just, but agreeable to
the very intention and design of Government.

It seems to me to be an undeniable Position, that Government is intended for
the safety and protection of those that are Governed; and that where the
Supreme power is lodged in a single Person, he is Invested with that power, not
for his own greatness or pleasure, but for the good of the People. The
Tyrannies in Aristotle's time, and those that continue to this day in the
Eastern parts, must certainly have degenerated from a better kind of Government
by some accident or other; since what people can be supposed to have been so
void of sense, and so servilely inclined, as to give up their Lives and
Liberties to the unbounded disposal of one man, without imposing the least
condition upon him? For admit, according to Mr. Hobbes, that Monarchical
Government is formed by an Agreement of a Society of Men, to devolve all their
power and interest upon one Man, and to make him Judge of all Differences that
shall arise among them; it is plain, that this can be for no other end, than the
Security and protection of those that enter into such a Contract; otherwise,
you must suppose them Madmen, voluntarily to strip themselves of all means of
Defense, against the fury and violence of one of their number, rather than
continue in a state of War, where at the worst, they are as free to Rob, as
they are subject to be Robbed. It Is hard therefore to conceive, that Absolute
Monarchy could ever have been constituted by consent of any Society of Men,
(besides that we see those that live under them, would be glad to shake off
their Yoke if they could) but it is probable they may have been raised by the
Ambition and Valor of some Prince, or Succession of Princes, or by the peoples
supineness in suffering themselves to be enslaved by degrees, and so being at
last forced to submit, when 'twas too late to oppose.

I have insisted the longer upon this Argument, because another depends upon
it, which comes nearer the present Question; for if no Reason of Government can
be assigned, but the Safety and Protection of the People, it follows naturally,
that the Succession of Princes in Hereditary Monarchies, cannot be binding, nor
ought to be admitted, where it proves manifestly inconsistent with those ends.
I need not instance in all the cases that incapacitate a Prince to perform the
Office of a Chief Governor; but I can think of no disability so strong or so
undeniable, as his being of a different Religion from that which is generally
owned by the People.

Religion, considered only in a Politic Sense, is one of the chief Supports of
Civil Government; for the fear of corporal Punishments, nay of Death itself,
would often prove insufficient to deter men from refusing Obedience to their
Superiors, or from breaking their Laws, without those stronger ties of Hope of
Reward, and Fear of Punishment in another Life. The Romans, of a fierce and
rude people, were made tractable by Numa, and submitted to such Laws and
Customs as he thought fit to introduce, not so much by their being convinced of
the reasonableness of those Laws, as by the finding a way to persuade them,
that all his new Constitutions were the Dictates of a Divinity, with whom he
pretended daily to converse. This sense of Religion raised that People
afterward to that incredible exactness of Order and Discipline; and the belief
they had the Gods of their side, made them run so intrepidly upon Dangers, that
Cicero observes, that though some Nations excelled them in Learning and Arts,
others equaled if not exceeded them in Valor and Strength, 'twas to Religion,
and their respect to Divine Mysteries, that they owed their Conquest of the
World. But this very Religion, that is the Bond of Union between a Prince and
his People, when both profess the same, must of necessity produce the contrary
Effects, and be the seed of the most fatal Disorders, nay of the Dissolution of
Governments, where they differ. The same Conscience that ties the Peoples
Affections fastest to the Prince in the first case, dissolves all manner of
Trust, all bonds of Obedience, in the second.

It is impossible that a Prince should signify any thing toward the support
of the People's Religion, being himself of another; nor would it ever be
believed, if he could: And how can that Government subsist, where the People
are unanimously possessed with a belief that the Prince is incapable of
protecting them in that which for the most part they value above all other
considerations? I know no instance can be given in this Northern part of the
World, even in those Kingdoms that have varied from their Original Constitution
and are become Absolute, that a Prince of a different Religion from the People,
was ever admitted to the Crown. Queen Mary here in England met with some
opposition; yet she could not be said to be of a different Religion from the
People: for Popery was so far from being extirpated in her days, that she found
a Parliament that joined with her in the restoring that Religion. But in
France, when the King of Navarre, a Protestant, was presumptive Heir to the
Crown, the States assembled at Blois (as all Historians of that Time agree) had
certainly Excluded him, and the rest of that Branch that were Protestants from
the Succession, if they had not parted abruptly, upon the Death of the Duke of
Guise and his Brother. Nay some affirm, that the King himself, though of the
Established Religion, was not out of danger of being Deposed, upon a Suspicion
of his favoring too much the Protestant Faction, in opposition to the League.
After the Kings Death the Hereditary Right was without Dispute in the King of
Navarre; but he found none to assist him in the making good his Title, but the
Protestant Party, of whom he was the Head, and some Creatures of his
Predecessor, that took his part more out of Hatred to the League, than
Affection to him. This Prince was at last indeed admitted to the Crown, upon
his Conversion to the Church of Rome. But that would not have sufficed, nor
would the Generality of the People, who were extremely zealous for their
Religion, ever have trusted one that had been of another, had he not happened
to be a Prince of incomparable Courage and Conduct, who through Seas of Blood,
and after many Victories, forcing his Entrance into the Capital City, made his
way to the Throne by Conquest, rather than by a voluntary Admission of the
People. It is observable by the way, that the Bishops and Clergy of France were
so far from setting up a Divine Right of Succession above the Religion
established, that most of them opposed him even after his Conversion, all of
them before; and the Pulpits rung with such bitter Invectives against him,
(only upon the account of Religion) as perhaps no Age can parallel. This I
should think might serve for Instruction to some Bishops, that I could name,
who by maintaining that nothing ought to overruled the Hereditary Right of
Succession, must either confess, that their Religion deserves not so much to be
defended as the Romish does, or that they themselves are not so zealous in the
defense of it as they ought to be. Let these Assertors of Divine Right tell me,
if in France, at this day the most Absolute Monarchy in Europe, and where the
Succession is held most Sacred, a Protestant Prince would be admitted to the
Crown.

And here in England, besides the consideration of Religion, that of Property
is not to be neglected, since what security can be given that Abbey-Lands, in
which most Landed men in the Kingdom have a share, would not be restored to the
Church under the Reign of a Popish Prince? The Objection that a Prince may be
of the Church of Rome, and yet not change the Established Religion, is
frivolous. For though there may be a possibility of his not attempting it,
deterred perhaps by the peoples universal detestation of Popery, or discouraged
by the ill success of former Attempts; this amounts to no more, than that he
will not bring Popery in, because he cannot. But is this all that a King of
England is obliged to do, by the Oath which he takes at his Coronation? An Oath
not only a Crime for him to take, (if he be a Papist) but impossible for him to
keep. For can a Papist defend that Religion to the utmost of his power, which
cannot be fully secured but by the suppression of his own? Can he be a fit Head
of the Protestant Interest abroad, who (while he continues of the Church of
Rome) must wish there were never a Protestant left in the world? If he be
incapable of doing this, that is, if the ends of Government cannot be obtained
in the ordinary course of Succession, the State must of necessity fall into
Confusion, if there be not an extraordinary power lodged somewhere, to provide
for its preservation.

That Power here in England, is in a Parliament, and has often been made use
of; but I conceive, for the Reasons above mentioned, never more justly than
upon this occasion.

And though the Justice of this Bill be very clear, I think the next thing yet
easier to prove, which is, That it is His Majesty's real Interest to pass it.
For if this Government be so constituted, that the King having the Hearts of
his people, is one of the most considerable Princes in Europe, but without them
signifies but little, either at home or abroad, as I doubt that is the case;
and if nothing can contribute more to the alienating the peoples Affections
from him, than his denying this Bill, one would think there needed no other
Motives to induce His Majesty to pass it. But besides, I should not think this
unworthy of His Majesty's Consideration, if there are some persons to whom he
may have a just prejudice; and who if they cannot bring to pass whatever they
propose to themselves, will still be endeavoring to make the Breach wider;
whether the denial of this Bill may not furnish them with too plausible
Arguments with the People, to refuse such necessary demands as His Majesty may
make for the Safety of the Kingdom, or the support of his Alliances; and
whether on the contrary, the passing it may not very much disappoint those
Counterfeit Patriots, by taking from them the best pretense they have of
stirring up the People to Sedition.

Nay, who knows but the refusal of this Bill may exasperate the Nation to that
degree, that a Title may be set up on pretense of a former Marriage, by the
help of false Witnesses, which though as ridiculous in itself, as injurious to
His Majesty's Reputation, may yet put the whole Kingdom into a flame?

The Expedient of taking away all Regal Power from a Popish Successor, and
leaving him only the Name of a King, can be no satisfactory security to the
Nation, unless such a Form of Government were settled during the Life of his
Predecessor. For otherwise the Successor, (having a right to the Crown, which
without an Act to exclude him he will have) may not only pretend that the
Predecessor cannot give away his Prerogative, but probably may succeed in
opposing it, by the difficulty that is always found in the introducing of New
Constitutions. Now whether this Expedient (being put in practice during the
Life of the present King) be not as good for the people, as the Bill, I shall
not now dispute; but as to the King himself, I think it is clear, that nothing
can be less for his Honor or Interest, than to admit of such an Expedient.

The Objection that this Bill may Disunite Scotland from England, seems not
very weighty. For first, we know not but a Free Parliament there, may pass a
Bill to the same effect; but if they do not, the Disunion cannot happen, unless
the Duke outlive the King; and in that case, will continue but during his
Survivance, for the next Successor will unite the Kingdoms again. This
inconvenience therefore, if it be at all, will be of so short continuance, as
cannot be of weight to balance with those present and visible Mischiefs that
may fall upon the Nation for want of this Bill.

Some have fancied, and I hope it is but a fancy, that the King has made a
Solemn promise to his Brother, never to pass it. I will suppose the worst. If
His Majesty have made such a promise, I conceive, with submission, it is void
in itself. For if he have taken an Oath at his Coronation to maintain the
Established Religion, and in order to that, it be necessary to pass this Bill, I
doubt no subsequent promise can absolve him from the performance of that Oath.
In the next place, all promises are understood to be for the advantage of him
that makes them, or of him they are made to, or both. But the performing this
would not only be ruinous to His Majesty, but of no advantage to his Royal
Highness: for how great soever his Merit and Virtues are acknowledged to be, he
lies under a circumstance that makes it impossible for him to come to the Crown
(though this Bill never pass) but by Conquest; and that way he may have it,
notwithstanding all the Acts that can be made to oppose him.

I shall add no more to the trouble I have given you upon this Subject, but
that I am for this Bill, because I think it just and necessary, not because it
is contended for by a Party: for I hold my self as free to differ with that
Party, when I think them in the wrong, as to agree with them when they have
reason of their side. This may be an Error, at least may be subject to
mis-construction, in a time that most things are so; but I hope you that have
known me long, will judge more charitably of

SIR, Your most Humble Servant.

FINIS.

