A DIALOGUE About the French Government, WARS, CRUELTIES, ARMIES, FLEET, etc.
Between TOM and DICK, two Seamen.
HONEST Tom, what, such a Man alive! I never thought to see thee, after so long
an Embargo.


Tom. My dear Dick! what cheer? well met in old England once again.


D. Prithee where have been adrift, ever since we lost sight of each other,
that plaguey shower of Fire, Hail, and Smoke, against the ^yman at Cape Spartel?


T. That same Pickaroon has kept me under Hatches at Sally ^^er since, at the
old Egyptian sport of Brick and Mortar; ^^d had it not been for our gracious
King and Queen I might ^^ve lain Wind-bound in that Gulf for ever.


D. Sally, quoth'a! I wish we had that day sunk with the rest (...) our
Fellows, rather than lived thus long to see a worse ^^^t of Pickaroons swagger
thus at our own doors; -- but ^^^ce it is come to that, we'll even venture one
brush together ^gain, and make the Monsieurs know the difference between ^ar
Oak and their Firr, 'tween English Men and French Toadstools.


T. Dear Dick, we'll fight, and live or dye together: But ^rithee what became
of thee after that unlucky Rencounter? ^ast thee struggled with Wind and Water,
and lived by the ^ope ever since?


D. I wish I had died by the Rope rather than live (as (...) did) by the Oar;
for the Sallyman with the Weathergage having soon mastered us, the Frenchman
that lay there aloof bartered with him for what was left on board; and I among
others have ever since tugged 'tween Heaven and Hell, 'tween Wind and Water
above ground, but under the Hatches of a French Galley, the Masterpiece of all
Slavery (this side old Charon's Ferry-boat,) where one meets in a narrow
bottom, with all the tickling torments of whole Barbary. But the Galleys lately
putting in to Torbay, I slipped my Chain, and Tingmouth being on fire, I fairly
ran away by the light on it.


T. It Is a bad Fire as well as Wind brings no Man good: By my troth well
exchanged! a French Galley for English Liberty, and Bread and Water for roast
Beef! but prithee what Company had there?


D. Why, of all sorts; for the Galleys, like Hell and the Grave, refuse none:
there are all Nations as well as French, and all kind of Criminals, especially
Hugonots (which is a Crime of the first rate in France) and among those French
Protestants there are many, that like our Sea-Chaplains, can Preach and Pray as
often as the gingling of the Chain and the absence of the Commander would permit.


T. Truly, Dick, though my Cabin was the bottom of a musty Cellar, yet I kept a
Diary of Wind and Tide; that is, of the frowns and favors of my grim Patroon,
which with a Moorish Tune or two I have learnt, will be some divertisement to
us aboard. But first give me thy opinion of these Monsieurs; what a plague
brought their French impudence to our Channel?


D. I Will be free with thee, Tom, and give thee such an account as my own dear
bought experience, or that of others ^ay have furnished me -- A French Papist
then is a vain f^^e, fickle Creature, a Bubble blown by a Priest, and tossed
abo^^ by the breath of his mouth, a bad Neighbor, a worse Friend true to
nothing but a Whore, and to no Interest but tha^ of his Master's Ambition; a
mere Butterfly, that flutters and whifles about for a while, and then falls and
dies in the dirt, it is a Spaniel that fetches and carries, but not for himself;
he ^e is wrapped warm like a Silkworm, and fares well to day, but to morrow is
reduced to his Linnen-brogues, and wooden Shoes, and is glad to find Bread and
Onion, and to yield up the fat of his Land to the Priests, and their
fellow-Caterpillars.


T. At this rate all France is but one Galley, and French Subjects are more at
the Oar than those in Barbary, if, like Worms, every cloven foot may crush
them: Have they any Nobility and Gentry that dare stand up for Liberty, and
Property, and the Laws, and oppose such proceedings?


D. Yes, yes; as much as a Ery of Eish dare oppose a Leviathan; their King's
pleasure is their Law; Statutes and Magna Charta's are but so many Cobwebs;
their Nobility and Gentry are forced to give up their Estates, and to live upon
Court Pensions, to turn Flag-men and Scarf-men, and never be heard of but in
the Camp and Gazers; all Men of Estates are become Men of War; and those that
followed the Plough are now Pioneers, and follow the Leaguer; the Merchant has
no Trade, and is turned Farmer; Vintuers and Coopers are made Seamen; and
Wines and Brandy die where they grew, for want of vent.


T. So that their Seamen drink well, if they do but eat and work accordingly.


D. Their Seamen, I tell thee, are a sort of Water-Rats, that have been more
used to Land, and to creep in Vineyards, than to climb up a main Mastyard;
they are choice Seamen went off with the flood of Protestants that left that
Kingdom; and though the great Turk be a Friend of France, yet there are 1200 of
their best midship-men padlock'd up at Algiers.


T. Perhaps it is more tolerable being there than at home: But after all, what
would they be at?


D Why, at any thing that is not their own, rather than be quiet: The French
value themselves upon their address in trespassing upon their Neighbors, in
seizing their Possessions, in keeping their Freeholds from them, and seek no
other Title than that of Conveniencie; that is, when Monsieur casts a longing
eye to any Place or Country (as Lorain, Alsatia, Hudsons-bay, or the like) that
he thinks convenient for him, he sends before him some Title-forging Attorney,
that soon finds out Hamperfuls of old, musty Pretensions, that shall reach any
corner of the New or Old World that his Master likes best; and then follows
Beelzebub with his Legions, who puts himself in possession; and in all these
Cases of Convenience, he is both Witness, Judge, and Party.


T. That Is French Law, I believe, and will scarce hold water any where else;
but this Monsieur had need of Guinea and Peru: Whence, I prithee, has he to pay
these Fleets and Legions that turn the World thus upside down?


D. His Priests and Dragoons prog for him, as thou know at Sally, the
Jack-calls do for the Lion; he takes from Peter to pay Paul; he robs one Friend
to pay another, and squeezes out of one Country all its grease, to liquor his
Boots for the next; he has borrowed the Church-Plate for his Mint, and their
Bells for his Artillery.


T. Prithee what are those French Engineers called Dragoons, which our
Goodwifes and Children are so much afraid of?


D. Oh! those are a kind of Fishermen that catch Hugonots; a sort of booted
Apostles that are sent up and down to root out and destroy a certain Weed,
called Protestants; the Men they send to the Galleys, the Children they hang
about the Hedges, and make a present of to the Birds, Cats, and Dogs; but the
Women, they first discharge their Love at 'em, and then their Blunderbusses;
they ravish, torture, and slave them; they make of them Beasts and Monsters,
and then lock them 'tween four Walls, without hopes of ever seeing the Sun,
unless they resign up their Bibles and Consciences together, and then worship
the Beast and the Whore of Babylon.


T. Brave rogues! indeed, most cruel to the weaker Sek! Is It true that they are
such Zealots as to carry on the War with Fire and Faggot yonder in Germany?


D. Most certainly; and that Fire is seven times fiercer than I can describe
it; insomuch that the poor Wretches whom they fry and roast, without pity of
Age or Sex, think Hell's broke loose, or that the last Conflagration is at
hand; and yet all the Monsieurs do, they say, is for the good of their
Religion; for this they burn and plunder Towns' and Countries, turn Cities into
Charnel-Houses, and Churches into Bonfires, dig and plough up Churchyards, rip
up the bigbelly'd, and drag the Dead about the Streets.


T. So that the Womb and the Crave, the Quick and the Dead, taste alike of
their inhumanity; and all this in Popish Countries too?


D. Yes, and much more; they ravish the Mother, strip the Father, and then kill
both for company; the Priest debauches the Daughter, and then locks her up for
his own use in a Cloister, and makes her next Relations maintain her: And for
all these Cruelties which they practice wherever they come, all the World has
now a Crow to pull with the Monsieur, and are resolved to pound him up, to
recover some satisfaction for all these Pranks.


T. LEWIS the GREAT, quoth'a; this is the Devil and all his Works. The reason
then that Papists forbid the Bible is, for that their practice is quite against
it: What, would they have these good qualities to recommend them to us here?
It Is much that people so well known, and so much hated, should still have the
Weathergage, and good success always for them: What, do they burn Popish
Churches too? Since there are no Bibles there to kindle their fury, or to feed
their flame? Prithee how comes the Priests to suffer it? and what becomes of
the Bells?


D. Why, it is no new thing for Turks and Tartars, and every Tool to fire a
Town; but Churches still escaped, till this French way of warring was found
out: besides, their Friend the Great Turk would not believe them to be in good
earnest, if they did not do something more than ordinary. As for the Priests,
they go shares, and have the Bells for their pains, which they sell to the
Gun-Founders, who melt them into Canonical Guns and Mortar-pieces; and the Owls
are made believe, that being Consecrated, they will do better execution against
Heretics.


T. The French indeed have seemed to use some Spell or Black Art in the case,
or how a vengeance could they have gulled their Neighbors of all those strong
places that opened to them so easily at their first appearance?


D. Ah, Tom, there are more ways to sink a Ship than one: the French often kill
with white Powder, that gives no report; their Artillery of late years have
been gilt, and instead of the Battering Ram, they have used the Golden Fleece;
their Silver Trumpers were turned into Silver Keys that had Wards to open all
the Locks in Germany; Brass, and Bell-mettle is not the surest for execution;
this Monsieur finds his Pistols of more force than his Culverins; and that few
Men of War, of what Rate soever, are proof against them: But if this Charm
fails, he works under ground, and employs Rogues and Thieves to steal and
betray Towns, or else to fire them; and then he has his Spies of all sizes and
Sexes with his Pensions and Presents; and over and above all, he has a little
gaudy Fly (called a French Miss) to bait his Hooks and Traps withal: And these
are but some of those many Links whereof the French Chain of Slavery is
composed.


T. But prithee, Dick, what Friends or Seconds has the Monsieur in all this
puther he makes in the World?


D. By me troth not many; some may fear, but none can love him, unless for his
Money; for like our Town-Bullies, he thrusts himself into all Quarrels; cuffs
the one, malls the other; and though none gets but Blows and bloody Noses, yet he
is still a winner; so that all know him too well to trust him, excepting his
singular good and only Friend the Great Turk, who is made believe the Half Moon
is made of French Cheese.


T. Bless us all! not trust the greatest King in the world, as I heard a French
Lackquey call him to other day. With all this huffing and hectoring he must
have some public Faith and common Honesty.


D. I Am afraid not any to spare; enough for his own turn; and when that is
served, he cares no further; whoever struts upon the Stilts of Tyranny and
Oppression, is no Slave to his Word; his Heart is Flint, his Forehead Brass,
and has no Bowels, nor sense of right or wrong; and thus the Monsieur breaks
Treaties to preserve the public quiet; steals Towns in time of Peace, to
prevent War; makes truce only to disarm his Neighbor; and thus all is Fish
that suits with his Convenience and Advantage.


T. I Am sure this would be to play the Canary, if we did so at Sea: One that
bubbles the Fatherless and Widow (as I heard he did the Intant King of Spain
and his Mother) I Have done with him; it is well we have a Ditch between us and
his Monsieurship; but prithee what is their opinion of us in England?


D. I Will promise thee, very mean; one of them tells the World in Print, we are
a sort of Animals that have no Faith, Religion, Honesty, or Justice amongst us;
that we are Cruel, Foolish, Gluttonous, and Proud to the highest deg^^^ that we
are great Braggers, little Doers, sit for no war^ Action, but for a rubber at
Cuffs, and the Bear-Garden, etc.


T. He could not well say worse in so few words; t^ have forgot (it seems) we
were once fit for someth^^^ when one or two of our Kings were Crowned at Par^^
Well, there is no love lost; I Am sure the Moors and all ^^^bary have the same
opinion of the French that we and Europe have; That the are Base and Perfidious
in their ^ture, false to their Word, Peace-breakers, Lustful, and Rev^^^^ful
beyond any Creatures, treacherous in their friendship, B^ and Unmerciful when
they are uppermost, cringing and faw^^^^ when they are down; in fine, a
Generation of Fiddlers and ^r^kemakers, and wandering remnants of the Itch and
(...) Baba Hamed, my Patroon, used to say, the French (...) were an Army of
Painted Flies, of much noise, and little stren^^^ that insensibly spread their
Maggots where ever they came, (...) that he hoped e're long to see the Vermin
confined to their (...) Country. And I hope that those who have almost sunk
(...) Great Turk himself, may yet bring his Friend by the But to return to our
point, what is thy opinion of this F^ Have they good Gunners?


D. Let me see, how stands the wind? it veres Eastern where it stood so long
before and after the late Engagement, that scarce a French man but had bewrayed
him (...) (what with their new Wines, and more for fear) lest (...) English and
Dutch should have born upon them; for let (...) tell thee, Tom, they came not
to fight, if they could h^^^ done their job by any other slight of ^and; they
are ready at Pimper le Pimp as at Fire and Gunpowder. (...) for the Men, they
are poor, three-penny faced Fellows, go Legged, shrivel'd shoulders, feeble
Knee'd, and look m^ like Tailors and Garden-weeders than Se^men; and ca^ we but
once to grapple, thee and I could clear a wh^^^ Deck of them; they look very
squeamish, as if they ^^lished not Salt Water, but would rather be any where
th^^ at home, to pay two thirds of their daily labor to the gre^^ Leviathan.
As for their Gunners, they are Men trained (...) in the wildfire Schools at
Thoulon and Breast, which funish'd those Masters of the Art of Burning to
Genoua, Algie^^ and Germany, and sent us that famous Guy Fauz Gunner (...) the
late Powder plot; and they were all Disciples of that Ign^tius Chief of the
Jesuits, who (his Name tells thee) w^^ himself a Fire-master.


T. What, came they not to fight, say thou? Or wou^^ they have blinded our
eyes with Gold-dust, and wheedle the Mayors in the West (as they did the Mayor
of Messing with a dose of Louis d'Ors to deliver up their Towns? Bu^ these
Monsieurs, like Old Nick, draw Men in, and the leave them in the lurch; and no
Creature so despicable (...) he that betrays his Country a la mode de France:
And remember in my last Straits-Voyage, how scornfully ever Cur up'd with his
Leg and pissed upon those turn-coat Sicilian^ who swallowed the Yellow Bait,
and suffered the Monsieur to cach their whole Kingdom in his Net. God save old
England! I hope yet to see them taught an English Jigg, and cut many a cross
Caper 'tween this and the Lands End (...) Ha, up-Boys! all hands abaft! we must
whip the Monsieur out of our Seas, and make him, like a Crab, crawl backwards
to his own Creeks.


D. God save our King and Queen! our wooden Walls, our true Sons of Neptune,
and our honest Tar-Boys; I hope to see the day yet Monsieur must shrug and
cringe (as formerly) for leave to fish for a few Soals in our Seas.


T. Well fare Queen Bess, that kept his Nose to the Grindstone, that he durst
not lay the Carcass of a Ship upon the Stocks without her permission; and well
fare that day that Forty English Ships fought Eighty French, and hamstrung them
so, that none escaped to carry the news of their defeat.


D. Cheer up, Lad; we'll pay them now I hope for their good service in 1672, in
standing by, and looking on without firing a Gun.


T. Ay, and for that cast of their Office, in firing Ships, Guns, and all at
Chatham in 1666; to say nothing of that Firing between the Monument and
Temple Bar, which (if all be true) proceeded from the warm Zeal and Affection
that these French Fire-masters bore to our City; which may perhaps yet find a
time to return them their Complement. But hold! here comes our Noble Captain,
aboard whom we are to serve.


D. I Will swear he promises well; he treads firm, and has the plain, bold look
of an English Seaman.


T. And I Will swear he is no Up-start Sea-weed; he is no sucking Tar; none of
those Meal-pated, Whifling Damnee's, but is as well a seasoned Lad as any in
the Fleet. And so let us clap more Sails to our heels, else he will be aboard
before us.


LONDON: Printed for Randal Tailor near Stationers' Hall. 1690.


