A DIALOGUE BETWEEN A Monkey in the Old Bailey AND AN Ape in High Holbourn.
Monkey. What Is the matter Brother? you will not speak of late without Anger and
Passion ushers in the Discourse, I am sorry my Cracking of Nuts disturbs your
Repose.


Ape. The Devil take your Cracking for me, it may easily be heard to the upper
end of Holbourn: A Gentleman cannot be a little Apishly disposed in
Propositions, and Observations, or the like, but presently its swallowed into
the All-fogies of your Courant: the noise has spoiled, I am sure, many a
Friday mornings Nap, after whole Nights Observatoring.


Monkey. Why? Has not Monkeys as much privilege for to write Courants for
money to buy Nuts, as Apes Observators for money to buy Aples.


Ape. No, you unmannerly Monkeys-Face, I think not, is there no difference
between the Shepherd and his Dog? an Ape is a Gentleman, and by virtue of his
Descent claims a great many Privileges as his Birthright.


Monkey. As much Manners as your Worship, and as well Desended, if that be a
sufficient tolleration for Scribbling; nay, I never heard but a Monkey had the
precedence, if not for Gentillity, yet for Honesty, for the world knows you are
a sort of Creature that will be imitating: I believe the Gentleman pretended,
is but one of your Apish tricks; but pray wherein lies your peculiar privilege
above the Monkey?


Ape. That it may be a Correction to your Sawciness, I Will tell you: My Patent,
like some sort of Pardons, was stamped by Creation, and is of so extensive a
Nature, that I have liberty to Fidle all sorts of Tunes, either Regal or
Oliverian, to speak all sorts of Tongues, either Italian or English, to be of
any Religion, Christian or Insidel, Protestant or Papist, to keep any Company,
either Masters or Apprentices, to be dispensed with as to Ecclesiastical
Cannons, in going to Church once a Year, instead of once a Month: to Ape any
Office either in Church or State, to give Rules of Guidance not only to
Ecclesiastical, but Secular Politics too: these and ten thousand more I could
give you, but I must observe my Vow of Mortification: my sit is coming, I begin
to swell, in a word know then I am the Center in which all Actions and Public
Resolutions for the Service of the Government, and what is done injurious to
the King, or his Friends, meet.


Monkey. Cheap enough; who would wrong so Innocent a Soul? Did not I tell you,
Roger, the property of an Ape: because the Printers Wife Paints her Face,
therefore you must: a person of Honor had a Pardon come out of Paradise,
therefore forsooth your Patent must be one of the six days Work too; but the
Lawyers tell me that odd name was given the Child, because the Office of
Baptism was performed after the Presbyterian way, without Godfathers, it being
a Basketted thing, found at the door, and like to be kept by the great
Parish-Stock, the Churchwarden of St. Martins was not very curious in the
thing, but your Patent is to my knowledge of a different Nature, having past the
usual Offices, as Billings-Gate, Newgate, S -- House, Westminster Hall,
Sadlers-Hall, Doctors Commons, etc. Oh me and St. Giles's Church too, (no
further I hope that way yet) nay I have heard of a Commission that you have to
seize all the Discourse of the Westphalia Folks, and all the talk over a Glass
of Wine, as Prohibited Goods: Ah poor Pugg, look to thy self, thou know the
man bragged he had power to seize Monkeys too: but Brother now I see your sits
almost over, either do it your self or give me leave to Read a few Lines more
of that Famous Patent.


Ape. Pray do, the more you look, the worse you like; there is enough to make
all the Monkeys in the world tremble!


Monkey. The more Danger the more Honor: Nothing Venture nothing Have: Oh
Heavens what omissions you made, certainly you are the happiest man in the
world, both for Privileges and Prerogative! What, to write any thing, whether
True or False! to Abuse any person whether deserved or not: to say White is
Black, or Black is White, to obtain an end: to say Popery is Protestantism, or
Protestantism Popery; to write one week in Vindication of one Party, and for
diversion sake the next Monday Morning fall upon the persons Vindicated; to
persuade the people that its the Interest of Protestants to be very cautious of
entertaining any ill opinion of the Genteel Papists: to be a Commonshore for
Contribution to empty it self into, as well from -- House, as Ely-House, to
write Histories of Conspiracies, to Correct the Plotters mistakes in their own
Discoveries: to perform sometimes the Priests Office in Marrying Popery and
Presbyterianism together, and making a modest Son of the Church Father too;
calling Parliaments the Rabble of the Nation, and representing the Councels and
Debates of their House as Ridiculous as the Consult of Addressers at the
Wonder! Calling Lord Mayors and Courts of Aldermen a company of Impudent
Fellows: and Zeal against Popery, Faction and Rebellion: Arraigning the
Government, Appeals to the Rabble, and the like: to justify the Papist as the
Loyal Race of mankind, and wipe off Plots and Conspiracies, as Aspersions cast
upon those men: and to excuse all by virtue of that Honest Maxim, It is my
Trade, I am paid for what I do.


Ape. Stay, stay, the old Distemper, my Tympany, begins again to seiz my
Spirits, time is too short a space to Read it in, I Will give it you in short: I
can be what I will, do what I will speak what I will, write what I will, abuse
who I will, commend who I will, and all this without Reason, Sense, Honesty, or
Conscience: under this one pretense of Loyalty, and being serviceable to the
Church.


Monkey. Its well you stopped me (I began to tire)
And gave me breath a little to admire.

Ape. What is your Monkeyship of the Poetical Tribe, a company of Treacherous
Rascals: you shall be sent to Oxford to Crack Nutts: to see a Loyal Gentleman
invested with a Garment of many Colors, is that a thing so much to be admired
at: I believe it rather an Object of Envy than Admiration.


Monkey. You are mistaken, I Envy neither the great Chair, nor the peaceable
thing that sits in it, but if I see a Fools Coat upon a Knaves back, and admire
a little, who can hinder me? perhaps I have a mind to give my Eyes a Fairing in
an Ocular glut upon so pertty an Object, for it falls out sometimes, that he
that is Andrew upon the Stage, is Master of the Show in the Booth; or which is
all one, he that is a Papist about the Middle-Row, is a Son of the Church as by
Law Established, at St. Giles's; or if you consider him the other way, by that
time he comes in Fanchurchstreet, by his Arrival with Dr. Fell at the Hague,
(you know the Sea is Purgative) its petty Treason then to question the
sincerity of the Conversion, or a kind of making the Government hold up its
hand at the Bar. But why Brother should you be against the Poetical Tribe?
Methinks this a kind of Reflection upon Marchiment Needham, and your Masters
Servant in Salisbury Court, a kind of Arraigning the Muses, and the Menial
Misses too: for my part I had rather go to Oxford to Crack Nuts, than to Rome
for Filbirds, my Dinner upon a Courant in the Old Bailey, pleases me as well as
Dining upon Observators at Sadlers-Hall, I had as live write for men, as Boys,
and keep them Company when I have done; and have as much Fortune as my Standish
will hold, to stand by them.


Ape. You Uncharitable and unmannerly Rascal, would I had but an Inquisition
for your sake, and my great Chair in power, I would soon make you fell the
weight of a Sentence that would sire you and your Courant about your Eears:
what do you take me to be Jack on both sides, one half a Protestant, and the
other a Papist?


Monkey. A Wit, a wit! An excellent hand at guessing I Will Vow, he has Robbed me
of the very Secrets of my Soul. A Jack-an-Apes on both side? yes hang me if
that be not my thoughts, and that the left is the Romanist, because it is the
Heart side; and you must not be affronted at my Opinion, for I am under the
Conduct of one Mr. L. in the matter; inferior things you know must be guided,
whether in Ecclesiastical or Civil Affairs. When Catholics has spoke
suspiciously of your Sincerity in the Cause, you always had my good word. I
challenge spoke suspiciously of your Sincerity in the Cause, you always had my
good word. I challenge the most unbelieving man of them all to produce one
single instance, that ever any Ape in the World spoke a word in his whole Life
against the Church of Rome, and I am sure you are too much a Gentleman to act
Retrograde to your own Nature; for most of the public Villainies charged upon
the men of that Communion since the Discovery of the Plot, you have by a
delicate kind of Habeas Corpus, removed the Guilt, and with Pen in one hand,
and Paper in the other, Aped behind the Dissenters Asses, and at the Lappet of
his Coat fixed the whole Information, and so by a STRANGE kind of Metamorphosis
his next Excrements becomes a Plot against the Government.


Ape, What need all these innumerations, Sirrah? for all this is within the
power of my Commission, that since I know their thoughts better than they do
themselves, why may not I be permitted to speak their words, and to speak any
thing for such too, and then Beacon like warn the people of the danger, and if
the don't come in quickly with their Contributions as well as others; I will
send a Regiment or Two of Observators amongst them, to proceed to Millitary
Execution, and then you shall see them Void nothing but Axes Hatches, and
Gibbets, and the like Instruments of Death and Destruction: but who can charge
the Genteel and Fashionable Religion of the Romanists, with any such Practice?
they are too much Gentlemen to be Enemies to the King, or the Established
Religion: to be concerned in Plots, and Conspiracies against the Government in
such low and dishonourble things as Burnings and Massacres: these actions more
suit the Genius of the Mechanical Presbyterian, Dunghil-bred Dissenter, or the
Clownish Conformist, that never consulted nothing but the English Bible, Bishop
Usher's Body of Divinity, the Dutch Anotations, or so, but those who have
denoted themselves Disciples to Bellarmin, Thomas Acquinas, with the rest of
those great and Heroic Souls, and have had their constant Conversation among
Gentlemen, you may as well persuade me that Endimions Palace is made of Green
Cheese, or that Vesper once stole a Flitch of Bacon out of a Finchly Chimney,
and carried it clear away from the poor Rustic into his own Region, as to talk
me into a belief, that those accomplished Gentlemen of the Church of Rome,
should be guilty of such Clownish and homespun Deportments as the late noise
makes them, a man may sweep away this Dust, without doing any harm to Pavement,
Altar, Chancel, nay Isle, Belfrey or Steeple.


Monkey. Or Weathercock either. Ha boy Hal, well done Roger, Cokes him Pugg, is
this one of the Tunes that was played before Oliver? This is a Genteel come off
indeed, The History of the Plot, The Dissenters Sayings, Richard and Baxter,
Ephraim and Ezekiel; The Case put are Idle and Ridiculous things to this:
here is an exact account of the growth of Knavery indeed; Certainly none but
Colleges Grand Jury can question such Evidence as this: here is the Doctrine
of Probability all-over, and the Mystery of Jesuitism unvailed; without
question, this was blown out of a Roman-Nose: I don't question, had thou but
the Phanaticks in thy power, they should all be cut out into two penny Chops,
and Stued in a Philip and Mary Pipkin; do not think a good Honest Churchman,
by way of Addition, would not make the Broth and Sippets the better? I believe
to suck boths Bones would have an equal sweetness in your Palate, but yet I
commend thee, Roger, (for its pity but the Devil should have his Due) its an
act of kindness to give them warning, thou scornest to let the Gentry be run
down, being with in the Lines of Communication your self, if one may run the
hazard of believing you: for one of the Gadburian Tribe in the Ancient Bailey
(a good Care-full Fellow, tells the world he has Calculated your Nativity, and
that a three penny Planet Ruled the Roast, others say it is because of an Apish
Habit of lolling, that your Doublet is so often out at Elbows: Its pity truly
that a Gentleman should be born under such a Beggarly Influence, and under the
inevitable control of such Apish and destructive Gestures: but an Ape will be
an Ape, what says Scoging? who can reasonaby expect Oats in the Excrements,
when the Horse never eat any thing else but Hay and Straw? this is the
strenuousest Argument against the Validity of the Evidence of a Popish Plot,
that ever the world yet heard of what Clownish and unmannerly Generation of men
those are that asperse Gentlemen at this Rate who have parts and Breeding of
their own, and Persons of Quality to their Parents? Men that have such Brave
and Generous Principles Hereditary to them, to charge them with Plots, is a
little hard, I confess, and upon a due Consideration of the Premises, I am a
little wavering in the matter my self: (here is Observatoring for you, Care)
enough to stop your Mouth to Eternity; but I know you will say, It Is either a
Lestrange or a Strange-Lee, and if you do I cant help it, Droll and Impudence
are of as comfortable Importance to the Gent. as any Canterbury Divine ever had
to his Back: well you have brought the People of the Church of Rome off with
Drums beating and Colors Flying, I have nothing more to say, I am forced to
yield to the Strength of Argument: But before we part Prithee lets have your
Opinion about this new or Protestant Plot, do you think Its Real or no?


Ape. This Question Tickles my Fancy, indeed I waited for it all this while,
for you must know I have a Double Obligation upon me to bring one off, and the
other on, but when I talk of a Protestant Plot, I would not be misunderstood in
the Definition, as if it was to be attributed solely to the Dissenters from the
Established Church; for we have a sort of Unthinking Churchmen now a days,
understanding not Articles aright, think themselves in Charity oblidged to have
Respectful thoughts of their Dissenting Brethren: that make a great stir about
the Virtues of Love and Peace which the Gospel enjoins. And look upon it as
absolutely necessary for the securing the Protestant Religion that a good
Correspondence be maintained betwixt the two parties, so that I would be
understood in this Conjunctive signification in the matter, for we have People
under the Denomination of moderate Sons of the Church, that I cannot in
Conscience Discharge, they carry it so fairly to the Dissenters, and are in
many particulars worse; and to make the matter more plain, I must take up the
Clergy too, that make too great Noise upon the fifth of November, and will not
pay their Contribution money to a Gentleman that spends himself for the service
of the Church, who to Render him the more Capable is obliged to Dwell after
the other end of Town Grandeur, and I believe between these two, a thing called
the Protestant Plot was begotten, and none but a sort of Infidels will question
it; for my part, it has found a Room in my Creed already, and I shall make it
my business to maintain the Truth of it to the last drop of Ink in my Standish.


Monkey. This is brave indeed! Gallantly spoke, I Will assure you: This makes a
very considerable Addition to your former Accomplishments, and in my opinion
sets you down very near the Pale of Perfection, I mean that side which you say
Dissenters finished their Course on. Certainly he that taught an Ape to hold a
Candle, was mighty ingenious, for then the Creature was made a kind of Luminary
to the World, and was in his kind very serviceable. I knew, Roger, how to
please thy Fancy, for I found thee always expressing a great deal of pleasure
when some occasion was found of exposing the Protestant Interest, though the
thing quarrelled at, never was heard of before. The Protestants are mightily
beholden to you for your good Service indeed; and they are mighty ungrateful
that do not publicly own it, as well as privately contribute for it: For my
part, was I not well acquainted with your Nature and Temper, I could scarce
believe any Creature upon Earth could ever have arrived at that degree of
Impudence as to pretend himself a Gentleman to whom the Church of England is so
much in debted for his good Offices he has done her. If you had said the Church
of Rome, I would have soon believed you, for there is no man in the whole world
that is acquainted with your Pamphlets and the Circumstances of the Papist in
the present conjuncture, but will be obliged in Respect to Truth, to own that
your Scribbling of late has been as Serviceable to those sort of men as any
thing in the whole World could be. As several of the Learned and Reverend of
the Conforming Clergy has, as occasions have presented, Declared, and it is no
acquittal from the Clergy to object, that you have wrote in the vindication of
the Established Church, for I look upon that merely as a Cloack for Malicious
Insinuations to pass the more unsuspectedly; you do not, because you Durst not
do that; besides its inconsistent with the Cause you have espoused that you
should, for under the notion of being a Stickler for the Church, the work is
Accomplished, Persons being apt to Conclude that such a Person Designs no Ill,
that makes a Noise about the Church, though there is few Persons whose
Conversation has been any thing public, but has heard as much from the most
Professed Papist, now I think never the better of such a man in this Commending
Humor, because I know him to be such an avowed Enemy to the Church, that
nothing would please him better than to see her as well as the Dissenters
partakes in the same Calamitous Subversion, though for the present it comports
not with his Interest to Discover the true Sentiments of his Soul: But the
Hypocrite some way or other is usually a self Discoverer; what Labor and Pains
has a few Hackney Rogues in Print taken to Evince the Reality of a Protestant
Conspiracy, expressing thereby the Delightfulness of their Souls, to Endeavor
to Impress such A belief upon the minds of men and in doing this, what
Insinuations they give us that the Popish Plot is a little questionable, and
that we must not be too forward in giving a believing Entertainment to the
Evidence about one; but on the Protestant side, every Undutiful word of a
heated Brain must without Control be Represented as a Plot against the
Government: Now can any Person of Consideration with Respect to the Protestant
Interest, think these men any Friends to it, who make it their Business to
Impair the Credit of the Popish Conspiracy, and to Advance the other: And to
muster up the most notorious Lies and Falshoshoods to Confirm the Story: Well
Brother, let me but ask one question more and I will trespass upon your
patience no farther at present; What is the Reason the French King is so much
in your Favor that you pass over his Proceedings against the French
Protestants with so kind an Observator?


Ape. Because A Company of Whiggs tell such Improbable Stories of the Cruelty
that is shown them, that none but A man with four Legs could ever be Guilty of.


Monkey. What An unpar allel'd Error have I been in all this while! I always
thought Queen Mary and the Rest of the Popish Princes with us that was so Cruel
in Burning and Destroying so many Protestants had been Persons that had but two
Legs and two Hands a Piece: I had the like Opinion Concerning Bloody Bishop
Bonner, Gardener, and the rest of the Murdering Clergy of those times, that so
Barbdrously used so many Protestants Ministers and others amongst us, I always
thought the same of all those Massacrating People, (the Popish Priests and
others) in Ireland, that so Inhumanely murdered so many thousand Men Women and
Children: And the Popes too; (that are a Sort of Creatures, as the Papist say,
neither Men nor Gods) at whose Charge all those Savage Murders of Protestants
in all Ages are to be Laid, which may justly make that Religion odious to all
Mankind; I say, I always thought that these Infallible Murderers of Protestants
had not no more Hands and Legs neither: And that you may have a French Story
too, I believed the same of those that Carried on the Masacre at Paris. What
art a French Pentioner too, Roger? is this also Contribution work? I had
thought you had only under-taken the Vindication of our English Catholics: But
I see I was mistaken, I hope suddenly, to see the French Kings pretenses in
Flanders and Germany, justified at a Dialogue between a Dutch Whigg and a
French Tory; well I Will say but one word to take off the Fears and Jealousies if
the People, and then bid you adieu; and it is only this, That they would
Entertain no fear of a Papist, nor a Popish Successor, till they see one that
has four Legs and four Hands, for he that has but two a piece can never
beable to hurt them.


Ape. No more they cannot; and none but A Company of Ignorant Whiggs will fear
it.


London: Printed for John Johnson. 1681.


