IMPRIMATUR.

Rob. Midgley.
March 22. 1685/6.
A DIALOGUE BETWEEN Philiater and Momus, Concerning a late Scandalous PAMPHLET
CALLED The Conclave of Physicians.

A Whip for the Ass, and a Rod for the Fool's Back.

LONDON, Printed for Walter Kettilby at the Bishop's Head in St Paul's
Churchyard, 1686.

modern book plate Academioe Gantabrigiensis Liber


A DIALOGUE BETWEEN Philiater and Momus, Concerning a late scandalous Pamphlet
called The Conclave of Physicians.
Philiater. THIS many a day I have had a Wambling Desire to chatt with you,
Momus. And you ought to allow your self a Play-day sometimes, and be as merry
as a Cricket: for to be always sour and upon the fret, must needs make your
life wonderfully sad and dismal.


Momus. You are much mistaken, Philiater, and are but little acquainted with my
constituent Principles. I was born as sharp as Vinegar, and sour as Verjuice;
and do hope to become as piquant and corrosive as Aqua fortis.


Phil. Nay then indeed I was egregiously mistaken. You are, it seems, a
particular Jumble of Constitution, and are neither Fish, nor Flesh, nor good
Red Herring.

But still, Does not this crossgrain'd Temper of yours make you very uneasy
and unquiet within your self? A continual state of Hostility with your
Neighbors, and that without intermission or any the least truce, and the never
giving your Thoughts respite, must certainly tire you out in time, and I fear
impair your Health. But especially a Civil War I do look upon to be the most
destructive and inhumane, the most dreadful and detested of all others. And men
had much better to suffer quietly abundance of Incoveniencies (which the World
ever provides of some kind or other to all conditions) than to hazard the most
deplorable Extremities and Miseries, into which Civil War does constantly bring
them.


Mom. Alas! You are as much out in your Politics, as in your Physic. Neither
the Happiness of my mind does depend upon domestic Peace, nor the Health of my
Body upon being cocker'd with March-panes, and Sugar-plums; I have no sweet
Tooth to please. You cannot but have heard that in some Countries they do feed
upon Poisons, and they are said to turn into good Nourishment: Nay there are
Cannibals in the World who can feed upon one another; and man's Flesh is never
the worse meat, because it may disagree with your squeamish Stomach. I would
have you to know that Jarrs and Contentions, Revilings and Calumnies, are the
only Music that tickles my Ears, and I do as naturally delight in Mischief and
in Civil Animosities and Quarrels, as Soldiers of Fortune do in Declarations of
War between one Kingdom and another.


Phil. If that be your Temper, Momus, pray what think you then of the Author of
a late Pamphlet, called The Conclave of Physicians, which is a piece so foul
and scurrilous, and full of gross Detraction against the Faculty he is of, that
all persons unconcerned, who have any share of Goodness or Manners, do blush at
the reading it. But the worse it is, it seems, the better you like it.


Mom. Why, you have named the Man of all men that I do the most admire. I have
inspired this Author with the fullness of my Daemoniacal Spirit. Nay, I have so
far possessed him, and he me, that we two are grown to be all one. Never was
there such a Friendship between two Brothers growing out of the same Trunk, and
making together one Complete Monster: never was there known such a Discordia
concors, as between Momus and that Author.

I could name other scurrilous Pamphleteers, who have done their best to
inflame mankind, to misrepresent and speak evil of Dignities and Societies, and
on whom I have poured some small portion of my Evil Spirit: but this Author is
my Beloved, my prime Minister, my dear Darling, and choicest Instrument of
Malediction, insomuch that whatsoever he says I assent unto it readily, and
having my self guided his Pen in the Treatise you speak of, I am bound to own
it as written by my self; and he will not, or ought not to take it amiss, if I
take upon the His Defense in my own name, against your silly Exceptions.


Phil. Agreed then, Momus, let us debate that matter as it deserves. For as to
the Numerical Author himself, I must needs say, I never saw his Face, nor ever
entertained one word of Discourse with him, nor ever had to do with him in any
thing whatsoever, either great or small, good or bad. So that I fear you will
show your self much more passionate and prejudiced for him, than I can well be
thought to be against one I know only by his Writings and by Hearsay. Indeed I
have as great a Zeal for Truth, and for the Public Good, as you can have for
Calumny, and for Public Confusion. If I had not, I should be more prudent and
careful of my Peace and Quiet, than to engage thus with one, from whom nothing
can be expected but throwing of Dirt and Filth, and a continual spawn of
Ribauldry. However I shall spare personal Reflections for the present, more
than the Book obliges me to; I shall not rake up diverse passages of his Life,
nor examine his Morals, as he does very maliciously those of the Conclavists,
but reserve Matters of that kind, or lay them aside according as he mends his
Manners, having never received any particular or personal provocation from him.
And indeed it is exceedingly disingenuous and unworthy a Liberal Education;
besides that I could never wish any Personal III to another man, because he
differs from me in judgment. It is in order to his Amendment that this Rod is
designed, and a little to prevent, if not cure his Itch, or rather Leprosy of
Scribbling. But, Momus, seeing you will personate this Author, tell me what
moved you to write this Pamphlet, and therein so grievously to traduce the
Faculty you were bred to?


Mom. You are not to expect Reasons for every thing I say or do. Ask the reason
why Fire burns, why Storms and Tempests do roar and make a noise, why the Negro
is black, why that which is heavy sinks downwards, why that which is light
flies upwards, and why light inconsiderate Heads do fly at, and revile their
Superiors. It is their Nature to do so, and it is mine to do as I do.


Phil. But certainly you must have had some Reason more than ordinary for such
keen and deadly Animosities as you express toward Physicians. The Tigre and
Panther and other Wild Beasts have a hungry Stomach to plead for them, when
they kill and destroy, and seize upon their prey; but I suppose you will not
own that it is for Bread and necessary Sustenance, that you make this
lamentable havoc of men's Good Names, and expose so many Grave and Learned men
in Fools-coats, and Antic Shapes, to be baited and hooted at by the Mobile.


Mom. Yes, I have Reason enough, and many good Reasons, why I have thus taken
in hand my Pen of Defiance, dipped it in Gall, and writ the most bitter things I
could invent. If the Laws did not restrain me, there is nothing so horrid or
dreadful, that I should fear to commit against them all, nay, against all
Associated Physicians upon the Earth: And after I had glutted my self in their
destruction, and satiated my Revenge with an entire extinction of that Faculty,
I would be content to die in so good a Cause, and then I should, like a true
Stoic, laugh even in Phalaris his Bull.


Phil. Your passion, Momus, is raised too high; your Choler is all a fire. The
Physician, if consulted, would advise to take away a good quantity of Blood;
for doubtless you have the highest Inflammation of it that ever was known. This
is not like a common Heart-burning: Unless it be your Temper, as they say of
the Salamander, to live in the Fire, you would certainly consume your self with
so intense a degree of Heat. Indeed you must cool a little, or else there can
be no discoursing with you.


Mom. For once, Philiater, I Will try to conquer my self in some measure. In a
violent Storm, I confess, it is prudent to take down the Sails, lest the Vessel
be oversett: The Rudder, I know, can be of no use in a Hurricane; Therefore let
the Winds cease their Fury; the Sea grow calm again as soon as you will, and
you shall find me guide my Discourse like an experienced and skilful Pilot. And
without any further Simile's of Fire or Water, or any thing else, I will easily
satisfy any intelligent Judge, why I writ the said Book you are so much
offended at.

Know then, that when I came to this Town to practice, I neglected the entering
my self into the College, as you call it. I expected at first to be courted and
sought to by them, as knowing my own Worth, and the Excellency of my Education
above that of any the best of the Members of this same College; and therefore
it would have been an Honor to them, and a great condescension in me, to have
been admitted into the best Capacity among them. By degrees, as I grew into
Fame and Renown, and so was called to the assistance of the better Sort (who
will not be persuaded to die without Consulting more than one Physician, let
his Name be never so famous, or his Skill never so great) there was a necessity
of my meeting several of them one time or other, and I being a Stranger to
them, they presumed to tax me ever and anon whether I were of the College; now
I being forced to answer still in the Negative, they would often insinuate this
Foolery into my Patients sick Head so far that I soon lost by this means the
squeezing many a wealthy Patient, and instead of becoming admired for my
profound abilities, I was scoffed at, and rejected, as being, forsooth, not of
the College.


Phil. And why would you not submit to the College's Examination, which is very
candid and gentile, I am sure; by the undergoing of which, you might easily
have avoided that exception, and been Hail fellow well met, with those naughty
Inquirers?


Mom. I scorn to be examined by such as they, or by any Physician living.


Phil. I know no reason, why you should conceit your self a better man than
every body else, who took your Degree abroad, and who was dubbed a Doctor at
seventeen Years of Age: A time of Age, or rather of Youth, beyond which the
Boys do commonly stay two or three Years at our great Schools, such as
Westminster and Winchester, before they set footing to the University. And if
you had been kept longer at School, when you were pertly Commencing Doctor, you
might probably have learnt to be less malapert, than thus to prefer your Dearly
Beloved Self before all the Learned Doctors of our two Famous Universities, who
are taught better things, and who in order to their Degrees are fain to stay
twelve or fourteen Years at least, before they are suffered to take it, and by
that means they do become much riper in Years and in Understanding, than you,
who, Casus Med. Chapter p. 142.
as your self tells us, In making the Petit Tour of France, did in your way
take your Degrees in Physic, both of Bachelor and Doctor. It seems then you
alighted from your Horse, I hear at Leyden (to whose Honor be it spoken,)
walked to the Physick-Schools, and took those Degrees, one with one hand, and
the other with the other. For it is plain by your description, your first and
chief business was to make the Petit Tour; your lesser and secondary Affair was
to take along with you those Degrees, which indeed had much better have been
left behind, than to have caused all this Strife and Animosity about their
Worth and Precedence. But how you came to find Leyden, a Town in Holland, to
lie in your way, as you were making the Petit Tour of France, is a Mystery that
I cannot comprehend. For all Travelers that ever I met with do assure me that
they did use to frolic it down the River Loire, when they did make this famous
Tour. But you have a singular art to find London in Paris, and Paris in Venice;
you can find nothing but Ignorance in the Learned, and Learning to overflow in
Changelings and Idiots; you can make a Mountain of a Molehill, turn Light into
Darkness, and by some wonderful skill in Magic can confound the Order of
Nature. Again, those your Youthful, Foreign, and light-come light-go Degrees,
did cost much less Pains, Expense, or Time, than our Grave and Manly
Vniversity-Degrees use to do. Wherefore I am amazed why you should thus
overvalue those your foreign Degrees, which our Laws do allow no Privileges
to, but rather restrain under a due subjection, and at the same time you should
thus undervalue the staple and substantial Degrees of Oxford and Cambridge,
which our Laws do highly and deservedly favor. When you were matriculated at
Oxford, you might remember that you took an Oath, which because a Customary
thing, I fear, you have quite forgotten. By that Oath you solemnly swore to
promote, as much as in you should lie, the Honor and Good of that University.
Besides, wherever you took your Degrees in the making your Petit Tour, you
could not but take Hippocrates his Oath. You did then swear, Per Deum
Omnipotentem, quod sancte Vitam and Artem tuam conservaveris, By Almighty God,
that you would live, and exercise the Art of Physic, like a Good man. You did
then likewise swear, Quod quae inter curandum videris aut audieris, imo etiam
ad medicandum non adhibitus, in communi hominum vita cognoveris, ea siquidem
efferre non contulerit, tacebis: and tanquam arcana apud te continebis. Hoc
igitur jusjurandum tibi integre servanti, and non confundenti, contingat and
vita and art feliciter frui, and apud omnes homines in perpetuum gloriam tuam
celebrari. Transgredienti autem, and pejeranti, his contraria eveniant. That
what things you should see or hear in your Practice of Physic, nay even where
you are not called upon as a Physician, what you shall happen to know in the
common conversation of men, if it be not convenient to divulge them abroad, you
shall not divulge them, (...), as judging such things fit never to be once
mentioned. Therefore according as you keep this Oath inviolably, and make no
breach of it, you beseech God to grant, that you may enjoy a comfortable Life,
and have a successful Practice, and that you may be held in esteem among men as
long as you live, and be famous to future Ages. But that if you violate, and go
contrary to this Oath, you wish all evil on the contrary to your self. Thus I
have given you some part of your Oath in Latin, because you took it in Latin
not in Greek. And I have rendered the words into as plain and proper English as
the true Sense of the Original would bear. Now, Momus, tell me soberly, have
you no Remorse upon your Mind, no Stings of a guilty knawing Conscience, for
that you have so publicly acted contrary to the Tenor of this Oath, for the
writing such wicked Invectives against the Faculty of Physic, and for your
thus divulging not only things fit to be concealed, but maliciously exposing
them in the worst and blacker colors in which your Invention could contrive to
draw them?


Mom. Thou art too weak to dive into my Politics, or to apprehend the solidity
and firmness of my Temper. My heart is past relenting, past admitting poor
Peccavi's, it is not sophisticated with Gumms and Lachrymae, A Stone used in
Physic tried that way.
but is hard as Stone, and impenetrable to the test and pricks of a red-hot
Needle. Do thou think Preachments, or doelful Stories will now mollify it?
The tender Virgin indeed has much ado to get over the first great Fault, and
when she has at last yielded after a long resistance, the poor creature is full
of confusion and terror. But when once she is arrived to the audacity and
courage of a Common Notorious Strumpet, she is then past sorrow and repentance,
and little less than an absolute Miracle can reclaim her into some degrees of
her former natural Modesty. And so the shame-sac'd Youth, who has been bred in
a virtuous Country Family, when he comes first to Town, and enters into one of
our Academies for Education, he cannot but keep good hours, and is enticed or
dragged to a Brothel House, like a Bear to the Stake; but after a little
initiation into the Mysteries of Debauchery, all his discourse shall be
flourished with Dam'mees, he brings them out with a good grace; he proclaims
aloud in the Playhouse how many Claps he has got already, nay, he shall make
himself, if possible, ten times filthier than he really is, and glory most in
that which formerly he would have blushed to think of.


Phil. But yet methinks the Laws of our Country, which have long empowered and
established the College of Physicians, should be some Motive to persuade you,
that it is better and more prudent to enter into the Union of that Learned
Body, than to continue thus withoutdoors, indistinguishable in the wretched and
contemptible Herd of Quacks, Mountebanks, Wise-Women, Astrologers, and other
ignorant or impudent Impostors.


Mom. I have been diverse years at absolute Defiance with them and their Laws; I
have provoked, nay worried them with unpardonable Indignities and Defamations:
in a word, I have never feared to encounter the most powerful and celebrated of
them all; and to this day I have stood and kept my ground, no one of them
daring to enter the lists, to engage publicly with me. And do you now think I
have any reason to be timorous, or to startle at their idle Laws? No, they know
their own weakness, and are conscious to themselves what a folly they should
commit in contending with me at points of Law.


Phil. I know not what cunning you may have to evade the force of their Laws.
but I have heard it confidently asserted, that never any Empirick yet, whom the
College has thought fit to prosecute, could make his Defense so good against
their Power, but that at last he was forced to shoot the pit and run for it, or
else was reduced to very great Extremities.


Mom. I hope you will not range me among those little Empiricks, whom I scorn
as much as the Conclavists themselves. Read the Description of my Education in
my Casus Medico-Chirurgicus, read it thoroughly, and with attention, and you
will find me to be somebody; and not a contemptible, creeping Empirick. I
defy them again and again, I laugh and grin at them all in a lump. They deal
with me at Law!


Phil. But really, bold Sir, it is very unfitting that so many swarms of
Empiricks, and illegal Practisers, as do nowadays pester this great City,
should be suffered, as they do, to murder and destroy the King's Subjects, and
the College not call them to account for it; as they did in times past. The
whole Nobility, and the flower of the English Gentry do spend some part of
their time in this Metropolis; their Wives and Children are many of them here
trained up and educated, and every body cannot distinguish between a Ninny and a
man of Sense, between an Empirick and a true Physician.


Mom. For my part, I see no difference between the Learned and the Illiterate
Empirick. Put them in two Scales, and you will find the one weigh as much too
heavy, as the other does too light. The one does often do as much good at a
venture, as the other does mischief deliberately, and through ill Principles.


Phil. I perceive then you are wiser, in your own opinion at least, than our
Noble Kings, and most Wise Parliaments. For they saw matters of this kind quite
otherwise than you do. The Preamble to the 3 of Henry 8. chap. 11. runs thus:
Forasmuch as the Science and Cunning of Physic and Surgery (to the perfect
knowledge whereof be requisite both great Learning and ripe Experience) is
daily within this Realm exercised by a great multitude of ignorant persons, of
whom the greater part have no manner of insight in the same, nor in any other
kind of Learning: some also can no letters on the Book, so far forth, that
common Artificers, as Smiths, Weavers and Women, boldly and accustomably take
upon them great Cures, and things of great difficulty; in the which they partly
use Sorcery and Witchcraft, partly apply such Medicines unto the disease as be
very noious, and nothing meet therefore; to the high displeasure of God, great
infamy to the Faculty, and the grievous hurt, damage and destruction of many of
the King's Liege-people; most especially of them that cannot discern the
uncunning from the cunning: Be it therefore (to the surety and comfort of all
manner of people) by the Authority of this present Parliament enacted, etc.

Again, the Preamble to King James's Royal Charter granted to the College of
Physicians does run thus: Whereas our most Noble and Renowned Predecessor, King
Henry the Eighty late King of this our Realm of England, in his Princely wisdom
deeply conlidering, and by the Example of Foreign well-governed States and
Kingdoms, truly understanding how profitable, beneficial and acceptable it
would be unto the whole body of this Kingdom of England, to restrain and
suppress the excessive number of such as daily professed themselves learned and
profound Practisers in the Faculty of Physic, whereas in truth they were men
illiterate and unexperienced, rather propounding unto themselves their private
gain, with the detriment of this Kingdom, than to give relief in time of need:
And likewise duly considering that by the rejecting of those illiterate and
unskilful Practisers, those that were learned, grave and profound Practisers in
that Faculty, should received more bountiful Reward, and also the industrious
Students of that Profession would be the better encouraged in their studies and
endeavors. For these and many other weighty Motives, etc. The Charter which
our late most excellent Monarch gave them, runs much in the same strain. So
that our Kings and Parliaments do express a just and sufficient indignation
against those illegal Practisers.


Mom. Come, come, a Blot is not a Blot until it be hit. I have traveled
through Germany, and the best parts of Europe, and have learned with a few
Chequeens to make my self shot-proof against all they can do. Nor did I spend
my time so ill in France, but that I quickly got the trick to purchase with a
few Pistols, a Title big enough to make me despise the pedantick Privileges of
Colleges and Conclaves. There it is a common thing for a man of Knowledge, who
has learned the Art of Curing Diseases by fits and starts, hither and thither,
out of the ordinary dull road, to write himself Physician in Ordinary to his
Majesty, and Counselor to the King in his Councils, after which he can safely
interlope wherever he pleases. Nay, every ordinary Mechanic is not only
treated with the style of Monsieur, but can hang at his door, in great or
Golden Letters, MARCHAND in Ordinary to the King, from the lowest Trinket to
the highest.


Phil. Sure you cannot but know, that in France no Physician though never so
highly doctorated, will be permitted to practice Physic in any of their Towns
of Resort, unless he be first Aggregated, or Imbodyed into the Society of
Physicians dwelling in that place, and in order to that, be examined by them
afresh let him show a Diploma never so fairly Gilded, or be his Pretenses never
so Honorable.


Mom. I do not deny the matter of Fact: But I did not go to France to learn
Fashions, or the Rules of Civility. The Custom you speak of is a Monopoly, and
it is equally unjust and dishonorable.


Phil. The Custom we speak of is highly necessary: And there ought to go more
to the being entrusted with men's lives than the mere getting a Diploma, en
passant, whilst a man is upon the ramble, sowing his wild Oats. For otherwise
more over-forward Youths of seventeen than one, might probably in their Travels
stumble upon the Degrees of Bachelor and Doctor, when they should better be
conning Tully's Offices at School, and learning many sententious verses in
Horace, Juvenal, and Persius. The Morals of those Books well digested will lay
good foundations for the making a better man, and consequently the better
Physician. Besides, the foresaid Custom may be one true Reason, I am sure it is
a good Reason, why the French do multiply and increase at the rate they do,
insomuch that they can always spare vast numbers of Frenchmen, to supply all
their neighbor Countries, nay sometimes more than the jealous Natives would
willingly admit.


Mom. But still these Monopolies are not to be endured.


Phil. In troth, Momus, our Parisians are the most negligent and inartificial
Monopolizers that ever were heard of. For them to suffer such an inundation of
Empirical Interlopers, when they have in themselves the Monopoly of Physic
according to Law, they do really deserve to be blamed! For them to suffer so
many noxious and deleterious Weeds to grow and overspread their Country, when
they are entrusted with the care that none but useful and beneficial Plants
should grow in their Physick-Garden, it is a sad and grievous fault! But still
these Monopolies may better be endured than Levelling. A little good order is
to be preferred before a Chaos of Confusion.


Mom. I acknowledge there ought to be a certain subordination among men, and
can sometimes distinguish between a Prince and a Peasant; between a Courtier
and a Clown. That which I insist upon is this, that all Conclaves of Physicians
do tend to the destruction of mankind, and therefore out of my abundant
Wellwishes to the World, I have fired this Beacon, and give such a loud Alarm
to the Country, that all Paris, and more than seven miles about, will ring of
it with a witness, this many a year. In a word, I have detected the Intrigues,
Frauds, and Plots of the Physicians against their Patients, and their
destroying the Faculty of Physic. Let me tell ye, it is a Pill that will stick
in their Throats as long as they live, and will give them more bitter Gripes
and woeful Pains than ever Coloquintida could do.


Phil. No such matter, I assure ye. I have heard it indeed now and then
mentioned among the Learned Members of the Faculty; and all that ever I could
observe upon it was only this, that they looked upon the Author to be a
malicious, mad, and Giddy Hair-brain, and looked upon the Pamphlet with the
greatest contempt imaginable; no one, that ever I heard, thinking it worth the
pains of an Answer.


Mom. No! I called all the Infernal Spirits to my assistance. I rowzed all the
Faculties of my Heart and Brain, with more violence than the Lion is said to do
himself with his Tail, when provoked to a combat; I whetted my memory, put my
imagination upon the Rack, in scirpo nodum quaerere; and I got Argus his eyes
to search into every corner of the Town, to ransack every Patient's Chamber,
and Apothecarie's Shop, in order to find proper materials for the greater
perfection of this Work; and do they at last despise it, as you say?


Phil. The very same upon my honest Word. Alas, the Faculty of Physic is built
upon surer Foundations than to be shook with every whiffling Wind. It is not to
be battered down with Pop-guns, and Boys play. They have Salves for every Sore;
they have Antidotes for every poisonous Dart that is shot at them, and
generally the Dart that is shot against 'em rebounds upon the head of their
Enemy, to his great Misfortune, if not utter Ruin.


Mom. I can never think them such men of Might as you speak them. For would any
one that pretends to Manhood, and has Power and Strength on his side, suffer,
as they tamely do, every saucy Jack to pull them by the Beard, and every
licentious Buffoon to scoff at them how he pleases? What if their Predecessors
had some power to curb the Insolences of those that contended with 'em? I am
well satisfied that their strength is gone: they are now come to a Decrepit Old
Age, and does intolerably.


Phil. 'Twill be well for you, if you find them such dull Hocuses, when you
come to try the point together. You would do well to read a Book lately
printed, called The Royal College of Physicians of London, founded and
established by Law, as appears by Letters Patents, Acts of Parliament, adjudged
Cases, etc. Collected by one of their worthy Collegue's Dr G. You will find
likewise in the same Book, An Historical account of the College's Proceedings
against Empiricks and Unlicensed Practisers in every Prince's Reign, from their
first Incorporation, to the Murder of the Royal Martyr King Charles the First.
This Book does plainly prove, that they have exercised very great Power, both
by way of Fine, and Imprisonment without Bail or Manprize, and by diverse
Overthrows at Law; and the Learned in the Law (who can best judge of those
matters) do positively affirm that they have the same power still.


Mom. Let the Lawyers say what they will, and the Confederates write what they
will, in spite of all they can do, I will think, and say, and also write what
I will. Moreover, he that is so far debauched in his Senses as to be admitted
into any Conclave of Physicians, does, ipso facto, as much entitle himself to
all their Man-slaughters, Fourbs, and Impostures, as he that is listed among a
Troop of Neapolitan Banditi does at that moment participate in the guilt of all
their former Crimes and Villainies, in the same manner as if he had been a part
in them himself. Preface.


Phil. So that by your way of Arguing, the Communion of Saints ought to be
expunged out of your Creed, as well as a Combination of Banditi. It seems a man
ought not to unite with any society of Christians, for fear he should be
thereby infected with the Guilt of every particular Pretender to that
Communion. Henceforth let no man bind his Son Prentice to a Trade, lest ipso
facto he make him go snacks in all the Lies and Cheats of every individual
Knave that in turning the penny. Let all Societies and Corporations be
dissolved by your Magisterial Quo Warranto, because they so nearly resemble
these Conclaves of Physicians. Let no man marry a Wife, lest himself be guilty
of Adultery every time the slippery Associate takes a frisk abroad to see a
Friend. And is that the reason why some men do divorce themselves a mensa and
thoro, even from Virtuous Women, and upon second thoughts do become
Melancholic Celibates, after God had joined them together? I have heard it
often affirmed (to the honor of the Married State) that the Conversation of
Women (in a lawful way) does wonderfully sweeten, and civilize the manners of
men, and that they are Helps very meet for us upon many accounts. But I shall
grant that Marriage cannot make the Ethiopian change his Skin, nor the Leopard
his Spots. He that is born an Unsociable Creature, in whom Sowreness and
Austerity are radically implanted, and who by the abuses of Chemistry has
turned all his Animal Spirits into keen and corrosive, insomuch that he can
think of nothing but what is sour and grateing to ingenious ears, it must not
be expected that the State of Matrimony should tranform him into a Lamb, or
make him mealy-mouthed. But again, let us consider. He that is so far debauched
in his Senses as to be admitted into any Conclave of Physicians, etc. It is a
strain of that rapture, and extravagance, that certainly you must have been in
some Trance when you penned it. It is so shamefully silly, as well as malicious
to the highest degree, and every body that reads must needs so see through it,
that I am almost ashamed to repeat a piece of such gross weakness, wherein you
have taken such timely care to expose your self to the Censure and Scorn of all
men, Have you always had so implacable a hatred unto, and extravagant opinion
of all Conclaves of Physicians?


Mom. No. Time was, when I though well enough of some of them, and particularly
the Conclave of Physicians at London. It was at a time when I had no small
hopes of getting an Honorable Admittance among them, and in order to it did
use frequently to meet Doctor A.B.C. near the Plot-Office, (since so called) in
Aldersgate Street. About the same time I writ an excellent and popular
Treatise, called The Disease of London, or a New Discovery of the Scurvey,
Printed Anno 1675.


Phil. By the good token that you spoke well of people once in your life; Pray
let us hear a little of the Harangue you then made in favor of the College, and
the Leanred Members of it.


Mom. The Preface to that work begins thus:

It is observable, that the First solid Foundation of Physic, was laid by the
great Architect of that Art Hippocates, in an Isle called Coos; and it is no
less remarkable, that the truest Superstructure was made on it, in this Island
by the Famed College of Physicians of London. It was a Member of that Society.
Doctor William Harvey of Immortal Memory, that had laid another Basis by
detecting the Circulation of the Blood, for which this Britain may as justly
merit the Title of Divine, as the other Coos. The Rubbish that was cast about
it by Parisanus, Leighnerus, and others, to obscure it, tended to render it
more firm; notwithstanding this was so smoothly removed by that Incomparable
Physician Sir George Ent, the now President of the College, in his Apology,
that all Universities did then adjudge those void of Apprehension, that did not
readily embrace that Principle, and that it was impossible for any man to
arrive to be a Physician without the knowledge of it. A little after in the
same Preface, I did call the whole Body an Apollinean Society, and a Society
whose fame is spread as far as the Art of Physic it self. Nay, and giving an
account of the Practice of Physic, I did declare, that the Fellows of the
College have proved so wonderfully successful in it, that their Methods of
Curing the most stubborn of Diseases, may serve for a fit Pattern to all the
World to practice by; and I cannot deny but in many Cases it has proved so to
me, which to acknowledge is the sole occasion of my introducing this Discourse.


Phil. And can you read the acknowledgment of so great a Truth without
blushing, and confusion? A Truth hich Foreigners do universally own; (and you
could not choose but find it so in your Travells) but yet as true as it is,
they are too modest and ingenuous arrogantly to proclaim their Methods of
Curing for Patterns to all the World. You cannot but know that we have greater
plenty of stubborn Diseases, than those Hotter Countries have, though which you
traveled. Nay, the same untoward and stubborn Disease shall be more stubborn
with us, than it is with them; a Clyster, and a purge, and a Bleeding or two
will not do, in this stubborn Country. Our Physicians do find they have a
great deal more to think of, or else they would never have proved so
wonderfully successful as you say they are, (and there is no doubt of the truth
of it) in the Practice of Physic. Therefore he is not debauched very far in
his Senses, who speaks true sense in the opinion of sober men, and who forbears
not to give to Deserving men their due; but that man's debauched beyond hopes
of recovery, who is gone so far, that he has lost all common Sense, lost the
Memory of the principal things he writ of, even the sole occasion of so late a
Discourse, in acknowledgment o the just worth of the Learned Fellows of the
College, whose Methods of Curing may serve for a fit Pattern to all the World
to practice by. This is not an ordinary debauch of the Mind for a Physician of
your Education to rail, like a Madman, at all Societies; and even of
Physicians, with a most bloody ipso facto, worse than any Anathema. If Malice
and ill Nature had not only overclowded, but extinguished your Reason, if the
Senses of your Mind were not absolutely besotted or infatuated, you could not
but have known who is the most likely to be debauched in his Senses; either he
that easily submits himself to the Laws and Statutes of his Country, and lives
in a due subjection to the Government under which he is born and bred, or else
he that would break and confound all order, overturn and dissolve, by his good
will, all Societies in the World, and who would rather be a solitary Wild
Beast, range all alone, like a declared Enemy to Mankind, than be any ways
Sociable, though it be in the Conyersation of most Learned and Admitale men.


Mom. Pish! That Treatise was written ten Years ago, and though it had the
advantage of bearing my Name before it, yet I must tell you, it was not written
by me. It was a different Hand, and different Person that writ it. For they say
that Physicians do generally hold that once in every seven Years our Bodies are
quite changed from what they were. Our Gizzards are wholly new, and there is a
total supply of new Matter, though under the same Form; And further, that
Arch-Philosopher, Aristotle, is so extremely of the foresaid opinion, that he
positively maintains, a man cannot go twice the same man into the same River.
Now I have very good reason to think that Mores animi sequuntur Temperamentum
corporis, and therefore the Body of that Hand which writ that Treatise of the
Scurvey, might be of another-guess Frame and Temperament, than this which writ
the Conclave of Physicians, and so the Mind might then be more inclined to
write Panegyricks of Worthy men, than to expose them to the lash of Satirical
Reflections. Does not a Sun-shiny day also strangely influence the Mind, and
make it brisk and frollicksome, kind and debonaire, when the effects of a
Clowdy Season are quite the contary? so that you see there might be very many,
and very good reasons, both for the one, and for the other.


Phil. Indeed I should hardly have thought you so great a Changeling, as you
learnedly bespeak your self. If the Weathercock of your Brain does so depend
upon the Wind and Weather, according as the Physick-Season is fair or foul with
you, I fear we must never expect more of those Sunshiny Books, these last of
the Cloudy and Malevolent sort being now so natural to you. You are too old to
change to the better, and are so exceeding bad, that you cannot possible change
to the worse.


Momus. Whatever you may therefore think of my future Constancy in the same
tenor of ill will to the Faculty, I do find some considerable alteration in my
Dyscrasy, since the first Edition of my last Book. For whereas other Authors do
reprint their books with some Additions, I have published the second Edition of
mine with many Alterations.


Phil. That Is pretty. That you should spy such Faults worthy to be Altered in
the Brat of your own Brain! But I would fain hear a little more of the Preface
of that Scurvey-Author, adjourning one minute our further Entertainment by the
Conclave-Author.


Momus. For many Ages the World was ignorant, whence the superfluous moisture
proceeded, which we hourly spit out, until the outlet, viz. the Ductus
Salivales were discovered by the Learned Doctor Wharton, a Fellow of the
College; and though it was generally believed, nothing could be further
declared, touching the Structure of the Liver, yet so elegant a description of
its most intime Parts, and Dissemination of its Vessels, Cholidochus, and a
very exact pursuit of the Lymphaeducts, was made by the most accomplished
Doctor Glisson ( the late Prefident) in his Anatomi-Hepatis, that in a manner
it appearaed, as if nothing had been solidly written of it by any before him.
ibid.


Phil. Now give us a cast of the Conclave-Autor's opinion concerning the
College's Ignorance in Anatomy, and his own superlavtive Proficiency in it.


Momus. That is not fair; you unseasonably interrupt me. I was going on; but
because you are in haste to have it, hear the Conclave-author speaking thus in
the Preface: What new Discoveries have they made in Antaomy these twenty Years?
Certainly none: and I dare presume to say, I my self have divulged more new
Anatomical Observations, which are of greater use, than all of 'em in a Bundle.


Phiol. Say you so, most mighty Author? Are those Worthies lately mentioned, of
Immortal Mentory, those Incomparable Physicians, those famous and most
Accomplished Presidents, that Learned Fellow of this College, to be all
cashiered and forgetten, with a What new Discoveries have they made in Anatomy
these twenty Years? You would have the incautious and less-knowing Reader to
understand a hundred Years by your slily limited twenty Years. The lightheaded
Gallant must not have one word of hint, as if any the least thing in Anatomy
had ever been discovered by them before. But he shall have his Bellyfull of
your hidden Discoveries, and must swallow them with an Implicit Faith. Yet in
all the Anatomical Discourses that ever I heard since my coming to this Town,
which is some many a Year, I nev er heard Man, Woman, or Child, neither Learned
nor Unlearned, no Curious Virtuoso, nor Incurious Coxcomb of any kind, to
mutter the least Syllable of your New Anatomical Observations; whereas not only
this Town and Kingdom rings, but Foreign Universities, and Anatomical Authors
far and near, do with one consent acknowledge aloud, how highly they are
indebted to our Divine Britain, as you called it, and particularly to the most
Experienced and Learned Physicians of the College of London, as in another
place, for their many improvements of Anatomy. I could name diverse Members of
the College now living, whose Names are deservedly Great in that respect, and
are not like to be forgotten in after-ages, no more than those men of Immortal
Memory, of whom you read us a Lecture, are forgotten in this. But I find you
expected every Year from the College a product of New Anatomical Observations,
as constantly as the Spring and Harvest. When Apelles has drawn his Picture,
and finished it in every Point, would you have the Succession of Painters be
always dabling about it, until they spoil it again? Friend, this Century has
done very well, and much better than you could wish, in Anatomy, perhaps more
than all the Ages in the World before; and it deserves little blame from Momus
himself. Besides, we ought in civility to leave something for our Children
after us to do; and not to become such Monopolizers of Anatomy, as You, who
dare presume to say, I my self have divulged more new Anatomical Observations,
which are of greater use, than all of 'em in a bundle. I wish you would have
directed us where we might meet with a Bundle of your spick and span New
Anatomical Observations. I fear you have divulged them to none but your self.
And though you dare presume to say as much as any Sciolist whatsoever, yet you
are not so very competent a judge of their greater use, than those of all the
World besides, or even of all the Members of the College. And so thus much for
the Conclave-Preface. Now give me one relishing Bit more, out of that
Scurvey-Preface. For really I must needs take it all by Bits and Snaps, and my
further Answer to the Book of the Conclave must be in some measure according to
the Book it self, which gives us our Entertainment, not in solid substantial
Dishes, but by way of hash and piecemeal. Besides, it would clog and lie hard
upon our Stomachs, and tire our patience, if we were to examine nicely, to feed
upon, and to digest the whole and every part of it. And I would have this Oglio
of the Author's particular preparing so served up, that there may be something
to please the Palate of the Merry and Morose, the Sour and the Sweet, nay, a
little for all sorts of Readers, who have been amused with his Book.


Momus. That some Distempers had escaped the Observation of the Grecian and
Arabian Physicians, was evidenced by the eminently learned Doctor Bates, Doctor
Glisson, and Doctor Regemorter, Colleagues, in that excellent Treatise de
Rachitide. In all my Travels, I had never the good Fortune to be particularly
acquainted with a person equal in Literature, Experience and Observativation,
with Doctor Bates; I must confess, I went ever from him more knowing than I was
before. ibid.


Phil. It Is true, these Colleagues have proved notable men in their Generation,
and Doctor Bates particularly deserves his due, as being Dead, and so not like
to incommode or interfere with the Caprichio's of the Living. I am mightily
mis-inform'd, if this Great Man, at the very beginning of your particular
acquaintance with him, did not immediately, upon the first Conversation, so
soon as your Back was turned, declare to your Friend who introduced you, that
he thought you could never fix to any thing, nor so much as fix in a place, or
in plain English, that you had a Maggot, or a Worm in you Head; which indeed
has since driven you about from Hatton Garden to Fleetstreet, and from
Fleetstreet to Hatton-Garden again; from thence to Chelmsford in Essex, and
from Chelmsford to Ipswich; and now at last from Ipswich to I know not where;
the one half of you to Westminster, and to other half to about Vxbridge. But
again, if you had had the good forturne to have been received a Member of that
College in due time, and by that means had got a fair opportunity to be more
particularly acquainted with diverse Eminent and very Knowing Men still living
among them, you might possibly have met with others as Instructive Acquaintance
as you did in all your Travels. If you had Associated with them, you would
certainly have learned more Modesty and less Arrogance, than you now have. You
might then have accounted it a greater Honor to have been the least among
those Learned Colleagues, than thus to pride your self with being thought the
first among the contemptible Empirical Tribe. Now proceed, and read me some of
those places I have marked with a black coal.


Mom. Will you take no notice then of I Conuglio pitolo, and the Conuglio
Grande. You are to believe this Tract is not written to please many. Preface to
the Conclave.


Phil. Yes, yes: Those great letters do give us to understand that you can
speak some Italian; we will not doubt but that in your Travels you picked up
some scraps of that kind. And you had a great advantage to it, by traveling so
young. For an idle Boy is much better at learning Languages, than a wise or
full-grown Man. Momus, you need not have told us that we are to believe this
your Tract s not written to please many. I should rather incline to believe
that it was not written to please any, but to gratify an inveterate rancour of
mind, to please only your own self, and to quench a little your sitis
inextinguibilis, your unsatiable thirst of Revenge, and most implacable hatred
to the Faculty, for not courting you forsooth to be of their Number. But
perhaps your Tract may please some besides your self, it may please some
besides your self, it may please some little Quacks and Mountebanks, to whom
the College is a declared Enemy according to Law; it may please some squandring
frothy Gallants, who have been privately great Sufferers by your Little
strowling Menus, whose Contagion they could not discover by reason of her Mask,
and who in all probability had suffered most of all from you Grand
Hermaphroditick Cure, your Herculean, Gigantean, Vulcanous, or other Conceited
Cures. Their ill Cures, no doubt, might make them angry with Physic it self,
because they suffered under the hands of an Ill Physician, and had not the wit
to distinguish between a good Commodity and a bad, or between a man and a post.
Lastly, Your Tract might please those who are never pleased with any thing that
is good, such who continually sneer at all that is serious, who think it Wit to
expose Virtue and Religion in uncouth Burlesque, and whose profligate Lives do
make it their Interest to declare for Scurrility on your side.


Mom. You are too severe, Philiater, If you had been one of our Party, and had
showed so great a Zeal for Errors, Defamations, and Misrepresentations, as you
do for Truth, and for the Public, I should not have wondered; but thus to
exceed the bounds of Moderation for the sake of others more than ones own
particular, is a Mystery, and a Riddle to me that I cannot unfold. For they
say, Every bodies business is no bodies business. Sure a good Fee of our side
would abate this heat you show for the Good of the Public.


Phil. A good Fee is no such tempting matter, as to make me forget my duty. You
and I are great strangers I find. If you knew me thoroughly, you would possibly
understand that I am more easily inflamed into a Passion, when I meet with
wretches who conspire the Public Ruin, and who care not how they trouble the
waters of their Country, so they may the better fish in them, than when I meet
with particular Affronts, or personal Provocations. I have learned that Love is
the fulfilling the Christian Law. And I hope I should sooner cut my own flesh,
than willingly injure another man by Word, or Deed, unless I looked upon him to
be a common Enemy to mankind, and to become a Wolf or a Tigre to us all.
Therefore, Momus, read on, but before you enter into the Tract, let us have one
of those Advertisements, which immediately follows the Contents.


Mom. Modern Curiosities of Art and Nature, etc. composed and experimented by
the Sieur Lemery Apothecary to the French King.


Phil. That Is false, and a trick; it is a Bastard laid at the wrong door, and
therefore fit enough to be premised to the succeeding Tract. I can tell you,
from undoubted Authority, that the Sieur Lemery in his Letters to his Friends
here, who were inquisitive upon the matter, does with great concern disclaim
his being the Author of this delicate piece. He thinks himself extremely
injured, in being thought the Author of such a Rhapsody of pretended
Experiments, Astrological Cures, Housewifery and Cookery, and a tedious long
Mish-mash of Tittle. It was written (and so printed) by a Sieur named d'Emery,
a Gentleman at large, and not by the ingenious Sieur Lemery, now a Doctor of
Physic. Now as for the other three Books, there advertised together, we'll
even let them pass, as needing to be hung out with such a Bush, in order to
force a sale.


Mom. Solomon gives us this remark (Ecclesiast. chap. 2. verse. 3.) There is a
time to kill, and a time to heal; which my mother-wit interprets, That a
Physician, at some times he kills, and at some times he cures. Furthermore,
observe, that as Solomon sets down that there is a time to kill before the time
to heal; so generally Physicians (especially of pretended Societies) kill more
than they cure. p. 3. and 4.


Phil. The same Solomon ( Prove. 26.4, 5.) gives us another good remark, worthy
your serious consideration. Answer not a Fool according to his Folly, lest thou
also be like unto him. Which I do understand thus: when you discourse with a
Fool, or proud conceited Coxcomb, do not fawn upon him, and sooth him in his
follies, but boldly and honestly expose them to deserved scorn, lest thou also
be thought like unto him, and so thou become so unfortunate, as to be taken for
a Bird of the same feather. And then again, in the next verse: Answer a Fool
according to his folly, left he be wise in his own conceit. Which is easy
enough to interpret: Answer a Fool, (when he writes egregiously silly, and
maliciously) not with a grave discourse, and serious arguing, but serve him up
with his own sauce, show him the hideous deformity of his Visage in a true
Looking-glass, let the scoffer be soundly scoffed at, lest he persist wise in
his own conceit. In the same third Chapter of Ecclesiastes, not second, (as you
mistake and blunder, being not used to read the Holy Scriptures carefully and
with any good design, but merely to profane, and grossly abuse them) in that
third Chapter, I say, you will find a time to weep for your unparalleled
offenses, as well as to laugh without reason, like a Fool; there is a time to
keep silence, especially in what you have taken an Oath to keep silence; and
there is a time to speak seriously and discreetly which the Tract before us
does too much insinuate that you never observe. Likewise there is a time to
love as well as to hate. But you can observe no other times, but there time of
killing and healing. The first you observe too much, and take a most particular
notice of it, being infinitely tickled with the conceit, that the Wiseman has
put the killing time in the first place. Whether you observe as you should do,
the time of healing, will best be judged by the following discourse. And now,
Momus, I shall advise you to forbear abusing Scripture so scandalously and
conceitedly. We Will give you leave, for the present, ludere cum corio humano,
but by no means cum sacris. Be merry and wise, and remember that we are acting
a fulsome farce, wherein it is very improper to consult such a man as Solomon.
Your Mother-Wit to pretend to the Wisdom of Solomon!


Mom. In most Countries, a Criminal who is to be put to the Rack, or any ways
executed, is usually, from his suffering, called the Patient or Sufferer; and
so is the sick man that is to subject himself to the rigid sentence of some of
theCombined Physicians, which renders the word Patient or Sufferer truly
synonymous to both. p. 5.


Phil. In all Countries, that ever I heard of, a Criminal is called a Criminal,
as a Spade is called a Spade. But in your Practice we will allow a Venerial
Criminal, who is to undergo your Herculean, or other Bombastick Cures, to be
properly called a Sufferer. And yet let him suffer the Rack you put him upon,
never so much, in order to expiate for his past Crimes, I guess you would take
it very unkindly to have him usually called your Sufferer. But when once he is
in your Limbo, the sick man must even be contented to take it Patiently, and so
may be called your Patient. Pray would you your self, in sober sadness, allow a
good Generous Patient who subjects himself to your rigid uncontrollable
sentence, to be called immediately your Sufferer? I believe the Gentleman would
soon take his leave of you, and would much rather subject himself to the milder
sentence of some of the combined Physicians, in hopes to find out a Preserver
from the Sufferings you thus imprudently threatened him withal. Now let the word
Patient or Sufferer be truly synonymous with you, we of the Combined Party,
Combined together in the knowledge of better things, shall always distinguish
between a Fools Cap, and a Philosophers Beard, between the Music of a Rattle
and a Base-Viol.


Mom. If that be not revera the greatest truth, I think I paid off the men of
Physic about the New Disease, a name of ignorance, their Asylum ignorantiae.
One time they shall tell you, it is an Ague; another, it is a Feavor; a third,
it is an Ague and Feavor; a fourth, it is Feavor and Ague; a fifth, it is the new
Disease; a denomination so idle, that every Novice in Physic might well
suspect they had never read Hippocrates or Galen; especially upon observing,
that every Autumnal or Epidemick Distemper is by them termed new: whereas, the
gentle Pox excepted, there is not any among all those they have nominated new
Diseases, but what is amply described in many ancient Authors. p. 10, 11.


Phil. I believe we shall find you horribly out, revera, in most of your
greatest truths. The men of Physic you speak of, have read Diseases both New
and Old, and they have read Men too. What if one Woman tells you, it is an
Ague, the Nurse, a Fever, the Midwife, an Ague and Fever, and after all an old
Gossip comes and tells you, it is the New Disease; must the Men of Physic
become Sufferers for the Women's tittle tattle? But what if a raging Autumnal
Epidemical Fever has been sometimes even by Physicians called the New Disease?
Is a Disease not to be called New, because it had entered into your Crotchet
before, or because you might possibly have read something like it in some
ancient Author? It is certainly New to John-a-Stiles, and John-a-Nokes, in one
sense at least; they never saw, nor heard of it before. But it seems you, and
every Novice in Physic might well suspect they had never read Hippocrates or
Galen. Whereas if your self had but cursorily (as Novices use to do) looked into
Hippocrates, (...), of Epidemical Diseases, you would have found him
immediately describing the first, second, and third Constitution of the Air,
and the variation of Diseases according to its various Constitution, in the
Isle Thasus. And do you, and your Novices think, that this Island of Great
Britain is less subject to the various alterations of Air and Seasons (and
consequently to a great diversity of Diseases) than Thasus was? You must needs
have heard that many good Women in our Island do carry Almanacks in their
Bones, and do very sadly bemoan the great uncertainty of our Seasons. We need
not go back to Hippocrates and Galen for the understanding so plain a truth;
you might easily have consulted one of our own late Authors, but indeed a
Combined Physician, and you might have had sufficient satisfaction in this
matter. In his Works, after his excellent Treatise De Morbis Acutis (wherein
the Circulation of New Diseases, and New Epidemical Constitutions is made as
plain as a Pikestaffe) you will find an Epistola Responsoria in Cambridge, a
Head of a Medical College there, and he one of Her Majesty's Physicians in
Ordinary, with Fee, to the Judicious Author of the foresaid Treatise. This
Epistle from so Great a Man is full of acknowledgments to the Author, for his
so nice Observations of the different Constitutions of the Air, many years
past, and for giving so Historical an account of the succession of different
Epidemical Diseases, according to the predominancy of this or that Constitution.


Mom. However you value and set forth that Modern Author, yet I must tell you,
I have in diverse places of my Tract made him a mere Bumpkin; I scorn to read
the Works of our Modern Associates, unless to ridicule and expose them. I do
aver, that the gentle Pox excepted, there is not any among all those they have
nominated New Diseases, but what is amply described in many ancient Authors. p.
11.


Phil. I know very well that you have shamefully abused many Worthy and
excellent Men, and can tell the true reason why you have taken such pains to
abuse this particularly. When we come to discourse of the Jesuits Powder, you
shall have it as freely as I had it. In the mean time let us mind the business
before us. The gentle Pox! If it be so gentle, I would fain know why you should
think of nothing but Herculean and Gigantean Cures for it, as you unwittingly
do it your Little Venus unmaskt. Is it seemly, or becoming a Man of your
Education, that has Traveled so far, to call for Hercules his Club, or a
Giant's strong arm to encounter a poor gentle Pox? The Female, the gentle Sex
does often suffer under this Disease; and will you presently fright the poor
Creature out of her wits, with telling her, she must undergo your Herculean or
your Gigantean Cure? You are exceedingly unkind to the little Venus, especially
if it be considered, what you observe in the Gigantean Cure, Art. 14. Indeed a
Patient had better half hang himself, than undergo this Cure, there being
nothing comparable to the pain in their mouth, anguish about their heart and
sides, and the extreme thirst they endure, having, like Tantalus, their mouth
full of water, and yet ready to perish for want of drink. Neither is this all,
some growing Phrenetick in the Cure, others Paralytick and Apoplectick. Momus,
if this be your way of curing gentle Diseases, that a Patient had better half
hang himself than undergo it, trust me, I Will have a care of you in violent
diseases: for by your rule a man had better be quite hanged than undergo that
Cure. Well but if the Pox be not gentle, we'll allow it to be gentile, though
not so over-gentile neither, as your Adage would have it: Three Campains and
six grand Cures make a Grand Gentleman. The grand Gentleman truly is but in a
poor condition, if he must undergo no less than six grand Cures, your grand
Hermaphroditick gallimaufrey Cures, in order to be so accomplished. But the
gentle Pox excepted, there is not any, etc. What, have you so soon forgot, that
some Distempers, (more than one) had escaped the observation of the Grecian and
Arabian an Physicians, was evidenced by the eminently learned Doctor Bates, and
others, Colleagues in that excellent Treatise de Rachitide? You soon forget your
Friends, I see, though never so particularly acquainted with them. Here the
Rickets, and some other Distempers were solemnly and formally acknowledged to
be New Diseases, but the Maggot biting another part of your head, the gentle
Pox must only be excepted. And are they amply described, and in many ancient
Authors? I dare venture a Chequeen or two, that you cannot show me one ancient
Author, wherein the Rickets are so amply described.


Mom. I can be easily persuaded, that how great an Idol soever a Fellow is set
up by the Vulgar, from the false suggestion of Dog-fleying, he shall never
arrive to a sagacity of distinguishing Diseases, unless he has from the
beginning been trained up to it, by the conduct of able Professors at home and
abroad, and frequently visited Hospitals in several Countries. p. 15.


Phil. That Fellow, that you make so slight of, is one who spends his whole
time so diligently in the service of the Public, that you shall hardly for
your Jacobus get one minute of his time, more than is absolutely necessary.
Indeed he is a worthy Member, and Fellow of the College, but he is not a Fellow
for every saucy Jack. He is not made an Idol only by the Vulgar, but is
infinitely courted and sought to, by the Nobility, and even the Royal Family;
and his late Majesty of Blessed Memory (who could pass as good a judgment on a
Physician as perhaps any other Prince) did in his last sickness, as I have
heard, make Particular Applications to this Fellow, as much at least as to any
of his other excellent Physicians. It is abundantly better to be made an Idol
in Anatomy by others, than to make an Idol thus pitifully and wretchedly of
ones self, as you do, who dare presume to say, I my self have divulged more new
Anatomical Observations, which are of greater use, than all of 'em in a bundle.
Nor is he set up for an Idol, only from the false suggestion of Dog-fleying; he
has fley'd not only many a Dog, but many a Man, who perhaps has not half so
well deserved to be hanged for stealing, or robbing a poor Thirteen pence half
penny, as those who make it their trade to steal away or rob the good names of
Excellent Men. But the best of it is, the mouths of some men are no slander.
And so that your false suggestion of Dog-fleying, will never make this great
man the less an Anatomist, whose name is spread far and near over the learned
World, and much farther than your Travels, so often boasted of, could reach.
But alas! He shall never arrived to your sagacity of distinguishing Diseases,
unless be has from the beginning been trained up to it, by the conduct of able
Professors at home and abroad. I could show, too clearly to your shame, what
little sagacity you have in that respect, notwithstanding the multiplicity of
your scribbling, but that I should be guilty of too tedious and troublesome a
diversion. I could lay before you thousands of indecencies in expression, and
such gross follies that a Schoolboy would deserve to be whipped for 'em.
Insomuch that every man of common sense and Education, cannot but see the
greatest want of sagacity imaginable, in those lesser things, and therefore
cannot but shrewdly suspect beforehand your sagacity in distinguishing
Diseases: So that I doubt extremely, that you have not been trained up to it,
as Horses are to their paces, with a Whip and Bridle; I fear you broke loose
too soon, which might occasion your unproficient wandering into other Countries,
from the beginning. But, Momus, you have even condemned your self; pray what
able Professors of the Art of distinguishing Diseases did you learn under at
home? For we do not now talk of chopping of Logic, but Physic Professors. I
know you can name plenty of Professors abroad, but I defy you to name one
Professor at home, from whom you learnt to distinguish Diseases, under
seventeen Years old, your Year of Perfection, wherein you took the Degrees both
of Batchelour and Doctor.


Mom. Let me tell you, it is a rare and extraordinary thing to be ripe so soon
as I was. How People will stare in a very forward Year to see a handful of
green Crabs at Christmas! You may be sure, that if I had got a knock in my
Cradle, I should never have come to this perfection at writing Books; besides,
I was born a Physician, and frequently visited Hospitals in several Countries.


Phil. Bless me, that you should be a sour Crab so early! You confirm me much
inmy opinion, that it is not good nor safe to send Children from School (where)
they are careful ykept out of harms way) to the University so soon. Your
Friends had better have sent you to a Mansion in Moor-fields, than to Exeter
College, when they did. No doubt this great error of theirs did occasion your
so rank and desperate a hatred of Colleges ever since. If you had been kept a
while longer under a strict hand, you would not have bragged, that you were
born a Physician, whereas all others are fain to take great pains to be one,
and do travel over many god Athors, more abundance of them than you did
Countries. But the last accomplishment to your Physic was, that you visited
Hospitals, which our Universities do want, and therefore can never sufficiently
accomplish their Scholars with a due Education. We have Hospitals too in
London, though not in the Universities, and yet we seldom hear of Students in
Physic leaving their Studies, and coming to Town to visit the Hospitals
frequently. It Is well, if they visit them once in curiosity, when their other
affairs do bring them to Town. For they know well enough that the Practice of
Physic in Hospitals is not to be nicely imitated, when they have taken their
Degrees, and are Licensed to practice per totam Angliam. What, must Gentlemen
and Porters, ladies and Oyster-women be served with the same coarse treatment?
But perhaps the Hospitals abroad have greater virtue in them to edify and
instruct young Students. The Able Professors there do wonders, and the hearing
them prate magisterially, as if they were reading Lectures without control in
their Schools, may perhaps be of admirable efficacy. No, the most that the
Scholars do learn from them (as I have been informed) is to give a Clyster of
Decoctum commune, and Electnarium Lenitivum, or to give a large fulsome Bolus
of Cassia, or Catholicum, or to take their Bouillon and Ptisan. Truly the
practice of Hospitals in your several Countries will not so well agree with the
humor of our Country. When you are in England you must do as they do in
England, as when you were in Rome or paris, you might do as they did in Rome or
Paris.


Mon. But that which puts almost the last hand to render a man a Physician 9all
others, though they have clambered up to a Degree, are little different from
Mountebanks or Manslayers) is to be very well grounded in the true Method of
Physic, or order of applying proper Remedies, internal and external, to
Diseases in their just time and Doses. p. 17.


Phil. Some part of this might pass indifferently well: only I cannot but
observe, that, whatever you may think, there is abundance of probability, you
were not your self so very well grounded in the true Method of Physic, etc.
I Will give you an instance or two of it hereafter. But why should you craftily
insinuate, as if most Collegiate Physicians clamber'd up to their Degree (as it
is easy to sound the depth of your Intrigues) and so you would proclaim to the
people (looking another way) that they are little different from Mountebanks or
Man-slayers? I would ask you, which is most likely to be the Clamberer to
Degrees, he that stays at School to sixteen or seventeen at least, and then
stays twelve or fourteen Years at the University, before he has the Ambition to
think of the Degree of Doctor, or he that at seventeen (your Year of Jubilee)
has done with Universities and Travels, and nothing forsooth can content the
Youth, but both the Degrees of Bachelor and Doctor? It was a Clambering time
of Age you took them in; and more, you were then strangely upon the Ramble. So
that it is too plain, you had not this last hand, the true Method of Physic,
to render you a Physician, but the hand of some Cunning Doctor (who knew well
enough what he did) was employed first in taking your money, and then
conferring upon you (who did covet and aspire to them) the Titles of Bachelor
and Doctor; I warrant, he remembered the old Adage in those places: Accipimus
pecuniam, and dimittimus Asinum. Which I leave to your Mother-wit to interpret.
And now difference your self from Mountebanks or Man-slayers.


Mon. And now after all this Apparatus, we will suppose our Insant-Physician,
his mind gaudily painted and daubed with the ancient, uncertain, and some new
tickling Notions in Medicine, etc. p. 17, 18.


Phil. You are still for clapping your childish Fools coat of Infant-Physician
upon the back of our Men of Physic. It Is mighty silly to call others in
contempt by your own Proper name. Of all the Physicians, both far and near,
that ever I heard of, I never suspected one man sit to cope with you for right
of claiming this Title of Infant-Physician. Indeed I had thought of the year
one and twenty before now, but could never have believed (unless you had told
it in the height of your vanity) that a lad of seventeen could by Academick
Authority be invested with the power and care of other men's lives, when the
Laws of his Country would not trust him with his own Estate. Well! But his
Mind must be supposed to be gaudily painted and daubed, as his Body is bedecked
with Ribbands and fine things, and his Head with a Feather in the Cap; so the
mind of this Physick-Child or Infant must be gaudily painted like St George a
Horseback, and daubed like the Sign-post, but with what? With the ancient
uncertain, and some new tickling Notions in Medicine. How sadly therefore ought
we to lament the unhappy Date of poor Hippocrates and Galen! their ancient
Notions are all uncertain, and not to be depended upon! We have read them then
to little purpose. Hippocrates, you must be no longer Divine, for the
Infant-Physician will have it sO. For alas! Momus, the new Notions only are
tickling to your lascivious Mind. And why do they tickle you? Only because they
are New: which nevertheless I cannot but a little admire, that you sHould be
such a friend in a corner to new Notions, when you are so declared an Enemy to
new Diseases.


Mon. Now upon application of this Discourse to two or three hundred
Physicians, you shall searce find six, tha tcan justly pretend to the title of
a good Physician, or whose Education does hardly qualify them to be rendered
such. p. 21. and adding thereunto, that they are insufficiently educated,
ignorant, insagacious, and inexpert (as most are) in what a desperate case are
their patients? p. 22.


Phil. Now to me this Discourse of yours, without any tedious examination of a
deal of Fiddle-saddle, but merely putting it to be tried by the reason of your
Mobile (to whom, and for whose sake, you writ your Tract) or by any one of your
able professors at home and abroad; this Discourse, I say, cannot well avoid
the being presently condemned to be burnt by the hands of the common Hangman.
For it is a kind of Heresy in Physic as you apply it. Upon application of it
to two or three hundred Physicians, you shall scarce find six, etc. Scarce six!
Indeed you sHould have allowed us seven or eight at least in civility. the
number seven is by much a more famous number, from the seven Wise men of Greece
and Gotham, from the seven Deadly Sins (in which you have such a share) and
from its being a Climacterical number. Besides, how many young men's heads are
tickled with New Notions, when they come to the seventh year of their Prentice
ship. You know they have privileges that Year greater than ordinary, and can
tell how to fit there Hats to their head, nay many of them that year think
themselves better men than their masters. And again, the very derivation from
seven, seventeen is a number of great note with you. It was the remarkable year
of your Assumption of those Titular Degrees, and ought never to be forgotten,
being the Clambering year of all. I shall say nothing to the other famous
derivation from seven, seventy. Indeed we should have been better contented, if
you would have vouchsafed us but eight good Physicians in the two or three
hundred. For that is a very complete number, the most complete of all numbers,
say the Pythagoreans. I dare not inch any further, guessing at your stingy
nature and narrow Soul; a Soul that Pythagoras will be puzzled to find a body
upon the next Transmigration, little enough to contract it self in. We'll never
dispute the standing of a thousand such Souls as yours upon the point of a
needle. Scarce six, you say, that can justly pretend to the Title of a good
Physician. No, not six allowed of, in two or three hundred. Pray how came you
to be so well acquainted with two or three hundred Physicians? You that have
lived in such Physical Obscurity, that you have never showed your self in the
light of the College, which if you had, you had certainly been enlightened with
a better knowledge of them, than thus to condemn them all, and more than all,
by dark and uncertain hearsay. let the Spectators judge who can most justly
pretend to the Title of a good Physician, either they who have cheerfully
submitted to the legal test of a good Physician, the college's Examination, and
are thereby re and nomine what they pretend; or he that never dared, or never
did submit to be tried by his lawful Peers, as to his abilities, but got an
empty Title or Qualification (thanks to the Courtesy of England), to whoop and
hollow thus at bundreds of worthy Persons, he knows very little or nothing of.
But their Education does hardly qualify them to be rendered such. And adding
thereunto that they are insufficiently educated, etc. How many times must we
hear of their mean and insufficient Education! And how often must your Tracts
ring of your wonderful Education, and with a, read the description of my
Education in my Casus Med. Chir. Comparisons, you might know, are odious, and
Laus in ore proprio foetet. You live near very ill Neighbors. The good
Education of our Collegiates is better proved by their Modesty and Ingenuity,
than by Vaunts and Boastings; there are very few of them but can tell stories
of their Travels, and Opportunities, as well as Thraso or Momus. But it is not
their Court fashion. I shall end this tiresome Rhodomantado of yours with your
own words, which you ought the rather to believe, because they are your own;
After you had, in your natural Philosophy, p. 21. fallen out unmercifully with
John Baptista van Helmont (a person that I expected to have found you in love
with, for his strange melancholy and extravagant Whimsies) and told us of him,
that the Churchyard was the sure Register of his Patients, you adjoin, His
Arrogance and Boastings were symptoms of his depravate conceptions. And so I
conclude this fulsome, unmannerly, concerited, and ridiculous Splutter you make
about your Hogen Mogen Education: That your nauseous Boasting of it is a
certain Symptom of your depravate conceptions.


Mom. Ay but now in what a desperate case are their patients, they being so
ignorant, insafacious, and inexpert, as most of them are? But the matter is not
much; the greater part of humanity (I should say inhumanity) not deserving a
good medicine, Method, or Care of a good Physician. p. 22. And so in great
wrath and dudgeon I have ended the first long Chapter of my Tract.


Phil. What, desinere in piscem, end in Wrath, and Anger! But we know you
cannot help it, your head and Tail being all of the same Lump. If I might pass
a judgment upon your Face from this Chapter, I should think the one side of it
painted with the silly Mimick, the other bedaub'd with the sour Momus. You
began it with the rude and improper, but still witty, witty, introducing
Solomon to laugh with you as you were casting firebrarnds at Physicians, and
saying, Am I not in sport? And now at last you turn the other side of your
Face, and full of anger tell us, that humanity is inhumanity, and that no body
hardly deserves a good Medicine, Method or Care of a good Physician. Momus, the
matter would not be much, if the Town and Country both were condemned to want
your care and assistance; for it may be much better for many a humane Creature
to have no Physician at all, than such a peevish, testy, unkind, inhumane one
as he who makes so slight of humanity in general. When he speaks of humanity,
he says he should say inhumanity, as if there were no difference between a Man
and his Dog. Come, come, this Town is very well stored (to your hearts grief
and discontent) with good medicines, good Methods, and good Physicians, without
any need of learning good things from you.


Mon. Observation speaks this truth; he that dwells a long time upon any
particular introductory part of Physic, seldom or never arrives to a
considerable proficiency in his Art. p. 23.


Phil. Observation also speaks this truth: An empty vessel sounds loudest.
Observation says likewise: A good beginning makes a good ending; or as the
Poet, dimidium facti qui been coepit, habet. Now upon application of these
observations to your case, Momus, I fear that your dwelling so long a time as
you did upon many particular introductory parts of Physic, was the unfortunate
cause that you never arrived to a more considerable proficiency in this Art.
For to other day in rummageing a Book-seller's shop to see what rarity I could
find, I chanced to meet with a thick Quarto of yours, that I never heard of
before, called Archeologia Philosophica Nova, or, New Principles of Philosophy.
You had a good opinion of it, no doubt, for you put your Phis-nomy before it,
with your hair combed, large Band and Bandstrings, with your Outlandish
Whiskers, turned up a l' Hispaniole, and a Death's head in your left hand. The
Work is full of nothing but the introductory parts of Physic (with which your
head was then stuffed as full as ever it could hold) Philosophy in general;
Metaphysics or Ontology; Dynamilogy, or a Discourse of Power, (not Political
but Tautologico-scholastical) Religio Philosophi, or Natural Theology,
(dedicated to your Mother, in thanks for your Mother-wit) and lastly, Physics,
or Natural Philosophy.


Mom. It is a Book that I shall never be ashamed of. Suspend your Verdict upon
those Writings, until you have perused them twice, and then if disrelishing,
dishering, false or contradicting, to give your self the trouble of letting me
know my Errors in the Sense of them. But that my further duty may not prove a
regret to me, the answering of such desires in latin will oblige me to remain,
Courteous reader, your Humble Servant. preface.


Phil. Peruse them twice! I would not be condemned to such a miserable drudgery
for many a Pistole. He that reads them once, and understands what he does, will
have enough and enough of them, I Will warrant him. Young men especially, I would
warn to have a care of these Writings; and that they may take the more warning,
I Will give them a small taste of the Ocean they will there meet with in his
Natural Philosophy.

They will learn there,

That the Chaos had a form. p. 11.

The different Effects of the seven Knocks of the Chaos.

What the Catochization of a Flame is. p. 145.

Why a potch'd Egg does commonly rest it self in the middle of the water in a
Skillet. p. 66.

Why a Kiss feels pleasing to ones Lips, and why the same delightful feeling
happens also to a Dog, applying his Chops to a Bitches Tail. p. 201.

Whence it is that a man may carry a greater weight upon a Wheel-barrow than
upon his Back. p. 427.

How Virginals and Organs are made to play by themselves. p. 154.

Why a Squib turns into so many whirles in the Air. 38.

Why Feathers, Cobwebs, and other light bodies do expand themselves, when
thrown into the Air. p. 40.

Why a man, whilst he is alive, sinks down into the Water, and is drowned, and
afterward is cast up again. p. 105. And there he reprehends The trying Witches
by swimming in the water.

That Water is not moist naturally, neither does it moisten. p. 36.

That the Scent of Excrements smells sweet to a Dog. And that a Dog scents a
Bitch a great way off, although locked up, without seeing of her, and
apprehends the Scent under the Tail to be no ill Scent. p. 197.

Now these your profound Phenomenon being to my dull Apprehension very
disrelishing, dis-hering, and mere Whim-wham, you would have me give my self
the trouble of exposing your Errors in latin. Without giving my self that
trouble, (as you esteem it) the plenty of accurate latin Expressions in your
Tract de Febribus, has showed you just as good a latin Scholar, as your New
Principles of Philosophy do set you forth for an English one. But however our
Mother Tongue be the more proper for expressing our Minds at present, yet I
would not have you to despair; for if in good time a fair ocasion offers it
self (as much lies you know in your own power, you being hencefroth upon the
good Behavior) I may think it no such great trouble to be the Courteous
Reader's humble Servant, with you in Latin.

Mon. Some of these Problemes may be very divertive to Young men. But I have
provided in that Work variety of Entertainment for all sorts of Students. I
have confuted Rene des Carts his Principles in general, and in particular. I
have taught Aristotle to define Nature better than he has done. But the
strangest thing of all is, that I should be able to write so large, and learned
a Book in English, since it was never my fortune to read two sheets of any
English Book in my Life, or ever to have had the view of so much as a
title-leaf of an English Grammar. Preface.


Phil. 'Twas great pity therefore that you should never have read Lilly's Qui
mihi. There are notable Documents in it. But we see what a man may come to,
when left to himself betimes. You brought forth a thick Quarto at the very
first attempt! But how came you ever since to spawn nothing but Duodecimo's,
and Sexagesimo's? Sure you found that you had ill luck with Quarto's, otherwise
we could not have missed a Folio all this time.


Mom. I do take that Quarto to be the Glory of all my Writings. It was writ
like a Philosopher in earnest. And they, who perused it twice, as I advised
them, could not but easily perceive that I could have writ Folio's enough, if I
had thought fit. My chiefest design ever since the seventeenth Year of my Age,
when I had just finished my course in Physic, and taken my last Degree (Oh
brave boys!) consisted in elaborating such demonstrations in Natural
Philosophy, as might serve to unfold the nature of Beings in relation to the
Art of Physic, hitherto so uncertain, blind and unfounded on Art, that I dare
confidently assert, etc. ibid. Pref.


Phil. Hold, or you will make me to work (...). A little at a time, I beseech
you. A man may easily surfeit of your demonstrations, they are so hard of
concoction, and apt to lie upon the Stomach. And besides, if we take too much
of them, we shall have no room for the Banquet that lies before us, the
principal design of our present meeting. You are a man of as much might in
elaborating demonstrations, as Don Quixot was at encountering Giants and
Wind-mills. You are no less than a Knight Errant in Physic, given to vast and
daring designs, and as bold as blind Bayard, at the unfolding the nature of
Beings, hitherto (God bless us) so blind and uncertain, until all-seeing Bayard
dares confidently assert, what in his Wisdom and deep Politics he shall think
fit. It is in troth a thousand pities that every conceited soft-head should
thus be suffered to venture upon removing Mountains so much above their
strength, or to elaborate demonstrations in Natural Philosophy. You soared at
high and lofty matters from the year you were absolutely spoiled in, the
seventeenth year of your Age, for ever afterward; and from Puer imi subsellu
in the Physick-Schools, from receiving Dictates to day, nothing forsooth can
content your ambitious mind, but the being Doctor in Cathedra, the teaching
your Masters to morrow. Remember the Fate of young Icarus, who would not be
persuaded to hearken unto good Counsel. He flew high, as well as you in your
younger days. But what came of it? His wings were soon melted by the heat of
the Sun, as yours are like to be by any little Degree of heat, by way of
answer. Why the young man whilst he is alive sinks down into the water, and is
drowned, as you have it before, to the just terror of over-forward Youths, who
shall aspire at such high matters, as to teach Cicero to perform the part of an
Orator, Hannibal the Art of War, or even Aristotle how to define Nature, or
Grave Professors any thing else in relation to the Art of Physic, or the
Science of Natural Philosophy.


Mom. You may save your labor, and counsel those that will hearken to you. But
will you take so little notice of a Book of that magnitude? It is worth your
Perusal more than you are aware.


Phil. Well, if we must lose some more time, let us have your opinion of the
Divines, which made way for your New Natural Theology.


Mom. The Divines heavy dull imaginations hallucinating in the appearance of
the Scriptures, like several eyes in apparent objects of the Sky, some framing
this, others that likeness of them. I am not now to be confirmed in my belief
that the worst of Atheism is latent in many supposed Divines, their sinister
ends, cheats, and vile secret passions of the flesh, betraying their Hypocrisy.
Certainly, were I to pick (out of my own Profession) some that were to surmount
all others in wickedness, I should not need long time to ponder upon my
Verdict. Pref. You see I am not afraid to shoot my Bolt at them too, for their
heavy dull Sentiments in Theology. They do confound their small relics of
Natural Faith into a detestable Atheism, however clothed with a dissembled
time-holiness under their dark habits, to feed their covetousness out of their
Benefices. Ibid.


Phil. Fie, fie! does such Billingsgate Rhetoric become a man with Spanish
Whiskers, and a Deaths-Head in his hand? And it is the greater aggravation of
your fault, that you use such bitter expressions so near the Title leaf, and
hang them over the Door, that they may be seen by all those who have neither
leisure, nor will, to enter into the Work it self. Besides, it was not well
done, to put them for an Introduction to your Religio Philosophi, because they
neither contain the Moderation and Charity of True Religion, nor the Temperance
and Sobriety of True Philosophy. I Will warrant, that pretty tickling Title of
Religio Medici did run to and fro in your head, and you were grievously sorry
that it was taken up before. For otherwise I dare confidently assert, you would
never have been contented with Religio Philosophi. But if you will give me
leave to deliver my Verdict, and without long pondering upon the Business, you
ought in propriety of speech, to have called it Morosophia Juvenilis, or
Religio Stulti. You know I reprehended you a little for abusing Solomon's
Words, and grinning as you did when you made him mingle Nonsense. But now in a
serious mood, deliberately, and in prepense Malice, to call so many Divines,
without restriction, Cheats, and Hypocrites, Blockheads and Atheists, deserves
a more severe Correction than an ordinary Reprimand. I have seen naughty Youths
of above seventeen whipped soundly for much less faults. Now as for that
detestable thing called Atheism, I should think it very serviceable for the
public, if all Boys, and Buffoons, inconsiderate Scriblers, and Soft-heads,
were strictly prohibited from meddling at all with it. For all their weak and
ridiculous defenses of Truth against Atheism do only serve to raise Devils
which they have not the Wit to lay again. And to conclude, I have that just
veneration for Holy Persons, and Holy things, (which no body ought so much as
to play with, much less mortally to hate) that I would rather even suffer you
(as you did before) to bewray your own Nest, than profanely to meddle with
matters of Theology.


Mom. Why, then let us return and see how affairs stand with the Conclave.
There you will discern that some Physicians get a greater Reputation by
killing, than others by curing. p. 28.


Phil. You know best who those Some Physicians are that have such a cunning
knack of getting reputation. They may be your Particular Acquaintance, and you
speak indefinitely of them. Indeed some Physicians (who are tried and
experienced in their Art, and are known to be through-paced in the Practice of
Physic) though they may have some Patients dye under their hands, let them do
their best, may yet deserve, and doubtless do get greater Reputation by their
excellent Management and apparent Skill, than others, either desperate
Chemists, or professed Empiricks, or other ignorant Undertakers can possibly
deserve, though a Patient may have escaped under their hands. Momus, I do much
doubt, for all that we have your word for it, that any inhumane Physicians of
your Acquaintance do get such mighty Reputation by downright Killing, and more
than our Collegiates do by their Curing; take my word for this, that however
the Curers may for some time (as you know there is a time for all things) be
hindered in gaining their deserved Reputation, yet one Curer will at the long
run become conspicuous in the face of the Sun, and in the middle of this great
City, when an hundred of your infamous Killers must be fain to lurk in
obscurity and little corners, not daring to show their heads before the face of
the Illustrious Curer.


Mom. Some Physicasters by reputing themselves Virtuoso 's, Mathematicians,
Philosophers, and witty Cracks, have insinuated this Enthymeme to the
Commonalty, that therefore they must necessarily arrive to the top of their
Profession; for since their porous Brain was capable to imbibe such knotty
Mysteries, it is not improbable, they might much easier suck up the quintessence
of the Art of Medicine. To this Category belonged that famed Doctor of Norwich,
who being Posted away from his House with a Coach and Four, to a sick
Gentleman, etc. p. 49.


Phil. Do those Physicasters repute themselves Virtuoso's, Mathematicians etc.
as wretched and pitiful Scriblers do repute themselves good Writers? Or are not
those Virtuoso's, Mathematicians, and Philosophers, insipidly called
Physicasters? The Virtuoso, among all the rest, that you pitch upon to fleer at
is, forsooth, that famed Doctor of Norwich, the very man to whom you were so
highly beholding for furnishing you with that notable hint of Religio
Philosophi, taken plainly from that leading Card, Religio Medici. But it is not
fair, that because one excellent Physician, a man of sense, did once write a
Religio Medici, that therefore every Sylliton must follow the Example, and
broach New Religions, or rather Irreligious Whimsies to the Worlds end. but why
is it that you have such an aching tooth at this ever-famous Doctor of Norwich,
that City being seated so much out of the way, and at such a distance from
London? Certainly your mouth watered at that Province for your Practice; and it
is the more likely, because you made two Stages of your Practice, in the way
toward it, at Chelmsford, and at Ipswich. Indeed you did not stay long in
those places, whether it were that you had some final innuendo's (as you call
them) from the ill-affected Inhabitants to depart in peace from among them, or
that it be the destiny of your troublesome life to be always an Erratick
Physicaster, and upon the Travel, as it is said some Physicians of old were;
though the difference is great between their Travels and yours: the fame of
those old Physicians did cause them to be courted out of one Country into
another, whereas the miscarriages of New-fanglers, do make every Country think
it a blessed riddance to part with 'em. And now let us consider the pretty
story you tell of this Eminent Doctor. The catching a gaudy Butterfly made him
lose so much time, that the Patient was dead before he came. Here I observe
that you make them hunt the Butterfly so long, that one would think they were
rather hunting a wild Bore, or a sturdy Stag, than a poor fluttering Butterfly.
Again, the Coach-driver is made to have no more wit, than to leave his four
Horses to the wide World, and to go a hunting too over Hill and Dale, after the
Fly: And what was the Patient's disease? A Syncopal Fit, or in plain English, a
Swound. Do Syncopal Fits use to last so long, whilst four Horses can be
harnessed, and sent to the Doctor, and his coming expected? You show us here
your great Skill in Diseases. Syncope est praeceps omnium virium lapsus: A
Swound is a sudden failure of the Faculties, both Vital and Animal. The very
Pulse is gone, and the Person too for good and all, if there be not some
Friends by to throw water in his Face, to lay him upon his Back, to pull him by
the Hair, to wind his Fingers, and to give him some Cordial immediately. They
are not to fold their hands, and be mere Spectators, waiting for the Doctor's
Cordial, and Presence. If they be so silly, the Gentleman will be as cold as
Marble, long before the Doctor can come, let him post away as fast as he will.
Doubtless therefore the Doctor was sent for, by way of prevention against the
future, not to cure in all haste the Syncopal Fit. So that, Momus, you have
told a very likely Tale, and the Virtuosi are like to suffer much by it.

The Mathematician you fling at, for getting the Reputation of a Great
Physician upon that account, is really a very extraordinary Person, and
deservedly arrived to the very top of his Profession; he has approved himself
not only a Prime Physician, but a most Dextrous Surgeon, he is not only a most
Acute Mathematician, but a man of universal Learning, and lastly a most
accomplished Courtier, and every way very much a Gentleman. But because your
head is shallow, no body's else must have any depth; because your Worm takes up
such a deal of room, Great Men must not be allowed one spare corner, even for
the Mathematics. Aristotle is said to observe, that every idle Coxcomb can
make a Philosopher of one kind or other, but that only curious Wits are capable
of learning to purpose those Knotty Mysteries, the Mathematics.

Philosophers, and Philosophy, are nowadays a thing exceeding cheap and
common, and though it were once an inestimable Jewel, yet it has been so often
counterfeited and abused by insipid and fantastical Youngsters, scribbling Books
of Natural Philosophy, that there are few of the Conclavists that will now so
mightily contend for it. Yet there is one thing, wherein I cannot but
acknowledge them very Great Philosophers. They have for diverse years undergone
your insolent Taunts, and vile Detractions, with a Philosophical Patience, and
Magnanimity, nay even with a kind of Stoical Insensibility, when they had Pens
among them, which could put you to so much confusion and shame; that if you
have any sense of Truth, Honesty, or Honor, you could not avoid the more than
half-hanging your self, rather than undergo the torment they would put you to.

As for your Witty Cracks, we shall give you free leave (and take it kindly of
you) to ingross the whole Monopoly of that Commodity to your self, and your
Cronies, if you have any. A Crack is a Common Shore of filth and nastiness,
that has lost all sense of shame or modesty. She represents all good Men to be
bad, and bad she makes to be worse than they are. She is made up of Lies,
Deceit and Hypocrisy; and take this for a Truth, Whatsoever she says is false.
Never believe her stories, though she swears upon her Soul, or her Salvation,
or though she does (with you in your Preface) protest, and call Heaven to
witness, to this Wheedle, or to that Untruth. And the wittier the Crack is, so
much the more is she to be avoided. For she will pick your Pocket in her
Embraces, and her Snares are hard to be discovered. She is a dangerous and
infectious Creature, and let her paint, or mask it how she will, she will at last
make you to find by sad, though late, Experience (as one of them once told a
Gentleman of my Acquaintance, who taxed the Damosel for unkindly giving him
more than his due) that if you will fish, you must catch Frogs sometimes. How
came she by it?

The only sure way to escape the Infection of Witty Cracks, is the same we
observe for avoiding the Plague, to fly before them, and not to come near them.
For if you will dally and play about their Flame, think it no marvel if your
wings be burnt some time or other, and at last you meet not with a gentle, but
virulent and destructive Pox.

But alas! The heads of the Commonalty are apt to be intoxicated with Enthymems
and Categories, or rather to be puzzled with Fustian and Bombast. You tell them,
in pure Nonsense, that the Physicaster's porous Brain is thought capable to
imbibe Knotty Mysteries, as if Knots were liquid, and the imbibing, or drinking
Knots were as common as drinking the King's Health. And by the same
Catachrestical Metaphor they suck up the Quintessence of Medicine, whereas it
is much safer for a Ninny to suck a Bull than to suck Medical Quintessences,
because they are so hot in the mouth. Now, Momus, you see what it is for
half-witted people to meddle with Wit. Wit is a two-edged Tool, that Fools and
Children are absolutely forbid to play with. If they do, it is ten to one they
cut their own fingers with it, before they have done.


Mom. You have been horrible tedious upon this Paragraph, and will tire a sober
Reader's Patience. I have great variety of divertising and curious passages for
you, and you even run your self out of breath upon one thing. Leave this light
and whimsical Raillery, and you shall hear me preach serious and sober Matter.


Phil. The field is so large and fruitful, that I cannot help expatiating in
it. A tolerable good Physician will draw some good out of any ill Plant, and
you are well acquainted with that trite Aphorism (though you know best, who
made it an Aphorism) viz. that there is nothing so hurtful or poisonous, be it
Spider or Toad, but has it is use. p. 97. And so you must give me leave to
provide you some good and beneficial Instructions, though the Subject be never
so bad. Why, every Paragraph could spin out into a laudable Duodecimo, or
Sexagesimo, if there were not such an abundance of new matter pressing
earnestly for admittance. Therefore let us hear you preach some sober serious
business.


Mom. Those who shall have listed themselves in the Service of the great God,
and by assuming Orders, distinguish themselves from the Laity; exercising that
most honorable Function, by praying, preaching, and their exemplary Life and
Conversation, to the glory of their great Master, and the saving of Souls from
Perdition, those I say that shall do this only for a time. etc. p. 57, 58.


Phil. Bless me! That such good Words should drop out of so foul a mouth! That
a man who so lately profaned God's Priesthood, and called the Divines Cheats,
Hypocrites, and Atheists, should now so strangely transform himself into a
precious Saint! that most honorable Function, the great God, their great
Master, and the saving of Souls from Perdition: These are very serious words,
and ought not to be used in Masquerade. Doubtless you would never have thus
lifted up your Eyes to Heaven, proclaimed a Fast, and made this Preachment;
unless the murdering some man's Reputation were very near. Momus, this Nation
has suffered too much already from the Intrigues and Designs, and the direful
Effects of Hypocritical Canting. We should as soon believe Hugh Peter's
Incarnate again, as give any credit to you, when you preach Godliness. But tell
me, what mischief is now upon the Anvil, and against whom?


Mom. It is against one, who (Scelus horrendum!) from the Divine Ministry,
betook himself to the Exercise of Physic. Do you think that I (who could be
heartily contented that there were no Physicians at all, and with whom it has
been a Maxim a good while, The fewer Physicians the better:) think you that I
can endure with Patience, that other Professions should thus dare to trespass
upon their Neighbors Copyhold, or Fee? My Wrath rises at such men, let them
be never so Learned.


Phil. You are much in the right, Momus, in what you said last, yet it was much
to the Glory of Caesar, that he was ex utroque Caesar, that be had both the Pen
of an Excellent Orator, and could write curious Commentaries with it; and also
that he had a keen and invincible Sword, with which he cut down all his
Superiors, and established himself in the Imperial Throne. The Soul and the
Body are linked together in a most strict Union, and in all likelihood the
Physicians of the Soul have full as hard, if not a harder Task, to cure men's
Vices, and correct their Manners, than Physicians of the Body can have to cure
their Diseases, and purge their Bodies from peccant humors. But yet the Person
you mean has proved no shatter-brain in the Faculty of Physic, nor has he
spent his time to little purpose, like an unsteady Rambler; he has taken his
Doctor's Degree where you were once, to their shame and sorrow, Matriculated.


Mom. Can it be imagined, that one who had for several years mounted the
Pulpit, should to increase his Fame in Physic, be guilty of so palpable an
Imposture, as to assert publicly, that by giving six grains of Salt of Ambar,
he had caused a Dropsical Patient to piss the measure of a Kilderkin? In short,
libera nos from those that practice Physic in Nomine Domini. p. 62, 63.


Phil. This wild Freak, and improbable Chimaera, can hardly be imagined by any
but Momus himself. You may as well publicly assert, that it has rained Nuts
and Suggar-plums, or that you can cure all incurable Diseases with a wet
Finger, as persuade the World that a man of sense, especially a Physician of
the Conclave, should thus sillily talk of curing Dropsies. The true State of
the case, according to the best information I have of it, is thus: This
Physician, and another of the same Confederacy, joined in Consultation, upon a
Patient that had been troubled with the Strangury, and who had hardly made any
water in nine or ten days, did advise the taking Salt of Ambar, among other
things; not six grains, as you ignorantly pronounce, but more than three times
six, and repeated Doses. The things he took did open the Tap, and set the water
a running, not to a Kilderkin (you might as well have said to a Tunn) but to
about a Gallon, which was much to the Patient's Ease, as well as the mirth of
sneering Bussoons. This was the Foundation upon which you built this pretty
contrivance of a story, wherein you mistook unconscionably the Patient's
Disease, the Remedy and the Effect. And by such gross or wilful mistakes in one
Case a man may judge of your Candor and Sincerity in the rest. But, in short,
you are not for libera nos from those that practice Physic in Romine Domini,
you are altogether for those that practice Physic in Romine Diaboli.


Mom. Upon those, that lay so weighty a stress on their Opiniator Methods,
ought to be imposed a Voyage to Russia, there to exercise their Galenicisms
upon the Boyars, and others of their next subordinate quality, who receive
Physic from the hands of their Medico's upon no other condition or terms, than
if the Pills, Potions, Powders, and Bleedings, have not the pretended success,
those that advised them, are to justify the rationality and experience of them
upon their own Bodies, in a double proportion. As thus: A noble Patient having
by three or four Bleedings received a palpable prejudice, or possibly his
untimely dispatch into the other World, the advising Physician for a punishment
of his unwarrantable and unskilful rashness, is to be blooded six or eight
times, etc. p. 76, 77.


Phil. What sort of Medical Hotch-potch are you made of, Momus, that thus
unwittily talk of Opiniator Methods, and Galenicisms. Ever now and then you
besprinkle your Tracts with the venerable Name of Galen, and would hint as if
you were not a little versed in his Methods and Writings, but now they are all
Galenicisms, and ridiculous Solecisms, as the Worm will have it. Neither the
Novelties of Helmontius, or Rene des Carts please you at all, nor the ancient
Methods of Galen, which have passed the Test and Approbation of so many ages.
New and Old, Jest and Earnest, Right or Wrong, are all alike Bad, when Momus in
his Dream stumbles upon them. And who is the greater Opiniator? Either Galen,
who was so modest, that he never put his Name (much less his Picture) before
any of his Books, as you may read in his seventh Book, de Methodo Medendi; or
Momus who writes his Name to every Tract in Great Letters, and who one while
writes himself Physician in Ordinary to his Majesty, and in the time of the
Rebellion, Fellow of the College of Physicians at the Hague (thanks to his
Mother's Bohemian Interest) another while he styles himself (after his Name in
Great Letters) Med. Spag. Dogm. Chir. and Phil. D. perhaps in imitation of Dn.
Aureol. Philip. Theophrast. Bombast. ab Hoenhaim, or Paracelsus. To day he
tells you his Name, with plain M. D. without a word of his Degree of Bachelor;
to morrow he is only Physician in Ordinary to His Majesty, and not a word of
the College at the Hague. So that, Momus, you are always at variance even with
your own Titles. A Lad at School shall have something to do, to turn and wind a
Golden Verse into Changes, so often as you can do your Gilded Titles.


Mom. Every Body cannot vary the Phrase, as I have had the Honor to do, in the
Title-Leaf. But what think you, would not that excellent Custom of Russia, if
practiced here, make our Galenists to quit the English Stage, and to travel, as
I have done, into other Countries?


Phil. You are grossly ignorant, I perceive, of the State of Russia, or else
abominably malicious. However I shall give my self the trouble to inform you a
little. The Muscovites have so fond an opinion of the Physicians Skill, that
they do make him to be Infallible, and Omnipotent in his way, and if a Patient
miscarry, they impute it to his want of will to save the man, and not to
Nature, or the defect of Art. Hence some of them, as being bred mere
Barbarians, and being all ignorant in any point of Learning, may perhaps pass
some indignities upon their Physician, when he does not fully answer their
groundless Expectation. But that conceit of yours, their making the Physician
to bleed a double quantity himself, and the swallowing down double the quantity
of a Purge he gives, when it has not the desired effect, I do take to be the
pure invention of Momus, who cannot for his life tell a story as he should do,
but has the frail memory of common Liars, and so adulterates every Truth he
hears with some gross alloy of Falsehood. It is no new thing for the best
Physician to meet sometimes with an unworth treatment. And so Prosper Alpinus
de Medicin. Egypt. lib. 1. cap. 3. tells us how Physic came to degenerate
there from the Rational Ancient Methods into a mere obsequiousness, and the
treating or flattering Symptoms, instead of encountering the Causes of
Diseases, as Galen teaches to do in his 9th Book de Meth. Med. Hic corruptus
medendi modus non a priscorum illorum medicorum ignorantia principium duxit,
sed ut ex Aegyptiis historiarum peritis audivi, a barbara priscorum Aegypto
imperantium tyrannide; tempore enim quo Mamaluchi illiusce regionis obtinebant
imperium, omnia ea loca Medicis doctissimis florebant, qui dogmatice summaque
cum ratione medicinam faciebant, sed tanta erat ea in dominis barbaries, ut
optimi illi doctissimique medici vel rebus been gestis saepe lucri loco ab iis
contumeliis afficerentur. Illorum aliquis dolor aliquo correptus non secus
quam furens bestia, subito ut sanaretur imperabat, quod cum non semper ita cito
eveniret, pessime miseros eos Medicos tractabat. Alpinus has in the same place
much more to the same purpose. But to return to Russia, (without the imposition
of a Voyage thither) although some particular brutish Bojar (who perhaps knows
no difference between a Pearl and a Pebble, and who probably is not so well
civilized as a Boore or a Peasant in the Southern parts of Europe) may possibly
have been as rude as a Bear, and as unmannerly to his Physician, as the Author
of the Conclave is to the Faculty of Physic; yet the Czars, or Emperors of
Russia, have more than once applied themselves to our Princes, to beg the
Favor of a Physician from hence. In Queen Elizabeth's time the Fame of our
Learned and Skilful Collegiates had so far reached the Ears of the Czar, that
he sent Letters on purpose to that Great Queen, to beseech her, that she would
send him a Physician to his Person. And the Queen sent him Doctor James, a
Fellow of the College, with a Royal Letter, in which, among others, are these
words. Quod hominum genus (meaning Physicians) quoniam and plurimarum rerum
cognitionem, and morum probitatem non vulgarem postulat; Noluimus vel non parum
providae esse salutis tuae, vel negligenter honoris nostri, quin virum tam
probitatis laud insignem, quam cognitionis in re medica, usasque laud
commendatissimum, ad te mitteremus, eaque propter e domesticis, e nostris ex
eorum numero, qui corporis salutisque nostrae, secundum Deum, custodes sunt,
Robertum Jacob. in Medicina Doctorem, virum literatum artis suae peritissimum,
morum honestate probatissimum, ad te mittimus; non quia libenter eo careremujs,
sed quoniam tibi, tanguam nobis volumus and cogitamus facere been: Eum ut pari
cum gratia a nobis accipias, and honor merito prosequaris, etiam atque etiam
rogamus, etc. The Annals of the College do mention others afterward sent
thither on the same account, whither there would hardly have ventured a Second
after the First, if they had not known how to value men, under God so
exceedingly useful. The Learning of the Russians goes no farther than to write
and read in their own Language. And he that can do that, is a great Scholard
among them. One of our sorry Astrologers, who has Skill enough to understand an
Ephemeris, and thence to read and foretell the time of the Moon, and Eclipses,
shall infallibly be esteemed a Conjurer, and a dealer in the Black Art. They
think there is more Wisdom in the Beard than the Word of him that has a Beard,
than the Oath of a smooth-faced Gentleman. They will write upon their Knees,
though a Table stands before them. They are a savage, sottish, shameless
people, (as Olearius tells us) and can never learn any good of their
Neighbour-Countries, because every Russ is forbid upon severe penalty to
travel, or see Fashions abroad; and if any Rambler has not the wit to hold his
tongue, but must be blabbing what fine things he has seen without doors, his
Tongue shall most certainly be cut out, that he may tell no more Tales. The
best of it is, they are of a healthy and strong Constitution, and are seldom
sick, Drunkenness excepted. When they are, Garlic and Strong Water are all
their Remedies (even in a Fever) because they know no better. But now their
Bojars begin to know the happiness of having a good Physician, and can
distinguish well enough between such a one a Mountebank, who will commonly let
down his Breeches before them, and show all he has to the Multitude, in order
to recommend his other Accomplishments.


Mom. I have enough and enough of these Muscovians, but after I had flung my
Wildfire to frighten my Conclave-Enemies, I gave you a Memoire of fatal
Memory. But did the public good so much influence any honest judicious
Physician, as to become an Observator of such Methodists; in the space of a
year he might exceed a Volume larger than the Septuagints; but then for that
term it is necessary he should have a Sauve-garde, to save his Brains from being
knocked out. p. 79.


Phil. I know your beloved Maxim: Fling dirt enough, and some will stick; and
know from whom you learned it in your Travels. We fear no just and honest
Observator. Such an Observator is one that has wit and ingenuity in abundance.
He writes good sense and apposite words, and scorns to rake the Kennel for
abominable and filthy stories to abuse and bespatter his Superiors. In a word,
he is so consistent with himself, that let him write never so many Volumes, he
will defy Momus to convict him of one plain Untruth. We know likewise, what a
long and hard Labor you had to bring forth the First Part of your Conclave,
and what Pain and Gripes you have endured about it, ever since the Publication
of your Casus. There in the Description of your Unfortunate, and illbestowed
Education you give us in Shorthand an Abbrege or Embryo of this illshapen
Monster; you told us there in few words the greatest part of those unlikely
stories, which were in time, and with good husbandry, to grow into a distinct
Pamphlet. But considering how large the Town is, and how willing many an angry
Nurse, discarded Apothecary, or discontented Melancholic Patient, might prove
to furnish scandalous matter for your premeditate and longintended purpose;
certainly you had but very little Interest, or Power, and would find it a
harder task than you think it, to take together a sufficient number of
scandalous Aspersions, in order to equal, much less exceed a Volume larger than
the Septuagints, in the space of a year. Especially if you do take the
Septuagints to be seventy Volumes, as perhaps you may. But it may be you might
have taken the hint of the Septuagints from its dear Relation to the Year
seventeen, the Year of Triumph, and everjoyful Memory, for sake of those early
Degrees of yours, both of Bachelor and Doctor. Again, What great matter is
there in your Second Part of the Conclave, besides Crambe his costa, the same
jarring Tune grateing ingenious Ears over again, a little more stuff of the
Jesuits Powder, of which it is very easy to collect enough to make a
Discourse, after so much written, as there is, by the French, and others,
concerning it. Then indeed you show your Wit as well as Goodness, in most
shamefully persecuting the Ghost of the late Glory of Physic, Dr. Willis. De
mortuis nil nisi been, say we; but with you it is, Nil nisi male tm de mortuis
quam vivis. After this, you add almost four leaves of Animadversion, on the
five leaves in the First Part, which are said to contain the chief Subject of
this Treatise; all the rest being doubtless very impertinent, or at least of
mean concern, in comparison with the Chief-subject. Next, you give the
Apothecaries more of your Correction than they deserve, which must needs cause
a very strange Wonderment in any one, that does not consider it is Kindness of
Momus his bestowing. After which, you entertain us with a long Story of a Lady,
which single Story you call in the Title of the Chapter, Some eminent Cases in
Physic. Now if it were so easy as you would hint, to exceed a Volume larger
than the Septuagints, with your scurrilous, and often profane Ribaldry, you
would not serve us as you do, fill our expectations with some eminent Cases in
Physic, and at last put us off with one only Case and no more.

But then (if you should write so large a Volume) for that term (or rather for
that piece of Nonsense) it is necessary youshould have a Sauvegarde, to save
your Brains from being knocked out. No, no! Momus, you need not fear the
knocking out of that which you never had, or lost long ago. Your Skull is
thick enough to defend you against Knocks, and especially of such who use only
Argumenta Galenica, not Bacilina. We never order Madmen to be knocked o'tho'
head, but to be tied and bound fast enough, and to be kept in safe Custody that
they may do no more mischief, either to themselves, or others. And, Momus, I
dare engage, that is all you need fear from our Actions of the Cases how large a
Volume so ever you scribble, Of eminent Cases in Physic.


Mom. I am not only of opinion, but possibly certain, etc. p. 83.


Phil. We shall not have room for all your odd Opinions, and possible
Certainties; or rather plain uncertainties. We should run into a Volume larger
than the Septuagints, if we should undertake to examine the truth of all your
idle Opinions, and uncertain possibilities; or your Whimsical Conceits,
frequent Incoherences, pert and dull Expressions, and the gross Errors you
commit, even in your own Mother Tongue. This is not possibly the last time you
and I may meet. And I would have some pity upon the Reader, not to overcharge
him too much at a time; lest he should come to nauseate the very sight of such
course and insipid Fare, as you do help us to. Give us some of your Certain
Conclusions, which you have drawn (by head and shoulders) from the best of your
Observation.


Mom. Why then, I may justly conclude, among a hundred Physicians you shall
find ninety five learned Mountebanks, and possibly five Real Physicians. p. 85.


Phil. The whole Body of the College does not yet make up the Number of a
hundred Physicians, so that (to fill up) we would admit one scabbed Sheep into
the sound Flock, in hopes to cure him. But where to place you, I know not. Sure
you will not have the impudence to pretend to a Place among the five Real
Physicians; and as for the Learned Mountebanks, in troth you have not yet
deserved so good a Title. For it is no great point of Learning to resolve
Phenomenon about Wheel-barrows and Potch'd Eggs, to descant upon the Whirles of
Squibbs, or the Expansion of Feathers and Cobwebs; but especially about the
Application of a Dog's Chops to a Bitches Tail, or to explicate and give deep
Reasons why a Dog apprehends the Scent of the Excrements under the Bitches Tail
to be no ill Scent. These nice points might do very well for a Merry-Andrew,
but can by no means become the Grandeur and Dignity of a Learned Mountebank.
Learning is a thing of great Value and deserved Esteem, even among the
Unlearned. It is a Rarity too in my Opinion, and unless we look after True
Learning among a hundred Physicians, I cannot tell where to find it in such
plenty among a hundred of any other Profession. You conclude then, that there
are Ninety five Learned Men in the hundred Physicians, but your kindness must
be (...), bitter as well as sweet, they must be Mountebanks forsooth! Prithee
which are most like Mountebanks, either those Modest, Learned, Methodical, and
Experienced Men, who never vaunt and boast more than they can do, but often do
more than they say; or he that dares presume to say, I my self have divulged
more new Anatomical Observations, which are of greater use, than all of 'em in
a Bundle. See Preface, and who, p. 100. presumes to say, I dare undertake in a
Weeks time, to inform the most illiterate Capacity, having but an ordinary
Memory, how to manage those five Courses (before mentioned) with a better
Method, and far greater Success, than any of these Anatomical Pretenders ever
were fortuned with. And I can easily make it appear, that it is possible to
comprehend as many plain and necessary Instructions, Rules, and Remedies in one
single Sheet, that by observing of them, any man without other advice may in
most Cases cure himself, with far greater safety, speed, and success, than the
best of the Pretenders to Anatomy could ever yet challenge, or lay claim unto.
Ibid.

Here you have outdone Thessalus himself, that most impudent pretender, as
Galen calls him, and gives us an account of him in his first Book de meth.
medendi, a subject you are often apt to talk of. This brazen-faced Empirick was
grown to that height of folly and rashness, at Rome, that he proclaimed he
could teach the whole Art of Physic in half a Years time, without men's
applying themselves to any other study, or learning any thing more. Wherefore
Cobblers, Diers, Carpenters, and Smiths, being enticed by his bold and easy
pretenses, did at that time, says Galen, whole crowds of them leave their
Handycrafts, and under that Master did betake themselves to physic (which
ought to have been most Sacred to such men) to the destruction of Mankind. What
would that great Physician have said, think you, if he had heard of your dare
undertake in a Weeks time at London, and of your one single sheet, wherein you
say, you can easily make it appear, that any man may by you be taught in most
cases to Cure himself with far greater safety, speed, and success, than the
best of the pretenders to Anatomy could ever yet challenge, or lay claim unto:
Whereas that through-pac'd admirable Physician, in the Book aforesaid, used the
very argument of Anatomy against Thessalus his shameful pretenses, urging that
all Philosophers, and knowing men, did with one consent agree, that no man
could be able to Cure Diseases, nor had any right to offer at it, until he had
first searched into the nature of the whole Body, by understanding its Anatomy.
Now though half a year be a very short time for Carpenters, Diers, and Smiths,
to learn the whole Art of Physic, you have out-shot him exceedingly, who can
in one single sheet, and in a Weeks time, teach any man stranger things than
all the Empiricks before you. One word more: though Thessalus did (as you now
do) speak mighty things of himself, and in an Epistle he writ to Nero, had
these arrogant expressions: Seeing that I do make a new Sect of Physicians, and
the only one of all that is true, because all the Physicians who have been
before me, have writ nothing that is useful, either to the preservation of
Health, or the Cure of Diseases. And afterward says he, Hippocrates has taught
pernicious Principles. At this rate did that Rhodomontado then yelp against
Physicians, and though he did crack and bounce (as you will needs now do) yet
what is become of his Communitates and Syncritica, etc. They are all gone,
perished and forgot. We should never have heard of the Wretch by his own
Writings, unless Galen had thought fit to give a check to his presumption, by
vouchsafing to expose his folly to Posterity. Now you, Momus, must expect a
worse fate of Oblivion; for though you have provoked with tooth and nail the
Galens, as well as the Galenists of our time, to take notice of your malevolent
and scurrilous Pamphlets against the Faculty, yet you see none of those great
men will do you that Honor, looking on your rage and madness with more
Contempt than Anger. I would advise you to write your next Project against
Physicians in Latin, and if you follow the Copy of that pure, elegant, smooth,
and oh how excellent Pattern of that nonpareil de Febribus, you will give the
greater diversion; however take your own way, write either in your own style,
having a care of Priscian's head; or after that indifferent good Latinist,
Thomas Willis his style, I Will promise you for your Comfort, you shall be
answered in Latin (the thing you once longed for) and if the best Pens be too
busy to mind you, you shall have your Match at least, a Pen (don't you doubt)
as good as your own, and of a Galemst too, a great admirer of excellent men, a
natural Enemy both to Fopps and turbulent Spirits, and yet one who will give
even a Devil in Physic his Due.


Mom. But is not that a great matter for a lonely solitary man, who so seldom
sees the face of any Real Physician, and who scorns to have any Knowledge of
them; is it not a mighty matter that he should thus be able to teach all the
World out of his own simple Observation?


Phil. Yes, yes, it would be wonderful strange, if Sir Politic should among
his other Conclusions, draw as Army of forty Thousand Men out of the Ventricles
of his Brain, and muster them in his Bedchamber, whilst a Man can crack a Nut.
It would be a wonderful matter if a Lad should write good Latin, before he can
speak common Sense; but especially if a Child should at seven years old, or a
Boy before seventeen (the year that it has been done in, to our everlasting
astonishment) should, because he cries and roars, be dubbed Bachelor and
Doctor, in order to make him quiet. What strange Physical Projections such
young and early Doctors might in time bring about, I cannot well comprehend;
but we that have been of a slower growth, and who have learned long since (not
from you, who do cant it impertinently in the beginning of your first Chapter
of the Conclave) that Life is short, and Art is long: We know the Art of
Physic to be a much longer business, than to be any ways comprehended in one
single sheet: As we know, that every thing is not Gospel, which a Mountebank
comprehends in his Printed Paper of Directions. You cannot but know better
things too, but your Spleen works into your Head, and suggests many ridiculous
Melancholic Whimsies, which ought to be imputed to your Distemper, and is the
true cause that your Pen runs so fast before your Wit. But give your reason,
why you thus condemn very unmercifully ninety five of a hundred Physicians to
be only Learned Mountebanks.


Mom. They are those false Methodists, who boast, that with Opium and Jesuits
Powder, they can Cure all Diseases. Neither are they advanced to a much higher
form, that imagine ordinary Dispensatories are sufficiently stockt with
Medicines adequate to the Cure of all Diseases, whereas they contain sew
others, than such as may serve for vehicles for greater Medicines, or are only
virtuated to remove slight supersicial Distempers. Whence I may justly
conclude, etc. as before, p. 84, 85.


Phil. Ex ore tuo te judico. Once more I must return to consult the Preface
(beforementioned) to your Tract of the Scurvy, the Disease of London, as you
call it, though I doubt you can give no great reason to Philosophers, why the
Scurvy should be more the Disease of London, than other Places, especially the
Maritime Towns. Only you calculated that Tract for the Meridian of London, to
tempt Londoners to take good notice of the Authors Name, and Titles, and to
give them a hint what notable help they might expect from this Man of Might,
who is able to write a Book about it, and can teach others how to Cure this
reigning London-Disease. But first, who are they, and those false Methodists,
who boast such ridiculous and improbable things? I openly challenge you to name
one Man of the Conclave, or any other related to it by the way of Domestic
Degrees, who has been so vain and silly, as to boast, that with Opium and
Jesuits Powder, he can cure all Diseases. This I can tell you, from an Eminent
Druggist, who is best able to judge, what vent there is of Druggs, that he has
not known so sorry a Market, for the Jesuits Powder, this many a Year as this
last Year of all. He never sold near so little, since it came first into play.
And he will now sell the very best Jesuits Powder for twenty shillings the
Pound, or under, who five or six Years ago sold it for eight Pounds the Pound.
So that instead of Curing all Diseases, you see it grows to be a mere Drugg.
And for Opium, he could not observe any greater vent of late than ordinary.
Some of that indeed must be always used, for making Venice-Treacle and
Mithridate. Now read me what this Scurvy Author said to the business of
Dispensatories, that we may compare Notes a little between him, and this
Antagonistical Paragraph.


Mom. The Pharmacopoea compiled by the whole body of this Apollinean Society
(meaning the Conclave) does justly merit the Character of a most Elaborate
Work, from those that shall compare the several compositions in it with their
Original, where the amendments of omitting of superfluous, incongruous, or
asymetrous ingredients, and substituting of necessary and proportionate
Correctives, are to every eye very obvious, and their care, that those
Medicines be neatly and artificiality prepared by the Apothecaries of London,
has proved so successful, that Travelers are obliged to Attest, that Pharmacy
is in no foreign part so much improved, as it is here. And a little after,
still I must say, that Medicines are no where so neatly, so honestly, and so
skilfully prepared as here at London, and in that particular you may easily
believe me a judge, etc. Preface to the London Disease.


Phil. You have here given a high Character of our Pharmacopoea, as of a most
Elaborate Work, and Travelers, you say, are obliged to attest it; so that we
will easily take your judgment in this case, and not expect from our
Dispensatory Medicines adequate to the Cure of all Diseases, no more than from
Opium and Jesuits Powder. We do not expect to make men Immortal, no more than
to free them from the common accidents of humane Life, from the unavoidable
Malice and Detraction of ill men. Waspish Bees will sting many times without a
cause, though they become Drones by their little spite; Dogs will snarl and
bark, as well as delightfully apply their Chops to a Bitches Tail. We may as
well expect the Wind to blow always from the same corner, or the Tide never to
flow, as that inconsiderate Scriblers should not write palpable
Inconsistencies, and gross Contradictions. Momus, you even shoot at Rovers, and
therefore it is no wonder you so often miss your mark. But Dispensatories are
not sufficiently stocked with Medicines adequate to the Cure of all Diseases.
It is plain that your head runs strangely upon the Cure of all Diseases,
notwithstanding that you lay all the blame upon Vtopian Methodists, who deal so
extravagantly in Opium, and Jesuits Powder. We do take it pro consesso, that
the Dispensatory-Medicines can cure some Diseases, but you say they are only
virtuated to remove slight superficial Distempers. Now I do take the Vinum
Benedictum, Oxymel Elleboratum, Theriaca Andromachi, Mithridate, Merturius
dultis, Pilulae e duobus, Spiritus Salis Armoniaci, Lavendulae compositus,
Nitri, etc. to be virtuated with a great deal stronger qualities, than only for
removing slight superficial Distempers. Some of them might do very well in your
own Distemper, which is no slight and superficial one, but very tough and
untoward, very deep and remote, in the most inward recesses of your Skull; and
which occasions your writings to be so slight and superficial. Let me advise
you before you write again, to try the virtue of some of them, especially the
two first. For otherwise we may have such an abundance of filthy, nasty stuff,
thrown forth, altogether unbecoming a man of your Education, that the sight of
it will be apt to nauseate the very stomach of any tolerable, or Indifferent
Reader, and may make him cast in spite of his teeth.


Mom. Were it put to debate which of these two sorts of Sharlatans, viz. the
Anatomical Theater-Mounter, or the Orvietan Bank-Mounter, is the greater
Impostor, it would beyond all peradventure be determined by men of Brains, in
favor of the latter, etc. p. 89.


Phil. Were it put to debate, which of your Legs, the right or the left, ought
to go first, beyond all peradventure they would kick up one another heels
during the contest or debate. For you so often declare for the wrong side, and
when you fight, take the wrong end of the staff, that any man of Brains must
needs wonder how you can ever be in the right. And how ignorantly you talk of
Anatomical Theatre-Mounters! You such a mighty man in Anatomy, and not know the
Structure of an Anatomical Theater! Their Theaters are not mounted, or raised
like the Recreation. Theaters above the Pit, or the Mountebank-Theatres above
the People, but the Doctors do stand or sit as level with the Floor, as a
Gentleman does in his Parlour. Indeed for the convenience of Spectators there
are some little ascents to Seats, that young Batchelors, and young Doctors
(much above seventeen) may the better learn and see. And are not you a fine
Viper thus to tear the Bowels of your Mother-Anatomy, from the sucking of whose
Milk you ought to have got greater Skill in Diseases, than from sucking
Chemical Quintessences. I rather fear, that, Viper-like, after you had done
your best to kill that good Mother, you even sucked some Sow, which has made
you thus to hate Anatomy ever since. For if this were not so, you could never
have thus hastily determined, (like a man of no Brains, or at least who has no
guts in his brains) in favor of the ignorant Charlatan, or Mountebank, rather
than the Learned and never so complete Anatomist.


Mom. The use of pretended Anatomical Physicians is great and necessary in a
populous Country, where neither Famine, Pestilence, or War have had any
sooting for many years. In this case men would devour one another, the place
not being extensive enough to feed all, were it not that Physicians by their
male practice prevented the Plethory of Inhabitants. p. 97.


Phil. Are the Pestilence, War and Famine become such pretty. diversions to
you, ever since you were Casus M. Chapter p. 143.
Doctor-General (as you proudly, and in likelihood falsely, phrase it) to the
Army in Flanders? They have the Pestilence at Constantinople, almost as often
as your heart can wish, yet the Turks find no such convenience in it as you
imagine. But I see you have some reason for being at continual War with your
self, and for fighting one of your Tracts against the other, as you have done;
since it is a Maxim with you (you learnt it no doubt in the Camp) Bellum pace
potius; or that War, and a Killing Physician, are so highly necessary to hinder
men from devouring one another. And the same Principle may be one reason, why
you look so exceeding meagre and lean (as your acquaintance tell me) as if you
were starved and famished, and would devour all that you meet, it may be in
order to prevent a Plethora or redundance of corrupt and cacochymical humors.
But the use of pretended Anatomical Physicians is great and necessary, lest men
should devour one another. Take it in the right, proper, and even literal
sense, and the Paradox may hold pretty good Water. Your self, Momus, is the
boldest, the veryest Pretender to Anatomy, that we may happen to hear of in
many an Age. You cry aloud, even in your Preface, that all Passengers who
cannot stay above a minute or two in a Booksellers Shop, may take special
notice of your gross Pretensions to Anatomy, I my self have divulged more new
Anatomical Observations, etc. And you dare to say it in the most Anatomical Age
that ever was known. There is no doubt but such bold desperate Pretenders to
Anatomy may be their malepractice do much to prevent a Plethora of Inhabitants.


Mom. I would ask you to what length do you intend to spin out this Treatise? I
am grown very weary of these your Reflections; I have skipped over abundance of
places that you had marked, and yet we make but a slow advance. We are not yet
come to the Chief Subject of this Tract.


Phil. In troth then I could find in my heart to let alone the Chief Subject,
until some other time. It is very unusual with other Writers thus to lead us a
dance so foreign to the Chief Subject for so many Pages of a little Pedling
Tract, and to keep the Chief Subject, as Children do the best Plum or Cherry,
to he last. It begins p. 101. ends p. 113. And all the lesser trifling Subjects
are commanded to stop, and make a full point in about a Sheet more of this
Elder Duodecimo. One thing I have to say to your Chief Subject (though it being
matter of Fact, and not having duly examined it, I shall say but little to it)
that meeting one of the four Physicians concerned, soon after your crude
Pamphlet was first spawned abroad, and knowing your Chief Quarrel was against
the Jesuits Powder, I asked him whether the Bark were given in that case, and
he protested to me, that it was not given at all, at least that he knew of;
that he was indeed very much for the giving it, but the other Physicians being
of another mind, he had acquiesced, and did not rudely fling out of the
Consult-Room, as Momus upon every Pett was wont to do in a Case of his own
describing.


Mon. Why, at this rate the Chief Subject, that was kept as a Dainty to the
latter end, even comes to just nothing.


Phil. I cannot help that; valeat quantulum valere potest. When a Man fleys a
Catterwauler, what can he have, bating Anatomical hints, more than the Skin?
the Chief Subject of many a Pamphlet besides this proves to be a sorry
pittance, and as light as a Feather, or Cobwebb, when it comes to be weighed in
the scales of Sense or Reason. Men oftentimes write they know not what, and
they know not why. And, Momus, do you expect to receive better Quarter than you
give? you that find such faults with others when there is no need, and who kick
and spurn at all other men, who come in your way, let them treat never so
carefully, can you expect in reason that they should take strict care not to
treat upon your Toes? Momus, pass on at a round rate, and skip over most of the
dismal passages before you, that we may have a few short touches at your
Younger Duodecimo, the second Part of the Conclave.


Mom. The 12th Chapter proves that the Jesuits Powder never yet cured any
remitting Fever. p. 118. And the next Chapter tells you what it is, and what it
is not. But after all, I could wish these Fathers had kept their Indian Bark to
themselves, and sure I am, hundreds would be on this side the Grave, whose
Bones are now turned into their first Element. p. 129.


Phil. Those that are skilled a little in Logic, do find it a hard Chapter to
prove a Negative. And so your 12th Chapter in dint of Argument will prove you a
very sorry Sophister, who so idly undertake to prove that, which it is
impossible to make out. The famous Freshman, who coming from the University
(his head being glowing hot with Syllogisms) undertook to prove to his Father
and Mohter, that the two Eggs they had for Supper were three, and who was sain
to rise a hungry Wretch when his plain and illogical Father and Mother had
eaten each their one Egg, bidding him to eat the third: this half-witted
Logician would never have been so simple, as you, who most ridiculously and yet
most confidently, in the very Title of your Chapter, do presme to prove that
the Jesuits Powder, never yet cured any remitting Fever. The raw Wag,
beforementioned, knew better things than so. His Tutor, I warrant, had soon
taught him among general Rules: Syllogizari non est ex particlari,
Neve Negativis, recte concludere si vis.
And, Negans est deterior Affirmanti, that is, the Negative is a worse end of
the staff, in Logical Combats, than the Affirmative. The reason is plain,
because a Fool can make more Objections in a day, than a wise man can answer in
a year. Therefore you are a fit man with all my heart, to write Archaeologia
Philosophica Nova, or, New Princiles of Philosophy! Go, learn your Rudiments
again, young Doctor, before you presume to teach Professors such False, and New
Principles of Philosophy. But to return, you could wish the Fathers had kept
the Indian Bark to themselves. And p. 2. you call it the Devil's-Bark. Oh how
your head was tickled with that New Notion! But before we are much older, you
must own, that if it was a Devil's Bark, it was a very kind Devil to you,
however unkind it has been to others. Was it so long since your self was taken
ill of a Remitting Fevor, (a febris lenta it could not well choose but be, in
such a depraved, sour, and melancholic Habit of Body) which Fevor afterward
turned into a Tertian-Ague, that made you to tremble many a time? you cannot
have forgot, that you then sent for two of our Associated Physicians, who
proposed to you the Specific assistance of this Devil's-Bark. At first indeed
you were very averse to its assistance, thinking it to be a Black and unkind
Devil, but at last you were over-perswaded, and hearkened to some who were wiser
than some, you admitted the Devil to take possession of your body, and it
proved a more gentle, harmless, and whiter Devil, than you deserved; for which
great kindness you ought not to be so ungrateful as you are, but give even the
Devil his due. And now if the Fathers had kept the Bark to themselves, what a
sweet loss might the Faculty have had! For all that I know, both Parts of the
Conclave had never been hatched, and so you might have lost the breaking many a
ridiculous Jest, and we the laughing at you now in very good earnest.


Mom. I am a declared Enemy to the Jesuits Powder, and would rather in my own
judgment, have been but half-cured by any thing else, than to have received so
perfect a Cure by a thing I naturally hate. Sure I am, if the Fathers had kept
that Devilish Bark to themselves, hundreds would be on this side the Grave,
whose Bones are now turned into their first Element. p. 129.


Phil. How come you to be so cock-sure, concerning hundreds of Patients, and
hundreds of Physicians? You may have learned a Figure in Rhetoric, Certum pro
incerto, of putting down a Certain extravagant Number, when you are the most V
ncertain in the matter that it is possible. We are very sure, that many a
Patient had been on the other side the Grave, if it had not been for the Bark,
under God; and you are sure that God knows who had been on this side the Grave,
if the Bark had remained in some Terra incognita. But alas! Their Bones are
turned into their first Element. Do Bones then use to turn so soon into
Element? If you had but viewed the Churches and minded them here and there with
a little Curiosity, as you traveled to and fro, sure you would have heard of
Charnel-Houses, Ossuaria, where dead men's Bones are kept for many Ages. Flesh
indeed is frail, but Bones are tough and firm, and that which is in the Bone
(you might have heard) will not easily out in the Flesh. No, they do not so
soon turn into Element.


Mom. When I say the Bark never yet cured any one man of a Remitting Fevor, I
also say, excepting possibly three or four among a Million, whose robust
natures neither Disease nor Remedy could destroy. p. 119.


Phil. You think your self now a cunning Sophister, in distinguishing so soon
as you do, that the Bark never yet cured any Remitting Fevor qua talis, that
is, qu tenus continua, but quatenus intermittens. Ibid. Because it does not
cure qua talis, it never cures at all. And because it does not cure as you
would have it do, quatenus continua, it must be fain to cure, as that which the
Fevor is not, that is, quatenus intermittens. So that in your Logic a
Remitting Fevor has two faces, a blind side (quatenus continua) never to be
cured, and a pretty gay look, (quatenus intermittens) to be cured by halfs, or
between Hawk and Buzzard. But, Momus, I can tell you one remarkable Story of
One that was cured of a certain Fevor, quatenus intermittens; and in which you
were very highly concerned. An Apothecary, living near Lumbard street, I think,
in St Swithin's Lane (who had the honor to be esteemed your Apothecary in
Ordinary, but without much Fee, as you Physician in Ordinary to his late
Majesty, but without any Fee at all.) This Apothecary having lingered long under
an Intermittent Fevor, and being a Sufferer under your hands, and under those
Specific Remedies you boast you have equal to Riverius his Febrifuge, Jesuits
Bark, or any other, in Intermittents, (as Part II. p. 31.) and yet, unfortunate
man that he was, he still grew worse and worse, notwithstanding the Energy of
your rare and wonderful Febrifuges, equal to that of Riverius, or the Jesuits
Bark, or any other, all the World over. But at last two Good Women, who had no
mind, it seems, to lose their Apothecary, applied themselves to a worthy
Physician of the College, whom you often spurn and spit at, and call the Doctor
of Contraries, who had never seen the face of the Sufferer before, and who then
knew nothing of his unhappy Destiny in suffering so much under your rigid will
and pleasure. The Doctor aforesaid is prevailed to visit your Sufferer, finds
him in a very ill and lamentable condition, advises him to take of the Jesuits
Bark Scrupulos duos quarta quaque hora, for two days; which he had no sooner
advised, but going down stairs he met Momus himself, who declared with open
mouth, that he was utterly against giving the Sufferer the Jesuits Powder, to
save the man's life. But he was grown wiser, than to suffer any longer, he took
it according to order, and became incontinently as sound as a Roch. Now this
was the true cause that moved your Spleen to so high a degree against this
worthy Doctor, and that which occasioned you to call him by ridiculous Names,
and among others, the Doctor of Contraries, p. 67. as if Opium, and Jesuits
Powder were such opposite Contraries; whereas it is known to every body, that
they are both of them, exhibited in due time, and with due caution, most
powerful Allayers of febrile commotions. And this made you talk of the
Confederacy of the Female Legate, p. 54. But the Confederacy was in truth like
the Confederacy of Associated Physicians, for the good and safety of men, and
not for their hurt. Henceforth therefore we will not call you the Doctor of
Contraries, as you do sillily and improperly call a Good Physician, but we will
very appositely and properly call you, from your gross inconsistencies and
manifold repugnancies between your own writings, the Doctor of Contradictions.


Mom. Would it not move a stone, that he should have the Devil and all of
thanks, and a Sostrum of two Pistoles for his two Visits, when the Patient
ought in duty to have depended on my Skill? But still I except only three or
four among a Million, whose robust natures neither Disease nor Remedy could
destroy. p. 119.


Phil. What pity it is, their natures should be so robust! and how punctual you
are in three or four among a Million! as if a Million of Patients were as
common in your Observation, as a Flock of Pigeons in the Country. It is all
alike to you, and sounds to the Tune of No Carrion will kill a Crow. Or, Dav
veniam Corvis, vexat censura Columbas.

Now open The second Part of the Conclave, that we may see whether either of
the two Barrels be better Herring; or whether upon two or three years musing on
your former Follies, you are grown ever a whit wiser than before.


Mom. Beofre I have done with this, I could edify the Reader more than he is
aware, had I not determined to forbear utting more sense into my Friends of
Paris, than Nature, or their School-Learning has planted into them. p. 128.


Phil. If it be so determined, to the prejudice of your Mock-friends, we will
even be contented, and shed no tears, I Will promise you, Come, read some few
passages in the Second Part.


Mom. Why then I will begin with Thomas Willis, who for couching Physical
Romances, and Romantic Notions, smoothly, elegantly, and to Physicians of Par.
only resembling Truth, does exceed Monsieur Scudery in his Historical Fictions,
could it but be believed, the style and the Latin were as much his own as the
Matter. p. 17.


Phil. Never did man deserve the name of Momus better than your self. For the
greater and more excellent any Medicine is in its kind, the more violently you
are set against it; and so the greater, more conspicuous, and of Illustrious
Fame or Memory any Physician is, the more venomous and bitter, and the more
implacably malicious you are against him. Do you dare to speak of Thomas
Willis, as of Tom-Fool, or Tom of Bedlam? That great and incomparable man of
Immortal Memory, has left a Name behind him, which will never be forgotten. He
died in the height of Honor, and will be commemorated with Glory by future
Physicians in the learned World, when your Memory like your Carcass will stink,
and when your Bones are turned into their first Element, as you inspidly
express it. To this same Thomas Willis, you (like an unmannerly proud Quaker,
who has mighty reason indeed to boast of Education) will not vouchsafe even the
Title of Doctor; which he has infinitely more deserved, as well as his others,
than you that of Bachelor, or even Student in Physic. You unwittingly couple
him with a man most admirable in his Way, the famous Monsieur Scudery, whose
Works, though Romances, if you had studied more than you have done, or even if
you had perused them twice in their most Elegant, and Polite Translation, you
might have mended your Style, and in part have mended your Manners. And do this
Great man's Notions to Physicians of Par. only resemble Truth? Yes, they are
held in wonderful esteem by Physicians of Leyden, and Physicians of Padua. If
you have any little Correspondence that you hold in those Places, desire your
Friend to ask any, or all the Professors Opinion concerning Doctor Willis his
Works, and you will find them All on his side, Admirers of the Man. His
Pharmaceutice Rationalis will always show the World, how smoothly, elegantly,
and solidly, he could couch Physical Notions, and explicate, beyond all that
ever went before him, the Operation of Medicines in Humane Bodies. But after
those few smooth words you give unto Thomas Willis, you presently suspect and
say, could it but be believed, the Style and the Latin were as much his own as
the Matter. The Matter indeed, and the Sense of a Book is the main thing that
deserves to be minded, but every Reader is not judicious enough to dive to the
bottom of the Matter, and therefore politeness of Style, apposite Words,
perspicuous, easy, proper, and unaffected Expressions, are also of singular
use. If You had been better acquainted with Monsieur Scudery, you would have
had words enough at command, and not be forced to coin base, and nonsensical
words, such as Grove, Catochization, etc. and think to bring your self off with
crying, it is Philosophical so to do, as in the Preface to your Quarto. Your
Sense as well as Style would have had more Uniformilty, than to be one while
calling the Divines Atheists, Cheats and Hypocrites, and anon wiping your
mouth, demurely to tell us of that most Honorable Function, and to hint as if
you were concerned about the saving of Souls from Perdition. Doctor Will is did
in many things recte sentire, and in all things id quod sensit, polite eloqui
potuit. But to do as you do, for a man to put his Thoughts into Print, who has
no skill to place them in any tolerable order, nor to illustrate them with any
good Fancy, nor to delight a judicious Reader in any manner of respect, is the
part of a man who cares not how abominably he abuses our Patience, and
misspends his own time, and he is a shame to Letters or Learning. Mandare
quenquam literis cogitationes suas, qui eas nec disponere, nec illustrare
possit, nec delectatione aliqua allicere Lectorem, hominis est intemperanter
abutentis and otio, and literis, as Tully has it Tusc. qu. lib. 1. But how
shall we cure your Unbelief, as to the property, or menum and tuum of his Style
and Latin? To satisfy all the Scruples of Momus will be a had Chapter, and it
may be as hard as your 12th Chapter, Part 1. wherein you made bold to prove a
Negative. But this I shall say, that he was known to be an Excellent Latin
Scholar, and an acute Philosopher, and was therefore chosen to by Sydley
Professor of Philosophy, in Oxford. He was the most generally applied to, by
Scholars, and University-men of all sorts, that perhaps was ever known before.
And his Custom was, when he was called to Patients out of Town, so that he had
some time to spare, he carried a Tinder-Box with him, would trike fire himself,
at Three or Four a Clock in the Morning, and would be as busy at Couching
Physical Notions, for the Benefit of the Faculty, as ever Momus could be at
rakeing together ridiculous and detracting Stories. Whoever would read the just
Character of this Great and Eminent Physician, let him but run over two or
three Leaves, the Postscript Preface to the second Part of his Pharmaceutice
Rationalis, which Postscript was written when men do not use to be flattered,
after his Death.


Mom. Had the said Willis from Observation abstracted his Novels, a happier
Success would have attended his Practice, than which nothing ever proved more
pernicious and fatal to most of those Patients, that subjected themselves to
his, and the followers of him, Their debauched Advice, which the Bills of
Mortality of his time, and since, did amply testify. p. 18.


Phil. I shall leave his numerous Patients, who many of them do still lament
his loss, to judge the Happy Success of his Practice. But you do very amply
testify a most inveterate rancour and malice, as well as insupportable Folly,
who thus to gratify a Deadly Hatred, and most unreasonable Pique, cannot
forbear thus Sacrilegiously disturbing and profaning the Memory of so Pious, so
Great, and so Admirable a Physician.


Mom. When I was a Student in Exeter College, Willis was so inconsiderable,
that he was forced to block at his Pen, and so by forgeing of Novelties,
thereby removing the Bushel from over his Candle, ailured a number of poor
Country Patients, though at that time very raw in all manner of Experience,
nor advanced in the least in practical Observations; so that at last Justice
for his having so long impunitely injured Mankind, made him his own
Executioner, dying under the same misapplications, so many hundreds had
miscarried by. p. 27, 28.


Phil. You were a special Student indeed, who several Years before seventeen
could thus pass your rash and hasty censure on the Practice of Learned
Physicians. Could your so early study of Philosophy, make you a proper Judge
either of his Practice, or his Works in Physic, which you do call (like a
real, but malapert Blockhead) to block at his Pen? Momus, your Expressions are
so contemptible, mean and senseless, and your Vanity so extravagant, that I
have hardly patience to entertain more Discourse at a time with such an empty
Puff.


Mom. Sure You could not think so hardly of me, if you had well considered, or
twice perused the account of my Education, Casus M. Chapter p. 140, 141. or if you
had but stayed to the end of this my Willisian Chapter, which my head has run
so much upon, that I have bestowed no less than eight Leaves upon it; whereas I
did not, or then would not, write six entire Leaves upon the Chief Subject of
my first Part. But in short, Should I charge my self with the trouble of
Copying out the Theory of intermittent, and continual Fevors, abstracted from
Experience, and experimental Observations, the sole Original and Fundamental of
true Knowledge, you would at the same moment be furnished with a Guide easily
to conduct you to Remedies equal to Riverius his Febrifuge, Jesuits Bark, or
any other in Intermittents, and to Medicines in continual, putrid, or
malignant, beyond any yet discovered, that shall manifestly abate the
Distemper, and extinguish malignity; but it is foreign to my intention ever to
gratify that ungrateful and malicious Tribe of Par. etc. p. 31.


Phil. I will give much the same Advertisement, you did in your Casus Med. Chapter
p. 146. That there is one Momus, to whom the Courtesy of England gives the
Title of Doctor, he lives somewhere about Westminster, or Uxbridge, learned his
Trade of John Pontaeus, and does, more than any other Mountebank before him,
bounce and crack of the worth of his Medicines up and down the City and
Country, though whether he keeps the Stage I cannot inform. I have read many a
Quack-Bill in my time, but do not remember that any of them yet have pretended
to more, than to have Remedies beyond any yet discovered, in continual, putrid,
or malignant Febors, and equal to any the best in the World in Intermittents.
Other Quacks have had some small share of Modesty, and have been contented with
pretending to Remedies beyond any yet discovered, in the Scurvy, Dropsy, Pox,
Griping of the Guts, the Stone, Consumptions, etc. but you are the first man to
whom the Courtesy of England (ah shame on it!) gives the Title of Doctor, who
would thus wretchedly monopolize the Cure of all acute Diseases. You did not
learn that of your Master Pontaeus. He had indeed a Salve for Burns and Sores,
he had an Antidote that would do no hurt, and he had a Plaster for Corns on
your Feet or Toes. But he had the grace to leave Fevers to the management of
Physicians; and was abundantly more civil and ingenuous in his way; he
contented himself to be Mountebank Paramount, but never offered to copy out the
Theory of Fevors, and say that at the same moment he furnished the World with a
Treasure greater than the Indies.


Mom. Willis his Purge signifies nothing in a stubborn, or inveterate Tertian;
it must be a Cathartick of another nature, and greater energy, among which I
could discover one to the Physicians of P. that at once or twice purges off
those viscous putrid Humors in a great part, the other it precipitates to the
Bladder, and the remainder it fixes, which three Properties ought to concur in
any Medicine that deserves to be named a Febrifuge, or specific Antipyretick;
but that would be casting Pearls to Sw. p. 38.


Phil. Your Purge then is a very discerning and intelligent Purge, and makes a
very good hunter, that will search to the bottom of every cranny of the body,
in order to purge, fix, or precipitate by Urine, the naughty febrile Humor.
Which three properties, you say, are necessary to the being a Specific, and
yet we find little or nothing of them in the Jesuits Powder, the main modern
Specific; and therefore a true Specific, because it makes no Evacuation. But
you will not discover, or cast your Pearls before Swine, that is, you dare not
bring your Works of Darkness to the light of the Sun, or your counterfeit, and
base adulterations to the Test of a skilful Artist. Your Pearls are mere
Pebbles, and you shall never persuade us that your cackling Geese can be
melodious Swans.


Mom. After all, I must tell you, Fevors are curable by Methods different from
these, and Remedies, which they never yet have found out, nor ever will. For if
any of a Genius inquisitive should endeavor to conduct them into a true path,
would for his pains, be rewarded with ill language, reproach, and all manner of
ingratitude; and therefore no more shall be siad at present. p. 53, 54.


Phil. Sat verbum sapienti. There is no necessity of your telling us, that the
Moon is made of green Cheese. Consult the wise Women, and inquisitive
Astrologers, and they will all tell you the very same, you so often cloy us
with. They have a great many Infallible Medicines, as well as you Specificks of
a new Invention. But if ever you should chance in a kind mood to impart to the
World, or tell your notable Methods and Remedies that are such curing
contrivances in Fevors, I would earnestly request one thing of you, and that
is, not to let us know the Methods and Remedies you used in the Cure of Fevors,
when you took your Residence at Ipswich; for they could not be these you now
speak of, because there is a strong report in Town, that you could not, or did
not, save the life, (hardly) of one person in a Fever, whom you undertook at
Ipswich; your Methods and Remedies that you then used, proving so fatally
unfortunate. I do not averr this of them, as you do worse things, upon less
grounds, of all Physicians, neither do I call Heaven to witness, but I must
say, that the Report is no blind Hearsay, and that I have reason to think it
came from the Place it self, and was brought to Town, as I am told, by those
who were the most capable Judges of such matters. Therefore don't endeavor to
conduct us into true paths with those Killing Methods and Remedies that you
used, when there was a time to kill, but be sure you give us a touch of your
Healing Remedies, if you have any in banco, that belong to the time of Healing.
But I am afraid you have no other Genius that guides you, and is to conduct us
into true paths, but an Evil Genius, an Ignis Fatuus, a Will-with-a-wisp, whose
conduct indeed will never be taken in good part by Learned Collegiate
Physicians, but deserves to be rewarded with Reproach, ill Language, and all
manner of Indignation: and therefore no more shall be said at present.


Mom. In conclusion, may I never be guilty of so much Knavery, and Ignornace,
as to become a Conclave-Physician. p. 51. This touches not my Copyhold, never
intending to herd with any Society of Physicians, unless there should happen a
wonderful Reformation, though I cannot deny, but I have formerly been a Fellow
of a College of Physicians, etc. p. 72, 73.


Phil. You would teach us to call down right Knave without Craft or Decency. I
must therefore tell you, that you need not fear, but Honest Men so well
forewarned as they are, will never be guilty of so much folly, as to admit
Knaves into their Society, nor Learned Men become so stupid, as to admit
ignorant, but horribly fantastical Dolt-heads, into their Conclave. But, Momus,
however you say here, may I never be guilty, and you never intend to herd with
any Society of Learned and Honest Physicians, yet I am at this time credibly
informed, that you are turning several Millstones which lie in your way, and
using Interest, to gain admittance into the Parisian Conclave, the College of
Physicians in London. But you cannot deny but that you have formerly been a
Fellow of a College of Physicians; Look you there! You cannot deny forsooth,
no, you cannot forbear, proclaiming it aloud, even in the Title-leaf (as you
call it) of some of your Tracts, that you were once (and how you came to lose
that Title, the College not dying, as other Titles sometimes do, I know not) an
unworthy and ungrateful Fellow of the College of Physicians at the Hague. But
for that, as I said before, you are to thank your Good Mothers Bohemian
Interest, not your native or natural Mother-Wit.


Mom. Notwithstanding, I do utterly despise these Pen and Ink Doctors, who are
ignorant how to bruise, powder, sift, infuse, or extract a Medicine, and to
weigh it into Doses. Wherefore the Pestil and Mortar Doctors for that reason
attain ten Patients to the others one, p. 56. And in the next Page, I conclude,
That generally throughout all Paris, the Apothecaries having fifty or a hundred
Patients to the Physicians one, it is an infallible Conclusion, that the Company
of Apothecaries get fifty or a hundred times more than the Band of Physicians.
p. 57.


Phil. Can you, who have spoiled so many Pens, and spilt so much Ink, in
scribbling such a deal of trash and wast Paper, can you be still so weak and
silly, and overclouded with Malice, as to know the Pen and Ink Doctors no
better? Is it possible, that you can so wretchedly insinuate, and beyond any
glimpse of probability misrepresent such Perfect Masters of the Pen and Ink, as
if they were Men, who can neither write nor read, nor tell one, two, and three,
as if they had never seen a Pestil and Mortar in all their lives, and knew not
the difference between a pair of Spectacles and a pair of Scales? This
Paragraph consists of three Doses, whereof the first we have weighed already,
and find it so light and heedless, that it will not weigh so much as an Atome,
much less any part of a Grain, whether of Sense, or even appearance of Reason.
The second is your preference of the Pestle and Mortar Doctors ten to one
before the others. Indeed if you mean by Patients every one that comes for a
pennyworth of Mithridate, or a half-pe'th of Vnguentum, we shall readily grant
them the greater number by far. And besides, these mock-Doctors, let me tell
you, have more dextrous cunning, and notable Cajoling Arts with 'em, in one of
their little fingers, than you have (if we may believe your own Pamphelts, the
bolts you so often shoot at random) in your whole body, But that we may the
more exactly. weigh this Dose, let us even take in with it the third Dose, and
put them together in the same scale. And that, you say, is an Infallible
Conclusion, that generally throughout all Paris the Apothecaries have fifty or
a hundred Patients to the Physicians one; and the Company of Apothecaries get
fifty or a hundred times more than the Band of Physicians. How easily do they
get Patients, by the help of your heedless Pen, from ten to one, in the turn of
the hand, or of one leaf, multiplied into a hundred to one! But notwithstanding
this Complement to the Man-Doctors, they might even shut up their Shops, and
the Pestle and Mortar might grow rusty, if they were condemned to wait until
Momus sends them Customers. You measure other men's Practice by your own
diminutive Bushel; and you talk ike an Apothecary, things that you don't
understand. But for all you thus despise the Physicians gettings, you may have
heard of fifty or a hundred Guinies, more than once presented to a Conclave
Physicians. when an Apothecary is well contented to get half a Crown for a
Purge or a Glyster, of one of his ordinary Patients. The Apothecaries tell us,
that they run many hazards in their gettings, and, if they be Honest, are at a
considerable expense too; they are of late Years exceedingly multiplied, and
the younger fry ready to devour one another. Besides, People have not
nowadays the patience to go through a course of Physic for a Year or two
together in Chroical Distempers, as they did formerly. The frequent use of
Jesuits Powder by the Doctors, and their curing thereby so soon as they do, is
of no such mighty advantage to their gettings, that they have any great reason
to boast. But to Conclude, though not Infallibly, however your rash and
incongruous Conclusion be with you Infallible, like your pretended Medicines, I
can tell you, that one of the most Eminent Practicers now in Town, did lately
assert publicly in my hearing, that according to the best Observation he could
make of Physicians gettings, he thought the Faculty of Physic (notwithstanding
the present boundless Interlopings of Empiricks, Apothecaries, Mountebanks,
Bill-men, wise Women, and all-knowing Astrologers) does at this time get more
Money, than ever it did in any Age before us.


Mom. That Is very strange to me, who have maintained, that five sixths of the
Physicians go with their hands in their Pockets all day, the greatest part of
business passing only through few men's hands, p. 58. But afterward I say,
Practica est multiplex; it is no wonder if half the Physicians cannot get so
much, as will buy water to wash their hands. Thus much of Pantagruel and
Garagantua. Simon and Judas, or Apuleius and's Ass. p. 71.


Phil. When you talk of five sixths of the Physicians so very punctually, sure
you forgot, that you do abandon the acquaintance of Physick-Doctors for their
male-practice, and other horrid saults there drawn in black, and that there is
no sort of men you look upon with greater contempt. As Part I. p. 90. But
whatever you spleen makes you say, a great part of the Physicians do go in
their Coaches good part of the day, and do seldom put their hands in their
pockets, unless to drop a good Fee; and however you say the greatest part of
business passes only through few men's hands, yet it is an odd sign of business
being so scarce in this Great and spreading City, that every Physician, who is
of late admitted into the College, is fain to pay near twice as much for his
Admission as ever was required before. One would think therefore, that Practica
est multiplex, or there is Practice enough for many; else why do they pay so
much, is it only to purchase one of your Airey Titles? But in sober sadness, do
five sixths of them go with their hands in their Pockets all day? Will they not
take them out to feel a Pulse? And you say half the Physicians cannot get so
much, as will buy water to wash their hands, (Oh wonderful!) in a place where
water is so scarce, that perhaps no City in the World, not Rome it self, with
her famous Aquaeducts was ever more plentifully supplied with Water. Half then,
and five sixths are the same identical Number in your Arithmetic. Thus much of
Fool and Knave, Push-pin and Bawbles, Whimwham and Nonsense.


Mom. Before we part, I must tell you, I am no such Friend to the
Aposthecaries. You may believe, it is not one Bill in twenty is exactly made up
according to the Doctor's Order; neither is it fitting it should, for often his
Prescriptions are so idle and incongruous, did not the Experience of the
Apothecary correct, alter, and substitute what he pleases, there would be mad
work in the sick man's Gutts. Therefore grant the Doctor prescribes overnight
a Sudorifick Cordial Julep; the other prepares it, with the addition of a few
grains of Resin of Gialap, or Scammony, without the least hazard of discovery,
etc. p. 62, 63.


Phil. In troth your friendship is such an odd and inartificial Medley of
Bitter, Sweetish, and Sour, that a man had better be without it. Your
Complements are like Judas his Kiss. If the Apothecaries do not make up exactly
one Bill in twenty, our Patients are finely brought to bed. This is much to the
Credit of the Apothecarie's Shop you went to once a day, kept by a Relation of
your Landlord, where you were taught the Trade of an Apothecary, as in your
Casus, p. 141. I am glad, it was not in England, and I hope it is not our
Apothecaries trade, to play such wicked Pranks. But the Experience of the
Apothecary is of singular use to correct, alter, and substitute what he
pleases. Many of our Practicing Apothecaries are so busy in visiting their
small Patients, or else are grown so lazy and high, that oftentimes not one
Bill in twenty is made up by the Master Apothecary, but that piece of drudgery
is left to the shatter-brain Boy or Apprentice. And has the Boy such wonderful
Experience, that he may alter, and substitute what he pleases? Sure the
Doctor's Prescriptions are not so idle and incongruous. Momus, you make as mad
work with the Apothecaries, as you have done with the Physicians, but we shall
both pardon the random flights of a hotheaded Pair-brain. You ought to be sent
to the Doctor of Bedlam, to take some Doses of Hellebore. Though your idle and
incongruous scribbling will never hurt one jot, either the Apothecaries Trade,
or the Physicians Practice. But grant the Doctor prescribes a Cordial Julep,
the other prepares it with the addition of a few grains of Resin of Gialap, or
Scammony without the least hazard of Discovery. I will for once supponere non
supponenda, grant your ridiculous Whimsies, and, I hope, groundless
Imaginations, the Resin of Jalap or Scammony will certainly make such mad-work
in the sick man's Guts, that there will not only be the greatest hazard of
discovery imaginable, but the plainest evidence in the World, as plain and
sensible as the Rose in your face, against the Apothecary who dared to make
such mad work instead of a Cordial.


Mom. Though from these Notions I could desume Matter enough to expatiate into
a large Volume (by deriving thence the various kinds of continual and
intermittent Fevors) I judge it at present unnecessary, leaving the further
search to those ignorant lazy Drones that are called Conciave-Physicians. p.
102.


Phil. We are too well satisfied of your abilities that way; we grant that you
have a Talent that can expatiate, if you have a mind to it, into a large Volume
(larger than any Nick Culpepper ever writ) as by woeful Experience we too often
find, that the weakest man in the Company can expatiate in discourse, and talk
more than all the rest together. But by no means do not exercise your Talent to
the utmost extent; -- It will be no great sin,
To hide that Talent in a Napkin.
as a late Ninny has it. Leave the further search of those matters to wiser
heads, and they will take it very kindly of you. But pray what are those
precious Notions, that you could wire-draw to such a frightful length? They are
Fevors, and other Distempers explained (that is well) and cured (that is better)
by New Principles. p. 93. This New Principle, as old as it is, taking in your
explanation, is New News to us, and no less than the Circulation of the Blood,
which as it was the most easy thing in the World to be found out, so might the
manner and ways of it, which notwithstanding hitherto have lain asleep, though
this could scarce have happened, unless among such, as are greater Block heads
than common Seamen. p. 98. Physicians then have been to blame for explaining
the Circulation by Anastomoses, or Inosculation of the Capillary Arteries into
the Veins, and then afterward for taking their refuge to the Pores, and
explaining the Circulation per taecos meatus, and qualitates occultas, their
old asylus ignorantiae. p. 99. I would therefore ask you, because you are such
a knowing man, and given to Discoveries, which way, or by what ductus the pond
of Water that stagnates in the Abdomen of Hydropical Persons does come to be
evacuated in such quantities by Stool, upon the taking a strong Hydragogue.
Tell me that frankly and plainly, without refuge to asylum ignorantiae, and you
will winn my Love and Admiration too. Eris mihi Magnus Apollo, both in Latin
and English, both in hard words, which you love dearly, and in plain and proper
terms, which I love as well. How things come to pass, is oftentimes as puzling
to be in Divinity. How is found to be in Divinity. We see Light and Colors,
abut notwithstanding all you have said about them in your early days, or in
your Natural Philosophy, yet I must needs confess we are still too much in the
Dark, and are not altogether satisfied in the matter, though indeed one would
think a man might safely enough believe his own eyes. Again, in tempore
vivimus, and quid tempus sit ignoramus: in loco sumus, and quid Locus sit
ignoramus. We know the Wind blows from every Quarter, and the Maggot bites from
every corner of your head, but why the Eastern Wind to all Countries is the
most unwholesome, why are South Wind is so moist, and the North so cold, is
beyond every man's skill to determine; as it is why you should declare your
self so bitter and implacable an Enemy to all Societies of Physicians, and in
them not only to those with whom you have contended face to face, as it has
been your practice to do in the Consult-room, but even to those who never
offended you, and whom you never saw, nor perhaps ever heard of. Is it Manners,
or at all agreeable to the Rules of Civility you might have learnt in France,
when you were making the petit tour, went to l' Hostel Dieu, or assisted
Monsieur Jannot at the greater Operations in Surgery at the Charite-Hospital;
it is Manners, I say, or agreeable to your French Education, thus to call
Physicians in general, ignorant and lazy Drones, great Blockheads and Idiots in
the same Chapter? Will you needs prefer the Invention of Common Seamen before
that of the best Physicians, in the business of the Circulation? Is the Great
Inventor of the Circulation of Immortal Memory, who made Britain Divine, thus
to be dwindled from a Giant into a Dwarf? Is the Learned Doctor Harvey to be
degraded below the invention of Common Seamen?


Mom. Not to detain you longer with these impertinencies. p. 100. I know your
Curiosity will demand, what Remedies they are, that are virtuated with a power
to effect so great a Work, to wit, the Infallible Cure of Fevers. I answer,
that the Materia Medica, whereout they are to be prepared; you see one sort
every day, if you look but a little beyond your Nose (that is plain enough) you
need not grub for it in the depth; another you tread upon, that is pity; any a
third is as common in your mouth (whether you be Rich or Poor, Sick or Well) as
the Bread you eat: what they are further, I shall never discover publicly (not
for a World) nor commit their Preparation to any Apothecary; you must come to
me in private, and bring Faith along with you, as well as Money, for it is not
fit such Medicines should be abused, or slighted as Dirt, by every Conclave
Physician. p. 108, 109.


Phil. No, I shall never be such a Curious Coxcomb, as to be inquisitive after
you idle Impertinencies. Indeed your ought not to be so Prodigal of your little
stock of Knowledge. They ought to be kept very charily and warm, as a Snake in
your bosom, or a little weakly Babe that comes at the beginning of the seventh
Month. You need not talk of what we every day see, or tread upon, or eat. If
you had happened to read Martinus Rulandus his Pharmacopoea Nova, de
Stercoribus and Vrinis, you would have found, that there is exceeding great
virtue and power in a Stercus; and that a man may have reason to expect greater
effects from a wholesome Stercus, and without Chemical Preparation, in its plain
puris naturalibus, than from any of your Remedies, prepared according to Art,
of which you crack and bounce, without fear or wit. The Public, I dare engage,
will never have reason to lament the want of your Discoveries. We know that you
have been very profuse and lavish, like a common Prostitute, of All you have,
and in your little trifling Tracts have told us all that you know, and
abundantly more than you can justify; and because you find that overliberal
vent of Trifles instead of Remedies does turn to a small account, do you now
think to Cajole the World with telling them, what rare things you have still in
store? Bonum quo melius, eo magis communicabile. One Modest and Ingenious Man,
who is more ready to learn of others, than to teach crude and jejune Notions,
shall Discover better Observations, and more Excellent Remedies in a single
sheet, than a thousand such as you with all your noise and clamor, with your
arrogant Pretenses, and vain Ostentation, can for your life (do the best you
can) in a Volume larger than the Septuagints.


Mom. The truth hereof appears, by the Remedies I have used on such occasions,
which in half an hours time have reduced the Patients to their right reason
(out of a Delirium) by no other manner of operating, than by causing a free
Circulation in the Brain. p. 109.


Phil. And so I have known a certain Stercus (I can assure you) to do wonders
in the like case; and if it does not operate so well in the first half hour,
yet it has not failed in a few half hours to reduce the Patients to their right
reason. You see, I am not shy of Discovering so precious a treasure, for the
good of the World; and I would not only recommend it to your Particular Use,
but you deserve to be forced to take liberally of it, and to make it your daily
food, as well as Medicine, until your notorious Delirium goes off, and you be
at last reduced to your Right Reason, and to better Manners than you have yet
learnt.


Mom. I have no manner of Patience thus to hear not only my Incomparable
Remedies so vilely abused, but the gravity of my Person so shamefully
ridiculed, my Anatomico-Philosophical Discoveries thus contemned, and my Books
I have written to be so horribly misrepresented with that which galls me more
than any thing else, I mean, with plain and undeniable Truths. I hated all
Physicians sufficiently before, but now I am thus provoked, I hate all the
World, Man, Woman and Child, and if I were a Conjurer (as God knows I am not)
and so had Skill in the Black-Art, I would raise such a Tempest, and universal
Hurricane, as should confound them all together, and bury me and my Books, with
the Answer to them, in one Knock to a Chaos.


Phil. Fie, Momus, fie! Such an extravagant passion does not become a man of your
Education. Remember what you once taught us in your Natural Theology: When a
man is incensed; they say he is as full of hatred or venom as a Serpent, or
when he is inflamed with anger, they resemble him to the Devil, in saying he is
as angry as the Devil, Not. Theol. p. 111. Again, the greatest advantage which
the Devil ever takes of men, is in their Passions. How many are there that hang
and murder themselves in Wrath, Love, (this, they say, does seldom happen
nowadays) Sadness, etc. Ibid. Once more, a Passionate man is by wise men (by
Solomon himself often) accounted a Fool, for it was one of the Tenants of the
Stoics, That no wise man was Passionate.


Mom. Would you have a man burst with Rage and Vexation, and not to express
mind a little? Are not Women and Children allowed sometimes to cry and roar,
when they are crossed and angered? And do they not say they find ease by
shedding of Tears? Would you have me burn to a Cinder, with the Fire and Flame
within me, and suffer no Water, or Tears, to quench the devouring Flame?


Phil. Yes, one Tear from your haughty evil Eyes, one deep sigh from your hard,
and unrelenting Heart, one good Reccavi from your foul, and most abusive Pen,
would give us some hopes of your Repentance, for one of the greatest sins that
can be committed, an habitual course of Calumny and Detraction. I remember your
tell us that A Passion seldom seizes on a man, but it leaves a Cinder, so that
it easily blazes again, Not. Theol. ibid. p. 111. And withal, that there is no
Passion but what is full of Pain, ibid. p. 112. Therefore have a care of the
Cinder, and consider that you fill your self full of pain.


Mom. Do you then think that I can cry, whine, or relent? I am too old to alter
my Natural Temper. Those simple Fancies I writ in my younger days, when I was
raw and unexperienced in the World, when I hardly knew what I did, and when I
only said what other men said before me. But now I am a man of Might and
Understanding. There is no Physician upon the Earth, but I scorn to truckle to
him. And I am not now to learn of Hippocrates, or Galen. Then Physicians do
probably wish all the World sick at once, 11. Part p. 58. And to conclude all
in one word, There is no trust to be put in Religio Medici, many of whom, I
verily dare affirm, believe, there is neither God, Heaven, Devil nor Hell, p.
69.


Phil. O tempora, o mores! Oh dreadful and abominable! Is it so verily? Is it
so probable that the Physicians do wish all the World sick at once? Do they
wish Friends and Foes, Rich and Poor, Nurses and Apothecaries, all to be down
together? Would they spare none to call them to their Patients, to open the
door to them, or to give them their Fee? Would they be contented for one short
term of a Hurry of business to go with their hands in their pockets all the
rest of the year? According to your way of reckoning they are most wretchedly
simple, and know their own Interest but little. But to your Conclusion which is
so black and dismal, that I hardly know how to meddle with it. You speak for
your self, I hope, in the first place. And in good truth you write at such a
Mad and Frightful rate, that a man may justly conclude, you not having the fear
of God before your Eyes, but unwittingly moved and seduced by the instigation
of the Devil, did dare to affirm such horrible things of your Brethren;
Brethren, I say, in Title or Profession, but by no means Brethren with you in
iniquity. You do not do well to let that same Religio Medici run so mightily in
your head. There is more Sense, and Religion too in a Paragraph of that Book,
than in all your fantastical, raw, and yet borrowed conceits of Natural
Theology, your own Natural Mother (to whom you dedicated that precious piece of
Divinity) being Judge. Religio Medici is a serious thing, consisting of very
Uncommon Notions, and such as every paltry Pretender is not a competent Judge
of. The Physicians have the same unhappy Fate, as most other Wise men have,
when they talk frankly of Religious Matters, to be easily and exceedingly
mistaken. The things above us are seen at a great distance even by the Divines,
and the Physicians, or Natural Philosophers, do bring them good part of the way
to the Coelum Empyreum. If therefore the sagacious Naturalist does sometimes
without reserve discourse of things far above their, and every man's
apprehension, must he presently be censured by ignorant or malicious Coxcombs,
for Religio Medici, or for little or To Religion; although he never so strictly
observes the main duties of True Religion, I mean, Love, and Charity, Justice,
and Honesty, rather than put his Trust in things of far less moment, but more
Popular in the Eyes of the World, I mean, Outward Performances. You verily dare
affirm, as extravagant things, as much plain Nonsense, as ridiculous and
improbable Stories, as many palpable Untruths, and even flat Contradictions, as
perhaps any man that ever pretended to be an Author. But verily I never had
patience to read to much of other insignificant Scriblers, being quickly cloyed
with one leaf or two of the Pamphlet, where I was drawn in by the usual decoy,
the tempting promises of a Title-leaf. But pour Game, Momus, and your big
Titles, did promise more than was every where to be met with. And the Subject
was extraordinary; it made some noise too before it came out, and we had mighty
expectation of the Birth of no less than a Mountain, and after all, we find not
a ridiculous Mouse, but a Worm, or a Maggot brought forth. To conclude, I
verily dare affirm, that reckoning the whole number of Legal Physicians of the
College, you shall hardly find in any other Profession (the Divines only
excepted) or in any other Society, Trade, or Title, (unless you pick and
choose) so many Good men, and Good Christians (number for number) as among the
Physicians, to whom you are so grievously and unreasonably Uncharitable.


Mom. You have the best opinion of Physicians that ever I knew, and am apt to
think men will judge you t have as much too good an opinion of them, as you
would persuade, that I have too little. Are you your self so well caressed, and
courted among them, that in return you complement them at this high rate? Or,
have you not some latent self-interest you aim at? For certainly you could
never dare thus to enter the Lists with Me for nothing.


Phil. I know the Physicians Faults, as well as their Virtues, and would
neither have the one magnified in your Microscope, nor the other lessened by
the weakness of my Praises. They are Men (though they have been sometimes in a
manner deified, even whilst alive) as well as other people; and therefore it is
no such marvel if the Art of Physic may have some that are no better than they
should be, as well as the Law, and the Gospel. There is no doubt but there is
mismanagement of Affairs among them, or else you would never have dared to
affirm such gross things of them all in general. Your Horns would else have
been pulled in long ago, and you would have been contented to confine your
roving head within the circumference of your Shell. Time was, when they knew
how to manage their own Power to better purpose, and to curb the intolerable
insolences of Prating Quacks, and Impudent Empiricks, after another-guess rate
than they now do. And time will come, I hope, before you are a little older,
that they will know their own strength again, and not tamely suffer any
foul-mouthed Wretch thus to bespatter and vilisie Admirable men, the Glory of
the Age they live in, with such a licentious freedom, an unlimited and full cry
of Billingsgate dialect, as if you neither feared God, nor Heaven, Devil, nor
Hell. As for Caresses and Endearments, they seldom happen to any great degree,
among the same Members of any Profession, and especially here in England; and
it is commonly said, Men of the same Trade do seldom so far agree. I have no
reason to Complain, for want of their reciprocal Civility. But for any
self-interest in what I have now done toward the serving them according to my
small Capacity, I have not the least Aim of that kind And to convince you the
more that I have no such Aim, I shall take some care to keep my self Incognito,
leaving to you the supposed pleasure of quam pulchrum (or rather for you quam
foedum) est monstrari, and dicier Hic est.


Mom. Ay, do your best to hide or conceal your self, I shall find you out in
time. And if I do, by Heavens and all that is Good, by Hobgoblings and Bugbears,
and all that is Evil, by my Mother-Wit, and by both my Degrees, I will ransack
every passage of your Life, I will rummage every corner you have haunted, I
will dress you in such an Antic and Ridiculous Habit, and make you so hideous
and deformed a Creature, that you had better be half-hang'd, or even undergo my
Herculaean, or Gigantean Cure of the Pox, than ever have presumed thus to
contend with me, and hazard a trial of Skill with the sharpest Case-maker in
Town.


Phil. Your Threats are like Chaff before the Wind. By thus struging you do but
entangle your self the more. And pray do not persuade your self, that no body
could have answered you according to your Folly before now, or that no body had
the Courage to undertake it. You are infinitely below the consideration, or
Animadversion of the more Curious Pens in our Society. I have foreborn with
abundance of Patience all this while, giving way to others (who could do it
much better) to undertake this Physick-quarrel with you. But fearing lest their
continued silence might make you still wiser in your own conceit, I have for
your good and Amendment made this gentle Rod for you, a Rod more gentle than
your gentle Pox, and a Rod, you see, that will break no Bones, but only smart;
and I have served you somewhat as the Learned Doctor Gill did the saucy Tom
Triplett, hoisted you up, and scourged you a little, but more gently than you
have deserved, for making such a noise, and thus rudely and Clownishly entering
into the Conclave of Physicians.


Mom. I verily dare affirm, that you have done the worst you can, and believe,
you cannot write another Dialogue upon this Subject, because you have said so
much in this.


Phil. Sure you, that have been so tiresome a Scriber, who have so often
distracted the Studies of Young men, from useful Authors, to hear Cerberus
bark, or spit fire at the Faculty of Physic, do not at last think it such a
mighty business to write a little Book. Do you not observe that Grocers Shops,
and Pastry-Cooks are very plentifully supplied with Printed Trash, which they
do put to a much better use, than the Authors, or Pen and Ink-spoilers could do
before. Have you never been saluted in the streets by poor pedling Hawkers
with, Master, will not you please to be so kind to buy a Book? You will do a poor
body a deed of Charity. And after all, in so liceurious an Age of Printing, do
you now doub, that I cannot write a Second Dialogue between a conceited silly
Momus, and a man of some Sense, when the Subject is inexhaustible? Be
contented, and take this Chastisement quietly, and without muttering, or else
you shall find worse Rods in piss prepared for you. Multum post terga relictum
est, ante oculos plus est.


Mom. You are unreasonably prejudiced against this Author, or else you could
never be so violent against him.


Phil. It Is very right. I am exceeding prejudiced against this pretended
Author, who, notwithstanding that he had such strange and wonderful advantages
of a Liberal Education, that the like was hardly ever known, if we may take his
word for it; who notwithstanding than he had a Physical Cap of Maintenance
clapped upon his head, by way of Complement Extraordinary, and a fair and fine
Diploma put into his hand, at seventeen, yet that he should turn the Badge of
Honor into a Fool's-Cap, and that the Hand which was once solemnly laid upon
Hippocrates his Works, should dip his Pens in the Gall of an Ass, instead of
downright Ink, in order to expose to the scorn of the ignorant Mobile, and
mischievously to lessen the Faculty he was so much beholding to: How can I
choose but be prejudiced against so unworthy and errant a Mad-cap? Momus, you
have more reason too than you are aware to be prejudiced against this man. He
has been no great Friend to you once upon a time.


Mom. No! What has he done? Tell me. I hope, he has not been guilty of speaking
well of others, especially his Superiors, more than once in his life. I hope he
has not kept Peace in his Family, defended the Innocent, or been shie in spying
of Faults.


Phil. No. None of those matters. But he has abused and ridiculed even Momus
himself the most grossly, and unpardonably that ever was known.


Mom. Wherein?


Phil. Why, at the end of that same Preface to his Archaeologia
beforementioned, he adjoins six Verses to Momus, so Poetastick or fantastic,
so wretchedly simple and Nonsensical, that you would wonder to hear them. they
do hobble upon all six at such a frightful and shameful rate, and the third is
so lame of most of his Feet, that I think it has got a Gangrene, for it has no
manner of Sense in it, though I have tried all the ways imaginable to put any
little life into it, rather than none at all.


Mom. Let Us hear what they are. Sure my Friend could not so far forget himself.


Phil. Open both your Ears, or both your Eyes then; and keep your Mouth wide
open, that if you should cast, you may be ready:

To Momus.
Thou cross-grained Mome, it is time forbear to squint,
If not, I Will coin and cast thee in the Mint.
Bodel be stamp a Dog gnorring at a Bone,
More stupid, more dull than any dunghill Stone;
If now thou should grow civil beyond what I can
Hope, then thou art no more a Beast, but a True Man.

Mom. Thou cross-grained Mome! He might have Thou Would me a little more Civilly
than so. I can easily pass by Squint, Bodel (or Hocus Pocus) gnorring Dog, dull
and stupid, dunghill stone, and his calling me Beast; I could pass by this
Charybdis of a carping Momus, or that Scylla of a livid Zoilus, as a notable
expression, and a sign of his Learning, in the foresaid Preface; but to lessen
me into a diminutive Monosyllable, like Bob, Dick, and Tom, is a thing I do not
allow, and cannot but take unkindly.


Phil. To be short, what think you of those six Verses? are they not beyond
compare?


Mom. Indeed they are the worst that ever were made to me. And the worse
because they come from the Pen of a Philosopher. I would not advise him to
meddle with Rhime-doggrel any more. But this is to be said for him. It was in
his younger. Years, when his head did rove upon Greater Matters, upon
Philosophico-Ontologico-Dynamilogico-Theologico-Macrocosmical and Microcosmical
Principles.


Phil. Those were not doubt great and weighty matters, which wanted to be
ushered in state with six such special Attendants. To my seeming, they are more
insipid Poetry, than those on that wretched Astrological Poetaster, Soffold's
Best Pills; Read, Try, Judge, and speak as you find.

The Head, Stomach, Belly, and the Reins they
Will cleanse and Cure while you may work or play.
His Pills have often to the makers praise
Cured in all Weathers, aye in the Dog Days.
In short, no Purging Medicine's made, that can
Cure more Diseases in Woman or Man, etc.
The very same thing in Verse, that you so stiffly maintained in Prose,
concerning your Remedies, that you have made us Despair to know, because you
never will Discover them.


Mom. My Remedies! I scorn them. I would have you to know, that I can make
better Remedies, than his, when I make Water; and I can make better Verses in
my Sleep, than he can waking in his most Poetical musement. If he had showed
Wit (as well as Malice) in his Tracts, I would have stood by him, like a
Friend. The very reading of them has made me Dull and Sleepy. Philiater, Leon
Pantheram Remunerasti, you have given him a Rowland for his Oliver.


Phil. Momus, we know that you can verba dare; you slip a Complement that might
have been spared. Your precious Friend may even curse his ill Fate, which gave
him an Incurable Knock in his Cradle.


FINIS.
The Reader is desired to Correct the following Mistakes.

PAge 18. line 25. for blacker read blackest. p. 47. l. 3. r. anatomia. p. 59.
l. 2. for Tittle r. Title. p. 120. l. 10. instead of you are not for libera. r.
you say libera. p. 134. last line, for Cases 1. Case.

(...)
