A Dialogue between the Arch-B. of C. and the Bishop of Heref. Containing the
true Reasons why the Bishops could not read the Declaration.
With Allowance,

July the 6th. 1688:


Cant. MY Lord, I am glad to see you, but I must deal plainly with you (as Paul
did with Peter) and Rebuke you to your face, for your late Schismatical
carriage.


Hereford, Your Grace startles me!


Cant. Nay, my Lord, you have startled me, and the rest of my True-blue
Brethren more, by your unexpected Separation from our blessed Community. For
when we entered into an holy Consultation against the Lords Anointed, saying,
Come, Let us break his Royal Command, and cast the cords of all Obligations to
Obedience from us. You proved a Dissenter in this matter, and published your
Reasons too for not bravely Disobeying as we did. Whereby you have much damaged
us; We look for some satisfaction as to this great and weighty Point.


Heref. May it please your Grace, I am very sorry if I have given you any just
cause of Offense, which yet I am not Conscious of. I have done nothing but what
was my Duty, as a Christian in general, and as a Member of the Church of
England in especial, from whom I have been taught to obey my Prince in all
things that thwart not any declared Law of God; which no body of any sense can
say, the Reading his Majesty's Declaration does: therefore I was bound to an
exact Compliance, or else I could not have approved my self a True Son of the
Church.


Cant. My Lord, It Is a sign you have been long in the Country, you are so much
a Stranger to our Intreagues here. We know, Reading the Declaration is in it
self an harmless thing, and the King ought to have been obeyed in it: but our
Circumstances were so extraordinary, that we were forced to borrow a point of
Obedience, and we promise the King (if He will take our Words) to pay him
double at another time when we have more heart to it. As for instance, If his
Majesty did (Oh! that he would) forbear us, and have patience with us, till he
Commanded us to enquire into our several Parishes what Dissenters were
Inhabiting or Lodging there, and return their Names, that they might be
forthwith Prosecuted against; He should see what amends we would make him for
the little Slip now, in our hearty and affectionate Obeying such a for ever
precious Order. We would make our Sullen Tongue-ty'd Priests open wide their
Jaws, and cry aloud in the Public Asiemblies: Where the Word of a King is,
there is Power, and who may say unto him, What do Thou? But to return, My
Lord, to speak inter nos; Our Controversy with you, is not for obeying the
Kings Command, but for not Joining with us. We are laying our Heads together,
and making use of all the Wit and Policy we have, and truly are bound to take
up a little K. too upon Interest of some not far from us, (who have enough to
spare) to support the Grandeur of our declining Church. And we verily thought
we should have had your aid and assistance in this great Work. But you have
finely given us the lurch. Well; it is no matter; I hope with what strength we
have (which I assure you is not small) we shall do the thing without you. You
heard how well we came off the other day.


Heref. Yes, May it please your Grace, and I heard how Piously you came on. For
before your appearing at the Council Board, your Grace, and the other Reverend
Bishops, went to Prayer. Now I have exactly read all the Prayers in our
Rubric, and cannot find one Prayer proper to your Graces Condition at that
juncture of time. And I know it is not your Graces Principle to use any other
Prayer.


Cant. My Lord, I am sorry you are so short-sighted; I tell you there is a
Prayer very pertinent to all our Conditions, which we made use of, and found
great comfort and refreshment in.


Heref. Will your Grace vouchsafe to acquaint me with it, for I cannot imagine
what Prayer it should be.


Cant. My Lord, It Is in the beginning of the Liturgy, and it seems to be
Prophetically penned for our very Case at that time: It runs in the language of
Confession, which best suited with us then. For though we would not acknowledge
our Crime to Man, yet we confessed our state to God (according to the truth of
it) in the following Words: We have erred and strayed from thy ways like lost
sheep; We have followed too much the Devices and Defires of our own hearts; We
have done those things which we ought not to have done, and we left undone
those things which we ought to have done; (especially the obeying our
Sovereigns Just and most Righteous Command) And there is no health in us, and
so the Lord have mercy upon us. And a great deal of Mercy we have found, in
being delivered from our great and sad Calamity, to the great Rejoicing of the
Rabble and all the Scum of the City; and not only so, but a prodigious Miracle
has been wrought for us in the midst of our Enemies, to confirm the Truth of
our Cause; Such a Miracle as former Ages never saw, and future Ages will very
hardly believe.


Heref. If your Grace please, I desire to know it, I thought our Church laid
no stress on Miracles.


Cant. I, but my L. our Church being at a very low ebb, the Pillars of it
standing at the Bar, and for a Miracle to be wrought at such a time, and upon
such an occasion, we should be blind indeed if we did not take notice of it.


Heref. Will your Grace tell what it was.


Cant. To the Honor of our Cause, the Glory of our Hierarchy, the truth of our
Constitution be it spoken. The Lawyers Pockets (which were ever as tenacious as
the Strgian Lake) could not hold our Guinea's, as soon as they had done their
Work, they were compelled by an unaccountable, and more than common Magical
Impetus, (contrary to the very nature of their Souls) to return back their
Wages, their Stomachs on a sudden were so squeamish they could not beat the
sight of our glittering Gold.


Heref. This is strange indeed, and may pass for a Miracle, and so let it pass
for me! Will your Grace be pleased to tell me the Reasons of your not Reading
the Declaration. Was it really for fear of Popery getting uppermost?


Cant. No, No, My Lord, We are not so weak as to have any apprehension of that;
only if we can (and there are no Endeavors wanting) gull the Mobilee into a
belief that that is the great and true Reason, it may do us no diskindness.


Heref. Then, May it please your Grace, was it because you scruple the
Dispensing Power.


Cant. No indeed, My Lord, nor for that neither. We are for Dispensing Power,
Exalting Power, Stretching Power, any Power, always provided it be on our side,
only we thought this the plausiblest pretense for our Disobedience, because we
might fly to some Journals of Parliament for Refuge from the Storm of Royal
Thunder.


Heref. If I may not be too bold with your Grace, I would humbly beg you to
tell me the Right Reasons, You do not know what Influence they may have upon me.


Cant. Why then, My Lord, you shall have them.

First, We were against Reading the Declaration, because we had no band in the
making of it, nor was our Advice ever asked about it, and it is the nature of
we Prelates to oppose every thing, that was not Originally hatched in our
Noddles.

Secondly, Because there runs such a Vein of Mercy and Tenderness throughout
the Decla. as is quite opposite to our former Practices, and present
Principles. Indeed Solomon says, a Kings Throne is established by Mercy; But
alas! a Bishops Throne would quickly be ruined by it. And tho we have often
ventured shaking the Royal Throne by our irregular methods to preserve our
selves, yet now our heartbreaking Grief is, that we have a Prince too
Sagacious to commit his Scepter into our violent hands.

Thirdly, The King has disobliged us and we had no other way to manifest our
Resentments. To your Tents, O Israel, had been too open, and exposed us to
present danger; and therefore we thought it Prudence to begin with scrupling
and questioning his Authority, and if we escape (as I don't much doubt it) with
this, we may more confidently proceed to higher things afterward.

Fourthly, There is a necessity of our becoming Popular (tho we heretofore so
much reclaimed against it) as matters now stand with us, and there was no way
to effect it like this. For upon our refusing to Read the Declaration, we could
not but suppose we should be questioned for it, then it was but giving out we
were sufferring for the Protestant Religion, because we would not join with the
Papists (as the Dissenter do at this day) and the giddy-headed multitude we
knew well enough would soon take the Alarm and cry us up to the Skies in their
Huzzas. These are the only men that stand up for the Protestant Religion, we
should all be Papists if it were not for such as these. Now as we Projected we
have gained the point of being the Moblies Darlings.

Fifthly, We did not Read the Declaration because our Sovereigns Sentiments and
ours are so vastly differing. He is not for constraining Conscience, ay, but we
are. He is for no man's suffering for Religion, but we are for every Bodies
suffering that cannot come up to every Gim-crack of our Worship. And hence it
is against our Natures. Consciences, as well as Interest to read Liberty to
those People whom we would always have kept in bondage unto us.


Heref. May it please your Grace, if these be (as believe they are) the real
reasons of your disobeying his Majesty's Command, as to the Reading His most
Gracious Declaration, I must beg your pardon to remain in the choice I have
made, A true Son of the Church of England, and an obedient Subject to the King
my Master.


LONDON, Printed for L. P. 1688.


