A DIALOGUE BETWEEN Hodge and Heraclitus: OR, A CHARACTER OF An Informer, With
his lewd Practices laid open By Goodlove Freeman, Esquire

Printed for D. Davies in Duke street,

A DIALOGUE BETWEEN HODGE and HERACLITUS.
Herac. OHo, Brother, whether so fast, you seem somewhat pensive, what is the
matter, I hope the little Monkey-face Soliciter in the Old Bailey, nor the
Printers wife, nor the ugly ghost of forty one has not crossed your way in
your passage.


Hodg. Damn that Rat-catcher, and as for the other piece of starched formality
I have no need of now, those days are past, but to tell you the Truth,
Brother, (which I am not often guilty of) Im going to Sams, to instruct our
young Pupels.


Herac. But what Paper have thou got in thy hand, which you seem not well
pleased with


Hodg. Why shall I tell thou, it is a confounded Whigish Paper which I formerly
stopped when I was in power, but is now creep'd abroad, I tell thee the Reading
of it has so disturbed me, that I thought I should have took up my Lodging
with Oliver's Porter in the n^w Coledge in Moor-fields, had not I been now and
then diver^^d with the Charms of a new Song of Old Simon the King, which (...)
Chanters sing daily by my Window.


Herac. But prithee let me see thi^ Paper, I have a great mind to hear it read.


Hodg, Here, take it and read it, thou art the youngest man, faith and troth I
have not my Spectacles about me, or I would not give you the trouble, but I
know i^ will not please you, here take it.


Herac. A new Character of an Informer.


Hodg, A P -- -- d -- -- -- it, read that the rest of the Company may hear it,
for this will make us work enough for some weeks


Herac. Be patient, sir, and I will begin.


The Character of an Informer.
AN Informer (I mean of the baser sort, whose Picture only is here intended to
be drawn) Is one of the Devils Nut-hooks; a Priviledg'd Trapan, or a common
Barretor under pretense of Authority: a Petty-fogging Caterpillar that
scandalizes the Law, by making it accessory to his Rapines and Oppressions; a
new Trapp for the Tongue, that Lime-twigs all that come near him, and puts most
that he converses with, on the Tenter-hooks of an Indictment for nothing.

A mischevious Vermin, bred out of the Corruption of the Body Politic; that
feeds (like Toads) only on Poisons, and sucks the peccant Humors so long (like
a Horse-leach) till he burst with Venom, or is forced to disgorge by the
Emetick quality of a Halter: He makes good the old Maxim, Summum Jus, Summa
injuria; and cuts Justices Balance to pieces with her own Sword; He talks all
Law, and never troubles his head with Equity or Religion, unless it be only to
suppress them, and having no Conscience himself, is resolved to be a Plague to
all those that dare own they have any: He never opens his Mouth but you shall
see it Lyned with some old dormant Piece of Poulton, whom he reads merely as
Conjurers do Scripture, to do mischief with it; You would think him bred a
Glasier, he is so apt to pick Quarrels; or some broken Merchant, that has flung
his soul overboard, to make himself every way a complete Bankrupt. He will
court a man to beat him, that he may worry him next Sessions for the Battery,
and drop dangerous words on purpose to Prosecute you for concealing them;
Presentiments, Citations, Warrants, Convictions, Seazures, etc, are his
Universal Language, and he is better acquainted with the Form of an Indictment,
than his Pater Noster, for he never names God, but when he swears by him.

His Revenue consists in Actions Popular, and his whole employment is to go a
Fishing with Penal Statutes; he thinks by that to take store of fat Gudgeons,
but at last catches only a Frog? For his malicious Projects (like chemical
Attempts of Transmuting Mettalls) seldom answer the trouble and charge; and
his mighty Incomes of Penalties can but just purchase Ale enough to make him
drunk, and afterward he is forced to run on the Tick (at a Friends) for Coffee
to make him sober, if he may be said ever to be so; whose Hair-brained Sk^ll is
perpetually Hurrycan'd with malice, and in Childbed throws till it is delivered
of some New-minted Villiany.

There is nothing in Nature so base and contemptible as one of his Quality; a
Bum-baily is a worthy Gentleman to him, and the Apparator scorns his company
more than a Phanitick does a Parson's: the Boys stare on him as a Monster; Big
bellied Women are ready to miscarry at the sight of him, and People generally
avoid his Converse as they would do the Pestilence, and indeed they have
reason, for he is one of Gods more grievous Judgments! Squire Ketch himself
would not endure the scandal of drinking a Pot with him, were he not in certain
hopes of a future Advantage by him? a Popish Fire-ball Flinger is not more
hated in the City than he, only the Justices Clark and He call Cozens, because
he brings the most Grists to his Mill, and warrants him a Trade.

The Wise Athenias (we read) banished a Coffin-maker out of their City, because
the cause of his mirth was others sadness; what would they have done with such
a Setting-dog, (who like a beast of Prey) lives wholly on mischief, and can
neither eat nor drink, without some Law be violated; so that if ever he say any
Prayers, they are only that men may daily increase their crimes, and act more
unlawful things; that his Gains may rise proportionably. For though like a
c^nning Archer, he seem to make the Public Service the Mark of his aim, yet he
squints aside at his own ends, which are the true Butt all the Arrows of his
Prosecutions are shot at: He pretends himself a Zealot for Law, and the
Churches chief Scavinger; But is in truth a Prostituted Varlet, and for all
him, Episcopacy might lie in the Kennel, and Acts of Parliament (though never
so just and necessary) stop Mustard-pots, if he did not hope to get a Spill by
them. And for Twopence advance, from either Geneva or Rome, i will undertake the
same Fellow would burn the Common Prayer, and tear Magna Charta to pieces, if
he have not done it already.

Whatever boasts therefore he makes of his Loyalty, or Orthodoxness, those that
wear any Eyes about them will judge, so bad a man can scarce make the best
Subject and that we are like to have a glorious Reformation, when open
Profaneness is employed to correct supposed Heresies: a Good Cause is
undoubtedly scandalized by such vile Instruments, and could not but Blush to
see those Prosecute Persons for Ceremonial Nonconformities, who are themselves
so much unconformable to all the fundamental Laws of Religion and Morality?
Does it not sound excellently to hear one of these promoting Hectors cry out,
Damn me, before I have done, i will make all these Phanatick Sons of Whores come
to our Church, and s^rve God gallantly. Is not this think you, a fit Agent to
Proselite D ssenters? a rare Saints-Bell to Ring all into the Organs? Yet
examine his Pedigree, and you must confess him descended of an ancient Stock,
being the Son of Abaddon, or a natural By-blow of Belzebub's, whom without
breach of Charity we may conclude to be the first Founder of this order of
Informants, since the Scripture reckons amongst his Titles, That of Accuser of
the brethren, Nor is he less nobly allied, For Hamman and Julius were his two
Elder Brothers, and Free of the same Trade, though bot^ Hanged, which serves
only as an Omen of what at least he deserves, though the times should prove so
unjust as not to give it him. His younger Years were but an Apprentiship in
Debauchery, and having by Lust and Riot, consumed his Patrimony, or what he
could cheat others of, he now Imagines to Retrieve a Fortune by spoiling and
wasting those that have been either more Pious or Industrious: He has broke
ofter than a Town-Gallant has been Clapped, and followed more Tricks than a
Country Mercer usurps Trades; But all failing. The Devil in pure pity wished
him to this New Employ, and furnished him with a Prodigious Stock of Wickedness
to set up with; yet being unwilling to Trust him without Security he freely
made a Morgage of his Soul, and swears he has cheated the Subtle Fiend, because
it was forfeited long before. He is now as eager after his Prey as a
half-starv'd Cormorant, and cares not though he ruin half a Nation, to support
his own Prodigalities, being so perfectly Mercenary, That he would accuse his
own Father (if he did but know him) of Treason, and burn his Mother for a
Witch, to get six pence: He values an Oath no more than a Gamester, and
swallows Perjuries as fast and as easily as a Jugler does Pins and Daggers.

He Ferrets a Conventicle just as a Poll-cat does Rabbets in their Buroughs,
and the Rich men there skulks down in their Pews when they see him come in,
dreading him more than a Partridge does a Hawke, or a City Crack a Marshals
man* I never before knew the meaning of that Latin Proverb, Lupus in Fabula,
but now I Guess the English to be An INFORMER in a Meeting House, for sure the
sight of him is enough to make a Teacher hoarse; most of the Day he spends
perdue in blind Alehouses, and little Sallies to discover who has the
Impudence to serve God, And before Night he is sure to be in the Crown-Office:
A Justice of Peace can never be at quiet for him; and the honest Constable
looks upon him as his Evil Genius that is perpetually haunting and egging him
on to mischief: Yet though he be thus troublesome to others, he is still his
own greatest Enemy, for whilst he designs harm to others, it redownds to
himself; And Good-men like Cammomile grows the better (perhaps the more
Numerous and Faster) for his treading them down. He being only as a black
ground to set off the Luster of their Merits, since often times whilst malice
seeks to wound, it cures those against whom it is Levelled, and destroys it self,
like the Glass that Reverberating the Serpents Poison killed her with her own
Weapon.

Just as he gets his Money he spends it, For as he takes Wages to fight against
God, so he lays it out again in the service of the Devil, Consuming in
Bawdy-houses, what he gets by surprising Meeting Houses; so that his Rapines
not being able to supply his Prodigal Debaucheries* and his Hellish Designs
being blasted by Heaven, he is either forced at last to cast Anchor in a Goal,
or else is mowed down as a Noxious Weed by the Sith of Justice: To which
deserved Fate I leave, etc.

I leave him, if in the mean time his guilty Conscience (hitherto smothered) do
not before Revive and Condemn him, and he himself save the Hangman a Labor, by
preventing Him.

Hodg. I smell by the style of it, that this seems to be written by the
confounded damned Whig, W. or C. or V. or the Tub Preacher in White-Fryers.


Hirac. P -- -- on it Brother, it must be one of these, or all of them in the
brave club together, for it is a close thing.


Hodge, I understand by their discourse, that they have their private Cabals as
well as we.


Hirac. Yes, yes, Mr. T. and H. and W. daily frequent them in Masquerade, but
enough of this, let us pelt at it soundly in our next.


Hodg. With all my heart, here is work for one Month, P -- on it, so farewell.


FINIS.

