THE Word of the Lord TO HIS CHURCH AND Holy Assembly Regenerated and born
again of the righteous Seed, which the Lord has blessed.

To whom this is sent to be carefully and distinctly read, in the fear of the
Lord, when they are met together, in the Light of the Covenant of the most High
God.

Blessed, yea for ever blessed are they whose Names are written in the Lambs
Book of Life.

Printed in the Year, 1666.

The Word of the Lord to his Church, etc.
DEar precious Brethren and Sisters, in the ever honorable, peaceable birth of
the Seed immortal, which the Lord has blessed; grace, mercy, and peace be
multiplied amongst you in the aboundings of the enlarged mercies of our Lord
Jesus Christ; in whom feel the flowings of the bowels of your brother, whose
life with all the relations and enjoyments of this world has been and is
freely given up to serve you. Dear breathing, hungry and thirsty babes of my
heavenly Father. Oh the deep of his compassions that opens in my heart to you;
Children, Immortal, born again, in which bowels of tender love I exhort you all
diligently to watch to the heavenly attendancies of the spirit of life, in the
Covenant of Light, in the Lord our Righteousness, that you may all feel his
mighty power condemning sin in the flesh, and quicken your spirits, to live and
reign through faith in his name, that over the accuser of the Brethren you may
stand and never more to be bowed down, as some of you have been in years past,
through the mysterious working of the evil attendancies of your minds, in which
you will read me in what I write: for you that fear the Lord, and watch to his
light, you have a clear discovery in the true sensibility of what is good, and
what is evil, and hear you have learned your condemnation; but some that come
forth with us after a regulation of their conversations in some outward
observations according to the light, for want of watchfulness, are drawn by the
mystery of iniquity, and so go from us to rest in what they have done, and
delights their hearts in the knowledge more then the life that gives the
knowledge, and thus they eat the forbidden fruit, and what ever is pretended in
the service of God there is self-endedness in every undertaking, and under the
fainedst humi^ity, a self-priding spirit is found, as it is written, I deck
thee with my jewels, but thou took my jewels and played the harlot, and decked
thy self; and these are they that run and busies themselves to be helpful in
the work of the Lord, whom the Lord never sent; and though they may conceit
themselves they do a great deal of good, and say in their own hearts I am wise
and rich, and sees, and wants nothing, which in the taste of the imm^rtal birth,
which taste all things as it really is, they are known to be blind, na^ed, and
miserable, and want all things, and so is manifest that God never sent them;
therefore do they not profit the people at all; and if they turn not to the
light to wait for God to destroy the self-priding spirit in the gifted man,
that the birth may reign that makes self of no reputation, but they abide where
they are to feed of the tree of knowledge, of good and evil, from whence rises
strife and contentions, then shall they assuredly perish as the glory of the
flower of the field, and be consumed as the withering grass, and shall be
extinguished as the wandering Stars, which fall down to the Earth, whose luster
and glory shall be seen no more; f^r the Lord will dry up the tongue of the
Egiptian sea, and all intruding births that offer up a sacrifice before the
Lord, which burdens the Children of the Royal seed: what is before written it
shall come upon them, the mouth of the Lord has spoken it to my great joy. And
all you dear Lambs of the Lord God Almighty, who delights to hear the living
voice of the spirit of the most high God amongst his people, that so you may
have the bread of life broken to you for which you hunger, and until you have
it, your sorrows is known unto the Lord, etc. and to withold you from the
enjoyment of what you hunger, for great is the wrath of the enemy as before
written, as he leads some to their own destruction in a self-priding spirit in
outward observation, so does he seek to destroy the innocent babes by his
temptations and his secret and private accusations, where he continually seeks
to add affliction to the afflicted, who live in the deep sense of their own
misery, notwithstanding all their obedience with life to death, until they be
sealed up with the holy spirit of promise in the free mercies of God in the
Covevant of Light in the Lord, thereto be established in the marriage uni^n
with Christ our Righteousness for ever: And seeing you dear Lambs that abhors
every evil way in love to the Lord, who manif^steth his light which reaches
the sensitive part, God in his Eternal Wisdom to hide pride from Man, and that
not any should boast and say stand by I am holier then thou, that all may be
buried in the sense of their own misery, therefore has he hid our life with
Christ in God, that all his Children may lie prostrate before the throne of his
Grace, and free mercy there to wait till he reveal the life to satisfy the
soul according to the desire raised up in the light; but oh dear Lambs how does
the accuser rage and takes his advantage when you do not feel the life as
sencibly satisfying your thirst, as you are sensible in the Light what you
thirst for; oh how does the accuser bow you down to undervalue what the Lord
has done for you, and cause you to look constantly at your own weakness, and
at the temptations you meet with all, and often accuses you that few is like
unto you, and that you will never be able to get over those besetments and evil
attendancies of your minds; and hear many lies mourning in secret, bearing many
heavy burdens through he^^kening to the accuser who violently assaults you, and
accuses you day and night before the throne of God, and when any sparklings of
the glory of the quickening spirit is manifest in you to raise you up to
believe in the name of Christ, where your life is hid: Then the Accuser in
great fury strikes you down and bids you take heed of presuming, there is no
such thing belongs to you as yet, you must see such and such things overcome
before you can expect such seize of the free mercy of the Lord: thus does
the enemy chain you in darkness, and draws you into a self-striving spirit,
where many strives to enter the Kingdom, and enters not, for without Faith
there is no entrance, neither is it possible to please God; therefore all
Children born Immortal, you can understand me in this matter, for unto you this
is directed in the simpathizing spirit, where your burdens is mine, and your
sorrows is my sorrows, when I behold how the enemy chains you down, and how the
red Dragon in the greatness of his rage is ready to devour the tender birth,
which has no life but in the Righteousness of God in Christ, the sense of your
exercises, weights and burdens, causes mine eyes to be as a fountain of tears
to water the Altar of God, when I approach the throne of his Grace, in the
sensibility of all your misery to wrestle with the Lord my God in the st^ength
of the life, which has delivered my soul out of the thraldom where you are
bound, and the Lord is prevailed withal for you, and he has commanded me in
the word of his faithfulness in this day, that his spirit is poured upon me, to
preach the Gospel to you that is poor in your spirits, and to entreat and
beseech you to judge sin, and self, and lend not your ears to the accuser, or
to any evil attendancy that would hinder you as little Children to enter the
Kingdom, or for looking up in the light to lay hold on the life through faith
in the name which in the unlimited power and soul saving sanctifying spirit of
the Lord Jesus, which will supply all your wants, for he is as free to save you
as he is to convince you, of the need of his Salvation: Oh the Lord persuade
you of the truth of these words that I may be eased in the travel of my soul
for you, who st^nd mourning at a distance, and will not come that you may have
life: oh be entreated in true watchfulness, in the light, to judge all your
doubts, thoughts, fearfulness, and unbelief, and what ever would hinder you,
from laying hold of the soul-saving Power, of the Lord of Life: Oh let not the
locks of the beloved, be any more bedewed with the drops of the night; which is
your doubts, and resistances of his love, but all you necessitated people, that
are born of the Seed, that cannot live without the Light of the Countenance of
God; and in the secret of your hearts, abhors all self-seeking, and
self-serving, that you may serve the Lord in uprightness; is the pressure of
your spirits; and your daily breathings unto the Lord: Oh open your ears, and
hear the Proclamation, from the Throne of the Glory, of the unlimited love, and
mercy of the God of your Salvation; who has commanded me once more, in the
demonstration and power of his spirit, to exhort ye all, in the light of his
own Covenant to come away, to the Fountain of life; let not the excusing Man be
hearkened unto in this day of Gods invitation; but every one in the sense of
your necessities draw near; and look all to the God of living mercy; for as the
Serpent was lift up in the Wilderness, so is the Son of Man lifted up this day;
therefore come away, come away; in the simplisity of your spirits; and resign
freely to be orde^ed by him, who says who ever comes unto me, I will in no
wise cast off, and he will cure you, of all your maladies; he will cause the
lame to leap, and you that has been blind, to see his love extending unto you;
and he will bind up your broken hea^ts; and he will comfort the mourners in
Sion; and he will lift up the bowed down heads; and he will consolate the
afflicted, and set free the Captives; and he will wash the stains off all your
Garments; and he will dry up all the Ishues, that has putrified, and will
cause the dumb to speak, and the solitary to sing the high praises of our God;
he will be the Husband of the desolate Widow; and an entertainer of the
stranger; in his great distresses; and a Father he will be, to the immortal
birth, that has no comfort, but in his presence; therefore I beseech you, and
dearly entreat you, who has any sensibleness upon your spirits, of the need of
the help of the Lord, our God: Oh stand not at a distance, in unbelief; oh be
persuaded to commit your souls and bodies to the orderings of the Lord Jesus;
where your help is laid up for you, and all that truly wait and believe in his
Light, and Life, shall see, the Windows of Heaven opened; and the Sluices of
the River of pleasure drawn; and the Floodgates of mercy set wide; that every
one that is born again, may find more strength, life, soul-saving power, joy,
and peace, in the Light and Covenant of Life, in the Lord Jesus, then there is
strength in the power of Darkness, to draw us from him. Therefore dear Brethren
and Sisters, be not doubtful, be not doubtful, but believe, over, above, and
beyond, all whatever appears within, or without, that would draw you from your
steadfast standing in the Light, Power, and Life of Jesus; that so through
faith, in his name, you may say to the Mountains, be removed, and it shall be
so; yea in this faith, resist the Devil, he will fly away, and you shall tread
down Satan, and trample upon all wicked thoughts, and evil attendancies of
your minds, as ashes under the soales of your feet, yea the accuser of the
Brethren, that accused you, before the Throne of God, will be cast down; and
you shall reign over him, in the Light, and Life of the Lord of Glory; and so
become the free born Sons and Daughters of the ever living God; members of the
Church of the first born, who are redeemed from the Earth, and on whom the ends
of the World is come, that in newness of Life through faith, you may live,
which will make an entrance through all that would veil, into the holy City,
new Jerusalem, where there is no curse, neither is the Gates shut day nor
night; for there is no night, as you in the powerful word of faith, reign over
your dark thoughts, doubts and accusings, which did benight you; but now
fighting the good fight of faith, the enemy will be kept forth of your
habitations, and you will see your right to the Tree of Life, which stands in
the midst of the Paradise of God, there to feed, and grow Pillars in the Temple
of the Lord; and shall go no more forth, but as you have received Christ, so to
walk in him, and as you are overcome with the glory of his pure love, and
constrained in the overcoming life, to offer up sacrifice of prayer,
exhortation or praises in the Assemblies of the People of the Lord, or in your
own Families you are to be faithful, for the least mite of the returns of his
own spirit is acceptable to him, so every one minister according to the
aboundings of the manifold Grace of God, and let not any from this liberty be
hasty to utter words before the Lord, least they be found intruders, and have
their reward with them as is before written in this Epistle, who are the
troubles of the Heritage of God where ever they come, yet notwithstanding what
they do; let not the dear Children of the Lord be unfaithful when you are moved
in the forcible power of the Word of the Lord, which is as a fire and a hammer
that breaks the R^cks in pieces, and lays all in the dust before the Lord
within you, be you faithful and keep in the bounds and limits of the pure
savoury spirit of Life, that so we may all be as a Family of Prophets, and as
Assemblies of living Ministers from the highest stature to the least babe born
again Immortal of the seed of God, in whom the spirits of the Prophets is
subject to the Prophets, and every Member in the pure life will know their
service in the body, the strong leading the weak by the hand, and in all
seize of the gifts of God, denies and girts up self, to serve one another
in pure love, which is known in the inward Man, the washing one another feet,
and here is Christ and his Disciples, and the Lord really known to be one and
his name one, which binds up in the Eternal Unity of the Spirit and bond of
peace, being all clothed with the Wedding Garment, sitting at the Table of the
Lord, eating his flesh, and drinking his blood; so we being many are one bread
in Christ the bread of Life, and he binds us up in the one Garment, his own
Righteousness, where there never was rent, nor never will, because our head,
who commands and governs the Members of his body, is the Prince of Peace, and
therefore Peace he gives unto us, which the World knows not, neither can they
take it from us, let every one read that can understand their lot to be in this
Inheritance, and there to abide to the end of their days, that an Eternal Crown
of Glory may remain with them here, and for ever when time shall be no more:
And all you my honorable Brethren and Sisters in the Lord, who travel in the
strength of his pure peaceable Spirit to gather the scattered of the House of
Israel, the Glorious Presence of the Almighty God prosper you in your
undertakings, who often leaves the ninty and nine that kept their state with
God and in the unwearied spirit, labors to bring in the souls that is driven
away, and when they will submit to the Word of the Lord, oh how do you bear
their burdens, and brings them again with joy and triumph with the host of
Heaven; who rejoices more over one that was lost, but now found, and brought
again, then over the ninty and nine that need no repentance; for you with me
knows assuredly they that turn a sinner from the error of his ways, saves a
soul from death, and hides a m^ltitude of sins; therefore shall you shine as
Stars in the Firmament of Heaven, abiding faithful in gathering many souls to
God* Righteousness, in whom feel my life with you in the forcible unity in this
spirit of our beloved: Oh the Lord increase the number of you, dear pre^ious,
ever honorable Brethren and Sisters in whom this pure peaceable spirit of our
beloved reigns, my soul blesses the name of the Lord for you that ever you had
a being amongst the Children of Men, for you are the Chosen of the Lord from
the least to the highest stature, for to stand saviors upon mount Zion this
day, wherein the Lord is making up his Jewels whom he has prepared to endure
the trial of this suffering day, which ten years ago I was sent to proclaim in
your ears, that all might prepare to meet the Lord when it should speak forth
it self as in some measure it has done, and now does, to awake all to walk in
newness of life, to reign over the spirit of this world, and all the pomp and
glory thereof, and so to dwell in the established life, there to be hid in the
hollow of the hand of the Almighty God, as in a munition of Rocks in this
dreadful and terrible day of the Almighty God, wherein all hearts will fail,
but whose confidence is in the Lord alone, and waits in the Resurrection of the
Royal seed to be kept out, over, and above all things that would provoke the
eyes of his glory, that so in close union every soul may be kept in the bosom
of the Lord of life, the husband of the bride, the Lambs wife; for whom the
eternal, everliving, glorious majesty, God over all, has determined to appear
as he has done, so will he more and more, for the help of his helpless People,
whom he has chosen to trust in him before the Sons of Men, and has given
victory to overcome, in washing their Garments, and making them white in the
blood of the Lamb, therefore stand they before the throne of God praising him
day and night in his holy Temple, over all the wrath and cruelty of Men;
therefore all Chosen of the Lord look up to the Lord, who will plead our cause
in the face of all People; for Michael the great Prince spoken of by Daniel the
Prophet, will stand up and deliver them whose Names are written in the Lambs
Book of Life: Oh let us trust in Him, and give up all to Him, for he will
astonish the People as much as ever he did in any Generation, when he arises in
his dreadful vengeance to plead the cause of his own Church, which he will
preserve, and who finish in the way their faithful Testimony, the Crown of
Glory is their reward for ever; but a remnant there is who shall see the Lord
bring to naught all the wicked devices of the enemies of God in this Nation,
whom he will pour his vengeance upon, that they shall curse the day that ever
they afflicted the Innocent (...) of the holy God, whose confidence is in the
Lord alone; yea, it makes my eyes to be watered with tears in the deep sense of
the great Calamity that will come upon those that seek to destroy the People of
the most high God; Oh vengeance, terrible vengeance from the Lord our God will
be poured forth, that shall cause all hearts to fail that withstand the rising
of his Glory, and they shall gnaw their tongues for pain, in the anguish of
their souls, until they set free the Redeemed of the Lord, and give them
liberty to serve their God in the Land of their Nativity.

And this my God has commanded me once more to declare unto you dear suffering
Lambs of my Heavenly Father, for he is mighty to save, and will not let any
sufferings come upon us, but he will give us ability to rejoice through, over,
and beyond all that the power of da^k^ess can do, for he will cause the Earth
to shake, and the hearts of the People to fail, and all Nations shall know he
is our God, who will manifest his power txo the sight of our enemies, that not
any weapon formed against us shall ever prosper, or tongue lifted up, but it
shall fall in Judgment, which the Lord will perform in his own time, the mouth
of the Lord has spoken it.

Through your Brother and Companion in the Kingdom of patience and tribulation
in the Lord Jesus, where my life is bound up with you for ever.

Given forth from the Spirit of the Lord in the common Goal in Warwick the 27.
day of the fifth Month 1666. William Dewsbury

THE END

