A LATE DISCOURSE Made in a Solemn Assembly of Nobles and Learned Men at
Montpellier in France; By Sr. Kenelme Digby, Knight, etc.

Touching the Cure of WOUNDS by the Powder of Sympathy; With Instructions how
to make the said Powder; whereby many other Secrets of Nature are unfolded.

Foelix qui potuit Rerum cognoscere causas. Rendered faithfully out of French
into English

By R. White. Gent.

London, Printed for R. Lownes, and T Davies, and are to be sold at their shops
in St. Paul's Church yard, at the sign of the White Lion, and at the Bible over
against the little North Door of St. Paul's Church. 1658.

TO THE Most Noble, and Heroic Gentleman, JOHN DIGBYE. Esquire. at Gothhurst.
SIR, By making this Dedicatory Address unto you, I may truly say it is done to
the Renowned Author Himself; for, besides the ordinary relation of Father and
Son betwixt you, there was never, I dare boldly say, such a perfect exact
similitude twixt any two since the World began. For you resemble him, not only
in the outward Symmetry, in that goodly proportion, and comportments of your
body. You are like him, not only in Physiognomy of face, having the same
spacious front, the same perspicacious eyes, with other visible parts so
marvalously alike, but the tone of your voice, the accent of your words, your
very breath, and articulate sounds are the same with his; insomuch, that it
being well observed, this admirable similitude, or rather Identity, may be
called one of the greatest wonders of these times.

Now, Sir; this Resemblance being so exact, through all the outward parts
Capapee; It may be well presumed, that you are also like him in the Idaeas of
your soul, and the intern motions of your mind, and consequently in his sublime
speculations. Therefore, I hope, that neither the World will accuse me of
Impertinence, or your self of presumption that I make this Dedication, and
thereby style my self.

Highly Honored Sir, Your most humble and ready servant R. WHITE.

An Extract of the Royal privilege in France for printing the said discourse.
BY the Grace, and privilege of the King, given in Paris the one and twentieth
of December one thousand six hundred fifty seven, It is permitted to John
Ancelin to cause to be printed, sold, and uttered by what Bookseller he shall
think fit, a Book entitled A discourse made in a famous Assembly by Cavalier
Digby, Chancellor to the Queen of Great Britain touching the cure of wounds by
the Powder of Sympathy, etc. And this during the time, and space of ten years,
with prohibition to all Booksellers, and Printers to counterfeit, sell or utter
the said Book without the consent and permission of the said Ancelin, or of
those who shall derive a right from him, under the penalty of one thousand five
hundred Livers, and of all expenses, damages, and interests, as it is more
amply contained within the Letters of the said Privilege.

The said Ancelin has transmitted the right of the said Privilege to
Augustine Courb, and Peter Moet Merchants of books in Paris, according to the
Agreement betwixt them.

His Majesty's Library is furnished with two Exemplars accordingly.

An Information to the Knowing Reader.
THis Exquisite philosophical Discourse was made lately by that Renowned
Knight, Sir Kenelme Digby, in one of the most famous Academies of France. It
contains a variety of many recondit, and high mysteries of Nature, which are
all here unmasked. And as all that great Scientifical Assembly, composed of the
choicest wits under that Clime, stood then astonished at the profound
speculations of the Author, (which were delivered by way of Oration, and taken
in short writing upon the place as it was uttered) so I believe it will work the
same effect in any Judicious Soul, when he has seriously perused it.

R. WHITE.

A DISCOURSE Touching the cure of WouNDS, by the Powder of Sympathy.
My Lords,

I Believe that you will remain all in one mind with me, that to penetrate, and
know a Subject, it is necessary in the first place, to show whether the thing
be such as it is supposed or imagined to be: For would not one unprofitably
lose both his time, and labor, to busy himself in the research of the causes
of that which peradventure is but a Chimera, without any foundation of truth?

I remember to have read in a place in Plutarch, where he proposes this
question, Wherefore those Horses, who, while they are Colts, have been pursued
by the Wolf, and saved themselves by force of running, are more fleet than
other Horses? Whereunto he answers, That it may be that the searing, and
affrightment, which the Wolf gives unto the young beast, makes him try his
utmost strength, to deliver himself from the danger that follows him at the
heels, therefore the said fright does as it were unknit his joints, and stretch
his sinews, and makes the ligaments, and other parts of his body, the more
supple to run; insomuch, that he resents it all his life afterward, and
becomes a good courser: Or it may be, says he, that those Colts which are
naturally swift, save themselves by flying away; whereas others, who are not
so, are overtaken by the Wolf, and so become his prey: and so it is not because
they have escaped the Wolf, that they are the more fleet, but it is their
natural swiftness which saves them. He affords also other reasons, and at last
concludes, That it may be the thing is not true; I find it not so fit (my
Lords) to reply hereunto at a Table Discourse, where the chief design of
conversation is to pass away the time gently and pleasantly, without meddling
with the severity of high fetched reasons to wind up the spirits, and make them
more attentive. But in so renowned an Assembly as this, where there are such
Judicious Persons, and so profoundly learned, and who upon this rancounter,
expect from me, that I pay them in solid reasons; I should be very sorry, that
having done my utter most, to make it clear, how the Powder, which they
commonly call the Powder of Sympathy, does naturally, and without any Magic,
cure wounds without touching them, yea, without seeing of the Patient; I say, I
should be very sorry that it should be doubred, Whether such a cure may
effectually be performed or no.

In matter of fact, the determination of existence, and truth of a thing,
depends upon the report which our senses make us. This business is of that
nature, for they who have seen the effects, and had experience thereof, and
have been careful to examine all necessary circumstances, and satisfied
themselves afterward, that there is no imposture in the thing, do nothing
doubt but that it is real, and true. But they who have not seen such
experiences, ought to refer themselves to the Narrations, and authority of
such, who have seen such things; I could produce diverse, whereof I was an
ocular witness, nay, Quorum pars magna fui: But as a certain, and an accounted
example in the affirmative, is convincing to determine the possibility, and
truth of a matter which is doubtful: I shall content my self, because I would
not trespass too much upon your patience at this time, to make instance in one
only; but it shall be one of the clearest, the most perspicuous, and the most
averred that can be, not only for the remarkable circumstances thereof, but
also for the hands, which were above the Vulgar, through which the whole
business passed. For the cure of a very sore hurt was perfected by this Power
of Sympathy, upon a person that is illustrious, as well for his many
perfections, as for his several employments. All the circumstances were
examined, and sounded to the bottom, by one of the greatest, and most knowing
Kings of his time, viz. King James, of England, who had a particular talent,
and marvailous sagacity, to discuss natural things, and penetrate them to the
very marrow; As also by his Son, the late King Charles, and the Duke of
Buckingham, their prime Minister. And in fine, all was registered among the
observations of great Chancellor Bacon, to add by way of Appendix, unto his
Natural History. And I believe, Sirs, when you shall have understood this
History, you will not accuse me of vanity, if I attribute unto my self the
Introducer unto this Quarter of the World this way of curing.

Mr. James Howel, (well known in France, for his public works, and
particularly, for his Dendrologia, translated into French, by Monsieur
Baudouin) coming by chance as two of his best friends were fighting in duel, he
did his endeavor to part them, and putting himself between them, seized with
his left hand upon the hilt of the sword, of one of the Combatants, while with
his right hand he laid hold of the blade of the other: they being transported
with fury one against the other, strugled to rid themselves of the hindrance
their friend made, that they should not kill one another: and one of them
roughly drawing the blade of his sword, cuts to the very bone the nerves, and
mussles of Mr. Howels hand; and then the other disingaged his hilts, and gave a
cross blow on his adversaries head, which glanced toward his friend, who
heaving up his sore hand to save the blow, he was wounded on the back of his
hand, as he had been before within. It seems some strange constellation reigned
then against him, that he should lose so much blood by parting two such dear
friends, who had they been themselves, would have hazarded both their lives to
have preserved his: but this unvoluntary effusion of blood by them, prevented
that which they should have drawn one from the other. For they seeing Mr.
Howels face besmeared with blood, by heaving up his wounded band, they both run
to embrace; and having searched his hurts, they bound up his hand with one of
his garters, to close the veins which were cut, and bled abundantly. They
brought him home, and sent for a Surgeon. But this being heard at Court, the
King sent one of his own Surgeons, for his Majesty much affected the said Mr.
Howel.

It was my chance to be lodged hard by him: and four or five days after, as I
was making my self ready, he came to my House, and prayed me to view his
wounds, for I understand, said he, that you have extraordinary remedies upon
such occasions, and my Surgeons apprehend some fear, that it may grow to a
Gangrene, and so the hand must be cut of. In effect, his countenance discovered
that he was in much pain, which he said was unsupportable, in regard of the
extreme inflammation: I told him that I would willingly serve him, but if happily
he knew the manner how I would cure him, without touching or seeing him: it may
be he would not expose himself to my manner of curing, because he would think
it peradventure either ineffectual, or superstitious: he replied, That the
wonderful things which many have related unto me, of your way of medecinement,
makes me nothing doubt at all of its efficacy; and all that I have to say unto
you, is comprehended in the Spanish Proverb, Hagase el milagro, y bagalo
Mahoma, Let the miracle be done, though Mahomet do it,

I asked him then for any thing that had the blood upon it, so he presently
sent for his garter, wherewith his hand was first bound: and as I called for a
Basin of water, as if I would wash my hands; I took a handful of Powder of
Vitrol, which I had in my study, and presently dissolved it. As soon as the
bloody garter was brought me, I put it within the Basin, observing in the
interim what Mr. Howel did, who stood talking with a Gentleman in a corner of
my Chamber, not regarding at all what I was doing: but he started suddenly, as
if he had found some strange alteration in himself; I asked him what he ailed?
I know not what ailes me, but I find that I feel no more pain, me thinks that a
pleasing kind of freshness, as it were a wet cold napkin did spread over my
hand, which has taken away the inflammation that tormented me before; I
replied since then that you feel already so good an effect of my medicament, I
advise you to cast away all your playsters, only keep the wound clean, and in
a moderate temper, twixt heat and cold. This was presently reported to the Duke
of Buckingham, and a little after to the King, who were both very curious to
know the circumstance of the business, which was, that after dinner I took the
garter out of the water, and put it to dry before a great fire; it was scarce
dry, but Mr. Howels servant came running, that his Master felt as much burning
as ever he had done, if not more, for the heat was such, as if his hand were
twixt coals of fire: I answered, that although that had happened at present,
yet he should find ease in a short time; for I knew the reason of this new
accident, and I would provide accordingly, for his Master should be free from
that inflammation, it may be, before he could possibly return unto him: but in
case he found no ease, I wished him to come presently back again, if not, he
might forbear coming. Thereupon he went, and at the instant I did put again the
garter into the water, thereupon he found his Master without any pain at all.
To be brief, there was no sense of pain afterward; but within five or six days
the wounds were cicatrized, and entirely healed. King James required a punctual
information of what had passed, touching this cure: and after it was done, and
perfected, his Majesty would needs know of me how it was done, having drolled
with me first (which he could do with a very good grace) about a Magitian and a
Sorcerer, I answered, That I should be always ready to perform what his
Majesty should command; but I most humbly defired him, before I should pass
further, to tell him what the Author, of whom I had the secret, said to the
great Duke of Toscany, upon the like occasion. It was a religious Carmelite,
that came from the Indies, and Persia to Florence, he had also been at China,
who having done many marvailous cures with his Powder, after his arrival to
Toscany, the Duke said he would be very glad to learn it of him: It was the
father of the Great Duke, who governs now. The Carmelite answered him, That it
was a secret which he had learnt in the oriental parts, and he thought there
was not any who knew it in Europe but himself, and that it deserved not to be
divulged, which could not be done, if his Highness would meddle with the
practice of it, because he was not likely to do it with his own hands, but must
trust a Surgeon, or some other servant, so that in a short time diverse other
would come to know it as well as himself. But a few months after I had
opportunity to do an important courtesy to the said Friar, which induced him
to discover unto me his secret, and the same year he returned to Persia;
insomuch, that now there is no other knows this secret in Europe but my self:
The King replied, That he needed not apprehend any fear that he would discover,
for he would not trust any body in the World to make experience of this secret,
but he would do it with his own hands, therefore he would have some of the
Powder; which I delivered, instructing him in all the circumstances. Whereupon
his Majesty made sundry proofs, whence he received singular satisfaction.

In the interim, Doctor Mayerne, his first Physician watched to discover what
was done by this secret, and at last he came to know that the King made use of
Vitriol. Afterward he accosted me, saying, he durst not demand of me my
secret, because I made some difficulty to discover it to the King himself. But
having learnt with what matter it was to be done, he hoped that I would
communicate unto him all the circumstances how it is to be used; I answered
him, That if he had asked me before, I would have frankly told him all, for in
his hands there was no fear that such a secret should be prostituted, and so I
told him all. A little after the Doctor went to France, to see some fair
Territories that he had purchased near Geneva, which was the Barony of Aubonne.
In this voyage he went to see the Duke of Mayerne, who had been a long time his
friend, and protector, and he taught him this secret, whereof the Duke made
many experiments, which if any other but a Prince had done, it may be they had
passed for effects of Magic and enchantments.

After the Dukes death, who was killed at the fiege of Montauban, his Surgeon
who waited upon him in doing cures, sold this secret to diverse persons of
quality, who gave him considerable sums for it, so that he became very rich
thereby. The thing being fallen thus into many hands, remained not long in
terms of a secret, but by degrees it came to be so divulged, that now there is
scarce any Country Barber but knows it.

Behold now, Sirs, the genealogy of the Powder of Sympathy in this part of the
World, with a notable History of a cure performed by it. It is time now to come
to the discussion, which is, to know how it is made. It must be avowed that it
is a marveilous thing, that the hurt of a wounded' person, should be cured by
the application of a remedy put to a rag of cloth, or a weapon at a great
distance. And it is not to be doubted, if after a long and profound
speculation, of all the economy and concatenation of natural causes, which
may be adjudged capable to produce such effects, one may fall at last upon the
true causes, which must have subtle resorts and means to act. Hitherto they
have been wrapped up in darkness, and adjudged so inaccessible, that they who
have undertaken to speak or write of them, (at least those whom I saw) have
been contented to speak of some ingenious gentilenesse, without diving into the
bottom, endeavoring rather to show the vivacity of their spirit, and the force
of their eloquence, than to satisfy their Readers, and Auditors, how the thing
is really to be done. They would have us take for ready money, some terms which
we understand not, nor know what they signify. They would pay us with
conveniences, with resemblances, with Sympathies, with Magnetical virtues, and
such terms, without explicating what these terms mean. They think they have
done enough, if they feebly persuade any body that the business may be
performed by a natural way, without having any recourse to the intervention of
demons, and spirits: but they pretend not in any sort to have found out the
convincing reasons, to demonstrate how the thing is done.

Sirs, if I did not hope to gain otherwise upon your spirits; I say, that if I
did not believe, that I should be able to persuade you otherwise than by words,
I would not have undertaken this enterprise: I know too well -- Quid valiant
humeri, quid far recusent,
such a design requires a great fire, and vivacity of conceptions volubility of
tongue, aptness of expressions to infinuate as it were by surprisal, that
which one cannot carry away by a firm foot, and by cold reasons, though solid.
A Discourse of this nature ought not to attend a stranger, who finds himself
obliged to display his sense in a language, wherein he can hardly express his
ordinary conceptions. Nevertheless, these considerations shall not deter me
from engaging my self in an enterprise, which may seem to some much more
difficult than that which I am now to perform, viz. to make good convincing
proofs, that this Sympathetical cure may be done naturally, and to show before
your eyes, and make you touch with your finger how it may be done. You know
that persuasions are made by ingenious arguments, which being expressed with a
good grace, do rather tickle the imagination, than satisfy the understanding:
But Demonstrations are built upon certain, and approved principles, and though
they be but roughly pronounced, yet they convince and draw after them necessary
conclusions. They proceed as a strong Engine fastened to a gate to batter it
down, or as a plate of metal to imprint the mark of the money, at every turn
that truth makes, she approches but little, and as it were insensibly, and
makes not much noise, and there is no such great force required to turn her;
but her strength, though it be slow, is invincible, that at the end, she breaks
down the gate, and makes a deep impression on the piece of gold or silver:
whereas the stroke of hammers, and bars, (whereunto witty discourses, and the
flourished conceptions of subtle spirits) require the arm of a Giant, makes a
great noise, and at the end of the account, produces little effect.

To enter then into the matter, I will, according to the method of Geometrical
Demonstrations, lay six or seven Principles, as foundationstones, whereon I
will erect my structure. But I will lay them so well, and so firmly, that there
will be no great difficulty to grant them. These Principles shall be like the
wheels of Archimedes, by the advantage whereof a child might be capable to hale
a shore the bigest Carack of King Hieron, which a hundred pair of Oxen, with
all the Ropes and Cables of his Arsenal, were not able to stir: so by the
strength of these Principles, I hope to waft my conclusions to a safe Port.

The first Principle shall be, That the whole Orb, or Sphere of the Air is
filled with light. If it were needful to prove in this point, that the Light is
a material, and corporal substance, and not an imaginary, and incomprehensible
quality, as many Schoolmen aver, I could do it evidently enough, but I have
done this in another Treatife, which has been published not long since. And it
is no new opinion, for many of the most esteemed Philosophers among the
Ancients have advanced it, yea, the Great St. Augustine, in his Third Epistle to
Volusion, does allege, that it is his sentiment. But touching our present
business, whether the light be the one or the other, it matters not, it is
enough to explicate her course, and the journies she makes, whereunto our
senses bear witness. It Is cl^ar, that issuing continually out of her source,
which is the Sun, and lancing her self by a marvailous celerity on all fides by
straight lines, there where she rancounters any obstacles in her way, by the
opposition of some hard, or opaque body, she reflects, and leaping thence to
equal angles, she takes again her course by a straight line, until she bandies
some other side upon another solid body, and so she continues to make new
boundings here and there; until at the end, being chased on all sides, by the
bodies which oppose her in her passage, she is tired, and so extinguisheth. In
the like manner we see a Ball in Tenis Court, being struck by a strong arm
against the walls, leaps to the opposite side, that sometimes she makes the
circuit of the whole Court, and finisheth her motion near the place where she
was first struck. Our very eyes are witnesses of this progress of the light,
when by way of reflection, she illuminates some obscure place, whither she
cannot directly arrive; Or when issuing immediately from the Sun, and beating
upon the Moon, or some other of the Planets, the rays which cannot find
entrance there, bound upon our earth, otherwise we should not see them, and
there she is reflected, broken and bruised by so many bodies, as she meets in
her diversity of reflections.

The second Principle shall be, that the light glancing so upon some body, the
rays which enter no further, and which rebound upon the superficies of the
body, loosen themselves, and carry with them some small particles or atoms;
just as the ball, whereof we have spoken, would carry with it some of the
moisture of the wall, against which she is banded, if the plaster thereof were
also moist: and as in effect, she carried away some tincture of the black,
wherewith the walls are colored. The reason whereof is, that the light, that
subtle, and rarefied fire, coming with such an imperceptible have, for her
darts are within our eyes, as soon as her head is above our Horison, making so
many million of miles in an inimaginable space of time, I say, the light
beating upon the body, which opposes her she cannot choose but make there some
small incisions proportionable to her rarity, and subtility. And these small
Atoms being cut, and loosened from their trunk, being composed of the four
Elements, (as all bodies are) the heat of the light does stick, and incorporate
it self with the most humid, viscuous, and gluing parts of the said Atoms, and
brings them along with her. Experience shows us this as well as Reason; for
when one puts some humid cloth to dry before the fire, the fiery rays beating
thereon, those which find no entrance, but reflect thence, carry away with them
some small moist bodies, which make a kind of mist betwixt the cloth and the
fire. In like manner the Sun at his risig enlightening the earth, which is
humified either by rain, or the dew of the night, his beams raise a mist, which
by little and little ascends to the tops of the hills: and this mist does
arifie according, as the Sun has more force to draw it upwards, until at last
we lose the sight thereof, and that it becomes part of the air, which in regard
of its tenuity, is invisible unto us. These Atoms then are like Cavaliers,
mounted on winged coursers; who go very far, until that the Sun setting, takes
from them their Pegasus and leaves them unmounted: and then they precipitate
themselves in crowds to the earth, whence they sprung, the greatest part of
them, and the most heavy fall upon the first retreating of the Sun, and that we
call the Serain, which though it be so thin that we cannot see it, yet we feel
it as so many small hammers, which strike upon our heads and bodies,
principally the elder sort of them; for the younger sort, in regard of the
boiling of their blood, and the heat of their complexion, thrust out of them
abundance of spirits, which being stronger than those that fell from the
Serain, they repulse them, and hinder them to operate upon the bodies, whence
these spirits came forth, as they do upon those that being grown cold by age,
are not warranted by so strong an emanation of the spirits, which come out of
them. The wind which blows, and is tossed to and fro, is no other than a great
River of the like Atoms, drawn out of some solid bodies, which are upon the
earth, and so are banded here and there, according as they find cause for that
effect.

I remember to have once sensibly seen how the wind is engendered: I passed over
Mount Cenis, to go for Italy, toward the beginning of Summer, and I was
advanced to half the hill, as the Sun did rise clear, and luminous, but before
I could see his body, because the Mountains interposed: I observed his rays,
which did guild the top of the Mountain Viso, which is the Pyramid of a Rock, a
good deal higher than Mount Cenis, and all the neighboring Mountains. Many are
of opinion, that it is the highest Mountain in the World, after the Pic of
Tenariff, in the gran Canarie, and this Mount Viso is always covered with
snow, I observed then, that about that place, which was illuminated by the
Solar rays, there was a fog which at first was of no greater extent then an
ordinary boule, but by degrees it grew greater, that at last, not only the top
of that Mountain, but all the neighboring hills, were canopied all over with a
cloud. I was now come to the top of Mount Cenis, and finding my self in the
straight line, which passes from the Sun to Mount Viso, I stayed awhile to
behold it, while my people were coming up the hill behind, for having more men
to carry my chair than they had, I was there sooner. It was not long that I
might perceive the said fog descend gently to the place where I was, and I
began to feel a freshness that came over my face, when I turned it that way.
When all my Troup was come about me, we went descending the other side of Mount
Cenis, toward Suze, and the lower we went, we sensibly found it that the wind
began to blow hard behind our backs, for our way obliged us to go toward the
side, where the Sun was. We met with Pass^ngers that were going up, and we
down, they told us that the wind was very impetuous below, and did much
incommodate them, by blowing in their faces and eyes, but the higher they came,
it was lesser and lesser: and, touching our selves, when we had come to the
place where they said the wind blew so hard, we found a kind of storm, and it
increased still the lower we went, until the Sun being well advanced, drew no
more by that line, but caused a wind in some other place. The people of that
Country assured me, that it was there always so, if some extraordinary and
violent accident did not intervene, and divert his ordinary course, which is,
that upon a certain hour of the day, the wind does raise it self to such a
rumb, or point, and when the Sun is come to auother point, another wind rises,
and so from hand to hand it changes the point till the Sun set, which always
brings with it a calm, if the weather be fair, and that always comes from the
Mount Viso, opposite to the Sun. They told us also, that the daily wind is
commonly stronger toward the bottom of the Mountain, than toward the top,
whereof thereason is evident, for the natural movement of every body natural
does increase always in swiftness, according as it moves forward to its
center, and that in an unequal number, (as Galileo has ingeniously
demonstrated, I did it also in another Treatise) that is to say, that if at the
first moment it advances an ell, in the second it advances three, in the
third five, in the fourth seven, and so it continues to augment in the same
manner, which proceeds from the density, and figure, of the descending body
acting upon the cellibility of the medium. And these small bodies which cause a
wind from Mount Viso are thick, and terrestrial; for the snow being composed of
aquatical parts, and of earthly united by the cold, when the heat of the Solar
beams does disunite and separate them, the viscous parts fly with them, while
the terrestrial, being too heavy to fly upward, fall presently downward. This
makes me remember a very remarkable thing, which befell me when I was with my
Fleet in the Port of Scanderon, or Alexandrette, toward the bottom of the
Mediterranean Sea: there they use to disimbark, when they go to Aleppo, or
Babylon. I had done already what I had intended to do in those seas, and
happily compassed my design, so it imported me much to return to England as
soon as possibly I could, and the rather because my Ships were battered by a
great fight, which I had had a little before, against a formidable power;
which, although I had obtained the better, yet in so furious a dispute, my
Fleet was in some disorder, and my Ships full of wounded men. To advise
therefore of the most expedient road to come to some harbor, where I might
repair my Ships, and be in surety: I assembled all my Captains, Pilots, and
Mariners, the most experienced of my Fleet; and having propounded unto them my
design, they were all of an unaminous opinion, that the surest course was
toward the South, and to coast upon Syria, Judea, Egypt, and Africa, and
render our selves at the straight of Gibraltar, and sailing so near the body of
the earth, we should have every night some small briezes of wind, whereby we
should in a short time make our voyage. And besides, we should not be in any
great danger to meet either with Spanish or French Fleets, for England was at
that time in open war with both those Kings, and we had advise that they had
great Fleets abroad, to vindicate some things we had done in prejudice of them,
both those sixteen months that we remained Master of those seas, therefore it
concerned us to make toward some safe Port, where we might both refresh our
men, and repair our battered Vessels.

My opinion was clean contrary to theirs, for I believed our best course were
to steer our course Westward, and to sail along the coasts of Cilicia,
Pamphylia, Lydia, Natolia, or Asia the Less, and to traverse the mouth of the
Archipelago, leave the Adriatic on the right hand, and pass by Sicily, Italy,
Sardinia, Corsica, the Golps of Lion, and so coast all Spain, telling them that
it would be a great dishonor unto us to forsake our best road, for fear of the
enemy, for our chief business thither was to find them out, and the protection
which it pleased God to afford us all along in so many combats in going, was
cause to make us hope that the same providence would vouchsafe to guide us as
we should be returning. That there was no doubt but the road which I proposed
unto them, considered simply in it self, was, not without comparison, the
better, and the more expedit to sail out of the Mediterranean sea, and gain
the Ocean, because said I, that although we have the briezes from off the earth
as long as we were upon the coasts of Syria, and Egypt, we shall not have them
at all while we sail upon the coasts of Lybia, where there are those fearful
sands which they call the Syrtes, which are of a great extent, the said coast
having no humidity, for there is neither tree nor herb grows there, for there
is naught else but moving sands which covered and enterred heretofore at one
glut the puissant Army of King Cambyses. Now where there is no humidity, the
Sun cannot attract to make a wind, so that we shall never find there, specially
in Summer time, any other wind but that Regular wind which blows from East to
West, according to the course of the Sun, who is the father of winds, unless
some extraordinary happen, either from the coast of Italy, which lies
Northward, or from the bottom of Ethiopia, where the Mountains of the Moon are,
and the source of the Cataracts of Nile: therefore if we were near the Syrtes,
the winds of Italy would be most dangerous unto us, and expose us to shipwreck.
I reasond so, according to natural causes, while they of my Council of war kept
themselves firm to their experience; which was the cause that I would do
nothing against the unanimous sense of all, for although the disposing, and
resolution of all things depended absolutely upon my self, yet I thought I
might be justly accused of rashness or willfulness, if I should prefer my own
advise before that of all the rest: so we took that course, and went happily as
far as the Syrtes of Lybia: but there our land briezes failed us, and for seven
and thirty days we had no other but a few gentle Zephirs, which came from the
West, whither we were steering our course. We were constrained to keep at
anchor all that time, with a great deal of apprehensions of fear, that the wind
might come from the North, accompanied with a tempest, for if that had
happened, we had been all lost, because our anchors had not been able to hold
among those moving sands, for under water they are of the same nature as they
are upon dry land, and so we might be in danger to be shipwrackt upon that
coast. But God Almighty, who has been pleased I should have the honor to wait
upon you this day, did deliver me from that danger. And at the end of seven and
thirty days, we observed the course of the clouds very high, which came from
Southeast, at first but slowly, but by degrees faster and faster, insomuch,
that in the compass of two days, the wind which was forming it self a great
way off in Ethiopia, came in a tempest to the place where we rid at anchor, and
lead us to the place whither we intended to go; but the force of it was broken
before, coming so long a distance.

Out of this Discourse we may infer, and conclude, that every where wheresoever
there is any wind, there be also some small bodies, or atoms, which are drawn
from the bodiess, which lie in the bodies, whence they come, by the virtue of
the Sun, and of Light, and that in effect this wind is nothing else but the
said atoms agitated, and thrust on by a kind of impettiosity; and so the winds
do partake of the qualities whence they come, as if they come from the South,
they are hot, if from the North they are cold, if from the Earth alone they are
dry; if from the Marine, or Seaside, they are humid and moist; if from places
which produce aromatical substances, they are odcriferous, wholesome and
pleasing: As they say who come from Arabia Faelix, which produces Spices,
Perfumes, and Gommes, of sweet savor, or that which comes from Fontenay, and
vaugirard at Paris, in the season of Roses, which is all perfumed: as on the
contrary, those winds that come from stinking places, as from the sulphurous
soil of Pozzuolo, do smell ill: as also those that come from infected places,
bring the contagion along with them.

My third Principle shall be, that the Air is full throughout with small bodies
or atoms, or rather that which we call our air, is no other than a mixture, or
confusion of such atoms, wherein the aereal parts do predominate.

It is well known, that in nature there cannot be actually found any pure
element, without being blended with others, for the outward fire, and the light
acting one way, and the internal fire of every body pushing on another way,
causes this marvailous mixture of all things in all things. Within that huge
extent, where we place the air, there is sufficient space, and liberty enough
to make such a mixture, which Experience, as well as Reason, does confirm. I
have seen little Vipers, as soon as they came from the eggs, where they were
engendered, being not yet an inch long; which, having conserved them in a large
gourd, covered with paper tied round about, that they might not get out, but
little holes being made with pins, that the air might enter, they increased in
substance, and bigness so prodigiously in six, eight, or ten months, that it
is incredible, and more sensibly, during the season of the equinoxes, then,
when the air is fuller of those ethereal, and balsamical atoms, which gave
them their balsamic virtue, which they drew for their nouriture.

Hence it came that the Cosmopelites had reason to say, Est in aere occultus
vitae cibus. There is a hidden food of life in the air. These small Vipers had
but the air only for their sustenance, nevertheless by this thin viand, they
came in less than a year to a foot long, and proportionably big and heavy,
Vitriol, Saltpeter, and some other substances, do augment in the same manner,
only by attraction of air.

I remember, that upon some occasion, seventeen or eighteen years ago, I had
occasion to use a pound of oil of tartar; it was at Paris, where I had then no
Operatory. Then I desired Monsieur Ferrier, a man universally known by all such
that are curious, to make me some, for he had none then ready made, but did it
expressly for me, and for the calcination of tartar, twenty pound may be as
easily made as two, without increase of charge, therefore he took occasion
hereby to make a quantity for his own use. When he brought it me, the oil did
smell so strong of the Rose, that I complained that he should mingle it with
that water, in regard I had desired him to do it purely, by exposing it to the
humid air, for I verily thought that he had dissolved the salt of tartar in
Rose Water; he swore unto me that he had not mingled it with any liquor, but
that he had left the tartar calcind within his Cellar, to dissove of it self.
It was then in the season of Roses, therefore it seems that the air being then
full of the atoms, which come from the Roses; and being changed into water by
the powerful attraction of the salt of tartar, their smell became very sensible
in the place where they were gathered; as the beams of the Sun do burn, being
crowded together in a burning glass.

There happened also another marvailous thing, touching this oil of tartar,
which may serve to prove a proposition which we have not yet touched, but not
to interrupt the course of the story; I will tell it you by way of advance. It
was, that as the season of Roses was passed, the smell of the Rose did vanish
away from the said oil of tartar, so that in three or four months it was quite
gone. But we were much surprised, when the next year the said odor of Roses
returned as strong as ever it did, and so went away again toward winter, which
course it still observes. Which made Monsieur Ferrier to keep it as a singular
rarity, and the last Summer I found the effect in his house.

We have in London an unlucky, and troublesome confirmation of this doctrine,
for the air uses to be full of such atoms. The material then whereof they
make fire in that great City, is commonly of pit coal, which is brought from
Newcastle, or Scotland. This cole has in it a great quantity of volatile salt
very sharp, which being carried on by the smoke uses to dissipate it self, and
fill the air, wherewith it does so incorporate, that although we do not see it,
yet we find the effects, for it spoils beds, Tapistries, and other household
stuffs, that are of any beautiful fair color, for the fuliginous air does
tarnish it by degrees: and although one should lock up his Chamber, and come
not thither a good while, and keep it never so clean, yet at his return, he
will find a black kind of thin soot cover all his household stuff, as we see in
Mills, there is a white dust, as also in Bakers shops, which uses to whiten
the walls, and sometimes gets into cubboards and chests. The said coal-soot
also gets abroad, and fouls cloths upon hedges, as they are a drying, as also
in the Spring time, the very leaves of trees are besooted therewith. Now, in
regard that it is this air which the lungs draw for respiration among the
inhabitans, therefore the phlegm and spittle which comes from them, is commonly
blackish and fuliginous. Moreover the acrimony of this soot produces another
funestous effect, for it makes the people subject to inflammations, and by
degrees to ulcerations in the lungs. It is so corrosive, and biting, that if
one put gammons of bacon, or beef, or or any other flesh within the chimney, it
so dries it up, that it spoils it. Wherefore they who have weak lungs, quickly
feel it, whence it comes to pass, that almost the one half of them who dye in
London, dye of ptisical, and pulmonicall distempers, spitting commonly blood
from their ulcerated lungs. But at the beginng of this malady, the remedy is
very easy; It is but to send them to a place where the air is good: many do
usually come to Paris, who have means to pay the charge of such a journey, and
they commonly use to recover their healths in perfection. The same
inconveniences are also, though the operations be not so strong in the City of
Liege, where the common people burn no other than pit coals, which they call h^
ville. Paris her self also, although the circumambient be passing good, yet is
the subject to incommodities of that nature. The excessively stinking dirt and
channels of that vast City, mingleth a great deal of ill allay with the purity
of the air, stuffing it every where with corrupted atoms, which yet are not so
pernicious as those of London. We find that the most neat and polished silver
plate, exposed to the air, becomes in a short time livid, and foul, which
proceeds from no other cause, then from those black atoms, the true color of
putrefaction which stick unto them. I know a person of quality, (and a singular
friend of mine) who is lodged in a place, where on the one side a great many
poor people do inhabit, where few Carts use to pass, and fewer Coaches: his
neighbors behind his house empty their filth and ordures in the middle of the
street, which uses hereby to be full of mounts of filth, which is used to be
carried away by Tombrells; when they remove these ordures, you cannot imagine
what a stench, and a kind of infectious air is smelt thereabout every where.
The servants of my said friend, when this happens, use to cover their plate,
and andirons of polished brass, with other of their fairest household stuff,
with cotton, or course bays, otherwise they would be all tarnished; yet
nothing hereof is seen within the air: yet these experiences do manifestly
convince, that the air is stuffed with such atoms. I cannot omit to add
hereunto another experiment, which is, that we find by the effects, how the
rays of the Moon are cold and moist. It is without controversy, that the
luminous parts of those rays come from the Sun, the Moon having no light at
all within her, as her ecclipses bear witness, which happen when the earth is
opposite twixt her and the Sun, which interposition hinders her to have light
from his rays. The beams then which come from the Moon, are those of the Sun,
who glancing upon her, reflect upon us, and so bring with them the atoms of
that cold and humid star, who participate of the source whence they come:
therefore if one should expose a hollow basin, or glass, to assemble them, one
shall find, that whereas those of the Sun do burn by such a conjuncture, these
clean contrary do refresh and moysten in a notable manner, leaving an aquatick,
and viscuous glutining kind of sweat upon the glass. One would think it were a
folly that one should offer to wash his hands in a well polished silver basin,
wherein there is not a drop of water, yet this may be done by the reflection of
the Moon beams, only, which will afford a competent humidity to do it, but
they woe have tried this have found their hands, after they are wiped, to be
much moister than usually: but this is an infallible way to take away warts
from the bands, if it be often used.

Let us then conclude out of these premises, and experiments, that the air is
full of atoms, which are drawn from bodies, by means of the light which
reflects thereon, or which sally out by the interior natural heat of those
bodies, which drive them forth. It may happily seem impossible that there can be
an emanation of so many small bodies, that should be spread up and down the
air, and be so carried up and down, and so far by a continual flux, (if I may
say so) and yet the body whence they come receives no diminution that is
perceptible, though sometimes it is visible enough, as by the evaporations of the
spirits of wine, musk, and other such volatile substances. But this objection
will be null, and the two precedent principles will render themselves more
credible, when we shall settle another, viz. That every body, be it never so
little, is divisible ad infinitum, not that it has infinite parts, for the
contrary thereof may be demonstrated, but it is capable to be divided and
subdivided into new parts, without ever coming to the end of the division. And
it is in this sense that our Masters teach us that quantity is infinitely
divisible. This is evident to him who shall consider with a profound
imagination the essence, and the formal reason of quantity, which is nothing
else but divisibility. But in regard that this speculation, is very subtle,
and metaphysical, I will serve my self with some geometrical demonstrations to
prove this truth, for they accommodate best with the imagination. Euclide does
teach us in the tenth Proposition of his sixth book, that if one take a short
line, and another long one, and that the long be divided to diverse equal parts
twixt themselves; The little one may be divided also into as many equal parts
among themselves, and every one of those parts also in others, and these last
into so many more, and so consecutively, without being able ever to come to
that which is not divisible.

But lets suppose (although it be impossible) that one might divide, and
subdivide a line, so that at last we should come to an indivisible, and lets
see what will come of it. I say then, that since the line does resolve it self
into indivisibles, she ought to be composed of them; lets see whether that may
be verified. To which purpose I take three indivisibles, and to distinguish
them, let them be A. B. C. for if three millions of indivisibles make a long
line, three indivisibles will make a short one. I put them then in a rank.
First, I put A, then B, so near, that they touch one another: I say that B must
necessarily possess the same place as A, or that it does not possess it; if
it does possess the same place, they both together make no extension, and by
the same reason, neither 3 nor 3000 will do it, but all the indivisibles will
unite together, and the result of all shall be but only one indivisible. It
must be then that being not both in the same place, yet touching one another,
one part of B must touch one part of A, and the other part touches it not.
Then I add the indivisible C, whereof one part shall touch a part of B, which
touches not A, and by this means B is copulant, lying between A and C. to make
the extension. To do this, you see that we must admit that B has parts as the
other two, which by your supposition are all indivisible, which being absurd,
the supposition is impossible. But to render the matter yet more perspicuous,
lets suppose that these three indivisibles, make one extension, and compose one
line, the proposition already cited from Euclide, demonstrates that this line
may be divided into thirty equal parts, or into as many as you please: insomuch
that it must be granted that every one of these three indivisibles may be
divided to three parts, which is point blank against the nature and definition
of an indivisible. But without dividing into so many parts, Euclide shows by
his tenth proposition of his first Element, that every line may be parted into
two equal parts: but this being composed of indivisibles of unequal number, it
must necessarily follow, that being parted into two, there must be an
indivisible more on the one side than on the other, or that that of the middle
be parted into two halfs: insomuch, that he who denies that quantity may not be
divided, ad infinitum, does entangle himself in absurdities, and
incomprehensible impossibilities. And on the contrary, he who assents unto it,
will find it no impossibility, or inconvenient, that the atoms of all bodies,
which are in the air, may be divided, stretched and carried to a marvailous
distance. Our very senses make faith hereof in some sort: there is no body in
the World, which we know of, so compact, so solid, and weighty as gold, yet
nevertheless, to what a strange extent and division may it be brought unto,
Lets take an ounce of this massy metal, it shall be but a button as big as my
fingers end. A beater of gold will make a thousand leaves or more of this
ounce, one half of these leaves shall suffize to guild the whole surface of a
lingot of silver, of three or four ounces: lets give this gilded lingot of
silver to them, who prepare gold and silver thread to make lace, and let them
draw it to the greatest length and subtilty they can, let them draw it to the
thinness of a hair, and so this thread may be a quarter of a league long in
extent, if not more: and in all this length there will not be the space of an
atome which is not covered with gold. Behold a strange and marvailous
dilatation of this half leaf: let us do the like to all the rest of the beaten
gold, it will appear that by this means this small button of gold may be so
extended, that it may reach from this City of Montpellier to Paris, and far
beyond it: into how many million millions of atoms might not this gilded line
be cut with small cisers.

Now, it is easy to comprehend that this extention, and divisibility made by
such gross instruments as hammers and cisers, is not comparable to that which
is made by the light and rays of the Sun. For it is certain, that if this gold
may be drawn into such a great length by spindles, or wheels of iron, some of
these parts may easily be carried away by those winged Coursiers we spoke of
before, I mean, by the rays that fly in a moment from the Sun to the earth.

If I did not fear it would prove tedious unto you by my prolixity, I would
entertain you with the strange subtility of little bodies, which issue forth
from living bodies, by means whereof our dogs in England will pursue the sent
of a man's steps, or of a beasts, many miles: and not only so, but they will
find in a great heap of stones that which a man has touched with his hand:
Therefore it must needs be, that upon the earth, or upon the stone, some
material parts of the touched body remain, yet the body does not sensibly
diminish, no more than ambergrise, and the Spanish skins, which will send out of
them an odor during a hundred years, without any diminution of skin or smell.
In our Country they use to sow a whole field with one sort of grain, to wit,
one year with barley, the next with wheat, the third with beans, and the fourth
year they let it rest, and stercorize it, that it may recover its vigor by
attraction of the vital spirit it receives from the air, and so plow it up
again after the same degrees. Now, the year that the field is covered with
beans, the passengersby do use to smell at a good distance off, if the wind
blow accordingly, the smell of the beans, if they be in flower: it is a smell
that has a suavity with it, but fading, and afterward unpleasant, and heady.
But the smell of Rosemary which comes from the coasts of Spain, goes far
further. I have sailed by sea along those coasts diverse times, and I have
observed always, that the Mariners know when they are within thirty or forty
leagues of the Continent, (I do not exactly remember the distance) and they
have this knowledge from the smell of the Rosemary, which so abouuds in the
fields of Spain; I have smelt it as sensibly, as if I had had a branch of
Rosemary in my hand, and this was a day or two before we could discover land,
it is true, the wind was in our faces, and came from the shore. Some Naturalists
write that Vultures have come two or three hundred leagues off, by the smell of
carrens, and dead bodies left in the field, after some bloody battle; and it
was known that these birds came from a far off, because there is none uses to
breed there: they have a quick smelling, and it must be that the rotten atoms
of those dead karkases were transported by the air so far: and those birds
having once caught the sent, they pursue it to the very source, and the nearer
they come to that, the stronger it is.

We will conclude here that which we had to say touching the great extent of
those little bodies, which by the mediation of the Sun beams, and of the light,
use to issue forth out of all bodies that are composed of Elements, who throng
the air, and are carried a marvailous distance from the place, and bodies where
they have their origin, and source, the proof, and explication of which things
has been the aim of my discourse hitherunto.

Now, my Lords, I must, if you please, make you see how these small bodies that
so fill, and compose the air, are oftentimes drawn to a road altogether
differing from that which their universal causes should make them hold; and it
shall be our fifth principle.

One may remark within the course, and aeconomy of nature, sundry sorts of
attractions: as that of succion, or sucching, whereby I have seen a ball of
lead at the bottom of a long steel exactly wrought, follow the air, which one
sucked out of the mouth of a Canon, with that impetuosity, and strength, that
it broke his teeth. The attraction of water or wine that is done by the
instrument Scyphon is like to this, for by means of that, one liquor is made to
pass from one vessel into another, without changing any way the color, or
rising of the lees. There is another sort of attraction which is called
magnetical, whereby the loadstone draws the iron. Another electrick, when the
Iett-stone draws unto it straws. There is another of the Flame, when the smoke
of a candle put out, draws the flame of that which burns hard by, and makes it
descend to light that which is out. There is another of Filtration, when one
humid body mounts upon a dry body, or when the contrary is done. Lastly, when
the fire, or some hot body draws the air, and that which is mixed therewith.

We will treat here of the two first species of attraction, I have sufficiently
spoken of the rest in another place. Filtration may seem to him who has not
attentively considered it, nor examined by what circumstances so hidden a
secret of nature comes to pass, and to a person of a mean and limited
understanding, to be done by some occult virtue, or property, and will persuade
himself, that within the Filtre, or strayning instrument, there is some secret
Sympathy, which makes water to mount up contrary. to its natural motion.

But he who will examine the business, as it ought to be, observing all that is
done, without omitting any circumstance, he will find there is nothing more
natural, and that it is impossible it should be otherwise. And we must make the
same judgment of all the profound mysteries, and hidden'st my steries of
nature: if one would take the pains to discover them, and search into them with
judgment.

Behold then how Filtration is made, they use to put a long tongue of cloth, or
cotton, or spongy matter, within an earthen pot of water or other liquor, and
let hanging upon the brim of the pot a good part of the cloth, and one shall
see the water presently mount up, and pass above the brink of the vessel, and
drop at the lower end of the piece of cloth, upon the ground, or within some
vessel: and the Gardners make use of this method to water their plants and
flowers in Summer by soft degrees. As also the Apothecaries, and Chemists, to
separate their liquors, from their dregs, and residences.

To comprehend the reason why the water ascends in that manner, let us nearly
observe all that is done. That part of the cloth which is within the water,
becomes wetted, to wit, it receives and imbibes the water through its spongy,
and dry parts at first. This cloth swells in receiving the water, so two bodies
joined together, require more room than one of them would by it self. Let us
consider this swelling, and augmented extension in the last thread of them
which touch the water, viz. that on the superficies, which to be distinguished
from the rest, let it be marked at the two ends, (as by a line) as with A. B.
and the thread which immediately follows, and is above it, let it be C. D. and
the following E. F. then with G. H. and so to the end of the tongue: I say then
that the thread A. B. dilating it self, and swelling by means of the water
which enters twixt it fibers, or strings, approaches by little and little to
C. D. which is yet dry, because it touches not the water; but when A. B. is
grown so gross, and swelling, by reason of the water which enters, that it
fills all the vacuity, and all the distance which lies twixt it, and C. D. as
also that it presses against C. D. by reason of its extension, which is
greater than the space was betwixt them both, then it wets C. D. because the
thread A. B. being compressed, the exterior part of the water which was in it,
coming to be pushed on upon C. D. seeks there a place, and enters within the
threeds, and wets them, in the same manner as at first the exterior, and
highest part, became wet. C. D. being so wetted, it shall dilate it self as A.
B. did, and consequently pressing against E. F. it cannot choose but work the
same effect in it, which before it had received by the swelling and dilatation
of A. B. and so by gentle degrees every thread wets its neighbor, until the
very last thread of cloth tongue. And it is not to be feared, that the
continuity of the water will break, ascending this scale of chords, or that it
will recoyl backwards, for those little ladders so easy to be mounted render
the ascent the more easy, and the woolly fibers of every thread, seem to reach
their hands to help them up at every pace: and so the facility of getting up
contremont, joined with the fluidness of the water, and the nature of quantity,
which tends always to the uniting of substances, and of bodies which it
clothes, when there occures no other predominant cause to break, and divide it,
causes that the water keeps it self in one piece, and passes above the brink
of the pot. After that its voyage is made more easy, for it goes after its
natural panching, always downwards. And if the end of the cloth hangs lower
without the pot, then the surface of the water within the pot, the water spills
on the earth, or some vessel placed beneath, as we see that a heavier chord
being hung upon a pully the longest, and heaviest falls upon the ground, and
carries away the shortest, and lightest, making it pass above the pully. But
if the outward end of the cloth which is without the pot were horizontal, with
the surface of the water, and did hang no lower then it, the water would be
immovable: as the two sides of a balance, when there is equal weight in both the
scales. And if one would power out the water that is in the pot, in such sort
that the superficies did grow lower than the end of the cloth: In that case the
ascending water becoming more heavy than the descendant on the other side,
without the pot, it would call back that which was gone out before, and was
ready to fall, and would make it thrust on, and return to its former pace, and
enter again into the pot, to mingle again with the water which lies therein.

You see then this mystery, which at first was surprising, displayed, and made
as familiar and natural, as to see a stone fall down from the air. It Is true,
that to make a demonstration thereof, by an exact, and complete rigor, we must
add other circumstances, which we have done in another Discourse, wherein I
expressly treated of this subject. But that which I now say is sufficient to
give a tincture how this so notable an attraction is made.

The other attraction which comes by fire, which draws unto it the ambient air,
with the small bodies therein, is made thus;

The Fire acting according to its own nature, which to push on a continual
river, or exhalation of its parts, from the center to the circumference, and
out of its source, carries away with it the air which adjoined, and sticking
to it on all sides, as the water of a river trains along with it the earth of
thae channel or bed, through which it glides. For the air being humid, and the
fire dry, they cannot do less than embrace, and hug one another. But there
must a new air come from the places circumjacent, to fill the room of that
which is carried away by the fire, otherwise there would a vacuity happen,
which nature abhors. This new air remains not long in the place which it comes
to fill, but the fire, who is in a continual carreer, and emanation of his
parts, carries it presently with him, and draws the new air, and so there is a
perpetual, and constant current of the air, as long as the action of fire
continues. We daily see the experience hereof, for if one makes a good fire in
ones Chamber, it draws the air from the door, and windows, which chough one
would shut, yet there be crevices and holes for the air to enter, and coming
near them, one shall hear a kind of whisling noise, which the air makes in
pressing to enter, and it is the same cause that produces the sound of the Organ
and flute; and he who would stand between the crevices, and the fire, he should
find such an impetuosity of that artificial wind, that he would be ready to
freeze, while he is ready to burn the the other side next the fire. And a candle
of wax being held in this current of the wind, would melt by her flame blown
against the wax, and waste away in a very short time: whereas if that candle
stood in a calm place, that her flame might burn upward, it would last much
longer. But if there be no passage whereby the air may enter into the Chamber,
the one part then of the vapor of the wood which should have converted to
flame, and so mounted up the funnel of the chimney descends downward against
its nature, for to supply the defect of air within the said Chamber, and fills
it with smoke, but at last the fire choaks, and extinguisheth for want of air.
Whence it come to pass that the Chemists have reason to say, that the air is
the life of the fire, as well as other animals. But if one puts a basin, or
vessel of water before the fire upon the hearth, there will be no smoke in the
Chamber, although it be so close shut, that the air cannot enter, for the fire
attracts parts of the water, which is a liquid substance, and easy to move out
of its place, which aquatic parts rarifie themselves into air, and thereby
perform the functions of the air. This is more evidently seen if the Chamber be
little, for then the air which is there penned in, is sooner raised up, and
carried away. And by reason of this attraction, they use to make great fires,
where there are hushould-stuff, of men that died of the Pestilence to disinfect
them. For by this inondation of air which is drawn, the fire does as it were
sweep the walls, the planks, with other places of the Chamber, and takes away
those little putrified, sharp, corrosive, and venomous bodies, which were the
infections that adhered unto it, drawing them into the fire, where they are
partly burnt, and partly sent up into the chimney, accompanied with the atoms
of the fire, and the smoke. It is for this reason that the great Hippocrates,
which groped so far into the secrets of Nature, disinfected, and freed from the
plague a whole Province, or entire Region, by causing them to make great fires
every where.

Now, this manner of attraction is made, not only by a simple fire, but by
that which partakes of it, viz. by the heated substances: and that which is the
reason and cause of the one, is also the cause of the other. For the spirits,
or ignited parts evaporating from such a substance, or hot body, carry away
with them the adjacent air, which ought necessarily to be nourished by some
other air, or by some matter which keeps the place of the air, as we have
spoken of the basin, and tub of water put before the fire to hinder smoke. It
is upon this foundation that Physicians do ordain the hot application of
Pigeons, or young dogs, or some other hot animals, to the soles of the feet, or
the handwrists, or the stomachs, or navills of their patients, to extract out
of their bodies the wind, or ill vapors which infect them; and in time of
contagion, or universal infection of the air, pigeons, cats, dogs, with other
hot animals, use to be killed, which make continually a great transpiration of
evaporation of spirits, because the air by those attractions it makes, taking
the room of the spirits, which issue forth of evaporation, the pestiferous
atoms which are scattered in the air, and accompany it; use to stick to their
feathers, skins, or furs.

And for the same reason we see that bread coming hot from the Oven, draws unto
it the must of the cask, which spoils the wine, if they put it hot upon the
bung. And that onions, and such hot bodies which perpetually exhale unto them
the fiery parts, which appears by the strength of their smell, are quickly
taken with infectious airs, if they be exposed unto them, which is one of the
signs to know whether the whole mass of the air be universally infected.

And one might reduce to this head the great attraction of air, which is made
by calcind bodies and particularly by tartar, all ignited by the violent action
of the fire upon it, which is heaped together, and bodified among his salt: for
I have observed that it attracts unto it nine times more air than it weighs it
self. For if one should expose to the air a pound of salt of tartar well
calcind, and burnt, it will afford you ten pound, of good oil of tartar,
drawing unto it, and so bodifying the circumjacent air, and that wherewith it is
mingled; as it befell that oil of tartar which Monsieur Ferrier made me,
whereof I spoke before, But me thinks that all this is but little compared to
the attraction of air, which was made by the body of a certain Nun at Rome,
whereof Petrus Servius, Urban the Eighth's Physician makes mention in a book
which he has published, touching the marvailous accidents which he observed in
his time. Had I not such a vouchy, I durst not produce this History, although
the Nun her self did cnnfirm it unto me, and that a good number of Doctors,
of the faculty of Physic at Rome, did assure me of the truth thereof: There
was a Nun, that by excess of fasting, of watchings, and mental orisons, was
so heated in her body, that she seemed to be all on fire, and her bones dried
up, and calcind: This heat then, this internal fire drawing the air so
powerfully: this air did incorporate within her body, as it uses to do in salt
of Tartar, and the passages being all open, it got to those parts, where there
is most serosity, which is the bladder, and thence she rendered it in water
among her urine, and that in an incredible quantity, for she voided during some
weeks more, than two hundred pounds of water every four and twenty hours. With
this notable example I will put an end to the experiments, I have urged to
prove and explicate the attraction which is made of air, by hot and ignited
bodies, which are of the nature of fire.

My sixth Principle shall be, that when fire, or some hot body attracts the
air, and that which is within the air, if it happens that within that air there
be found some dispersed atoms of the same nature, with the body which draws
them, the attraction of such atoms is made more powerfully, then if they were
bodies of a different nature, and these atoms do stay, stick, and mingle with
more willingesse with the body which draws them. The reason hereof is the
resemblance, and Sympathy they have one with the other. If I should not
explicate wherein this resemblance consisted, I should expose my self to the
same censure and blame, as that which I taxed at the beginning of my Discourse,
touching those who speak but lightly and vulgarly of the Powder of Sympathy,
and such marvails of nature. But when I shall have cleared that which I contend
for by such a resemblance and convenience, I hope then you will rest satisfied.
I could make you see that there are many sorts of resemblances which cause an
union between bodies, but I will content my self to speak here only three
signal ones.

The first resemblance shall be touching weight, whereby bodies of the same
degree of heaviness do assemble together, the reason whereof is evident, for
if one body were more light, it would ocupy a higher situation than the heavier
body, as on the contrary, if a body were more weighty, it would descend lower
than that which is less heavy, but both having the same degree of heaviness,
they keep company together in equilibrio, as one may see by experience in this
gentile example, which some curious spirits use to produce, for to make us
understand how the four elements are situated one above the other, according to
their weight, and heaviness. They use to put in a vial the spirit of wine
tincturd with red, to represent the fire, the spirit of turpentine tinctured
with blew for the air, the spirit of water tinctured with green, to represent
the element of water; And to represent the earth, the Powder of some solid
metal enamelld; you see them one upon the other without mixing, and if you
shake them together by a violent agitation, you shall see a Chaos, such a
confusion, that it will seem there is no particular atoms that belong to any of
those bodies, they are so huddled pell mell altogether. But cease this
agitation, and you shall see presently every one of these four substances go to
its natural place, calling again, and laboring to unite all their atoms in
one distinct mass, that you shall see no mixture at all.

The second resemblance of bodies which draw one another, and unite, is among
them, which are of the same degree of rarity and density. The nature and effect
of Quantity is to reduce to unity all things which it finds, if there interpose
not some other stronger power, (as the differing substantial form, which does
multiply it) do not hinder. And the reason of that is evident, for the essence
of Quantity is a divisibility, or capacity to be divided, which is as much to
say, as to make it Many, whence it may be inferred that Quantity it self is not
many, therefore she is of her self, and in her own nature, a continued
extension: seeing then that the nature of Quantity in general tends to unity,
and continuity, the first differences of Quantity, which are rarity, and
density, must produce the same effect of unity, and continuity in those bodies
which convene in the same degree with them. For proof whereof, we find that
water does unite, and incorporate it self, strongly, and easily with water, oil
with oil, the spirit of wine with spirit of wine, but water and oil can hardly
unite, nor mercury with the spirit of wine, and other bodies of differing
density, and tenuity.

The third resemblance of bodies which unites and keeps them strongly together,
is that of Figure: I will not serve my self here with the ingenious conceit of
a great personage, who holds that the continuity of bodies results from some
small hookings or claspings, which keeps them together, and are differing in
bodies of a differing nature. But not to extend my self two diffusively in
every particularity, I will say in gross, as an apparent thing, that every
kind of body affects a particular figure. We see it plainly in the several
sorts of salt, peele, and stamp them separately, dissolve, coagulate, and
change them as long as you please, they come again always to their own natural
figure, after every dissolution, and coagulation. The ordinary salt does form
it self always in cubes of foursquare faces, saltpeter in forms of six
faces: Ammoniac salt in Hexagons of six points, as the snow does, which is
sexangulary. Whereunto Mr. Davison attributes the pentagonary figure of every
one of those stones which were found in the bladder of Monsieur Peletier, to
the number of fourscore; for the same immediate efficient cause, which is the
bladder, had imprinted its action both within the stones, and the salt of the
urine. The Distillators observe, that if they power upon the dead head of some
distillation, the water which was distilled it imbibes it, and re-unites
incontinently, whereas if one would power any other water of an heterogeneous
body, it swims on the top, and incorporates with much difficulty. The reason
is, that the distilled water which seems to be an homogeneous body, yet it is
composed of small bodies of discrepant figures, as the Chemists do plainly
demonstrate, and these atoms being chaced by the action of fire, out of their
own Chambers, or as from the beds, which appropriated unto them by an exact
justness, when they come back to their ancient habitations, viz. to the pores
which are left in the dead heads, they accommodate themselves, and amiably
rejoyn and comensurate together. The same happens when it rains after a long
drouth; for the earth immediately drinks up the water, which had been drawn up
by the Sun, whereas any other strange liquor would enter with some difficulty.
Now, that there are differing pores in bodies which seem to be homogeneous,
Monsieur Gassendi affirms it, and undertakes to prove it by the dissolution of
salts of differing natures in common water, when says he to this effect, that
when you have dissolved common salt, as much as it can bear, if you put only a
seruple more, it will leave it entire in the bottom, as if it were sand, or
plaster, nevertheless, it will dissolve a good quantity of saltpeter, and
though it touches not this salt, it will dissolve as much of Armoniacall salt,
and so others of different figures. In so much as I have observed elsewhere, we
see plainly by the aeconomy, of Nature, that bodies of the same figure use to
mingle more strongly, and unite themselves with more facility, which is the
reason why those that make a strong glue to glue together broken pots of
porcelain, or crystal, or such stuff, do always mingle with the glue the
powder of that body, which they endeavor to raccomodate. And the Goldsmiths
themselves, when they go about to sodder together pieces of gold, or of silver,
they mingle those bodies always in their own dust.

Having hitherto run through the reasons and causes why bodies of the same
nature, draw one to another with greater facility and force than others, and
why they unite with more promptitude, lets now see according to our method, how
experience confirms this discourse, for in natural things we must have
recourse, on dernier ressort, to experience. And all reasoning that is not
supported so, ought to be repudiated, or at least suspected to be illegitimate.

It Is an ordinary thing, when one finds himself burnt as in the hand, he holds
it a good while as near the fire as he can, and by this means the ignited
atoms of the fire, and of the hand mingling together, and drawing one another,
and the stronger of the two, which are those of the fire, having the mastery,
the hand finds it self much eased of the inflammation which it suffered. It Is an
ordinary remedy, though a nasty one, that they who have ill breaths, hold their
mouths open at the mouth of a privy, as long as they can, and by the
reiteration of this remedy, they find themselves cured at last, the greater
stink of the privy drawing unto it, and carrying away the less, which is that
of the mouth. They who have been pricked, or bit by a Viper, or Scorpion, hold
over the bitten, or pricked place, the head of a Viper or Scorpion bruised, and
by this means the poison, by a kind of filtration way, went on to gain the
heart of the party, returns back to its principles, and so leaves the party
well recovered. In time of common contagion, they use to carry about them the
powder of a toad, and sometimes a living toad or spider shut up in a box; or
else they carry arsnick, or some other venomous substance, which draws unto it
the contagious air, which otherwise would infect the party: and the same powder
of toad draws unto it the poison of a pestilential cole. The scurf or farcy is
a venomous, and contagious humor within the body of a horse, hand a toad about
the neck of the horse, in a little bag, and he will be cured infallibly; the
toad, which is the stronger poison, drawing to it the venom which was within
the horse. Make water to evaporate out of a stove, or other room, close shut,
if there be nothing that draws this vapor, it will stick to the walls of the
stove, and as it cools, it recondenseth there into water: but if you put a
basin or bucquet full of water into any part of the stove, it will attract all
the vapor which filled the chamber, and so doing, no part of the wall will be
wetted. If you dissolve Mercury, which resolving into smoke, does pass into
the recipient, put into the head of the limbick a little thereof, and all the
mercury in the limbick will gather there, and nothing will pass into the
recipient. If you distill the spirit of salt, or of vitriol, or the baume of
sulpher, and leaving the passage free betwixt the spirit, and the dead head,
whence it issued forth, the spirits will return to the dead head, which being
fixed, and not able to mount up, draws them unto it.

In our Country, and I think it is so used here, they use to make provision for
all the year of Venison Pasties, at the season that their flesh is best, and
most savory, which is in July, and August, they bake it in earthen pots, or
Ryecrust, after they have well seasond it with salt and spices, and being cold,
they cover it 6 fingers deep with freshbutter, thatthe air may not enter.
Nevertheless it is observed after all the diligence that one can make, that when
the living beasts, which are of the same nature, and kind, are in Rut, the
flesh which is in the pot smells very rank, and very much changed, having a
stronger taste, because of the spirits which come at this season from the living
beasts, which spirits are attracted naturally by the dead flesh: and then one
has much to do to preserve it from being quite spoiled: but the said season
being passed, there is no danger, or difficulty to keep it gustfull all the
year long.

The wine Merchants observe in this Country, and every where elsewhere there is
wine, that during the season that the Vines are in flower, the wine which is in
the Cellar, makes a kind of fermentation, and pusheth forth a little white lee,
(which I think they call the mother of the wine) upon the surface of the wine,
which continues in a kind of disorder, until the flowers of the Vines be
fallen, and then this agitation or fermentation being ceased, all the wine
returns to the same state it was in before.

Nor is it now that this observation has been made, but besides diverse others,
who speak hereof, St. Ephrem the Syrian, in his last Will and Testament, some
1300 years ago, reports this very same circumstance of wine, which sensibly
suffers an agitation and fermentation within the vessel the same time, that the
Vines seem to exhaletheir spirits in the Vineyards. He makes use of the same
example in dry onions, which bud in the house, when those in the garden begin
to come out of the earth, and to embalm the air with their spirits; showing
thereby by these known examples of nature, the communication between living
persons, and the souls of the dead. Now, those winy spirits that issue from the
buds and flowers, filling the air, (as the spirits of Rosemary use to do in
Spain) they are drawn into the vessels by the connatural, and attractive virtue
of the wine within: and these new volatile spirits entering, do excite the most
fixed spirits of the wine, and so cause a fermentation, as if one should power
therein new or sweet wine; for in all fermentations, there is a separation made
of the terrestrial parts from the oily, which come out of the essential parts,
and so the lightest mount up to the superficies, the heaviest become tartar
lees, which fall into the bottom. But in this season, if one be not very
careful to keep the wine in a proper, and temperate place, and keep the cask
full, and well bungd, and use other endeavors, which are ordinary with Wine
Coupers, one runs a hazard to have his wine impaird, or quite spoiled, because
that the volatile spirits coming to evaporate themselves, they carry away with
them the spirits of the wine that is barrelled by exciting them, and mingling
with them. As in like manner the oil of tartar, which Monsieur Ferrier made,
attracting to it self the volatile spirits of Roses, diffused in the air in
their season, suffered such a fermentation, and made every year new attractions
of the like spirits, in regard of the affinity which this oil had contracted
with those spirits at its first birth, whereof it was deprived as the season
passed. And it is for the very same reason that a table cloth, or napkin,
spotted with mulberries, or red wine, is easily whitned again at the season
that the plants do flower; whereas at any other time these spots can hardly be
washed away. But it is not only in France and other places, where Vines are near
Cellers of wine that this fermentation happens: in England, where we have not
Vines enough to make wine, the same thing is observed, yea, and some
particularities beyond. Although they make no wine in our Country to any
considerable proportion, yet we have wine there in great abundance, which is
brought over by the Merchants: It uses to come principally from three places,
viz. from the Canaries, from Spain, from Gascony. Now, these Regions being
under different degrees and climates in point of latitude, and consequently one
Country is hotter or colder than the other; or that the same vegetalls grow to
maturity sooner, it comes to pass that the foresaid fermentation of our
differing wines advances it self more or less, according as the vines whence
they proceed, do bud and flower in the region where they grow: it being
consentaneous to reason, that every sort of wine attracts more willingly the
spirits of those Vines whence they come, than of any other.

I cannot forbear but I must make some digrestion here, to unfold some other
effects of nature, which we see often, and are not less curious than the most
principal which we treat of, and will seem to be derived from more obscure
causes, notwithstanding in many circumstances they depend on the same
principles, and in many much differing, It is touching moles or marks which
happen to infants when their mothers during the time of their pregnancy, have
longed after some particular things. To proceed after my accustomed manner. I
will fall to exemplify. A Lady of high condition, which many of this Assembly
know, at least by reputation, has upon her neck the figure of a Mulberry, as
exactly as any Painter, or Sculptor can possibly represent one, for it bears
not only the color, but the just proportion of a Mulberry, and is as it were
embossed upon her flesh. The Mother of this Lady being with child, she had a
great mind to eat some Mulberries, and her imagination being satisfied, one of
them casually fell upon her neck, the sanguin juice whereof was soon wiped off,
and she felt nothing at that time. The child being born, the perfect figure of
a Mulberry was seen upon her neck, in the same place where it fell upon the
mothers, and every year, in Mulbery-season, this impression, or rather
excressence of flesh did swell, grow big, and itch.

Another Maid which had the like mark of a Strawberry, was more inconumodated
therewith, for it inflamed and itched in Strawberry season, but it broke like
an Impostume, whence issued forth a shanp corrosive humor. But a skillfull
Surgeon took all away to the very roots, by cauterising; so that since that
time she never felt any pain or change in that place which did incommodate her
so much, it being become a simple fear.

Now then, lets endeavor to penetrate if we can the causes, and reasons, of
these marvailous effects. But to go the more hansomly to work, that within the
actions of all our senses, there is a material and corporal participation, viz.
that some atoms of the body operate upon the senses, enter into their organs,
which serve them as funnels, to conduct and carry them to the brain, and to the
imagination. This appears evidently in vapors and savours. And concerning the
hearing, the exterior air being agitated, does cause a movement within the
membrane, or tympane of the ear, which gives the like shaking to the hammer
which is tied thereunto, who beating upon his anvil, caused a reciprocal motion
in the air, which is shut within the crannies of the ear, and this is that
which we usually call found.

Touching the sight, it is evident that the Light reflecting upon the body, it
sees enters into the eyes, and cannot avoid, but it must bring with it some
emanations of the body whereon it reflects, as we have established in the
second Principle.

It remains now to show that the like is made within the grossest of our
senses, which is the Touch or Feeling: For if it be true, as we have shown,
that every body sends forth a continual emanation of atoms out of it self, it
makes much for the assertion of this truth. But to render this truth yet more
manifest, and take away all possibility of doubt, I will demonstrate evidently
to the eye, whereof every one may make an experience in a quarter of an hour,
if he be so curious, yea, in a less compass of time.

I believe you know the notable a affinity which is betwixt gold and
quicksilver; if the gold touches mercury, it sticks close unto it, and
whitens it in such sort, that it scarce appears gold, but silver only; if
you cast this blanched gold into the fire, the heat chaseth, and drives away
the mercury, and the gold returns to its former color, but if you repeat this
often, the gold calcines, and then you may pound, and reduce it to powder.

Now there is no dissolvant in the World that can well calcine, and burn the
body of gold, but quicksilver. I speak of that which is already formed by
nature, without engaging my self to speak of that which is spoken of among the
secrets of Philosophy. Take then a spoonful of mercury in some porcelan, or
other dish, and finger it with one hand if you have a ring of gold on the
other, it will become white, and covered with mercury, though it does not any
way touch it. Moreover, if you put a leaf of gold, or a crown of gold in your
mouth, and if you put but one of your toes in a thing where mercury is, the
gold which is in your mouth, though you shut up your lips never so close, shall
turn white, and laden with mercury: then if you put this gold in the fire to
make all the mercury evaporate, and that you reiterate the same thing, your
gold will be calcind, as if you had by amalgation joined mercury therewith
corporally. And all this will yet be done more spee dily, and effectually, if
in lieu of common mercury, you make use of mercury of antimony, which is much
hotter, and more penetrating, and though you drive it away by force of fire, it
will carry away with it a good quantity of the substance of the gold: in such
sort, that reiterating often, this operations, there will no more gold remain
for you to continue your experiments. If then that cold mercury does so
penetrate the whole body, we ought not to think it strange, that subtle atoms
of fruit composed of many ignited parts will pass with more facility and
quickness. I will further make you see how such spirits and emanations, do
suddenly also penetrate steel, though it be a substance so compacted, cold, and
hard, that the said atoms may keep their residence there many months and
years. Within a living body, such as is man's, the intern spirits do aid, and
contribute much facility to the spirits that are without, such as those of
fruits are, to make their journey the more east to the brain. The great
Architect of nature in the fabric of human body, the masterpeece of corporal
nature, has placed there some intern spirits, to serve as centinells, to bring
their discoveries to their General, viz. to the imagination, who is as it were
the Mistress of the whole family, whereby a man might know, and understand
what is done without the Kingdom, within the great World; and that it might
shun what is noxious, and seek after that which is profitable. For these
sentinels, or intern spirits, with all the inhabitants of the sensitive organs
are not able to judge alone: insomuch, that if the imagination or thought be
distracted strongly to some object, these intern spirits do not know whether a
man has drunk the wine which he has swallowed, if perchance seeing a person
who comes to salute him, he fixes his eye upon him all the while, or if he
listens attentively to the air of some melodious song, or musical instrument,
for the inward spirits bring all their acquisitions to the imagination; and if
she be not more strongly bent upon another object, she falls a forming certain
Idaeas and Images, because that the atoms from without being conveyed by these
intern spirits, to our imagination erect there the like edifice, or else a
model in short resembling the great body whence they come forth. And if our
imagination has no more use of those significative atoms for the present, she
rangeth them in some proper place, within her Magazin, which is the memory;
where she can repeal, and rebuke them when she pleases. And if there be any
object which causes some emotions in the imagination, and touches her more
near than common objects use to do, she sends back her sentinels, the internal
spirits, upon the confines, to bring her more particular news. And thence it
proceeds that a man being surprised by some particular man, or other object,
who has already some eminent place in his imagination, be it of desire, or
aversion, then that man sudendly changes color, and becomes red, then pale,
then red again at diverse times, according as the Ministers, which are those
intern spirits, do go quick or slow toward their object, then they return with
their reports to their Mistress, which is the imagination. But besides these
passages we speak of, which go from the brain to the external parts of the
body, by the ministry of the nerves; there is also a great road from the brain
to the heart, by which the vital spirits do ascend from the heart to the brain,
to be animated, and hereby the imagination sends unto the heart, those atoms
which she has received from some exterternal object, and there they make an
ebullition betwixt the vital spirits, which according to the intervening atoms,
either cause a dilatation of the heart, and so gladden it, or they do contract
it, so sadden it, and these two differing, and contrary actions are the first
general effects, whence proceed afterward the particular passions, which
require not that I pursue them too far in this place, having done it more
particularly else where, and more expressly.

Besides these passages, which are common to all men and women, there is
another that is peculiar only to females, which is, from the brain to the
matrix, whereby it often falls out that such violent vapors mount up to the
brain, and those in so great a number, that they often hinder the operation of
the brain, and of the imagination, causing convulsions and follies, with other
strange accidents, and by the same channel the spirits or atoms pass with a
greater liberty, and swiftness to the womb or matrix when the case requires.

Now lets consider how the strong imagination of one man does marvailously act
upon another man, who has it more feeble and passive. We see daily, that if a
person gape, those who see him gaping, are excited to do the same. If one come
perchance to converse with persons that are subject to excess of laughter, one
can hardly forbear laughing, although one does not know the cause why they
laugh. If one should enter into a house, where all the World is sad, he becomes
melancholy, for as one said, Si vis me flere dolendum est primum ipsi tibi,
Women and Children being very moist and passive, are most susceptible of this
unpleasing contagion of the imagination. I have known a very melancholy woman,
which was subject to the disease called the Mother, and while she continued in
that mood, she thought her self possessed, and did strange things, which among
those that knew not the cause, passed for supernatural effects, and of one
possessed by the ill spirit: she was a person of quality, and all this
happened, because of the deep resentment she had for the death of her Husband:
She had attending her four or five young Gentlewomen, whereof some were her
Kinswomen, and others served her as Chambermaids. All these came to be
possessed as she was, and did prodigious actions. These young Maids were
separated from her sight, and communication, and as they had not yet contracted
such profound roots of the evil, they came to be all cured by their abscence;
and this Lady was also cured afterward by a Physician, which purged the
atrabilious humors, and restored her matrix to its former estate, there was
neither imposture, or dissimulation in this.

I could make a notable recital of such passions that happened to the Nuns at
Lodnn; but having done it in a particular Discourse at my return from that
Country, where I as exactly as I could discussed the point, I will forbear
speaking thereof at this time, otherwise then to pray you to remember, that
when two Lutes, or two Harps, near one another, both set to the same tune, if
you touch the strings of the one, the other consonant harp will sound at the
same time, though no body touch it, whereof Galileo has ingeniously rendered
the reason.

Now, to make application to our purpose of all that has been produced to this
effect, I say that since it is impossible that two several persons should be so
near one another, as the mother and the infant when he lies in the womb, one
may thence conclude, That all the effects of a strong and vehement imagination
working upon another more feeble, passive, and tender, ought to be more
efficacious in the Mother acting upon her son, then when the imaginations of
other persons act upon them who are nothing to them. And as it is impossible
for a Master of Music, let him be never so expert, and exact, can tune so
perfectly any two Harps, as the great Master of the Universe, does the two
bodies of the Mother and the Infant, so it follows by consequence, that the
concussion of the principal string of the Mothers, which is the imagination,
ought to produce a greater shaking of the consonant string in the Infant, to
wit, his imagination, then the string of a Lute being touched, upon the
consonant strings of another: and when the mother sends spirits to some parts
of her body, the like must be sent to some part of the child's body.

Now, lets call to memory how the imagination of the mother is full of corporal
atoms, which come from the Mulberry, or Strawberry, which fell upon the neck,
and breast, and her imagination being then surprised with an emotion, by the
suddenness of the accident, it follows necessarily that the must send some of
these atoms also to the brain of the Infant, and so to the same part of the
body, where she took the stain first, twixt which and the brain, there pass
such frequent and speedy messengers, as we have formerly set forth. The Infant
also on his part, who has his parts also tuned in an harmonious consonance
with the mothers, cannot fail to observe the same movement of spirits twixt
his imagination, and his neck, and his breast, as the mother did twixt hers: and
these spirits being accompanied with atoms of the Mulberry, which the mother
conveyed to his imagination, they make a profound impression, and lasting mark,
upon his delicate skin, whereas that of the mothers was more hard. As if one
should let fly a Pistol charged with powder, only against a marble, the powder
does nothing but sully it a little, which may quickly be rubd off; but if one
should discharge such a Pistol at a man's face, the grains of the powder would
pierce the skin, and so stick and dwell there all his life time, and make
themselves known by their black-blewish color, which they always conserve.

In like manner the small grains or atoms of the fruit which passed from the
mothers neck to the imagination of the Infant, and thence to the same place
upon his skin, do lodge, and continually dwell there for the future, and serve
as a source to draw the atoms of the like fruit dispersed in the air, according
to their season, (as the wine in the Tonne draws unto it the volatile spirits of
the Vines) and in drawing them the part of the skin, where they reside
ferments, swells, eats, and inflames, and sometimes breaks. But to render yet
more considerable, these marvalous marks of longing, (since we are upon this
subject) I cannot forbear to touch also another circumstance, which might seem
at first to be a miracle of nature, beyond the causes which I have alleged:
but having well eventilated it, we shall absolutely find that it depends upon
the same principles. It is, that oftentimes it falls out, that the impression
of the thing desired, or longed for, by the mother, falls upon the child,
although she touch it not, or that it falls upon her body. It Is sufficient that
some other thing do fall, or inexpectedly beat upon some part of the woman with
child, while such a longing does predominate in her imagination, and the figure
of the thing so long desired after, will be found at last imprinted upon the
same part of the body of the Infant, as it was upon the mother who received the
blow. The reason hereof is that the atoms of the thing longed for, being raised
up by the light, go to the brain of the big mother, through the channel of the
eyes, as well as other more material atoms, proceeding from the corporal
touch, would go thither by the guidance of the nerves. And of these petty
bodies, the mother forms in her imagination a complete model of that, whence
they flow forth by way of emanation. But if the women be not attarchd but
inwardly, these atoms which are in her imagination, make no other voyage than
to her heart, and thence to the imagination, and to the heart of the Infant,
and so cause a reinforcement of the passion in them both, which may be moved to
such a violent impetuosity, that if the mother does not enjoy her longd-for
object, this passion may cause the destruction both of the one and the other,
at least prejudice her notably in their health, and so make a great change in
the body. In the mean time, if some unlooked for blow surprise the mother in
any part of her body, the spirits which reside in the brain are immediately
sent thither by her imagination, as it happens often in this case of longing.
But in all other such sudden surprisals either among women or men, these
spirits are transported with the more impetuosity, the more the passion is
violent. As when one loves another passionately, he runs suddenly to the door
when any knocks, or that -- Hylax in limine latrat, hoping always it is the
party which entirely occupies his thoughts, (for qui amant ipsi sibi somnia
fingunt) who comes to give him a visit: And these spirits being moved by this
sudden assault, being then mingled with the petty bodies or atoms of the
longd-for thing which possesses so powerfully the fantasy they lead them
along with themselves to the part of the body which is struck, as also to the
same part of the body of the Infant, as well as to his imagination. And after
that all which happened is but the same in order to the mother, and the child
when the Mulberry or Strawberry fell upon the neck or breast of the Ladies,
with whom I have entertained you.

Permit me, my Lords, to enlarge my digression a little further in one word, to
raccount unto you a marvailous accident, known all over the Court of England,
in confirmation of the activity and impression which the imagination of the
mother makes upon the body of the Infant, whereof the was big. A Lady that was
my Kinswoman, (she was the niece of Fortescu, the Daughter of Count Arundel)
came to give me visits sometimes in London; she was fair, and of a good
feature, and she knew it well, taking great complacency, and not only to keep
her self so, but to add that which she could further: thereupon she was
persuaded that the patches and flies which she put upon her face, gave her a
great deal of ornament, therefore she was carfull to wear the most curious
fort: but as it is very hard to keep a moderation in things which depend more
upon Opinion than Nature, she wore them in excess, and patched most of her
face with them; although that did not much add to her beauty, and that I took
the liberty to tell her so accordingly, yet I thought it no opportunity then to
do any thing that should give her the least distaste, since with so much
civility and sweetness she came to visit me. Nevertheless, one day I thought
good, in a kind of drolling way, (so that she might not apprehend any
coffeehouse) and Ridentem dicere verum quis vitat? to tell her of it; so I
let fall my discourse upon her big belly, advising her to have a care of her
health, where of she was some what negligent, acording to the custom of young
vigorous women, which know not yet what it is to be subject to indispositions;
she gently thanked me for my care herein, saying, That she could do no more for
the preservation of her health than she did, though she was in that case: you
should at least, I replied, have a care of your child, O for that, said she,
there is nothing that can be contributed more. Yet, I told her, see how many
patches you wear upon your face, are you not afraid that the Infant in your
womb may happily be born with such marks on his face? But said she, What danger
is there that my child should bear such marks, though I put them on
artificially? Then you have not heard, I replied again, the marvelous effects
that the imaginations of Mothers work upon the bodies of their children, while
they are yet big with them, therefore I will raccount unto you some of them; so
I related unto her sundry stories upon this subject, as that of the Queen of
Ethiopia, who was delivered of a white boy, which was attributed to a Picture
of the Blessed Virgin, which she had near the teaster of her bed, whereunto she
bore great devotion. I urged another of a woman who was brought to bed of a
child all hairie, because of a pourtrait of Saint John Baptist in the
Wilderness, when he wore a coat of Camels hair. I raccounted unto her also the
strange antipathy which the late King James had to a naked sword, whereof the
cause was ascribed, in regard some Schotch Lords had entered once violently
into the bedchamber of the Queen his mother, while she was with child of him,
where her Secretary, an Italian, was dispatching some letters for her, whom
they hacked, and killed with naked swords before her face, and threw him at her
feet, and they grew so barbarous, that there wanted but little but that they
had hurt the Queen her self, who endeavored to save her Secretary, by
interposing her self, at least her skin was rased in diverse places. Bucanan
makes mention of this Tragedy. Hence it came that her son King James had such
an aversion all his life time to a naked sword, that he could not see one
without a great emotion of the spirits, although otherwise courageous enough,
yet he could not over-master his passions in this particular. I remember when
he dubbed me Knight, in the ceremony of putting the point of a naked sword upon
my shoulder, he could not endure to look upon it, but turned his face another
way, insomuch, that in lieu of touching my shoulder, he had almost thrust the
point into my eyes, had not the Duke of Buckingham guided his hand aright.

I alleged her diverse such stories to make her apprehend that a strong
imagination of the mother might cause some notable impression upon the body of
her child to his prejudice. Moreover, I pray consider how attentive you are to
your patches, and that you have them continually in your imagination; for, I
observed, that you have looked upon them ten times since you came to this room,
in the looking-glass. Have you therefore no apprehension that your child may
be born with half moons upon his face; or rarather that all the black which you
bear up and down in small portions, may assemble in one, and appear in the
middle of his forehead, the most apparent and remarkable part of the visage,
and may be as broad as a Iacobus, and then what a grace would it be to the
child, Oimee, said she, rather then that should happen, I will wear no more
patches while I am with child: Thereupon at that instant she pulled them all
off, and hurld them away. When her friends saw her afterward without patches,
they demanded how it came to pass, that the who was esteemed to be one of the
most curious beauties of the Court, in point of patches, should so suddenly
give over the wearing of them: she answered, that her Uncle, in whom she had a
great deal of belief, assured her, that if she wore them, during the time she
was with child, the Infant would have a large black patch in the midst of his
forehead. Now, this conceit was so lively engraven in her imagination, that she
could not be delivered of it: And so this poor Lady, who was so fearful that
her child might not bear some black mark in his face, yet she could not
prevent, but it came so into the World, but that he had a spot as large as a
crown of gold in the midst of his forehead, according as she had figured before
in her imagination: it was a daughter that she brought forth, very beautiful
throughout, this excepted. And it is but few months ago, that I saw her bearing
the said mole or spot which proceeded from the force of the imagination of her
mother.

I need not tell you of your neighbor of Carcassona, who lately was brought to
bed of a prodigious Monster, exactly resembling an Ape, which she took pleasure
to look upon, during the time she was with child, for I conceave you know the
story better than I. Nor that of the woman of St. Maixent, who could not
forbear going to see an unfortunate child of a poor passenger woman, who was
born without arms; and she her self was delivered afterward of such a
Monster; who nevertheless had some small excrescences of flesh upon, the
sholders, about the place whence the arms should have come forth. As also of
her who was desirous to see the execution of a Criminal, who had his neck
broken according to the laws of France, whereof the took such an affrightment,
that made so deep a print upon her imagination, that presently she fell in
labor of her child, and before they could carry her to her lodging, but she
was brought to bed before her time, of a child who had his head severed from
his body, both the parts yet shedding fresh blood., besides that which was
abundantly shed in the womb, as if the headsman had done an execution also upon
the tender young body within the matrix of the mother. These three Examples,
and many others truly alleged, which I could produce, although they
mainifestly prove the strength of the imagination, would engage me too far, if
I should undertake to clear the causes, and unwrap the difficulties which would
be found greater then in any of those instances wherewith I have entertained
you, because that those spirits had the power to cause such essential changes,
and fearful effects, upon bodies that were already brought to their shapes of
perfection, and it may be well believed, that in some of them there was a
transmutation of one species to another, and the introduction of a new
informing form in the subject matter, totally differing from that which had
been introduced at first, at least if that which most Naturalists tell us, at
the animation of the Embryo in the womb be true: but this digression has been
already too long.

Est modus in Rebus, sunt certi denique fines,
Quos ultra citraque nequit consistere Rectum.
To return then to the great channel, and thread of our Discourse, the
examples, and experiments, which I have already insisted upon in confirmation
of the reasons which I have alleged, do clearly demonstrate that the bodies
which draw the atoms dispersed in the air, attract unto themselves with a
greater power and energy, such as are of their own nature then other
heterogeneous, and strange atoms; As wine does the vinal spirits, The oil of
tartar fermented by the levain of Roses draws the volatile spirits of the rose;
The flesh of deer, or vemson buried in crust attracts the spirits of those
beasts, and so all the other whereof I have spoken.

The History of the Tarantula in the kingdom of Naples is very famous; you know
how the venom of this animal ascending by the hurt that the party has
received, being pricked therewith toward the head, and the heart does excite
in their Imagination an impetuous desire to hear some melodious aires, and most
commonly they are delighted with differing aires; Therefore when they listen to
an air that pleases them, they begin to dance incessantly, and thereby they
fall a sweating in abundance, in such sort that this sweat makes a great part
of the venom to evaporate, besides the sound of the music does raise a
movement, and causes an agitation among the aerean and vaporous spirits which
are in the brain, and about the heart, and diffused up and down through the
whole body proportionably according to the nature, and cadence of such music,
as when Timotheus transported Alexander the Great with such a vehemence to such
and such passions as he pleased; In the like manner also when it happens that
one Lute does sound it makes the strings of the other to shake by the motions
and tremblings which it causes in the air, though it be not touched otherwise
at all: We find also oftentimes that the sounds which are no other thing than
the motions of the air, cause the like movement in the water; as the sharp
sound which is caused by rubbing hard with ones finger the brim of a glass
full of water, does excite a noise, a turning, and boundings in the water of
certain drops, as if the water did dance according to the cadence of the sound:
The harmonious sounds also of bells in those Countries where they use to be
rung to particular tunes does make the like impressions upon the superficies of
the rivers that are nigh the steeple, specially in the night time when there is
no other movement, which stops, or choakes the other supervenient one; For the
air being contiguous, or rather continuous with the water, and the water being
susceptible of movement, there is the like motion caused in the fluid parts of
the wat er as began in the air, and the same contact which is betwixt the
agitated air, and the water which is by this means also moved; happens also to
be betwixt the agitated air, and the vaprous spirits which are in those bodies
who have been bit by the Tarantula, which spirits by consequence are moved by
the agitated air, that is to say by the sound; and that the more efficaciously,
that this agitation or sound is proportioned to the nature and temperature of
the party hurt: And this intern agitation of the spirits and vapors helps them
to discharge the vapourous venom of the Tarantula which is mixed among all their
humors; In the like manner that standing puddle waters, and corrupted aires
being putrified by long repose, and the mixture of other noisome substances are
refined and purified by motion; but winter approaching which devoures these
bealts, people are freed from this malady, but at the return of that season
when they used to be pricked, the mischief comes again, and they must dance
again as they did the year before: The reason is that the heat of summer does
stir, and raise up the venom of the beast, whereby it becomes as malignant, and
furious as it was before; And the poison being heated, and evaporating it self,
and dispersing in the air the levain of the same poison, which remains in the
bodies of them who have been hurt, draws it unto it self, whereby such a
fermentation is wrought, which infects the other humors, whence a kind of
smoke issuing, and mounting to the brains of these poor sick bodies, does use
to produce such strange effects.

It is also well known that where there are great dogs, or mastiffs, as in
England, if any be bitten perchance by any of these dogs, they commonly use to
kill them though they be not mad for fear that the levain of the canine choler
which remains within the body of the party bit, draw unto it the malignant
spirits of the same dog, which might come to distemper the spirits of the
party: And this is not only practiced in England where there are such
dangerous dogs, but also in France, according to the report of father Cheron
provincial of the Carmelites in this Country, in his examen de la Theology
mystique newly imprinted, and which, I have lately read. I will say nothing of
artificial noses that are made of the flesh of other men, for to remedy the
deformity of those who by an extreme excess of cold have lost their own, which
new noses do putrify as soon as those persons out of whose substance they were
taken come to die, as if that small parcel of flesh engrafted upon the face
did live by the spirits it drew from its first root, and source; For although
this be constantly avouch'd by considerable authors, yet I will not insist more
upon it, and desire you to think that I offer nothing unto you which is not
verified by solid tradition, such, that it were a weakness to doubt of it.

But it is high time tha^ (...) should come now to my seventh, and last
principle; it is the last turn of the engine, and as I hope will batter down
quite the gate which hindered us an entrance to the knowledge of this so
marvailons a mystery, and which will imprint such a lawful mark upon the
doctrine which I hold forth, that it will pass for current money. This
principle is, that the source of those spirits or of the bodies which attract
them to it self, draw likewise after them that which accompanies them, as also
that which sticks, and is glued, and united unto them. This conclusion needs
not much proof, being evident enough of it self, if there be nails, pins or
ribands tied to the end of a loug chord, or chain, and if there be a knurle
either of wax, gum, or glue, and that I take this chord or chain by one end,
and draw it after me, until the other last end come to my hands, it cannot be
otherwise but that I take into my hands at the same time the nail, the pins,
the ribands the knurle, and all that is applied thereunto: I go therefore to
relate unto you only some experiments that have been made in consequence of
this principle, who will most strongly confirm the others produced before.

The great fertility, and riches of England, consists chiefly in pasturage for
the nourishment of beasts, we have the fairest in the world, with abundance of
other animals, and principally of beef and kine. There Is not the meanest
Cottager but has a Cow to furnish his family with milk, it is the principal
sustenance of the poorer sort of people, as it is also in Switzerland, which
makes them very careful of the good keeping, and health of their cowes; Now,
if it happen that if in boiling the milk it swells so high that it sheds over
the brim of the pan, and so comes to fall into the fire, the good woman or
maid, does presently give over whatsoever she is adoing, and runs to the pan
which she draws off the fire and at the same time she takes a handful of
salt, which uses to be commonly in the corner of the chimney to keep it dry,
and throws it upon the cinders where the milk was shed; Ask her wherefore she
does so, and she will tell you that it is to prevent that the Cow which gave
this milk may not have some hurt upon her udder, for without this remedy, it
would come to be hard, and vlcerated, she would come to piss blood, and so be
in danger to die; Not that this extremity should befall her the very first
time, but she would grow ill disposed, and if this should happen often, the Cow
would in a short time miscarry: It might seem that some superstition or folly
might lie herein, but the infallibility of the effect does warrant from the
last, and for the first many believe that the malady of the Cow is
supernatural, or an effect of sorcery, and consequently that the remedy which
I have alleged is superstitious, but it is easy to disabuse any man of this
persuasion, by declaring how the business goes according to the foundations
which I have laid; The milk falling upon the candent coals is converted to
vapor which disperseth, and filtreth it self through the circumambient air,
where itrancounters the light, and the solar rays which transport it further;
augmenting and extending still farther the sphere of its activity: This vapor
of the milk is not alone or single, but it is composed of fiery atoms which
accompany the smoke, and vapor of the milk which gave the milk mingling, and
uniting themselves therewith; now, the sphere of the said vapor extending it
self unto the place where the cow is, her udder, which is the source whence the
milk proceeded, attracts unto it the said malignant vapor, staying, and
sticki^^ it self there together with the fiery atoms that accompanied it. The
udder is in part glandulous, and very tender, and so consequently very subject
to inflammations, this fire then does heat, inflames, and makes it swell, and
in fine makes it hard and ulcerated; The inflamed, and ulcerated udder is near
the bladder, which comes likewise to be inflamed making the anastomoses, and
communication which is twixt the veins, and the arteries to open, and to cast
forth blood, and to regorge into the bladder, whence ordinarily the urine uses
to come forth, and empty it self: But whence comes it, you will say that the
salt remedies all this? It is because he is of a nature clean contrary to the
fire, the one being hot, and volatile, the other, cold and fixed; Insomuch that
where they use to rancounter, the salt as it were, knocks down the fire; by
precipitating and destroying its action, as it may be observed in a very
ordinary accident; The chimneys which are full of soot use to take fire very
easily, now, the usual remedy for that is to discharge a musket into the
funnell o the chimney which loosneth, and brings down with it the fired soot,
and then the disorder cease, but if there be no musket or pistol, or other
instrument to draw down the soot, they use to cast a great quantity of salt on
the fire below, and that choakes, and hinders the atoms of fire, which
otherwise would incessantly mount up, and join with them above, which by this
means wanting nouriture consume themselves, and come to nothing; The same
thing befalls the atoms which are in a train to accompany the vapor of the
milk, the salt does precipicate and kill it upon the very place, and if any do
chance to escape, and save themselves by the great struglings they make, and go
along with the said vapor, they are nevertheless accompanied with the atoms
and spirit of the salt which stick unto them, which like good wrastlers never
leave their hold until they have got the better of their adversary: And you
shall observe by the by, that there is not a more excellent balm for a
burning, than the spirit of salt in a moderate quantity: It is then apparent,
that'tis impossible to employ any means more efficacious to hinder the ill
effects of the fire upon the udder of the cow, but to east upon her milk being
shed over upon the cinders a sufficient quantity of salt: This effect touching
the conservation of the cowes udder in order to the burning of her milk makes
me call to mind that which diverse have told me to have seen both in France and
in England; viz. when the Physicians do examine the milk of a nurce for the
child of a person of quality, they use to make proofs sundry ways before they
come to judge definitively of the goodness thereof, as by the taste, by the
smell, by the color, and consistence thereof; And sometimes they cause it to
be boiled until it come to an evaporation, and see its residence; with other
accidents, and circumstances which may be learnt, and discerned by these
means: But those of whose milk this last experiment has been made, felt
themselves tormented in their papps, and duggs, while their milk was a boiling;
therefore having once endured this pain, they would never consent that their
milk should be carried away out of their sight, and presence; although they
willingly submitted to any other proof than that by fire: Now, to confirm this
experiment of the attraction which the cowes udder makes of the fire, and
vapor of the burned milk, I am going to racount unto you another of the same
nature, whereof I my self have seen the truth more than once, and whereof any
one may easily make try all. Take the excrements of a dog, and hurl it into
the fire more than once, at the beginning you shall find him heated, and moved,
but in a short time you shall see him as if he were burned all over panting,
and stretching out his tongue, as if he had run a long course: Now, this
alteration befalls him because his entrails drawing unto them the vapor of
the burned excrement, and with that vapor the atoms of fire which did
accompany it, they are so changed, and inflamed that the dog having always a
fever upon him, and not being able to take any nourishment his flancks do lock
up, which causes his death at last. It were not proper to divulge this
experience among such persons as are subject to make use of any thing for doing
of mischief, for the same effects which happen to beasts, would fall upon men's
bodies, if one should try such a conclusion upon their excrements: There
happened a remarkable thing to this purpose to a neighbor of mine in England
the last time, I sojournied there: He had a very pretty and delicate child, and
because he would have his eyes always upon him, he entertained the nurse at
his house, I saw him often, for he was a pragmaticall man, and of good
addresses, and I had occasion to use such a man; One day I found him very sad,
and his wife a weeping, whereof demanding the reason, they told me that their
little child was very ill, and that he had a burning fever, which inflamed all
his body over, which appeared by the redness of his face, that he forced
himself to go to stool, but he could do little, and that little which he did
was covered with blood, and that he refused also to suck; And that which
troubled them most, was that they could not conjecture any cause how this
indisposition should befall him, for his nurse was very well, her milk was as
good as could be wished; and in all other things there was as much care had of
him as could be; I told them that the last time I was with them, I observed one
particularity whereof I thought fit to give them notice, but something or other
still diverted me, It was, that their child making a sign that he was desirous
to be set on his feet, he let fall his excrements on the ground, and his nurse
presently took the fire-shovell, and covered it with embers, and then threw all
into the fire, the mother began to make her excuses, that they were not so
careful to correct this ill habit of the child, saying that as he advanced in
years, he should be corrected for it, I replied, that it was not for this
consideration that I held this discourse with her, but I was curious to know
the reason of her child's distemper, and consequently to find some remedy, And
thereupon I related unto them the like accident which had happened two or three
years before to a child of one of the most illustrious Magistrates of the
Parliament of Paris, who was bred up in the house of a Doctor of Physic of
great reputation in the same town, I told them also what I have now related
unto you touching the excrements of dogs; and I made reflections unto them upon
that which they had often heard, and what is often practiced in our Country,
which is that within the villages which are always dirty in the winter, if it
happens that there be a Farmer which is more proper than others, and who keeps
more neatly the approaches to his house than his neighbors do, the boys use
to come thither in the night time, or when it begins to be dark, to discharge
their bellies there, because that in such villages there is not much commodity
of easements, besides that in such places so fitly accommodated these gallants,
the boys are out of danger to sink into the dirt, which otherwise might rise
up higher than their shoes, but the good houswifes in the morning when they
open their doors, use to find such an ill favored smell that transports them
with choler. But they who are acquainted with this trick go presently and fire
red hot a broach or fire-shovel, and then they thrust it into the excrements
all hot, and when the fire lessens, they heat it again oftentimes to the same
purpose; In the mean time the boy which made the ordure feels a kind of pain,
and colic in his bowels, with an inflammation in his fundament and a
continual desire to go to stool, and he is hardly quit of it till he suffer a
kind of fever all that day, which is the cause that he returns thither no
more; And these women to be freed from such affronts do pass among the
Ignorant for sorceresses, and to have made a compact with the devil, since
they torment people in that fashion without seeing or touching them. This
Gentleman did not disallow those things which I have already told you but was
confirmed farther when I told him that he should look farther into the
fundament of his child, for without doubt he should find it red, and inflamed;
and that visiting him, he should find that it was full of pimples, and
excoriated; It was not long after that this poor child fell into a
languishment, and with much pain and pitiful cries he voyded some small
matter which in lieu of casting it into the fire, or to be covered with embers,
I caused to be put into a basin of cold water which was put in a fresh place,
which was continued to be done every time that the child gave occasion, and he
began to amend the very same hour, and within four or five days he became
perfectly well recovered, But fearing to trespass too much upon your patience;
I will hold you no longer but with one experiment only very familiar in our
Country; and afterward I will make a summary of all that has been said, to
make you see the force, and value of this whole Discourse.

We have in England as I touched before excellent pasturage for the nourishment
and fatting of cattle, so abundantly that it falls out often, that the Oxen
come to acquire so excessive store of fat, that it does extend it self in a
great quantity to their legs, as also to their feet, and hoofs, which
oftentimes causes impostumes in the bottom of their feet, which comes to
swell, and cast out a great deal of core, and putrified matter, which hinders
the beast to go; The proprieters when they observe that, though the beefbe
never the worse for the shambles, yet are they damnified, thereby, in regard
that not being able to bring them to London, where the grand market is for fat
beefs through all England, as Paris is for Auuergne, for Normandy, and other
provinces of France, I say the Graziers not being able to bring them to London,
they are constrained to kill them upon the place where their flesh is not worth
half the price, that they might have got in London; Now there is a remedy for
this inconvenience which is, that one must observe where the Ox, Cow, or
Heifer, does plant upon the Earth his sick foot, the first time that he rises
up in the morning, and at that very place one must cut out a green turf of that
Earth where the beast had trod with that foot, and put this turf upon a tree,
or upon a hedge lying open to the North wind, And if that wind come to blow upon
the turf of Earth, the beef will be cured within three or four days very
perfectly, but if one should put that turf toward the South wind, or South
west (which in Tholouze is called d'Autant here in Montpellier le Marin, and in
Italy le Scirocco) the distemper in the Ox will increase; These circumstances
will not seem superstitious unto you when you will have considered how that by
the repose of the night the corrupt matter, or core does use to gather in a
great quantity under the foot of the sick Ox, and coming in the morning to
set his foot upon the ground, he presses forth the impostume, the matter
whereof sticks to that part of the Earth, and makes impressions upon it; Now,
this turf of Earth being put, and exposed in some proper place to receive the
dry cold blasts of the Northern winds, the dry cold blasts of that wind does
intermingle with the said corrupted impostumated matter which strerching its
spirits all along the air the ulcerated foot of the animal, which is the source
of all draws them unto it and with them it attracts also the cold dry atoms
which cause the cure, the malady requiring no other help than to be well dried,
and refreshed. But if one should expose this turf to a moist hottish wind, it
would produce contrary effects.

Behold, my Lords, all my wheelsformed, I confess they are ill filled, and
polished, but let us try whether being put together, and mounted they will make
the engine go, but if these wheels being well joined, and placed do draw the
conclusion, or this unshaken carraque to a good port, you will, I presume, have
the goodness to pardon the grossness, and rude expressions of my language,
and passing by the words you will content your selves with the naked truth of
things, let us therefore apply that which has been spoken to that which is
practiced when a hurt person is cured. Let us consider Mounsieur Howell wounded
upon his hand, and a great inflammation hapened upon his hurt, his garter is
taken covered with the blood that issued from the wound, it is steeped in a
basin of water where Vitriol was dissolved, one keeps the basin in a closet, at
the moderate heat of the Sun, and at night in the chimney corner, in such sort
that the blood which is upon the garter be always in a good natural
temperament neither colder, or hotter than the degree required in a healthful
body; what ought then to result, (according to the doctrine that we endeavor
to stablish,) from all this! In the first place the Sun, and the light will
attract a great extent, and distance off, the spirits of the blood which are
upon the garter, and the moderate heat of the hearth, which acts gently upon
the composition (which comes to the same thing, as if one should carry it dry
in his pocket to make it feel the temperate heat of the body) I say the
moderate heat of the hearth does push out the said atoms, as the water which
gathers it self round in the filtration or strainings use to drive on that
which mounts up to make it go faster, and more easily, making it also to dilate
it self, and distill, and so march of themselves a good way in the air, to help
thereby the attraction of the Sun, and of the light.

Secondly, the spirit, of the Vitriol being incorporated with the blood cannot
choose but make the same voyage together with the atoms of the blood; Thirdly,
the wounded hand expires, and exhales in the mean time continually abundance of
hot fiery spirits which gush forth as a river out of the inflamed hurt, which
cannot be but that the wound must consequently draw unto it the air which is
next it; Fourthly, this air draws unto it the other air which is next it, and
that the next to it also, and so there is a kind of current of air drawn round
about the wound. Fifthly, with this air come to incorporate at last the atoms,
and spirits of the blood, and the vitrioll which were diffused, and shed a good
way off in the air by the attractions of the light, and the Sun. Besides, it
may well be that from the beginning the orb, and sphere of these atoms, and
spirits did extend it self in so great a distance without having need of the
attractions of the air, or of the light to make them come thither. Sixthly, the
atoms of blood finding the proper source, and original root whence they came
do stay, and stick there, and so reenter into their natural beds, and
primitive receptacles, whereas the other air is but a passenger, and
evapourates away as soon as it comes, as when it is carried away through the
funnell of the chimney, as soon as it is drawn into the chamber by the door.
Seventhly, the atoms of blood being inseparably with the spirits of the
Vitrioll, both the one, and the other, do jointly imbibe together within all
the corners, fibers, and orifices of the veins which lie open about the wound
of the party hurt, which herby are comforted, and in fine imperceptibly cured.

Now to know wherefore such an effect, and cure is so happily performed, we
must examine the nature of Vitrioll, which is composed of two parts, the one
fixed, the other volatill. The fixed which is the salt is sharp, and biting,
and caustique in some degree. The volatill is smooth, soft, balsamicall, and
astringing, and it is for that reason that vitrioll is made use of as a
sovereign remedy in the collyres for the inflammations of the eyes, and when
they are corroded, and scorched by some sharp and burning humor or defluxion.
As also in injections where excoriations and scaldings use to happen, as also
in the best plasters to stanch the blood, and incarnate the hurt. But they who
well know, how to draw the sweet oil of vitrioll which is the pure volatile part
thereof, know also that in the whole closet of nature, there is no balm like
this oil. For this balm or sweet oil does heal in a very short time all kind
of hurts which are not mortal, it cures, and consolidates the broken veins of
the breast, as far as the ulcers of the lungs which is an incurable malady
without this balm. Now, it is the volatill part of the Vitriol, which is
transported by the Sun (the great Distiller of nature) and which by that means
does dilate it self in the air, and that the wound, or part which received the
laesion, draws, and incorporates with the blood, together with its humors,
and spirits. And that being true, we cannot expect a greater effect of the
volatile vitriol, but that it should shut the veins, stanch the blood, and so
in a short compass of time, heal the wound.

The method, nd primitive manner how to make use of this sympatheticall remedy
was to take only some vitrioll, and that of the common sort, as it came from
ehe Druggists, without any preparation or addition at all, and to make it
dissolve in fountain water, or rather in rain water, in such a proportion that
putting therein a knife, or some polished iron it should come out changed into
the color of copper: And within this water they used to put in a clowt or rag
of cloth embrued with the blood of the party hurt the rag being dry, but if it
was yet fresh, and moist with the reaking blood, there was no need but to
powder it with the small powder of the same vitrioll, in such sort that the
powder might incorporate it self, and imbibe the blood remaining yet humid, and
keep both the one and the other in a temperate heat, and place, viz. the powder
in ones pocket, and the water (which admits not of this comodity) within a
chamber where the heat should be temperate. and everytime that one should put
new water of vitriol with fresh powder and new cloth, or other bloudied stuff,
the patient should feel new easement as if the wound had bin then dreft with
some sovereign medicament. And for this reason they use to reiterate this
manner of dressing both evening and morning.

But now, the most part of those who serve themselves with the Powder of
Sympathy, do endeavor to have Vitriol of Rome, or of Cypres, then they calcine
it at the whiteness of the Sun: And besides, some use to add the Gomme of
Tragagantha, it being easy to add unto things already invented.

Touching my self, I have seen such great and admirable effects of Vitriol it
self of eighteen pence the pound, as of that Powder which is used to be
prepared now at a greater price: yet notwithstanding I do not blame the present
practice, on the contrary I commend it, for it is founded upon reason.

First, it seems that the purest and best sort of Vitriol does produce the best
operation.

Secondly, it seems also that the moderate calcining thereof at the rays of
the Sun does take away the superfluous humidity of the Vitriol; and this
calcination does not touch any part but that which is good: as if one should
boil broth so clear that it would come to be gelly, which certainly would
render it more nourishing.

Thirdly, it seems that the exposing which is made of the Vitriol to the Sun to
receive calcination, renders its spirits more fitly disposed to be transported
through the air by the Sun when need requires.

For it ought not to doubted be but that some part of the aetherean fire of the
Solar rays does incorporate with the Vitriol, as it is plainly discovered by
calcining Antimony by a burning glass, for it much augments the weight of it
almost half in half; now some particles of the Solar beams mingling with the
Vitriol, in this case the luminous part of that substance is also calcind
together, and so is made apt, and disposed to be carried in the air by a
semblable light, and Solar rays. As we see that to make the tongue of a pump to
draw the water the easier from the bottom of a well, one does use to cast a
little water from above upon it. Now, the light carrying with it so easily the
substance that is so connatural to it, it carries also with it the same time,
with the same facility, that which goes incorporated with it.

Fourthly, these Solar rays being embodied with the Vitriol, are in a posture
to communicate unto it a more excellent virtue than it has of it self, as we
find that Antimony calcind in the Sun, becomes, whereas it was rank poison
before, a most soverain, and balsamical medicament, and a most excellent
corroborative of nature.

Fifthly, the Gomme of Tragagantha having a glutinous faculty, and being for
the rest very innocent, may contribute something toward the consolidation of
the wound.

My Lords, I could add unto what is spoken many most important considerations
touching the form and essence of Vitriol, whereof the substance is so noble,
and the origin so admirable, that one may avouch with good reason, that it is
one of the most excellent bodies which nature has produced.

The Chemists do assure us that it is no other then a corporification of the
universal spirit which animates and perfects all that has existence in this
sublunary World, which is drawn in that abundance by a Lover so appropriated,
by means whereof I my self have in a short time, by exposing it only unto the
open air, made an attraction of a celestial Vitriol ten times more in weight,
which was of a marvailous pureness and virtue, a privilege which has not
been given but to it, and to pure virgin saltpeter.

But to anatomise as we ought the nature of this transcendent undividual, which
nevertheless in some fashion may be said to be universal, and fundamental to
all bodies, it would require a Discourse far more ample then I have yet made.
But as I perceive I have already entertained you so long a time, it would
prove a very great indiscretion to trench further upon your goodness, who have
hitherto listened unto me with so much attention, and patience, if I should go
about to enter into any new matter, and embark my self for a further voyage.
Wherefore remitting diverse matters to some other time, when you shall please to
morder me, coming now again to the general consideration of this
Sympatheticall cure, I will put a Period to this Discourse, after that I shall
have told you two or three words, which will not be of small importance, for
the confirmation of all which has been alleged by me hitherunto.

I have deduced unto you the admirable causes of the operations, and strange
effects of the Powder of Sympathy from their first root. These fundamental
causes are so enchained one within the other, that it seems there can be no
default, stop, or interruption, in their proceedings. But we shall be the
better fortified in the belief of their virtue and esticacy, and how they come
to produce the effects of so many fair cures, if we consider that then when
some is practiced in one of these causes, or in all of them together, we see
and perceive immediately an effect altogether differing from the former. If I
had not formerly seen a watch or clock, I should be justly surprised, and
should remain astonished to see a hand, or a needle, so regularly, mark the
journal hours, and motion of the Sun, upon the flat of a quadrant; and that it
should turn, and make its round every four and twenty hours, there being
nothing seen that should push on the said needle: But if I look on the other
side. I see wheels, ressorts, and counterpoises, which are in perpetual
movement; which having well, and soberly considered, I presently suspect that
those wheels are the cause of the movement, and turnings of the said needle,
although I cannot presently discern or know how those moving wheels do cause a
motion, in the needle of the quadrant, because of the plate that lies
interposed betwixt them. Therefore I reason thus within my self; That every
effect whatsoever must have of pure necessity some cause, and therefore that
the body moved there, ought necessarily to receive its movement from some other
body, which is contiguous to it. Now I see no other body which makes the needle
of the quadrant to move and turn then the said wheels, therefore I must of
force be per swaded to attribute the movement unto them. But afterward, when I
shall have stoped the motion of those wheels: and taken away the counterpoise,
and observed that suddenly the needle ceased to move, and that applying again
the counterpoise, and giving liberty for the wheel to turn, the needle returns
to her ordinary train, or by making one wheel to go faster by putting my finger
unto it, or by adding more weight to the counterpoise, the needle does hasten,
and advance its motions proportionably. Then I grow to be convinced and
entirely satisfied, and so I absolutely conclude that these wheels and
counterpoises are the true cause of the motion of the needle.

In the same manner, if interrupting the action of any of those causes which I
have established for the true foundation of the Sympathetical Powder, I alter,
retard or hinder the cure of the wound; I may boldly conclude, that the
foresaid causes are the legitimate, and genuine true causes of the cure, and
that we need not amuse our selves to make indagations for any other.

Let us then examine our business by that bias. I have affirmed that the Light
transporting the atoms of the Vitriol, and of the blood, and dilating them to a
great extent in the air, the wound or place hurt, does attract them, and
thereby is immediately solac'd, and eased, and consequently comes to be healed
by the spirits of the Vitriol, which is of a balsamical virtue. But if you put
the basin, or Powder with the cloth embrued with blood, within an Armory, or
into a corner of some cold rooms, or into a cave, where the light never comes,
nor fresh air, which makes the place corrupted, and to have ill smells, in that
case the wound can receive no amendment, nor any good effect from the said
Powder. And it will fall out in the same manner, if having put the basin, or
Powder in some By-corner, and that you cover them with some thick cloth,
stuffing and spongie, which might imbibe the atoms that use to come forth, and
which retain the the light and rays which enter there, where they are thereby
stopped and quite lost. Moreover, if you suffer the water of Vitriol, to
congeale into ice, or the cloth wherein it is dipped, the party hurt shall be
sensible at the beginning of a very great cold in his wound; but when it is
iced all over, he shall feel neither heat nor cold, in regard that congealed
cold does constipate the pores of the water, which nevertheless does not cease
to transpire, and send forth spirits. If one should wash the cloth, spotted
with blood, in vinegar, or lie (which by their penetrating acrimony, transports
all the spirits of the blood) before the Vitriol be applied, it will produce no
effect, yet if it be washed but with pure simple water, it may nevertheless do
something, for that water carries not away so much, but the effect will not be
so great, as if the bloudspotted piece had not been washed at all, for then it
is full of the spirits of the blood. The same cure is performed by applying the
remedy to the blade of a sword which wounds a body, if it come not to pass
that the sword be too much heated by the fire, for then it would make all the
spirits of the blood to evaporate, and in that case the sword would serve but
little to perform the cure. Now, the reason why the sword may be dressed in
order to the cure, is because the subtle spirits of blood do penetrate the
substance of the blade, as far as the extent, which the sword made within the
body of the the wounded party, where they use to make their residence, there
being nothing to chase them away, unless it be the fire as I said before. For
experiment whereof hold it over a chafing dish of moderate fire, and you shall
discern on the side opposite to the fire a little humidity which resembles the
spots that ones breath makes upon lookingglasses, or upon the burnished blade
of a sword. If you look upon it athwart, some glass which makes the object
seem bigger, you shall find that this soft dew of the spirits consists in
little bubbles, or blown bladders: and when once they are entirely evaporated,
you shall discern no more upon the weapen, unless it were thrust a new into
the body of a living person. Nor from the beginning shall you discover any such
thing, but precisely upon the part of the blade, which had entered the wound.

This subtle penetration of the spirits into the hard steel, may confirm the
belief of the entrance of such spirits into the skin of a woman big with child,
as I remind to have proposed unto you in my sixth Principle remarkable in its
own place. Now then, while the spirits lodge in the sword, they may serve as
great helps for the cure of the Patient, but when the fire has driven them all
away, the remedy applied to the sword, will not avail any thing at all.
Furthermone, if any violent heat accompanies these atoms it inflames the
wound, but common salt may remedy that, the humidity of water humectates the
hurt, and the cold causes a chillness in the party wounded.

To confirm all these particulars, I could add to those I have already
raccounted many notable examples more, but, I fear me, I have already too much
exercised your patience, therefore I will industriously pretermit the
mentioning of them at this time, but I offer to entertain any of this
Honorable Assembly therewith, if they have the curiosity to be informed of
them accordingly.

I conclude then, Messieurs, by representing unto you that all this my stery is
guided, and governed all along by true natural ways and circumstances,
although by the agency and resorts of very subtle spirits.

I am persuaded my Discourse has convincingly showed you, that in this
Sympathetical cure, there is no need to admit of an action distant from the
Patient. I have traced unto you a real Communication twixt the one and the
other, viz. of a Balsamical substance, which corporally mingleth with the wound.

Now it is a poor kind of pusillanimity, and faintness of heart, or rather a
gross ignorance of the Understanding, to pretend any effects of charm or
magic herein, or to confine all the actions of Natre, to the grossness of
our senses, when we have not sufficiently considered, nor examined the true
causes and principles whereon it is fitting we should ground our judgment: we
need not have recourse to a Demon or Angel in such difficulties.

Mec Deus intersit, nisi dignus vindice nodus
Insiderit. --
TELOS.
Books printed for, and to be sold by, Thomas Davis.
MAster Paul Bains his Practical Commentary on the Ephesians, lately reprinted
with Additions. Fol.

Speedells Geometrical Extractions, newly reprinted with Additions. Quarto.

Oughtredi Trigonometria the figure.


