A Dialogue betwixt Mr. State Rogue, a Parliament Man, and his old Acquaintance
Mr. John Undertaker.
State Rogue. WHat moody, musing Jack, winding up thy Politics? Come prithee
what project on Foot now? For I know thou art a Man of Projects.


John Undertaker. O my dear State Rogue! why 'saith I Am just now going to your
House at Westminster, that Famous Nursery of your Name and Family.


S. R. What to the Parliament House? Prithee what Business have thou there?


J. U. Why, to tell you the Truth, I Am going to try what I can do in order to
stem that Tide of Blood that runs with such a mighty Torrent from the Veins of
my distressed dear Countrymen.


S. R. What some Project of Peace on foot, Jack? It Is so upon my Life, and the
Grand Lewis has made thee Mediator. Well, you are a rare Fellow; a most
excellent Undertaker. I see thou have not thy Name for nothing, no more than I.


J. U. No 'saith, he has not employed me; nor am I going about his Business,
but my own, and my Countries.


S. K. As what prithee?


J. U. Why look you, I intend to propose it to the House, the carrying on a
vigorous War against France, or carrying on the War against France with vigor;
take it which way you will.


S. R. A very pretty Proposal. Why this has been proposed, and resolved on,
Seven years agon.


J. U. Why ay this is true; but you see, and we all see, that here is nothing
come of it. Therefore I intend to undertake the Business my self, my dear State
Rogue: And first, I Will know of our wise Senate how many Millions per An. they
will give me to do it; and how many Years they are willing to allow me to
humble this great and mighty Monarch of France.


S. R. Well, and what then?


J. U. Why then, for Six Millions per An. and Seven Years to effect it, I Will
undertake the Business.


S. R. What alone, and without an Army?


J. U. Ay, ay, alone; and without an Army. Give me but Money enough, and let me
alone for Undertaking?


S. R. As how prithee?


J. U. Why, thus, do you mark me? Look you, as soon as I have got the Money,
away go I into Flanders, live great, spend the Money, no matter how; look on
peaceably, and be a Witness of the King of France's taking several of our
strong Towns; and when the French Army have done the Business, they cut out for
that Campaign, and are gone to their Winter Quarters, away come I home again;
tell the Parliament what noble Feats I have done, ask them for another Six
Millions, return to Flanders again the next Season, and do just as I did,
before; and so go on till the Seven years are expired: And if this will not reduce
France, and save the Lives and Reputation of our brave English Boys, the Devil
is in it.


S. R. Ha, ha, ha, by my troth thou make me laugh; a most incomparable
Project! O rare Mr. Undertaker! But you are not in earnest sure Jack?


J.U. Not in earnest? Yes, in good gerning earnest. Why prithee State Rogue
where is the Difficulty? Is there any Difficulty in my going into Flanders, and
back again? Is there any Difficulty in my standing by, whilst the French take
our Towns? Is there any Difficulty in my asking the Parliament Money? And can
there be any Difficulty in my taking the Money, when they frankly give it me?
Where, in the Name of Pharaoh, than lies the Difficulty of carrying on my
Project? Now, Mr. State Rogue, what occasion have you for laughing?


S. R. Ha, ha, ha; Oh I shall die, I shall die; ha, ha, ha; Oh I shall kill my
self with laughing. Why the Devil's in thee sure to talk at this rate.


J. U. Now cannot I, for the Soul of me, understand where lies this merry
Conceit; nor what in the Name of Fate it is that thou laughest at. I ask thee
where is the Difficulty in my Undertaking, and thou fallest a Laughing.


S. R. Ha, ha, ha; why no, my noble Undertaker, here is no great Difficulty in
thy going into Flanders, and back again, etc. But the Difficulty remains Man
still of conquering France. And the Difficulty is, That the Parliament should
be such a Pack of Fools, and Asses, as to give thee such a Mass of Treasure as
thou have projected, to the impoverishing and sinking the Nation, to carry on a
Project that has neither Head nor Tail; to carry on a vigorous War with France,
and here is no War commenced, nor like to be, according to thy Project.


J. U. Shaw, shaw, you talk like an Apothecary. Why is it not the same Thing
for the Parliament to give me the Millions for looking on, and seeing our Towns
taken, as to give it to a Dutch Man, who takes with him a mighty Army, and does
no more with it than I do alone? Nay, don't I deserve it infinitely better? For
do I hazard any one but my self, and that not much you see? Do I harrass a
Hundred thousand Men off their Legs, one Year after another, to as little
purpose as to set our Dogs to bark against the Moon? Do I let Men die like Dogs
in Ditches, and starve them for want of Bread? Do I lead on an Army to Face the
Enemy, cry holoo, set them on, and then run away, and leave them to be
sacrificed? Where Is the Wonderment then in giving me these mighty Sums, who am
an honest English Man, for doing alone better Service than the Dutch Man, and
all his Army? Why don't I maintain the Honor and Reputation of our Country,
and Coun^ry-men, infinitely better than he? For I Am resolved never to put it to
the hazard of a Battle, or being shamefully beaten, when I know we must be
beaten so often as we fight. What think you, Mr. State Rogue, I think the Case
is plain and clear: And yet if the Parliament gives me these formidable Sums
presently, they are a Pack of Fools, and Asses. But to give it to this Dutch
Man, who has no more Right or Title to it than I have, they are a wise Senate.
Prithee show me the Wisdom for the one, and the Folly for the other, and now
you had best laugh again.


S. R. By my Life I begin to think you are in earnest indeed.


J. U. Why have I not Reason to be so? I don't see but the Project may take. I
have as much Money as he it is true, but still I save the Men. And if the
Parliament is so prodigal of their Countries Money, as to throw it away to no
purpose, may it not as well, nay better, be given to an honest English Man, as
well as to a Dutch Man? Besides, I could find ways to spend the Money at home,
and so let it ci^culate, and not impoverish the Nation. And is not this better
than the Dutch Man's sending it abroad to be circumcised, and so sent home to
us again to set us all together by the Ears?


S. R. Come Jack, prithee leave off this Boffoonery, and be serious. What, in
the Name of Pharaoh, should make thee imagine that the Parliament should give
thee such vast Sums of Money for no Service; only for looking on, and seeing
the French conquer, and take our Towns?


J. U. And what, in the Name of Jupiter, should make thee approve of their
actually giving it to a Dutch Man, for the very same Non-service?


S. R. Prithee has not this Dutch Man (as thou call him) a formidable Army
at his Command, to oppose the Growth and Greatness of the Power of France, to
hinder them from making any further Progress in their Conquests, and to carry
on the War with vigor against them?


J. U. Very good; and after Six years Experience, and trial of Skill, what has
this Dutch Man, and his mighty Army, done more than I alone would have done?
Have not the French, for all him and his formidable Army, been always
successful? Have they not taken what Towns they pleased? Have they not
shamefully beaten us, time after time, so often as they had a mind to fight us?
And have not the English Army as shamefully run away, to the Dishonor of their
Country? Who were always wont to conquer, and never to be beaten, when led on
by an English King; but when headed and led on by a Dutch Hogan Mogan
Stadtholder, what wonder if they are degenerated, and become the Scorn and
Contempt of Christendom? And yet for this worthy Service, Mr. State Rogue, and
his Crew, cry every Sessions, Come let us give him more Money; let us pick the
Pockets of our Fellow Country men; and drain and sink the English Nation to
make Holland great, and let us erect their Trophies on our Ruins; let every
Nobleman and Commoner be unplumed, that a Hogan Mogan Stadtholder may flutter
and fly with our Wings. This is the down right plain English of all your
Proceedings; put on what Vizard or Mask you please to gull the People. This
Dutch Man no sooner returns from his shameful Beatings, but he is Huzza'd into
Town with Bonefires and Illuminations, as if he returned a mighty Conqueror:
And what is all this but perfect Madness? And who could possibly commit such
notorious Follies, but a Rebellious Nation, who with their Loyalty had lost
their Brains. He, notwithstanding all his shameful and disgraceful Campaigns,
impudently cries out more Money; and ye, the Caterpillars and Frogs of Egypt,
croak and echo presently more Money, come let us give it him. And this has been
the cry so long, that the Nation not only squeeks, but groans under the Burden
that ye their worthy Representatives have laid upon it, and know not how to
unburthem tnemselves.


S. R. Ay, ay, Jack; and let the Nation Squeek and Groan on; so long as we
Laugh, the Care is taken. Prithee who may they thank for their Squeeking and
Groaning but themselves? Was not almost the whole Nation mad for a Dutch King,
and a War with France? And now they have them, they are sick of them; out so
long as we the R^p^esentatives are Gainers by it; so long as the Dutch
Stadtholder is kind to us, and feeds us plentifully with Money, let them be
sick, and dye, and be damned; we matter it not, for we are resolved to give him
Money still. Look you, Jack, you know one good Turn deserves another: And so
long as our K. William is kind to us, why should not we be kind to him?
Especially when we can do it at so cheap a R^te, as the picking one Pocket to
fill another. It Is but robbing Peter to pay Paul: And so long as the Dutch King
seeds us English Men with good English Gold, he shall never want it old Boy.


J. U. O most incomparable Patriots! English Men, English Devils rather, Pick
pockets, Betrayers of your Country, Hang-men of your Fellow Subjects and
Countrymen, the Peoples Scourge and Plague; have we entrusted you with our All
to do us Justice, and to redress our Grievances, and ye make it your Business
to undo us, to rob us, to enslave us? Ye have already beggared the Nation; and
what is the Consequence of Beggary out Slavery? And thus ye go on in your
Villainy, and laugh at us. It Is but robbing Peter, ye cry, to pay Paul: But when
Peter has no more Money, how, in the Devil's Name, will ye pay Paul? And it is
almost come to that already. But I suppose when Peter has no more Money, he is
to be stripped, sold, and sent a Slave to Amboyna, or some of the Dutch
Plantations, to make room for them to Lord it here. Ye Crocadiles! Ye brood of
Vipers! O if it was but Lawful, with what pleasure I could curse ye! O England!
unhappy England! betrayed by thy own Children! What is there never an English
Massianello that has the Courage to run through the Streets of London, and cry
out to the People, We are betrayed? No true English Man that dare stand up for
Liberty and Property?


S. R. Why how now, Jack, you are Angry.


J. U. Angry; by H -- vens I think it would make any Man Angry, I Am sure any
true English Man. What honest English Man can see his Country sinking ruined
and undone, without concern, and no Man lend a hand to bu^y it up? To so those
Men who are at the Helm, and whose Business it is to bring the Ship safe on
Shore, using all Arts and Tricks to run her on Ground, and split her all in
Pieces? Prithee dear State Rogue, if we must be ruined, let it not be in such
bloody haste. Six Millions per Ann. a formidable Sum, and for what? Every
Spring to go over into Flanders to see the French Campaign; and if we approach
too near, we are sure to get a kick of the Breech for our Sauciness; and are
soundly beaten. Why all that we can possibly aim at, is to wait on the French
Army, to dig our selves into Trenches, and like Foxes secure our selves in
Holes, for fear the French should devour us. And since this is all the
Business, since my first Project will not take, I have another in my Head, and
that is this. Let us capitulate with France, and give the French King Three.
Millions per An. to sit still where they are, and go no farther; so here will
be Three Millions per Ann (...) besides the, Lives of many Thousands of our
best Men; And thus we shall be able to hold out the War with vigor, many Years
longer. What thing you of this Project, wont this do neither?


S. R. I think thou art a rare Fellow at Projects: But this wont do by any
means. This will never take in the House; for what shall we get by it?


J. U. Get by it, what do you mean? If we don't get, at least we shall save.


S. R. As what prithee?


J. U. Why we shall save many a sound Drubbing, we shall save our Bones whole
in our Skins, we shall save spilling our Blood, we shall save Three Millions of
Money yearly; and I think this saving is a kind of getting.


S. R. Poh; all this is nothing, thoa mistakest me. I say, what shall we the
Representatives in Parliament get? What is it to us who Loses, so long as we
are Gainers? For it is not the Nations Business that we are concerned for now,
but our own proper Interest. Will the French King bribe us, as does K. William?
Will he make us his Pentioners, and will he be more generous to us than K.
William?


J. U. He will upon my Life; provided ye prove as great Rogues to King William,
as ye did to his Father. Betray him as ye did his Father, kick him out of the
Kingdom, and then swear he has abdicated, and then vote your selves all Kings:
And I Am sure all honest thinking Men will believe ye as good Kings as the Dutch
Stadtholder. Do this, I say, and the King of France will give ye any Thing:
Nay, I dare engage ye Three Millions per Ann. shall all be at your Service.


S. R. Why 'faith, Jack, set this Project on foot, and I fancy it may take.
Make us but sure of larger Bribes from the French King, and I Will engage for my
Brother Rogues he shall have the Money. Why prithee Self interest is our God,
and Religion: And as we have for this betrayed our King and County; where is
the Difficulty, for a greater Interest, of playing the same Trick over again,
and leaving the Prince of Orange in the Lurch, and becoming Friends to France?
Look you, Jack, that you may not doubt of Success in this Affair; be assured
it is our Principle, to sacrifice Father, Brother, King, any Thing for Interest.


J. U. Dear State Rogue, I Am satisfied it is so. Well, I Will to the House, and
propose the Project there; you assure me it will take? And then for France, and
the Business is done. But hark you, State Rogue, you will make your Interest in
the House, and I will secure you out of the Three Millions: Let me see, -- Let
me see, -- Five hundred Guineas for a Bribe. Be sure you lay before your
Brother Rogues a Mass of Money, a Million at least of the Three shall be
distributed amongst them, as a yearly Pention, to encourage them in their
Roguery, and make them a Pack of thorough paced Villians; for those you know
are the Men of Honor, the Men of Worship, in little England.


S. R. Fear not, Jack; if thou can manage the Project right with Grand Lewis,
and secure us the Money, the Business will most assuredly be done: For we have
a prevailing Party in the House, that Money will tempt them to any Thing. There
is not such a Devil in Hell as this Money, to work a Parliament Man into what
Form or Figure you please; enough of this will make him what Devil you have a
mind to, and when he has got the Money, call him as many Rogues, Villains, and
Devils as you please, he laughs at ye; and cries, it is better to be a rich Rogue
than a poor Devil, as ye Jacobnes are, starving about Town under that foolish
Notion of Loyalty. Five thousand Guineas did thou say, for a Bribe? Ay, that
may do, I Will take it: And if I give it back again, as my Lord what do you call
him did, mark me down for a Fool, as well as a Knave. Prithee tell me, Jack, is
not every Man desirous to put himself into the Mode, and Fashion of the Times?
Why now is the Time, and Fashion, for every Man to be a Knave, a Villain, a
Rogue, a Rebel, a Traitor; and he who is the greatest, is the most admired; and
in this we glory and pride our selves, and laugh and despise such poor honest
Loyalists as thou, and thy Suffering Brethren term your selves; who have little
else to do, but to sigh, and groan, for a turn of Fate, which ye call by the
Name of better Times. Alas poor Animals! We often meet you in the Streets with
dejected Countenances, like so many Ghosts that live in Monuments, and have no
other Conversation than amongst the Dead: And your only Diversion is, to curse
the Times, rail strenuously against the Government, to get into little Jacobite
Coffee-houses, and Ale house Clubs, (for the poor Devils have no Money to drink
Wine with) there to build Castles in the Air, how King James is to be restored,
and then what brave swaggering Boys you will be. Ha, ha, ha, farewell, my honest
Undertaker. Live on with that pernicious Principle of Honesty, and be still as
little as it will make thee, whist we the Knaves prosper, and grow great: But
however forget not to stem the Tide of English blood, and save the Nation Three
Millions per. Ann. by virtue of giving us one. Farewell.


J. U. Fear not, it shall be done.


S. R. But stay, now I think on it, what art thou, Jack, to get by this Project,
in case it succeed? We you know are to give out of the Peoples Money Three
Millions per Ann. that the French King will be quiet, and keep within his
Lines; and for this doing, the great Monarch is to give us the Reprosentatives
in Parliament, One Million back again. Good: This is just as we do with the
Prince of O. He puts the Question, Will we pick the Pockets of our Fellow
Subjects every Year and give him out of them Six Millions per An. to carry on a
vigorous War with France? And our Answer was, Give us ^00000. l for every such
Sum, and the Business shall be done, as you see effectually it is. Now if
France will be contented with half the Sum, and redouble upon us what Will. O
gave us, I see no difficulty in the Business: For this way we shall get more,
and oppress the Poople less. But then what will my honest Undertaker get by the
Projects?


J. U. The Honor to do my Country Service, the Reputation of a true honest
English Man, and Lover of his Country, nothing else. And this I value more than
all your sordid Gold, that ye have unjustly and barbarously squeezed from the
Sweat and Blood of your Country.


S. R. Why then, my true honest English Man, farewell: And may thou grow fat
with Honor and Honesty, whilst we Knaves wallow in Gold, and roll in Plenty.
And so I leave thee to think and wish for better Times: Ha, ha, ha.


Mr. John Undertaker, solus. Good God! what is this World come to? What an Age
it this we live in? When perjured Villains, Knaves, Rebels and Traitors, shall
brave it thus, and gl^ry to be so? When Sin and Wickedness shall be exalted to
the Throne, and Virtue and Honesty trampled under Foot? When honest Men shall
not be permitted to live, and for no other Reason but because they are honest?
When all Places of Honor and Trust shall be reserved for the bare faced
Villains? Thou great God! how long will thou suffer the Rod to be in the Hands
of these Monste^s of Men to chastise us? When will thy Justice awake, to disarm
this Herd of Monsters, and de^iver the distressed Israelites from the Plagues
of this Egypt, and the great Monster Pharaoh, and his hellish Ministers? When
is it that we shall see Virtue once more take her place, and be seated on the
Throne, and this black Devir Rebellion b^nished hence to Hell?

Well, I have aimed at a double Project here. The first would not take, because
Money enough was not offered the House of Commons: But if the last succeed, I
have my Ends. If we can but alter the Channel, and make our Gold and Silver run
another way than what it does, the Business is done; the Confederacy breaks of
it self: For it is nothing but our Money that cements them, and when that is
broken, our Royal injured Master must return in spite of Malice, and all the
Rebellious Devils in Hell. But if this be smoked, my Project is at an end.
However, I have made a perfect Discovery how we are betrayed, and how the
Nation is bought and sold; and by those very Men who were entrusted to defend
and protect it.


FINIS.

