A DIALOGUE Concerning the TIMES.
Between Philobelgus and Sophronius.
Phil. HOw is it Sophronius, how goes the World now?


Sophr. Go? I believe not so well as was generally expected.


Phil. Come, you are so full of your Hypocondriacal Fancies? Prithee why don't
you take a little Physic this Spring?


Sophr. Look you! I am probably as Sanguinly inclined as your self, but my
present Circumstances are a great check upon my Complexion; and I think it an
unnatural imposition to require a Man to make himself merry with his own
Misfortunes.


Phil. Your Grievances.


Sophr. To speak comprehensively they are the Dutch, and their Attendants, viz.
Taxes, Losses, and stop in Trade: I Am sure my Estate suffered considerably by
all Three of them the last Year, and you know my case was not singular: And
truly at the rate that Honor and Conscience go now a days, for ought I see, a
little Money is the only Thing one can trust to: Now when a Man looses his best
Friend thus unhappily, I hope you will give him leave to pay a decent respect
to his Memory, and put his Humor a little into Mourning.


Phil. Pray give over your Philosophical Cant; don't you know we have a new
Parliament ready to fit; there you will have a Cure for all your Maladies.


Sophr. I know there will be a public Meeting at Westminster; but I Am afraid
the Effects of it will not be so powerfully kind as yo^ seem to expect.


Phil. Never question it! The greatest part of these Members are known to be
Church of England Men, and well affected to Kingly Government; so that the
Monarchy and the Protestant Religion will be effectually secured by them: For
the Church of England Side being so considerable a Majority both for Numbers,
Quality, and Interest, whatever is Legislatively done by that Party, must by
consequence be received with the most general Satisfaction: This Expedient will
silence our Political Disputes, and lay our Animosittes asleep. And when we are
once thus happily united, you may without flattery promise your self, that
Ireland will be reduced in a short time.


Sophr. No doubt of it and France too: But pray what Measures do you think will
be taken by these Westminster Lords and Gentlemen, in order to the performing
these extraordinary Things?


Phil. Though I don't love to pronounce upon the Actions of so considerable a
Body, yet since you ask me that Question, I Will venture to tell you it is my
Opinion, They will confirm the Proceedings of the late Convention and
Parliament.


Sophr. That may be; but methinks you give an untoward reason for your Opinion:
For why should Men of the Church of England Persuasion confirm the Proceedings
of Republicans and Presbyterians, for such you grant had the Ascendant over the
Houses the last Year?


Phil. Upon Emergency of State we must bend our Principle a little; when the
Necessity is once over we can return Straight at leisure.


Sophr. Well! I find it is a great happiness to have a Conscience with a
Muscular Motion, that can stretch and contract as occasion serves. But what
makes you talk about mending the Acts of the late Assembly at Westminster, Are
the new Laws out of Repair already?


Phil. To deal franckly, I Am afraid they were never well put together; for the
Writs by virtue of which the Convention met, were neither sent by the King, nor
directed to the Sheriffs, both which ought to have been done according to the
stated Forms of our Constitution.

Now though I am not willing to be of the Opinion of a late Author, that these
Omissions are such Essential Nullities as no subsequent Ratification can
remedy, (Reflect upon Parl. Pacif. p. 1.) yet I think they ought to be supplied
by a regularly convened Authority.


Sophr. Now you are upon Omissions, give me leave to mention another: You may
remember the Convention neglected to take the Oaths of Allegiance and
Supremacy. Now this some People will interpret in an unfortunate Sense. Because
there are Two Statutes which say expressly, That every Thing which the Lords
and Commons, do before they have taken the said Oaths is Null and Void. 7 Jac.
1.30 Car. 2.


Phil. Don't trouble your self, here will be swearing enough this bout.


Sophr. In good time! But still I am sorry to hear the late Acts at Westminster
wants confirming.


Phil. Why so?


Sophr. Because if they want confirming, (especially upon such material
Accounts;) they are imperfect, and consequently properly speaking no Laws at
all. For Law, like moral Good, depends Exintegra Causa; if any due Circumstance
be wanting it looses its Nature, and never rises into any Authorty.


Phil. If they are not entirely perfect, they come very little short, and ought
to be regarded accordingly.


Sophr. Under favor you are out, they are certainly either complete, or null:
For we must observe that an Act of Parliament is not like Cloth and Ribbans,
valuable in Nails and Remnants; there is no such Thing as half, or three
quarters Law; either it must hold out to the end of the Measure, or it is good
for nothing. Now do you think your Arguments, which prove the Defects, and
consequently the Nullity of the late Westminster Proceedings, has not brought
us into a fine Condition? What has the Habeas Corpus Act been shackled, New
Oaths framed, the Clergy Suspended and Deprived, the Peoples Pockets drained, a
Court Martial set up, etc. and all without Law? For it seems the late
Ordinances have no sufficient Authority till they receive it from the next
Meeting. Has not Liberty and Property been admirably secured all this while?
Why were not those Members as you call them Dissolved, as soon as their Head
was Chosen, to make room for a legal Assembly if it could be had; for to what
purpose should they sit, when they were under an incapacity of doing any
Parliamentary Act? This I mention to let you understand what an odd Opinion the
People will be apt to have of the Westminster-Transactions, and by consequence
of the whole Revolution, if you pretend to mend, and strengthen the Authority
upon which they stand.


Phil. I conceive you; but after all I must add that how singular soever a
Confirmation may look, its an Expedient absolutely necessary: For besides some
other Defects in point of Form, the King's Writs and their omitting to take the
Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy above mentioned, are such invincible
Objections that there is no getting over them.


Sophr. As you say the Objections press very hard; but are you sure they will
be removed by the Confirmation you expect from the ensuing Meeting


Phil. Yes, what should hinder their removal? Are not the Royal Writs Issued
out according to the Formalities of the Law? And as for the Oaths you need not
fear the Members will forget to take them.


Sophr. Right! but Oaths are sometimes so unfortunate as to prove their point
no more than Wagers. For the purpose, suppose for Arguments sake a Man is about
to swear himself into some post of power or advantage, and Confined to a
particular Object well enough known, if he would but take day light along with
him; but the Man for Reasons best understood by himself, chooses to swear in the
dark, and and so stumbles upon a wrong person. I desire to know what his Oath
signifies in such a Case?


Phil. Not much to his Business: but I Am afraid your Instance has no kind
Application in it. To come out of the Clouds therefore, I would gladly
understand what Objection can be fairly made against the Authority of the
ensuing Parliament.


Sophr. Excuse me there, I am not willing to meddle with that point! But if you
have a mind to put a feigned Case, and lay the Scene in Utopia, I don't care if
I discourse with you upon a resembling Argument only to support Conversation a
little.


Phil. Pray let us hear what a Talent you have at Romancing.


Sophr. Well then to take Sir Tho. Moore's Liberty, let us suppose the Utopians
under an Hereditary Monarchy, and that as long as the Royal Line continues, the
People have no more right to choose their King than their God; suppose that the
Laws of that Kingdom expressly declare it Unlawful to take up Arms against the
King upon any pretense whatever; and that bare Possession against Right, has no
countenance from the Utopian Constitution. Suppose a Monarch thus invincibly
fortified by Law, Opposed by one part of his Subjects, and Deserted by most
part of the rest, so that he is obliged to retire out of his Kingdom for the
security of his Person and Honor. Upon this some part of the People, who were
either instrumental in the Change, or wanted leisure to recollect themselves,
or courage to stand by the Laws; put themselves under the Protection of a
Foreign Prince, who had lately made a Descent upon the Kingdom without
premising any Complaint by his Ambassador, or demanding Satisfaction in a
public way. This Prince at the instance of some obnoctious and engaged
Persons, assembles a Select, and in some places a preconcerted number of the
People, which the Utopians call a Convention. This meeting having neither the
Essence, nor so much as the form of Law, tells the Nation (though by a very
slender Majority) that the King had Resigned the Government; though besides
other demonstrative proofs, they had his Letters on the Table to convince them
on the contray. These Men as the Utopian History informs us, notwithstanding
they had no Right to dispose of sixpenny worth of Property, made no difficulty
to deseise their King of his Crown and Dignity; to the maintenance and support
of which they are obliged to swear before they can enter upon any part of the
Legeslative Authority. After this remarkable beginning they proceed to choose
the aforesaid Foreign Prince their King, though every body knows Utopia is no
Elective Monarchy. This Prince of their own making, and who by Consequence
could have no Authority but what they gave him; yet to make them some return
for their kindness, gives them a Power vastly greater than they pretended to
before, and sublimates them into a Parliament (which signifies the same Thing
in Utopia, it does with us.) This Meeting after some Trial, he dissolved
probably among other Reasons, because he saw the People were not generally
satisfied about the Legality of its Constitution. Since, they say, he has
summoned a New one, in which the usual Preliminaries will be punctually
observed; and yet some People fancy all this will not do neither.


Phil. Why so?


Sophr. Because the Convention, which is the Foundation upon which the late
Utopian Revolution stands, had no Authority to transact public business, and
therefore their Proceedings though much more moderate might justly have been
excepted against.


Phil. Your Reason.


Sophr. Because they Convened themselves by virtue of a Foreign Authority
without the Kings Summons; neglected to make those solemn Tenders of Duty and
Allegieuce to their Sovereign which the Law requires, and wanted the Royal
Assent to give life to their Votes. Now if the Convention was an Unlawful
Assembly, the whole Foundation is Sapped, and then all the Superstructure must
tumble into Rubbish.


Phil. Though I cannot say I am pleased with your Entertainment, yet pray go on,
and be as clear as you can; for since we are discoursing about a Subject which
is Visionary and Romantic, we may speak as intelligibly as we please.


Sophr. I say then if the Convention was a private unauthorized Meeting, if
they had no Power to set aside their Old, and make another King; then their New
Governor can have no Right to to the Regal Style and Authority. Nihil dat quod
non habet: A man cannot receive that from another, which he has no power to
give. Nothing but a Nullity can proceed from a Nullity, for no effect can rise
above the Virtue and Efficacy of its Cause. Such essential Defects in the
Principles of Government are like Errors in the first Concoction, never to be
rectified: And therefore the assuming the usual Forms, and appearing in the
shape of the Old Constitution, is to speak softly, but Pageantry and Varnish,
at the best.


Phil. I am told that about the year 1660, in the Reign of Don Carlo's, there
was a Parliament made out of a Convention, which was soon after dissolved, and
another convened according to Law: In which the Acts of the former were
confirmed. Which confirmation passing upon them they were always looked upon as
unquestionable Law; though I grant you they would have been null and
unauthoritative without it. And pray has not a Parliament as much Authority
now, as it had Thirty years since.


Sophr. No doubt on it. But you mistake the point horribly; the case is by no
means the same.


Phil. Where lies the difference?


Sophr. I wonder you don't perceive it! Pray was Don Carlo's a Conventionary
King. Did he derive his Power from the Election of the People? on the contrary
was not his Title and Authority wholly founded upon Hereditary Right according
to the known Laws of the Monarchy? I confess if his Father had been then
living, or he had broke in upon the Succession your precedent would have held,
but now it is nothing to the purpose.


Phil. Make it clearer if you can.


Sophr. Clearer still! Why don't you know there can be no Parliament in Utopia
without a King; for there, Rexest caput, principium, and finis Parliamenti; as
a great Lawyer has it.


Phil. And have not the Utopians made themselves a new King, what would you
have more?


Sophr. I perceive you have forgotten what we have discoursed already
concerning the incompetent Authority upon which their present Establishment is
founded, and that they have nothing but Air for their Basis; however I shall
only refresh your memory with Two Questions, your Answer to which will I
suppose give you full satisfaction. Pray can a Prince forfeit when the Laws
expressly declare him irresistible, and that his People have no Authority to
call him to an account.


Phil. No.


Sophr. Then if he was once King, he must continue so as long as he lives,
except he is pleased to Resign.


Phil. I don't see Princes are very willing to do that; but your other Question.


Sophr. The next thing I ask you is whether it be not a contradiction in Terms
to choose a King in an Hereditary Monarchy?


Phil. I am sorry I am obliged to Answer yes; but the reason is so plain that
there is no help for it.


Sophr. Very well! I suppose by this time you are sufficiently convinced that
this next Utopian Parliament as you call it is no more then a second Edition of
the Convention; and appears with all the great Errata of the first Impression.


Phil. You have an unlucky hand at telling a Story; for though we have made a
long Voyage, and cut the Line for Conversation; yet methinks the case of the
Utopians is so like our own that I cannot help being uneasy at the Resemblance.


Sophr. You seem to have a tender Sense of things; which I hope is no ill
prognostic.


Phil. Since you say so much, I must freely own to you, that in my Opinion the
late turn of Affairs was very indefensible, and I would not for the World have
been engaged: But since it is brought about without my assistance, I think my
self obliged to stand by it, and not go murmuring about, and unhinge the
public Settlement.


Sophr. How well we are, or are like to be Settled, upon our new Bottom, is
pretty apparent: but granting the present Establishment was never so firm and
agreeable, yet let me tell you that the abetting an obnoxious Interest, and
uniting in un-maintainable Designs, is no better than a Confederacy of --, it is
an open Defiance of Justice and Honor; and the Settlement of those Quos dicere
nolo. I perceive you are so good natured as not to throw a man out of his
House; but if he is once dispossessed, though by never so remarkable a
violence, none more forward then your self to Garrison it against him; and if
he offers to return at his peril be it. You are a little squeamish about
beginning an ill thing, but an admirable second: for rather then right should
take place, and oppression be obliged to refund, you are bravely resolved to
venture your all. I desire to know whether success can change the nature of
good and evil; or right is founded upon wrong? if not, what a monstrous
inconsistency is to practice that which we condemn, and maintain that which we
abhor? will you engage your Advice, your Person, and your Interest, for the
support of violence? and imbark Body and Soul in a Cause which you own to be
unaccountable? This is to be a partaker of other Men's Sins with a witness.


Phil. I grant the Cause was unaccountable at first but --


Sophr. At first! Then it is so still: For undoubtedly that which it is unjust
to get, it is unjust to keep; unless Impenitency be a Virtue, and fresh Injuries
a sufficient Satisfaction for old ones.

In the Name of Reason consider the weight of the Case, the singularity of the
Guilt, and the extent of the Mischief, and then keep your old Opinion if you
can.


Phil. I confess if I thought the former Government could recover without
bringing Popery along with it, I could hearken to what you say.


Sophr. Pray can you be made a Papist against your Will?


Phil. No. Religion of what denomination soever supposes choice and conviction
of Judgment.


Sophr. Good! Then you may secure one, and every Body else by God's Grace may
do as much: So that in fine there is no fear of loosing our Church, unless we
betray it.


Phil. But though our Protestant Faith cannot be wrested from us, yet are we
not like to suffer for adhering to it?


Sophr. I Am afraid rather for not adhering to it. God grant our Practice may be
as regular, as our Profession will be undisturbed: Of all Nations we are most
unlikely to have Experiments made upon us; you remember how Passive Obedience
went in Eighty eight. But I am not at leisure to argue this point any further
with you; if you are unsatisfied you may consult a late Book, called Vindiciae
Juris Regii, which I am told will cure you of your Fears, if you are not
overgrown with Spleen, and Prejudice. However at present granting (which I
don't believe) that your Apprehensions were reasonably founded, What are we the
better? Would you have us keep out Popery right or wrong, or is nothing wrong
which tends to so Sanctified an End?


Phil. Truly, I think, Religion ought to be our principal Care, and secured by
all Means.


Sophr. That is by all good Means and ill Means: Does St. Paul tell us that we
may do Evil that Good come on it. Pray, what Church is that which we used to
charge with such Doctrine as this, with Deposing Kings, and making Holy Wars to
suppress Misbelievers? Which is so rank a Principle, that not many of the
Jesuits themselves will own it.


Phil. When you have said all, I Am afraid the Beast in the Revelations should
prevail, except we make a vigorous Opposition.


Sophr. How can that be, when we have so much modern Prophecy against him? But
setting aside this mistical Divinity, give me leave to ask you a Question.
Suppose you owed a Roman Catholic a Sum of Money, could you find in your
Conscience to pay him, or would you cheat him for the Protestant Religion?


Phil. Cheat him no, God forbid!


Sohpr. Very well! And for the same reason if you own him Allegiance ought you
not to pay it? you know the Title of the Kings of England depends only upon
Birth right, and Lineal Descent: so that let their Creed be what it will, their
Authority is the same: And therefore the obedience of the Subject ought to be
proportionable. Nay when we have a Prince of a different Persuasion, we should
rather oblige our selves to a greater exactness of our Behavior upon this
account, to prevent all suspicion of Disaffection, and to preserve the Honor
of our Religion.

For the Love of God, therefore Philobelgus, let us hear no more of this
horrible Cant. Let us not give the World an occasion to belive that Protestancy
teaches us to break our Faith; and to be guilty of those Crimes, which modest
Heathens would blush at. Let us not defend the best of Churches, with the worst
of Practices. Nor damn one Age to secure the next. To use such Expedients as
these, is the way to ruin that which we would Support; and to make our
Communion Nauscious and Contemptible; for there is no Man of Natural Probity,
none that is Generously Inclined, but will scorn a Religion which obliges him
to be a Knave.


Phil. You know our Religion does not give this scandalous Liberty.


Sophr. True: but if it be taken, how then?


Phil. You grow warm: But for my part I hope all will be well, because as I
observed to you, the Parliament consists mostly of Church of England-men.


Sophr. I wish they may show themselves truly such. I Am sure their Quality, the
Principles they avow, and the State and posture of Affairs, may justly raise
the expectation of the Nation: so that a disappointment now, would be much more
unaccountable then formerly. For a Man to mistake his way in a Tempest, and to
be over born with Tumult, and general Distraction; though it is very unfortunate
has something of excuse in it. But to pursue the same steps upon thought and
deliberation; when we have Light and Demonstration to guide us. To choose
confusion for our Model; to persist in so remarkable an error, when the mortal
consequence stares us in the Face, must mightily inflame the guilt, and make
the blemish indelible. It Is in the Power of these Lords and Gentlemen you speak
of to make a noble Stand: to revive the Interest, and retreive the Honor of
their Country and Religion: God grant them Resolution to act up to the
Opportunity.


Phil. Hold! I have enough; and that you may not suspect your Discourse i^
thrown away; I give you my word, I will consider what you have said.


Sophr. Very well! if all People would do so impartially, it is easy to guess
the effect: but I Am afraid it is the way of too many to hearken only to one
side; or to think upon neither. Adieu.


FINIS.

