A DIALOGUE BETWEEN TWO Young Ladies LATELY MARRIED, Concerning MANAGEMENT OF
Husbands.

LONDON: Printed in the Year 1696.

A DIALOGUE BETWEEN Two Young LADIES lately Married, etc.
Amy. WEclcome, my dear Lucy! I have longed to see you.


Lucy. Sweet Amy! I have had no less impatience for your dear Company. Lord!
how you're altered, methinks you seem more beautiful than ever: A very Angel!


Am. Fie, Lucy, do you begin to abuse me thus already?


Luc. No, I vow; you appear such in my eye, really.


Am. Perhaps my new Mantua adds to my little Beauty: You like the Fashion then?
It Is the newest Stuff.


Luc. As I live, I never saw any thing more pretty; sure it is all Spanish Wool.


Am. Yes, yes, the Wool is Spanish, but it was Dyed at Venice.


Luc. There is no Silk can wear neater -- And what a delicate Color! -- For
Heaven's sake, from whence had you this Noble Present?


Am. From whence, Lucy? From whom should a Virtuous Wife receive it but from
her Husband?


Luc. Oh happy you, who have such a Husband! would I had Married a Cobbler when
I met with my Bargain.


Am. How now, Friend! do you repent already?


Luc. How is it possible I should do otherwise? do you see these Rags, and how
I am dizen'd? Thus it goes with my Husband's Wife. Let me dye, if I am not
ashamed to appear in Public, when I perceive how genteel other Women go, whose
Husbands are much inferior to mine born for Quality and Estate.


Am. The true Ornament of Wives does not consist in Apparel, or Dress, as we
are taught by St. Peter, (for I heard this of Mr. Fleet -- d lately in a
Sermon) but in chaste and modest Behavior, and in the imbellishments of the
Mind. Let the tawdry Misses of the Times seek, by their gay Dress, to attract
the admiration of many Eyes; we, that are Married, ought to esteem our selves
fine enough if we please our Husbands only.


Luc. But, in the mean time, my good Man, though he be so very penurious to his
Wife, is other ways sufficiently profuse in wasting that fair Estate which I
brought him.


Am. In what?


Luc. In those Debauchees which are most pleasing to his wicked nature, Wine,
Dice, and Whores.


Am. Oh! good words.


Luc. It Is even so, Amy: And when, at length, after a tedious expectation on my
part, he comes home between One and Two in the Morning, Drunk as David's Sow,
he lies by me the rest of the Night snorting like a Bear. Sometimes he Vomits
in the Bed; not to say more.


Am. Hold, hold, you have said too much already; and I must tell you Lucy, you
disparage your self in disparaging your Husband.


Luc. As I hope to breath, I had as good have a Broom-staff to my Bedfellow as
such a Man.


Am. And do not you Scold when he comes home thus?


Luc. Ay, and reason good, I think; he finds I want no Tongue.


Am. And what does he?


Luc. Why, at first, he answered me again in the same manner, thinking, I
suppose, to Silence me with high Words and Rhodomontades.


Am. And did all this stir never end in blows?


Luc. Once we were both so well heated, that we were just ready to fall to it.


Am. What do I hear!


Luc. He flourished his Cane, and huff'd after a very tearing rate.


Am. Did not you fear?


Luc. Not at all: I snatched up a Buffet-Stool for my defense, and had he
touched me with one finger, he should have found I wanted not hands.


Am. A pretty kind of New-fashion Shield, had you had but your Distaff instead
of a Lance --


Luc. He should have found me a very Amazon.


Am. Alas, alas, my Lucy, this is not the way.


Luc. What way would you have me take with him? If he respects me not as a
Wife, neither will I respect him as a Husband.


Am. But St. Paul Teaches, That Wives ought to be subject to their Husbands
with all reverence: And St. Peter proposes to our imitation the Example of
Sarah, who called her Husband Lord.


Luc. I know all this; and besides that, the same Paul commands, That Husbands
love their Wives, as Christ loved his Church. Let him remember his Duty, and I
will not forget mine.


Am. But where Affairs are in that posture that both cannot Rule, it is fit that
the Wife yield to the Husband.


Luc. But how can he be called a Husband, who regards me only as a Servant?


Am. But tell me, Lucy, did he then forbear striking?


Luc. Yes, he forbore; and he did wisely, otherwise he had been soundly beaten.


Am. But you, I warrant, did not forbear Scolding.


Luc. You may swear it.


Am. What did he in the mean time?


Luc. Sometime he seemed to sleep Dogs-sleep, sometimes he would laugh and
neglect me; then he would take up an old rotten Lute, on which there was hardly
left three whole strings, yet he would Fum, sum, on that damned Instrument,
only to drown my noise.


Am. This enraged you.


Luc. So far Amy, that I can hardly express my Passion; much ado had I to hold
my hands.


Am. My dear Lucy, will you permit me to speak freely to you?


Luc. Most willingly.


Am. You shall have the same liberty with me. And thus much seems due to our
old friendship, which was first contracted, as I may say, in our very Cradle.


Luc. True, Amy; nor is there any of my Acquaintance more dear to me than your
self.


Am. You must know then, that whatsoever your Husband proves, there is no means
of changing. Of Old, indeed, there was a thing in use, for a Remedy in this
case, called a Divorce; but Authority has Abrogated that Custom. There is now
no Remedy, but that you must be his, and he yours, during Life.


Luc. Our Superiors did ill to remove that good Law of Separation.


Am. Oh, forbear such expressions, it was Christ's Will and Pleasure.


Luc. I cannot think it.


Am. It Is so; there remains therefore nothing now, but that both Parties
endeavor a mutual Peace and Concord, and that they strive which shall conform
most to each others Humor and Inclination.


Luc. But may not I endeavor to make and mold him as I see fitting?


Am. I know not what you call making and molding; but of this I am confident,
that most Husbands, how bad so ever they are, owe much of the occasion to their
Wives.


Luc. It seems all goes well between you and yours.


Am. The very height of Peace and Quiet.


Luc. But was it always in the same calm from the beginning?


Am. We never had what I may call a Storm! It Is true, some little Clouds (such
as are natural to all Mankind) might, perhaps, sometimes gather, and seem to
threaten foul Weather, unless prevented by discretion. Every Man has his
peculiar humor and fancy: And in truth, Lucy, every Woman has her peculiar
Deserts; which things ought always, especially in Matrimony, to be known and
observed, but not hated.


Luc. You are in the right.


Am. It happens frequently, that Affection decays between Husband and Wise
before they sufficiently know one another: Have a care therefore in the
beginning, for Conjugal Love being once shattered, is hardly ever well united
again, especially where there have been bitter Reproaches between them; where
things are but new glued together they are easily disjointed, but if you let
them fix till the Glue be well dried, they become as strong as if all of a
piece. Nothing therefore ought to be omitted between the new Married in the
beginning, that so their actual kindness may the better fix and settle; and
this ought chiefly to be sought by obsequious and complacent Endearments, for
that Affection which depends only on Beauty is seldom lasting.


Luc. But tell me, I beseech you, by what unknown Arts have you wrought over
your Husband to so much Complacency.


Am. I will tell you, that you may use the same method.


Luc. If I am able.


Am. There is no difficulty, if you are but willing, neither is it too late,
you are both young enough; and if I am rightly informed, it is less than a Year
since ye were Married.


Luc. It Is very true.


Am. I will tell you therefore, but you must mind me.


Luc. Most attentively.


Am. My principal Care was to appear to my Husband always in a good humor,
that so I might give him no occasion of disquiet; I observed his Affections and
Inclinations; I observed proper times, and methods, by which he was most apt to
be appeased, or offended; just as those do who reclaim your Elephants, and
Lions, and such like Creatures, which are not to be overcome with force.


Luc. Even such a Beast have I at home to deal with.


Am. Men appear not before Elephants in White, nor before Bulls in Red, in
regard these Colors have been observed to exasperate those Creatures, just as
the sound of a Timbrel or Drum is said to enrage the Tiger, so far as that he
will tear his own Flesh for madness. So those that manage Horses, they speak
them fair, they smack their Mouths, they stroke them, and clap their Necks; and
by such means, they become as gentle as a Lamb. How much rather ought we to
observe these Arts toward our Husbands, to whose constant Society, both at Bed
and Board, we are fatally obliged for our whole Life?


Luc. Go on.


Am. These things premised; I conformed my self to him, shunning all occasions
of offense.


Luc. As how?


Am. First, in the Affairs of the Family, (which is indeed the pecular Province
of a Wife) I not only took care that nothing should be wanting, but that all
things might be to his humor, even in the most criminal Matters.


Luc. Name some.


Am. For Example: Suppose he loves this or that Dish more than other, or his
Diet thus or thus ordered, or his Bed made or furnished after this or that
manner.


Luc. But how could you behave your self to such a Husband who is never at
home, unless Drunk?


Am. Permit me and I Will tell you. If my Husband appear out of humor, I observe
the time; I neither laugh nor jest, as is the indiscreet Custom of some Wives,
but put on a Countenance suitable to his, very serious and grave. A good Glass
represents her Face exactly who looks in it, so should a good Wife that of her
Husband, when affected either with Joy or Sorrow; when he is sad, she ought not
to appear pleased, or laugh when he laments. When he is angry, she ought either
to sweeten him with soft Language, or in Silence submit to his Passion, till
she find a more proper opportunity either to vindicate her self, or to admonish
him. Thus did I, if at any time my Husband came home in Drink; I used no
Language but what was pleasant, and forced him to Bed with all the little
Tricks of Love and Fondness.


Luc. Unhappy is the condition of us Wives, if we must thus submit to all the
Extravagancies of Choleric and Drunken Husbands.


Am. As if the Sufferance were not Mutual: Come, come, Lucy, Wives have many
faults which Husbands are compelled to bear with; yet there is a time, when, in
a serious manner, a Wife may Lawfully advise her Husband, if the occasion be of
weight, but if it be about a Trifle, she ought not to contest it.


Luc. Well, proceed.


Am. Thus, when she finds his Mind at liberty, neither Troubled, nor Pensive,
nor Drunk, then is the time, in private, and with obliging Language, to advise,
or rather entreat him, that in this or that particular he would more consider
his Estate, Health, or Reputation. Yet, as I said, this Admonition must be
delivered in a pleasant and obliging manner, or else it will do more harm than
silence. I have used sometimes to make a long Apology by way of Preface, that
he would not be offended, if I, Silly Woman as I am, think my self concerned
for his Honor, Health, or good Condition. At other times, when in few words I
had advised him of such things as I thought convenient, I have immediately, of
my own accord, broke off the Discourse, and found out a more pleasing Subject.
It is almost a general fault in our Sex, my Lucy, that when we have once begun
to speak of any thing, we can never tell when to give over.


Luc. Men say so.


Am. But, above all things, I give you this Caution, That you never contest
with your Husband before Company, and that you never complain abroad of what is
done at home; the Breach that happens between two without Witness, is not hard
to be composed, but in case any thing should happen of such nature, that the
Wife can neither endure with patience, nor prevent by all her entreaties,
Civility requires that she complains to the Parents or Relations of her
Husband, rather than to her own, and that in such a modest temper of Language,
that it may appear she is only displeased at her Husbands Vice, and not his
Person. Nor would I have her discover all, for by this means her very Husband
will heartily acknowledge, and love her Civility.


Luc. The Wife that can do this, Amy, must be a perfect Philosopher, a very
Stoic in her Passions.


Am. By such Behavior, we win our Husbands to the like Civility and
Complaisance for us.


Luc. But there are some Men whom no good Offices can oblige.


Am. I am not of your Opinion. But suppose there be, consider thus: Your
Husband, be he what he will, yet he is your Husband, and you are tied to him
for Life; it is therefore much more tolerable to endure his humor, such as it
is, or by fair means to render it something more easy, than by ill Language to
make him worse. What say you, if I produce Examples of some Husbands who have
used this method in reclaiming their Wives? How much more convenient is it
then, for us to observe toward our Husbands?


Luc. You will produce an Instance of a quite different Nature from my Husband.


Am. There is a Gentleman of my Acquaintance, one of singular Learning, and
very accomplished Parts, who not many years since married a handsome young Girl
of about Sixteen years of Age: She had been constantly Educated at home in the
Country, where you know the Gentry delight most to abide for the convenience of
Hunting and Hawking. He had always desired a Wife of that condition, Untaught
and Innocent, that so he might with less difficulty form her to his own humor.
They were no sooner Married, but he began to Instruct her in Grammar, Music,
and such like Arts, that might be of future advantage. These things were new to
her, who having been bred at Ease, and unacquainted with all Conversation or
Divertisements, but what she had been used to among her Fathers Servants, found
her self quickly tired with her Husband's Documents. She began to be stubborn,
and when he urged her to her Duty, she would weep bitterly, and take on in such
an extravagant manner, that sometimes she would cast her self on the ground, as
impatient of Life. When her Husband saw there was no end of this unreasonable
Behavior, dissembling however his disgust, he invites her to accompany him to
her Fathers in the Country, for the Divertisement of a Summers Journey. This
motion was very grateful to her; being arrived there, he Rides out one Morning
to Hunt with the Father, leaving his Wife at Home with her Mother and Sisters.
Being in the Field, he draws the Father from the other Company, and
complaining, tells him, That he hoped to have found in his Daughter no small
Comfort and Ease to the remaining part of his Life, but that he had found her,
much against his expectation, continually in Tears, always Discontented and
discontenting him, and Deaf to his Advice; he desires him therefore, to use his
Authority toward the Reformation of her untractable Humor. The Father replies,
That he had given up his Daughter wholly to his Government, and that if he
found his Words ineffectual, he should use what other means he pleased, and
reduce her by force. I know my Power, and what I may do, says the Son-in-Law,
but I am unwilling to use such extremity to one that I love so tenderly as I do
your Daughter; I desire rather that she should understand her Duty from your
Persuasions, and the Authority of a Parent. Within two or three days after
this, the Father finds his Daughter alone, and, with many frowns, begins with
reminding her how, that she having so little Beauty of either Mind or Body to
recommend her, that he often had dispair'd of ever getting her a Husband; that
having now procured her such an Invidious Match, and made her happy with much
Industry, yet she, not considering what he had done for her, nor the value of
such a Husband, who, had he not been of a wonderful good Nature, would hardly
have received her into the number of his Servants; and she to Rebel thus! In
short, he seemed so moved, that he hardly forbore striking: For you must know,
this Father was a Man of such a ready Wit, and such quick Parts, that he would
Personate any Character or Passion as he pleased. The Daughter hereupon, partly
overcome with Fear, and partly with a true sense of her own Guilt, casts her
self at her Fathers Knees, begs his Pardon for the past, and assures him of her
future Duty; on those Conditions he Pardons, and Promises his Affection.


Luc. Well, but how was this performed?


Am. The Girl being parted from her Father, returns to her Husbands Chamber,
where finding him alone, she falls at his feet, with these expressions: Sir, I
have not hitherto known either you or my self as I ought, but for the future
you shall see me nothing less than what I have been; I beg you would forget my
past Behavior. At these words the Husband raised her with a Kiss, and promised
mighty Matters on her amendment.


Luc. And did she alter her Behavior?


Am. Never was any Woman more humble all the following part of her Life; there
was nothing her Husband could desire, but she flew to obey him with the
greatest alacrity imaginable: So great, and so entire, was their Affection from
that time. Within a few years after this, she freely acknowledged her self
infinitely Happy in such a Husband; and that without him, she had been the most
wretched of Women.


Luc. Such Husbands as this, are as rare as Black Swans or White Crows.


Am. I Will tell you now another passage, which happened but lately in this City
-- But I fear you are tired with this Subject.


Luc. Oh, not at all: Your Discourse, my dear Amy, can never tire the Hearer.


Am. Away, away, you Railly -- There is a Person of no mean Quality, but he
shall be Nameless, who being much addicted to Hunting, as most are of his
condition, met accidentally, one day, with a Country Girl of Exquisite Beauty,
which, by the Poverty of her Mother, was not at all diminished. The Jolly
Hunter sell desperately in love at the first sight, he frequented those Parts
continually on the account of this Passion, though his pretense was Hunting. His
Wife, a Lady of singular Virtue and Discretion, suspecting something, without
much difficulty found out the Intrigue. She takes occasion to see the House,
she views their Beds, tastes their Drink, enquires into their Diet, and finds
nothing of Furniture, nothing of Convenience, but all signs of a miserable
Penury and Want. She returns home, and the next day brings with her an
excellent Silk Quilt, a Treat of Sweetmeats, Drinking-Plate, and Silver
Dishes; these she left at the Country Cottage, with some Money, requesting the
Old Woman, that whenever the Gentleman came, she should Treat him with more
Ceremony, dissembling her self, in the mean time, to be his Sister, and not his
Wife. Some few days after this, the Husband gives his Country Mistress a Stolen
Visit; he is amazed to see the Poor Hovel furnished after so unusual a manner,
and so many rich Movables in every Corner. He inquires the surprising Cause,
and is told, That a certain Lady of Quality, a Relation of his, but whose Name
they knew not, had sent them all in, with Orders to Treat him after a more
Honorable fashion than formerly. He begins to suspect his Wife had a hand in
this, and at his return questions her upon the Point; she confesses all. He
demands further, How she came to be so wondrous kind to Accommodate that House
with such Furniture? My Dear, says she, you having been always used to Splendid
and Noble Entertainments, and I finding how poorly you were received there, I
thought it my Duty to take Care, that when you are minded to make those Visits,
they might be able to give you a Reception more suitable to your Quality.


Luc. Oh! Miracle of a good Wife! Had I been concerned, instead of a Quilt I
would have brought him a Truss of Thorns and Briers to lie on.


Am. Hear the conclusion: The Husband discovering, by this Action, such a sweet
and obliging Nature in his Wife, did, of himself, forbear all his old
Debauchery, and became the most faithful Husband imaginable. -- I presume you
know Sir Bazill.


Luc. Very well.


Am. He, as you know, being in the prime flourish of his Youth, Married a Wife
of declining Years.


Luc. You mean he Married a good Estate, not a Wife.


Am. Let it be so then. Soon after the Marriage, he began to be weary of his
Wife, and fell desperately in love with a young Beauty of the Town, at whose
Lodgings he frequented continually, rarely either Eating or Sleeping at Home.
What would you have done in this case?


Luc. I would have dragged her by the Hair about the Streets. And for him, had I
seen him going on such a Visit, I would have Crowned his Head with a full
Chamber Pot; and in that Ornamental Pickle he should have sought a Mistress.


Am. But his Wife acted more discreetly. She invites her Rival to her own
House; she receives her in the most obliging manner imaginable. Thus she
procured her Husbands Company, without any other Charm than that of seeing his
Mistress at his own House; and in case he should sometimes Sup with her abroad,
his Wife would not fail to send them some good Treat, and bid them be Merry.


Luc. I would sooner dye than be my Husbands Bawd.


Am. You do not consider, Lucy, that this way is much more secure and easy,
than by injurious Language to exasperate him still more, and give occasion of a
lasting Quarrel for Life.


Luc. I confess it the less Evil, but I could never be able to act with so much
Patience.


Am. I will give you one Example more, and I have done with particulars. Our
Neighbor here at the next Door, an honest good Man as breaths, but a little
too subject to Passion, happened the other day, in a sudden heat, to strike his
Wife, a Woman of a sweet temper, who, without delay, retires to her Closet, and
there weeps most bitterly; the only way she used to vent her Sorrow. It was not
long after, that some occasion or other brought her Husband thither, who
finding her in that posture, What means (says he) these Baby tears? leave for
shame. Her answer was prudent and obliging; Your unkindness is of that nature,
that I am forced either to regret it thus, or (like other Women) in Clamor and
Reproaches: I choose this way, Sir, as most consistent with your Honor and my
own Love. With these Words she touched her Husbands very Soul, who, in a
thousand kind expressions, made a solemn Promise never to be guilty in that
nature again; nor was he.


Luc. I have often desired thus much of my Husband for many reasons.


Am. Yet you are still at variance with him.


Luc. What would you have me do?


Am. In the first place, consider calmly with your self the nature of those
things which you complain of, and you will find you ought not to resent them so
heinously, but rather pass them over in silence; and be assured, his Mind will,
of necessity, be reformed by obliging Behavior; you will certainly wholly
subdue his temper to your desires, or, at least, you will live much more
comfortably than at present.


Luc. He is so Salvage, that no good Offices can ever oblige him.


Am. Oh, say not so: The wildest Creatures that are may be reclaimed by
Endeavors; Despair not then of any Man. Try the Experiment but some Months,
and then blame me if you find my Counsel unfuecessful. There are some faults
which you ought to avoid with more particular Care: Above all, take especial
heed that you never quarrel in Bed, let all there be kind and obliging; for if
that place, which is in all Nations esteemed Sacred to Love and Pleasure,
become profaned with Hate and Discord, you lofe the best means of renewing lost
Affection. There are some Wives of such unquiet temper, that in the most
ravishing Enjoyment they cannot forbear to Scold and Wrangle, changing very
Pleasure it self into Wormwood, and by their implacable Behavior, corrupting
that good Medicine which is usually the best Cure for Discontent.


Luc. I must confess I have done thus often.


Am. A Wife ought, at all times, to avoid any action that may be unpleasant to
her Husband; but chiefly in Love's softest Minutes.


Luc. True, to a Husband: But Amy, I have to do with a very Brute.


Am. Fie, fie, forbear ill Language; most bad Husbands, as I said before, owe
much of the occasion to their Wives. But to proceed: Those who are Versed in
the old Poetic Fables, tells us of Venus Cestus, which was a Girdle, in which
was Quilted, with abundance of exquisite Art, all that was powerful in
procuring or restoring Love; and this Girdle she wore continually when she
enjoyed her Husband.


Luc. I know the Fable.


Am. But know the Moral too.


Luc. Speak it.


Am. We are Taught by this old Tale, Lucy, that a Wife ought to employ all her
Faculties most assiduously to oblige her Husband in Bed, by which means she
will infallibly heal all breaches, or decays of Conjugal Affection, and expel
all Clouds of Neglect or Displeasure that may be gathering in his thoughts.


Luc. But where can we poor Women procure this Divine Castus?


Am. You need not Conjure for it. There are no Charms requisite to obtain it,
but only those of Behavior, and a sweet obliging Temper.


Luc. It Is impossible for me to comply with such a Husband as I am Cursed with.


Am. It Is your own fault that he is such. Suppose it were in your power (as
they say of Circe) to transform your Husband to a Brawn or Bear, would you do
it?


Luc. It Is a hard Question: I know not what to answer.


Am. How! Not know? What, had you rather have a Brawn for your Bedfellow than a
Man?


Luc. No sure; I Would rather have a Man.


Am. But suppose further, that you were able, by some Circaean Art, or
otherwise, to reform your Husband from a Drunkard to a Man of Morals, from a
profuse Prodigal to a Purchaser, and from an idle Drone to an industrious Be,
would you not do it?


Luc. Undoubtedly I would: But who will teach me these Arts?


Am. You need no Teacher, the Art is yours already, you only want a Will to use
it. Never think whether you should respect your Husband as such, he is such
whether you will or not; but how to make him better, that should employ your
thoughts. They say all things have two Handles: You regard only your Husbands
faults and imperfections, which your own aversion does continually aggravate;
by this Handle you always take him up, but thus you can never hold him. View
rather, and consider his Accomplishments and Virtues, by this Handle you may
hold him fast; thus, if you take him, he is your own for ever, the proper time
to search into his faults, had been before you Married.

-- Had you been wise,
You had chose your Husband from your Ears, not Eyes.
It Is now too late to accuse his faults, but not too late to cure them.


Luc. What Woman ever Married, or chose a Husband by her Ears, I wonder?


Am. She Marries by her Eyes, who takes a Man only for Shape and Beauty; but
she who guides her love by what she hears of his good Name and Reputation,
chooses a Husband by her Ears, and acts much more discreetly.


Luc. You advise well; but it is too late, Amy.


Am. Not at all too late to endeavor to mend a bad Husband; I wish you had a
Child by him, that would conduce much to make up the breach.


Luc. I have a Child.


Am. How! a Child! Since when?


Luc. Long enough.


Am. Prithee how old?


Luc. Almost seven Months.


Am. Why this is wonderful; do you breed Children in three Months time?


Luc. No. Why?


Am. You must of necessity, if we compute the time from your Wedding.


Luc. That Is true. -- But -- you must know, I had had some Discourse with him
before we Married.


Am. Discourse, Lucy! I never knew before that Children were got by Discoursing.


Luc. I Will tell you all. During our time of Wooing, he happened one day to find
me alone in my Chamber, where, not dreaming of his Visit, I had set my self
close to Work on my Bedside; he seeing the opportunity fair, began to play the
Rogue, and tickle me, in a jesting manner. Now you must know, I am extreme
ticklish, and not being able to endure his Fingers, I fell all along as in an
ecstasy; he, it seems, pursued his point, and almost smothered me with Kisses.
What he did beside I do not well know, but I Am sure that soon after I found a
great alteration, a thousand Qualmes, and all the signs of a breeding Woman.


Amy. A very famous History! But how can you, Lucy, find in your heart to hate
that Man, who can get you with Child in a jesting manner? What could he do
think you, when he applies himself to Work in earnest?


Luc. Nay, I Am with Child again already.


Am. Brave, I protest! You see a good Plowman, and a rich apt Soil, make a
quick Harvest.


Luc. Ay, ay, he performs this way better than I desire.


Am. Few Wives are of your Mind. But tell me one thing more, is the Conjugal
Debt duly paid at present?


Luc. No, I have stopped all Payments.


Am. He is the less then to be blamed for Rambling. Is your Child Male or
Female?


Luc. A delicate Boy.


Am. That Boy ought to make you Friends; and it will be effected undoubtedly,
if you would but yield a little. What do other People say of your Husband? What
Character has he abroad?


Luc. He is reported abroad to be of a most obliging Behavior, kind, liberal,
and an excellent Friend to those that love him.


Am. Thus far there is hope: I see he is without Door what you could wish him.


Luc. But to me only he is quite otherwise.


Am. However, be you such to him as I advised, and if you do not find him
become the same Man to you too, never give me credit. Your Husband is but
young, (I guess him about four and twenty) he cannot yet know well what it is
to be a Housekeeper, and all the Duties that belong to that Name. Think thus,
Lucy, and do not think of Separation.


Luc. I cannot forbear it, my Life is so uneasy.


Am. It Is impossible you should desire it, if you would but rightly consider
what a wretched Creature a Wife is when parted from her Husband, and how
Excellent her Character who Loves and Obeys. Nature requires, and God commands,
that the Wife depend wholly on her Husband. Be assured, a Husband is just like
an Estate; you have both one, and if you lose that, you must starve, or live
without any. In the last place, think of your poor Child, the Common Interest
of both his Parents. How would you dispose of him? Would you take him with you?
Then you dispossess and rob his Father. Would you leave him behind you? Then I
know you relinquish the dearest Treasure you have. Pray answer me one Question;
have you any back Friends, that would rejoice to see you miserable?


Luc. Yes, some. I have a true Mother-in-Law for one; and to match her, there
is my Husbands Mother as very a Devil as her self.


Am. Are they very malicious?


Luc. I believe they have wished me ruined a thousand times.


Am. And would you gratify their Malice? You do it abundantly in a Separation.
What thing can be more pleasing to them than to see you live forsaken; a Widow:
Nay, worse than a Widow; for Widows may Love, and Marry again where they fancy,
which you can never hope for.


Luc. I approve your Counsel, my dear Amy, and would practice it, but I am
discouraged to think of such a tedious labor.


Am. You have a pretty Parrot here, that speaks some Words exceeding plain;
have you been long in teaching him?


Luc. O Lord, aye; the Bird has cost me a World of Pains and Patience.


Am. And can you think the undertaking tedious, when you endeavor to reclaim a
Husband, in whose Society you may spend your whole Life with Pleasure? Can you
take pains to teach a Parrot, and not endeavor to win a Husband by kind
Language? What pains do some Men take to break a Horse, and make him easy? Be
assured, Lucy, it deserves more pains to make your Husband kind.


Luc. What would you have me do?


Am. I Will tell you in few Words. Take care that all things within Doors be
neat, and in good order, that so he may not be Sick of Home. Let your Behavior
be affable and familiar, yet always within the limits of that Reverend esteem
you owe a Husband. Be neither too sad, nor airy; neither too Coy, nor Wanton.
Let his Diet be Choice, and well Dressed. Observe what he likes best, and
provide that often. Observe what Company he most favors, and Invite them
continually; Treat them, and Oblige them often. Let all such Entertainments be
gentile and pleasant, nothing to be then wanting; but least of all, Mirth and
good Humor. And when at any time you find him Merry with a Glass too much, or
so, if he begins to Tune his Lute, be you also ready with your Voice, to make a
Consort. Thus, by degrees, you will teach him to delight to be at Home, and
consequently, to avoid a World of needless Expenses; for he must of necessity,
in a short time, consider thus: Am not I a Madman to be so often abroad,
Debauching away both my Estate and Reputation, among a Company of rotten
Whores, filthy Creatures, equally unsound in Mind and Body, when I have here at
Home a Wife of such a temper, so infinitely beyond them all for Beauty, Touth,
and Wit; and what is more considerable, a faithful Wife, and one that loves me
so entirely, and in whose Company I can enjoy what delights I please, without
Scandal or Hazard?


Luc. Well, suppose I should act thus as you Advise, yet I fear Success.


Am. Trust to me: I Will take it upon my self if you fail. In the mean time, I Will
go and begin with him; I Will teach him his Duty too.


Am. I love you for that; but for God's sake, take heed our Consultation be not
discovered. If he should smoke us, he would run into all the Extravagancies of
Bedlam.


Am. Fear not that, you shall see I will manage my Words with such Cunning,
that himself shall begin the Discourse, and tell me all your Discords: Then
will I handle him in such a manner, and use such Arguments, that I doubt not
but to leave him in a better humor for your advantage than I found him. I will
only mention you by the by, as one that I hear loves him with a perfect
Affection.


Luc. Prosper the Event sweet Heaven.


Am. -- Do not suspect;
Heaven will not fail, unless your self neglect.

FINIS.

