THE Complete Ambassador: OR TWO TREATIES OF THE INTENDED MARRIAGE OF QU:
ELIZABETH Of GLORIOUS MEMORY; Comprised in LETTERS OF NEGOTIATION OF Sir
Francis Walsingham, her Resident in France. TOGETHER With the Answers of the
Lord BVRLEIGH, the Earl of LEICESTER, Sir THO: SMITH, and others. Wherein, as
in a clear Mirror, may be seen the Faces of the two Courts of England and
France, as they then stood; with many remarkable passages of STATE, not at all
mentioned in any HISTORY.

Faithfully Collected by the truly Honorable, Sir DVDLY DIGGES Knight, late
Master of the Rolls.

LONDON: Printed by Tho: Newcomb, for Gabriel Bedell and Thomas Collins, and
are to be sold at their Shop at the Middle Temple Gate in Fleetstreet, 1655.

To the Reader.
READER.
YOu are here presented with a PIECE, never intended for the Press, which has
slept long amongst the Papers of Sir DUDLEY DIGGES, late Master of the Rolls; a
Personage of known Wisdom and Integrity, and who understood well the value of
this Manuscript, which had nothing forged or supposititious in it.

There is no kind of Writing, that men do generally with more greediness look
into, then LETTERS; especially, if they be Letters of State, from Great and
Wise Persons, and in a Wise Time, as these are. And that appears in the Two
Volumes of Letters, lately printed under the Titles of CABALA, and Secrets of
Empire; which have been very well resented: and, though indeed, they have no
Coherence of Time or Matter, but are a Rapsodie of the dispersed thoughts of
the Dead, upon several occasions; yet (like a Prospect of Various Objects) have
delighted the Curious Eye. This Collection, being a continued Negotiation of
Sir FRANCIS WALSINGHAM, during his three years Residence (as Ambassador) in
that Mysterious Treaty of Queen ELIZABETH'S Marriage, successively, with the two
Great Brothers of VALOIS, will without doubt meet with an equal, if not a better
reception; and not only please the Judicious sight, with its Order and
Uniformity (like a large Prospect at sea;) but may be of great use to those
Gentlemen that shall be bred up to serve Princes hereafter in this kind of
Honorable Employment. And though the English have been hitherto so reserved, as
not to make public the Treaties and Negotiations of their Ambassadors abroad;
so that we have hardly any notion of them, hut by their Arms, which are hung up
in Inns where they passed; yet the French and Italians (who think themselves as
wise, and as good Politicians) have frequently done it; which we see and read
with delight, as giving a better account of Affairs, Times and Persons, then
any History can do; unless men of Action, and great Statesmen, could find
leisure (as CAESAR, and some others did) to set down (with integrity) the
several Passages of their Times.

The Persons who acted this Scene, and who speak by their Letters; are, the
QUEEN her self, LEICESTER, BURLEIGH, WALSINGHAM, and Sir THOMAS SMITH; such a
Iuncto (for abilities) as were sufficient to govern the whole world: but the
chief ministerial parts lay upon BURLEIGH and WALSINGHAM, two such Ministers of
State, as no age in this Nation has produced their Equals.

Of her Royal-self (whom all EUROPE did either honor or fear) I shall only
say, That as she had the judgment to make good choice of her Servants, though
she rewarded but sparingly (like her Grandfather HENRY the seventh) yet she had
the Fortune to find them more loyal and secret then those Princes that
succeeded her, notwithstanding their great gifts, and effusion of the Treasure
of the Crown, which now (with their bodies) lies buried in the Dust.

And if at any time it concerned her to be well served, it was in this great
Treaty of a League and Marriage with FRANCE; where she had to do with as
cunning a Lady as her self (the Queen Mother) and with the King her Son, CHARLES
the ninth, the deepest Dissembler that ever wore Crown.

For the Match it self, whether it were really intended by the FRENCH, I make
some doubt of the first; namely, that with the D of ANjou, afterward HENRY the
third; but do rather think it was set on foot with design to amuse our Queen,
and the Protestant Princes of FRANCE, and to breed a Confidence the better to
draw them into the Net at Paris, I mean the barbarous and bloody Massacre on
St. Bartholomews Eve, 1572. being the second year of this Negotiation; and by
reason of the close carriage thereof, could never be discovered by our
quick-sighted Ambassador, with all his Spies and Intelligencers, till he was
almost overwhelmed in it himself.

For the second Treaty, which was set on foot in the year 1581. with Monsieur
the Duke of ALANSON, I do conceive that it was really intended by the FRENCH,
and by the chief of the ENGLISH Council, except LEICESTER (who had pretensions
of his own;) but for her own Mind, what that really was, I must leave, as a
thing doubly inscrutable, both as she was a Woman and a Queen.

Concerning that Immortal hatred that grew between her and the Queen of SCOTS,
occasioned by difference in Religion, contrary State-Interest, Neighboring
Kingdoms, Emulation of Greatness, and perhaps of Beauty too; and wherein all
the Princes of Christendom did interpose, some one way, and some another (as
will appear by these Letters) I can resemble it to nothing better, then the
Poets feigned quarrel between JUNO and VENUS, which did so often trouble the
whole Family of their Gods; and the Scots Queens assuming the Arms of ENGLAND,
in the time of her first Husband (though she afterward excused it as an act of
constraint, she being under obedience) was that Manet alta mente Repostum. That
injury which could never be forgiven, till it was expiated with her blood.

And though these Things were the main part of the Negotiation, yet there falls
in other important Matters, concerning the Protestants of France, and Germany,
the business of Ireland, and the Low Countries; the English Fugitives,
controversies about Merchant Affairs, etc. All so well digested, and delivered
in so plain and clear a style, without any pomp of Words, or ostentation of
Wit, as renders the PIECE much more valuable to those that know a good Hand,
when they see it. And if a man could be beholding to his Ciphers, as Sir ROBERT
NAUNTON says, speaking of these very LETTERS in his Fragmenta Regalia, they
would have told pretty Tales of the Times: but I must leave the decyphering
part to those that have more leisure and dexterity that way, and conclude all
with this reflection upon our Ambassador, which will fall under the careful
observers eye; how vigilant he was to gather true Intelligence; what Means and
Persons be used for it; how punctual he was in keeping to his Instructions,
where he was limited; and how wary and judicious where he was left free; still
advancing, upon alloccasions, the Reputation and Interest of his Great Mistress,
with a most lively and indefatigable Devotion.

October, 16. 1654. A. H.


A TABLE Of all the Letters contained in this Book.
INstructions for Sir Francis Walsingham, sent Ambassador into France 1 Sir
William Cecil Lord Burleigh to Sir Francls Walsingham 5 Sir Francis Walsingham
to Sir William Cecil ib. Q. Elizabeth to Sir Francis Walsingham ib. Sir Francis
Walsingham to Sir William Cecil 6 To the Earl of Leicester 7 The Queen to Sir
Francis Walsingham 9 The Queen to Sir Henry Norris ib. Doubts of Sir Francis
Walsingham 17. etc. Sir William Cecil to Sir Francis Walsingham 18 Instructions
by the Queen to Sir Francis Walsingham ib. Sir Francis Walsingham to the Earl
of Leicester 2^ To Sir William Cecil ib. To Sir Walter Mildmay ib. Sir Henry
Norris and Sir Francis Walsingham to the Queen 22 Sir Francis Walsingham to Sir
William Cecil 26 Sir Francis Walsingham to Sir William Cecil 28 Sir Francis
Walsingham to the Earl of Leicester, 28, 29. Sir Francis Walsingham to Sir
Walter Mildmay 30 Sir Francis Walsingham to Sir William Cecil 31 Monsieur
Pinart to Sir Francis Walsingham 32 Sir William Cecil to Sir Henry Norris and
Sir Francis Walsingham ib. Sir Francis Walsingham to Sir William Cecil 33 Earl
of Leicester to Sir Francis Walsingham ib. Sir Francis Walsingham to the Earl
of Leicester 34 Sir Francis Walsingham to Sir William Cecil ib. Sir Francis
Walsingham to the Earl of Leicester 35 Sir Francis Walsingham to Sir Walter
Mildmay 38 Sir William Cecil to Sir Francis Walsingham 39 Sir Francis
Walsingham to Sir William Cecil ib. The Queen to Sir Francis Walsingham ib. Sir
Francis Walsingham to Sir William Cecil 42 Sir Francis Walsingham to Sir
William Cecil ib. Sir Francis Walsingham to the Earl of Leicester 43 Sir
Francis Walsingham to Sir William Cecil 45 Earl of Leicester to Sir Francis
Walsingham 47 Sir Francis Walsingham to the Earl of Leicester 48 Sir Francis
Walsingham to Sir William Cecil ib. Sir Francis Walsingham to the Earl of
Leicester 50 Lord Burleigh to Sir Francis Walsingham ib. Earl of Leicester to
Sir Francis Walsingham 51 Sir Francis Walsingham to the Earl of Leicester 52
Sir William Cecil to Sir Francis Walsingham 53 Sir Francis Walsingham to the
Lord Burleigh 55 Sir Francis Walsingham to the Lord Burleigh 56 The Queen to
Sir Francis Walsingham ib Lord Burleigh to Sir Francis Walsingham 57 Sir
Francis Walsingham to the Lord of Burleigh 58 Instructions of the Queen
concerning the Match with France 62, etc. L. Burleigh to Sir Fr. Walsingham 66
Sir Francis Walsingham to the Lord Burleigh 67 Earl of Leicester to Sir Francis
Walsingham 71 The Queen to Sir Francis Walsingham ib. L. Burleigh to Sir
Francis Walsingham 72 Sir Francis Walsingham to the L. Burleigh ib. Sir Francis
Walsingham to the L. Burleigh 73 Sir Francis Walsingham to the Earl of
Leicester 76 The Q. to Sir Francis Walsingham ib. Lord Burleigh to Sir Francis
Walsingham 78 Sir Francis Walsingham to the Lord Burleigh 79 Sir Francis
Walsingham to the L. Burleigh 81 Lo. Burleigh to Sir Francis Walsingham ib. Sir
Francis Walsingham to the L. Burleigh ib. Earl of Leicester to Sir Francis
Walsingham 82 Sir Francis Walsingham to the Earl of Leicester ib. The Q. to Sir
Francis Walsingham 83 L. Burleigh to Sir Francis Walsingham 87 L. Burleigh to
Sir Francis Walsingham ib. Sir Francis Walsingham to the L. Burleigh 88 The Q.
to Sir Francis Walsingham 93 L. Burleigh to Sir Francis Walsingham 94 Sir
Francis Walsingham to the Lord Burleigh ib. Earl of Leicester to Sir Fr.
Walsingham 96 Sir Francis Walsingham to the Earl of Leicester ib. Sir Francis
Walsingham to the Earl of Leicester and L. Burleigh 97 The Queen to Sir Francis
Walsingham ib. Lord Burleigh to Sir Francis Walsingham 100 Sir Francis
Walsingham to the Lord Burleigh 101 Sir Francis Walsingham to the L. Burleigh
103 Lord Burleigh to Sir Francis Walsingham 104 Earl of Leicester to Sir
Francis Walsingham 105 The Queen to Sir Francis Walsingham 106 L. Burleigh to
Sir Francis Walsingham 108 Sir Francis Walsingham to the L. Burleigh 109 Earl
of Leicester to Sir Francis Walsingham 110 Sir Francis Walsingham to the Lord
Burleigh ib. The Queen to Sir Francis Walsingham 111 Earl of Leicester and Lord
Burleigh to Sir Francis Walsingham 115 Lord Burleigh to Sir Francis Walsingham
115 Earl of Leicester to Sir Francis Walsingham 116 Sir Francis Walsingham to
the Lord Burleigh 117 Sir Francis Walsingham to the Earl of Leicester ib. Sir
Francis Walsingham to Sir William Cecil 118 Sir Francis Walsingham to the Earl
of Leicester 119 Sir Francis Walsingham to the Earl of Leicester 120 Sir
Francis Walsingham to the Lord Burleigh 121 Sir Francis Walsingham to the Lord
Burleigh 123 Sir Francis Walsingham to the Earl of Leicester 127 Lord Burleigh
to Sir Francis Walsingham 129 Earl of Leicester to Sir Francis Walsingham ib.
The Queen to Sir Francis Walsingham ib. L. Burleigh to Sir Francis Walsingham
134 Sir Francis Walsingham to the Lord Burleigh 135 Sir Francis Walsingham to
the Lord of Burleigh 136 Lord Burleigh to Sir Francis Walsingham 137 L.
Burleigh to Sir Fr. Walsingham 138 Earl of Leicester to Sir Francis Walsingham
139 L. Burleigh to Sir Francis Walsingham 140 Sir Francis Walsingham to the L.
Burleigh 141 Sir Francis Walsingham to the L. Burleigh 144 The Q. to Sir
Francis Walsingham 145 Lord Burleigh to Sir Francis Walsingham 146 Earl of
Leicester to Sir Francis Walsingham ib. Instructions for Hen. Killegrew Esquire
Ambassador in France during the absence of sir Francis Walsingham 147 Sir
Francis Walsingham to the Lord Burleigh 149 Sir Francis Walsingham to the Earl
of Leicester 150 Sir William Cecil to Sir Francis Walsingham 151 Sir Francis
Walsingham to the L. Burleigh ib. Lo. Burleigh to Sir Francis Walsingham twice
152 Earl of Leicester to Sir Francis Walsingham 153 Instruction for sir Thomas
Smith Ambassador Entraorninary in France 154 Sir Francis Walsingham to the L.
Burleigh twice. 160 Lord Burleigh to Sir Thomas Smith 161 L. Burleigh to Sir
Francis Walsingham 163 L. Burleigh to Sir Francis Walsingham 164 Lord Burleigh
to Sir Francis Walsingham twice 165 Sir Thomas Smith and Sir Francis Walsingham
to the Queen. 166, 169 Sir Francis Walsingham to the Lord Burleigh 172 Sir
Francis Walsingham to the Earl of Leicester 173 Sir Francis Walsingham to the
L. Burleigh 174 Sir Thomas Smith to the Queen 176 The Queen to Sir Francis
Walsingham 180 Sir Francis Walsingham to the L. Burleigh 182 Sir Francis
Walsingham to the Lord Burleigh 184 The Q. to Sir Thomas Smith and Sir Francis
Walsingham 185 Lord Burleigh to Sir Francis Walsingham 187 Sir Francis
Walsingham to the Lord Burleigh 188 Lord Burleigh to Sir Francis Walsingham 189
Earl of Leicester to Sir Francis Walsingham 190 Sir Francis Walsingham to the
Lord Burleigh ib. Sir Tho. Smith to the Lord Burleigh 191 Sir Tho. Smith to the
Lord Burleigh 193 Sir Tho. Smith to the Lord Burleigh 198 Sir Tho. Smith to the
Lord Burleigh twice 199 Sir Tho. Smith to the Lord Burleigh 200 Sir Tho. Smith
to the Lord Burleigh 202 Sir Francis Walsingham to the Lord Burleigh ib. Lord
Burleigh to Sir Francis Walsingham 203 Earl of Leicester to Sir Francis
Walsingham ib. Sir Francis Walsingham to the Earl of Leicester 204 Sir Francis
Walsingham to the Lord Burleigh ib. The Queen to Sir Francis Walsingham 205
Instructions for the Earl of Lincoln, Ambassador extraordinary to the French
King 206 Lord Burleigh to Sir Francis Walsingham 212 Earl of Leicester to sir
Francis Walsingham ib. Sir Francis Walsingham to the Lord Burleigh 213 Lord
Burleigh to Sir Francis Walsingham 214 Conference betwixt Duke Montmorency and
some of the Queens Council ib. Sir Francis Walsingham to Sir William Cecil 216
Sir Francis Walsingham to the Earl of Leicester ib. Sir William Cecil to Sir
Francis Walsingham 217 Sir Francis Walsingham to the Earl of Leicester ib. Sir
William Cecil to Sir Francis Walsingham 218 Sir Francis Walsingham to Sir
William Cecil ib. Sir Francis Walsingham to the Lord Burleigh 219 Sir Francis
Walsingham to Sir William Cecil 221 Sir Francis Walsingham to the Earl of
Leicester 222 Sir Francis Walsingham to Sir William Cecil 223 Sir Francis
Walsingham to the Earl of Leicester 224 Sir Francis Walsingham to Sir William
Cecil ib. Sir Francis Walsingham to Sir William Cecil 225 Sir Francis
Walsingham to the Earl of Leicester, ib. The Queen to Sir Francis Walsingham
226 Q. Elizabeth to Sir Francis Walsingham 228 Sir William Cecil to sir Francis
Walsingham 230 Sir Tho. Smith to Sir Francis Walsingham ib. Sir Francis
Walsingham to Sir Tho. Smith 231 Sir Francis Walsingham to Sir Tho. Smith 232
Sir Francis Walsingham to Sir William Cecil ib. Sir Francis Walsingham to the
Earl of Leicester 234 The Queen to Sir Francis Walsingham 235 Sir Tho. Smith to
Sir Francis Walsingham 236 Sir William Cecil to Sir Francis Walsingham 237 Sir
Tho. Smith to Sir Francis Walsingham 238 Sir Francis Walsingham to Sir Tho.
Smith 239 Sir Francis Walsingham to Sir Tho. Smith ib. Sir Francis Walsingham
to Sir Tho. Smith 240 Sir Francis Walsingham to Sir Tho. Smith 243 Sir Francis
Walsingham to the Lord Burleigh 245 Lord Burleigh, Earl of Leicester, Sir
Francis Knowles, Sir Tho. Smith to Sir Francis Walsingham 246 Lord Burleigh to
sir Francis Walsingham 250, 251 Earl of Leicester to sir Francis Walsingham ib.
Sir Tho. Smith to sir Francis Walsingham 252, 253 Sir Francis Walsingham to the
Lords of her Majesty's Council ib. The Queen to sir Francis Walsingham 259 Sir
Tho. Smith to sir Francis Walsingham 262 The Queen to the French King on the
behalf of the Vidam of Chartres 263 Lord Burleigh to sir Francis Walsingham
264 Earl of Leicester to sir Francis Walsingham ib. Sir Francis Walsingham to
sir Tho. Smith 265 Sir Francis Walsingham to sir Tho. Smith 267 Sir Francis
Walsingham to the Lord Burleigh 269 Sir Francis Walsingham to the Earl of
Leicester 270 Answers to the French Ambassador 271 Sir Francis Walsingham to
the Earl of Leicester 273 Sir Tho. Smith to sir Francis Walsingham 274 Sir
Francis Walsingham to sir Tho. Smith 275 Sir Francis Walsingham to Sir Tho.
Smith 276, twice Sir Francis Walsingham to sir Tho. Smith 278 Sir Francis
Walsingham to the Lord Burleigh 281 Sir Francis Walsingham to the Earl of
Leicester 282 Sir Tho. Smith to Sir Francis Walsingham ib. The Lord Burleigh to
sir Francis Walsingham 283 Earl of Leicester to Sir Francis Walsingham 284, 285
Sir Francis Walsingham to sir Tho. Smith 86 Sir Francis Walsingham to the Lord
Burleigh 287 Sir Francis Walsingham to Sir Tho. Smith ib. Earl of Leicester to
sir Francis Walsingham 288 Lord Burleigh to sir Francis Walsingham 289 Sir
Francis Walsingham to sir Tho. Smith ib. Sir Francis Walsingham to the Lord
Burleigh 290 Sir Francis Walsingham to sir Tho. Smith 291 Sir Francis
Walsingham to the Lord Burleigh 292 Sir Francis Walsingham to the Earl of
Leicester 293 Sir Francis Walsingham to the Lord Burleigh ib. Sir Francis
Walsingham to the Lord Burleigh 294 Sir Francis Walsingham to sir Tho. Smith
295 Sir Francis Walsingham to the Lord Burleigh 296 Sir Francis Walsingham to
the Earl of Leicester ib. Sir Francis Walsingham to the Lord Burleigh 297 The
Queen to Sir Francis Walsingham ib. Sir Tho. Smith to Sir Francis Walsingham
299 Lord Burleigh to Sir Francis Walsingham 301 Sir Francis Walsingham to Sir
Tho. Smith ib. Sir Francis Walsingham to the Earl of Leicester 302 Sir Francis
Walsingham to the L. Burleigh 303 Sir Francis Walsingham to the L. Burleigh
304, 306 Sir Francis Walsingham to Sir Thomas Smith 307 Sir Fr. Walsingham to
the Earl of Leicester 308 Sir Francis Walsingham to the Lords of the Council.
ib. Sir Thomas Smith to sir Francis Walsingham 310 Lord Burleigh to Sir Francis
Walsingham ib. Earl of Leicester to Sir Francis Walsingham 311 Sir Francis
Walsingham to sir Thomas Smith 312 Sir Francis Walsingham to the Lord Burleigh
313 Sir Francis Walsingham to the Earl of Leicester ib. Sir Francis Walsingham
to the Lord Burleigh 314 Sir Thomas Smith to Sir Francis Walsingham 315 Lord
Burleigh to Sir Francis Walsingham 316, 317 Instructions for the Earl of
Worcester. 318 Earl of Leicester to Sir Francis Walsingham 322 Sir Thomas
Smith to sir Francis Walsingham 324 Sir Francis Walsingham to the Earl of
Leicester. 325 Sir Francis Walsingham to sir Thomas Smith 326 Lord Burleigh to
Sir Francis Walsingham 327 Sir Francis Walsingham to the Lord Burleigh 328 Sir
Francis Walsingham to sir Thomas Smith 329, 331, 332 Sir Francis Walsingham to
the Lord Burleigh 333 Sir Thomas Smith to sir Francis Walsingham ib. Lord
Burleigh to Sir Francis Walsingham 334 Answer of the Queen to the French
Ambassador comcerning the Duke Alanson 335 Lord Burleigh to the French
Ambassador 3^9 Sir Francis Walsingham to the Lord Burleigh ib. Sir Francis
Walsingham to the Lord Burleigh 343 Sir Francis Walsingham to sir Thomas Smith
344 Sir Francis Walsingham to the Earl of Leicester 345 Sir Thomas Smith to Sir
Francis Walsingham 346 Lord Burleigh to Sir Francis Walsingham 346, 347 The
Queen to Sir Francis Walsingham 348 Answer to the French Ambassadors ib. The
Queen to King Henry of France 351 Instructions for Sir Francis Walsingham, in
his second French Ambasiy, 352, 353, etc. For a League with France. 355 Sir
Francis Walsingham, to Sir Henry Cobham, and Mr. Summers 356 Sir Francis
Walsingham to the Lord Burleigh ib. Sir Henry Cobham, to Sir Francis
Walsingham, 357 Francis of Valois, Duke of Anjou and Alanson to Sir Francis
Walsingham 358 Lord Burleigh to Sir Francis Walsingham 359 Sir Francis
Walsingham to the Queen 360 Sir Francis Walsingham to the Lord Burleigh 363 Lo.
Burleigh to Sir Francis Walsingham 372 Lord Burleigh to Sir Francis Walsingham
374 Sir Francis Walsingham to the Lord Burleigh 375 Sir Francis Walsingham, Sir
Henry Cobham, John Summers to the Lord Burleigh 376 Lo. Burleigh to Sir Francis
Walsingham 377, 379 Sir Francis Walsingham, Sir Henry Cobham, John Summers to
the Lord Burleigh 380 Memorial for Mr. Summers 384 Private Memorials for him
385 Sir Francis Walsingham to the Lord Burleigh 386 Sir Francis Walsingham to
the Queen 387 Lord Burleigh to Sir Francis Walsingham 388, 389, 390 Sir Francis
Walsingham to the Queen ib. Sir Francis Walsingham to the Lord Burleigh twice
392 Lord Burleigh to Sir Francis Walsingham 392, 394 Sir Francis Walsingham,
Sir Henry Cobham, John Summers to the Lord Burleigh 396 Sir Francis Walsingham
to the Lord Burleigh ib. Lord Burleigh to Sir Francis Walsingham 397 Points
accorded, and not according upon the League Offensive and Defensive 400 401,
402, 403 Sir Francis Walsingham, Sir Henry Cobham, John Summers to the Lord
Burleigh ib. Sir Francis Walsingham to the Lord Burleigh 407 Sir Francis
Walsingham to the Lord Burleigh ib. Sir Francis Walsingham to the Duke of Anjou
409 Sir Francis Walsingham to the Lord Burleigh 410 Lord Burleigh to Sir
Francis Walsingham 412 Sir Francis Walsingham to the Lord Burleigh 413 Lord
Burleigh to Sir Francis Walsingham 414 Lord Burleigh to Sir Francis Walsingham,
Sir Henry Cobham, and John Summers 419 Lord Burleigh to Sir Francis Walsingham
422, 423 Answer to the Commissioners concerning the League Offensive ib- Sir
Francis Walsingham to the Queen. 426 Sir Francis Walsingham to the Lord
Burleigh 428 Conference betwixt the Queen Mother and Sir Francis Walsingham 429
Sir Francis Walsingham to the Lord Burleigh 434, 439 Sir Francis Walsingham,
Sir Henry Cobham, John Summers to the Lord Burleigh ibid.
NEGOTIATIONS OF STATE AFFAIRS, BETWEEN The Lord Burleigh, and Sir Francis
Walsingham, in the Reigns of Qu: Elizabeth, and Charles the 9. of France. Anno
Dom: 1570.
Instructions for Francis Walsingham Esquire; sent by the Queens Majesty to the
French King, for the Matters following, the 11 of August, 1570. in the 12 year
of Her Majesty's Reign.
ELIZABETH R.

FIrst, you shall conferr with our Ambassador Sir Henry Norris knight, upon
this Charge now committed unto you, and as you two shall think best, to proceed
therein for our Service, so we are well content to allow your doings; and for
the repair and delivery of our Letters to the French King, and to the Queen
Mother, with such other circumstances thereto belonging; you shall also follow
the advice and discretion of our said Ambassador.

The charge which we do commit to you, rests only and principally upon this
special Matter following; whereunto we will that you direct your whole actions.

We desire that the Accord betwixt the King our good Brother, and the Prince of
Navarre, Prince of Conde, and the Admiral, with the rest of the Company, being
the Kings Subjects, might be made as favorable for the reasonable contentation
and surety of the said Princes and their party, as may be possible to the
maintenance and continuance of them in the liberty of their Consciences for the
cause of Religion.

And because we consider that there is no small labor made by some directly to
impeach this accord, and by some others though not openly to withstand is, yet
by doubtful dealing in the granting to their Requests to ruin the said
Princes and their party in the end: We find it the more necessary for us to
use all good means to countervail such contrary labors, and to procure not
only a good Accord, but therewith a continuance thereof, as a matter which in
our Conscience and Honor we think good both for the King and his whole Estate.
And therefore after you shall understand the state of the Negotiation of this
matter by the Deputies of the two Princes with the King, and wherein it shall
be profitable for them that our Ambassador and you shall deal with the King or
Queen Mother in our Name; Our meaning is, you shall in this manner, or the
like, declare our Intentions, as Grounds whereupon you may lay the rest of our
Reasons and persuasions that shall be thought good to be propounded to the King.

First, you shall say that we earnestly request the King to set apart all
manner of Jealousy that either has been, or may be insinuated to him, of our
meaning in this cause betwixt him and his Subjects: for that we mean as well,
and so always have to him and his Estate, as if we were his natural Sister,
and never had any intention to maintain or comfort any of his Subjects against
him to move any trouble to his estate, or to diminish any parcel of his Crown.
And yet you shall say, That we will in this sort be plain with him, thinking
yet best to agree with good Friendship and Honor, that we could never be well
satisfied or content in our minds, to have the said Princes and their party,
for professing of the Religion whereof they have freedom granted to them, to be
overthrown or distressed by means of partiality of their private Enemies, as
long as they never required in substance any other thing of the King, then a
permission to enjoy the benefit of the former Edicts granted unto them for the
exercise of their Religion. In the which we do also consider that they had
been so long suffered as a great portion of people of his Realm had been in
their young years therein nourished and established, and without opinion of
damnation of their souls, they could not change the same, so as we pray the
King to take this our plain dealing in good part, and to interpret of our
advice that we are bold to give him, as one that means first and principally
best to him and his estate, and no otherwise to his Subjects, then shall in our
Judgment further the quietness, repose, and augmentation of him in Honor,
Wealth and Surety.

You shall next to this say, that we have partly considered of such Petitions
and Demands as we be informed his Subjects have in most humble sort required to
be granted to them: And we note the substance of them to consist specially upon
these points. The first, that they may be restored to his favor and grace as
most humble and faithful Subjects; a thing most meet for a King to be granted
both readily and bountifully, and consequently to serve him with their lives,
lands, and goods: a thing also for a King most profitable to embrace and
accept. And the next, that they may be permitted to serve almighty God by
exercise of Christian Religion, according to their Profession, and to quietness
of their Conscience; a thing also in the sight, of God most commendable, and
needful of all Christian Subjects. And last, that they may have assurance
hereof in some better sort, then by former experience they have had, a matter
of most moment to be regarded for a full perfection of all the rest, and
without the which the rest are of no account.

In these Suits most humbly presented, of Subjects to a most Christian King, of
so great a multitude of People, consisting of such sundry kinds and estates, of
Princes of his blood, of noble Captains, of learned men meet for Government and
Counsel, of valiant Soldiers, of great Burgesses, rich Merchants, yea of
Women, Children, and all inferior sorts almost innumerable, we cannot see, but
the more speedily, the more bountifully and assuredly the King shall deal with
them, as a Father with his Children, the more shall be his own quietness, his
comfort, his riches, his strength, as we doubt not but he sees without
Declaration; and glad we are to hear it commonly reported, how well disposed he
himself is to receive them to his favor: And therefore you shall say, it
needs not to discourse with him, though he be young in years, what infinite
dis-commodities and lamentable mis-haps has within a short time grown to his
Estate, by denying to his Subjects of their reasonable requests. And though
there be per case by some hard hearted persons, cavilations found to reprehend
some part of their requests in particular, yet we require him to think how meet
it is for him, the Sovereign Prince, not to want profit and honor of so general
a Peace in his Kingdom, by re-uniting to himself of such a multitude of
serviceable Subjects, which indeed is of such a moment, as no cavilation would
be admitted against any particular point that may stand with his Estate, and
accelerate the Peace. But to consider the King being the Sovereign to command,
and they his Subjects to obey, and so by nature always to live in fear, are to
be rather comforted with a large grant to their requests, and a full
satisfaction of assurance, then by denying any Portions of their demands, to be
nourished in doubt and anguish of mind; whereby neither part should rest in
assurance, neither the King, for he had denied, nor the Subjects, for they
could not obtain; and so as it happens in sickness, the recidivations might be
most perilous. And after you have dealt with the King for furtherance of any
particular impediments, you shall also say, that we do promise the King, and
will be content to make any assurance, that he shall require meet to be made
betwixt Princes; that if it shall please him to be a gracious Lord unto them,
at this time, in their requests, and not to abridge the same to their
misliking, whereby they may gather doubtfulness and fear of continuance of that
which shall be granted them; if any of them shall contrary to their promises
and submissions, attempt any thing directly or indirectly to the trouble of the
Kings Estate, and contrary to the duties of true Subjects, we shall not only
condemn them in our own judgemen^ and so pronounce them to the world, but shall
also, as the King shall find it meet, prosecute them as common enemies to our
selves.

And for any particular matter, that you shall be by the Deputies of the
Princes requested to further, you shall do well to be instructed how to
maintain their Demands, which shall be committed to you with such reasons as
may be agreeable to be mentioned by you, having respect that you shall deal
therein for us, being a Queen and a Monarch with a like Prince.

And if any on the Kings behalf shall object to you, that our dealing for those
Princes and their company, being subjects in this sort, to have liberty granted
to them for exercise of Religion in other sort then the King himself, and the
common Authority of the Realm does profess, is not agreeable with our own
actions and proceedings against our Subjects that have lately sought in like
manner liberty to use the Roman Religion contrary to our Profession; you may
answer thereto very well, that if they mean this by a late rebellion stirred up
this last year, in a part of our North Country, by the Earls of Northumberland
and Westmerland. First it is very true, that they only colored outwardly their
rebellious attempts, with a pretense of Religion. And you may say, seeing the
matter is objected, that it is well known, and you are warranted to avow it,
that the principal cause of that Rebellion was wrought (you will not say by the
Queen of Scots) but sure you are, by her Ministers both here in England and
Scotland, and by some of the principal parties of the Nobility in Scotland,
that do hate Roman Religion.

Besides that, it is evident, that the two Earls that were the heads thereof,
before they did begin their Rebellion, did at no time show themselves unwilling
to exercise the rights of the Religion established by Law in this Realm; but as
they gave their consents when the order thereof was first established in
Parliament, so did they ordinarily resort from the beginning of our Reign in
all open places to the Churches and to Divine Services in the Church, without
contradiction or show of misliking.

Thirdly, if either they, or any other of our Subjects, would make request to
be at liberty to acknowledge the Authority of the Church of Rome, as the Pope
would challenge it in this Realm, and as by his Bulls and Decrees he does
declare his meaning, how he would exercise it to the ruin of our Crown, it is
so manifest, and that even by late experience notoriously well proved, that
such a provision to be granted, induces necessarily the party to be criminal
of treason and as in no wise any such permission can be by us granted to any
Subjects within our Realm; without we would therewith also, yield our Right and
Royal Title to the will of Traitors, wherein manifestly appears a notable
difference betwixt such a permission as the Kings Subjects do require for
exercise of their Religion, which also has been by the Kings Authority
granted heretofore to them, and the permission that were to be granted to any
of our Subjects, that would exercise the Roman Religion in our Realm, and obey
the Commandments, Decrees and Bulls of the Pope; for we never could perceive,
that the exercise of the Religion professed by the Princes, and their adherents
in ^rance, did any way prejudice the Kings Title and Right to his Crown, but
that the Professors thereof did always with all humbleness and constancy,
acknowledge and maintain the same, without adhering to any other Power or
Authority; but we see it manifest, and have lately proved it, and duly
punished it, in such as seek to erect up the Authority of the Pope in our
Realm, and do directly and manifestly not only impugn our Estate Royal; but
labor to remove us from the Throne of our Kingdom, whereunto Almighty God
has placed, maintained, and preserved us; a matter so manifestly full of
danger, as neither we may yield unto, no, nor none of our good Subjects will
never assent thereto, but in that quarrel will adventure all their lives, lands
and estates, as of late against the Rebellion that was colored with a pretense
of Romish Religion, we did sufficiently prove generally in all parts of our
Realm, and in all Estates and persons by the readiness of their service. And
thus you have a general note how to direct you in the prosecution of the
purpose intended by this your journey; not doubting, but both in this, and all
the rest of your Charge, you will join your self with our Ambassador, who for
his Acquaintance and his Experience, can very sufficiently inform you how to
deal.

If any thing shall be moved to you for the Queen of Scots cause, you may say,
that before your departure, and within two or threes days after that Monsieur
de Poigney had been with us, we had certain intelligence from Scotland, that
the Lord Levinston, which was sent from the Queen of Scots, to solicit the
leavying of Arms, and to bring some of the Nobility to confer both with us and
her for ending of the troubles, had been with the Duke of Chastelheranlte, the
Earl of Argile, and others joined with them before the 20 of the last month,
for so his own Letters do testify to our Cousin the Earl of Sussex our
Lieutenant, upon our borders toward Scotland; and that he found them well
content with the Articles accorded by us with the French Ambassador, and the
Bishop of Ross, and that he was well forward in his Commission, so as we do
look now daily both for a general ceasing of Arms there, and for the access of
the Noblemen on both parties of that Realm here, to treat and conclude upon the
Queen of Scots cause. And if any further matter be moved unto you in this, you
shall say, that you have no more to say therein.

When you have been with the King, and entered so far into this Charge as our
Ambassador and you may see likelihood of the end hereof, we would be advertised
with all speed possible. And if our Ambassador and you think that the hasty
yielding of the Deputies in their negotiation, may bring peril to the cause, we
think it good that they might be induced to stand somewhat hard therein, as
policy may serve them, without making to them any further aids of money. But
as yet, we do rather give them some countenance to use more earnestness for
their own surety.

Cecil.


To the Right Worshipful my very loving Friend, Mr. Francis Walsingham Esquire.
SIr, the French Ambassador has sent hither a Servant of his, to demand
audience of the Queens Majesty, who reports, that he is to advertise her
Majesty of the conclusion of the Peace which was published on Thursday last:
And for that I could not as yet this morning speak with her Majesty, I thought
good to give you signification thereof, to the intent you might stay, until I
have herein spoken with her Majesty; and by my next Letters advertise you,
whether her pleasure be, that you should wholly stay, or otherwise go on your
journey with some other Instructions. And so I wish you well to do,

from Chenys, this Sundaie morning the 13 of August. 1570. Your assured William
Cecill.


To the Right Honorable Sir William Cecill Principal Secretary to her Majesty.
According to your Honors order, I mean to stay till I hear further from you,
how her Majesty means to dispose of my service; and so in the mean time
leaving to trouble you, I most humbly take my leave.

From London the 13 of August, 1570. Your Honors to Command, Francis Walsingham.


To our trusty and well-beloved. F. Walsingham, Esquire. presently sent unto the
French King.
ELIZABETH R.

TRusty and well-beloved, we great you well; having this day received Letters
from the French King, by his Ambassador, making mention of towardness of a
Peace made with his Subjects; so as the Ambassador affirms, that he takes it
to be assuredly published at Paris, the II of this month; and yet because
otherwise we do not make full account thereof, but think it meet you shall keep
on your journey, with this order, that if it be not accorded before your
coming, then you shall proceed as before you were appointed; and if it be
concluded, then shall you deliver these our Letters which we now send,
directly to the French King, by which we do signify unto him, how we had
dispatched you before, to move him to make some good end with his subjects; and
now hearing by his Ambassador of the conclusion, we cannot forbear, but charge
you to proceed, specially to congratulate with him for so happy a benefit, as
by his reconciliation of his Subjects to him, we certainly are persuaded that
God could not give him a greater. And so our pleasure is, you shall use all
good language to express the joy thereof; and to offer all manner of endeavor
that is in our power, to further the good keeping and continuance thereof. And
in like manner we would have you, by means of our Ambassador, to cause the
Admiral and his party to understand our intention in the sending of you this
time, making it appear to them how careful we are of their welldoings, and
shall be willing to do any thing in our power reasonable, to continue to them
the fruits of this Accord: And to let them also understand, that the special
sending of you over at this time was chiefly for their cause.

Given under our Signet at Henly the 15 of August, the 12 year of our Reign
1570.

A Copy of the Letter sent to Master Secretary, touching the negotiation had
with the King the 28 of August, 1570.
SIr, it may please your Honor to advertise her Majesty, that the King
accepted in very good part her Congratulation, as from his good Sister and
Neighbor, who has always wished his well-doing and prosperity (for these
were his words) after Congratulation done to the King. The Queen Mother, having
inquired of me of the well-doing of her Majesty, asked me how the Queen of
Scots did. I answered her, that at my departure, for any thing that I knew to
the contrary, she did very well; then she proceeded to enquire of me touching
her present estate: I answered, according to the tenor of my Instructions, in
what state she stood at my departure, wherewith she seemed to rest very well
satisfied: And then she fell to protestation, that for her own part she was so
well persuaded of the Queens Majesty's merciful disposition, as she knew right
well, that if she did deal any thing hardly with the Queen of Scots, it rather
proceeded from some of her Ministers, then from her Majesty's self. I replied,
that I was glad to understand, that she conceived so well of the Queen my
Mistress's good disposition; so was I sorry, that she should think that she
would be, by any of her Ministers or Councillors, drawn to any thing, either
toward her, or any other, that might not stand with her honor; for that her
skill and years was now to direct, and not to be directed: I desired her
therefore, in her Majesty's name, that she would evermore reserve an ear for
her (a thing that would not in equity be denied to the meanest person in
France) who in all her actions hitherto toward the Queen of Scots, had dealt
with that regard to her honor, as she was right able to justify herself both
toward the King her good Brother, as also toward all other Princes. Then she
made great protestation of her indifferency, and that she is no less affected
in good will toward her Majesty, whom it pleases says she, to do me the
honor as to call me by the name of a Mother, then to the Queen of Scots her
Daughter in Law: And therefore, in wishing her liberty, I do it, says she, as
much for the Q. your Mistress quientness sake, as for any other respect, which
without her liberty can hardly grow unto her. This Sir, in effect, was the
whole course of the speech that passed from her in that behalf, which she had
then with me apart; the King being then in talk with my Lord Ambassador. Then
she caused the King to deal with me in that behalf; to whom I showed the state
of her cause, according to the contents of my Instructions, wherewith he seemed
to be satisfied: He told me, that he wished that the Queen his good Sister,
according to her merciful inclination, would have some compassion of her cause,
and grow to some speedy conclusion in that behalf. I told him, that I doubted
not but that her Majesty would for his sake do that which should be to his
contentation so far forth as might stand with her hononr and safety: Then he
protested, that otherwise he would not desire it. Thus having imparted to your
honor the effect of my Negotiation, to the end you may advertise her Majesty,
I most humbly take my leave.

From Paris the 29 of August, 1570. Your Honors to command. F. Walsingham.


I have caused by my Lord Ambassadors means, according to her Majesty's order,
Monsieur Cavanes, one of the Commissioners for the Princes, to advertise them
of her Majesty's intention of sending me into these parts, as tending chiefly
to their benefits, which thing he has already advertised; and as I learn
there comes forthwith a Gentleman from the Queen of Navarre, and the rest of
the Nobility, the King here being made privy thereof, to give her Majesty
thanks for the great favor showed them in this their troubles. Thus Sir,
having advertised you of the Accomplishment of that which was appointed to me
to be done by virtue of my Instructions, to the end you may impart the same to
her Majesty, I most humbly take my leave.

The Copy of my Letter to the Earl of Leicester.
RIght Honorable, and my very good Lord; for that I know my Lord Ambassador
here, imparteth unto your Lordship, the present state of things here, I shall
need the less to trouble your Lordship in that behalf.

Touching my Message of Congratulation, the King accepts the same in very
good part; he professes good will toward the Queen my Mistress, and touching
the Peace, he protests to keep and observe the same inviolably, which his
proceedings hitherto does very well confirm the same. The mutinous Messiems of
Paris, he has fundry times since his repair hither, very sharply rebuked, and
charged them with contempt; he advises them to take another course, and says,
he will be known to be a King: And therefore for that his meaning is that the
Edict should be duly observed, he commands them straightly to look to the due
observations of the same.

The like advertisement has he given to the Presidents of his Parliament here,
who seem as yet to stand in some terms with him: For whereas the King would
have them sworn to the observation of the Edict, they refuse the same --
alleging, that in the entrance into their Government, they ordinarily take an
oath to observe all such Edicts, as by the King shall be published; what will
be the issue of the refusal, I know not. The King tells them, that the
passions of some of his Counselors has been of more value then his
Authority; and therefore he assures them (which he confirms with many an
oath) that unless they turn over another leaf, he will provide him of new
Presidents, and extend such punishment toward them, as their contempt
deserves, and may be admonishment to others to avoid the like.

As, I can gather in the time of my short abode here by such a Conference a^ I
have had with some of judgment, I find the grounds of the continuance of the
Peace to be in number five, his own disposition, necessity, pleasure, the
Kings misliking, with certain of his Council, and his late favoring of others.

His disposition of Peace, is not grown to-him of late, but has been from the
beginning, as those that have well observed him do testify; and therefore
there is the more hope of continuance of the same.

His necessity has two parts: first, he lacks treasure to maintain the
charges of further Wars. Secondly, those that have served him in these wars,
are grown so weary of them, as men judge, that hardly they could have been
drawn to continue them any longer.

Pleasure and Wars are direct contraries, and he being so much inclined to the
one, as he is an enemy unto the other, it is thought therefore, that hardly any
thing will bring him to do that that may hinder his pleasure.

His misliking toward the house of Giuse continues, who have been the
nourishers of these wars: And though of late the Cardinal of Lorrain has had
access to the Kings presence, yet is he not repaired in credit, neither deals
he in Government.

His favor to Montmorencie, a chief worker of this Peace increases, who now
carries the whole sway of the Court, and is restored to the Government of
Paris; besides, he has procured the displacing of Monluc, Monsieur d'Escars,
and la Vale^t, and procured to be placed in their rooms, etc.

These, my Lord, be the grounds that I can gather of the new accord, the doubts
of the not continuance are in number three:

First, it is thought that this Marriage with the Emperors daughter, may draw
him from this peaceable inclination.

Secondly, the great conference that is between the Q. Mother and the Cardinal
breeds some doubt of some practice to impeach the same.

Lastly, it is a common fear, that Monsieur can hardly digest to live in the
degree of a Subject, having already the reputation of a King: he seems yet to
run one course with the King in liking and misliking; but so to continue it, is
altogether thought unlikely.

I have been desirous underhand, to search out somewhat touching the thing your
Lordship gave me secret informations of, yet I can learn nothing thereof;
though that would be dangerous, yet I pray God there be not a thing attempted
of more danger, which may with more ease be brought to pass.

I leave your Lordship to consider, by that which has been showed, both hope
and fear of the continuance of this peace: What will be the issue of this
Tragedy, I pray God that fall out that may be to his glory; and so committing
your Lordship to his tuition, I most humbly take my leave.

From Paris the 29 of August, 1570. Yours to Command, Francis Walsingham.


To Master Secretary.
SIr, being in doubt whether I might return before advise given or no, my
Negotiation being done; in the end, I concluded with my self, that it was
better to stay and to attend her Majesty's order, then to return home at all
adventure: This therefore shall be to desire your Honor, that I may by your
good means understand her Majesty's pleasure in this behalf. Touching the state
of things here, I forbear to write unto your honor, for that I know my Lord
Ambassador has fully advertised you: And so leaving further to trouble you at
this present, I most humbly take my leave.


To our trusty and well-beloved Francis Walsingham Esquire present in the Court of
France about our affairs.
ELIZABETH R.

TRusty and well-beloved, we great you well; we perceive by your Letters
written from Paris the 29 of the last month unto our Secretary, how diligently
and orderly you have performed the Message and Charge committed unto you, which
we take in very good and acceptable part; being glad to understand your
ability and fitness to do us further service hereafter. And where, among other
things, you desire to know our pleasure for your return unto us, or further
stay there. Forasmuch as we have made choice of you to be our Ambassador
Resident with our good Brother the French King, instead of Sir Henry Norris,
whom we are very shortly to revoke, we would be very glad, so it would stand
with your commodity, and without returning back hither, you did remain there
still for that purpose; which if you can do, upon signification thereof unto
us, we shall give order for our Letters of Credence to be addressed unto the
said King, and to be sent forthwith unto you, for your placing with him as our
Ambassador Resident there: Howbeit, if the necessity of your business be such,
as you must of force be driven to return over, and to settle your things here,
before you can be able to do us service there, then are we well contented, if
there be no other remedy, that you repair over some short while, to prepare
your self to return back again for our service, with as convenient speed as may
be.

Given under our signet at Rycot the 7 of September the 12 year of our Reign
1570.

To our Right trusty and well-beloved Sir Henry Norris, our Ambassador Resident
with our good Brother the French King.
ELIZABETH R.

TRusty and right well-beloved, we greet you well; whereas Monsieur Moulenet
being lately with us, did not only bring several Letters from the French King
our good Brother, and the Queen Mother; by which the said King and she expressly
required us to use toward the Queen of Scots, all honest and favorable
treatment due to a Queen of her quality, and to set her at liberty, and aid
her to be restored to her Realm with Authority due to her; but also according
to the credit given by the said Letters, he the said, Moulenet did at length
with very earnest speech deal with us therein, alleging, that in this doing we
should much satisfy the King his Master, and procure to our self great honor;
adding many other Allegations to induce thereunto to the maintenance of the
said Moulenets speeches and negotiations.

Thereunto we have made some brief Answers, as the time then served, and as we
thought meet to satisfy them. But yet finding them to continue in their
earnest solicitations, and in the end earnestly requesting our Answer to the
French King, we told them, that the time did not then conveniently serve us to
send such an answer to them (as the case required) to our good Brother, but we
would shortly impart our meaning herein more at large by you, being our
Ambassador there Resident, in such sort, as we trusted our said Brother and the
Queen Mother should find the same reasonable.

And so will we, that you shall with your best opportunity resort to them
both, and declare unto them, that because of the length and variety of the
matters which we have committed unto you to be declared; yet per case it be
hard for you to express the same so orderly and readily in speech as you gladly
would do, you may require of the King license to read unto them in such sort as
you have turned it into French, a thing usual to this their Ambassador, and not
to be misliked, especially in you that most herein use their language, and not
your own natural; as their Ambassador does here, to his great commodity. And
this being granted, when you read it, our meaning is not, you shall deliver the
same out of your hands to be kept or copied, unless it be very earnestly pressed
by them. And thus it follows that you shall declare:

We have considered of the Letters sent unto us by Moulenet from them both,
with also the further explanation of the Contents thereof by him, according to
the credit given unto him. The sum whereof, was to require our favor toward
the Queen of Scots, in using her with favorable treatment due to a Queen of
her quality, and aiding her with our power to be restored to her Realm, and
obedience of her Subjects: And though we did suddenly say somewhat to Moulenet
on our own part, to have satisfied him, as we have done the like at sundry
other times to their Ambassador here Resident; yet not knowing how they have
conceived or delivered our speeches to the King our good brother, nor how
therewith he is satisfied, which we are desirous to do in all reasonable
requests, according to the good Amity that is and ought to be between us, we
have thought good at some more length, to impart to our good Brother and Queen
Mother, both our doing and meanings in all this case of the Queen of Scots,
nothing doubting but the same being by them considered with their indifferent
judgments, it shall appear that we have done nothing hitherto, in this case,
contrary to honor and reason, or otherwise then very necessary and urgent
cause has moved us, or might have moved any other Prince having the like
cause; neither yet in deeming the request of our good Brother the King in such
sort and condition as it it made, have we given him any occasion of offense
toward us. And this to do, we are moved in good will, in respect of the mutual
Amity that is betwixt the King and us, and not of any necessity we have to be
accountable to any person for our actions; and so we trust the King will accept
the same in friendly manner.

And before he shall know what is to be said on our part, we do earnestly
require them both, as a good Brother, and a good Sister, according to the
fervent offers of their good amity and perfect love made to us, not only by
their Letters, but by Messages, that they both will give ear hereunto, as
Princes and Persons standing indifferent in this cause, without declination of
their affection, or adverting their judgments to the instigations of any
particular persons that are more affectionate of nature to the person of the
said Queen, then to the truth of the matter; and this being granted, as in
honor it cannot be denied, specially betwixt friends, as we make account of
them both in all our honorable causes, we doubt not but we shall well see, that
in stead of request or expostulation made to us, we shall be found to have
deserved praise and thanks for our doings past, and shall not be disallowed in
forbearing hereafter to grant simply to the requests as they are made. And
after the King and his Mother shall grant to us this reasonable request, you
shall proceed and say, First, we require our good Brother to consider what part
of his request has been already accomplished of our natural disposition; and
next, what part we have not as yet yielded unto; and then also, he shall see
uponwhat just reasons we forbear to assent to the rest of their requests, as it
is made, where we are required to use all honest and gracious treatment due to
a Queen of her quality: The truth is, since her flying into our Realm, where
she escaped an evident danger of her life, we caused her to be always
honorably attended by persons of Nobility, and such as were of the ancient
Families of our Realm; we have entertained her at our charges with a company of
her own, of such Lords and Ladies as she her self made choice of to remain with
her, and appointed her houses of such Commodity of pleasures and pastimes as
the Country would afford: And herein being constrained to say somewhat more
for our self, then otherwise we would, but to answer calumniations, we are
assuredly informed, that for her own Person, her Diet and commodity of Past^me
meet for the conservation of her health, she for the most part when she lived
at her own will in Scotland, had no better Entertainment or Diet, but rather
many times worse and baser, as it is well known to all persons that understand
both: So as for the state, and honest and favorable treatment of her own
Person, we are sure no lack can be found -- suppressed, or rather untrulie
reported of us, wherein we have been much wronged, contrary to our deserts, the
King our good Brother, and his Mother, not a little abused with such untruths.

If fault have been found that she has not been used according as a Q. of her
quality, if therein be meant, that she has not such honor done in the
services of her, as are due to a Queen, she herself is to answer to the same,
for by her own servants she has been, and is continually served. And we think
not but that they have therein accomplished their duties according to her
desire, at the least, to speak the truth, we are credibly informed, that in
Scotland she had commonly less reverence done to her in her services by the
self same servants, then has been by them here. And as to such of ours as have
attended upon her, we think they have not forborne to do their duties at all
times agreeable to her estate, except per case she her self have of her
courtesy at sometimes remitted some part thereof to them. But for our part
truly, notwithstanding such great offenses as she has diversely made unto us,
we have been alwa^es careful of her person to be honorably used, and of her
health to be by all possible good means preserved, esteeming it our honor so to
have her treated and used, being brought into calamity, and flying into our
Realm as she did.

But now if the rest that be required, be not granted, that is, to have her
aided with our power to the restitution of her Realm; we trust to make it
manifestly appear, that to consent thereunto, as is required, were not only a
great folly in us, and dangerous to our Estate, but against all common reason,
and such an error, that neither Prince nor private person, having any sense of
understanding, would commit, the circumstances being well considered. And
though many things be well known commonly to the world, for maintenance of this
our judgment, yet the beginning of these things could not be known to the King
our good Brother, in respect of his young years, and to the Q. Mother, though
they have been well known, yet either her time since occupied with her own
dangerous causes, or the continuance of perpetual informations for the Scottish
Queen, or else some part thereof touching the time of her worthy husband King
Henry, and her son also King Francis, may per case have brought the most part
of things to oblivion, or at least, have altered her judgment, or else move
her to give the less heed to them, being now remembered: nevertheless, as
briefly as we can, with passing over of a great number of accidents and
scruples of offenses, and especially such as concerned the time of King Henry,
or King Francis the ^econd, which were of no less importance then the assailing
of our Crown and Title, as the world knows, we will lay before their eyes
these things following, to show how the acts and dealings of the Scottish Q.
toward us have provoked us to deal in another manner with her, then hitherto
we have.

First, she is the person by whom, and for whom only it is manifestly known,
that our Kingdom and Crown was Challenged almost as soon as Almighty God
called us by right thereunto. And how many ways that Challenge was furthered
and maintained, prosecuted and published, needs not to be recited, for all
Nations of Christendom understand it. And if we should enter to inform our good
Brother the King, of the particularities thereof, howsoever the same should
touch the time of his noble Father King Henry, and his Brother King Francis, it
may be thought he being Son and Brother of such Kings, yet he would in his
judgment inwardly with himself think us not well used. But for avoiding of
things displeasant, and considering since the same unkindness was showed in his
Fathers and Brothers times, a reconciliation of Amity has followed, which we
observe firml^; we will omit all other parts, and remember only the things done
by the Scottish Queen after the death of her husband King Francis, when she was
at her own liberty.

We sent our Ambassador to her, and being in France, we required, according to
a certain T^eatie of Peace concluded in July, 156C. by sufficient Commission
from King Francis the second her husband, and the Q. her self, under the
several hands and seals, as well of Scotland as of France, to confirm the said
Treaty, as was by their Commissioners having Authority, covenanted and
concluded.

In which Treaty was concluded Articles of good Amity betwixt us and her in
our Countries, and those as beneficial for her as for us. And also a provision
and especial Covenant, that she should forbear from thenceforth to attempt or
offer us any like wrong by challenging of our Crown as she had done before
time. To this our request, delay was made, not with alleging any thing to the
contrary of our right or maintenance of her former Challenges. But yet she must
now (being a Widow, and sole Governor of her Kingdom of Scotland) in these
causes have the presence of some of her Nobility or Counselors of the
Scottish Nation; at whose coming she would confirm the said Treaty. This was
not much misliked of us: Shortly some of her Nobility and Counselors came to
her from Scotland; and then being e^tsoons required in most friendly manner, to
be remembered of her promise by the Ambassador, having Commission so to do, and
offering to deliver unto her the reciprocal of our part under our Great-Seal,
it was again deferred, until she should her self return into Scotland; which
she said should shortly be, and then she would not fail to perform it well,
though these delays were not convenient to nourish friendship, but rather to
engender suspicion, with some other practices then discovered, yet in respect
of our natural desire to have her come into her own Kingdom, and then to live
neighbourly with us, we forbore to show any great offense for those great
delays. And when she returned into Scotland, we e^tsoons sent to her, and
demanded the same again, with offer of all manner of good friendship, which
being again deferred, upon pretense she was not fully settled in her Realm, we
forbore also for that time, though not without great cause of misliking; and
then in the mean season following, notwithstanding many good offices used on
our part, by sending sundry times both Messages and Ambassadors to visit her,
to offer unto her all good offices. It chanced that a young Nobleman, our near
Kinsman, brought up in our Court named the Lord Darlie, was secretly intised to
pass into Scotland upon other pretenses, for private suits for Lands, and such
like. And there without our knowledge, according to the same former practices,
whereof we were not altogether ignorant, though we would not seem so jealous of
the same; he was suddenly accepted by that Q. to be affied in contract of
Marriage with her, as one thought to be a meet person to work troubles in our
Realm for her advantage, yea contrary to the advice of the wiser sort of her
Council; and consequently contrary to our will and liking, was married to her
in all haste. And after that it was there devised to make him an instrument to
work danger to us and our Estate by sundry practices, not only with certain of
our subjects, but also with some foreign persons, as far forth as the power of
the same Q. and her said husband being our borne Subject could extend; In which
their doings, sundry their practices were discovered to us, and made frustrate:
And yet after that nevertheless, when the said Queen had a Son of that
marriage, we were of nature moved to set aside all unkindnesses, and did send
thither an Ambassador, a person of honor, the Earl of ^edford, to assist the
Christening of her Son, to whom we also were Godmother. At which time
unkindness being known to be between her and her husband, although he had
grievously offended us, we having compassion of the unnatural discord betwixt
them, and fearing some event thereof, caused our said Ambassador at that time
to use all the good means he could with her to repair the same which he was not
able to do, such was become her misliking of her husband, although in him on
the other side (as we heard say) was found all manner of lowliness meet for him
to recover her favor. And then also we required her to perform that which in
Justice and Honor she was bound to do, and had so often delayed; which was, to
confirm the Treaty before concluded, sending unto her at the same time under
our hand and seal the reciprocal for our part. But then she began to allege a
matter not before heard of; which was, that from some words in a certain part
of the Treaty, it was doubted, that she might be prejudiced in such right as
she pretended to be due to her next after us, and the children of our body;
whereof we being advertised, caused it to be answered, that if there were any
such words, we were content they should be rased out of the Treaty, and she
should not be moved to confirm any such Clause. But that answer being not
accepted, which was very strange and unreasonable; a new matter of delay was
invented, pretending that she would send some of hers shortly into England, to
treat with us thereupon, and so finish that which we did demand; whereof
indeed nothing ever follovved well, although we had these great causes of
miscontentation, as indeed indifferent persons may well perceive, and did now
clearly see whereunto these delays did tend very ungrateful and not without
danger, if we should not regard our self well; yet when a miserable
calamity ensued shortly after to her, that the King her husband, with whom
of late she was grievously offended, was cruelly strangled, and horribly
murdered, and the principal murderer named the Earl Bothewell, having a
virtuous lavvful wife (of a great house) living -- because suddenly her
husband being first immediately upon the murder committed, and directly and
openly imputed to him -- advanced by her to high degrees of honor and estates
of lands, who nevertheless vildly misused her, to the great grief of all her
subjects and friends; we were stricken with inward compassion of this her
great extreme miseries and infamy, which was spread upon her, and sent to
her special Messengers, not then to request her (as we had done before) to
confirm the Treaty, but to have regard unto her honor, and to relinquish such
an odible person, being the known murderer of her husband, an unlawful person
to be married to her; and generally so evil a man in all vices, as he had the
common name to excel all others in iniquity, wherein no advice of ours could
prevail. But in the end he being hated of all her Estates, and seeking by force
to subdue them that intended to prosecute the Murderers, was forced to fly
the Realm: And leaving her lamentably in the field desolate, she was conducted
from thence to a place of restraint, where she refused to renounce the said
Murderer, whilst she was thereby in present danger to have her life taken
away from her by fury of her Nation, as she well knows: We by speedy
Messages, and other kind of earnest means used toward them that were most
irritated against her, saved her life: A benefit such, as she never received
the like of any worldly creature; and full glad we were, that God gave us such
power and disposition of mind, to bestow so great a benefit of her, who
nevertheless had offered us the greatest worldly injuries that could be
devised. It followed, that when she had found means to escape to her liberty,
whereof we were very glad, she sell again, by Gods suffering, into a second
calamity as dangerous as the former; for having attempted, by force, to
overcome the party that adhered to her son, that was then crowned, and accepted
King by the States of the Realm, and that also with her consent, as they
affirm, her party was overthrown in her own sight, and she thereby forced to
escape, by flying with a very small number. And being hardly pursued, she was
driven for safety of her life to enter into a simple vessel, and crossing over
an Arm of the sea, came into England, unknown in the Port where she landed;
yea, she herself dissembled her person for a time. But yet shortly after being
discovered who she was, and we hearing thereof, within three or four days (for
sooner we could not, in respect of the distance of the place) set forth by
Commandment to have her comforted, and honorably used: And afterward warned
certain persons of honor and credit to attend and wait upon her, to bring her
from the borders of our Realm, where she was in manifest danger of her contrary
part of Scotland to be suprized: And granted her to remain further within our
Realm, in a Castle of an ancient Nobleman, with all her company that escaped
with her, and with some others that did also follow her; and there she had such
entertainment (altogether upon our charges) as was meet for a Queen, and for a
person brought into such calamity, or for one that had notoriously challenged
our Crown, and would not perform that she was bound to do for our satisfaction.
After she had been there some time, and that she had now through her whole
Realm been newly charged with the former crimes, as to have been directly the
procurer and deviser of the horrible murder of her husband, to have married
the principal murderer, to have defended and succord all the rest of the
murderers, whereof some of the principal were her own servants, with a number
of infamous crimes: We caused her to be friendly dealt withal, to understand
what she would have us to do for her, that with our honor we might do -- to
relieve her of the infamies wherein we were nearly touched, even in the inward
part of our heart, considering the fresh death of her husband was not yet
punished, he being next Kinsman both to her and us living, on the King our
Fathers side, and on hers also. After many things propounded, at length she
agreed, that her cause of Criminations should be tried as one that was not
guilty of the principal crime, the murder, and that we should have her
allegations for her defense; whereunto we assented, assuring her, that if by
any means it might appear, that she was not to be duly charged to be a deviser
and procurer thereof, as she was charged, her accusers should be with all
severity punished, as reason was. And she should have our aid to be speedily
restored to her State; but what followed hereupon, and what was the cause why
she did not cause her Commissioners to answer to the matters produced against
her, we do omit for this time, having been heartily sorry, that where so many
matters were produced, to charge her to be culpable, and she by her
Commissioners thereof made privy, did not suffer the same to be further tried
of what value they were to have such credit as they did pretend: And in this
great matter, being so heinous, it is well to be considered of our good Brother
and Sister, to what respect more of her honor, and care of her, then of our
self, we hitherto forbore to notify abroad the mutitudes of the Arguments
produced against her; by which if we had been by any ways disposed to hinder
her, as per case some of her friends would have thought of us, we could have
made, and yet can make no small advantage to abase her estimation to the whole
world, and yet publish nothing but the only rude and bare arguments and
matters as they have been manifestly and orderly produced, leaving to the
world to consider of the same as should seem most profitable.

But herein have we esteemed more her honor, then our own profit, having an
intention to overcome evil, if it might be with good; and the rather, for that
Almighty God has so fortified our estate otherwise with his blessings, and
so abased hers with the lack thereof, as, we thank him, we have no need of
such means to abase our Enemies, or evil vvillers.

And thus far did things pass until this last year, in which time, vvhilest
we were occupied and traveling at her request with the States of her Realm,
who had accepted and acknowledged her son as their King, to come to some
Conformity with her for her return into her Realm, and for a concord to be
made betvveen her and her States; she again had, without our knowledge,
entered into a secret dealing of marriage with a principal Nobleman of our
Realm; and not contented therevvith, when we did mislike it, she by her
Ministers entered into such an intelligence with certain of our Noblemen in the
North part of our Realm, as they now since Michaelmas, burst out into an open
Rebellion, making their outvvard show of intent, to change the state of
Religion, contrary to the Laws of our Realm; but in very deed, as manifestly it
is to us more known, and truly discovered, their meaning was chiefly to set up
her, not only in her own Country, but in this our Realm. And though it
pleased God to animate all our Subjects generally of all Estates so to accord
to serve us in the speedy suppression hereof; yet her manner of unkind dealing
against us in this dangerous sort is not the less to be weighed in respect of
that which was by her intended to our utter subversion; a matter worthy
consideration of all such as have States and Government, and that mean to
preserve them from subversion by such Rebellions, wherein the very Crown of
the Prince is sought.

And thus having as shortly as so many matters of so many years continuance
could suffer, passed over no small number of unkind and dangerous enteprises
against us; and contrariwise, of our manifold kind and abundant benefits
toward her in all her necessities, we doubt not but now, if the requests that
are made to us to aid her to our power, to restore her forthwith to her Realm,
shall be applid to the former things preceding, no indifferent person of any
judgment will, or can think it in conscience reasonable to move us to commit
such a dangerous folly, as to be the author our self to hazard our own Person,
our State, our quietness of our Realm and People at one instant, without
further consideration how we might preserve the same, as God has given them
unto us, and not to be lost (as it were wilfully) and with contemning or
neglecting of the wisdom that God has bestowed upon us, to possess and to
maintain our Crown and Dignity with public peace and quietness amongst our
Subjects: And therefore, although now lately in this time of Rebellion,
whereunto we well understand that she has a party, we did cause her to be
removed further into our Realm, from the parties where the Rebellion was
stirred, and there forbad resort to be made unto her, as before was common for
all persons, but of her own Country and ours, we see not why this our dealing
in so dangerous a time should be blamed, being assured that no Christian Prince
in like case, would have done less. And therein we durst appeal to the
judgment of any Prince or Potentate in the world that will profess any
indifferency in judgment; yea, we dare think, that even herself and her most
affectionate friends cannot think us here to have dealt unreasonably.

The like might be thought also, in that we have of late restrained one, whom
she used as her Ambassador, being a Bishop, whom we used almost as one of our
own, for her sake, upon due information that he has been a principal motioner
and nourisher of this late Rebellion, by diverse means: A matter to be as much
allowed for us to do, in the stay from subversion of our Realm, as were to stay
and restrain one that would bring more fire to a City, which he has already
set on fire. In this sort we have so nearly represented to the King our good
Brother, and the Queen his Mother, some part of such circumstances of the Queen
of Scots cause, as we doubt not but reason, honor and good will shall move them
to conceive of us, as we should be the like to conceive of them, if they had
the like cause with any other Prince, as we have with the Queen of Scots,
having thought meet to omit a multitude of other circumstances, tending also to
this end* because we would not extend this our letter to overmuch length for
wearying the King with Declaration thereof.

But if the King could but imagine, or the Queen Mother for him, how some other
Prince might have attempted the like dangers to his Estate and Crown, and
continued the like offenses toward him, where he had showed kindness, we are
assured they might think it somewhat in us, if we should, after the truth
declared, move the King for any particular respect of a third person to consent
to that, which should plainly after hazard his Estate, being our Friend; and by
some such imagination of a like cause, we think their judgments shall be best
directed thereof: Sorry would we be that any like indeed should happen unto
him, to inform him how to judge in our case.

When you have thus done, if the King or his Mother shall object any thing
hereupon, as it were in excuse of the Queen of Scots, or entreating further for
her, you may say in answer, -- That whatsover it shall please them to move unto
you, you will make report thereof, and doubt not, howsoever the Queen of Scots
doings have deserved other dealing, yet our natural inclination toward her, is
by our doings so manifest, as in any reasonable request; we doubt not, but we
should be found reasonable to have regard to the King our good Brothers motions
and requests, that may stand with our honor and safety to accord unto; and so
we trust the K. means, not to propound any thing unto us, otherwise then in
good terms of friendship, whereby always they that are to make demands or
requests to their friends, do regard how they may stand to the safety of their
friends; and so has Moulenet and the French Ambassador certified unto us, that
the intention of our good Brother is to no other end. You shall also inform the
King, that after we had given order to cause thus much to be written, his
Ambassador came to us, and signified the good will of our good Brother, in
imparting to us the double of such answers as he had made to the Demand of the
Queen of Navarre, and the Prince of Navarre, and Conde and others, for the
which his dealing with us in such friendly sort to make us participate of his
doings we heartily thank him* and as we answered his Ambassador so you may say
also to the Queen, That except we might understand what the said Queen, and the
rest, with others have to say to this offer, we cannot give any resolute
judgment thereof. But we think the King shall do a godly act, and both
honorable and profitable to himself and his Country, if he shall give them
assurance of their lives; So as they may change that common opinion which is in
the World, that they have their lives more safe whilst they take up Arms,
then they were in time when the peace was granted to them, such has bin the
insolency of evil ministers to break the Kings commandment and endanger the
Credit of his word and promise; And in our opinion nothing is so hard in all
this matter, as assurance to them to enjoy that which shall be granted, and if
our Credit or opinion with them may help them -- to accept the Kings favor, so
as we might see in what sort they might -- therefore be sure notwithstanding
the interruptions of evil ministers, we would be glad to be the furtherer of
so good an act, as thereby the King might have an universal quietness in his
Countries.

The Ambassador also now moved us that we would take Care that no aid of Armor
or Weapon should be by us or our license Conveyed to Rotchel, to the
maintenance of the Kings Subjects there, whom he n^meth Rebels, whereunto our
answer was that we did direct no person thither, or licensed any to carry any
thing thither that might offend the King. But generally we must permit our
subjects as Merchants to resort for their trade to all places indifferent in
France, wishing that they might find like trade in others parts for their
necessity as they do by likelihood in Rotchel, and that we would not doubt but
they would follow their Comodity in other places and not at Rotchel; for
generally Merchants follow where gain is most with surety and friendly usage,
and so you may make report to the King.

Lastly the Ambassador moved us in the Kings name to understand whether he
might assure the King that we made no leavie of Soldiers in Almaigne, as it
was commonly reported, whereunto we answered that presently we made none, but
yet we have such friendship with sundry Princes of Almaigne, as if we should
have need to require any numbers for our service, if any unkindness by force
should be offered us by any our neighbors we can speedily thereof be
furnished, and for the state of our Realm we are determined indeed to prepare a
force both by Sea and by land; whereof if the King shall hear, we require him
to conceive no jealousy of our evil meaning toward him and his Countries,
trusting that from him no occasion shall grow to alter our Amity.

Given under our signet at our Honor of Hampton Court the 23 of Febr. 1569 in
the 12 year of our reign.

A Note of such doubts as I desired to be resolved of by her Majesty before my
entering into my charge.
WHether I should treat only with the King; and in Case the King either with
sickness, or to follow his pleasures, refer me over to his mother or to
Monsieur his brother, Whether it be her Majesty's pleasure I shall treat with
them.

For that the King gives a deaf ear to a long negotiation, whether having
occasion to deal with him from her Majesty in some matter of weight and
length, I shall not exhibit the same to him in writing, declaring first by
mouth the effect thereof, and if I shall exhibit it in writing whether her
Majesty shall not think it most expedient to deliver the same either in
Italian or Latin for avoiding of such Cavelling as may be made upon the
translation to French, whereof Sir Henry Norris has had experience.

How far forth, and in what sort from time to time I shall deal with the
Rebels that presently are retired into France, or hereafter shall retire.

How I shall behave my self in any public Assembly toward the Ambassador,
as well of Spain as of Portugal, either in taking or giving place.


To my very loving Friend Francis Walsingham Esquire appointed for Ambassador to
the French King.
SIr I send you herewith the Queen Majesty's instructions as they are finished;
and her Majesty's pleasure is; that you should not forbear your journey but
proceed; and if on the way you come to certain knowledge of the Kings speedier
entry into Paris -- meet to accelerat my Lord of Buckhurstes coming thither,
her Majesty would have you send some in haste back. And so not well able to
write any further, but to end with my hearty wishing you a prosperous journey
to your hearts desire,

23 December 1570. Yours assuredly William Cecil.


Instructions ^iven to our trusty and wel-beloved servant Fra. Walsingham Esquire
presently sent to be our Ambassador Resident with our good Brother the French
King, the 19 of December 1570.
ELIZABETH R.

FOrasmuch as we are already determined to license our trusty and wel-beloved
Sir Henry Norris Knight, who has of a long time served us faithfully as our
Ambassador with the French King our good Brother, to repair over unto us, and
to leave that place; and that we have made special choice of you upon a
singular liking of your vertuousand good conditions to serve us in the same
place, wherein we trust our expectations shall be well satisfied of your
fidelity and diligence. And for the rest also we doubt not but by the
experience which you shall daiely have, you shall be able to accomplish that
which shall be requisite: and for the better instruction of you, we have
thought meet to cause to be delivered unto you in writing these few things
hereafter following by way of memorial. After you have delivered you letters,
and and bin presented to the King by our foresaid Ambassador whom you shall
suceed, for the doing whereof our said Ambassador can sufficiently direct you,
and will we doubt not, but make good recommendations of you to the French King,
to the Queen, Mother and others such as shall be thought meet; we will that you
shall use such speech unto them, that it may appear that your special Charge
is to be a Minister for the conservation of the good Amity that is betwixt us
and the King, and Consequently to preserve Concord and mutual intercourse
betwixt the Subjects of both our Countries, according to the good Treaties that
remain betwixt us for that purpose: and therefore considering you are so
determined for your duty sake to us, and for the good that may ensue thereof,
you shall require them if at any time any thing to the contrary shall be
conceived of you (as we trust shall not, because you mean to give no occasion)
yet it may please them before any such judgment be conceived of you, it may be
in some wise declared as they may understand our answer, wherewith you doubt
not but to satisfy them.

Your office consisting of sundry parts, the first and principal shall be to
continue there as well to execute our commandment, and to deliver our letters
and messages upon matters occurrent, as to require and to receive answers; and
to the best that you can, to procure thereupon reasonable and speedy
resolutions, as the nature of the matter, shall import: for the well doing
whereof, we must refer you hereafterwards to such particular directions as we
shall send you by our special Letters, whereby you shall be best directed in
manner to proceed.

The second shall be, to have continual regard to all manner of their doings
there, as well private as public, that may be prejudicial to us or our estate:
And therefore after good consideration and knowledge thereof had, to advertise
us diligently and secretly; and to this end, you shall do well to require of
our said Ambassador (your predecessor) some good information by what means you
may atta^n to the knowledge of things needful and requisite, and whom you may
best trust and use to attain to the more certenitie; and if any thing be
discovered unto you at any time, that shall seem of importance, that the
information thereof may well abide the time of your advertisement to us, and to
answer again, we leave it to your consideration and discretion to omit no time
convenient, but to resort to the King, or some other, as you shall think meet,
to declare what you understand and mislike, and in what sort it is hurtful to
the Amity betwixt us; And therefore to require some information, or some plain
answer, meet to be imparted to us, for discharge of your duty. And that in this
behalf you shall not use, by way of complaint upon any light intelligence, but
you do first by conference of things together, find the matter to be true and
worthy of complaint, least hereafter less regard be had to you, when you shall
have just cause to complain.

The third is, to have regard to such suites, as our Subjects (using the trade
of Merchandise within those Realms) shall have cause to make; that they may
have by your soliciting ready expedition, with justice, upon causes of
depredations or arrests, or any such injuries or molestations; and therein to
solicit such of the Kings Counsel, as you shall find to have charge thereof;
letting them to understand, that besides the bond of Justice, whereunto they do
direct the King such favorable expedition of our Subjects, shall provoke us
and our ministers to do the like, and shall also breed mutual love betwixt the
Subjects on both parties, and give cause to a more frequentation of intercourse
of Merchants, being a thing beneficial to both the Realms. And because you
shall be the more able to understand, and to treat in your conferences and
negotiation upon any thing generally touching the Amity betwixt the King and
us; or more particularly, for the deciding and determining of any causes that
may come in controversy for the trade and intercourse of Merchandise betwixt
the Subjects of both our Countries and kingdoms, you shall do well to have with
you some Copies of the treaties now remaning in force betwixt us and the King,
by the which you shall be very well informed and directed, as by certain rules
how to treat and deal in all causes that may there come in controversy, and
thereby be bound to require due observation as cause and matter shall require.

We doubt not but you do consider, how profitable a thing it is for quietness
of us and our Realm, to have that party in France which has professed
reformation of Religion, to be maintained and contained in the favor, which the
King has granted them by his Edict; And therein we would have you at all
times (when occasion shall be given you) let it appear to the King, that we
think nothing can procure more assurance of inward quietness in his Realm, then
the due observation of those things which he has granted to his subjects in
his Edict; and you may say that he has more cause by experience to believe us
therein, then any other Prince that is his Allie besides us, that shall be of a
contrary mind. And so experience has taught us already to think, and may well
ascertain him, considering he has seen and felt the continuance of the
troubles of his Realm, whilst he followed the advice of other Princes and
Potentates, and dissuading him from granting such favor as he has done to his
subjects. And in any other thing wherein you shall be able at any time to
further and advance the observation of the matters of the Edict in favor of
them of the Religion, we would you should endeavor your self in such sort as
may stand with our honor. And of this our intention we will that you give
understanding to such of the principals of that part as have interest therein,
which you shall best do by the advice of your predecessor, who has best
acquaintance with these persons. Lastly, for certain matters lately treated of
here by the French Ambassador as touching the Queen of Scots cause, and the
preparations of ships and men of war made in Brittanie, you shall at your
coming to our Ambassador, learn in what state he has left those things, and
how he has answered the King, and so you may persist in the same course until
you shall be by us otherwise directed.

We have by our Letters to our foresaid Ambassador willed him to make deliverie
unto you of all such our Plate as he had delivered unto him at his entry into
his charge, which you shall receive of him by Indenture, if you shall have need
thereof.

Where we meant that you should have accompained the Lord of Buckhurst in his
journey to the French King, and so have bin presented with him to the said
King; now that we cannot understand the certainty of the said Kings entry into
Paris, at which time our meaning was and is that the said Lord of Buckhurst
should be there, we would not that you should abide any longer but proceed in
your journey; and if on your way you do perceive that the Kings entry will be
now in the beginning of Januarie [our will is] that you shall without attending
any longer for the coming of the said Lord of Buckhurst, proceed by our
Ambassadors means to be presented to the King, and to take the place of our
ordinary Ambassador, so as our former Ambassador Sir Henry Norris may return
at his Commodity. We would have you inform your self, by the judge of the
Admiraltie of all causes depending betwixt our subjects and those of France,
upon pretense of depredations, that you may the better answer complaints which
either ours or the others shall make.

And farther we would have you to acquaint your self by his means, with a
complaint lately exhibited by the French Ambassador in the name of the
Merchants of Roan, and what answers has bin made to the same, by such as we
did ordain to devise the same, whereof the said Judge was one. You shall also
receive a complaint which certain of our Merchants of London trading to Roan do
presently make for the Innovation of certain taxations by the Magistrates of
Roan upon the goods of our said subjects, contrary to the common use,
whereupon you shall (being well informed) of the inconveniencie thereof, and
the injustice; solicit the remedy thereof, so as time shall conveniently
require.

William Cecil.
Ended the 22 of December 1570.

To the right Honorable, and his very good Lord, the Earl of Leicester.
MY very good Lord, I write unto you at this present rather to use this as an
earnest of my diligence hereafter to follow, then for any good matter that I
have to write.

Passing through Canterbury, I visited the Cardinal, and delivered unto him
your Lordships Letters, who gave me as much light as he could touching the
present state of France, concerning the matter whereof it pleased your
Lordship, to give me a watch-vvord, there passed nothing betwixt us. The
picture your Lordship desired, I will take order shall be sent to you with
what convenient speed may be, beseeching your Lordship wherein my poor
service may stand you in stead, to use me with such boldness as I may thereby
assure my self that your Lordship makes account of me; and so further leaving
to trouble your Lordship at this present, I most humbly take my leave,

at Bullen the second of January 1571. Your Lorships to command, Fr. Walsingham.


To the right Honorable Sir William Cecill, her Majesty's principal Secretary.
SIr, I arrived here at Bullen the first of this month, where I could learn
nothing worthy the advertisement, for you know, Sir, that frontier news are
never of any great value; only this I learned of the Governors Son in law
here, a Gentleman of good account, and one of the Order, who accompanied with
diverse other Gentlemen came to visit me from the said governor Monsiuer de
Calliac, who told me that the Kings entry is deferred until the midst of
Febr. but hereof for the observing of the time, here is no more assurance than
there was before of the first of January.

Leaving Bullen, I have not forgot to enform your honor of the great exactions
used by the Innkeepers at Gravesend, Canterbury, and Dover, in the prices of
Victuals, whereof besides mine own experience, I learned by certain strangers
that passed over with me, they are so great as in no Country is used the like,
where all things bear so unreasonable prices in the market, and the people so
free from impositions of the Prince. Surely, Sir, it were well done that there
might by your good means and furtherance, some order be taken for the Redress
hereof, as well for her Majesty's honor, as for the ease of the poor
travelers. Thus Sir, having no further matter worthy the advertisment, I leave
to trouble your honor, most humbly taking my leave

from Bullen the second of January 1571. Your Honors most bounden, Fr.
Walsingham.


To the right Honorable, Sir Walter Mildmay, one of her Majesty's privy
Counsel.
SIr, you know that Frontiers are commonly better furnished with fables then of
matters of truth, and therefore I leave to make you partaker of such brutes as
are here occurrent; at the Governors hands here I was well received, who is
one that has always showed himself well inclined to our Nation in these times
of jealousy and unkindnesse, that has reigned betwixt the two Countries.

Touching my own particular, if my charges continue as they begin, whereof
there is small hope to the contrary, except there be some extraordinary
consideration had of me by your good means in transportation, my allowance will
not suffice to bear half my charges; I would therefore most humbly desire you
at the time of the receipt of the bill to weigh it accordingly.

Before my departure, I was earnestly requested by Mr. H. Cobham to recommend
unto you, a cause in controversy between him and Mr. Cartwright, committed to
your hearing and redress, who desires your convenient favor, which I beseech
you, Sir, the rather he may receive for my sake. And so leaving further to
trouble your Lordship at this present, I commit you to Gods protection.

From Bullen the 2 January 1571. Your Lordships to command Fr. Walsingham.


To the Queen most excellent Majesty.
MAy it please your most excellent Majesty to be advertised; receiving your
Highness Letters of the 16 of January, and perceiving your gracious pleasure
touching my Revocation, I cannot but as well for this, as your most favorable
acceptance of my service during my residence here, in most humble wise
acknowledge those favors of you; And after having conference with Mr. Francis
Walsingham, at good large, further of your Majesty's meaning, we both sent to
the Court to demand Audience, but the King being then newly removed from
Chantilly, and the Queen Mother repairing hither to Paris, our Audience was by
her deferred until the Kings coming to Madrid, where the Court being settled
the 21 of January, we were requested in the Kings name to come thither, the 25
of the same; and repairing thither at the pointed time, we were entertained by
Monsieur de Lause, who by the Kings appointment dined with us. After dinner
being once ended Chevalier de Sener was likewise sent from the King to
accompany us; so after we were advised by Sir Gihoronovi Gondi to repair to
the Kings presence, and staying a while in the Chamber of presence, being
courteously entertained by the Duke of Nevers and the Nobility; The King came
forth. Then I Sir Henry Norris, drawing near to him, said; That her Majesty
perceiving nothing more necessary to entertain the good Amity and
intelligence between Princes, then their devotion of good Ministers, had chosen
this Gentleman, Mr Francis Walsingham, being descended of a good house,
approved virtue, and like sincerity, to succeed me, and to reside your
Majesty's Ambassador near his person; not doubting, but according to your
Majesty's charge given him in that behalf, he would use all means possible to
entertain the good and neighbourly Amity between your Majesty, and likewise
the continuance of the intercourse and traffic between your Realms and
Subjects; which I prayed God long to continue, to his glory, to the increase of
your Honors, and tranquillity of your Realms, and all Christendom. Also I
declared that your Majesty had sent certain Letters unto him, his wife, and
mother; whereupon the King giving you most hearty thanks, of your choice of a
Gentleman so well qualified, and desirous to continue that thing which he so
much wished, he required me to cause the Gentleman to come to him. Then I
Francis Walsingham being thus presented by Sir Henry Norris, after ordinary
salutations done, I delivered your Majesty's Letters, which after he had caused
to be read by his Secretary Pinart, I showed him the great charge you gave me
so to direct my course in this service, as might best tend to the maintenance
of the good Amity between your Majesty's; as also the free traffic and
Intercourse between the Subjects of both your Realms, which thing as well for
duties sake toward your Majesty, as the reverence I bear him, and the great
benefit that would grow to both your Realms, I said I would not fail to
observe with what care and sincerity I might: And therefore desired him that I
might come to my answer, which I doubted not should be such, as he should rest
therewith satisfied, and I justified.

To this, after enquire made of your Majesty's health, he answered, That he he
could not but conceive great hope of continuance of Amity betwixt her Majesty
and him, for that you had made choice of one to supply this place, so well
inclined to entertain it, as he has given him to understand by his Ambassador,
that I was; he said therefore that I was very welcome, and should at all times
receive at his hands, for your Majesty's sake, gracious Audience; for the which
I rendered him most humble thanks; and told him, That I hoped that I should do
nothing unworthy the good opinion he had conceived of me, And touching the
gracious Audience promised, I doubt not but that his Ministers both heretofore
had, and hereafter should receive the like at your Majesty's hands.

Those ordinary Ceremonies ended, being requested by the Deputies of the
Princes of the Religion, to recommend their cause at this present; for it is
generally conceived that the Ambassador sent hither from the Princes of
Germany, who besides congratulating the Marriage, recommended the observation
of the Edict, which was a thing procured by your Majesty, as with whom you
have some secret league, do concur in all things that tend to the advancement
of Religion, me thought I could do no less but say somewhat in that behalf,
both for that I thought the opinion conceived of the League and concurrencie
worthy the nourishment; as also for that by your Majesty's instructions, I am
appointed to do any thing that may advance their cause, so far forth as may
stand with your Honor; and to that end your Majesty may judge, whither I kept
my self within that compass. I thought it my duty to send you the effect of
that I said, whereby if I failed in any thing, being by your Majesty
admonished thereof, I may hereafter avoid to offend in the like.

I declared unto him, that your Majesty willed me to signify unto him, that
you (as his good and loving sister who wished unto him all prosperity, and
thinks none so great as quietness of Government,) do not a little rejoice to
hear of the great care he takes for the due observation of the Edict lately
published, as that thing which makes him honorable, and of great reputation
with all Princes, that are not carried away with passion; and that you do not a
little wonder to see his Majesty in these young years, able (through his great
foresight and wisdom) to quench a fire of so great a Consequence and danger as
lately was kindled and dispersed through his whole Realm, and now through Gods
goodness, and his good order was at this presence utterly extinguished: an
example for the rareness thereof, worthy to be honored in him, and followed in
all other Princes who prefer good Government, and the preservation of their
Subjects, before tyranny and destruction of the same. I told him further, that
your Majesty hoped that he now finds a difference between the advice of
those Princes his neighbors, that advised him to continue the Wars, to the
hazarding of his State, and destruction of his Subjects and yours, and other
Princes, that exhorted him to the contrary, who judged always Peace and
concord tending most to his safety and their preservation. And therefore for
that experience, now (the best means) has taught him to know the
inconveniences of the one, and the profit of the other, your Majesty doubts
not, but as of his own inclination he has always bin given rather to peace,
to preserve his subjects, (a property of a good and loving Prince) then by
sword and violence to consume them (a thing most fit for a Tyrant.) So he will
continue the said course that tends most to the due execution of his said
Edict, the only means to preserve quietness that now reigns in his kingdom;
This course unto God so acceptable, for himself so honorable, and for his
subjects so profitable, if any should seek to impeach, for that it is most
commonly seen, that good purposes (as well in Princes as private men) have many
hinderers, be he either a subject unnatural, or a neighbor evil affected, as
envious at his repose:

Your Majesty offers your self with all aid and power to assist him to your
uttermost, against all such as shall seek or hinder him in so good and godly a
purpose; And as your Majesty rests herein affected toward him, so you doubt
not but God who has wrought this godly inclination, will raise up other
Princes to assist him, and to be likewise affected toward him in this behalf:
And that therefore your Majesty prays God to bless him in this course, and
to remove from him all such as shall hinder him in so noble an enterprise; to
whom your Majesty wishes as prosperous success, as ever Prince had that
occupied his place and Seat.

To this he answered, that he had right good cause to accept in good part your
Majesty's advertisement, whom he must needs acknowledge to have always as his
good Sister and as on careful of his well doing, advised him to that which was
best, both for himself and his Country; he willed me therefore to assure your
Majesty, that the only care he presently had, was to entertain the peace,
whereof the Q. of Navar and the Princes of the Religion could well be witnesses
as also generally the whole Realm; To this I replied that I could not fail to
advertise your Majesty both of his well accepting of your advertisment, as
also of the good inclination toward the sincere observation of the Edict,
which news I did assure would be to your Majesty most welcome.

After I had thus ended with the King, and finding the Queen his wife absent
(who by report the night past had a fit of a fever) I signified unto him that I
had further Commission from your Majesty to present unto her your Letters, and
show unto her notwithstanding you Majesty had made choice of a personage
honorable to congratulate their Marriage, whose coming only stayed upon the
certainty of his entry, yet your pleasure was that in the mean time I should
have also executed the said office, which I would have gladly done, if it might
have bin without her trouble, whereunto he answered, that the night passed she
had the fit of a fever, which he thought would not long continue.

But hoped that within four or five days she would be in that good state of
health, as I might have access unto her, unto whom he assured me that both
your Majesty's Letters, as also the office of congratulation, whereunto I was
appointed, should be accepted in very good part, as from their good and loving
Sister.

This is the effect of my speech unto the King from your Majesty, the which
ended, making our reverences we were conducted by Monsieur de La^sac to the
Queen Mother; and because incontinent after dinner, we understood by Sig.
Gondi, some alteration of wonted custom; and that we should for the Solemnity,
visit apart the Queen Mother and her two Sons; we thereupon resolved to keep
one course in our several speeches to them, and coming to the Queen, I Sir
Henry Norris declaring the quality of the Gentleman your Majesty had sent to
be presented your Ambassador Resident, his good inclination toward the
continuance of the Amity between your Majesty and the King her Son; she
eftsoons answered, that she nothing doubted of your Majesty's good election;
she required the Gentleman to come to her.

Then I Fr^ncis Walsingham, after due salutation, presented your Majesty's
Letters, and used to her speeches, as before to the King, concerning your
Majesty's charge given me for the entertaining of the good Amity between the
King her Son and you. I also recommended unto her the observation of the Edict,
being so requested to do by the Deputies of the Princes of the Religion; as
also so to do the like to the Kings Brethren: My speech therefore from your
Majesty unto her in this behalf was, that you were glad to hear that she had
not only the reputation and honor to be a chief maker of Peace and Union
lately accorded, but also to be a chief Conserver of the same; wherefore, as
one that wished unto her all honor and reputation, you could but wish unto her
preservation in this course, so much to her honor, to the Kings safety, and to
the general benefit of his Country. Whereunto she answered, that she could not
but accept in very good part, both recommending your choice so well inclined to
entertain the Amity between your Majesty's, as they were fully assured thereof
by their Ambassador Resident in England, doubting not but such effects should
follow, as should redound to both your Majesty's contentations.

Being thus licensed of the Queen, we were straight brought to Monsieur de
Anjous Chamber; where I Sir Henry Norris, declaring this Gentleman to be sent
by your Majesty to succeed me, was not only commanded by you to entertain the
good Amity, but likewise to bear that respect unto him, and the Duke his
Brother, as toward your good Cousins and Parsonages of great account and
value. The Duke thanking me for this my good relation, requested the Gentleman
to come unto him.

Whereupon I Francis Walsingham, approaching near unto him, making reverence, I
showed him, that you willed me to do your commendations to him, and further to
tell him, that your were glad to understand that he did so honorably concur
together with the King his Brother in sincere and due observation of the Edict,
whereby he did not only get generally with all men the honor to be reputed a
Prince of courage in time of war, but also of Council in time of peace; which
courage you doubted not but he would continue, in respect of the good will he
bare to the King and his Country, and the regard that he had of his own
honor. And further, I showed him that your Majesty gave me commandment during
my charge here, to behave my self toward him and the King his Brother with
that good respect as was fit for me toward your Cousins and Princes of that
quality that they were of.

Whereunto he answered, with great courtesy, that he thanked your Majesty for
your commendations, as from a Princess of that honor you are, and whom he so
much reverenced. Secondarily, for the good encouragement you gave him to be a
good instrument for the observation of the Edict, which thing he was bound to
do in respect of his duty toward the King and his Country; so shall your
advertisement be of no small force with him in who is one that has always
showed himself well inclined to our Nation in these times of jealousy and
unkindnesse, that has reigned betwixt the two Countries.

Touching my own particular, if my charges continue as they begin, whereof
there is small hope to the contrary, except there be some extraordinary
consideration had of me by your good means in transportation, my allowance will
not suffice to bear half my charges; I would therefore most humbly desire you
at the time of the receipt of the bill to weigh it accordingly.

Before my departure, I was earnestly requested by Mr. H. Cobham to recommend
unto you, a cause in controversy between him and Mr. Cartwright, committed to
your hearing and redress, who desires your convenient favor, which I beseech
you, Sir, the rather he may receive for my sake. And so leaving further to
trouble your Lordship at this present, I commit you to Gods protection.

From Bullen the 2 January 1571. Your Lordships to command Fr. Walsingham.


To the Queen most excellent Majesty.
MAy it please your most excellent Majesty to be advertised, receiving your
Highness Letters of the 16 of January, and perceiving your gracious pleasure
touching my Revocation, I cannot but as well for this, as your most favorable
acceptance of my service during my residence here, in most humble wise
acknowledge those favors of you; And after having conference with Mr. Francis
Walsingham, at good large, further of your Majesty's meaning, we both sent to
the Court to demand Audience, but the King being then newly removed from
Chantilly, and the Queen Mother repairing hither to Paris, our Audience was by
her deferred until the Kings coming to Madrid, where the Court being settled
the 21 of January, we were requested in the Kings name to come thither, the 25
of the same; and repairing thither at the pointed time, we were entertained by
Monsieur de Lause, who by the Kings appointment dined with us. After dinner
being once ended Chevalier de Sener was likewise sent from the King to
accompany us; so after we were advised by Sir Gihoronovi Gondi to repair to
the Kings presence, and staying a while in the Chamber of presence, being
courteously entertained by the Duke of Nevers and the Nobility; The King came
forth. Then I Sir Henry Norris, drawing near to him, said; That her Majesty
perceiving nothing more necessary to entertain the good Amity and
intelligence between Princes, then their devotion of good Ministers, had chosen
this Gentleman, Mr. Francis Walsingham, being descended of a good house,
approved virtue, and like sincerity, to succeed me, and to reside your
Majesty's Ambassador near his person; not doubting, but according to your
Majesty's charge given him in that behalf, he would use all means possible to
entertain the good and neighbourly Amity between your Majesty, and likewise
the continuance of the intercourse and traffic between your Realms and
Subjects; which I prayed God long to continue, to his glory, to the increase of
your Honors, and tranquillity of your Realms, and all Christendom. Also I
declared that your Majesty had sent certain Letters unto him, his wife, and
mother; whereupon the King giving you most hearty thanks, of your choice of a
Gentleman so well qualified, and desirous to continue that thing which he so
much wished, he required me to cause the Gentleman to come to him. Then I
Francis Walsing^^ being thus presented by Sir Henry Norris, after ordinary
salutations done, I delivered your Majesty's Letters, which after he had caused
to be read by his Secretary Pinart, I showed him the great charge you gave me
so to direct my course in this service, as might best tend to the maintenance
of the good Amity between your Majesty's, as also the free traffic and
Intercourse between the Subjects of both your Realms, which thing as well for
duties sake toward your Majesty, as the reverence I bear him, and the great
benefit that would grow to both your Realms, I said I would not fail to
observe with what care and sincerity I might: And therefore desired him that I
might come to my answer, which I doubted not should be such, as he should rest
therewith satisfied, and I justified.

To this, after enquire made of your Majesty's health, he answered, That he he
could not but conceive great hope of continuance of Amity betwixt her Majesty
and him, for that you had made choice of one to supply this place, so well
inclined to entertain it, is he has given him to understand by his Ambassador,
that I was; he said therefore that I was very welcome, and should at all times
receive at his hands, for your Majesty's sake, gracious Audience; for the which
I rendered him most humble thanks; and told him, That I hoped that I should do
nothing unworthy the good opinion he had conceived of me, And touching the
gracious Audience promised, I doubt not but that his Ministers both heretofore
had, and hereafter should receive the like at your Majesty's hands.

Those ordinary Ceremonies ended, being requested by the Deputies of the
Princes of the Religion, to recommend their cause at this present; for it is
generally conceived that the Ambassador sent hither from the Princes of
Germany, who besides congratulating the Marriage, recommended the observation
of the Edict, which was a thing procured by your Majesty, as with whom you
have some secret league, do concur^e in all things that tend to the advancement
of Religion, me thought I could do ^o less but say somewhat in that behalf,
both for that I thought the opinion conceived of the League and concurren^ie
worthy the nourishment; as also for that by your Majesty's instructions, I am
appointed to do any thing that may advance their cause, so far forth as may
stand with your Honor; and to that end your Majesty may judge, whither I kept
my self within that compass. I thought it may duty to send you the effect of
that I said, whereby if I failed in any thing, being by your Majesty
admonished thereof, I may hereafter avoid to offend in the like.

I declared unto him, that your Majesty willed me to signify unto him, that
you (as his good and loving sister, who wished unto him all prosperity, and
thinks none so great as quietness of Government,) do not a little rejoice to
hear of the great care he takes for the due observation of the Edict lately
published, as that thing which makes him honorable, and of great reputation
with all Princes, that are not carried away with passion; and that you do not a
little wonder to see his Majesty in these young years, able (through his great
foresight and wisdom) to quench a fire of so great a Consequence and danger as
lately was kindled and dispersed through his whole Realm, and now through Gods
goodness, and his good order was at this presence utterly extinguished: an
example for the rareness shereof, worthy to be honored in him, and followed in
all other Princes who preserve good Government, and the preservation of their
Subjects, before tyranny and destruction of the same. I told him further, that
your Majesty hoped that he now finds a difference between the advice of
those Princes his neighbors, that advised him to continue the Waves, to the
(...) of his State, and destruction of his Subjects and (...), and other
Princes, that exhorted him to the contrary, who judged always Peace and
concord tending most to his safety and their preservation. And therefore for
that experience, now (the best means) has taught him to know the
inconveniences of the one, and the profit of the other, your Majesty doubts
not, but as of his own inclination he has always bin given rather to peace,
to preserve his subjects, (a property of a good and loving Prince) then by
sword and violence to consume them (a thing most fit for a Tyrant.) So he will
continue the said course that tends most to the due execution of his said
Edict, the only means to preserve quietness that now reigns in his kingdom;
This course unto God so acceptable, for himself so honorable, and for his
subjects so profitable, if any should seek to impeach, for that it is most
commonly seen, that good purposes (as well in Princes as private men) have many
hinderers, be he either a subject unnatural or a neighbor evil affected, as
envious at his repose:

Your Majesty offers your self with all aid and power to assist him to your
uttermost, against all such as shall seek or hinder him in so good and godly a
purpose; And as your Majesty rests herein affected toward him, so you doubt
not but God who has wrought this godly inclination, will raise up other
Princes to assist him, and to be likewise affected toward him in this behalf:
And that therefore your Majesty prays God to bless him in this course, and
to remove from him all such as shall hinder him in so noble an enterprise; to
whom your Majesty wishes as prosperous success, as ever Prince had that
occupied his place and Seat.

To this he answered, that he had right good cause to accept in good part your
Majesty's advertisement, whom he must needs acknowledge to have always as his
good Sister and as on careful of his well doing, advised him to that which was
best, both for himself and his Country; he willed me therefore to assure your
Majesty, that the only care he presently had, was to entertain the peace,
whereof the Q. of Navar and the Princes of the Religion could well be witnesses
as also generally the whole Realm; To this I replied that I could not fail to
advertise your Majesty both of his well accepting of your advertisment, as
also of the good inclination toward the sincere observation of the Edict,
which news I did assure would be to your Majesty most welcome.

After I had thus ended with the King, and finding the Queen his wife absent
(who by report the night past had a fit of a fever) I signified unto him that I
had further Commission from your Majesty to present unto her your Letters, and
show unto her notwithstanding you Majesty had made choice of a personage
honorable to congratulate their Marriage, whose coming only stayed upon the
certainty of his entire, yet your pleasure was that in the mean time I should
have also executed the said office, which I would have gladly done, if it might
have bin without her trouble, whereunto he answered, that the night passed she
had the fit of a fever, which he thought would not long continue.

But hoped that within four or five days she would be in that good state of
health, as I might have access unto her, unto whom he assured me that both
your Majesty's Letters, as also the office of congratulation, whereunto I was
appointed, should be accepted in very good part, as from their good and loving
Sister.

This is the effect of my speech unto the King from your Majesty, the which
ended, making our reverences we were conducted by Monsieur de Lassac to the
Queen Mother; and because incontinent after dinner, we understood by Sig.
G^ndi, some alteration of wonted custom; and that we should for the Solemnity,
visit apart the Queen Mother and her two Sons; we thereupon resolved to keep
one course in our several speeches to them, and coming to the Queen, I Sir
Henry Norris declaring the quality of the Gentleman your Majesty had sent to
be presented your Ambassador Resident, his good inclination toward the
continuance of the Amity between your Majesty and the King her Son; she
estsoons answered, that she nothing doubted of your Majesty's good election;
she required the Gentleman to come to her.

Then I Fr^ncis Walsingham, after due salutation, presented your Majesty's
Letters, and used to her speeches, as before to the King, concerning your
Majesty's charge given me for the entertaining of the good Amity between the
King her Son and you. I also recommended unto her the observation of the Edict,
being so requested to do by the Deputies of the Princes of the Religion; as
also so to do the like to the Kings Brethren: My speech therefore from your
Majesty unto her in this behalf was, that you were glad to hear that she had
not only the reputation and honor to be a chief maker of Peace and Union
lately accorded, but also to be a chief Conserver of the same; wherefore, as
one that wished unto her all honor and reputation, you could but wish unto her
preservation in this course, so much to her honor, to the Kings safety, and to
the general benefit of his Country. Whereunto she answered, that she could not
but accept in very good part, both recommending your choice so well inclined to
entertain the Amity between your Majesty's, as they were fully assured thereof
by their Ambassador Resident in England, doubting not but such effects should
follow, as should redound to both your Majesty's contentations.

Being thus licensed of the Queen, we were straight brought to Monsieur de
Anjous Chamber; where I Sir Henry Norris, declaring this Gentleman to be sent
by your Majesty to succeed me, was not only commanded by you to entertain the
good Amity, but likewise to bear that respect unto him, and the Duke his
Brother, as toward your good Cousins and Parsonages of great account and
value. The Duke thanking me for this my good relation, requested the Gentleman
to come unto him.

Whereupon I Francis Walsingham, approaching near unto him, making reverence, I
showed him, that you willed me to do your commendations to him, and furtsher to
tell him, that your were glad to understand that he did so honorably concur
together with the King his Brother in sincere and due observation of the Edict,
whereby he did not only get generally with all men the honor to be reputed a
Prince of courage in time of war, but also of Council in time of peace; which
courage you doubted not but he would continue, in respect of the good will he
bare to the King and his Country, and the regard that he had of his own
honor. And further, I showed him that your Majesty gave me commandment during
my charge here, to behave my self toward him and the King his Brother with
that good respect as was fit for me toward your Cousins and Princes of that
quality that they were of.

Whereunto he answered, with great courtesy, that he thanked your Majesty for
your commendations, as from a Princess of that honor you are, and whom he so
much reverenced. Secondarily, for the good encouragement you gave him to be a
good instrument for the observation of the Edict, which thing he was bound to
do in respect of his duty toward the King and his Country; so shall your
advertisement be of no small force with him in that behalf. For my self, he
told me, that during the time of my service here, I should receive, for your
Majesty's sake, any favor he could do for me. And after we had taken our leave
of the Duke, anon we were brought to the Duke of Alansons Chamber, to whom,
after we had used part of such speeches as we thought aptest for his capacity;
and he making such answer as may be expected of his young years, we departed
from him, returning to the place of our retreat, and so that night to Paris.
This being as near as our memories can serve us of all that in this Presenting
and Negotiation has been either delivered by us, or received from them, the
which we humbly submittting to your Majesty's wisdom and consideration, beseech
the Almighty long to preserve you in all prosperity.

From Paris the nine and twentieth of January, 1571. Your Majesty's most humble
Subjects and Servants, Henry Norris, Francis Walsingham.


To the Right Honorable Sir William Cecil, her Majesty's principal Secretary.
SIr, I have received at Sir Henry Norris hands, as well all such Copies as
concern the Scottish affairs, whereby I may be the better directed hereafter how
to proceed therein; as also all other instructions as may concern her Majesty's
affairs. Touching common matters, I refer your Honor to this enclosed of
common Occurrents. The matters of secrecy here, at the least such and so many
as I can learn are these:

The Pope, the King of Spain, and the rest of the Confederates, upon the doubt
of a match between the Queen my Mistress and Monsieur, do seek by what means
they can, to dissuade and draw him from the same: They offer him to be the head
and chief executionar of the League against the Turk, a thing now newly
renewed, though long ago meant; which League is thought to stretch to as many
as they repute to be Turks (although better Christians then themselves.) The
cause of the Cardinal of Lorraigns repair hither from Reyms (as it is thought)
was to this purpose.

The King as lately he uttered to le Sieur ^, seeming very much to mislike
hereof, utterred these words unto him, If this matter go forvvard, it beho^eth
me to make some counter-league. I find the Germans (says he) vvell-affected
toward me; and as for the Queen of England, I know she has good cause to
mislike of this League, as I my self have; and therefore (I suppose would be
glad to join with me. To whom the other replied, that he was glad that he
savv his danger, for that he hoped he would provide for the remedy; and
wished his Majesty that he would not forstovv the matter. And therefore
advised him, for that the Princes Ambassador of Germany were not departed,
that the mat^er might be broken to them; which thing the King thought not
convenient, for that that he thought their Answer would be, that they had no
Commission to deal in any such matteer; but rather thought it more meet to send
one of his own. Then the other told him, that if he did did send any body, it
behoved him to make choice of one that was no Catholic, for otherwise he
should not be to them either grateful or trustful.

Whereupon the King named Monsieur Biron, though he be not thought to be a
Hugonot, yet is he not taken to be your enemy. Whereupon the other answered,
that he had made choice of a very fit person.

After he had made me acquainted with this matter, he asked me how I thought
the King should find the Queen affected. I asked him whether he had any
Commission so far forth to deal with me. He told me, no; but he desired me to
say frankly my opinion how I judged the Queen my Mistress would be inclined. To
whom I answered, that for my own private opinion, I thought not but that her
Majesty would very well like of it, First, in respect of the common cause of
Religion. Secondly, in respect of the good will she bears the King, whose
friendship, above all other Princes, she does chiefly embrace. And lastly, in
respect of her own safety. And as for my self, for these respects, when the
matter shall grow to some further moving, it shall not lack any furtherance
that I can give him.

The said party, the day before this Message, came unto me, and told me, that
he was wished from I. to give me to understand, that Malicorne (who was sent
into Spain to congratulate the Marriage, and is lately returned) reports,
that Julian Remero at his being here, was dispatched from the Court to Ireland,
where he was to do some great enterprise. Further, he reported unto me, that
the King here is angry, for that his Congratulation was not accepted of the
King of Spain. in so good part as he looked for* but seemed to take some
exception of the Kings Letters, for that certain words of controversy to be
usually put in such Letters as passed between them, were now omitted. And
further to the increase of this unkindness, the King of Portugal, to whom the
Kings Sister was offered in Marriage, sent an answer by Malicorne, that they
were both young, and that therefore about eight years hence that matter might
be better talked of; which disdainful answer, is accepted here in very ill
part, and is thought not to be done, without the counsel of Spain. And amongst
all others, none takes the matter more grievously then Queen Mother, who
thinks her self not a little injured for the late friendship she has
professed to Spain.

He forgot not to renew the speech that passed between us touching the League,
desiring me to use some means to feel how her Majesty is inclined; which I
promised to do. And therefore I shall desire you to move her Majesty in that
behalf, that I may receive some direction how to proceed therein. And so
leaving further to trouble your honor at this present, I most humbly take leave.

From Paris the 28 of January, 1571. Your Honors to Command. Fr. Walsingham.


The Lord Seton, who lately came out of Flanders to demand succor (as I am
informed) is deferred over for answer until the Entry be past. He ^^eth here,
as I am given further to understand, with good store of Horse and Armor, and
very well furnished with money.

To the Right Honorable Sir William Cecill, her Majesty's Principal Secretary.
SIr, after the closing up of my Letters, I was certified by a Gentleman that
came presently from the Court, that the King is grown very sick of a burning
Ague; whereupon it is thought, that the time appointed for the entry should be
put over until after Easter. I will seek by what means I can for the
certainty, and so afterward advertise you. So leaving further to trouble your
Honor at this present, I most humbly take my leave.

From Paris the 28 of January, Your Honors to Command, Fr. Walsingham.


To the Right Honorable, and my very good Lord, the Earl of Leicester.
RIght Honorable, and my very good Lord, touching the present state of France
I refer you to the common Occurrents here enclosed, and leave unto you by them
to judge what likelihood there is of continuance of the Peace lately here
amongst them accorded. The best ground of continuance that I can learn, by
those that can best judge, is the Kings own inclination, which is thought
sincerely to be bent that way.

Touching his affection toward the Queen my Mistress, if outward entertainment
may be a just argument of inward affection, then surely there is great
likelihood of continuance of Amity and Concord. For first, I was in all those
places where the King had Governors, very well received. Then at the time when
Sir Henry Norris and I were appointed to have access to the Court for my
presentment (which was at Madrill) we were invited to dinner presently upon our
Arrival there; Laufay by the Kings appointment received us, and brought us to
the place where our dinner was prepared, where we lacked no store of good meat;
immediately after dinner, Chevaleir Thaers, sent by the King, came and told us,
that he was ready to give us audience; to whom we repaired, and were most
graciously received at his hands, who made great demonstration, by outward
speech and countenance of great good will toward the Queen my Mistress.
Besides my ordinary speeches, concerning her Majesty's charge, to behave my
self in such sort as might tend to the best continuance of Amity between their
Majesty's, I recommended the Peace, being so requested by the Deputies of those
of the Religion, which he seemed to accept in very good part.

Having thus ended with his Majesty, finding the new Q. not there, for that it
was given out she was sick of a fever. I declared unto him, that I had
Commission from the Queens Majesty, to have presented unto her her Majesty's
Letters; as also to have used some office of Congratulation of the late
Marriage between them; notwithstanding that her Majesty had made choice of a
Personage of calling honorable, to do that office, whose coming stays only
upon the certainty of the knowledge of his Majesty's entry; for that by the Q.
Majesty my Mistress, he is appointed to honor the same. The King alleged
sickness for excuse, and told me, that there should be another time appointed
me, for the execution of her Majesty's Commission in that behalf; which both of
him and her could not but be accepted in as good part as it was meant.

Having thus ended with the King; whereas before it was customably to be found
(as I learned by Sir Henry Norris) to have present at the Audience both Queen
Mother and the Kings Brethren in place with the King, we found now each of them
to keep their several Estate, and so were driven to repair unto them all
severally to their Chambers; and though from her Majesty I had no further
Commission to have done any Message, but to the King, and unto the two Queens,
yet for that at my last being there, exception was taken at me, for omitting my
duty to Monsieur; and besides, being requested by the Deputies of the
Religion, to recommend the observation of the Edict unto them severally;
therefore after access had to Queen Mother, my Letters being delivered and
certain ordinary speeches used, with the recommendation of those of the
Religion, I repaired to Monsieur, who very courteously, and with good
countenance received me. To whom my speech from her Majesty was, that she
willed me to present unto him her commendations; and further to say unto him,
that she was glad to understand that he did concur together with the King, in
that good and honorable meaning of the observation of the Edict, whereby he
did not only win generally the reputation and honor to be thought a Prince of
courage in time of War, but also of Council in time of Peace; which courage she
doubted not but that he would continue, in respect of the good will he bears
to the King and his Country, and the regard he had to his own honor.
Whereunto he answered, with great courtesy, that he thanked her Majesty,
First, for her commendations, as from a Princess of honor that she was, and
whom he so much reverenced. Secondarily, for the good encouragement that she
gave him to be a good instrument for the observation of the Edict; which thing,
as he was bound to do, in respect of his Duty toward the King and his
Country, so should her Majesty's advertisement be of no small force with him
in that behalf. For my self, he told me, that during my service here, I should
receive, for her Majesty's sake, any favor that he could show me.

Having thus done, I repaired to his Brother, to whom I used, besides
Commendations, some short Speech in recommendations of the Edict, for manners
sake.

I do rather, my very good Lord, dwell upon those particularities, in respect
of your Lordships request. In observing Monsieur, I had at this present, by
reason the place served very well for the purpose, good occasion to view him;
in stature, by judgment of others that viewed us talking together, he was
esteemed three fingers higher then my self, in complexion somewhat sallow, his
body of very good shape, his leg long and small, but reasonably well
proportioned; what helps he had to supply any defects of nature, I know not:
touching the health of his person, I find the opinion diverse, as I know not
what to credit; and for my own part, I forbear to be over curious in the search
threof, for diverse respects; if all be so well, as outwardly it shows, then
is he of body sound enough. And yet at this present, I did not find him so
well colored, as I esteemed him to be at my last being here.

Since my Arrival here, there has been great search made by diverse means, how
I am inclined to Monsieurs attempt. My general answer is, that I left my
private passions behind me, and do here submit my self to the passions of my
Prince, to execute whatsoever she shall command me, as precisely as I may, not
presuming to do any thing further then I shall be commanded. And as for her
marriage, whenever it shall please God to incline her to that Change, I
should forget my duty toward her and my Country, if I should not like very
well thereof, though my present calling requiret^ me to do no more neither in
that nor in any other thing further forth then I am prescribed. This answer
seems very well to satisfy those that would further this matter, for that I
was forejudged to be a very passionate Enemy.

Touching the pictures your Lordship desired, they can by no means be gotten,
for no man may make any counterfeit of the King or his Brother, without
license; if he do, the punishment is great. Thus having imparted to your Honor
that which at this present I thought worthy the advertisement, I most humbly
take my leave.

From Paris the 28 of January, 1571. Your Lordships to Command, Fr. Walsingham.


To the Right Honorable Sir Walter Mildmay of her Majesty's Privy Council.
SIr, I most humbly thank you for your favor promised me, by your Letters of
the 16 of this Month, touching my allowance for transportation. Surely, Sir, I
find my charges daily increase, through the extreme prises of things here. The
expenses of my horses at this instant grow to 4 l. the day, and yet is my daily
diet (through the meaness thereof) not such as the place I supply requires.
True it is, the entry causes the dearth to be so great and some hope there is,
that hereafter things will be more reasonable; but in the mean time* I find the
burden over heavy; and when things shall be best cheap, yet shall I find it
heavy enough. But herewith I leave further to trouble you at this instant. The
25 of this instant month, I was presented unto the King at Madrill, where he
now presently lies, being received by him with great courtesy and favor, as
also by his Mother and Brethren. I leave, Sir, to you to gess the cause of this
kindness; and yet I should do Monsieur de la Motte Ambassador with her
Majesty, great wrong, if I should not acknowledge some part of this good
entertainment, to proceed from the good report he has made of me, as one that
will do what lies in me to entertain the Peace.

Touching the state of things here, I refer you to this enclosed Note of
Occurrents; and though they seem to give some doubt of the Kings sincerity, yet
surely, Sir, they that know him thoroughly, are of opinion, that if the matters
grow to new troubles, he will incline to those of the Religion.

This Oration, Sir, whereof I send you a Copy, pronounced and delivered to
him, and to the Ambassador of the Princes of Germany, has put him in some good
courage; whereas before, by the faction of the Guises, he was put in great fear
of the Catholics, as well Foreign as at home. Thus, Sir, you see, for that he
is not settled in Religion, how he is carried away with wordly respects, a
common misery to those of his Calling. God make those of his calling more truly
Religious then we are: To whose tuition I most humbly take my leave, and commit
you to God.

At Paris the 27 of January, 1571. Your Honors to Command, Francis Walsingham.
Sir, I beseech you, when you have read and perused this Oration, that then it
would please you to send the same to Sir N. Thorckmorton.




To the Right Honorable Sir William Cecill, her Majesty's principal Secretary.
SIr, it may please you to be advertised, that the last of January, I received
a Letter from my Lord of Buckhurst by one Hollinshed, wherein he gave me his
notice of proceedings onward on his journey hithervvard. Whereupon I sent forth
M. Beal to the Court, being still at Madrill, to advertise the King and Queen
Mother from me.

First, that the said Lord of Buckhurst, who was deputed from the Queen my
Mistress to Congratulate his Marriage, had sent over thirty of his Train, and
that he himself about the first of this month, was minded to be at Dover,
there to imbark himself and the residue of his Company.

Secondarily, for that I heard the Queens Majesty was sick, whereby it was
doubtful when she should be in state able, without her trouble, or some peril,
to give the said Lord Buckhurst access unto her, to execute his charge from the
Queens Majesty, my Mistress; that therefore I desired to know of his Majesty,
and the Queen his Mother, whether there were any hope of her Majesty's speedy
recovery, whereby the said Nobleman may proceed in his journey, to accomplish
his said charge; or otherwise, whether I might not with his advice and favor,
write unto the said Nobleman some Letters of stay or return, if he were passed
the sea, or onward his voyage, until such time as he should be hereafter
further advertised of her Majesty's speedy recovery.

In answer whereof, I received this enclosed from Secretary* Pynart; and for
that Mr. Beal, whom he made privy to his Letter, did not see his answer
directly touching that point, which concerned his access to the Queen, he
desired to know what was the Kings mind in that behalf. To whom he answered,
for that it was doubtful by reason of the Queens sickness, whether the Lord of
Buckhurst, should have any access unto her (the only stay of her Entry and
Coronation) therefore the King refers it to my Lords own judgment, whether
he will come now, or stay until the other Entry. I have made my Lord privy of
my proceedings herein; as also, what answer I received from the King, referring
him to do therein, as his Instructions should best direct him. I have made him
also acquainted with my private opi^ion in this behalf; which is, if her
Majesty's direction may bear it, rather to proceed then otherwise: First, in
respect his coming now will be here accepted in as good part as at any time
hereafter. Secondarily, in respect of her Majesty's charges and his own.
Thirdly, in respect that the Governor of Picardie Monsieur de Pa^ne, and other
Gentlemen, who are appointed to repair to to Bullen to receive him, should lose
their labor, if he should not proceed forward.

And as touching the Queens sickness, whereby his access unto her, to
congratulate the Marriage growth doubtful (judged here the chief cause of her
repair hither) I do not think the contrary, but that her Majesty's honorable
and good meaning will be accepted in as good part, as if by access unto her he
might have executed the same, for that the let and impediment grows only from
God; and for confirmation thereof, there was lately sent an Ambassador from
Luca, to execute the like office, who by reason of her sickness could have no
access, and so was driven to deliver over his Message to the King, which was
accepted at his hands very graciously, and so was dismissed, as I heard,
rewarded with a very honorable Present. Thus having been over long in this
behalf, I leave further to trouble your Honor, and most humbly take my leave.

From Paris the first of February, 1571.

The Copy of Secretary Pynarts Letter.
MOnsieur je vous a envoye la pasporte que ce porte^r m' ay demand de vostre
part. Et j'ay faict entendre a leur Majestes conme vous m' avez mande que le
my Lord de Buckhurst devoit arriver au jourd^y a Do^ure, and que desia a^cuns
des gentlehommes de sa troop estoient passes a Bullougne, and que vous desires
d' entendre si les dictes Majesty's auroient agreeable que le dit Seigneur my
Lord, and sa troop se dimin^ast and que ie vous ferois plasir de vous mander
quand feroit l' Entree, Surquoy les dictes Majesty's m'ont faict dire que
iceluy. Sr my Lord de Buckhurst and sa dicte troop seront les tresbiens venus
and fort volunteers venus and receus, mais que la malady de la Royne avoit
este cause que l'on auise que le Roy seulement feroit sans grand ceremony son
entree le primier dimanche de Quaresme prochaine, and que le sacre de la dicte
Dame Royne and son entree estoient remis a une autre fois, a cause de sa dicte
malady, don't ie n'ay voulu faillir de vous advertir, Et saluer pour la fin de
ceste-cy ure bonne grace de mes bien humbles recommendations, priant dieu
Monsieur vous doner le bon jour.

An Chasteau Boulloigne le primier de feuriere, 1571. Ure bien humble avous
fair service Pynart.


To the Right Honorable Sir Henry Norris and Mr. Francis Walsingham,
Ambassadors for the Queens Majesty's in France, or to either of them.
I Am presently, as this bearer can inform you, unable to regard any matter,
and therefore excusable to you both, though I write not any longer Letter, this
that I write is in my bed, and therefore unperfect of necessity.

Upon a Letter of yours, Sir Henry Norris sent to me last by Nanfa^t, which I
showed to her Majesty, touching the advertisement that you had of the French
attempts in Ireland. Although her Majesty understood the like from Ireland,
and hops, when the season of the year shall mend, the same shall be remedied;
yet she complains hereof to the French Ambassador, requiring to let the King
understand that such kind of obliquites do not accord with the offers of the
Kings Amity, so often by him the Ambassador remembered.

And in like manner, her Majesty would that the King should be informed by you
both, if your commodity may serve, to negotiate jointly, or else by you Mr.
Walsingham, if you be entered into your charge, requiring the King, that her
Majesty may know his intention herein: so, as if those attempts be not
speedily redressed and stayed by his Authority, and according to his
friendship, that then her Majesty may otherwise provide for the remedy,
whereof cannot but follow such inconveniences as shall not be meet for their
Amities.

You shall not make the matter dangerous of it self, but only the attempts of
such as are his ordinary Subjects do show a contrary effect of that which it
has pleased the King to offer to her Majesty, and whereof her Majesty took
great comfort.

I am utterly tired with this writing, and am forced to remit the rest to this
bearer.

In my bed, at my house of Westminster the 26 of January 1571. Your assured
loving friend at command, William Cecil.


Totle Right Honorable Sir William Cecil, her Majesty's principal Secretary.
SIr, the third of this month I received a Letter of yours, directed to Sir
Henry Norris and to me; and after that I was entered into my charge, and Sir
Henry Norris had taken his leave of the King, I as a thing pertaining to my
charge, forthwith sent to the Court for Audience, which is appointed me the 6
of this present; so soon as I shall receive the Kings answer to the message I
shall do unto him in her Majesty's name, I shall not fail with speed to
advertise.

If la Roches attempt be done with his privity, as in reason hardly me
thinks, otherwise it nothing agrees to the great profession of good will he
makes here unto us her Majestities ministers; Which to the outward show is
done in that sincerity, as he that trusts least, may right easily thereby be
deceived. And yet when I consider how he is not fully restored to the
reputation of a King, and that daily many disorders of contempts are here
committed, I see some cause of stay in condemning, but hereof by his answer,
or at least, by execution of that which he shall promise, her Majesty shall
-- whether inward meaning, or outvvard profession do agree.

I was right sorry to understand that the gout has of late newly assailed
you, after so small time of respit: Surely, Sir, seeing that both God and
Nature do so require, you must with importunacie desire her Majesty so to use
your service, as you may long serve; of whose lack I pray God she may never
have trial. And so leaving further to trouble your Honor, beseeching him to
send you your health, and continuance of the same. I most humbly take my leave.

From Paris the third of February 1571. Your Honors to Command, Francis
Walsingham.


To my very loving friend Mr. Francis Walsingham, Ambassador Resident for the
Q. Majesty in France.
MAster Walsingham, I thank you for your Letters written at Bullen I do make
no less account of your good will indeed, then you have offered and assure
your self to find to my power as much Friendship at my hands as at any man's
hands in England. We have no cause of new matters to write unto you* here has
bin and is much speech of the man and matter I talked with you of in my closet
at Hampton Court, as yet there is no overture made directly of that side, and
till then little will be said unto it; in the mean I pray you inform your self
thoroughly of them, and let me hear some p^ec^ of your opinion of them; I
confess our estate requires a match, but God send us a good one and meet for
all parties. My Lord of Buckhurst will set forward in four or five days after
this date: so my good Francis farewell,

in some have this 16 of January 1571. Your assured Friend Robert Leicester.


To the right Honorable my very good Lord, the Earl of Leicester.
YOur Lordships of the 25 of January, I received the third of February, by the
which I perceive the matter your Lordship and I talked of has bred some speech
there with you, and here the matter passes not in great silence, but is taken
to be much more forward then I percieve it is, I mean amongst the Common sort:
so far as I can learn, there will be no further overture of this matter then
already is, for here they stand upon the reputation, and therefore would be
loath to move speech unless they were in full hope to speed; The experience of
others that have heretofore attempted like matter, makes them more doubtful
how to proceed; In my poor opinion the Commodities or discommodities of taking
or refusing may easily be seen; and therefore when they are once weighed, a
speedy resolution were best to cut off many inconveniences that delay of time
commonly brings. By my last of the 27 of January I made your Lordship
acquainted with my opinion so far forth as I could enform my self, using
such circumspections in that behalf as is fit for me, considering the jealousy
already conceived of me: But when I shall be further informed, I will not
fail further to advertise your Lordship. And so for this time having no leisure
to write any more at large, I most humbly take my leave,

from Paris the third of February 1571. Your Honors to command Fr. Walsingham.


To the right Honorable, Sir William Cecil her Mejesties principal Secretary.
SIr, it may please you to advertise her Majesty, that before I had access
unto the King, I sought by what means I could to be informed of the Irish
attempts by those of this country. And being given to understand that de la
Roch, who as I learned by Rogers, was the party that should lead the
Soldiers that made the invasion there, was here in this Town; I found the
means to cause Monsiuer Brickmals, for that he said De la Roch had served under
him, to deal with him, and to ask him, whether he had not bin in Ireland; who
answered, he had not bin there, but in such cold terms he denied it, as he
gathered by diverse circumstances, and his manner of speech, that true it was he
had bin there, which thing he seemed to be loath to affirm, for that (he said)
he was well assured that whosoever they were that dealt in the enterprise, the
King would disavow them. Hereupon at the time of my access, which was the 6 of
Febr. at the Cardinal of Burbons Lodging in Paris, I thought good to temper my
speech accordingly in such mile sort using this speech following:

I told him after ordinary commendations done, that though the Q. Majesty my
Mistress, was advertised from her Viceroy of Ireland, That one de la Roch his
Subject, had landed certain men there, who confederated with certain Rebels in
that Island, did commit (by way of hostility) certain outrages, not answerable
to the good Amity that rested between their Majesty's. Notwithstanding her
Majesty was so well persuaded of his great good will and sincere affections
toward her Majesty; whereof she had received by his Ambassador from him so
earnest assurance and protestation, that she could not but do him wrong to
think that this disoder should proceed from him, but rather from some evil
Minister of his, such as do mislike and envy the good Amity that presently
rests between them: And therefore so doubted not, but that his Majesty as her
good Brother, unto this good advertisement given, would in such sort extend his
Authority for the redress of this inconvenience, as she might have just cause
to think, that the new and earnest lately professed friendship was grounded on
sincerity, which could not but bring forth fruits answerable to the said
profession. To this in few words he answered, That of his faith he knew of no
such matter, and therefore willed me to give him the names of all such as I
could learn any ways offenders in that behalf; and that he would so punish
them, as that her Majesty his good Sister should well p^rceive what good
account he made of her friendship. After I had thus ended with him, I repaired
to the Q. Mother, both for that she rules all here, as also, for that the rest
of the Ambassadors here observe the same course, and declared unto her as unto
the King, that it was her Majesty's pleasure that I should so do; requiring her
Majesty's name, to be a good mean to avoid all such offenses as may any way
impeach the good Amity that presently is between the King her son, and the Q.
Majesty my Mistress. I received at her hands for answer, diverse good words of
assurance and continuance of Amity, which she promised to further so much as
lay in her power, and that she found the King her Son so well inclined thereto
as the Q. my Mistress might full well assure her self, that whosoever should go
about to disturb the same, should receive such punishment, as should be to the
Q. my Mistress satisfactions. I thanked her in her Majesty's name, and showed
her, that I would not fail to make report unto the Q. my Mistress of this her
good affection toward her. Wherefore though herefore she had received good
assurance, yet that friendship was of that Nature as it is alvvaies desired to
be entertained with the exercise of mutual good offices.

This Sir, was the effect of the speech that passed betvveen the Kings
Majesty, Q. Mother, and me, at this present access. Now to the end that there
may be some trial whether these words were as well meant as they were uttered,

I have made choice of one to send to Britain, to search out the names of the
offenders, to the end I may present them unto the King, to see whether he will
be as good as his word in punishing of them; further by him, that I said I
meant to take order there, to be advertised from time to time from thence of
such preparations as may any way reach to any of her Majesty's Dominions,
which I see a thing very needful, because this Town is full of brutes. As I
was in vvriting, I was certified by one, from whom my Predecessor Sir Henry
N^rris had his best intelligence, who repaired secretly unto me, and told me
this news following.

How that the enterprise of Ireland is of great consequency and danger, whereof
though he thought the King was not privy, yet he did assure me that the
faction of G^ise were great dealers in it.

Further he said, that the Popes Nuntio labored what he might to draw Monsieur
into the practice, promising him for the maintenance thereof, to be paid in
Paris 100000 for his encouragement; he made no difficulty to bring the said
enterprise to pass, in respect of the great intelligence that they have both
in England and Ireland; and that the same being won, it would be an easy step
to a step of more consequence, meaning England.

Lastly, he showed me, that if he would not accept this enterprise, yet
notwithstanding it was resolved it should go forward, and that the bills of
credit for the said some of 100000 are already here; if this advertisement
prove as true, as others that heretofore have bin given by him to my
Predecessor, then are they not to be neglected.

By another means I was advertised, that Stewkley in Spain presented an
instrument unto the King there, not only subscribed with the names of the most
part of the Irish Noblity, but also the names of diverse in England of good
quality, ready to be at his devotion; I learned further, that of late, fithence
the Lord Setons coming hither, there has bin some greater conference between
the Spanish Ambassador, and the Ambassador of Scotland. Further I learned, that
the greater part of those that are landed in Ireland, were Levied by the Earl
of Argile in the King of Spains name, within the said Earls Government, being
promised pay by the said King of Spains Ministers; they were embarked at the
Mule, or straight of Kenutire. One Skeldon, an ordinary servant of the Q. of
Scots, arrived lately here with Letters of some importance, as it is thought,
for that oftentimes he has had access to the Court.

Thus having made your Honor privy of all such things as I could learn, I
most humbly take my leave.

At Paris the 8 of Febr. 1571.

To the Right Honorable Sir William Cecil, her Majesty's principal Secretary.
SIr, I thought good to make you privy to this private Letter, directed
privately to your self, of certain talk passed between the Queens Mother and
me, which I desired her by protestation that she should receive at my hands, as
from a private person, not having commission as a public person to say any
more then that which concerned le Roches attempt; I protested unto her, that
the only mark that I would shoot at, during my service here, should be to
continue so much as might lie in so mean a Minister, good Amity between the
two Crowns as a thing profitable unto them both. And therefore I desired her
Majesty, first to consider how necessary it was for the safety of both Realms,
to have a firm league concluded between the two Princes; Then to weigh how fit
this present was for the same.

Touching the first point, I showed her, that though France enjoyed now through
Gods great goodness a general peace with all his neighbors, yet that it
should so continue it was not to be looked for; And that therefore in time of
peace, politic Princes were not unmindfull, that after peace wars commonly
follow, for that the earth is subject to alterations. In which consideration,
they commonly weigh the neighbors, who are by consequence of reason likest to
attempt any thing against them, which they see evidently to be that Prince
that is nearest by situation, and in forces mightiest; against whom, besides
ordinary forces, which they have alvvaies prepared, they seek to strengthen
themselves, and the Princes confederats. Now if your Majesty by this measure
of mightiness and nearness measure your neighbors; you shall then find, that
it is England, whose conderatie is chiefly to be desired: he that thinks
himself mightiest will be well advised before he deal with each of you.

Touching the other point* I told her, that I thought this time most fit;
first, for that there was in both Princes a like affection, being both of their
own proper inclinations peaceably inclined, with conformity of disposition, as
one of the best knots of assured friendship. Then, because there reigns some
unkindness between other (...) neighbors, with whom her Predecessors
heretofore had both long and good unity.

These circumstances well weighed, I concluded with her, that the time was now
fit, and the thing it self most fit to be prosecuted; and that her Majesty was
most fit to bring the same to good effect, as she in whom the King (as he had
just cause so to do) reposed the direction of his whole Government.

To this she replied, That first at my hands, both the King and she did look
for nothing else but good offices, tending to the maintenance of good Amity.
Secondarily, that as at present they enjoyed peace, so they had good hope of
the maintenance of the same generally with all their neighbors. Lastly, that
she hoped that the Amity between the Q. my Mistress, was of all parties very
sincerely meant. Notwithstanding, if she should desire to enter into some
streighter league; she was of opinion nothing would be more grateful to the
King.

To this I answered, that I was glad to receive at her hands so good hope of
the Kings inclination in that behalf. This in effect was that, that passed
between her Majesty and me.

The reasons that moved me to use this speech were these: first, for that Spain
seems not to be at this present very well inclined toward the Q. my Mistress.
Secondarily, for that the King has no great liking of Spain, as before
advertised. Lastly, for that I was advertised, how that the Admiral had
advised lately the King and Q. Mother by his Letters, to seek to strengthen
himself by confederacy with the Princes of Germany, and the Q. Majesty my
Mistress.

Sir, having now made you acquainted with my speech, as also with the reasons
that moved me thereto, I shall most humbly desire you according to your
promise to advertise me of my errors either in this or otherwise in this my
present service, which you shall perceive that I will accept in so good part,
as you shall think your advise well bestowed, and thereby to be better able to
serve her Majesty with more skill.

In my other Letters, as that which was to be shevved to her Majesty, I
forbear to set down the Popes Nuntios persuasions he used toward a
dissuading Monsieur from the Q. which were, First she was an Heretic,
Secondarily that she was old, by whom he could scarce hope after issue; And
lastly that England, which he said he was well assured, was the mark he
chiefly shot at, might be achieved, and that right easily by svvord to his
great Honor, and less inconvenience, then making so unfit a match. Thus you
see Sir how they make the account without their host; I hope they shall have
more will then power to hurt us, and that God will still reserve our poor
Country for a sanctuary for his poor persecuted flock. To whose tuition I
commit you, most humbly taking my leave.

From Paris the 8 of Febr. 1571.

To the Right Honorable my very good Lord the Earl of Leicester.
SIthence I last wrote unto your Lordship, which was the third of this month,
I have learned nothing fit for your knowledge, saving of some practice that
concerns Ireland, wherein I refer your Lordship to Mr. Secretaries Letters.
Touching the other matter, they think here you do but dally, and though no
overture has bin made, notwithstanding I find this already has bin done
underhand, if the matter go not forward, will breed some disdain, for that
they take their penny to be so good silver, as they think them evil used, if it
may not pass as current. To the end that there may grow less harm thereof (as
some there must needs) your Lordship shall do well to hasten it to some (...)
with what speed you may, which I pray God may be as good as ever happened in
like case. And so leaving further to trouble your Lordship at this present, I
most humbly take my leave, committing you to his protection.

From Paris 8 February. Your Lordships to command Fr. Walsingham.


To the Right Honorable Sir Walter Mildmay, one of her Majesty's, privy
Counsel.
SIr, I understand by my servant Mills who follows my suite, how it has
pleased you of late both to recomend the same unto Mr. Secretary, as also to
the B. of London, so that the hinderance I was like to receive by Mr. Haddo's
death, is now, Sir, by your good means remedied, whereby I hope my cause will
grow both to a speedy and a good end.

Sithence I last wrote to you, there has fallen out here no alteration, saving
that the entry which should have bin performed with preat solemnity, is now
like to go forward the 6 of this next month, being so published with the sound
of the Trumpet, without any great pomp of Ceremonies, by reason of the new
Queens sickness, who is now in way of recovery.

Of late by her Majesty's commandment, I dealt with the King about de la Roches
attempt in Ireland, who denies that ever he was acquainted with the matter;
and therefore promises to see him or any other that has dealt in that behalf
punished, whenever I shall inform him of their names, if the redress hereof
fall out to be better then heretofore was wont to be yielded by his
predecessors of like promises, in like cases, it will be but all in words, for
such is the expedition of this Court, in promise speedy, in performing slow. At
this time surely there are great practices in hand for the invasion of Ireland,
wherein the Pope and Spain join: And as for the Cardinal de Lorrain, as he may
may underhand, he fails not to further the same to his uttermost.

I have herein advertised her Majesty what I can learn in that behalf, hoping
that there will be good eye had thereto in time, least Ireland, through too
much securetie, be neglected, as Callis was. And so leaving further to trouble
your Honor at this present, with my humble commendations to my Lady, I commit
you to Gods protection.

From Paris the 8 of Febr. 1571.

To the right Honorable Mr. Francis Walsingham, Ambassad^r Resident for the Q.
Majesty of England.
SIr, my Lord of Rutland has such confidence in your friendship as I think it
superfluous otherwise therein then to thank you for the good offers you made
him at your departure, whereof he has made to me on your behalf very good
report.

In my opinion you shall do his Lordship a great pleasure to take occasion to
present him to the King as soon as you may, that he may be known before my Lord
of Burkh^rst coming.

In expressing of his lineage you may boldly affirm him to be a kin to the Q.
Majesty both by King Henry the eight her Father, and also by the Q. Mother,
and he is of the blood Royal in the same degree that my Lord of Huntingdon is,
the difference being only that my Lord of Huntingdon is of a Brother of King
Edward the 4. and my Lord Rutland of the S^ster of the same King, and indeed
thereby he is as near in blood, though further in danger of fortunes wheel,
which is busy with carriage of Kings Crowns to and fro.

I am not able to write any more by weakness of my body presently tormented
with pain,

from my house at Westminster the 28 January 1571. Yours assuredly, William
Cecil.


To the right Honorable Sir William Cecil, her Majesty's principal Secretary.
SIr, any that you shall at any time recommend, cannot but receive at my hands
any favor, or friendship that I can show them; But my Lord of Rutland, who
besides your commendations and his own calling has so many good parts in
himself that do recommend him, as he may well assure himself of any honor, or
aid that I can procure him; Sithence my last which were dated the 8 of this
month, I have learned nothing to any great purpose. The complaints of those of
the Religion have here but a very deaf ear given unto them: The King
commits them over to the Q. his Mother, and to Monsieur his Brother, being
himself altogether given to pleasure.


To our trusty and welbeloved Francis Walsingham, Esquire our Ambassador Resident
with the French King.
ELIZABETH R.

TRusty and welbeloved we greet you well, we have received Letters jointly from
Sir Henry Norris our late Ambassador and you, dated the 29 of the last month,
by the which we perceive in what sort you were presented to the King there by
Sir Henry Norris, as to remain our Ambassador. And in what sort you did orderly
proceed in declaration of our good will to continue the good Amity with the
King, and to appoint you as minister for the same, wherein we do not mislike of
such speech as by our Letter appeared to us, you used to the King to comfort
him in the maintenance and continuance of the inward peace of his Realm,
according to the benefit of his Edict lately granted to his Subjects for the
matter of Religion^ We have also seen and consider^d another matter of some
weight, whereof you willed our Secretary by your private Letters to him to
advertise us, concerning some motion made unto you by le Sieurs de upon certain
conferences had by the King with him, and therein we find that which you
answered to the said Sir, J. A. to be discreet and agreeable to our mind, and
and if you shall find any likelihood that such a matter may be further dealt
in, and that it be meant bona fide to proceed further, we would have you not
only as of your self, but as occasion shall be given to further it in our name,
for we do hold it so good and beneficial, as we rather doubt that some
impediment may grow to hinder the success thereof then of any speedy
furtherance: And therefore you shall do well to look well into the matter what
likelihood there may be to have it go forward before you discover our intention
to the King, otherwise then as you find necessary to provoke him thereto.

By some other your Letters, we perceive that the King there is well content
that the Lord of Buckhurst shall come forward notwithstanding the sickness of
the Q. and so we would have him proceed notwithstanding the same. After we had
caused thus much to be written hereof, we thought good to will you to take some
occasion of speech with the King of Spains Ambassador there Resident; and first
to let him understand, that now about the tenth of this month we have here
received a Letter from the Duke of Alva, signifying thereby to us that the
matter which he had to impart to us from the King his Master, was only an
offer from the said King to do any good office that in him might lie to procure
some good end of the cause betwixt us and the Q. of Scots, without any
particular respect to himself* but only for the common quietness of us both,
and of our Countries. And in this behalf the Duke requires to understand, in
what sort we will have the King to deal, assuring us of the said Kings earnest
intention to pleasure us in any thing he may. Of thus much you shall say, we
thought good to advertise the Ambassador, and to let him understand, that we
do very thankfully accept the Kings offer, and would be glad to take the good
will and friendship, if there were any cause thereof in this office, as at
this time there is not; for he shall understand, that we have already entered so
far into a treaty with the Q. of Scots for all causes and differences betwixt
us and her, as there remains nothing of any great value or difference betwixt
us, so as the final ending thereof rests upon the execution of the matters
accorded, and some further treaty remains now to compound certain matters
betwixt her and her Subjects; for which purpose there be commissioners already
come hither from her, and a part of the Nobility of Scotland; and such as are
to come as Commissioners from the other part, are (as we think) on their
journey hitherward.

We have also by these last Letters of the Duke in express words, that he
himself is earnestly disposed to do any thing that may maintain the Amity that
is betwixt the King and us, and particularly that he has accorded to have
restitution made, as our Merchants on both sides have thought it meet, and
means to send over some special person of credit to explain some small
differences rising thereof, and to put the whole in execution. These kinds of
dealings and offices you may say are very agreeable unto us, who by many means
made it appear, that the late differences have not grown of us, nor as we
think) of the Kings own disposition, but by untowardness of ministers; and now
whilst we are well content therevvith, we are sorry to think that certain
reports which we hear of Spain should be true, either in whole, or in part;
and as we would be gladest they were false, so are we desirous that we
might know them certainly from the King to be false And you shall say, because
we have seen some proof of that Ambassadors good disposition to the Amity
betwixt the Kings his Master and us, vvher^in he is much to be commended, and
that he may with more expedition and readiness by the way of France, certify
the King, and procure some Answer, we have heard and known it to be true, that
certain savage Rebels, being men of no value, had fled out of our Realm of
Ireland into Spain, and to cover their lewdness, and to procure both relief for
themselves, and such like as they be in Ireland, they do pretend their
departure out of the Realm for matter of Religion; when indeed they be neither
of one nor other Religion, but given to beastuallity, and yet have they wit
enough to show hypocrisy for their purpose. Sithence the first arrival of
these, we know also, that an Englishman, a Subject of ours, namely, Stewkley,
not unknown, as we think, for his former prodigal life both in Spain and other
places; and notwithstanding great favors showed unto him diverse times, upon
hope of amendment, and some tokens of his repentance, he did this last summer
(pretending to come out of Ireland hither, suddenly turn his course into Spain)
and as we hear, has light into the company of the aforesaid Fugitives and
Rebels; pretending by his superfluous expenses, which is altogether of other
men's goods, to be a person of some quality and estimation, and able to do some
great thing in Ireland, whereas, indeed, he has not the value of a Marmaduc in
land or livelihood, he has so solicited the King, or some about him, with vain
motions, as it is by him bruted, and otherwise also with some credit reported
unto us, which yet we do not believe, that the K. will send a Captain of his,
such a one as Julian Romero, or such like, with a number of Soldiers into
Ireland, to follow some vain device of those Rebels; whereof we cannot but
marvel that the King, or any of his Council, being of experience, can so
lightly give any credit to such a companion as Stewkley is, which could never
live long in any quiet condition at home; of whom we are not disposed to say
much, because we cannot say any good of him: But may say, it shall be
sufficient that his conditions may be only enquired of; and then we doubt not,
whosoever shall know them, will take heed how to adventure any thing with him.
And yet whatsoever it is, we cannot but find it strange, that he or any such
Fugitives, moving matters of attempt as Rebels, either should be allowed or
hearkened unto: For whatsoever has been conceived that any person of any
degree, being the King of Spains Subject, coming into our Realm of late years,
as many have done for safety of their lives, for matter of their consciences
(as we always understood) yet we do assure by our Honor, that there was never
person of any degree, that did motion unto us any matter offensive to the King
or his Low Countries, when opportunity served for such purposes, that was ever
allowed by us, or any such motion, or that ever received reward or comfort
therein, but was rejected; such has been our sincerity in these times, not to
give any comfort to the hurt of the King, or of his Countries. And now if these
reports which we hear should be true, we might think our selves evilly
recompensed, and should be provoked for our defense to use such means, as
otherwise of our selves we did never allow or like: And so we trust in reason
the Ambassador himself might think, and -- the conservation of the Amity
betwixt the King and us, and the restitution of the former -- and Trade betwixt
our Countries and Subjects; so we pray him to solicit some Answer in this
case. For whilst we should remain in doubt hereof, we cannot but foresee, and
to procure how to impeach any such attempts; wherein would appear that whereof
we shall be sure that we have some cause to doubt of the Kings good will. Thus
you see how we mean to have, by this occasion, some knowledge (if it may be) of
the Kings intention, although we meant not to omit otherway to come to the
truth hereof, doubting not but you will also use such good means as you can to
discover the truth, and not forget the former matter, concerning that which
certain of the French Kings Captains have attempted in Ireland, and the
bringing from thence a young Boy, the son of James Fitzmorice a Rebel.

Given under our Signet at our Palace of Westminster, the 11 of February,
1571. in the thirteenth year of our Reign.

To the Right Honorable Sir William Cecill, her Majesty's principal Secretary.
SIr, the 14 of this month, I presented the Earl of Rutland to the King at
Madrill, taking opportunity thereto, by preferring certain Merchants causes.
The King embraced him, and told him, that coming from her Majesty with her
Letters of Commendations, he could not but be very welcome, and should receive
at his hands from time to time during his abode here, any honor or favor he
could show him; and as I was departing, he called me unto him, and asked me,
what was done touching the Queen of Scots matter. I told him, That of late I
heard nothing, saving by certain Letters, that there were Commissioners come
out of Scotland from both parties; so that as I thought the matter was fallen
now to some Treaty. He willed me to recommend the matter in his name to the
Queens Majesty, and to tell her, that he doubted not but by her good means, it
should grow to some speedy end, as should be to her honor and his contentment;
and so promising his Majesty not to fail in that behalf, I departed for that
present: I shall therefore desire your Honor to inform her Majesty thereof;
as also, to procure at her hands what answer I shall make in this behalf.

Touching the state of things here, I learn secretly by the F. that the House
of Guise seeks to make a match between the Cardinal of Este and the Kings
Sister, for that the Duke of Ferrara has no issue, and by common opinion is
like to have none; which thing they seek the more earnestly, to impeach the
likelihood of marriage between the Prince of Navarre and the said Kings Sister.

The 22 of this month, my Lord of Buckhurst is looked for here, his lodging
and all other things fit for his entertainment being provided at the Kings
charges, if promise be kept. The new Queen is now well recovered, and removes
from Madril to this Town the 20 of this month; so that I purpose my Lord of
Buckhurst shall have access unto her, whereof she is over dangerous, a thing
not very well liked of this Nation.

Touching la Roches attempt, I can learn nothing more then that I have
advertised; neither can I learn that in Britain there is any preparation of
ships, but of such as belong unto Merchants. And thus leaving to trouble your
Honor, I most humbly take my leave.

From Paris the eighteenth of February, 1571.

To the Right Honorable Sir William Cecil, her Majesty's principal Secretary.
SIr, I would be loath in any Letter that is to be showed unto her Majesty, to
make mention of any thing that may any way concern Monsieur, for that her
Majesty does suspect that I am inclined that way in respect of his Religion;
and therefore, Sir, I shall desire you to use this Letter as private to your
self; and as for my inclination to Monsieur (for that I hear he may be drawn to
be of any religion) I see so great necessity of her marriage, as if it may be
her Majesty's contentment, and the benefit of the Realm, by judgment of those
that are fit to deal and advise in a matter of so great weight, I can be
content as becomes me, to subscribe the same. The matters that I thought to
make you privy of in this private Letter, are these;

First, I understand that Monsieur not long sithence, has given out certain
speeches to those that are nearest about him, that he makes no great account
to match with the Queens Majesty, through the persuasions of the House of
Guise and the Spanish Ambassador, who do not stick to use many dishonorable
arguments to dissuade him from the same: Besides, they use some arguments of
danger toward us, making the conquest of England a matter of no great
consequence, in respect of the intelligence they have there, no small number of
evil affected Subjects, and of those, some of no mean quality. The A. of late
had talk with ^ touching the opinion of the enterprise: he showed me that he
whosoever he was that should attempt the matter, should fail of his reckoning,
like him that made account without his host. The A himself seems to to have
no great liking thereof, but seems to be very well inclined toward ^.

The Spanish A. to divert them from Flanders, would be glad to set them in hand
in England, and yet would he be loath that France should have any further
interest in England, then it has. And as for the House of Guise, unless they
mean to make an unnatural match between Monsieur and their Niece, they would be
loath, in respect of her possibility, that he should have any further foot in
England then he has; but they both think it easilier achieved by Marriage,
then by Sword, and would be glad to divert him from the way of likelihood, and
to direct him to that way that carries least possibility. These being the
things I thought worthy of advertisement at this present, I leave further to
trouble your Honor, most humbly take my leave.

From Paris the Eighteenth of February, 1571.

To the Right Honorable, and my very good Lord, the Earl of Leicester.
MY very good Lord, as there is nothing more desired of one sort then two
marriages; the one between the Queen my Mistress, and Monsieur, the other
between the Prince of Navarre, and the Kings sister; so is there nothing more
impugned by the contrary part, wherein the Popes Nuncio, and the Spanish
Ambassador, do not fail to do what lies in them for the impeachment thereof:
And in this behalf they want not what assistance the House of Guise and their
adherents can yield. For the let of the first, they allege Heresy. For the
let of the latter, they secretly seek to match between the Cardinal of Este,
and the Kings said Sister; for that the Duke of Ferara his Brother has neither
issue, nor by common judgment is like to have any. This is rather intended,
then any just cause of hope conceived that it will come so to pass, for that as
I hear Queen Mother seems not to like thereof.

Touching my Lord of Rutlands access to the King and his Brethren, I leave you
to the report of his own Letters.

My Lord of Buckhurst, about the two and twentieth of this month, is looked
for here, who, as I suppose, shall be honorably received, and as honorably
used, during the time of his abode here. Thus for the rest referring your
Lordship to this enclosed of common Occurrents, I most humbly take my leave.

At Paris the seventeenth of February, 1571. Your Honors to Command, Fr.
Walsingham.


To the Right Honorable Sir Francis Walsingham, the Queens Majesty's Ambassador
with the French King.
SIr, if my sickness alone were considered, or my irksome business laid thereto
perused, I cannot think but you would excuse my not writing with my own hand,
or any long Letter by my enditing of the hand of another; and therefore now I
am enforced for that ^ittle I have to say, to use another hand. You shall
perceive by the Queens Majesty's Letters, what I have been enforced with some
pain to indite, by reason of my restless sickness and business; and therefore I
mean not to repeat any part thereof unto you, wishing you to supply any
defects in the manner of writing, with your own natural discretion.

This I will add, that I do hear out of Flanders, that one is coming hither
named Monsieur Senigam, to make an end of the long talk that has been of the
mutual restitution of the Ships and Wares arrested; and thereupon it may be,
that some further Treaty of the opening of the entercouse may follow. It is
also written from thence, that one is come to take the place of this wrangling
Ambassador, who I think shall be of the low Countries, named Seignieur Front,
one of the long Robe, that was here in Commission with the Marquess Vitells.
Here do daily come into our Ports, by drifts of winds, certain Hulks of Spain
and Portugal, with great riches, which though they are to be stayed, yet
surely* I trust, there shall lack no diligence to cause the riches of them to
be duly preserved for the owners. And if you shall hear any other report (as it
may be) I assure you it shall be against the good meaning of her Majesty and
her Council.

For the matters of Spain, besides that which is written in the Queens Letters,
I do hear, that Stewkley has caused one Mr. Huggins to be imprisoned, charging
him to the King, that he has advertised sundry things of that Court to my
Lord of Leicester and me, wherein Stewkley shows his traitorous meaning to
his Country.

We find it so hard here, by reason of this restraint, to send any meet person
into Spain, to discover things there; and I cannot tell, whether you might find
some there that might be trusted, in respect of the common accord of our
Religion, to be used under some other color of Errand thither, to discover
this Kings practices; and if you can so do with any reasonable charge, I wish
you so to to, and the same shall be satisfied.

Since the writing of the Queens Letter, I find that the E. Morton was come to
Barwick the fifth of this month, with the rest of the Commissioners of that
part, so as I look hourly for his arrival here; and that may you affirm to the
satisfaction of some there that be so greedy in the Queen of Scots cause: It
is here determined by the Queens Majesty, that there shall be a plain somewhat
before Easter, which is desired not to continue long, and so I wish it.

I doubt not but by this time, the Lord of Buckhurst has either visited the
King, or known when he shall; and I trust my Lord of Rutland has been a
Courtier before this time; for whom I dare be bold to thank you, upon the
presumption I have that you show him friendship, which I know he will of
himself deserve; yet I cannot but add thanks to his deserts, for the desire I
have to see good proof of him to the honor of himself, and of his Country.

I have no other thing, but that this afternoon God has called to his mercy
Sir Nicholas Throckmorton, having been sick not past six or seven days of a
Plurisie, joined with a disease called Periplen, he does but lead the way to
us, whereof I for my part have had sufficient schooling by my present sickness.
I pray you commend me to my Lord of Buckhurst, and whilst he is there an
Ambassador, I think you may do well to make him partaker of your charge.

From Westminster the February, 1571. Yours assuredly William Cecill.


To the Right Honorable Sir William Cecil, her Majesty's principal Secretary.
SIr, it may please you, to advertise her Majesty, that according to her
Commandment, I repaired to the Spanish Ambassador, and declared to him from
point to point, so much as is prescribed by her Majesty's Letters, especially
not forgetting to dilate that point that concerned her Majesty's good opinion
conceived of him, in respect of the good offices that he had done from time to
time to salve the differences and unkindness that depend between her Majesty
and his Master.

His answer was, in the Spanish tongue, which I understood not, and other
tongue then Spanish he would not vouchsafe to speak; and therefore, Sir, I may
rather tell you by gess then otherwise.

First, he seemed to be agreived, that he never heard any thing of the message
he sent about three months sithence by Sir Henry Norris, which concerned that
point; that the Duke of Alva lately has communicated to her Majesty touching
the Kings offers, to be a Mediator between the Queen of Scots and her Majesty;
he said, that she did never use Don Francisco, for so he named himself, but by
fits, who from time to time toward her Ambassador, had always used himself so
sincerely, as they could not but report, that Don Francisco was a Gentleman of
great sincerity: And if it had pleased her Majesty, to have used him
thoroughly, he would have done offices worthy of Don Francisco. When I came to
that point that concerned the brutes touching the King his Masters intention in
attempting somewhat that might not best agree to good Amity; whereof though
her Majesty had cause somewhat to doubt, in regard of his intertaining of her
Irish Rebels, and the Countenance given to Stewkley; yet being of her own
nature, not easily drawn to condemn upon brutes, without good ground,
especially being lately entertained by friendly offers, arguments of good
meaning, therefore desired him only to be a mean to procure at the Kings hand
some good assurance, that these be but vain brutes; and that his meaning is to
continue good Amity, and to avoid all such occasions as might breed any
contrary effect. To this (after some time spent in exclamations and
admirations) he answered, That nothing could seem so strange unto him, as her
Majesty being a Prince of that wisdom and experience that she is of, should
once give ear to such vain bruits, as thereby to doubt that his Master
(considering the long Amity that has been between the House of Burgundy and
England) would now attempt any thing that might breed any breach thereof. And
as for sending to his Master, he said, the way was long, and that it would be
two months at the least, before he could have any Answer. He said therefore,
he would write to the Duke of Alva in that behalf.

I showed, that my Commission was to request to procure satisfaction from the
King; and as for the Duke of Alva, her Majesty lacked no means to send unto
him, no more she did not to send unto the King; but would have been glad, as
one well persuaded of him, to have used his help therein, as a thing as
beneficial for his Master as for her Majesty. In the end, he said, he would
write, but that it would be two months before he could receive answer; in the
mean time, he wished her Majesty to think of his Master, as she would wish him
to think of her: Stewkley he protested never to have heard of. If in the rest
he be no sincerer then in this, then is he Don Francisco not so sincere as he
protests. As for any attempts by Iulio Romero to be done in Ireland, tell
your Mistress (says he) in few words, that you her Ambassador ^ere knows,
that they be no Spaniards that have the enterprise in hand. I told him, that
whatsoever I knew, he might assure himself her Majesty could not be ignorant
of. And whereas, said I, you think that they be Frenchmen, I assure my self to
the contrary, for that the King has so assured me. He showed me that he
thought the King in that behalf sincere; and that if there were any such
matter, it proceeded not from him, but from others.

This, Sir, was in effect what I could ghess proceeded between us; never spoke
I with a prouder man, or with one more disdainful in countenance, and in
speech. I suppose he is somewhat disquieted to see the honorable entertainment
used toward my Lord of Buckhurst, and therefore think him the rather to be
excused; besides, he seems to be no better affected toward me, then I am
toward him, which is such, and no further forth then may concern her Majesty's
service; I mean to have little else to do with him.

Sir, touching de la Roches matter before my Lord of Buckhursts repair to the
Court, we upon conference agreed, that he should make some entry into the
matter, and then afterward cause the King to call me to inform what I had
learned touching Roches proceeding in that behalf. And so at the time of
access, according to the order agreed between us, being called by the King, I
showed his Majesty, that (notwithstanding he was otherwise informed) the said
de la Roch had been in Ireland, and that he had left certain Soldiers there:
For whose safety he had brought hither two sons of one Fitzmorice, to be here
in place of hostages, who remain now in Breast in Britain, at a Kinsmans of the
said de la Roch.

And fu^ther I showed him, that the said de la Roch was lately departed out of
the Town; who before his going, secretly gave out, that he was dispatched about
some enterprise. I desired therefore his Majesty, that according to his
promise, and the great Amity, he professed to her Majesty my Mistress, he
would procure some redress in that behalf, which he with great earnestness
protested to us.

I also desired his Majesty, that it would please him to give me leave to
deliver to some one about him a memorial, to put him in remembrance thereof,
which his Majesty willingly granted, and appointed one Ger^lomo Gondi, a
Gentleman of his Chamber to be the party.

The like speech I used to the Queen Mother, who gave great assurance, that
there should be speedy redress thereof. I look shortly out of Britain to be
advertised thoroughly, by a Messenger that I sent expressly for that purpose
touching the enterprise; where also I have taken such order, as I shall not
fail to be advertised from time to time of such preparations as there shall be
made, whereof there may grow any suspicion of any intention to attempt any
thing that may touch her Majesty's Dominions. Concerning the having of any
intelligence in Spain, I hope to procure, that one of the Kings Ambassadors
men, upon some pension, shall advertise from time to time how things pass there.

According as her Majesty has commanded me, I will not be unmindful touching
the league, hoping not to omit any occasion or opportunity that may serve that
purpose, so far forth as my poor skill and experience may stretch.

Touching my Lord of Buckhursts entertainment here, which is very honorable,
and such as the like has not been used toward any other, I refer you to his
Lordships own Letters. I find him a Gentleman very wise and discreet, and very
careful to do that thing that may be for her Majesty's Honor, wherein he
spares no cost. And leaving further to trouble your Honor at this present, I
most humbly take my leave, beseeching God to send you better health, then by
your Letters I perceive you have.

From Paris the 25 of Febr. 1571. Your Honors to Command, Fr. Walsingham.


To my very Friend Sir Francis Walsingham, Ambassador Resident for the Queens
Majesty in France.
MY Lord Ambassador, I thank you for your Letters lately received from you, the
last being the ninth of Febr. wherein you give very good advice touching the
matter of Monsieur; and for my own part, I am of the same mind, to wish
sincerity and honorable dealing in it, that either upon very good
deliberation it may be embraced, or in time, and in best sort put from too much
entrance; for neither is our case meet to dally, nor his person for to be
abused, as he will think if he miss his desire, how fair soever we speak him.

Therefore for my own part, I wish all things to be thoroughly considered of
him, that her Majesty may fully understand the condition of his person
beforehand, which is one of the causes that moved me to say unto you, as I did
before your departure; for I find matter that is like to come in question, and
I perceive her Majesty more bent to marry then heretofore she has been: God
make her fortunate therein to his glory and our comforts. Touching the matter
of Ireland, Master Secretary made me privy to your Letters, and you do well to
follow the matter earnestly, and to enquire further thereof by all means you
can devise; for her Majesty is also advertised, that the King of Spain has
like intention, and almost ready to put his practice in execution; whereupon,
her Majesty does mean forthwith to take some order for that Realm. We have
lost on Monday our good Friend Sir Nicholas Throckmorton, who dyed in my house,
being there taken suddenly in great extremity on Tuesday before; his lungs were
perished, but a sudden cold he had taken, was the cause of his speedy death;
God has his soul, and we his friends great loss of his body.

The Queens Majesty, God be thanked, has her health well; and has summonded
a Parliament, which shall begin the 13 of April next. Thus with my hearty
commendations, I bid you heartily farewell,

this 14 of Febr. 1571. Your assured Friend, R. Leicester.


To the Right Honorable, my very good Lord, the Earl of Leicester.
YOur Lordships of the 14 I received the 16 of this present, and was most sorry
(as I had just cause) by the same to understand of the loss of so dear a friend
as Sir Nicholas was unto me, whose lack, if it were but private only to his
Friends, the loss were great; but if it be weighed generally in respect of her
Majesty and our Country, the want of him will then appear greater: For, be it
spoken without offense to any, for counsel in peace, and for conduct in war, he
has not left of like sufficiency his successor that I know. I will not dwell
upon this matter, for that it is no less unpleasant for your Lordship to read,
then for me to write. And leaving further to trouble your Honor at this
present, I most humbly take my leave.

At Paris the fifth of March, 1570. Your Honors to Command, Fr. Walsingham.


To the Right Honorable Sir William Cecil, her Majesty's principal Secretary.
SIr, as I wrote unto you in my Letters of the 25 of February, the Spanish
Ambassador came to visit me; who after some superfluous talk of love matters,
entered to talk of the unkindness that reigned between the Queens Majesty and
his Master, expressing with words of great vehemence, the desire that they were
drawn to some accord, as a thing to the benefit of both Princes, for (says he)
as the League between the house of Burgundy and England has been the
preservation of both the Countries; so the breach thereof might make them both
a prey to their neighbors.

I showed him, that I was glad to hear that he was of that good opinion, and
therefore I doubted not, but that he will use all those good offices that might
salve the unkindness.

The first, to cause all those occasions that might breed any suspicion of evil
meaning, to be avoided.

The second, to procure some grateful Ministers to be sent from the King his
Master unto her Majesty, to enter into some Treaty of accord.

To the first, he said, that her Majesty, whatsoever was given out to the
contrary, needed not to doubt of the Kings sincerity toward her.

To the second, he said, he saw not how the King could do it with his honor,
considering how the D. Marquis Vitelli and the King his Masters Ambassador were
rejected.

To that I replied, the offense grew by two of them, and therefore ungrateful,
and most unfit to deal in that behalf. And as for their having no direct
Commission from the King, but from him that had bred the offense, in reason he
was not fit to be employed in that care. The end of our talk was, that he for
his part, and I for my part, would not fail to think of those things that might
best tend to breed reconcilement between our Princes. But, Sir, to the end you
may know the ground and spring of this alteration, of so strange, to become so
familiar and courteous, you shall understand, that not past three days before,
he presented unto the King, three requests from the D. Alva. The first, for
that the D. was given to understand, that the Prince of Orange makes
preparation in Germany for Flanders that therefore it would please him (in
respect of the aid his Master had sent him in his civil troubles) to send him
the like number of Reisters, for the better understanding of the said Princes
entreprize.

The second, that it would please him, that he might leavie here such number of
Catholics* as would willingly serve his Master against the said Prince.

The third, that it would please him to stay certain ships there a preparing a^
Rochel on the Princes behalf.

To the first the King answered, That his treasures were so near spent, that he
took more care how to pay the Reisters (to whom he was indebted for service in
the last troubles) then he was well able at this present to provide any succor
or aid for the King his Master, and hoped, that seeing his necessity was such,
his said Master and good Brother would bear with all.

Touching the second, he answered, That if he should condescend to the leavying
of such Catholics as would be content to serve, that thereupon the H^gonots
would take occasion to put themselves in Arms, suspecting that the said leavie
were but colorable, and a device that might reach to themselves.

To the third he answered, That he was informed that the said ships were
prepared only to be revenged o^ certain of his Masters Subjects that had taken
certain ships of those of the Religion, and had drowned diverse of the men, and
others they had delivered unto the inquisitors.

These answers falling not out to his contentment, makes him, as I suppose, to
think, that the friendship of England is worth the having.

The first of this month there arrived here the Count Olivares, sent by the
King of Spain to congratulate the marriage; his train was only in number 11.
he is reported to be of livelihood forty thousand Crowns a year; his
enterment here is nothing answerable to that my Lord of Buckhurst has
receive^: I mean to repair to see him, as also to propound unto him if I see
occasion thereto, what by her Majesty I was appointed to declare unto the
Spanish Ambassador.

The second of this month, which was the day my Lord of Buckhurst took his
leave, there was set up a Bull, which was at Ponte de St. Estienne, of the same
day that Fe^ans was, containing the self same matter, which a servant of mine
(...), by reason he saw diverse flocking about it, tore it down, and brought me
the same, whereupon my Lord of Buckhurst and I, upon conference, before his
said access, immediately broke with the King in that behalf. The King called me
unto him, and asked me the contents of the said Bull; whereof being advertised,
as also I presenting unto him so much of the said Bull as was given me by my
servant, he showed himself very much moved thereat, in such sort as we might
very well see it was unseigned: forthwith he called Lansac unto him, and willed
him to take order with the Judge Crimniall, for the searching out of the setter
of the same, assuring us, if by any means he could be found, he should receive
such punishment as such a persumption required; considering the good Amity
between him and his good Sister.

I showed him, that if he did not take order in this, the like measure might be
measured to himself. He answered, that he did perceive that very well, and that
whosoever he were that should seem to touch in honor any of his Co^federates,
he would make account of him accordingly.

After my departure from the King, Lansac told me in mine ear, That he had
g^^at cause to guess, that this was some Spanish practice.

Thus, Sir, having made you partaker of such things as I thought me for her
Majesty to understand, I most humbly take my leave.

From Paris the 5 of Mar. 1570. Your Honors to Command, Francis Walsingham.
Postscript.
Sir Mr^^^ who willed me to write his name in Cipher, gave me to understand,
that a friend of his (who talked with an Italian Bishop of the house of
Salma^^i, who came lately hither from the Pope to congratulate the marriage)
did learn by him, that he has a practice in hand for England, which would not
be long before it br^ke forth: and he further showed, that one Merchant in this
Town has 14000 C^owns to be employed in that behalf.




To the Right Honorable, and my very good Lord, the Earl of Leicester.
MY very good Lord, I leave to my Lord of Buckhurst to show you how every way
he has b^n honorably entertained; therefore in this behalf this only will I
say* That such has bin my Lords good demeanor, as also, of the Gentleman of
his train, as the King and his Court rests very well satisfied, and gives
both him and them great commendations; protesting that sithence his coming to
the Crown there was not an Ambassador of like Honosur here, which I do not
learn at those hands that will report otherwise then they hear, to speak that
which may best content us; but from them at whose hands I do assure my self to
have received the truth; and for the increase of this good report, he spares
to use no cost or liberality to such as (by the King appointment) have given
attendance on him. Touching other things, the Duke of Longueville is lately
departed from the Court with coffeehouse, for that the Precedentship is
adjudged to the Duke of Nemours; protesting, That so long as the Queen Mother
lives, he will not come to the Court, for he judges her to be the cause
thereof. I hear secretly, that there is not the best liking between the two
Queens, whereof the young Q. is like to have the worst by common judgment; for
that here, whatsoever our Mother commands, takes place, and stands for
law. And therefore, if her Majesty desire to take any profit of France, she
must only be the Messiah and Mediator. I could therefore have wished, that
her Majesty had amongst other things bestowed some Present upon her. The Kings
Request unto the Pope for Count Galli^^zos delivery, is quite rejected; who
protests, That if all the Hugonots in France were encamped about Rome, he
would not deliver him. The King with this proud and disdainful answer is very
much offended; I would he would give the Hugonots leave to make some proof what
they could do for his delivery. Touching a Bull set up against the Queen, the
Kings coffeehouse therewith, and certain requests presented by the Spanish
Ambassador here to the King, I refer your Honor to Mr. Secretaries Letters;
And so leaving further to trouble your Honor, I most humbly take my leave.

Paris the 5 of March 1570.

To the Right Honorable Mr. Francis Walsingham, the Q. Majesty's Ambassador in
France.
SIr, I would not suffer this bearer pass without my salutations; Master Beal^
came this morning, by whom, and by your Letters, I have understood from you
such things as are of moment, and so have I imparted them to her Majesty, and
mean as shortly as I can to procure answer for the return of the bearer: her
Majesty, as there is good cause, allows well of your service; and so I bid
you well to do, and heartily thank you for your singular care and good will
which you show unto my Lord of Rutland, who advertiseth me of very countifull.
--

From Westminster primo Martii, 1570. By your assured, (as I was wont) William
Cecil. And as I am now ordered to Write, William Burleigh.
Sir Henry Norris makes friendly report of you to her Majesty, and to all
others. I write not to my Lord of Buckhurst, because I think he is on the way.




To my very loving friend Sir Francis Walsingham, Ambassador Resident for the
Queens Majesty in France.
MY Lord Ambassador, since my last Letter, unto you, I have little new matter
worth the writing, saving now we are much troubled with the Scottish causes, the
Commissioners of both parties are now here; and to write unto you what the end
will be certainly as yet, I cannot: we find both sides very stiff, and
hitherto those for the Kings party very resolute for the maintenance of his
Authority; her Majesty's scrupulosity touching his Title and Government, we
partly know. The unworthiness of their Queen to rule she grants, but the
instances of their cause to depose her from her dignity, she can hardly yet be
persuaded in, so yet she remains much perplexed; on the one side, she is loath
to set her up, or to restore to her her estate again. On the other side, she is
as loath to defend that which she is not well persuaded to have justice with it.
Between these, her Counsel chiefly seek for these two things; that her self
may be preserved in surety, and the true Religion maintained assuredly: For as
the state of the world stands, and upon through examination of this cause, it
appears, that both the ways be dangerous touching the Q. of Scots; for there
is danger for delivering of her to her Government, so is there danger in
retaining her in prison, her friends abroad begin to speak proudly for her; we
were wont also to have friends of our side if need were, but as far as I can
see, there is none of that side of the sea to be found that be Princes
absolute; well, our case is the harder, and we must say, Si Deus nobiscum quis
contra nos. Touching this matter, as soon as it shall grow to any likelihood,
either of the one side, or of the other, I will advertise you, and withal send
you the reasons of the advice. In the mean time, whatsoever you may hear,
believe me, there is no man in England can tell you which way it will go; yet
in respect of the King there, and his continual dealing for the said Q. her
Majesty rather gives in words more favorable that way then the other. Mr.
Norris is arrived here yesterday, being Shrovesunday, when Mr. Secretary was
created Baron of Burleigh, and I think ere it be long shall have the office of
privy Seal, but as yet remains Secretary still; and within a day or two Sir
Thomas Smith is like to be called to assist him. The Parliament is to begin the
2 of April next, the Queen Majesty, thanks be to God, is in very good health,
so are all your friends as you left them, save Sir Nicholas Throckmorton, our
good friend. Your wife was here lately to take her leave of her Majesty, who
used her very well and graciously. I pray you let us hear as often as you can*
conveniently. I would gladly understand of some good for the poor Cardinal
Chastillion: I desire, and also long to hear of the Q. Majesty's present, how
it is liked. Thus with my hea^tie commendations, I bid you heartily farewell,

the 26 March. 1570. Your assured Friend R. Leicester.


To the Right Honorable, my very good Lord, the Earl of Leicester.
BY your Lordships of the 26 of February, I find that there is some entry made
in the Scottish matters, and that you see them so full of difficulties, as
whether on retaining or releasing there should be more safety, you can hardly
di^cern things well weighed as well at home as abroad.

The common opinion of such as are of judgment here, and wish well unto her
Majesty and our Country, is, That if the pretended match between her Majesty
and Monsieur should not go forward, then nothing can be so dangerous as her
delivery; for here they stand upon this point, that neither the King can be
safe, nor the Realm ^uiet, unless Monsieur be provided of some other harborage.

The places likely to be attained, and fit for his calling, where they would
place him, are two, England and Scotland; if England refuse, then is Scotland
more ready to receive him. This well weighed, though your Lorship with the rest
of the Comissioners, are both wise and of great experience, notwithstanding so
full of danger is the Cause, as no resolution can possibly grow to you, that
shall be void of peril. I pray God therefore in this hard case, that that
course may be taken wherein is least peril, and most safety for her Majesty.

At this present, there is no matter here worthy of your Lordships knowledge,
only I am to trouble you with mine own particular estate, my charges grow here
to be so great, through the excessive deareness of the place, as necessity
forces me at this present to make my moan unto your Lordship, and to desire
your aid, that I may not be (as I am) overburdened; whereby the care how to
live, may hinder the only care I ought to have, how to serve. I have forborne
hitherto to express my grief, to the end that my Lord of Buckhurst's report
might add some credit to my complaint. And though my service cannot deserve so
much as I am allowed, yet my place, and my estate requires consideration to be
had of the present time; for otherwise, I shall not be able to do that which
shall be for her Majestites Honor and service: when men of livelihood were
employed in this calling, always change of time, bread change and of
Allowance. If any time therefore required consideration, this chiefly; for that
never was the like dearth here; and if any man's estate was to be weighed, none
more then mine, that am far inferior in ability to any other that ever supplied
this place. I will not longer entertain your Lordship with this private cause,
but commit it to your good consideration, assuring my self of any furtherance
that you can give me. And so leaving further to trouble your Honor at this
present, I most humbly take my leave.

From Paris the 9 of March. Your Honors to command Fr. Walsingham.


To my very loving friend Mr. Francis Walsingham Esquire the Q. Majesty's
Ambassador in France.
SIr, I have received your Letters, both by Mr. Wigmore and Beale, as by
H^rcourt I did late advertise you. And having made her Majesty partaker, both
by hearing them read, and by her own reading, I am in this sort directed to
answer you. To the first of the second, that is, to that of the 13 of Febr.
brought by Beale, her Majesty makes good account of the person of him, ^ mean
the 36 T s 4 t 10 30-0 ^ by the intelligence which he gave you; but it breeds
some doubt in her, that the certainty can be no otherwise understood, in that
it is informed you, that the practice continues by late dispatching of an
Englishman of high stature, and lean of visage; wherein is such incertainty, as
no man can thereby attain either to discover the practice, or withstand it, by
apprehending the party: and surely, Sir, her Majesty cannot but think, but they
that can attain to the knowledge of the practice, may as well attain to the
knowledge of the parties name; for they that are trusted with the matter, may
be trusted with the persons; and so her Majesty wishes you to endeavor your
self, with such as you shall think good, to come to the knowledge of some
persons, by stay of whom such a matter might be deciphered. For mine own part,
I think it likely that these practices are devised, but without more appearance
I see no evident reason to move me, that in the time when the Queen of Scots
her self, and her Factors, are in hope to be delivered by treaty, and with the
favor of our Queen, there should be any attempt otherwise for her escape;
wherein, how cunning soever men be in device, yet the execution stands upon
many adventures, and any mischance happening, might breed ruin to the whole
enterprise. I have been acquainted with many of these like advertisement. But
surely, I never found any substance in them in the event; but yet with them,
and without them, I ever find it good to be circumspect. I write not to have
you forbear from hearing and reporting of any the like, but my experience
serves to move you to procure the givers of such things, to discover the
matters more certainly, and so they are of more value.

The message sent you from Rochel, of some dangerous intent upon Ireland from
Spain, has more appearance; for that we also hear it from Spain confirmed, and
it is the same that before I advertised you concerning Stukelie.

I also smell some purpose of the Count Lodowicks coming with his ships toward
the Low Countries, to accompany the design; for his brother the Prince of
Orange, whereof I would look for some better success, if I had not
understanding thereof so many ways; for the force of that enterprise should
consist in suddenness and secrecy, which are not like to take place. Thus much
for your first Letter.

Now to the second brought by Wigmore, the Q. Majesty likes well of your
proceedings with the Spanish Ambassador there, and marvelleth that he should be
so coy with you, considering the reports of his former courtesies; but by
likelihood, some other accident moved it, which by you next speech will be
better discovered. The cause why that Ambassador could not be answered sooner
of the matter whereof he advertised her Majesty from the Duke of Alva, was,
for that her Majesty could not sooner hear thereof from the Duke. If you shall
find it convenient to impart matters to the said Ambassador you may let him
know of these things following; One Monsieur Senegen a Low-Countrie-man, is
coming to end the Treaty for rest^tution on both sides of the Merchants goods;
There are lately come into the ports of the West, certain Hulks laden from
Spain and Portugal, driven by Tempest. And because they should be well used,
the Ambassador here for the King, though in other things he be not used, has
been dealt withal to name certain strangers (Merchants) to resort to the
ports, and they have special Authority from us to put the same in all good
safety, and that no dealing shall be by any to the impairing of the said goods;
And this special favor is showed, because the time of restitution is at hand.
And therefore we mean not to give any cause of quarreling. There were also
certain other ships of War that came from Spain, being of the company which
conducted the Queen of Spain into Spain, which being furnished with Soldiers,
were favorably entertained, and permitted to depart at their pleasure. Of
these things you may give him knowledge, to make him have a better taste in his
mouth; he may perchance contrariwise complain of spoil of his Masters Subjects
by Pirates hanting the narrow Seas, and specially about the Isle of Weight: and
I cannot deny the spoils, but surely they are committed by one Lubresst and
others belonging to the Prince of Orange, which we cannot remedy; and yet Mr.
Horsey is presently dispatched with Authority to set forth certain ships,
either to take them, or to drive them from our Coast. I confess to you
privately, they are too much favored (lucri causa) but you may avow truly,
that the Q. Majesty does in no wise favor them: thus much to your second
Letter.

Now to some credit given by Mr. Beale concerning ^, a few words shall suffice,
if I cannot judge any thing in a ^2 ^3 ^4 ^6 ^8 the matter is much liked, and
all furtherers thereof allowed, and all disswaders not liked; I am commanded
thus to write, that if any mention should be made to you thereof, you should
show your self willing to advertise, and so you shall do well.

The retardation used herein by H. is not liked by A. and the good will of L.
in the furtherance is allowed. By this you may perceive how to order your self;
and surely this principle I hold, that no on thing shall warrant more surety
and quietness to the Queen Majesty the 3 5 7 in; but the manner and
circumstance are of the substance of my principal, and not accedents. Herein I
deal boldly with you; I find nothing in your writing or doing but allowable, if
otherwise I did, I would advertise you for friendship to your self, and for
good will to the office you bear.

Although I cannot advertise you certainly, as I would, of the grant of your
leases, yet I am in that forwardness, as I trust by next writing to send you
knowledge thereof. You must hereby be acquainted with the delays of the Court.

From Greenwich the third of March 1570. Sir Thomas Smith I trust shall be
admitted to the Council to morrow, and shortly after to be Secretary. I pray
you Sir commend me to Master Cavalcant.

Yours assuredly William Burghley.




Having in this sort ended my Letters, her Majesty repeated again unto me what
I should write unto you, of the great matter* which I desired might be in a
Letter from her self to you, but her Majesty thought it sufficient to be
imparted unto you in this sort following; If any person of value shall deal
with you to understand your mind in the case of her Majesty's marriage, you may
say; That at your coming from hence, upon some common brute of such a matter
concerning her Majesty and Monsieur D. Anjow, you sought what to think or
report thereof, and this you are assured that at your coming out of England,
her Majesty, upon consideration of the benefit of her Realm, and to content
her subjects, resolved to marry, if she should find a person in estate and
condition fit for her to match withal; and that she meant not to marry but
with a person of the family of a Prince; and you may add, that you cannot by
any means perceive, that her Majesty is altered from that disposition; so as
you may conclude, that if any such matter should be moved to you, by any meet
person to deal therein, you will advertise her Majesty thereof, and so would
her Majesty you should do. If God shall order this marriage, or any other, to
take place, you may well judge no time would be wasted, otherwise then honor
may require. I am not able to discern what is best, but surely, I see no
continuance of her quietness without a Marriage. And therefore I remit the
success to almighty God. This that I write privately to your self, ^ trust
shall remain to your self, for so do I with your private Letters, that no
person sees them but my self. I am wearied with writing. And the rest of
things, especially our Scottish matters, I refer to Master Beales declaration
3. March 1570.

Yours assuredly, William Burghleigh.


To (...) Right Honorable and my very good Lord, the Lord of Burghleigh.
YOur Lordship knows Necessity has no Law; and therefore I hope that my
present request, grounded on necessity, will be weighed accordingly; and
surely, if necessity forced me not thereto, I would forbear to do it for many
respects. I do not doubt, after my Lord of Buckhurst^s return, you shall
understand, as well by himself, as by others of his train, the extremity of
death that presently reigns here; which is such, that her Majesty's
allowance does not by 10 l. in the week defray my ordinary charge of
household. And yet neither my diet is like to any of my Predecessors, nor yet
the number of my horses so many as they heretofore have kept. I assure you,
Sir, of 800 l. that I brought in my purse into this Country. I have not left in
money and provision, much above 300 l. far contrary to that account, that I
made; who thought to have hade 500 l. alvvaies aforehand, to have made my
provisions, thinking by good husbandry somevvhat to have relieved my disability
otherwise: but my account was vvrong made, and therefore my reckoning falls
short, and so short that unless there be by your good means some consideration
had of me, I cannot but sink under the burden. I have written to my Lord of
Leicester; and unto Sir Walter in this behalf; who, I do assure my ^elf, will
join with you in this behalf: I most humble therefore beseech you so to take
care of me, as I, in caring how to serve, may no way be drawn from the same
by taking care how to live; and casting my care on you, I leave further to
trouble your Honor at this present, beseeching God to bless you in all your
doings.

At Paris the 14 of March 157. Your Honors to command Fr. Walsingham.


I am sorry to accompany the thanks that I am bound to give your Lordship for
obtaining my suite at her Majesty hands, with a new request; and so hard is my
case, that even necessity forces me thereto. And therefore the same being
grounded on necessity, will be weighed by your Lordship I hope accordingly.

To the Right Honorable, my very good Lord the Lord of Bu^leigh.
I Thought to send this bearer to attend upon your Lordship, for such dispatch
as it shall please her Majesty to make hitherward.

I forgate in my last to advertise you, how I had been to visit Olivares, whom
I found more solemn (after the Spanish fashion) then wise. I dealt with him
about Stenklies attempt, he protested they were but bruites. I showed him that
the Queens Majesty was advertised otherwise, and upon such likelihood, as she
had good cause to believe it. For first, (said I) the King gives him a daily
allowance. Secondarily, he has advanced him to the Honor of Knighthood.
Thirdly, that the said Stenklies should entertain about him certain Engineers.

To the first objection he answered, that the King his Master was glad to
entertain any Gentleman of countenance, that offered him service, as also to
honor them with the honor of Knighthood. I then made him acquainted with the
couse of Stenklies life, as also how little he had to take to, and therefore
willed him to consider how unworthy he was of any honor or entertainment in
respect of himself. But (said I) being as he is, a Rebel unto the Queens
Majesty, with whom the house of Burgundy has had so long Amity, and to be
used with that honor and entertainment at his Masters hand, gave her occasion
to think that kind of Amity not to answer best to such good will as outwardly
is professed and so, etc.

At Paris the 19 of March 1571. Your Honors to command, Francis Walsingham.


To our trusty and welbeloved, Sir Francis Walsingham Ambassador Resident with
the French King.
ELIZABETH R.

TRusty and welbeloved, we greet you well; we have seen the several Letters,
which you lastely wrote of the 5 of this month to the Lord of Burleigh our
Secretary, together with a Letter sent to you out of Spain, of the 25 of
January; and do like well of your diligence used herein; and having well
considered and looked further into ^he matter, and comparing your advertisement
with others of like sort, and finding the same to be of great importance, we
have resolved to send out of hand a Gentleman to the King of Spain, both to
decipher by speech with him and by other means to understand the Kings
intention herein and also to deal roundly and plainly with him in the matter,
and in the mean time we do give order for all events, for vvithstanding of any
enterprise, as well by sending of our ships to the seacoast of Ireland, as by
other Forces to be sent into Ireland.

And for that much time may pass before we can have answer from thence, we
pray you continue your travel and care to understand further, as much as you
may thereof, and to advertise, as matter may be further discovered worthy of
knowledge. Touching the matter of Credit sent to you from Rochel, whereof you
gave knowledge by Beal, we pray you, as of your self, to learn further thereof,
and to discover their intentions, and the likelihood of their intentions, and
what are the meanest sums of money to be demanded, and what are best assurance;
and as soon as you can to advertise us, without giving any token that you are
thus directed to do. For other matters, we refer you to the advertisements of
our pleasure, signified lately by the Letters of the Lord of Burleigh.

And whereas an ancient, and very good servant of ours, Sir Thomas Cotton
Knight, has occasion to complain, as he informs, of the evil dealing of one
Loen de la Hay, a Subject of the French King; who being once our Prisoner of
War, and licensed to depart upon his faith, upon condition to redeem and send
home freely a son of the said Sir Thomas Cotton, then Prisoner, or else within
a time limited, to return again as his Prisoner, has performed neither of
both; besides, a good sum of money which he lent to de la Hay at his departure,
yet unpaid: We have thought good to recommend the same matter unto you; and for
the better instruction therein, you shall receive herewith the request of the
said Sir Thomas Cotton, praying you to take some convenient time to open the
matter to such of the Kings Council, or to himself, if occasion may serve, and
to such other as you shall think able and well-affected to do any good therein;
and to seek by all good means that some reason may be had of the said de la
Hay, in this so plain and justificable a case; so as our said Servant may have
no further cause of Suit to the King for lack of justice, the party being well
able to pay, as is informed.

If you shall have any occasion to deal with the Spanish Ambassador there, you
may be bold to show him of these reports that we hear from Spain; and if he
shall hear of any our preparations by Sea and Land, that the same is for our
defense; and if we shall be offended, we will use them not only for defense,
but to offend for our Revenge.

Given under our Signet at our Manor of Greenwich the tenth of March, 1570. in
the thirteenth year of our Reign.

To the Right Honorable Francis Walsingham, Ambassador for the Queens Majesty
in France.
SIr, by the Queens Majesty's Letters you may understand, how well she likes
your diligence; and besides that which is therein contained, I am commanded
specially to write to you, that it is to her related, that certain reports are
made there, as she thinks, by practice from thence of such as do not ^ in
with ^ that a means ^, and so much in any place affirm. And if L. shall by
any occasion deal with you. A. will that you do so assure him; for A.
knovveth not of any 0234 color that does mislike hereof. Herein I am commanded
to to write earnestly unto you, and to will you by no means to hinder the
proceeding; for it is meant, as to me it appears, very earnest, and some
offense here taken with H. for an opinion of cold dealing. After the signing
of her Majesty's Letters, she commanded me, as she reposed trust in me, that I
should not be remiss her^in. And so I pray you consider thereof, and advertise
me what you hear and find thereof. I make haste to end, because I have many
things to do.

From Greenvvich the tenth of March 1570. Your assured loving Friend, Will.
Burleigh.


I have no more leisure but to pray you to commend me to my Lord of Rutland.

To the Right Honorable and my very good Lord the Lord of Burleigh.
HEr Majesty's of the tenth of March I received, the which I perceive her
Majesty has sundry ways advertisements of the Irish enterprise; whereof
as I had cause before to doubt, so have I now more cause then before, and
therefore am glad to understand that there is order taken for the vvithstanding
of all events that may happen in that behalf.

It may therefore please your Lordship to signify unto her Majesty that the
24 of this month, the Archbishop of Cassels sent unto me two of his Servants
to know whether he might come to speak with me or no. I answered them, that
whenever he would come he should be very welcome; and for that he should not
lose his labor in coming, I showed them that he should find me at home both
that day, and the day following. So the next day, being the 25. he repaired
unto me; his first speech tended to his justification, for departing out of
Ireland without her Majesty's leave; saying, that being deprived from his
living, and another substitute in his place, who he confessed to have outraged
before his departure, necessity enforced him to depart, to seek maintenance
some other where; and the rather, for that in respect of the said o^trage
committed, he has justly incurred the Lord Deputies displeasure. I showed him,
that his confession of his fault, was an argument of penitence. And therefore,
that I doubted not, that if he would seek pardon at her Majesty's hands, he
should find her Majesty graciously affected toward him, who has always been
more naturally inclined to remit then to revenge. I asked him, how long it was
since he departed out of Ireland. He showed me, that it was about two years
past. And after he embarked for Spain, where ever since his departure from
Nantes he has continued, having received ever after his arrival, very
honorable entertainment at the Kings hands, who yearly gave him 2000 Docats
pension. He shevved me nothing of his con^erence he had at Nantes with L. and
the C. neither did I seem to understand any thing thereof, but made always
show unto him, to believe whatsoever he said, as though I had never heard of
him before, nor of his proceedings. I proceeded further with him, and asked,
when he departed out of Spain. He showed me about the latter end of Ianury. I
told him, that there were brutes given out here, that the King of Spain had
some intention to invade Ireland. I asked him, whether before his departure he
heard any such matter. Then he brake and showed me, that about September last,
one Stewkley arrived in Spain, who after his access to Madrill, before he had
conference with the King, or any great Personage* he sent unto the said
Archbishop to desire to come and speak with him. To whom he returned answer by
his Messenger, that if he would come unto him, he should be very welcome:
Whereupon Stewkley repaired unto him; and after protestations had, how glad he
was to see him there, whom he knew to be Catholikely bent, he showed him, that
his intention of his repair into that Country, was to deal with the King of
Spain, about the reducing of Ireland unto his Government, whereby Heresy might
be expelled, and true Catholic Religion planted; and therefore desired him,
for that he was well acquainted with the Cardinal Spinoso, President of the
Council, that he would deal with him, to procure him access unto the King. To
whom he replied, that he thought that the King, in respect of the good Amity
between him and the Queens Majesty, would be loath to deal therein: And
further, that he for his own part, though he desired the Catholic Religion to
be there planted, yet did he mislike of the means, for that he would be loath
to see his Country under any other Government then that of the Queens Majesty
and her Successors: And therefore he desired him to hold him excused, in that
he could not, for those respects abovenamed, be a mean to bring him acquainted
with the said Cardinal, President of the Council. Whereupon Stewkley departed
from him, and went to the Duke Feria, and him acquainted with the cause of his
repair thither, and desired him to procure him access unto the King. So the
said Duke brought him to the King; whom the King, after conference had with
him, used very honorably, and appointed him a very fair house, and gave him
six thousand Docats: And besides that, he does give him daily allowance for the
maintenance of his table, which he takes to be great; for he spends at the
least Thirty Ducats a day. Two days after the King had conference with the
said Stewkley, the King sent for the Archbishop; and asked him whether he did
know the said Stewkley. To whom he answered, that he never saw him but here in
Spain; but by report he had heard, that he had been a Pyrate on the sea, of
life dissolute, in expenses prodigal, of no substance, neither a man of any
great account in his Country; notwithstanding he heard he was a Gentleman
born, and descended from a good House. Then the King told him of the offer,
that he had made touching the request of Ireland; assuring him, that he had
dealt so before his coming with the Irish Nobility, as he should find them
ready to receive such Forces as he should send. He wished the King not to be so
light of belief; for that Stewkley was not a man of that credit with the Irish
Nobility, to be able to bring any such matter to pass, whom they knew to be but
a shifter, and one who, for the maintenance of his prodigality, seeks to
abuse all men. With that the King replied, that besides Stewkleys own report of
his ability in that behalf, he was besides recommended to him by his
Ambassador, who willed to credit whatsoever he reported. Upon the mentioning of
the Ambassador, he made a digression; and told me, that the Ambassador did
great hurt in England, which he did not learn by hear^ say, but by sight of his
Letters; and therefore wished, that her Majesty would not long harbor so ill
a gest. The grand Prior was at the same time with the King, and present at the
Communication, and said, that the Archbishop would be loath that his Country
should come under the Kings Government, which he marvelled at, considering the
Kings liberality bestowed on him. To whom he answered, that so far forth as he
might with his duty toward God and his Country, the King should find him
serviceable at all times toward him; for whose prosperous estate, for that his
calling so required, he would pray: And so after this Communication had with
the King, he departed.

Not long after D. Feria meeting the said Archbishop, entered into talk with
him, and asked his opinion of Stewkley. He answered, that he had made the King
acquainted with his opinion, and that he feared that if the King do deal with
him, he would abuse him. Then D. Feria said, that the likelihoods that Stewkley
showed the King of the enterprise, were such, as there were great cause why the
King should embrace the same. For, says he, besides the Irish Nobility, he
has won a great number of the Queens Garrison to be at his devotion, as well
Soldiers as Captains. If the King, says the Archbishop, believe what he
says, then will there be no great difficulty in the interprize; but when it
comes to the trial, it will fall out otherwise. Well, said the Duke, I
perceive you are not willing it should go forward, and therefore you seek to
deface this Gentleman, whom we honor here with the name of the Duke of
Ireland. To that the Archbishop replied, that that Title and Calling was more
then ever Ireland was acquainted withal; and the more strange it will seem unto
them, for that he has there nothing to take unto. No, says the Duke I am sure
if he might enjoy his own there, it would well maintain that Calling. Surely,
says the Archbishop, if the rest of his talk prove no truer then this, then
shall you see the King much abused by him. After this talk passed between the
Archbishop and the Duke, Stewkley came and challenged the said Archbishop (as
he says) and told him, that if he were not as he was, a man of the Church, he
would be revenged of him for the report he made of him. In the end, after
report made of this, talk passed touching Stewkleys proceedings, he concluded,
that the cause of his departure out of Spain, was only that he saw great
likelihood that this enterprise should go forward; and therefore would be
loath, as one descended from the house of Desmond, to be suspected by his abode
there, to be a favourer of the said enterprise, hating nothing more then the
name of a Traitor. I told him, that I was very glad to here this talk pass from
him; whereof I promised him not to fail, to make her Majesty privy, hoping
that he meant sincerely touching the practice. I showed him, that her Majesty
was neither ignorant nor unprovided of the remedy, notwithstanding I did assure
him that her Majesty could not but take it in good part, if his meaning and
words agreed; both his withdrawing himself from thence, as also, in that he did
discover unto me her Minister here, what he knew touching the same. I prayed
him therefore to use plainness with me; and told him, that if it fall out
otherwise: First, he should be reputed a Traitor, and so little trusted of
those whose turn he should seek to serve; it being held for a common rule, That
a Traitor to his own Country, came never to be true to another. Secondarily,
that if he were partaker of the enterprise, the matter was provided for, and so
their attempt not like to take effect, whereby he should grow odious to those
that he should procure to enter into the same. And lastly, I willed him to
consider, what benefit would grow to Ireland, his Country, if it should be
reduced to the Spanish Government, who does rule altogether by Tyranny, as
diverse of the Countries where they do govern witness, whereof he as a Traveller
could not be ignorant; whereas now, they enjoy as great liberty as any Nation
does; and if there be any defect, it proceeds from themselves, who cannot
yield to embrace such good orders as her Majesty carefully for their benefit
has sought lately to place there amongst them, to reduce them from
Barbarousness to Civility. He then protested, that her Majesty should find him
sincere, though he were out of hope of all favor, in respect of his honor,
and the love that he bare to his own Country. But, says he, if it might
please her Majesty so far forth to be my good and gracious Lady and Sovereign,
as for that my Successor is dead, to restore me to my Country and Place, I
will then give to you in writing, her Ambassador here, both the manner of the
Conspiracy, as also the remedy. I showed him, that I would not fail to
advertise her Majesty thereof; notwithstanding, I thought good to desire his
return at this present, considering the suspicion conceived of him would breed
some doubt of sincerity; for that it might be thought, that his coming home now
was rather to give notice to the evil affected Subjects of his Country, how
things passed in Spain, then otherwise. He replied, that if he had meant any
such matter, he might have gone directly from Spain into Ireland. Then he told
me, that he feared that your Lordship had not conceived very well of him
through Huggins report. I made as though I never heard of Huggins; and showed
him, that your Lordship was not one that would lightly condemn any man; and
therefore willed him not to doubt, that if you might find him sincere, none
would be more ready to further him in getting her Majesty's favor then your
Lordship. Unasked, he showed me, that Huggins was returned again to Prison,
which thing I seemed not to regard. I asked him when Stewkley was to imbark.
He thought, not much before the end of April. I asked him, whether it was
true, that Julian Romer^ was appointed to that enterprise. He told me, that he
heard so

This was in effect the talk that passed betvveen us, which I thought good to
set down at length, to the end that your Lordship might the better judge, both
of the matters, and of the man. For my own opinion, I cannot tell what to
think of him; to suspect that he means not good, faith I have these causes:
First, I am informed, that two Irish men, sent from him out of Spain, were
the cause of Roches enterprise. Secondarily, I am also informed, that he was
sent for out of Spain by the Cardinal of Lorain. Thirdly, for that he wishes
the young Boy James Fitzm^rice's son, in Spain, that is now at Breast in
Britain. Lastly, I do not forget his Nation and Religion. I have placed some
especially about him, to whom he repaireth, as also who repairs to him. I
find the Irish Captain here, (whom I desired my Lord of Buckhurst to recommend
unto her Majesty) serviceable in this behalf. It shall go very hard, but I
will give a great ghess of the cause of his coming. He desires to know
within twenty days, how her Majesty inclines to his request. The only
hope I have of him is, that I imagine that he mislikes that Stewkley should
have the glory of the enterprise that they both pretended, and that he first
set abroach, and therefore would be glad to do any thing which might impeach
the same.

Now having made your Lordship acquainted with that which passed betvveen
us, I attend her Majesty's pleasure herein, how I shall direct my self. And so
leaving further to trouble your Honor at this present, I most humbly take my
leave.

From Paris the 19 of March, 1570. Your Lordships to Command, Francis
Walsingham.
Touching the other matter of credit committed to B. relation, I hope to be
able to advertise in what estate things stand within these ten days.




To our Right trusty and well-beloved Sir Francis Walsingham our Ambassador
Resident with our good Brother the French King.
ELIZABETH R.

TRusty and well-beloved, we greet you well; forasmuch as by the Lord of
Buckhurst we do understand in what sort the Queen Mother has moved unto him
the matter of marriage for her son Monsieur D' Anjou with us, and in what sort
both the King, her Son, her Self, and Monsieur, being the party, are desirous
that the same might take place, and that for the first entry into the matter in
respect of the doubtfulness that is generally conceived of our resolute
determination to marry, that is by the Queen Mother required, that none might
deal there in the same, betwixt them and us, but you as our Ambassador; and
that with none of their Council, but with Monsieur de Foix; we have thought
meet plainly to inform you, in what sort you shall deal, not doubting but you
will so use the same to all respects, as may concern our estimation in due
honor, according to the place we hold, and for the quality of our person and
sex. And because you shall the more orderly proceed herein, we do conceive our
answer by way of Articles, which we do understand were by him showed to the
Lord of Buckhurst, in writing; as follows:

The first Article of their demand was, to understand, both very speedily and
certainly of the truth of our firm resolution to marry.

To which you may constantly answer, that as the Lord of Buckhurst has already
said; so are we resolved, for the benefit of our Realm, and contentation of our
Subjects to marry with some person of Kingly blood and quality, meet for us and
our Country; and that we are free from all manner of impediments, to marry
where we shall please. And because that we perceive that notwithstanding the
like answer has been made in our name by some other, who has of late time
earnestly required to know our mind in this case; yet it is doubted by sinister
reports, that we have not a resolute mind to marry, but that we have a
disposition rather to hear of motions and suits for Marriage with Princes, and
great Estates, then finally to accept any of them, how honorable or reasonable
soever the conditions might be that should be offered. Therefore you shall in
times convenient, and as you shall be by some objections provoked, say, that we
are very sorry that our former dealings in like cases of Marriage moved to us
from other Princes, has not been better understood on our behalf, then it
seems they have been; whereby some prejudice is grown to make more
doubtfulness to be conceived in our Answers, then we mean. For the alteration
of which untrue conceptions, we cannot but generally answer, except it were
particularly remembered with what Prince, moving matter of marriage to us, we
did deal doubtfully. And therefore you shall say, that it is not unknown to the
world, for how many Kings, Princes and Estates, motions of marriage has been
made to us; and if the same were well considered, and our answers from time to
time truly known, certainly there was no cause to mislike the same, though the
motions took no place; neither could any of the parties think themselves
touched in honor by this, though their desires took no effect.

In the beginning of our Reign, that is not unknown how we had no disposition
of our own nature to marry, no otherwise then it is manifestly known, that
when the King our dear Father reigned, and many times pressed us earnestly to
marry; nor when in the late King our Brothers time, the like was renewed
unto us; even for such as then presently were in real possession of Kingdoms,
when we lived but in a private state as a daughter, or as a sister of a King,
yet could we never induce our mind to marry, but rather did satisfy our self
with a solitary life. If also it be considered, who they were that in the
first part of our Reign motioned marriage unto us, and how inconvenient such a
match was both for our self, for matter of conscience, and for discontentation
of our people, as then the time was, we doubt not but we might challenge to
our selves some praise, in that we yielded not thereto, when all other
vvorldly respects of honor, wealth and greatness, besides the worthiness of
the person, were evident to have provoked us thereto, But therein, and in all
other motions of marriage following, our answers were such, as if they were
known with their circumstances, we would not doubt but to have a general
allowance and commendation for our sincerity in dealing; as now it seems
that the world, which commonly erreth in such reports, has also erred in this
and sundry other things touching us, which time we doubt not shall make
manifest; for truly, whilst we continued, as it were, settled by natural
disposition in a determination not to marry, we did so also plainly answer all
persons, and required that the motions might be stayed; wherewith if the
parties or their Ministers would not be satisfied, but would continue rather
still their motions; what default was this in us? Yea, it is very true, that
some parties being answered by our own mouth, and that deliberately and
frequently, yet would they not accept the same for a final answer; wherein as
we could not but esteem their affection very great toward us, so truly did we
give them no new cause to hope of any change of our mind to marriage.

Nevertheless, after some course of years passed, we confess that the state of
our Realm, the continual urgent and frequent solicitations, not only of our
Counselors, to whom we always think meet to give ear, but also of the whole
Estates of our Subjects, being many times assembled in our Parliament, did stir
us to some further consideration by the weight of their reas^^s, then naturally
of our self we had been induced unto.

And therefore we yielded thus far to their importunity, that for such great
necessities concerning the universal state of our Realm, as were plainly laid
before us, we would not refuse to hear of any honorable motions to be made to
us for any person of a Royal blood, that might be meet for us and our Realm;
and that we would commend our heart to be directed by Almighty God, to follow
that which might be to the comfort of our loving Subjects: And this mind we did
continue, and did so far proceed, as reasonably we might with our honor, and
with regard to the estate of our Policy. And howsoever the world may mis-judge
of prolongation of such matters by us, certainly the same was not of any
intent in us to continue the same without purpose to conclude: But such were
the terms and difficulties in some points necessarily to be provided, as the
lack of satisfaction of us therein, was the only cause to us known of the
prolongation. All this we find meet at length to impart unto you, to the end
that you may also in like manner thereby, with truth, satisfy the hard
opinion, that as i^ seems is conceived of us, because it is seen, that many
suits has been made to us, and by great Estates, for marriage, and none has
taken effect. And as heretofore of late years, the solicitation of our loving
Subjects generally did induce us, for their sakes, to hearken to motions of
marriage, and to incline our selves thereto: So may you for more assurance of
our firm determination to marry, affirm to them that have judged doubtfullie
of us, that we do now indeed find in our own judgment, upon good respects, the
motions of our people, not only necessary for them, our Realms and Dominions;
but also convenient for our selves, so as a person may be offered to us,
agreeable for our honor, and meet for the state and policy of our Kingdoms.
And thus much may fully satisfy for justification of our doings against
sinister conceptions; and also, for a certainty for our determination, being
accompanied with a further resolution growing of our judgment otherwise then
aforetime.

The second points is to know, whether now that we have perceived by the Lord
of Buckhurst, the good disposition of the King and the Queen Mother to offer
the person of Monsieur, they might be assured of our continuance in this
resolution; and whether we will accept this motion in good part, and will be
pleased to hear further of it.

To this you may answer, That for continuance in our resolution generally to
marry, we trust there is no cause to doubt, the things before affirmed being
remembered; and how we will accept this offer of Monsieur, we cannot but plainly
confess it an argument of great good will in the King, and the Queen his
Mother; considering how that the King is married, there can be no greater nor
worthier offer made by the Crown of France, then of Monsieur D. Anjou; and
therefore we do thankfully accept it: But whether we shall be pleased to hear
further of this motion, is very doubtful for us to answer thereto; not that we
are ignorant what answer were meet, but that the interpretation thereof may be
conceived otherwise then we mean: And if any impediment shall hereafter justly
follow of the cause, without our default, the same might be imputed to us, as
others in like cases have been: And surely knowing the wisdom of Queen Mother
and her experience in such causes of matrimony, we would think, that without
demanding this point of us, she herself can best tell what is meetest to be
further done herein. For now that she knows our resolute determination
toward marriage, and with what manner of person, it is to be considered by
her, that if such things as are requisite for the contentation of both our
persons, and for the necessary conditions of the whole cause, shall be found
agreeable, then this offer shall not only be thankful, but by all good
probability take the effect that is by the offer intended. And if otherwise,
there should any just and necessary impediment happen, either for lack of
satisfaction of our own natural expectation concerning our person, or of
reasonable accord, upon the conditions requisite, specially for such as may
conserve the state and policy of our Realm; yet we see not, but the good will
of either party should be allowed, as well in us for yielding to hear and
consider of so honorable an offer as for them that made it. And herein you
shall say, that we pray the Queen Mother not to be over curious in requiring so
precise an answer, until the matter may be further treated upon and explained;
and not to think it any touch to the honor of her Son, to be named a Suitor to
us, as others of as great degree have been, though the motions took no effect,
rather for other impediments, then for any mislike of the persons. And thus
much we would have her persuaded, that as we did at the first honorably
forbear to hear of some offers, because the impediments were at the first
beginning manifest, although the persons were worthy to be liked. So in this
cause, if we did perceive any such impediment of weight and appearance, or that
we had conceived by any report, any just cause of misliking of this offer, we
would surely deal plainly with the King and Queen Mother, and would most
heartily thank them for so honorable an offer, and yet give them manifest
occasion to forbear; And truly we cannot give any answer hereto, but leave
this point to the wisdom of Queen Mother, who is not ignorant what is
belonging to such a matter as this is, specially toward us, being a Queen
never married, and having Kingdoms to be provided for with reasonable
conditions, for satisfactions of our loving Subjects, whom though we know are
so desirous to have us marry, as they will not mislike of any marriage that may
content us, yet shall we not take such advantage of their free good will but
that they shall plainly understand, that we will join with our private
satisfaction the regard of their quietness and surety.

The third is not by us dissallowed, that this matter may be treated upon
between you as our Ambassador, and Monsieur de Foix, until the matter may be
brought to more ripeness, so as the King may, without hazarding of his honor,
send a Noble Ambassador. And yet you may add as of your self, that you think
that the matter would be more readily expedited, for the mutual understanding
of our minds on both parties, by sending of some such special person as
Monsieur de Foix, upon some other pretense: And if you can so compass it, we
think many scruples would be avoided, better then can be by Letters sent unto
you; and if Foix may come, then shall you do well to advise him to think of all
circumstance aforehand. And yet afterward the King, if cause shall so permit,
may send an honorable Embassage for such a cause.

The fourth request is, that we should send to you certain Articles, for you to
declare our intent toward Monsieur, with authority for you to consent thereto,
so as the King should first deliver to you other Articles for Monsieur, wherein
we cannot but find many difficulties; For how can we tell what were meet to
propound, until we may understand what shall be first propounded by them that
make the offer?

But if they seem not contented with this answer, that then by your former
motion they will not send any person hither, you may say, that if they will
deliver to you their offers and demands, you will promise that the same shall
not be revealed to any person but to our self, and one or two about us, whose
advice we will use. And if you shall be demanded, what you think would be
looked for to be offered, you may say, that you think no less can be offered
for conditions, then was by the Emperor Charles, with King Philip to Queen
Mary. And that further, of necessity it must be specially prejudged, that
Monsieur shall not have Authority to exercise the form of Religion in England,
that is prohibited by the Laws of our Realm. And though you be not instructed
hereof, yet would we that you should specially open this matter secretly to the
Q. Mother; and though we mean not to urge her Son to any change of conscience,
otherwise then we wish him to be directed to the best, yet surely we cannot,
nor may not give him any authority to have any exercise in facts of such Rites
as are prohibited by our Laws. And as for his allowance of our Religion,
although we wish he might in conscience like it (and if he did understand the
form thereof, truly we do not mistrust but he would not mislike it) yet we
shall only require his presence in our Oratories and Churches. And this you
may say, is one of the matters of greatest importance to be considered by the
Queen Mother.

The fifth, that this matter should not be opened to the French Ambassador here
Resident, which because it is required may be observed; for surely we neither
to him nor to any other use to deal in such matters, but as we are provoked.
And yet why it should be kept secret we see not, considering it has been
already moved to us by sundry, and by some that are by nature bound to the
Crown of France, and that do think in their conscience the matter to be both
honorable and profitable to the Crown of France. And you shall say to the
Queen Mother, that she shall not mislike of us, though we think so well of our
selves and our estate, that if God shall order this her motion to take effect,
it shall be the best marriage for the honor of the King her Son, for the weal
of his Crown, and for the commendation of the Q. Mother, that any Q. attempted
this many hundred years for France. And yet we are content to keep this motion
secret, according to the request, meaning to make none other privy to the same,
but to such of our privy Council as are known we have just cause to trust,
both for their fidelities and secrecy, that is, our Cousin the Earl of
Leicester; whom you may say, that whatsoever may be otherwise doubted, we find
ready to allow of any marriage that we shall like, and withal marriages with
any Prince' stranger, most of all this with the Crown of France; the other is
Sir William Cecill, Lord of Burleigh, and our principal Secretary, and is well
known to be a dutiful servant, in any thing meet and agreeable for us and our
Realm, and so may you make report of them both.

The sixth is, that we would not make delay in answer as we do not.

The seventh to understand, whether we can be pleased that Master Cavalcant,
shall be used any further herein, which we remit to the consideration of the Q.
Mother, he being an honest Gentleman, and to our knowledge always disposed to
do good offices, betwixt us and the Crown, and therefore not to be dissallowed
by us, if the Q. Mother shall like of him. And yet we require you to have
regard that his dealings therein, considering that he departed lately from
hence, may not be conceived as directed by us. You shall do well to deal warily
with the Q. Mother in the matter of Religion, for the D. her Son, not as we
would press him to make a change of his Religion, although we wish it. But
that if he should marry with us, that he should not be warranted to do any act
contrary to our Laws.

Given under our Signet at Greenwich, the 24 of March. 1571.

To the Queens Majesty's Ambassador in France Mr. Francis Walsingham.
SIr, if you consider how weary, I may be in the first and second writing of
the Queens Majesty's Letters, to you, not being void of other business, you
will allow a short Letter at this time. If I be not much deceived Colly Weston,
North-hampton (...), in this: wherefore you shall do well not to be over
superstitious, considering the necessity of this time, and the dangers ^ wise
men there do find this matter for ^ not unmeet for C. God only knows the
success.

We here, and the good there have a great loss of the Cardinal Chastillon,
who is thought to have been poisoned by some French Apostata or Counter^eit.

I pray you hasten Mr. Cobham toward Spain, and as soon as you can let us know
what you shall receive from thence.

This case of ^ is deferred only to see some event of the matter for 88. for
if that succeed not as is now mentioned, the peril is the greater, by ^.

And what is done therein, for sparing of writing, you shall learn by Master
Cobham. By your Letter brought by my Lord of Buck. I understa^d the excess of
your charges there, whereof my Lord of Buckhurst has not as yet conferred with
me, But I will further your relief therein to my uttermost, and as cause
requires. Commend me humbly to my Lord of Rutland, to whom I write but a short
Letter.

From Greenwich the 24 of March 157^. Your assured loving friend William
Burleigh.
After I had written this, which with the Queens Majesty's I meant to have sent
by Master Henry Cobham, her Majesty commanded for more haste to send some
special conveyer with them, and so I send Harcourt. I am in doubt that if this
matter for Religion be not well conceived by them there, the adversaries to the
marriage will take great advantage thereof, and urge the persisting in it of
purpose to dissolve the same. So as I had rather the speech hereof might have
come from the Queen Mother or the others to you, and so you might answer them
as you are warranted, then to begin abruptly of your self. I wish they would
give you occasion so to do, which if they do not, then must you needs open it
unto them.

March 25 1570.



To the Right Honorable and my very good Lord, the Lord of Burleigh.
IT may please your Lordship to advertise her Majesty that hers of the 24 of
March, I received the 26 of the same: the contents whereof after I had well
weighed, and therewithal considered the great practices that are daily used
here, to stop that the match between her Majesty and Monsieur might not take
effect, which lacks not also any such help as may from her own subjects there
with you be ministered to breed an opinion in Monsieur that all is but
dalliance, and that he is like to march in the end in rank with the number of
the forsaken; whereupon as it should seem a few days past, he used this talk
with Monsieur de Foix, saying, Monsieur, you and others have brought me to
yield to this match, but I fear that by the next dispatch you shall well
perceive that there is no other meaning in the Queen of England but dalliance,
and that you and I shall be sorry that ever we waded so far; And surely said
he, for my own part, unless I shall find the answer direct, I will never enter
farther into the matter. These speeches and practices after I had well weighed,
and seeing the answers in her Majesty's Letters very fit and convenient to be
made by her in respect of the quality of her person and sex, had not the world
mistaken her former proceeding in marriage matters. But now in respect of the
said mistakings fearing that the same being made according to the course
appointed by her Majesty, would have seemed more doubtful then direct, and so
have utterly overthrown the matter; I was very much perplexed what course to
take, when I my self saw it most safe for me to follow the course by her
Majesty prescribed, whatsoever came of it. But when I beheld her Majesty first
how she in her own judgment did think it expedient for her to marry:
Secondarily that if her Majesty did mean to marry abroad this was the only
Gentleman fit for her to marry: Thirdly the coffeehouse of her subjects for
not marrying: Fourthly how presently she is beset with a number of foreign
practices, the execution whereof only stays upon the event of this match, I
then resolved that it was most fit for me to forget my self, and to think only
of her Majesty and of her safety; like that Roman, that notwithstanding a Law
was made that no man should hazard to come on the Wall without consent of the
Magistrate, yet he seeing the enemy preparing for the scale, and that the delay
of time in asking the Magistrates consent might have hazarded the loss of the
City, preferring a public safety before his private peril, repaired to the
Walls and repulsed the enemy; the matter afterward being called in question, he
was acquitted of the penalty, and adjudged a good member of the City: like
consideration made me to take this course following. In my proceeding with
Queen Mother somewhat swarving from the precise course of her Majesty's
instructions, yet notwithstanding keeping my self within the compass of the
same with due regard had both to her Honor and the place her Majesty bears.

Touching the first point I alleged precisely and wholly what her Majesty
appointed me to say unto her touching the justification of her proceeding in
causes of marriage; whose answer was, that that she did object unto my Lord of
Buckhurst, she objected rather as a common opinion conceived, then that her
self believed it, being not ignorant that the common sort, that understand not
the secrecy of Princes proceeding are always draw^ to believe the worst, But
says she I hope her sincere and direct proceeding in this now offered match
will breed due justification of her former proceedings in those marriage causes.

Touching the second, I showed her that her Majesty had conceived by my Lord
of Buckhurst that she desired to understand whether the King and she making an
offer of Monsieur, the same would be accepted in good part, at her Majesty's
hand; of this second point I left out these words Whether she would be pleased
to hear further of it.

In answer of this second point I showed her, from her Majesty, that she did
impute it as an argument of great good will in both her and the King,
considering how that the King being married, there could be no greater nor
worthier offer made by the Crown of France then Monsieur, and that therefore
her Majesty does most thankfully accept the same; and further that she willed
me to say unto her, that if her Majesty did preceive any apparent cause to
mislike of the matter, she would then deal plainly with the King in thanking
him for his good will, and in desiring to proceed no further: herewith she
seemed to be satisfied.

Notwithstanding for that this match did stand upon two necessary points; the
satisfaction of both their persons, and necessary accord upon certain
conditions, that therefore her Majesty desired her (as a Prince endowed with
kingdoms, could not but with her own private satisfaction have a due regard of
her subjects repose and safety by way of Capitulation) that if thereupon there
should grow any just cause of breach, yet that friendship and good Amity might
still continue, the good will of either party being to be allowed; their's in
making so honorable an offer, and her Majesty in yielding to give ear to the
same.

To this she replied, that she could have wished that the answer had been more
direct, not so much for her own satisfaction as for others in whom there rested
as yet some scruple; and the rather (says she) for that if in the handling of
this Matter there be used plainness, Ceremonies being set apart, whatsoever
issue the matter takes, yet friendship could not in reason but continue.

Then I proceeded to the third showing her that her Majesty was well content
that I as her Ambassador should treat upon this matter with Monsieur de Foix;
which course I showed her in my private opinion would draw the matter by often
sending to and fro to a great length, whereby that expedition would not follow
thereof that were to be wished. And that therefore if that they would not
follow thereof that were to be wished. And that therefore if that they would
make choice of some special person to send over upon some other pretense with
full commission to treat hereof, many scruples thereby would be avoided, which
otherwise might breed delay of time: And touching the person, I told her none
could be more faithful unto her Majesty then Monsieur de Foix. In this behalf
she told me she would first deal with the King, as also touching the fourth
point, how her Majesty could not tell what to propound until she saw what was
by them first propounded who by order were first to propound: and after she had
dealt with the King touching these two points, she promised I should the next
day have answer by Master Cavalcant, which she performed, whose answer was,
that for the more expedition the King and she thought it good to send Master
Cavalcant both speedily and secretly over, who should come fully instructed
with their resolute intention touching this match, who thinks that he shall
bring with him the Articles they mean to propound unto her Majesty; and
further, that if upon his return they find her by her answers fully resolute to
proceed, That then for the better ripening of the matter against the time that
an Honorable Ambassadge should be sent, Monsieur de Foix should come over upon
some other pretense.

I forbear at this present to deal touching Monsieurs having the exercise of
his Religion: first, for that they finding her Majesty's answers not wholly
resolute would have suspected it for a quarrel of breach; Secondarily, for that
without all suspicion in due place it may be be propounded amongst her
Majesty's Articles.

Touching the first point I forbear to say any thing for that they mean
sometimes (as I learn) to use their Ambassador there Resident with her
Majesty, as one whom they esteem and trust.

I did not forget to tell her that her Majesty for the more secret handling of
the matter had made choice of two only Counselors, unto whom she had
communicated the matter; the one the Earl of Leicester, whom she finds well
to allow of any marriage which her Majesty likes, though otherwise wrongfully
doubted, so specially of this that is now in Treaty. The other the Lord of
Burleigh, of whose fidelity her Majesty has had trial ever since she came to
her Crown.

^o this she answered, that these two Counselors being of her Majesty's
choice, she would not but very well allow of; and as for my Lord of Leicester
she said she had many ways good cause to judge him a furtherer of the match,
and therefore was glad of her Majesty's choice, and hoped thereby of the better
success.

The last point concerning Master Cavalcant, she said she thought him fit to
deal in it as one that before time had done good offices between the two
Crowns, and therefore she rather wished him to be admitted a Dealer.

I may not omit here to say mine opinion of him, which is that her Majesty
could not have allowed a Gentleman more faithfully inclined to her Majesty,
nor more fit for his discretion and secrecy to deal in a matter of such
consequence.

In the end having finished this point, to leave the better taste with her of
the matter, I concluded, being so warranted by my instructions, that if this
motion of hers should take effect, the like never happened these many hundred
years in respect of the great profit that would redound to both the Realms.

To this she answered, that as she never desired any thing with like
earnestness as she did this, so if the same should not take place nothing could
more grieve her. For (says she) besides the great benefit that will grow
hereby unto both the Crowns, on the success of this match depends the
quietness of all Europe.

This being all the talk that passed between Queen Mother and me. I leave to
trouble your Lordship any further, humbly taking leave.

From Paris the second of April. Francis Walsingham.


To my very friend Sir Fr. Walsingham Ambassador for the Queens Majesty in
France.
I Have upon the receipt of your Letter, written by Sir E. Gilbert, dealt with
her Majesty touching your chargeable dwelling there; I trust her Majesty will
have due consideration thereof.

You shall perceive by her Majesty's Letters her further pleasure touching
Monsieur, whose cause has been broken to her by my Lord of Buck, from the
Queen Mother: we perceive they deal very daintily, and doubt much her Majesty's
intention to marriage, at least, that she had rather hear of it then perform
it. But assuredly I do verily believe her Majesty's mind herein is otherwise
then it has been, and more resolutely determined then ever yet at any time
before: yet do they mean to deal so secretly on that side, as though they
will not yet believe it. And accordingly her Majesty minds not to deal but
as privately as may be devised, that if that should not take effect, the less
reproach is to either party: her Majesty has only broken this matter with my
Lord of Burleigh and me, and I think will not use any more till some appearance
fall out what is like to become of the matter.

The person of Monsieur is very well liked of, his conversation is harder to
know. I see her Majesty misliketh not of his estate; For she is of mind to
marry with the greatest, and he is left almost alone the greatest to be had.
The conditions will be all: wherein I am right glad, and we are bound to thank
God to see her Majesty so well to stand to the maintenance of the cause of
Religion: For as there will be no great difficulty in respect of his person and
estate to cause a marriage between them, so yet I perceive with the impeachment
any way of the true Religion here now established, she will for no cause deal
with him, as you may perceive by her Majesty's own Letters to you. Albeit she
does not mean in respect of his policy, to drive him in open show in the mean
time to renounce his own profession; but conditionally, that if they should
match, then wholly to maintain this as well privately as publicly. God send her
Majesty always during her life so to stand to the defense of so just a cause,
and withal, his blessings upon her for us all, that we may live and see her
bring forth of her own body, as may hereafter suceed her as well in that
happiness, as in the enjoining of her kingdom. So not doubting but we shall
shortly hear from you, I commit you to God.

In have this 23 of March 1571. Your assured friend, R. Leicester.


To our trusty, and right welbeloved Francis Walsingham Esquire our Ambassador
Resident with our good Brother the French King.
ELIZABETH R.

TRusty and welbeloved, we greet you well, we have seen your Letters of the 11
of this month written to the Lord of Burleigh, our Secretary, and perceive
thereby your diligence in exploring further certain matters practiced in Spain,
where you formerly wrote your doings, wherein we do well commend you, and
according to our former resolution (whereof we lately advertised you) we do now
send unto the King of Spain this bearer our servant Henry Cobham, one of our
Gentlemen Pensioners, for whose speedier and surer passing thither, we have
directed him to pass by you, both to confer with you, and to utter unto you
certain things from us, wherein you shall give him credit and also to procure
from the King our good Brother his passport, and surety to pass throughout
that Realm into Spain; and likewise to return; wherein we pray you to use some
diligence to obtain the same for our said servant as (you can consider) the
cause does require, we have instructed this said bearer of the Queen of Scots
cause, and have willed him to impart the same to you; and having well conceived
it, we would have you there to let the Queen Mother understand so much thereof
as shall be meet, that she may know our sincere dealing therein. And in your
speech to her, you may say, that we do somewhat marvel, that she does so often
solicit and press in the said Queen of Scots cause, considering that we have
not omitted to do any thing for her benefit, which time and commodity would
yield, and that with reason we might do: And specially we do the more marvel
of the late urging of us therein, considering the motion of the matter which
she lately uttered to my Lord of Buckhurst.

Given under our Signet at our Manor of Greenwich the 26 of March 1571. in the
13 year of our reign.

To the Queens Majesty's Ambassador in France Mr. Fr. Walsingham, my assured
friend.
AFter I had sealed up my other Letters with Mr. Cobham, I received yours of
the 18 by Mr. York, whereof I thought good to give you knowledge. I am also to
ascertain you, that although the contrary may be reported, my Lord of Leicester
finding just occasion thereto, does by all good means, to my knowledge, further
the marriage; and therefore I think it reason that by such good means as your
self may think meet, both the Q. Mother and Monsieur de Anjou might understand
his disposition, so as he may be well thought of herein. And if he find that
his doing may be liked there (if God be content with the cause) it is very
probable that it may take effect: you see how plain I deal with you, and the
rather, because I find by my Lord of Buckhurst, that upon the hope you have of
the amendment of Monsieur in Religion, you do not mislike of the matter: Surely
if Monsieur be not rooted in opinion of evil Religion, as by his young years
it is not likely, there might be argument made that marriage here with England
would be becoming a Professor of the Gospel: considering the towardness of him
to be a Martial Prince, he may prove a Noble Conqueror of all Popery in
Christendom, with such aids as may join with him in the Empire, and other
where. I wish he were capable of such a design: You see still the more I write
the more open I am; and yet considering the trust I have in your secrecy I
trust nothing hereof shall have light to do me any hurt, and so it is time to
end.

From Greenwich the 25 of March, late in the night 1571. Yours assuredly,
William Burleigh.
My style of my poor degree is, Lord of Burleigh.




To the Right Honorable and my very good Lord, the Lord of Burleigh.
THis bearer shall make you Lordship acquainted with the present state of the
matter, which of credit you committed to his report, at his last being with
you; and as at that time I did most earnestly request your Lordship, that if
you saw no likelihood of any good issue to grow by the revealing of the same ^
So I cannot but renew my said request, for surely in this my service, nothing
would more grieve me then that they of the Religion, whom I wish chiefly to
further, should receive by me any hinderance: Therefore I beseech your Lordship
most earnestly so to use it, as three may grow to them rather help then hurt;
on at the least, if there be no likelihood that that will fall out that were
(...) be desired, which is help, yet that the other might be avoided, which is
hurt.

And although it be my office to advertise and not to advice, yet I showed your
Lordship at my departure, that I would presume sometime as a private man, and
not as one that bears a public office, to write my private opinion touching
such accidents as should happen here, which I do assure my self that your
Lordship will keep privately unto your self, whom I am bound to make acquainted
with my follies, in respect of your promise, to admonish me of my faults.

Reasons in policy to give aid secretly, I see to be these, by consideration
of the Circumstance of the time:

First, in respect of the Spanish practice against Ireland, thereby to divert
them from the said enterprise.

Secondarily, in respect of the likelihood that there will grow wars, if the
practice go forward between France and Spain, whereby England shall live the
quietlyer.

Thirdly, That if the M. go forward, then shall it be annexed unto England, for
that it is meant that M. shall be the head of the enterprise, if the matter in
the beginning take good success, which in reason cannot do otherwise,
especially if England win in the same, by reason of the Match; and surely in my
opinion, no one thing will sooner draw Monsieur to incline to Religion, then
the hope of F 6.

Lastly, that whereas it is thought, that amongst other Articles in the Treaty
of the Marriage, he will request some yearly pension, if God should take away
her Majesty, he having no issue by her, he may be persuaded by her Majesty,
giving assistance in the said enterprise, to content himself with such a
portion as shall fall unto him by Conquest; for that her Majesty assisting,
full account is made that Spain, the Inhabitants of the Low Countries, being
quite aliened from him, as they are, shall not be able to defend the same. And
so desiring your Lordship to pardon this my swerving from my function; which,
as I said before, is only to advertise, I most humbly take my leave

at Paris the fifth of April, 1571. Your Honors to Command, Fr. Walsingham.


To the Right Honorable and my very good Lord, the Lord of Burleigh.
SIthence my last Letters unto your Lordship, touching the Archbishop of
Cassels, I have thus proceeded; I procured Captain Thomas the Irish man to
repair unto the said Archbishop, and to do him any friendship and service, he
might here show him in this Court, in respect he was a Nobleman, and of his
Country; which being at my request, he willingly did: And the Archbishop
seemed to take the same in very good part at his hands; whereupon he desired
the Captain to procure him access unto the Cardinal of Lorrain. And so not long
after he accompanied him to the Cardinal of Lorrain; who talked with him the
space of two hours: but what Communication passed between him and the said
Cardinal, he could not draw from him; yet thus much he signified unto him,
after his departure from him, that hereafter there might be some occasion
offered to employ him to some good service; and that therefore he should do
very well to make such report of him, as that he might grow in credit here; and
further, that he should say, that the Archbishop was a man of a noble family,
and of great reputation in his Country, that Ireland of it self was but weak,
and easy to be gotten by the Enemy, and such like talk to this effect. After
the Captain had made me privy hereof, my counsel was, that he should bear the
Archbishop in hand to do so; nevertheless, I advised him, that unto the
Cardinal he should report, namely, that true it was, that he was of a noble
family, and allied to the best in that Country, yet of no such credit and
reputation, whereby he might be able to do much in his Country, for that the
heads of the house of D^smond, whereof he was descended were under guard in
England. And if he should enquire of Ireland, that he should say, it was ^ot so
weak as the Archbishop reported it to be; but that whosoever should attempt any
thing against it, should find it able enough to resist a multitude, now that
her Majesty had caused Garrisons, and appointed certain ships to go on the
seas. Two days after the Captain was sent for by the Cardinal; and being
demanded, what manner of man the Archbishop was, of what estimation in his
Country, in what case Ireland stood in, etc. answered to every point as I
required him. Sithence which time, I learn, that the Cardinal makes not that
account of the Archbishop that he looked for at his hands. And therefore
considering that the Archbishop cannot take effect here, and that he is in some
necessity (as by Letters he wrote to the Cardinal of late I perceived) I think
he would easily be gotten to utter such things as he knows of this Spanish
Enterprise, so he might be well assured of the Queens Majesty's favor, and be
restored to his former living. I have appointed another Irish Soldier to give
attendance on him, and to mark diligently whither, and to whom he resorteth;
what company in like sort come unto him, and to certify me thereof. Thus much
have I learned of his proceedings since his coming to Paris, especially through
the Irish Captains means, who has dealt very dutifully in this behalf; and
has been so ready to do what I willed him, as I cannot but recommend him unto
your Lordship. He is very honest, and civil; and one that has taken profit
with these Civil Wars here, besides of good Parentage, breed and born in the
English pale. Sir Henry Norris has heretofore had trial of him; we both have
promised him, in respect of his dutifulness (as one worthy the entertaining) to
be a means unto her Majesty for him; and so of late, in respect of this
employing of him, have taken upon me to assure him, that he shall receive some
comfortable words from her Majesty; and therefore I am to desire your Lordship
to move her Majesty therein.

The 29 of March the Archbishop sent one of his men to me, willing me to send
some trusty servant of mine, to whom from time to time, he might communicate
the Spanish Enterprise, and so gave me knowledge thereof; between whom passed
this speech following:

After ordinary salutations done, I showed him that your Lordship willed me to
signify unto him, that you had written to the Queens Majesty in his behalf;
and that you hoped shortly to receive some answer; and that after receipt had
thereof, you would not fail to advertise him. Further, that you willed him to
deal plainly with you, as you for your part minded to deal honorably with him;
and that if it pleased him to advertise your Lordship of any thing, either by
word of mouth, or by writing, that you promised of your honor to to keep the
same with all secrecy, and that you offered your self most ready to pleasure
him in any thing that you could do for him.

I thank my Lord Ambassador, quoth he, in that it pleases his Lordship thus
honorably to deal with me; and if that by his good means I may be brought into
my Princess's favor, and enjoy my living, I should think my self most bound
unto him; and besides, make him privy of all Stewkleys practices. The only
cause of my coming out of Spain, was to obtain license to return into my
Country with my Princess's favor, if it might be, and to ^schew the name of a
Traitor; although one Huggins (whom for certain unseemly words he used against
Mr. -- the Queens Majesty's Ambassador) I reprehended has written diverse
Letters to Master Secretary Cecil and the rest of the Council, and so incensed
them against me, as that they have me in great suspicion. After this he asked
me whether I knew if any should be sent into Spain about this matter. I told
him, I knew not. Yes, quoth he, your Lordship told him so. I answered, that it
might well be so, but that I knew nothing thereof. Well (says he) it is more
then time that she did send, both for that the Queens Majesty has many
Traitors in Ireland, of the Irish men and English Soldiers there; and also,
because the King of Spain does what he can to win the French Kings Brother on
his side. And surely, says he, if the match go not forward between her
Majesty and Monsieur, it is to be feared that he will join with the King of
Spain in that enterprise.

I told him, that the common report was here, that Mounsieur did concur in all
things with the King; and that the King himself had made such Protestations of
Amity and Friendship toward the Queens Majesty, as that he, in respect of
his honor, would not, nor any of his Subjects, for fear of his displeasure,
durst not attempt any thing to infringe the same. Well (says he) I beseech God
they may long continue in Amity. In the mean time I will remain here as one
not known, until I know her Majesty's, pleasure. If I might go into my Country
with her good leave and license, I doubt not but what I could do much good
there, for that the most part of the Nobility are of some affinity with me; and
will, I am assured, be much ruled by my counsel. If I cannot obtain this
benefit at her Majesty's hands, after I have dispatched my business here, I
will return into Spain, where I have been most honorably entertained at the
Kings hands; having had, during the time of my abode there, besides two two
thousand Ducats for my annual pension, sometimes one hundred Ducats, sometimes
two hundred Ducats, and sometimes three hundred Ducats, when the Court did
remove, And to this end, says he, have I left four of my train at Nantes in
Britain, with some part of my goods, to the end that if I go into England, I
might send for them hither; if not, I might take them with me when I go into
Spain. He told me further, that Fitzmorice' s son was at Morles in Britain;
that Stewkley had sent one out of Spain, to learn what he did there, and to
discredit him, if it were possible. That the Duke D'alva has offered thirty
thousand Ducats for the Earl of Northumberlands ransom. And so fearing that I
have over troubled your Honor, I most humbly take my leave.

From Paris the fourth of April, 1571. Your Lordships to Command, Fr.
Walsingham.


To the Right Honorable, and my very good Lord, the Earl of Leicester.
MAdam de M^vie desired me to recommend unto your Lordship the Petition of her
Daughter; hoping by your good means unto her Majesty, there shall be no
deliverie made of her, without her special consent, in respect of the interest
she has in her in right of a Mother; the cause of her staying there being such
as it is, I did assure her, that she could not lack any protection that you
could give, who did honor in her the religious respect that she had in the
match of her daughter. Touching the provision of Mules your Lordship sent me
word of, I will not fail to cause some care to be used for the procuring of
them. I hear the King makes provision for some to present unto her Majesty
notwithstanding, because the same is not certain. I think it not fit to stay to
proceed otherwise. And so, etc.

At Paris the fifth of April, 1571. Your Lordships to Command, Fr. Walsingham.


To our trusly and well-beloved Sir Francis Walsingham our Ambassador R^sident
with our good Brother the French King.
ELIZABETH R.

Trusty and well-beloved we greet you well; we have perceived by your Letters
written to the Lord of Burleigh, in what sort you have lately conferred with an
Irish man, naming himself the Archbishop of Cassels, upon occasion sought by
him to make his submission and suit to us for his offense in departing out of
Ireland. And considering the conditions of the party, and the profit that might
follow by his discovering of the practices wherewith he is so thoroughly
acquainted, we can be content, that if you shall find it likely that he means
dutifully to ask pardon, as he pretends by his speech, that then you shall
give him comfort to continue with the same dutifulness and loyal meaning, and
provoke him to make repair hither into England; where you may assure him, he
shall not find lack of grace, if he humbly desire it, and by his truth
hereafter deserve it. And if you find him very difficult to be persuaded with
such general speech, without further assurance from us; you shall say, that you
have written so effectually unto us, with assirmation of your good liking of
his dealing with you in so plain terms, as he had done; as ye have power from
us to warrant him to come into this our Realm safely, and to make his means
unto us for our favor: If he shall show himself repentant of his former fault,
and disposed to live hereafter dutiful, he shall be provided of as good a
living as heretofore he has had. And if he shall not obtain our favor as he
desires, at his coming, your warrant shall serve him to return safely out of
our Realm; which manner of usage, you shall say, is very rare in us, but upon
your instance we have yielded thereunto. And so we pray you use it, and give
him warrant under your hand accordingly. And if you shall find that he has
sought to abuse you, as we perceive by your Letters you have some reason to
doubt, then shall you forbear to deal with him in the former sort; and yet
procure so much intelligence as you may at his hands; and after you shall
discover his continuance in falsehood and practice there, as you can see
occasion, and can gather matter against him, so deal with the King there, as by
all good means that may be, specially considering the Amity so often, of late
time, assured to us by the King, he may be delivered as an open known Rebel and
Traitor, especially in these practices used by him in Sp^^n, however he himself
has discovered his evils, with the excuses. And we have some cause the more to
doubt his lewdness there, for that Rogers, who brought your Letters, reported,
that after he was come from Paris, about St. Dennis, he met with an Irish man;
who told him, that this Archbishop had been secretly at the Court, and was
ready to be dispatched away into Spain, by the means of the Cardinal of
Lorrain; which if it were true, we cannot think but you have within a short
time after been made privy hereof by the Irish man. And so according as you
shall find the matter, we leave it to your discretion.

The Scottish Ambassadors, who have been here with us, the Bishop of Ross, the
Bishop of Gallaway, and the the Lord Leviston, as from their Queen; the Earl
M^rton, and others, as from her son, now amongst them accepted as King; the
said Queen, as they think, being justly deposed, have been long here, and
troubled not a little us and our Council. After much debating of the cause, we
minding to make (if it might be) a final end, to the assurance of our selves,
our Estates, and to the reducing of that Realm into quiet in it self without
bloodshed, or further occasion of intestine War and continual dissension, in a
Realm so near adjoining to us; found at the last, that the said Earl Morton and
his Colleagues had no sufficient Commission to treat of that matter, which, as
we thought, was most necessary to be treated of, if we should do any good in
it, which was my final end and purpose; that is, the ayding of our Sister the
Scots Queen, without impairing of our estate and ^uretie, and without putting
the Realm of Scotland in an extri^able danger of sedition and intestine war:
Whereupon we were enforced now at the (...), after much debating with both the
parties, so to leave the matter, (...) with each of their contentations (as we
think) both by going home for a time, the one, to have ample Commission to
treat with us, as appertains to that effect, we may do that good herein that
we desire; the other, to refresh themselves for a time, till the other having
Commission, may be made a party; which hither^o, without Commission from their
party which be on the young Kings side, can be accounted but as private
persons, and not to be dealt withal in reason to do any thing which may be
accounted of just moment, and effectual in Law. And they ^ffirm, that without
Parliament, there can be made no Commission, neither to them, nor to any other,
to treat of such matter: Whereupon their Parliament begun, and for fear of
prejudicing the Queens party in that behalf, at our motion surceased, and
prorogued until May day next: They go home to it there to have such ample
Power, Commission and Authority given to them or others, to treat with us and
the Queen of Scots party, for a final end; which done and and (...), we (...)
shortly to make an end of this controversy, to the pleasure of God, and
contentation of all parties, if it might be.

This you may show to the King, our good Brother, that it is our design and
purpose, and hitherto in this sort we have traveled and have good hope to
bring it to pass.

And if the King shall thus reply, But if they will give no Commission, or
otherwise defer it of purpose, without answering any thing what we will then do
(you may say) that we have thought upon that case. That if they shall seek to
look only but upon delays, and upon set purpose, and obstinately go about to
defraud our intent, which is to unity and quiet there, we must leave that
party which is unreasonable and obstinate and conclude with the other party
which will hear and understand reason: And so God willing we intend to do; the
good success whereof we do not doubt but the King our good Brother shall see,
and well allow of.

Given under our Signet at our Palace of Westminster the eighth day of April
in the thirteenth year of our Reign.

To the Right Honorable, my very good Friend Sir Francis Walsingham,
Ambassador Resident for the Queens Majesty in France.
SIr, my hard case is such, as either by business in health, or by dolor in
sickness, I cannot account my self a freeman, but a slave to serve, or an
offender to suffer torment. The will of God be fulfilled in me to his honor,
for otherwise I find no comfort in this world: of this enough. I am forced to
write this in my bed, with my hand, whilst I groan for pain in my knee and
foot, and therefore I must be short. I could no sooner get answer to your
Letters brought by Rogers.

Your Lordships brought yesterday by Harcourt, were, I think, welcome, and well
interpreted by her Majesty; for I sent them with my own sentence aforehand of
my good allowance of your discretion in your choice of taking and leaving.

The Queen of Scots you see is deferred, whereof that portion which is written,
was for my ease indicted by Sir Thomas Smith: You must make the best of it, and
seek out reasons to satisfy them there, that will mislike the delay. Indeed it
has been only devised to win delay. I thank you for your private Letter.

Even now we have very good news from the borders, that Dun-Britten Castle was
taken on Monday last in the night by cunning, where was taken the Archbishop of
Saint Andrews and the Lord Flenning, the manner how it was taken, is not
signified. But it is of a greater importance then Edenborough Castle,
considering it was receptaculum to all the Scottish Queens Foreign aid.

From Westminster, out of my bed, this Saturday at five of the clock, the
seventh of March, 1571. Your assured Friend, William Burleigh.
Excuse me to my Lord of Rutland for not writing.




To the Right Honorable, and my very good Lord, the Lord of Burleigh.
BEfore the receipt of her Majesty's, bearing date the eighth day of April, the
Archbishops enterprise offered up to this State, through the discreet usage of
the Irish Captain, was quite overthrown. For the same day that he should have
conference with Monsieur about the matter, the said Captain procured the
Archbishop to send him unto Monsieur, to know when it would be his pleasure
that he might wait upon him, and so he according repaired unto Monsieur.
Monsieur asked him diverse questions touching the situation of Ireland, the
manner of the Government of the same, to whom it appertained, and diverse other
such like questions: At the length he asked him, if the Country were fruitful;
and what commodity the Q. Majesty received by the same. Whereunto he answered,
that the Country was very poor, and that her Majesty was at continual and
yearly charges in keeping of the same, without receiving any commodity from
thence. Then he asked him, what the Bishop was. He answered him, that he was
banished out of his Country for certain disorders there committed. And that
sithence his departure from thence, he has been in diverse Countries, seeking
at Princes hands such relief as he might get, bearing them in hand, that he is
able to do much in his Country. And after that Monsieur had heard this report,
giving him credit, as one whom he knew; he willed him to tell the Arthbishop,
that he doubted that he should not be at any leisure to confer with him, being
now entertained in Counsel with matters of great wait; and further to say unto
him, that if he did lack any thing, upon knowledge thereof given, he would be a
mean unto the King for the same: Whereupon the Bishop by his Letters made
Monsieur acquainted with his poverty, and order was taken that he had sent him
two hundred Crowns. This I thought good to set down unto your Lordship at
large, for two respects; the one, to the end you might the better know the
Archbishop; the other, for that there may be by your good means unto her
Majesty, some consideration had of this Irish Captain, who from time to time
has been a very good instrument for the discovery of the practices against
Ireland, which he has done with the hazarding of his life, if his dealing with
me, or with Sir Henry (...) were known. I have taken upon me to put him out of
doubt, that this service of his will not be unconsidered by her Majesty.
Surely, my good Lord, if when we promise in these causes consideration, and no
regard be had thereto, neither can those of my calling promise reward; nor they
to whom we promise, give credit to our words, when no fruits follow. I beseech
your Lordship, therefore, deal earnestly with her Majesty in this behalf: he,
without respect of this present service, as I have before written, deserves
entertainment, in respect of his sufficiency and hability to serve her Majesty
through the skill he has gotten by experience had of these latter wars here.

After the receipt of her Majesty's Letters of the eighth of April, according
to the charge given me in them. I dealt with the Archbishop in respect of the
secret practices he promised to reveal: Such persuasions as I could, I used to
procure him to make his repair into E^gland, showing him that her Majesty
promised grace and pardon, if he would humbly desire it at her hands, and
purposed by his dutiful loyal meaning hereafter, to deserve it. And to the end
that he should not doubt of her Majesty's sincere dealing herein, I offered him
my safe conduct, having authority from her Majesty's so to do, to warrant him
to go safely into the Realm, thereby to obtain her Majesty's favor, with more
safety of his person, and to return in like case safely out of the Realm, if he
should misuse the same: whereunto he once willingly accorded; but afterward,
by what sinister counsel I know not, he changed his mind; in the end he came to
this issue, that unless it would please her Majesty to grant him this rude
request, which also I send your Lordship, signed with his own hands, he would
never return either into England, or into Ireland. I told him, that it became
not a Subject, and an offender, as he was, to stand in such terms with his
Prince, but with humble submission, and acknowledging of his fault, to crave
pardon, and to esteem this favor offered as rare; and not to be refused, but
with thankfulness to be received. If it shall please her Majesty to grant him
his pardon, his request is, that he might have knowledge thereof within these
twenty days; for that otherwise, he is minded to repair again into Spain. At
this present he is gone to Nantes in Britain, there to dispatch certain
businesses, as he says, promising to return, and not to depart out of this
Country these twenty days.

The 19 of this month there arrived here two Gentlemen named Conniers, and one
other named Beamont, who said they imbarqued at Newcastle the 12 of the same,
and they escaped very narrowly: After they had stayed here a day, departed by
Post into Flanders.

And so leaving further to trouble your Honor at this present, I most humbly
take my leave

at Paris, the 22 of April, 1571.

To our right trusty and well-beloved Sir Francis Walsingham our Ambassador
Resident with our good Brother the French King.
ELIZABETH R.

TRusty and well-beloved, we greet you well; we understand such Message and
credit you lately sent and gave to Robert Beal, to be declared by the Lord of
Burleigh to us, according as we did heretofore will you to explore the
circumstance of the matter now revealed to you. You shall as much as may be,
say to the party that has made the demand, that we are sorry that we cannot
satisfy their demand at this present; neither for the place where they require
to be satisfied, nor for the same with such speed, the same being indeed
impossible unto us both for place and time. And so you may conclude with
assurance, that the revealing of their intent to you, shall in no ways by our
means prejudice their purpose. And so we pray you use the matter, as they
report our answer to the best; we mean, with expedition to return Mr. Cavalcant
thither with so much of our resolution as we can conveniently open unto him.

And for the rest, we mean to commit to your charge by our other more special
Letter.

Given under our Signet at our Palace of Westminster, the thirteenth of April,
1571. the thirteenth year of our Reign.

To the Right Honorable and my very good Lord, the Lord of Burleigh.
HEr Majesty's answer contained in her Letters, bearing date the 13 of April,
I delivered unto the party, who awaited for the same, using the best words I
might to breed contentation. The reply was, that he hoped the suit being so
small, the surety offered sufficient, and the benefit that thereby might have
risen unto her Majesty so great, that the same would not have been denied; for
says she, Let her Majesty assure her self, that Spain will never forget the
arrest of the money, which she shall find when occasion of revenge shall be
offered.

They do here with great desire expect Mr. Cavalcants coming, and as I judge by
some Letters received from their Ambassador, they conceive great hope to
proceed; certain speech passed between Tilligney and the King, which I have
imported to my Lord of Leicester, makes me think that the Religion will be no
let, etc. And so etc.

Paris the 22 of April 1571. Your Honors to command, Francis Walsingham.


To the Right Honorable Sir Francis Walsingham, her Majesty's Ambassador
Resident in France.
SIr, I most heartily thank you for your so well advised Letters, and
considering I find them so circums^ectly written, and the matters contained so
well digested, I cannot but give you knowledge of my well liking of your
service, whereof to my power I will also procure the Q. Majesty to conceive
the like good opinion.

I am sorry that the Q. Majesty finds occasion to pretermit this late motion
whereof (it is likely) she might reap great fruit, to the quietness of her own
Countries; you must make the best that you can to content the parties; I need
not write more, because this bearer Mr. Beale is so sufficient, to whom I
have also shevved some of our occurrents.

From Westminster the 14 of April 1571. Your assured loving friend Will.
Cecill, I forgot my new word Will. Burleigh.


To the Right Honorable and my very good Lord, the Lord of Burleigh.
I Was glad by your Lordships of the 7 and 14 of April, to understand the good
liking you have of my raw dealing in matters of such weight as I am now
employed in; next her Majesty, to your Lordships contentation do I chiefly
seek, as his, whom (in this calling) I see has chief regard to Gods glory and
her Majesty's safety. I am sorry the request I preferred took no better effect;
I pray God it may be kept secret, that thereby there may grow no evil effect,
whereof I have some cause to doubt, by the experience I have had since my
coming hither; The fault I know, but no remedy I hope after; The enterprise
within this month will break forth, and I hope to good effect* by that I
have further understood of their matter; and surely, the match proceeding,
nothing could be more sit in my poor opinion, then for us to have been dealers
in the same, thereby to have avoided others.

Thus I am bold to write, as a private man, in a private Letter, having no
opinion as an Ambassador. And thus having nothing else at this present to
trouble your Lordship with, I most humbly take my leave.

From Paris the 22 of April. Your Honors to command, Fr. Walsingham.


To my very friend Sir Fr. Walsingham, Ambassador Resident for the Queens
Majesty in France.
TOuching the Archb. you shall understand her Majesty's pleasure by her
Letters. My Brother Sidney (the Deputy of Ireland) is arrived here; as far as
we can learn by him, there is great jarre between that Prelate and Prince
Stewkley, which has caused his great mislike to remain in Spain, it may be to
good purpose (if it be possible) to recover him and get him hither. For the
other greatest matter, you shall shortly receive her Majesty's full resolution;
it appears, her Majesty has good liking to proceed, if reason take place in
the conditions. God send such speed as may be to the glory of the Almighty God,
and her Majesty's good satisfaction. I suppose the dispatch will be ready to
depart by Sunday, or Monday at the farthest; I pray you send me another Cipher
more easy then the last. So with my hearty commendations, I bid you farewell.

In haste this good Friday. Your assured friend, R. Leicester.


To the Right Honorable and my very good Lord, the Earl of Leicester.
SEeing her Majesty has good liking to proceed, as appears by your
Lordships Letters dated on Friday last, I am glad to conceive great hope by
certain speech lately passed, between the King and Tillign^y, that Religion
will not be the let, which is the chiefest thing I respect in this match.

About an 8 days past, the King entering into talk with him concerning this
match, Tilligney showed him, that it seemed strange to the world, that Monsieur
(considering that this matter was in treaty) grew every day more suspicious
then the other. To that the King replied, That his Brother (if there fell out
no other let but Religion) would be ruled by him; And because (says he) I may
the better bring the matter to pass, I will have my Brother with me out of
this Town, and divide him from certain superstitious Friars, that seek to
nourish this new holiness in him; And I doubt not (says he) within these few
days so to work my Brother, as he will yield to any thing that I will require.

Two days after the King called again Tilligney unto him; and asked him,
whether he lately had any talk with his Brother. He showed him, that the same
day at dinner, Monsieur called him unto him, whose whole course of talk was
only in commendation of the Q. Majesty, and of the great desire he had to
have so happy and so honorable a match; whereby (says Tilligney) I see him so
far in, as I hope he will not make any difficulty at Religion, which will be
the chiefest matter the Queen will stick in. No (says the King) observe my
Brother well, and you shall see him every day less superstitious then other.

This I thought good at large to set down, as well in respect of the match; as
also, that your Lordship may see the great hope that may be gathered by this
speech, of the Kings revolt from Papistry.

Surely, I am of opinion, that if this match go forward, it will set the triple
Crown quite aside. According to your Lordships request, I have sent you this
enclosed Cipher; and ^o leaving further to trouble your Lordship at this
present, referring you over for other matters unto my Lord of Burleighs
Letters, etc.

From Paris the 22 of April 1571. Your Lordships to Command, Fr. ^alsingham.


To our trusty and welbeloved, Sir Francis Walsingham, Ambassador Resident in
France.
ELIZABETH R.

RIght trusty and welbeloved we greet your well, The bearer hereof Sr.
Cavalcant has bin here, and imparted to us certain matters (as it seems)
committed to his charge; whereunto the Ambassador here being also by him made
privy, they both have received our answer to such Articles as ^^th been by them
propounded. And of the same, and of our further pleasure how you shall proceed,
you shall by our other Letters and instructions more amply understand.

Given under our Signet, at our Palace of Westminster, the 17 day of April
1571. the 13 year of our Reign.

To our Right trusty and welbeloved, Sr. Fr. Walsingham our Ambassador Resident
in France.
ELIZABETH R.

RIght trusty and welbeloved we greet you well, you shall understand that the
French Ambassador and Cavalcant having special credit to move to us the matter
of marriage with Monsieur de Anjou, have propounded to us certain Articles in
French, whereof you shall herewith receive a Copy, To the which after some
conference had by our commandment betwixt our Counselors the Earl of
Leicester, and the Lord of Burleigh for us, and the said Ambassador and
Cavalcant of the other party, our said Counselors have delivered such answers
in writing to them, as also we send you herewith. In the debating whereof, the
Ambassador has with great earnestness, misliked sundry of them in this manner
following; that in the first he makes doubt, that the usage of the matrimony
by the orders of this our Realm, may contain matters which should be repugnant
to the Dukes conscience, and namely, that he should at that time be urged to
receive the Sacrament according to the institution of this our Church
whereupon, such words as are now at the last agreed in the answer, we think
ought and does satisfy them, though he pretend still some doubt; And yet if by
the answer they there shall not be satisfied, then you may do well to impart to
Monsieur de Foix the very order of the Book for that cause; And though the
receiving of the Sacrament at that time, be in some part there mentioned, yet
that being not out of necessity, you may of your self give them some cause to
hope, that it may (for reasonable respect) be forborne, and so they shall have
reason to be content with it. The clause to have the Dukes Ministers in, was
inserted upon such motion made by the Ambassador.

In the second he has found most difficulty, for that by our answer he says
no grant is made by us, that the Duke shall have liberty for himself and his
domestiques to use his own Religion; which he says he would not require, but
to be permitted withal these cautions and conditions; That he should use his
Religion in secret place and manner, and with such circumspection, as thereby
no manner of public offense should grow to our Subjects; but hereto he could
not have us yield, being answered, That we doubted not but that Monsieur de
Anjou, would (by the advice of Queen Mother) be contented with our answers,
being well weighed; in that we are content that by no means he, nor his
Domestiques shall be compelled to use the Rites of our Religion; otherwise then
shall be agreeable with his conscience;

But as for exercise of his own Religion, being specially forbidden by our
Laws, we cannot without manifest offense and peril to our State accord
thereto. And so we would have you to use all good persuasions to induce them to
be content with our answer in this behalf: for the better maintenance whereof
you may require, that it may be considered what peril it might be to the
quietness of our State to have one that should be our husband (by his example
in our house) to give comfort to our Subjects that presently are well devoted
to obey our Laws, to break them; which may so fall out in process of time, as
we might repent that ever we had been so evil advised. And therefore specially
you shall require Queen Mother to have good consideration hereof, as one that
by her own experience of Government has tasted of no small trouble growing by
such permission, although she have now at length prudently brought a stay in
the Realm; and in any wise you shall give them no other comfort in this behalf,
but return to us their answer.

The third Article is agreeable to the like Article, conceived in a treaty of
marriage betwixt King Philip, and our late Sister Q. Mary; so as thereto no
exception has been made by the Ambassador.

The fourth, though it was misliked by the Ambassador; yet it cannot be
otherwise by us ordered, and so the Ambassador was peremptorily answered.

The fifth, though it did not like the Ambassador, for that there is no
express sum of yearly revenues named to be allowed to the Duke, yet he has
accepted it with general words. And herein to maintain our answer, you may
truly affirm, that King Philip had no manner of thing allowed him, but
sustained all his own charge, and gave also to Noblemen, Gentlemen, and Yeomen
of our Nation good entertainment.

In the sixth, the Ambassador has alleged no misliking, but on our part you
may see by the latter part of the Article, that it is meet that we should know
the interest that the Duke has in his several Dominions, and how the same are
to succeed to his children, as well Sons as Daughters, if there be no Sons; and
so you shall require a particular answer thereto.

The seventh is agreeable to the like clause of an Act of Parliament, whereof
you shall receive better information in another writing, containing such thing
as on our part are to be demanded. And yet the Ambassador has earnestly
required, that if the Duke should overlive us, and have a child living, that
should be Heir to the Crown, he might continue the Title of a King, with his
addition to be called Rex pater; and if no child should be living, that then he
may be called Rex dotarius, which we think rather of matters of form then of
substance, and meeter to be thought of when greater matters are accorded, then
now; and so we have forborne to alter the Article.

In this sort you see the manner of our answers. And although by our Letters
yesterday we signified unto you, that we would give some instructions how to
propound other things to our benefit, and so we did also let the French
Ambassador understand; yet upon some better consideration, we have forborne,
thinking it meet, that this matter concerning the point of Religion, were first
on both parties determined, before we should proceed in the rest; for this
being accorded, there is no great difficulty in the rest; and this being not
accorded to our contentation, the rest are not to be dealt in; and if it be
misliked that we do not give you Commission to propound other things, as
perchance the Ambassador here will give them some hope that we now meant to do,
you may confess, that we have indeed considered of other things requisite,
wherein we think there will rest no difficulty. But we hold it most agreeable
to the Queen Mothers own intention, that the matter might be so dealt in, as it
might speedily appear what were to be hoped of herein. And considering this
matter, for the Religion seems of such substance, as none of the rest is, we
think it best to have this first treated of; And so either to proceed or
forbear, wherein, we trust our sincerity shall well appear. And so we would
have you to express our good meaning.

Given under our Signet, at our Palace of Westminster, the 19 of April, 1571.
the 13 year of our Reign.

Articles delivered by the French Ambassador, and Mr. Cavalcant, 13 of April
1571.
Q Ue le marriage se solemnizera sans user Des ceremonies, qui ne sont conformes
a la Religion De Monseigneur.

Que pour lay et ses domesticques, il poura fere libre exercice De sad
Religion, sans toutesfois alterer en aucune fa^on l'ordre sur Icelle receu et
approve par la loy en Anglet.

Qu'incontinent le marriage faict, Monsieur aie le tiltre Du Roy. d' Anglet. et
govern et administre iceluz conjointement auecla roine.

Que le lend demain apres le Marriage consomme, Monseigneur comme Mary de la
royne sera co^ronne et recea des subjects pour Roy.

Quil prendra soixante mil livres sterling par an du revenu du Roy^ D^ Anglet.
aff^n, quil se puisse maint enir convenablement a la dignite e^ grandeur du Roy.

Les d^scendans de ce marriage succederont es biens paternels and maternels,
conformement aux loix et custumes des royaumes et pais ou ils sout situez.

Et outre sila roy ne aecederoit ne laissant hoirs procrees dece marriage,
Monsieur (...) le nom et tilt^e, government et administration desusdits
soixante ante mil livres sterlin, affi^ qu'il puisse continuer sa premiere
splend^ur et grandeur.

Qu'entre le Roy treschrestien et ses enfans les Roys d' Anglet. et lez enfans
sera perpetuelle Ami^i^ et fraternit^^ ligue et union.


Explanatio Articulorum propositorum a D. Oratore Regis Christ^^niss. cum
potestate reservata ad ampliorem explicationem corundem; cum tempus
postulaverit.
MAtrimonium celebrabitur secundum leges and ritus ecclesiae Anglicanae ceteris
civilibus and regiis solemnitatibus adhibitis, quales adhiberi decet in
matr^noniis regum Angliae. In cujus celebratione licebit Illustrissimo, Duci
habere presents suos ministros tam ecclesiasticos quam civiles, qui contract^
matrimonii testes esse possint, re^quae omnes ibidem gestas in acta secun um
formam Juris redigere valiant; Illustr^ssimus Dux and domestici qui su^ (...)
sunt subditi Coronae Angliae nullo modo cogentur contra conscientiam su^m, ^ut
eorum uti vel exer^ere ritus ullos ecclisiasticos secundu^ morem ecclesiae
Angli^anae. Idem Illustr^ssimus Dux and Maritus charissimus serenissimae
Reginae Angliae eam tempor^^us congruis and usitatis comitabitur ad ecclesim
vel Oratorium, ibidemque morab^tur in loco sibi accomodato donec serenisima
Regina revertatur atque eam reducet ut tempus and locus postulabunt.

Preterea Idem Illustrissimus Dux neque per seipsum neque quovis alis modo
procurab^t, ut aliqua mu^atio aut innovatio legum Ecclesi^sticarum de Religi^ne
e^^tarum, in regno Angliae aut fiet aut tentetur, neque ullo subdito
serenissimae Reginae favorem ullum praestabit quo easdem leges ecclisiasticas
in ulla part violet, sed potius curabit and dabit operam ut hujusmodi violator
legum condi^ne puniatur.

Illustrissimus (...) post ma^rimonium con^^actum and consummatum, virtute
dicti Matrimonii gaudebit, una cum seren^ssima regina consorte sua; titulo
stilo honor and nom^ne regio constane and duran^e dicto m^trimonio, salvis
tamen Juribus legibus con^uetudinibus regni Angliae ceterisque cautis and
conventis quae in hac part specialiter provisa sunt, per tractatum de
matrimonio inter serenissimam reginam Mariam defunct^m sororem serenissimae
reginae and Phillippum nunc regem and tunc Principem Hi^paniarum. H^ud (...)
est hujusmodi postulat. consentire sine aperta injuria her. vel successor.
serenissimae reginae neque unquam hoc postulatum (...) in contractum matrimonii
a Carol. V. Caesare nofi^lii sui Philips Principis Hispan.

Quin aequum esse videatur ut Illustrissimus Dux suos proprios domesticos alat,
suis sumptibus, ubicunque tamen and quandocunque dictus Illustriss^mus Dux
tenebitur facere aliquas expensas mandato serenissimae Reginae, aut respectu
Regnorum suorum providebitur, ut omnes hujusmodi expensae solvantur ex erario
publico Regni Angliae.

Liberi ex^ hoc Matrimonio prognati in Materna hereditate suc^dent in regius,
secundum jura and consuetudines regnorum (viz.) primogenitus filius in Coronam,
quam Regina Matter habet, and si nulli extabunt filii Masculi, filiae; si
extabunt, succedent, viz prima and sola maxima natu, etc. Atque idem ut fiat in
hereditate paterna aequum est, and quo modo consuetudines locorum id ferrent,
intelligi par est.

Si reliqua petenda ab Illustri^^imo Duce, quo ad aequa fuerint, concedantur
non negabitur illi tutela filii and filiae suae cum in hoc matrimonio prognat,
Regnum Angliae pertinebit ac -- etiam regnorum eodem modo iisque conditionibus
and provisionibus quibus statutum est per quasdam ordinationes magni Parlamenti
Angliae in favorem Reg. Hispa. cum serenissima regina putabatur ex eo esse
gravida.

Nihil tale poterit in hoc casu per serenissimam Reginam concedi marito suo
superviventi, presertim ubi non extabunt liberi aliqui ex eo matrimonio, nisi
id fiat authoritate totius Regni per consensum trium statuum Regni Angliae;
Neque hujusmodi quicquam petitum est a Phil. Rege vel principe tempore
serenissimae nunc Reginae cum eadem serenissima Regina a compluribus petita ^it
in conjugem. At si quid hujusmodi in posterum sperari possit ut a statubus
Regni concedatur, tum potissimum expectandum est, cum Illustrissimus Dux fuerit
illis and Regno magis cognitus and perspectus.

^ltimo utiliss. est utrique Regno ut quam firmissima pax and confederatio
perpetua ineatur.

To the Right Honorable and my very loving friend, Sir Francis Walsingham, her
Majesty's Ambassador Resident in France.
SIr, this bearer returns with the Queens Majesty's Letters, and answer, to
such Articles as he brought hither; both which I do send you at this time, but
not that you should deal therein in any wise, until you shall receive the
Queens Majesty's Letters to inform you how to deal therein; and how likewise
you shall proceed further in other matters to be moved on her Majesty's behalf,
which are of more wait and consequence to be written, then can presently be
sent by this bearer; But I trust they shall be expedited within these few
days, and until that time I forbear to write any more. This bearer appears
to us a very careful and honest Gentlemen, and well devoted to the Queens
Majesty, and so I pray you let him know my opinion of him.

From Westminster the 18 of April 1571. Your loving friend William Burleigh.


To the Right Honorable and my assured friend Sir Fr. Walsingham, the Queens
Majesty's Ambassador in France.
SIr, after I had written my other Letters yesterday, there happened some
alteration in this great matter of moment; Where the Queens Majesty Majesty
had determined (besides her answer to the French Articles) to have also sent
you certain other Articles to be demanded of them there, whereby the whole
cause should be opened, and nothing left behind in silence; so that both
parties might have understood their mutual intentions. Now suddenly her
Majesty has thought good at this time to send only the French Articles, and
her answers, and for the rest she means to reserve until she may understand
how her answers are taken, and specially how the knotty point of Religion will
be smoothed* And the cause of this change (as I conjecture) grows of some
late intelligence brought thence, that if the Queens Majesty will stand
earnestly upon that point for Religion, it shall be assented unto, which
causes her to proceed thus confidently. And for my part, I wish most heartily
that it may so succeed, but that only I must fear, except you shall moderate
the matter better, they there will imagine that this matter of Religion is but
projected to color the delay in breaking off; for indeed in like cause so did
the Emperor for his Brother the Archduke Charles. As I cannot instruct you how
to dissolve this doubt there, but as cause shall be given; So, I know your
wisdom sufficient to invent sufficient answers to mollify their hard
conceits. Thus you see how inwardly I deal with you, and trust you will so use
it. I find Mr. Cavalcant very well disposed and sorry to see these occasions
given, though surely he sees here the Queen Majesty's disposition directly to
his contentation.

From Westminster the 19 of April 1571. Your assured friend William^ Burleigh.


To the Right Honorable, and my very good Lord, the Lord of Burleigh.
IT may please your Lordship to advertise her Majesty, that Mr. Cavalcant
arrived here the 24 of this month, by whom I received her Majesty's Letters,
the contents whereof, after I had perused and conferred with him touching his
proceedings, and for that the King and Queen Mother were departed out of this
Town, the one to St. Disier, the other to Monceaux to bring the Duke, and
Duchess of Lorrain onward on their way. It was agreed between us that he
should repair the next morning to Monceaux to Queen Mother, there to deliver
her Majesty's Letters as also her answers to the Articles propounded by the
King. Touching his proceeding with her I refer your Lordship to his own
Letters. By him I understood at his return that Queen Mother would speak with
me, at her repair to the Town, if I had any thing to say unto her; So the 26
of this month she repaired hither, and for that during the time of her abode
here she could have no leisure, she sent me word that the next day in the
morning I should repair unto her, to Qu^re.
come four English miles from Paris, and that there I should have Audience. So
according to her appointment I repaired thither the next morning, and at the
time of my access unto her presence, I showed her that I was come thither to
know how she rested satisfied with the answer she received from her Majesty by
Master Cavalcant to those Articles which were propounded by the King and her,
to the end I might advertise her Majesty.

She showed me, that the Answers made unto their Articles, seemed to her not to
be direct, saving tha^ which was made unto the second Article concerning
Religion; which (says she) is very hard, and nearly touches the honor of my
Son, so far forth, that if he should yield thereto, the Queen your Mistress
should also receive some part of the blemish, by accepting for a husband such a
one as by sudden change of Religion might be thought through worldly respects
void of all Conscience and Religion.

I replied, that I was willed to say to her from her Majesty, that she doubted
not but that Monsieur her Son by her good persuasion would take in good part
her said answers, who meant not such sudden change of Religion, as that he or
his household should be compelled to use the Rites of the English Church,
contrary to his or their Consciences: But forasmuch as the granting unto him
the exercise of his Religion, being contrary to her Laws, might by an example
breed such an offense as was like to kindle such trouble as lately reigned in
France, whereof both herself and her son had good experience. She therefore
hoped, that he who (if the match proceeded) was to sail with her in in one
ship, and to run with her one fortune, would not require a thing, that she by
no means could yield to, who tendered nothing more then the quiet and repose of
her Subjects, and therefore in respect ^hereof, could by no means consent to
any such permission, as might by any likelihood disturb the same.

To this she replied, that the not having the exercise, was as much as to
change his Religion; which thing he could not do upon a sudden, without the
note to be of no Religion; which dishonor I am sure no respect can draw him to
endanger himself. And as he in respect of the said ignominy, is resolved fully
not to yield, so can I with no reason persuade him thereto; and as for any
peril that may happen by the same, I think it shall be the best way of safety
of your Mistress, who always by the way of his Brothers sword, should be the
better able to correct any such evil Subjects as should go about to disturb the
repose and quiet of her Estate, which she may assure herself he will do,
without having respect to any Religion, whereof some trial lately has been
made by his consenting with the King, to have some good justice and example of
punishment done at Roan.

In answer whereof, I besought her to consider as well the Queens damage, as
her sons honor. I showed her, that of this permission great mischiefs would
ensue: First, the violating of her Laws. Secondarily, the offense of her good
and faithful Subjects. And lastly, the encouragement of the evil affected:
Which three mischiefs if you will weigh, said I, together with your Sons
honors, you shall find them of great moment; and that the Queens Majesty my
Mistress has great cause to stand to the denial of any such permission,
whereof is likely to ensue such manifest peril. And as for the aid of the Kings
sword, I showed her, that the example by permission, would do much more hurt
then either his own or his Brothers sword could do good, for that the issue of
our mischief by civil dissension, falls out commonly to be sudden and short,
but very sharp, and were not drawn in length, as those that happened in other
Countries, we having neither walled Towns nor Fortresses to retire to, thereby
to protract our Wars.

To this she answered, that her Son would soon be overcome by the Queens
persuasions in that behalf, who was more zealous then able to defend his
Religion, whereby the same inconvenience of example will not long last. For,
says she, it is generally feared by the Catholics, that this match will
breed a change of Religion throughout all Europe. In the end she concluded,
that neither Monsieur, her Son, nor the King, nor herself could ever yield to
any such sudden change for any respect whatsoever, neither could her Majesty
desire it, considering how much it would touch his reputation, whom she is to
match withal if it proceed.

I asked then of her, whether she would have me so to advertise her Majesty.
She desired me in any cause so to do; and to know directly, whether by yielding
or not yielding to the said second Articles with all reasonable cautions, she
meant to proceed or forbear; whereof she desired her Majesty at the farthest
to give answer within ten days, for that the King stays his progress only
upon that; and if so be she mean to proceed; then to send the Articles that are
to be propounded by her Majesty.

Monsieur de la Mothe Fenelon (as I learn by Monsieur de Foix) has given very
honorable report of the Queens Majesty's proceedings, assuring them that there
is nothing but sincerity meant.

If her Majesty resolve to proceed, I learn then, that Monsieur de Foix shall
come over with the Kings Answer, to such Articles as shall be propounded by the
Queens Majesty, and so to grow to some through conclusion. And so having
nothing else to advertise her Majesty at this present, I most humbly take my
leave of your Honor.

At Paris the eight and twentieth of April, 1571. Your Honors to Command, Fr.
Walsingham.


The CONFERENCE between me and Monsieur de Foix.
FOr my first entry in our Conference, I^ showed him, that I was glad that it
was my hap to be appointed to deal with him, who did concur with me in like
affection toward this cause, being drawn by public respects, as wishing well
unto our Countries and Princes; and therefore the rather hoped that the success
would be thereafter. I showed him, that great matters, before they could be
brought to an end, could not but be full of great difficulties; which if by the
good discretion of those which are Dealers and Instruments in the same were not
qualified, a profitable matter might by evil handling quail and take no effect.
I showed him therefore, that this matter being in appearance so good and
profitable to both our Countries, as I for my part would not fail to do therein
what there might lie in me to remove such difficulties as might rise, so far
forth as might stand with the Queens Honor and Safety. And if I did any way
fail, it should be for lack of judgment and experience, and not lack of good
will. I showed him, that by perusing the answer to the Articles, I found only
the difficulty to be in Religion, which by his good help, might be reduced to
accord, there was no doubt but that the matter would take that effect we both
desired.

To this Monsieur de Foix answered, that he was the rather willing to deal in
this matter, for that he was well persuaded of my good inclination in that
behalf, protesting, that he never more earnestly traveled in matter in his
life, which Monsieur could very well witness, whose persuasions to him chiefly
to enter into the matter, through the honorable report he made of her
Majesty's rare virtues and gifts; wherein through the Counter practices of
diverse other, he found no small difficulty, Monsieur being by them persuaded,
that it would be his hap to march in rank with the forsaken; which scruple
being by me, says he, removed, if the matter should not take that success I
desire, would be no less cause of displeasure, then otherwise of comfort, if
the same take good effect.

Touching the present difficulty of Religion; if her Majesty continue still
resolute to maintain her answer, I see the matter at an end. For (says he)
Monsieur has either Religion, or no Religion. If he have Religion, then
Religion being a constant persuasion, confirmed by time, cannot but in time be
removed, and not upon the sudden: if he have no Religion, then he is unworthy
of your Mistress, and the place and degree he bears. And surely, says he, as
Religion in all persons is to be desired, so in none more then in Princes, who
have no other bridle to stay them from evil, then Religion. And as for
Monsieur, says he, I know him to be religious in his kind, wherein, I suppose,
he is not so assuredly grounded, but that there may grow alteration and ^hange
thereof in time, through the Queens good persuasions, whereof we have seen good
experience of women's virtue in that place: Constantine was converted by his
Mother Helena; the King of Navarre by the Queen his wife; and therefore can I
not doubt but this match proceeding, Monsieur will be turned by his wife, who
is of that good disposition and nature, as in all his proceedings he is not
transported and carried away by passion, but guided and conducted by reason.

To this I replied, That the Queens Majesty wished not such sudden change of
Religion, as might breed irreligion, but only the forbearing of the exercise
whereof, might breed by permission both offense and stirrs in her Estate; and
as for the Examples of Constantine, and the rest, they are common for both; for
as many wives have been turned by their husbands, as husbands by their wives.

To this he answered, that to live without exercise of Religion, was as much as
to be of no Religion; and says he, the Queens Majesty I know is honorable,
and would not have him (...) with so great a spot, as to be thought an Atheist,
whom she m^ant so s^^aitly to tie her self to, as of two to become one, who is
to participate with him both in honor and dishonor.

To this I replied, that if it were true that I had heard, Monsieuer was not so
far from our Religion, having had some introduction therein by Curuvalet his
Governor lately deceased; and therefore if it please him to water those seeds,
that he had already received by some conference, ^he should be able easiely to
discern that the change of his Religion, should breed unto him no dishonor at
all, it being no less fault to continue in error, then commendable to come from
error to truth. I desired him to consider with me, both the inconvenience that
would grow to Monsieur by persisting in his Religion; and also, what greater
inconvenience would come unto the Queens Majesty my Mistress, by permission of
exercise of the same.

Touching the inconvenience that would happen to Monsieur, I told him, that it
is held for a general Maxim, that no Prince that is a stranger, and comes to
rule in a Foreign Country, can be welcome, or well received by the
Inhabitants: Therefore Monsieur coming into England, except it were by
accident, in respect of the partialities (said I) as you know are to
Protestants and Catholics, either of these two would be glad to be assured of
Monsieur. In reason now it is to be weighed, with which of these two he is to
join; with the Protestants, he shall favor those whom the Queen especially
favors; he shall concur with her in the maintenance of the present State and
Government; he shall gain the favor of her Majesty's Councillors, in whom she
reposeth her greatest trust; and lastly, he shall continue the Realm in repose
and quietness: I^ on the other side, he persist in his Religion, first, he
shall not gain the Catholics, unless they may have the like liberty as he
himself enjoys.

Secondarily, they are already devoted unto the Queen of Scots, and so
misliking nothing more then of his Marriage, doubting thereby to grow the
prejudice of her Title; whereby we may conclude, that by all likelihood, by
having of it, he shall not join the good wills of the Catholics, unless they
may participate with him in like liberty; and on the other side, it will breed
misliking of him with the Protestants, doubting the exercise of his Religion
will breed some unquietness in the State; and consequently, he will be misliked
of both, which inconvenience of misliking, I wished him to persuade Monsieur
well to weigh.

Touching the inconvenience that would grow to the Queen, I showed him the same
would rise three manner of ways: First, by breach of Law. Secondly, by offense
of her good Subjects; and, Thirdly, by the encouragement of evil Subjects.
Which, said I, if you will well weigh, are of much more moment then any may
happen to Monsieur, he being only touched by relenting in honor, the Queens
Majesty my Mistress both in honor and safety; he as a private person, she
being as a Monarch and a Prince, whose Kingdoms were to participate any
inconvenience that might befall unto her.

To this he replied, that his relenting in Religion being matter of conscience,
was an inconvenience of more weight then any that might happen to the Queen. In
the end, after many replications on both sides to and fro, he concluded, that
he was well assured that Monsieur in no case would be brought upon a sudden to
yield to any change of Religion for no respect; and yet that he doubted not but
within a ^mall tim^ after the Match, the same would easily be brought to pass
without any great difficulty. He willed me to consider how much this match was
misliked by the Catholics; and how much on the other side, desired of those
of the Religion here, and that in his opinion and conscience nothing could more
further Religion throughout Christendom then this match.

To this I answered, that her Majesty was on the other side fully bent to
maintain her answer to the second Article, or otherwise resolved not to
proceed; and so we ended.

This Conference was between us, the day after Master Cavalcants arrival,
Master Cavalcant being present. And so etc.

From Paris the eight and twentieth of April, 1571. Your Honors to Command,
Fr. Walsingham.


To our right trusty and well-beloved Francis Walsingham Esquire, our
Ambassador Resident with our good Brother the French King.
ELIZABETH R.

RIght trusty and well-beloved, we greet you well: By your Letters of the two
and twentieth of April, sent to the Lord of Burleigh, we perceive in what sort
you have dealt with the Irish Fugitive Morris fitz-Gibbons, naming himself
Archbishop of Cassel; and having considered his request in a Paper subscribed
with his hand, we do not so much disallow his request to have our pardon, and
his restitution of his Bishopric, if we shall so please, as the slender manner
of his suit, being void of all recognition of his offenses, and therewith, his
desire to repair out of that Country into Ireland, without first coming
hither, where he ought by his submission to recover his pardon: And therefore
we would that you should inform him by Letters, or by Message, and upon your
informations of his petitions, we do not allow of his manner of so slender
submission and petition. And if he will not humbly require pardon for his
offenses, and show himself repentant, and disposed to live hereafter in Ireland
like a faithful Subject, we mean not to bestow upon him either pardon or
Bishopric. But if he will upon your warrant come hither into England, he shall
find us ready to show him grace, according to his humbleness in suing for it.
This you may let him know, and express the same unto him in such sort as you
shall see cause; for except you shall understand certainly of him, we
understand there is no great account to be made of him as he pretends for
himself; neither is he of kin to the Earl of Desmond, as he alleges, nor of
any credit in England: And yet we are content to draw him home by means not
dishonorable. We do well allow of the Irish man whom you have employed to
attend upon him; but whether it be Captain Thomas or Henry is not expressed;
and we would have you to assure him, that he shall be considered by us: And we
pray you to advertise us in what sort you think best to have him rewarded.

Given under our Signet at our Palace of Westminster, the fifth of May, 1571.
and in the thirteenth year of our Reign.

To the Right Honorable Sir Francis Walsingham, Ambassador for the Queens
Majesty in France.
SIr, for answer to your Letters concerning the Iewd Lozell of Ireland,
intituling himself Archbishop of Cassels, the Queens Majesty's will serve. And
for reward of the Irish man, I pray you advertise your opinion by your next. I
hear by many means out of Spain, that the King is therein rather counseled by
Epimetheus, then Prometheus; he has employed much money upon Stewkley, and now
finds him not worthy of any more. Our Parliament is daily new with child
with projects for Laws, that I was never more weary. Your Letters for the
matters of D. has driven us to the wall, and particularly offended the Queens
Majesty. But the French Ambassador has Letters from the Queen Mother, and
from de Foix, wherein the matters are more tempered; and I think he has
Commission to qualify that hard Article that cannot be there digested. It is
too true that I perceive that you wrote to Master Hennage, that some comfort
here has made you hardlier answered. Indeed I wish things were not subject to
sudden changes, but Gods will be done; for I cannot tell how to satisfy
doubts, but must refer me to his power to direct me. As I received news out of
Scotland, so I send you them; we have matters revealed which will shortly
disgrace ^8 and offend ^2 and yet nothing shall be justly employed to the
Queens Majesty, but that she is of mere necessity forced in extremities to use
new remedies.

Yours assuredly, William Burleigh.


To the Right Honorable, and my very good Lord, the Lord of Burleigh.
IT may please your Lordship to advertise her Majesty, that according to the
tenor of her Letters, dated the fifth of May, I have given the pretended
Archbishop to understand by my Letters, who is now at Nantes, how her Majesty
does not allow the slender manner of his submission, neither can think him
worthy of favor or grace, unless upon warrant given by me, he makes his
repair into En^land, and there with all humility sue unto her Majesty for the
same. Of late he has sent from Nantes certain of his servants (as I am
informed) to what end I cannot learn.

I have informed Captain Thomas how her Majesty, upon information given by me,
does accept in very good part his late service in the discovery of the
pretended Archbishops practices; and that she means to consider thereof:
Whereupon he has desired me in his name, most humbly to desire her Majesty to
be so good and gracious a Lady unto him, as he may have some charge under her
Majesty, either in Ireland his native Country, or elsewhere, as one that
desires nothing more then to employ the experience he has gathered in these
Civil Wars in her Majesty's service: Here there is very good account made of
him: And notwithstanding that the most part of the ordinary bands are
discharged, as well Captains as Soldiers, yet has he allowed by the King
sixteen Crowns a month pension. His Father, whose name was Bathe, was one of
the Justices in Ireland, his Brother is Recorder of Drogheda. This I write
touching his Parentage, to the end her Majesty may the better conceive of his
loyalty. I am given secretly to understand, that Rodolphi had Letters of
Credit given him by the Spanish* Ambassador, unto the Duke de Alva: whereupon
he had long conference with the Duke, and was dispatched in post to Rome, with
Letters of Credit to the Pope; as also, with Letters of Credit to the King of
Spain, promising to be at Madril the 20 of this present month. Touching the
matter of secrecy committed unto him, I can learn nothing as yet;
notwithstanding I thought it my part to advertise your Lordship of thus much,
who perhaps by other advertisements can give some ghess what the same
imports. The Scots here have some enterprise in hand, as I am informed by the
party whom I appointed to observe the Lord Seatons doings. The Ambassador of
late has been at Court, and is returned from thence with answer not altogether
to his liking; and says, that so long as the Marriage is in Treaty, there is
no hope of good here to be done for the help of their cause. Birack, who lately
returned out of Scotland, is in hope to return with new Forces, which secretly
he says to his Friends depends only upon the resolution of the marriage now
in hand. The Lord Seaton departs hence out of hand into Flanders, being sent
for by her Majesty's Rebels there, who have somewhat in hand presently to be
executed. They of late have very importunately been in hand with me for
passports; but understanding they have such enterprise in hand, I thought good
in that behalf to make some stay for a time, alleging, that I have some order
from her Majesty to make some stay therein, until I be further advertised of
her pleasure, I hope her Majesty will not dissallow of this my doings, though
I do it without warrant. Out of Britain I am advertised, that la Roche had
discovered unto a Kinsman of his, that his enterprise in Ireland was, to have
executed a plot of Conquest, devised by Peter Strozza in King Henry's time;
which if the match go not forward, he is promised that he shall go in hand
withal: hereby it does well appear, that the expectation of this match is the
only stay of diverse pretended mischiefs.

Here they are in some perplexity, for that they hear nothing of her Majesty's
answer, being given to understand by the Ambassador, that her Majesty had
signified her mind unto me in that behalf. Queen Mother denies now, that she
prefixed a day of answer, and that I did mistake her. I must needs confess,
that in requiring the same, she used such words, as her Majesty has no cause
to be justly offended, which omitting to impart unto her Majesty, I do most
humbly crave pardon at her hands, being most heartily sorry, that through my
default, there should grow any unkindness between them. Her words were as
follows: First, she asked me, after she had willed me to signify unto her
Majesty the Kings and her resolution in what time I might have answer. I
shevved her, that I hoped within ten or twelve days; the rather, for that I
know my Mistress to be resolved, and therefore the matter required the less
deliberation. Then she desired me to will her Majesty, that they might have
answer within ten days, if it might be. These circumstances by me omitted, I
perceive her Majesty the rather to mislike the limitation of the time; for the
which as before, so again I most humbly require her Majesty's pardon. And so,
etc.

At Paris the fourteenth of May, 1571. Your Honors to Command, Fr. Walsingham.


To the Right Honorable Sir Francis Walsingham, the Queen^ Majesty's Ambassador
with the French King.
THere is nothing yet ready to send you touching the matter of Monsieur. The
Ambassador resident has received Letters of late, since yours came from the
Queen Mother, and from Monsieur de Foix, touching that cause: He showed his
Letter to me and my Lord of Burleigh; and it appears, that de Foix Letter
does qualify much the dealing which you and Cavalcant had; I mean, he writes
in sort to continue the matter, and as it were, that there would be offer made
by them: But her Majesty has handled the matter, exceeding well with the
Ambassador, and gives him no hope, without yielding of their part to that she
has reformed in their first demands. And as (...) as I can perceive, they will
rather yield then break off: God send all to be for his glory, and our good;
and so farewell my good Walsingham.

In haste this seventh of May 1571. Your assured Friend, To. Leicester.
Commend me to my Cousin your wife, by the next you shall hear more of this
matter.




To the Right Honorable, and my very good Lord, the Earl of Leicester.
MY very good Lord, the Protestants here do so earnestly desire this match;
and on the other side, the Papists do so earnestly seek to impeach the same,
as it makes me the more earnest in furthering of the same: Besides, when I
particularly consider her Majesty's state, both at home and abroad, so far
forth as my poor eyesight can discern; and how she is beset with Foreign
peril, the execution whereof stays only upon the event of this match, I do
not see how she can stand, if this matter break off. No particular respect (as
God is my witness) moves me to write thus earnestly, but only the regard I
have to Gods glory, and her Majesty's safety. They rest here somewhat
perplexed, for that the answer is so long deferred, being advertised from their
Ambassador, I had order from her Majesty in that behalf: Your Lordship
therefore shall do well, if there be none sent before the arrival of this
Messenger, to hasten the same with all speed. And so leaving further to trouble
your Honor at this present, I most humbly take my leave

at Paris the fourteenth of May, 1571. Your Lordships to Command, Fr.
Walsingham.


To the Right Honorable, and my very good Lords, the Earl of Leicester, and
my Lord of Burleigh.
I Thought good to advertise her Majesty with speed, that they rest here in
very good opinion of the matter; and that if the Articles were here, that are
to be propounded by her Majesty, it would make them more reasonable in the
point of Religion. Thus far I hear they are come on, that they are content
that that Article shall be left out uncapitulated. Montmorency who is now at
the Court, has done very good offices herein. They stand upon this, as I
learn, that her Majesty promised to deliver her Articles as soon as she could
receive the King; and that therefore without the having of them, will not deal
so frankly as otherwise they would; for that the same being promised and not
come, breeds mistrust; I beseech your Lordships therefore (for putting away
all jealousy) to deal earnestly with her Majesty for the present sending of
them with all speed; for that by her Majesty's Letters I perceive they are in a
readiness. To morrow I repair to the Court to deliver my message, whereof they
have an inkling by the Ambassadors Letters, who does deal very honorably
toward her Majesty. Thus for haste, leaving further to trouble your Lordships
at this present, I most humbly take my leave.

At Vernon the 19 of May 1571. Your Honors to command, Fr. Walsingham.


To our Right trusty and well beloved, Francis Walsingham Esquire our Ambassador
Resident with our good Brother the French King.
ELIZABETH R.

RIght trusty and welbeloved, we greet you well; after we heard the contents of
your Letters sent hither concerning your communication with the Queen Mother,
and also with Monsieur de Foix, upon the answer we sent you by Cavalcant to the
Articles brought by him, we understood also by the French Ambassador here
resident, that he had received Letters from the Q. Mother and de Foix
concerning the same matters. And though the answer made to you (as by your
Letters we conceive) were more peremptory, then such as the Letters to this
Ambassador (which we have seen) did purport, adding thereunto some dulcimes to
qualify the same, especally in answering that which we could not but object as
strange; that the Q. Mother required to have answer from us within the space of
ten days; yet to omit rehearsalls, either the contents of your Letters, or of
the Letters sent to this Ambassador; we think best to impart unto you, which we
will you shall impart to the Q. Mother, or to the King; which is thus, we find
more great and urgent causes to move us to persist in our former answer in the
Article of Religion, both for our conscience, our safety, honor, and
quietness, then can be be alleged or imagined for the conscience and honor of
Monsieur de Anjou, and the reasons hereof as apparent in this sort following:
First, if we shall grant a permission to Monsieur to have the use of his
Religion, which we take principally to consist in the having, saying, and
hearing of the private Mass, though the same should be secret for the place,
and rarely for the time, and not frequented with numbers; yet it might seem
doubtful to us how without offense of conscience, such a tolleration might be
by us permitted. Secondarily, though our conscience should not be offended, yet
we are well assured, that our realm being not void of diversities of opinions
herein, though indeed presently we find no disobedience worthy of any account
against our Laws, there could not any such exercise of Religion be used by our
sufferance (by a person of such estimation, as one being allowed to be our
husband, should be) but that the same would breed such a misliking to our best
subjects and servants, as surely should diminish their great love toward us,
and consequently hazard some inward troubles within our Realm, by occasion that
one part now dutifully obeying us, would grow doubtful of our conscience in
the observations of our Laws, and another part would be imboldened by example
of that which our husband should be permitted to do, should attempt to neglect
our Laws, and multiply occasions, discords, and seditions; and these perils
are so evident to follow, and so dangerous if they should follow, as surely if
we should not aforehand so consider them, we might condemn our selves of great
folly, as not having due regard either to our own particular estate, or to the
common quietness of our Realm; whereof hitherto, we thank Almighty God (through
his special goodness) we have had the effects of much contentation. On the
other part, we see no such matter of weight to be considered for Monsieur, that
either his conscience, his honor, or safety should be troubled, impeached, or
endangered; although we perceive that the Queen Mothers speeches seem to tend
thereto; for where it is said, and that by answer, if he should come hither,
and live without his own Religion, he should be accounted as one of no
Religion, and in time coming he should be (as de Foix says) an Atheist, and
so neither could we in right esteem him to have any faith; neither should he
keep the reputation that he has. Of all which, certainly, if we could think
that by our answer, and his yielding thereto, any hurt might happen to him, we
should utterly condemn our selves, and readily Reform the same, or else forbear
to give any answer at all; but you shall say, That we require the Queen Mother,
or the King, or if the cause so require, Monsieur himself, to consider better
of our answer; we leave him freedom to use our Religion, in that we are
content not to constrain him, or any of his otherwise to use it, then it shall
please him, saying, That we think it expedient, that if he should be our
husband, he should accompany us to the Church, and why he should not, or may
not use our manner of prayers and divine Service, certainly we think no reason
can be yielded by any that knows the same, and will compare it to that which
the Church of Rome does use; For in ours, there is no part that has not been,
yea that is not at this day used in the Church of Rome, as of late the same
has been allowed by the last Council at Trent; and if any thing be more in
ours, the same is part of the holy Scripture. Now therefore why it should be
objected, That Monsieur should live here without Religion, if he shall be
present at ours, there is no cause, except it may be objected, that ours is in
the English tongue and not understood; but to satisfy that, the same is also
in the Latin t^^gue as the service of the Church of Rome, and so ordered to be
used in our Universities* And if the Latin tongue should not content; it is
also, or may be translated into the French, either of which his own ministers
might use at his pleasure, in places convenient; whereby he might serve God
devoutly, and thereby not to be counted irreligious, or an Atheist: And if it
should be objected, that by this means it might be esteemed that he might make
a change of his faith in matters of questions in Religion; certainly herein it
might also be truly answered, that although we can be glad that all persons
should by Gods inspiration change from ignorance, or error, to knowledge and
truth; yet mean we not to prescribe to him, or any person, that they should at
our motion, or in respect of us, change their Religion in matters of faith;
Neither does the usage of the divine Service of England properly compel any
man to alter his opinion in the great matters now in controversy in the
Church; Only the usage thereof does direct men daily to hear and read the
Scriptures, to pray to almighty God (by daily use of the Psalter of David,) and
of the ancient Prayers, Anthemes and Collects of the Church, even the same
which the universal Church has used, and does yet use.

Lastly, if any one part of our Articles and Ceremonies should mislike him, as
surely we cannot conjecture of any such; Yet therein (the rest not being by him
misliked) some tolleration might be to forbear the same, until he might better
consider thereof. And to that which is said, That we permit Ambassadors to use
the Religion of Rome: First, we never made any grant thereof to any, whereby in
that respect his conscience is free. But being suffered, that is to say, not
molested, therein by any of our ministers of our Laws, the difference is
apparent between another Princes servant coming only but as a Messenger, or
tarrying to do Messages, which is the office of an Ambassador; and one that is
to be our husband, that is, in respect of Religion our head, and in order to be
joint Governor of our Realms, and subjects with us; that is, to assist us in
maintenance of our Laws, in punishing offenders, in giving good example to our
Subjects, in counselling us how to maintain the quietness of our estate, and
preserve to us, and to himself for our sake, the love which he shall find is
born to us by our subjects. And how contrary it shall be to all those that he
may do, as Ambassadors are suffered to do, in whom neither we, nor our People
can have any such Opinion of carriage for us, or them; or for our Laws or
quietness, every person understands. Yea, commonly, Subjects think the
contrary of all Ambassadors of strange Princes, though all give not like cause;
Thus you see what we think meet to answer at this time, having some reasonable
Causes to move us to think, That if the matter be as earnestly meant, as is by
the Ambassadors words pretended, they will not be so precise as to demand any
conditions in the case of Religion, whereof our estate may come in danger, or
our present quietness come in doubt; And therefore you shall be the more
earnest in setting forth the dangers that necessarily may follow. The
Ambassador has required us to send you the rest of such demands as is meet for
our part; whereunto we were once inclined, and have them in readiness; But now
we find it convenient, first to understand the resolution of this matter of
Religion, before we will propound the rest, whereby no delay of time shall
follow, if in the first we may accord; for we may speedily by Post send you the
same demands, if cause so require.

Given under our signet, at our Palace of Westminister, the 11 day of May 1571
and in the 13 year of our Reign.

To the Right Honorable, Fr. Walsingham Esquire her Majesty's Ambassador Resident
in France.
SIr, by the Queens Majesty's Letters you shall understand, what you are
directed to do and say; and therefore I must forbear to deal therein with you,
considering you are prescribed; But I will friendly let you know how the answer
has proceeded; and so the cause and circumstance known, you may the better
conceive the inward sense of the Message. At the first coming of your Letters
hither, with the answer from Queen Mother. In -- A was very sorry to judge the
matter so perplexed, and almost desperate; Whereby I then judged there was here
a plain forward intention to proceed in the cause, if this let for Religion
should not be a stay. After two days the French Ambassador had Letters, and
the Queens Majesty was by some informed, that saw the Letters, that there was
no such difficulty in that matter of Religion; Nevertheless, the Ambassador
himself being appointed to conferr with my Lord of Leicester, and me, made the
cause very hard, alleging directly, that Monsieur would never sustain that
dishonor, as to come hither with an account to the world, that he should have
no Religion; and then I answered, as is contained in the Queens Majesty's
Letters, setting out the neerness of ours, to such as was good and found in the
Roman; adding, that we omitted nothing but those which were impious and
doubtful to be against the Scriptures: And so with us he ended, with this
request, that the Queens Majesty would grant these words (quod) which sentence
I found imperfect, and so yet do; I reported this to the Queens Majesty, After
this, I was by one of some value secretly informed, that if this matter of
Religion were earnestly sticked unto, and peremptorily pressed, it would be
obtained; whereupon the answer was conceived, and I commanded to report it to
the French Ambassador; who hearing it; seemed much dismayed; and concluded,
That he saw not but this answer should make a breach and end of the whole: For,
if the answer (says he) be grounded upon the Queens conscience, then says he,
there is no qualification to be hoped for. Thus I reported, and thereupon I saw
her Majesty was perplexed, and wished I had forborne to have made the
principal foundation upon her Majesty's conscience, which I was commanded to
do, and therefore no fault in me. And to remedy the matter, I was willed
speedily to advertise the Ambassador secretly, that I was larger in explication
of her Majesty's conscience, then I see since my speaking with him was meant;
and that the principal reasons were the other of the misliking of her good
subjects, and of the danger to lose their good wills, etc. And so did I by a
little writing advertise him; whereby, what conceit he gathers, I know not;
but by some others I hear that he still judges it broken. After this, I was
commanded also to temper the sentence in the Queens Majesty's Letters, as you
perceive; for it is not as it was, an assertion of direct necessity, but of
possibility. Thus having some circumstances to give you some light, but what
you shall find by your light, God knows: I doubt the worst, and so I have
said; but yet the opinion conceived by her Majesty makes her to believe the
contrary.

It were strange that any one man should give comfort to the Ambassador in the
cause; and yet the same man to persuade the Queens Majesty that she should
persist; both these things are done, but I dare not affirm by any one; and thus
I end. In Scotland; the Q. party have recovered Edinburgh Town by Granges
favor; And yet presently he terms himself the Kings subject, and so they
are like to fray together, or else to come to consultation amongst themselves,
to govern the Realm without deciding the Kings title, or the Queens; I cannot
tell whether the greater part like better a or of none, for so their writings
and words purport; making no mention of King or Queen, but of Magistrates to
conserve the peace and liberty of their Country. And so I am forced to leave
of, and so I end

from Westminster the 11 of May 1571. Your assured loving friend, Will. Burleigh.


To the Right Honorable, and my very good Lord, the Lord of Burleigh.
IT may please your Lordship to advertise her Majesty, That the 20 of this
month I repaired to Galleon; where I had Audience at the Queen Mothers hands,
to whom I declared at large, such reasons as moved her Majesty to maintain her
first answer, touching the Article of Religion, the repetition whereof I leave
at this present to put down, the same containing no other thing, then that
which was perscribed me by her Majesty's last Letters, dated the 11 of May. To
this the Queen Mother answered, That she saw very well, that the reasons
alleged by her Majesty were not lightly to be weighed, and that therefore
she would consult with the King and Monsieur in that behalf; and that the next
day I should receive answer. By certain that wish well to the cause, I was
advised to deal with Monsieur himself; so repairing unto him, I showed him,
That I was appointed by her Majesty to make him understand, the great
inconvenience that would follow by such permission as he required touching the
exercise of his Religion; as also, that her Majesty (though otherwise she
could wish him reduced from error to truth) yet did not press him to any such
sudden change of Religion, as might cause him to be reputed for an Atheist;
only this she desired, that he would forbear the use of his private Mass, in
respect of the great inconvenience that would follow; and that further he would
examine, whether he might not with good devotion serve God with such form of
prayer as publicly is used in our Realm, being in effect nothing else, etc.
To this he answered, That he rather desired to be a mean to redress
inconveniences, then to breed any; to be a comfort, then a discomfort; and
that he thought it would otherwise fall out.

After he had thus ended, he replied, That though he was of years young, yet
any time these five years there have been overtures of marriage made unto him,
and that he found in himself no inclination until this present to yield to
any. But (says he) I must needs confess, that through the great commendations
that is made of the Q. your Mistress, for her rare gifts, as well of mind as of
body, being (as even her very enemies say) the rarest creature that was in
Europe these 500. years; my affection grounded upon so good respects, has now
made me yield to be wholly hers. And that therefore (says he) if I thought
that there could ensue any inconvenience to her disquiet, through me, I would
rather wish my self never to have been born. Touching my request for the
exercise of my Religion, considering the same touches my soul and conscience,
being but private for my self, in some private place, I suppose there will grow
no such offense thereof as will breed any disquiet, o^ alteration of state; and
therefore I hope she will dispense with me in that behalf. I replied, That I
hoped that when he had well weighed the inconvenience that would follow; that
without scruple of conscience he might well (with good devotion) frequent the
exercise of our Church service, he would not insist upon any dispensation. To
that he answered, that he knew not how God hereafter would dispose his heart,
and (that therefore for the present) he desired her to weigh in her own
conscience, what it were to do any thing with scruple and remorse of
conscience, and so desired me to present on his behalf his most affectionate
and humble commendation; and to assure her, That she only had Authority to
command him. The next day, as I was appointed, I repaired to the Court, and
there having access unto the King, I showed, that I doubted not but that his
Mother had made him acquainted with such reasons as lead the Q. Majesty my
Mistress to maintain her former answer in respect of the great inconveniences
that would ensue, as well perjudiciall to Monsieur his brother, as to her
Majesty. I showed him, That I was now only to request him from her Majesty,
that he would persuade his Brother, that in respect of the said inconveniences,
not to be so resolute in requiring a tolleration that might prove so dangerous;
as also, to advise him to examine, whether he might not with good conscience
serve God, according to such form of prayers, as is usually practiced
throughout her Dominious. To this the King answered, That the reasons alleged
by her Majesty were of great moment; he willed me therefore to desire her
Majesty, in his name, that the Articles by her to be propounded might be sent,
that the whole matter might be jointly considered of. And to assure her, that
he doubted not but that his Brother would be ruled by him so far forth, as
might stand with honor, reason, and conscience.

After I had thus euded with the King, I repaired to Q. Mother, to whom I made
report of such answer as I received from the Kings hands, which she said, I had
well conceived, for that it was the self same that they had resolved on between
themselves; she willed me to desire her Majesty that her demand might be at
the first propounded reasonable and well qualified, to the end this matter
might come the sooner to conclusion, and therefore she wished, that if it might
so lie in her, that the Ambassador might be made acquainted with them before
the sending of them over, who can give before hand some light what the King in
reason will consent unto, whereby to breed the more expedition; she concluded
with me, that I should assure her Majesty, that as well touching Religion, as
other points, reason should decide on their parts all such difficulties as
should rise. It is thought that Monsieur de Foix shall be sent over with the
Kings answers unto her Majesty's demands; he shows himself not unthankful
for such honor as he has received at her Majesty's hands, who earnestly
travelleth to remove such difficulties as do rise in this matter, and to stand
in her Majesty's defense against those that seek any way to touch her in
honor, your Lordship shall therefore do well to move her Majesty, that you by
your private Letters may signify unto him, that her Majesty does accept those
good offices done by him, in very good part. It is further thought, that
Monsieur Montmorency shall be the Nobleman, that shall be sent to ratify such
Articles as shall be accorded unto by the King: he has since his repair unto
the Court, marvelously furthered this matter, and has caused them to grow so
reasonable. Monsieur de la Mot does continually (by his Letters) make very
honorable report of her Majesty, touching her proceedings in this cause.

Monsieur de Foix has willed me to advertise your Lordship, that her Majesty's
direction to me, and her speech delivered to their Ambassador did not agree;
for he writes, That her Majesty promises some qualification of her answer
unto the second Article, and I deny the receipt of any such thing; he writes,
that I should deliver unto the King her Majesty's demand, and I deny to have
received any; he therefore wishes, for the advoiding of jealousy, that the
same were reformed, that the Articles be sent before the return of this bearer:
I do not mean to be known of the receipt of them, until I hear further of her
Majesty's pleasure.

Your Lordship shall do well; by the next, to send a Book of Common prayers
translated in the French, that I may present it unto Monsieur; I have seen of
them printed at Garnesey. C. Lodowick desired me most earnestly to move her
Majesty, that it would please her to license Hawkins underhand to serve him
with certain ships; which favor (if it please her Majesty to show him) he
hops she shall not have cause to forethink the same, which Letter shall well
appear, whenever occasion shall be offered, wherein he may do her service.
Mr. Cavalcant is here a very good instrument in this cause in hand, and does
deal therein both sinceerly and discreetly, and worthy of the trust that her
Majesty does put in him, whose assistance by no means I could have lacked.
Thus leaving further to trouble your honor etc.

At Vernon the 25 of May 1571. Your Honors to Command, Fr. Walsingham.


To the Right Honorable and my very good Lord, the Lord of Burleigh.
IT may please your Lordship to advertise her Majesty, That Q. Mother sent
lately unto me this Memorial, which I send your Lordship here enclosed,
requesting me, that some good justice might be done therein. The Memorial is
unperfect, making no mention at all either of personship, or place; but he
says that Monsieur de la Mot can declare unto you at large the whole
circumstance of the matter; of late I find here, in like causes, reasonable
expedition of Justice; and therefore it may please your Lordship to take order,
that they may receive like measure. Further she willed me to signify unto her
Majesty, that touching the information given unto her, how that the Scottish
Ambassador here had dealt with her and Monsieur about some attempt against
Ireland, that she, and Monsieur for his justification, do avow, that he never
moved any such thing unto them; And for that she understood, that this report
should be some let why the Scottish Ambassador obtained not a Paspor^ lately
demanded at her Majesty's hand; she desires her, for that she avoweth the
report to be untrue, to grant him the said Pasport, with free egresse and
regresse for her sake: she willed me further to advertise her Majesty, that he
assures her, that his repair thither to the Q. his Mistress, is for no evil
intent, but chiefly to deal with her in some particular causes touching
himself; wherein if he should falsify his faith, his comodity would be but
small, in respect of the living he presently enjoys in France. I have of late
granted Pasport, (alleging that I am now so warned from home) to certain
Scottish men; for that I see there is no cause of fear, France being so well
inclined toward us as they are; And as for Flanders, they begin now to stand
upon their guard, etc.

At Nantes the 26 of May 1571. Your Honors to command Francis Walsingham.


To the Right Honorable Fr. Walsingham Esquire the Queen Majesty's Ambassador in
France.
SIr, you must bear with my slow dispatches in returning your servants, for
that I cannot obtain such resolutions as may give cause to write; whereupon I
am forced to bear here patiently the lack I find, and you must do the like on
your part; hoping that Deus dabit meliora. Now I send away this bearer, meaning
and hoping to send herewith the great answer; and to give you some light
hereof; Thus it is, the French Ambassador upon the receipt of his last answers,
agreeable with your Letters, pressed the Queens Majesty to have the rest of
the Articles on her part, which in no wise she would agree unto, pretending,
that without a resolute answer to the Article of Religion this could not be;
wherewith the Ambassador was so wounded as indeed in conference with him I
found him desperate of the matter, and entered into passions. But after some
speechs used with him, I pacified him, with hope, that the Q. Majesty might be
by further persuasions induced to show the rest of the Articles; and so with
some long labourious persuasions her Majesty was induced to agree, that the
Articles should be made ready and showed, as things earnestly pressed by that
King and his Ambassador here, with which pretense her Majesty thought her
honor saved well, hereof I was appointed to inform the Ambassador, and then
was I also commanded to put the Articles in readiness, which were not unready,
as I conceived; but ere I could finish them, I was commanded to conclude them
with a request to have Calais restored, a matter so inconvenient to bring forth
a marriage, as indeed, I thought it meant to procure a breach, and so the
matter continued in my opinion desperate; but with good help it was remedied. I
desired that the Queens Majesty would let my Lord Marquis, the Earls of
suffex and Leicester to see the Articles, and so they did, and very honorably
and wisely gave counsel to forbear that Toy of Calais; and generally did
further the prosecution of the marriage, as a matter of all other most
necessary at this time. And now we take it that her Majesty intends it
earnestly; whereupon, yesterday in the afternoon my Lord of Leicester and I
have delivered unto the Ambassador a Copy of the Articles, which at the first
hearing he did not mislike; what he will do this day I know not, but certainly
they are very reasonable. Thus far are we passed: so I trust on Wednesday to
dispatch Harcourt.

Yesterday came de Pine with Letters to my Lord of Leicester from the King, the
Q. Mother, and Monsieur, which will much further the matter, and it is reason
that my Lord of Leicester be assured of favors both there, and at home; for
some that like not this match, may otherwise engender doubts in his Lordship;
And yet surely at this present he deals earnestly with her Majesty in the
furtherance of the match; you shall do well to let his Lordship understand what
good opinion is had of him for so doing. The matters in Scotland go hardly for
us, the Queens party, by Granges means, occupies Edinburgh, and the King is
constrained to keep in Sterling; both parties are in arms, which yet are used
defensive. The Queen party has had Money and Ammunitions from France. The
Bishop of Ross is still restrained, and so deserves. The Queen likes not of
the Bishop of Glascows coming into the Realm. Dr Story suffered at Tyborn on
Friday, and there refused to give alleagiance to the Queens Majesty, and
professed to dye as the King of Spains Subject; and so being arraigned on the
Tuesday before at the Kings Bench, he would not answer to the Indictment,
alleging, that he was not a Subject of the Realm; whereupon, without further
Trial, he was condemned as guilty of the Treasons contained in the Indictments.

The practices of Stewkley are abated in Spain, by discovery of his lewdness
and insufficiency. Huggins is here arrived; and so fare you well.

From Westminster the fifth of June, 1571. Yours assuredly, William Burleigh.
I send you a Note of our late Acts in Parliament.




To my very Friend Francis Walsingham Esquire Ambassador for the Queen Majesty in
France.
I Have received your Letters by this Bearer, who brought me also Letters from
the King, Queen Mother and Monsieur, whom I perceived has conceived good
opinion of my devotion for the furtherance of the matter of marriage with the
Queens Majesty. I have thought good to return this Bearer again, for that he
desired speedy dispatch; to whom I have imparted the state of that matter,
which only does stand upon the Article of Religion, to which her Majesty will
by no means relent: All other Articles are reasonable; and her Majesty has
showed her Demands to this Ambassador, and has dispatched the same to you,
which I think will be with you before this. For the other point, touching
Religion, if I might advise them thereof, they should not speak of it at all;
for sooner will her Majesty yield to reason himself, that shall have that
interest in her, that shall be her husband, then by any Contract or other
Declaration. And finding her Majesty disappointed upon the argument of that
point, to proceed as she has seemed in the matter, I cannot but hope of very
good success, to which for my part, in respect of her Majesty's surety and hope
of universal good to the cause of Religion, I must with well, and further the
best I can, according to your advice, whereof I thank you, and am glad to see
your consideration thereof. This Bearer shall further declare some part of my
mind unto you, for that I know him to be honest and trusty, and well devoted
to her Majesty and the cause of Religion. Thus, with my most hearty
commendations, I bid you farewell.

In haste this seventh of June, 1571. Your assured Friend, To: Leicester.


By the QUEEN.
To our Right Trusty and Well-beloved Francis Walsingham, our Ambassador
Resident with our good Brother the French King.
ELIZABETH R.

RIght Trusty and Well-beloved, we greet you well; although we did heretofore
think it reasonable to forbear the sending of any Articles to contain the
Demands on our part, until we might have a resolute Answer from the King to our
former Answers made to his Articles, sent hither by Cavalcant; and namely, to
the Article touching Religion: Yet finding by your Letters, and the continual
solicitation of the French Ambassador here Resident, how earnestly the King
desires to see our Demands; which when he shall have, he will make answer to
the former, we are, contrary to our own disposition, induced by these means to
send the same at this time, as you shall receive the same in Articles; whereof
you shall advertise the King and Queen Mother, and let them understand, that
were it not for the earnest solicitation of the Ambassador, we would have
forborne so to have done; for that we take it it may be interpreted in some
manner to touch us in honor, that not having knowledge how the King will
satisfy us in the matter of Religion, which is the principal, we should pass
further into the Treaty of all the rest, altogether upon uncertainty what to
hope in the principal. But to their satisfaction herein, you shall say, that we
not only caused the Earl of Leicester and Lord Burleigh, whom only of our
Council we have used herein, according to our former agreement, to impart our
Demands in certain Articles to the French Ambassador; but have also sent them
now in writing, to be by you showed unto them, having therein followed for the
most part the form of things granted to our late Sister, of Noble Memory, Queen
Mary, as by the Treaty of Marriage betwixt King Philip and her may appear. And
further, you shall say, that these Articles are but briefly and summarily
conceived by our foresaid Counselors, who have not the knowledge of the forms
of Law requisite in such case; so as we reserve to our selves power, if the
substance of them shall be granted, to cause the same to be in form of Law
enlarged, by such others of our Council, as by learning can better do the same.
Besides, we do deliver these Demands to be jointly considered with the Articles
of our first Answer to the Demands on their part brought by Cavalcant.

We perceive by the French Ambassador, that certain Clauses which we agreed
should be added to some of the first Articles, were not contained in the
Writing by you there showed: And not knowing whether in the writing of them
there, the same Clauses were omitted, for more surety we send you a new Copy
hereof, to be showed as you shall have occasion: And if indeed those Clauses
shall appear to have been omitted in the former, the same was omitted but by
the Writer.

If the King or any other shall press you to understand of our proceedings with
the Queen of Scots, as in misliking the restraint of the Bishop of Ross, or in
not determining her cause; you shall for the first say, that the evil parts
done by the Bishop of Ross, are such, and so dangerous to us, and our State, as
no Prince could suffer, as we think, the like, without some sharp revenge: For
where in the late Rebellion in the North, we understood that he had given the
Heads of that Rebellion comfort to enter into the same, which he could not
deny, being charged therewith, but that secretly they had sent to him for aid
and comfort before their Rebellion, although he yield the same unto them, nor
thought it meet to utter the same, and so we were content to pass over the
same, with hope that he would attend his causes only according to the place he
held, to be as an Agent or Minister for her, and not to intermeddle as he had
done with our Affairs, and to trouble our State; nevertheless, within a few
months after he did eftsoons secretly by night, which was the last Summer,
enter into such intelligences and practices with some of our Nobility, as we
could not endure the same, but for a time restrained him of his liberty, until
he promised never to be found in the like to offend us: Contrary whereunto he
has now of new entered into practices by his Letters and Ministers to stir up
secretly some new Rebellion in our Realm; and has for that purpose dealt by
his Ministers with certain our Fugitives and Rebels in the the King of Spains
Low Countries: As also with the Duke of Alva, and further prosecuted his
intentions to that purpose, by sending both to the Pope, and to the King of
Spain; of all which his doing we have full proof, and in certain part to prove
the same his own Confessions, and manifestly argue his guiltiness.

Now therefore you shall require the King or his Mother, if they shall deal
with you herein, to interpret well of our doings, for that we may not endure
such kind of dealing as may so endanger, or at the least trouble our Estate.
And for this purpose, if you shall be required, why we do refuse to grant to
the Bishop of Glascow passport, you shall say, it is upon the self same ground;
for we do well know his conditions, and specially how unmeet a man he is to
come hither to do any good office betwixt the Queen his Mistress and us, who we
know has rather been a maintainer then a pacifier of discord betwixt us in
times past. And for our intention toward the Queens of Scots, although her
Minister the Bishop of Ross has otherwise deserved; yet we do continue in
mind to proceed to the hearing and ordering of her cause, upon the coming of
certain Noblemen out of Scotland, both for her and the King her Son, the delay
whereof has lately grown by the renewing of arms on both sides, whereof being
by an express Messenger of ours now very lately sent into Scotland to both
parties earnestly charged by us, either of the parties do charge the other, and
excuse themselves; and yet at length they are now content to re-enter again
into Treaty offering to send hither their Commissioners. For which purpose we
have even this day returned answer to them of our contentation to hear them,
and have required both parties to lay down their Arms, which we doubt not but
they will; and so doing, we trust, shortly some good end will follow; for so is
our desire and full purpose, and so shall it appear by our actions.

Of all this we thought good to inform you, to the end you may the better
answer thereto, if speech be moved thereof, or else not.

Given at Osterley the eighth of June, 1571. and in the thirteenth year of our
Reign.

To the Right Honorable and my very loving Friend Mr. Francis Walsingham
Esquire, Ambassador Resident in France.
SIr, as I promised by my last Letters, sent by your Italian, so do I now
dispatch Harcourt. By her Majesty's Letters you shall see your charge, wherein
God give you good success; as I for my part sincerely mean, even for his glory,
and for the surety of the Queen my Sovereign, and weal of my Country; wherein
if I do dissemble, I wish, as I am writing, the indignation of the Almighty
Lord of Hosts. The cause of the Queens Majesty's persisting so hard in the
cause of Religion, wherein I rejoice, as the allowance of the matter is, as I
find and do disclose secretly an opinion, that her Majesty conceives, that if
she will stand fast, they will utterly yield. Now how true that will fall out
in the event, or why she is so informed, if it be not too certain, you may
ghess. I hear by some other, that du Pine says so; unto me he neither says
so, nor does answer to it, though I do ask him thereof directly. But this he
says, that Monsieur will be content to have the point of Religion left free,
without any Capitulation. This I pray you keep to your self, for it may be
mistaken of some. I send you a a Book in French of the Common Prayer, which is
hardly gotten, as this bearer can show you. I fear the first Articles were
mistaken, in that the Ambassador says they lacked some clauses. And I perusing
my Copies, find both sorts remaining with me; that is, one sort without these
clauses added, and another with them, whereof I do now send you one. I did name
to the Ambassador for the Queens Majesty's Dowry, Forty thousand Crowns; and
since I find the Queens Majesty content with Thirty thousand; for so was Queen
Mary's, by the name of Three thousand pounds Flemish, after forty grooz to the
pound, which makes but Thirty thousand Crowns French. The Ambassador, since he
had his answer, wrote to me to procure a more certain Answer what Monsieur
should have; and though it be not expressed in the first answers, where
properly it was to be answered, yet I think it shall be no less then the Dowry
of Kings Wives here has been, which is Ten thousand Marks, or Twenty thousand
Nobles. Now I must wearily, being assaulted with business of Scotland, which is
now in Arms, and dangerously for our part, and also fore Ireland, which is
only in trouble for want of money, give over, etc.

From Osterly, where the Queens Majesty is retired for this day and to morrow
the seventh of June, 1571.

To the ^ight Ho^^^ra^le, and my very good Lord, the Lord of Burleigh.
IT may please your Honor to advertise her Majesty, that the 19 of this
Month, having access unto the King, I showed unto the King her Majesty's
Articles, using such speech before the delivery of the same, as by mine
instructions from her Majesty I was directed. The King showed me, that he
could not but accept in the best part her Majesty's frank and confident
dealing, and that therefore he found himself most bound unto her, willing me to
assure her Majesty from him, that this sincere and direct dealing should
receive the like aquital at his hands. Touching his answer unto the said
demands, he told me he would confer with his Council, and would within a day or
two send for me to the Court, to understand what would be his resolution. The
eighteenth of this Month he sent for me, and there showed me, that upon
conference with his Council, he was resolved forthwith to dispatch a Gentleman
of his Chamber, named de l' Archant, being Captain of his Brothers guard, to
give her Majesty thanks, for that it pleased her to deal so frankly with him,
and so sincerely, as she had done in the Treaty of this weighty cause in hand;
which honorable proceeding of hers, he willed me to assure her, that he would
never forget; and further to signify unto her, that he made choice of the
Marshal Montm^rency, and Monsieur de Foix, to send over with his full mind
touching the Articles that have been propounded of either side; and that he
therefore desired by the said Gentlemen to understand when it shall be her
Majesty's pleasure that they shall come over to treat in that behalf. Having
then done with the King, the Queen Mother called me unto her, and told me, that
of late certain had gone about to persuade the King her Son, that her Majesty
meant nothing less then to proceed in this marriage, using sundry persuasions
to induce her to believe the same: Notwithstanding she assured me, that such is
the great good opinion that they all have of her Majesty's sincerity upon good
grounds, in respect of her Majesty's honorable dealing, as no such brutes and
sinister practices can prevail with them to make them think otherwise then
honorable of her Majesty, and yet she did assure me that the same did proceed
from such persons, as they might easily have been abused, had not her Majesty's
own sincere dealing assured them of the contrary. I showed her, that if she or
the King should otherwise think of her Majesty, they should do her great
wrong, and give her just cause to think her sincere dealing unsincerely
requited. This was the effect of my present negotiation. And so etc.

At ^ the twentieth of June, 1571. Your Honors to Command, Francis Walsingham.


To my very loving Friend Francis Walsingham Esquire Ambassador for the Queens
Majesty in France.
I Have written by du Pine of late to you, and before that, as I think, you
have received her Majesty's Answer, and such Articles as she does think meet to
be demanded. Her Majesty does stand still very stiff touching the point of
Religion required of that side; and as far as I can perceive, she will hardly
relent to any other qualification then you know of; and that being granted to
her, I suppose there will be no other difficulty. And surely in this, if
Monsieur remit the whole to her Majesty, there is no doubt but by that means
he shall obtain more then we wish, and more then is reasonable, or at the least
convenient to be openly contracted by them: For as by the one that may be had,
which is to be born withal for a time, in hope of better; so by the other, it
will altogether encourage such as are already too high and most meetest to be
kept under, even for both their sureties. For this cause it is only to be
wished: for these respects; the first, to the universal good of the cause of
Religion; the other, for the quietness of our present Estate: And for these
causes sake, I pray God to prosper it accordingly; and I see no cause gr^atly
to doubt, if that point of Religion be yielded on that side unto. The
Ambassador here does very honestly and well in the matter, and surely does good
offices between their Majesty's. For my part, I perceive by you, that I have
cause to thank him for his particular affection toward me, I can but thank him
here. And I pray you, as you may have occasion, use this favor for me, as it
may appear to the Kings Majesty there, how much his Ambassador has made me
know of his good acceptance of my good devotion toward the increase of the
good Amity between our good Sovereign and him, which does give me great
encouragement to go always the more forward, so far forth as with my duty to her
Majesty I may. Thus having no other matter presently to write to you, I bid
you farewell,

in haste the ninth of June, 1571. Your assured Friend, To. Leicester.


To the Right Honorable, and my very good Lord, the Lord of Burleigh.
THe ^ showed me his Mistresses Letters dated the seventh of this month -- him
to advertise A. that their -- of great moment in hand to impart -- he seeks
with England, and therefore -- roundly forward with the matter furthe -- to
advertise A. that there is a practice in -- the stealing away of the Scottish Q.
whereunto -- him to have regard. This as I can gather -- come from ^54 who
discovers it to his Master, he has not yet imparted the same unto A. by the
reason of his absence about ten days past, it was bruted here for most certain
truth, that the Scottish Queen was escaped into Flanders. Of late days, of these
common brutes, there have followed shrewd effects, whereof your Lordship shall
do well to advertise her Majesty to have an eye that way. The King is not yet
returned to Galleon, but remains still at Paris, which diverse of my fellows
find themselves agrieved withal, especially Spain. There rise daily new causes
of unkindness between the two Princes; Spain seems to set the King here very
light, which ingendreth in him a great desire of revenge, and lacks but
treasure to make open demonstration thereof. And so, etc.

At Loveirs the five and twentieth of June, 1571. Your Lordships to Command,
Fr. Walsingham.


By the QUEEN.
To our Right Trusty and Well-beloved Francis Walsingham Esquire our Ambassador
Resident with our good Brother the French King.
ELIZABETH R.

RIght Trusty and Well-beloved, we greet you well: Forasmuch as the French
Ambassador here, jointly with Monsieur de l' Archant, Captain of the Guard of
Monsier D. Anjo^, treated with us to have our consent, that the Marshal
Montmorency and others, nominated with him for the French King, might come
hither (as they say) to treat and conclude the matter moved betwixt us and the
said Monsieur, we think it necessary to impart unto you what has passed
therein at some length; which we have ordered to be put in writing by the Lord
of Burleigh, to the intent that on the one part, you should not be ignorant;
and on the other part, you should be better instructed how to treat upon the
matter, both with the King or any other that shall in this matter have
Commission to treat with you. In all our dealings with them you shall find,
that we have in no wise yielded to grant to Monsieur a liberty for exercise of
his Romish Religion; neither have we any inclination to yield thereto; and yet
for the benefit of our Realm, rather then for any particular inclination to
marriage, we have resolved this marriage to be meet for us, so as the
difficulty of Religion be well accorded. And where in the last end, upon
conference had by the Ambassador and Lord of Archant, with the Earl of
Leicester and the Lord of Burleigh, it may appear to you, that they finding a
resolute determination of their Ambassadors, should demand of us a liberty for
Monsieur in the cause of Religion, it should be denied, then did they thereupon
seem to yield, and by way of demand require to know, how it might be liked, if
the demand of Religion were utterly forborne and put to silence. Our meaning is
not, that you should make any mention hereof to the King, or any other, except
it be first moved to you. And then in that case you may well say, that if it be
not demanded by them in Treaty, then shall there need no contradiction to be
made in Treaty; and if they think the honor of Monsieur preserved in that, it
is not denied him; as likewise the honor of us should be preserved, in that we
have not assented thereto: And that there shall not be no further meaning by
Monsieur herein; but that as it shall not be by way of Treaty demanded before
Marriage; so he will be also content after marriage to forbear the use of it,
then may you seem to agree thereto. For otherwise you may plainly say, either
to Monsieur himself, or to some other in credit about him, whom you may trust,
that the forbearing of it by way of Treaty shall not content us only, but also
the forbearing of the use of it. And so we require you to express the same
plainly, where you shall see cause; for we cannot esteem it a plain dealing to
pass it over with silence in the Treaty, and yet to be in doubt whether the
same shall be used indeed, and thereby move a new controversy between him and
us, of more danger then is meet to be suffered, to follow for lack of plain
dealing with them: herewith included shall you have in writing, the sum of the
Conference had at this time, by which you may be fully informed. And whereas
prssport was required by de l' Archant for the Marshal Montmorency, Monsieur de
Foix, and Monsieur de Chiverny, we thought once to have sent it unto you, to
the end if the King would send them, you might deliver the same; but sithence
we have thought better to stay it, until we might know the Kings answer to you.

Given under our Signet at our Honor of Hampton Court the ninth of July, 1571.
in the thirteenth year of our Reign.

A summary of the several answers made by the Queens Majesty to the French
Ambassador and Mr. ^' Archant to their Message and Request.
THey first said, That the French King, Queen Mother, and Monsieur de Anjou,
thanked her Majesty for her sincere manner of dealing hitherto; and that
having considered such answers as her Majesty had made to the first demands,
and the last Articles delivered by her Ambassador, containing things to be
demanded on her part, which her Majesty had done upon earnest solicitation of
the King on his part: The King their Master, and the Queen his Mother, thought
fit to send this Gentleman to notify their great liking to proceed, and to
finish the matter; and therefore were determined to send hither an Embassage of
honorable and wise persons; that is to say, the Marshal of Montmorency,
Monsieur de Foix, and Monsieur de Chiverny Chancellor to Monsieur, to treat and
conclude the same, if so her Majesty would think meet, and would grant them
her license and conduct to come; who also were in such readiness, and
immediately upon the return of Monsieur de l' Archant, they would forthwith
take their journey hither.


To this her Majesty answered,
That she also thanked the King and the Queen Mother for their manner of
friendly dealing, in prosecuting this matter so earnestly; and for her sincere
dealing with them, she doubted not but her doings should always thereof make
good proof. But as to the matter of Monsieur and her, she could not understand
that it was in such forwardness, as by their speeches she gathered, that the
Ambassadors might come in such sort, as by their speeches it seemed to end and
conclude it; for that she, as yet, understood not the difficulties risen upon
the first answer, that were by the King conceived, namely, in the matter of
Religion; neither yet how her last Articles of her Demands were accepted by the
King, although she confess that she thought there could be no mislike in those
last Articles, considering there was nothing contained in them, but that which
already had been granted by King Philip to Q. Mary her sister; so as then her
Majesty concluded, that except the King would declare his contentation and his
Brothers, agreeable to her Majasties mind already declared in the matter of
Religion (that is, that she could not grant unto Monsieur liberty to exercise
the Roman Religion in any (...) contrary to her Laws) she saw it but labor lost
to send any Ambassadors.

To this the Ambassador and l' Archant, for answer, used long speeches, in
declaring how the King, Q. Mother, and his brother, desired nothing more then
the honor of her Maj. and the weal of her Estate; and so likewise hoped that
her Maj. would have due regard of the honor and estate of Monsieur, that
should not be judged by the world to be without a Religion; which must needs
be, if he should live here without the exercise of his Religion; and yet his
meaning was not, to use the same in any sort to be offensive to her Majesty,
or to breed offense to the quiet estate of the Realm. And so further, they used
many arguments to move her Maj. to yield to their desire. But her Maj.
persisted in her former determination, that she could neither with conscience,
nor yet in respect of policy, grant to Mon. such liberty as was required; and
added, that she was not of mind that Mon. should be constrained to live here
without exercise of religion; for if the form of the religion in England as it
is established by the Laws of the Realm, were considered by them, as it might
easily be, considering that it was published, and to be seen both in Latin and
French, it should be found that there is nothing in the same contrary to the
Roman religion, differing only, that the same is translated out of the Latin
tongue into English, and that some things, for reasonable respects, are
omitted, and not used in the Church of England, so as whosoever shall use the
same service, cannot be accounted without Religion, nor to do any thing
repugnant to the Roman Religion.

In this sort, with speeches at more length tending to these ends, they
departed from her Majesty upon their first access; and afterward they made
means that her Maj. would be pleased to give them some better answer; and in
like manner her Majesty thought her determination so reasonable for her to
hold, as she rather thought that they had some further power to yield to her.
And because her Maj. understood that the French King had concluded this matter
with the rest of his Council, and by nominating Ambassadors, had made the cause
patent, her Maj. hitherto having not imparted it to any others, but with two of
her Council, as she was required so to keep it secretly on the French Kings
behalf. Now she commands that the whole proceedings from the beginning should
be declared to her Council; and so being done, the same were very well allowed
by her Counselors, and her Maj. was earnestly moved by them all not to stay in
this matter of her marriage with Mon. de Anjon, so as he might be induced to
consent with her in Religion, or at the least not to have any exercise of
Religion contrary to hers. After this, the Ambassador, with l' Archant, came
again on Friday to her Maj. and renewing their former reasons, requested of her
Maj. to know her answer, whether the Marshal Montmorency should not come in
embassage, as before was signified to be the Kings desire. Whereunto in brief
the substance of her Majesty's answer was, that as she did greatly esteem the
Kings amity, and was desirous to conserve the same with mutual good will, so
was she very careful not to accord to any thing that in her opinion might in
any wise impair the same, by giving to him any cause or color of unkindness;
and therefore she wished that the K. would well consider this matter and
difficulty of Religion, before he should send his embassage: for considering
with her self, on the one part, that she could not chang her mind herein, nor
as she thought could by any persuasion hereafter, be moved to alter her
determination (although in most matters it is doubtful to determine de futur^)
but such was her mind resolute at this present; and on the other part, if the
K. should hope that his Ambassador might by treaty alter her Majesty's mind
herein, and that then indeed they should not be able so to do: And thereupon
the matter might break off, she doubted how the French King might conceive some
unkindness ^hereby, although she her self were altogether free from giving
cause thereof; and for that purpose her Majesty required them, in her name,
that the King would accept it for answer in as sincere part as she uttered it,
which was with a^ ea^nest respect to keep the amity, ^ well beg^n, inviolated.
And so still being by the Ambassador instanted to give them a more comfortable
answer, for that thereby the King and his brother might doubt of her Majesty's
intention in the principal matter. She answered them, that truly this cause of
Religion was directly for it self, and that being assented unto by the K. and
his brother, she knew no cause in the rest of the things, on her part, to move
any doubt, but by reasonable treaty they might be accorded, which, said she,
did the rather declare to them, because the K. might not think, that if the
point of Religion were by him and his brother assented unto, that her Maj. had
a meaning to make any difficulty in other points, and that the rather, because
she had declared her mind plainly in two several writings: the one, being an
answer to the K. demands; the other, containing demands agreeable to the like,
as were accorded betwixt K. Philip and Q. Mary* and so she concluded, that she
must remit the coming of the Ambassadors to the K. own judgment.

And thus they departed, as it seemed by their speeches, doubful of the
substance of the matter, and therefore they required to have the next day some
conference with the E. of Leicester, and the L. of Burleigh, to declare their
conceits upon the Q. Majesty's answer: and so they had on the next day
following, being Saturday, where they still pressed to have some reasonable
answer, that although the Q. would not presently assent to their request, yet
that if the Ambassador should come, the cause might not be thus peremptory
desperate, but that in some sort it might be obtained, that neither on the one
part Monsieur should be condemned to the world, and taken as a person
excommunicated from the rest of Princes, if he should not have the use of his
Religion, neither on the other part, the Q. Majesty thereby should take any
offense, or that the least part of her Estate should be troubled; for such was
the resolute determination of Monsieur and his profession, that from the first
time he should enter into the Realm, he would in no wise offend the meanest
subject the had; with many such speeches tending to persuade that Mon. would so
use his religion, or so forbear it in times and places, as not to cause offense.

They were answered, that the Q. Majesty could not give any other answer, and
that they might well perceive her sincerity in dealing, to ^tter plainly her
mind, as she did; and many reasons to maintain her resolution, were to them
remembered, as principally her conscience, next the desire she had to preserve
the State in quietness, which by granting him that should be her husband, a
power to break her laws in matter of such weight, must needs induce an
alienation from her of the minds and hearts of her good subjects, being of her
Religion ^ and indurate the minds of others, that though secretly, yet truly
are loath to obey the Laws, if they might have any maintenance to the contrary;
which though Monsieur would not give them, yet they would conceive a boldness
to offend, in the hope to be allowed by him.

In the end, it was moved to know the opinions of the said E. and L. Burleigh,
whether they thought it good that the Ambassadors should come. Whereunto it was
answered, that the consideration thereof did more directly belong to the K. and
that also they two could best give advice therein, for they saw what was likely
to be the issue of their coming: If the stay were not in Religion, there was no
evident let seen in the matter* and to speak truly, she said two Lords said,
they could give them no hope that the ^^bassage could (...) her Majesty's mind;
but that if they would demand of her Majesty a grant or toleration for
Monsieur, her Majesty would deny it. And therefore if they could not like with
the denying of it, they must forbear to demand it. Hereupon there followed some
opinions on both parts, that if Mon^ieur should forbear to require it, and
thereby her Majesty should not grant it, but that the matter should be (...),
and pass in silence, it might be, that Monsieurs friends might (...) their good
opinions of him, as of one that h^d not changed his Religion: and likewise the
Q. Majesty's good subjects should continue their opinions of her Maj. as of a
Prince that would not assent to any thing against her Religion. And with this
kind of speech we ended.


To my very loving Friend Francis Walsingham Esquire the Queens Majesty's
Ambassador with the French King.
AFter our very hearty commendations; considering the Queens Majesty has used
our service jointly, in treating of the matter betwixt her Majesty and
Monsieur de Anjo^, and that you are to be burdened in the prosecution thereof,
we have thought good to write also to you jointly; how her Majesty has
proceeded since the arrival of Monsieur l' Archant you may perceive by her own
Letters, wherein also somewhat is touched for our dealing with them; what the
said l' Archant shall of himself report, or what he shall bring from the
Ambassador, we cannot tell, but percase you shall hear somewhat thereof. Indeed
we were informed, that her Majesty's answer did not content them, whereupon we
being desirous that they should not conceive thereof worse then was meant, did
confer with them on Saturday last as is mentioned in the Q. Majesty's Letter;
and after long maintenance of her Majesty's reasons, and therewith giving them
sufficient hope, so as the matter of Religion might be concluded, they
descended to the devise of forbearing that article, whereunto her Majesty has
directed you what to say, if it be treated upon, and thereto we refer you.

As for the inward intention of her Majesty in this case, we cannot certainly
give you to understand more then it pleases her to utter. To the matter it
self, she yields as to a matter necessary for her Estate and Realm, otherwise
we see no particular forwardness, such as is commonly between persons that are
to ^e married. And now her Majesty shows no let, but this matter of
Religion, as if either that may be well accorded or well buried, we see no
impediment of any moment: we can but counsel you, as we use do our selves, that
is, to do and serve as she directs us; and for the rest to commit the success
to Almighty God, who direct you in this service to her Majesty's contentation,
with regard of Gods honor, and the weal of our Country.

From Hampton Court the eighth of July, 1571. Your very loving Friends, To:
Leicester, Will: Burleigh.


To the Right Honorable, and my very loving Friend Francis Walsingham Es
abque; her Majesty's Ambassador Resident in France.
SIr, I am in doubt whether to write or no: for to write nothing, were to
discomfort you, and to write something with uncertainty; cannot comfort, and
yet in extremities, the lesser is to be admitted. I assure you, that I cannot
assure you from hence, what is to be looked for by the Q. Majesty's manner of
answers as this time: she is not unwarned how dangerous it were, if in her
default the matter takes not success; and she seems to conceive thereof, and
pretends that she seems, that if the matter of Religion may be granted,
there will be no other difficulty: but whether she is persuaded that therein
the breach will be on that side, and so she to escape the reproof, I cannot
tell. God direct the matter, for I have done my uttermost, and so has other
Councillors here. My Lord Keeper has earnestly dealt in it, and so has my
Lord of Sussex; my Lord of Leicester has in my dealings also joined earnestly
with me, and among the rest of the Councillors, I know none directly against
it. From Spain we have no good answer, and therefore this amity were needful to
us, but God has determined to plague us, the hour is at hand; his will be done
with mercy. The Gentleman has a Chain of one hundred and sixty pound, which
was not easily had: The Queens Majesty has sent her Letters to the King,
Queen Mother, and Monsieur l' Archant.

From Hampton Court the ninth of July, 1571. Yours assuredly William Burl^igh.
Cheshol^ the Queen of Scots servant, that passed lately from Diepe, with money
and munition is taken by the Regent at Lethe.




To my very Friend Francis Walsingham Esquire Ambassador for the Queens Majesty in
France.
MR. Walsingham, you shall at length understand her Majesty's resolution
touching her answer to the Gentleman Monsieur l' Archant: for mine own part,
what opinion I have of this great matter, I will deal plainly with you, even as
I find her Majesty's disposition. For her desire to marriage, I perceive it
continues still as it was, which is very cold; nevertheless, she sees it is
so necessary, as I believe she yields rather to think it fit to have a
husband, then willing to have any found indeed for her. And I fear so it will
appear in this matter with Monsieur. For as you shall perceive by the Articles
passed already, there is among them all but one that makes the difficulty,
which is his demand to have his private exercise of his Religion: so it does
appear, if he would omit that demand, and put it in silence, yet will her
Majesty straightly capitulate with him, that he shall in no way demand it
hereafter at her hands: Which scruple, I believe, will utterly break off the
matter; wherefore I am in small hope that any marriage will grow this way. I
pray God that some other amity may be accepted, and yet I was at the first in
full conceit that her Majesty meant earnestly to proceed therein, and that she
had so advisedly thought of the matter, as any reason being offered, it should
not be refused: whereupon, as my part was, I did deal to the furtherance
thereof by all the good means I could, which not taking effect accordingly, I
shall be most sorry; albeit I do not mistrust the goodness of God, but
whatsoever shall fall out, it is his providence for the best, or at the least
for our just scourge for our deserts toward him. I can say no more, but
Almighty God strengthen her Majesty's true zeal to Religion; and failing of
this match, that she will allie her self with such other Princes abroad as will
earnestly join with her therein. And for this matter of her Majesty's marriage,
you shall do well to observe all their doings upon this answer, and gather the
certainty, as you may, what they intend, whether to yield to her Majesty
absolutely or no: if they will yield, then it must needs proceed; if not, then
must we provide in other sort, and the sooner the better; and if they do accord
to her Majesty's request touching the cause of Religion, certainly she says,
there shall be no other difficulty. God direct us to his glory, and so I make
an end of it.

Mr. Cobham is returned out of Spain, where we have no cause to look for any
friendship. The King used him gently, but those of Authority and Credit about
him most proudly and arrogantly: What terms we stand in in other places, is
easily known. Thus are we with our neighbor, in all places without friendship.
God protect and defend us, who is only able, and must do it for any policy is
used. Thus, with my most hearty commendations, I bid you heartily farewell.

In haste, this seventh of July, 1571. Your assured Friend, R^. Leicester.


To the Right Honorable, and my very good Lord, the Lord of Burleigh.
IT may please your Lordship to advertise her Majesty, that within two or
three days after l' Archant^ departure from hence, there came Letters hither
out of England, sent, as I am informed from the Ambassador there; by the which
he did assure those that are enemies to the match, that her Majesty had
nothing less, then intention to marry, whereof he was well assured by those
about her; and therefore willed them to be of good comfort, and never to doubt
of the matter. After l' Archants leave taking, and departing out of England,
the said Ambassador dispatched a Currier, who overtook him at Bullen, and
arived here a day or two before him. After the arrival of the said Currier, it
was given out here, that l' ^^chant brought but a cold answer, whereby it might
appear to them, that his first assurance was not without good ground: With
this, those that favored the marriage, were very much appaled. L' ^rchant being
come, and making so honorable a report of her Majesty's sincerity and
honorable dealing; the same also being confirmed by Monsieur de la M^ts
Letters, as a matter though desperate, began again to revive. Hereupon, they
have, with certain choice Counselors conferred, what resolution is to be
taken; they have continued in Council, chiefly about this matter, about the
space of five or six days, and yet cannot resolve what to do. I am put in hope,
that though the matter proceed not, yet that the Kings intention is, to send
some person of good quality, as well to thank her Majesty for her honorable
proceeding in this cause, as also to desire continuance of good amity. Of thus
much I thought good to advertise her Majesty before hand and when they have
fully resolved what they will do, I mean to dispatch another. And thus leaving
further to trouble your Honor at this present. I most humbly take leave.

From Melun the seven and twentieth of July, 1571. Your Honors to Command, Fr.
Walsingham.


To the Right Honorable, and my very good Lord, the Earl of Leicester.
I Most humbly thank your Lordship for your frank and plain dealing toward me,
touching your opinion of their cause. There is bred in them here now of late,
such a doubt before l' Archants arrival, of her Majesty's disposition to marry,
as they know not how to proceed. This doubt is nourished by advertisements come
from the Scottish Ambassador there with you, who pretends to know all secrets
of State: If this distrust were not, no doubt of it Religion would not be the
let; but to yield in Religion, and afterward to miss of their purpose, they
think would be a great touch in her. This difference, I fear me, will quite
overthrow the matter; and therefore it behooves her Majesty to look about her,
being environed with many practices, the executions whereof have staid upon the
event of the match. I do what I can to procure continuance, or rather increase
of amity. The King himself, as I learn, is very well inclined thereto, the
rather, through a mislike he has of Spain. I had well hoped there would have
grown some broy^ between them, but that matter, as far as I can learn, will
prove but a dream; and now this match not proceeding (as they seem much to
doubt it) the King, as I suppose, will be loath to attempt any thing against
Spain, though his will that way be good.

Her Majesty's liberality bestowed on l' Archant was very well employed; for
none can speak more honorably of her then he does; and as for your Lordship,
you have no cause to repent any courte^ie showed unto him, so good a report
does he make. The like also does one Cornet make, that accompanied l' Archant.
The Ambassador there, Monsieur de la Mot does seek to salve all things that may
breed an opinion in them here, that her Majesty deals otherwise then
sincerely: his good offices that he has done as well in this cause, as
otherwise, deserve honorable considerations at her Majesty's hands.

They have by the space of five or six days sat very hard in Council about
this matter; no Council dare devise, as I can learn, any thing in respect of
the distrust they have. I am put in good hope, that if they mind not to
proceed, yet they purpose to make choice of some one of good calling to send
over, as well to thank her Majesty for her sincere dealing in this matter, as
also to desire continuance of amity.

This is as much as hitherto I can learn, touching their intention concerning
this matter, wherewith I thought good to dispatch this bearer; and after the
through conclusion what they mind to do, then ^orthwith I mind to dispatch
another. And so leaving further to trouble your Honor at this present, I most
humbly take my leave.

From Melun the seven and twentieth of July, 1571. Your Honors to Command,
Francis Walsingham.


To the Right Honorable, and my very good Lord, the Lord of Burleigh.
IT may please your Lordship to advertise her Majesty, that after I had closed
up my first packet, thinking to have sent this Bearer presently with the same,
Mr. Cavalcant came unto me, sent by the Queen Mother, to request me to forbear
to sent to her Majesty for a day or two; in which time they would grow to some
through conclusion touching their answer; and that then it was the Kings
meaning to send for me, and to impart the same unto me; whereupon, I thought
good to stay for the satisfying of her request. According to her promise, I was
sent for by the King; at my access, he told me, that they had deliberated upon
the answer received from her Majesty by l' Archant, for that the same was of
great weight; and that his resolution, after long deliberation, was to send
Monsieur de Foix forthwith unto her Majesty, with his full intention touching
the same, who he hoped should find her not so resolute touching the point of
Religion. And further, he willed me to tell her Majesty, whatsoever should
come of the cause, that in respect of her honorable and sincere dealing in the
same, and the great confidence she sh^^^d to repose in him, she might assure
herself as much of his friendship, as of any other bodies in the earth; and
that she had full power to dispose of him, and of his Realm, to the benefit of
her self, and of her Subjects, whose sword should be always ready to defend her
against any that should attempt any thing against her. He joined his words and
countenance so together, as great demonstration outwardly of inward good will
could not but be seen.

Having ended with the King, I repaired to Queen Mother, who used long speech
in showing the great affection she bare to the cause; and that she was sorry
that so hard a point as Religion should be the let to hinder a match, whereof
there would grow so great benefit to both the (...). I told (...), that if it
pleased her, she might remove that (...) by the per^wading of (...) Son to
content himself with the exercise of our Religion. She told me, she could
hardly do that, for that it was a thing that touched his (...) and reputation.
I willed her again on the other side, to weigh what great reason the ^ueen my
Mistress had, not to yield to that point. She showed me, that she could not
deny but that her Majesty had some cause so to do notwithstanding she hoped
there would be some ^elp found; the party whom the King meant to send, being so
grateful unto her Majesty, and having sundry reasons to allege, to show both
how inconvenient it would b^ for her Son to live without some kind of
toleration; as also, that there would not follow by the same that inconvenience
in her Estate, as she fe^^ed. In the end she concluded, whatsoever in the
matter through this hard poin^ should become, that both she and the King were
infinitely bound unto her Majesty, for her honorable and sincere dealing in
this cause: And that for her own part, she would bear no less affection toward
her, th^n if she were her own natural daughter.

After I had done with her, Monsieur came unto me, and desired me on his
behalf, to ren^er unto her Majesty, most humble th^nks for the great
liberality bestowed on his servant l' Archant, who had made such report of her
Majesty's rare and Princely virtues, as it was an intolerable grief unto him to
see so great a block to lie in the way, as the point of Religion, which so
nearly touched both his Honor, and his Conscience, to keep him from the
attaining to the (...) good hap that ever in the world could happen unto him.
He protested how he wished, so that the same were ^^removed, he had lost an arm
or a leg: But howsoever, says he, the matter fall out, I shall desire her to
make account of me, as of a Champion ready at all times to hazard my life in
her defense during my life, against any that shall attempt any thing against
her.

This in effect is as much as passed from them at this (...) N^gotia^on. And so
leaving further to trouble your Honor at this pre^e^t, I most humbly t^ke my
leave.

At Melun the last of July, 1571. Your Honors to Command, Fr. Walsingham.


To the Right Hono^rable, and my very good Lord, the Earl of Leicester.
AFter long deliberation, the King is (...) to send over forthwith Monsieur de
F^ix with his (...) touching the matter in hand, who as I suppose, has
Commission ^o conclude either marriage, or some (...) between the two C^owns.
They rest here very w^ll persuaded of her Majesty's sincerity: So that the
matter resting now on those good (...), if you find not in her Majesty (...)
to marry (a thing most (...) for our st^ggering S^ate) then were it expedint to
take good hold of (...), which may serve to ease us for a (...) though our
disease (...). Her Majesty is bound to the Gentleman (...) ^ow comes; he
(...) every way in defense of her honor, as much as if he were her (...): he
is like to ^ear a great (...) in this Government; and (...) affected as he is
to her Majesty, he may stand her in great stead, therefore you shall do well
to advise her Majesty both honorably to use, and liberally to reward him: And
as for your particular part, you cannot be more beholden to a stranger; I doubt
not therefore, but that your Honor will use him accordingly. Touching the
point of Religion, though some hope came lately from their Ambassador of some
toleration, they are grown more stiff in that point then before. I am not to
advise in so great a matter: What my opinion is in that behalf, I refer your
Lordship to my former Letters. Great practices are here for the impeachment of
this match; the P. Nuncio, Spain and Portugal, are daily Courtiers to dissuade
this Match: The Clergy here have offered Monsieur a great pension, to stay him
from proceeding. In conclusion, there is nothing left undone, that may be
thought fit to hinder: For a day or two it was given out, that the matter was
quite broken, and that Monsieur had no meaning to procced. In respect of this
brute, at the time of my being at the Court, he used great words of assurance,
that there was no such matter; and that he remained still most constantly
affected; saying, that if it were his mishap not to proceed in this match, he
could not but think himself most unhappy. He protested, that he wished the loss
of an arm or a leg, as that difficulty might be so ordered, as he might not be
touched in Conscience and Honor. I used sundry persuasions to induce him to
content himself with the form of our Prayer, and not to stand so much upon a
toleration, which might be prejudicial both to her Majesty and himself, the
match proceeding: In outward show he seemed to have no disposition to r^lent.

For certain respects, they desire Monsieur de Foix coming to be kept secret
until his arrival. Besides Caval^^nts general good offices he does in this
cause, your Honor is particularly beholding to him for the good office he
uses toward you.

The desire I have to dispatch this bearer with some speed, will not suffer me
any longer to trouble you with these scribled lines. And therefore in haste I
commit your Lordship to Gods protection, who send you to grow to some
conclusion, as may be to Gods glory, and her Majesty's safety.

From Melun the one and thirtieth of July, 1571. Your Lordships to Command, Fr.
Walsingham.


To the Right Honorable, and my very good Lord, the Earl of Leceister.
MY Lord, if neither Marriage nor Amity may take place, the poor Protestants
here do think then their case desperat^; they tell me so with tears, and
therefore I do believe them: And surely, if they say nothing, beholding the
present state here, I could not but see it most apparent. What to hope of the
marriage I know not, because it has so many overthrows both here and there: If
it may be to Gods glory, and her Majesty's safety and contentment, I then wish
it, otherwise at an end.

Touching the conclusion of some League and Amity, I hope every one does wish
it, that desires her Majesty's safety, and the benefit of our Country,
notwithstanding there lies a block in the way, whereat diverse may stumble: The
block is, our ancient League with the House of Burgundy, which by entering into
some strait League with France, may somewhat be touched; and for that the one
cannot yield that profit that the other may, at the first sight it may seem
disp^table, whether the same is to be received otherwise then after the
acc^stomed manner; but if the circumstances of the present time be duly
considered, this block may be removed, and the Amity that will be proffered
profitably received.

The house of Burgundy, till of late days, was ever inferior to England, and
so depended thereon, but now being tied to the house of Austria, he is grown to
the greatness, as of inferior he is become superior; of a good quiet Neighbor,
a most dangerous and ambitious Neighbor; which we shall speedily find, if we
do not speedily provide for it.

How evilly they rest satisfied with us in respect of the Injuries received, it
is well known; how naturally they are inclined to Revenge, the world has had
sufficient trial of. If presently they forbear, it is not for lack of good
will, but in respect of the incommodity of the time, which if the jealousy
between them and France were taken away; we should soon see the experience
thereof to renew traffic with them, before they do think themselves revenged,
or that their pride or greatness be some way abated, were but to present them a
fit opportunity of revenge.

Now if the dangerous greatness of the house of Austria be well considered, the
miscontentment they have in respect of the injuries received, their natural
inclination to revenge, and the unseen traffic of our Merchants as yet: These
considerations well weighed, the case may seem somewhat altered.

And though France cannot yield like profit that Flanders does, yet may it
yield some profit with less hazard, and more safety. In this case two things I
consider chiefly:

First, That the house of Austria is become the Popes Champion, and professed
enemy unto the Gospel, and daily practices the rooting out of the same: And
therefore we that are Professors of the Gospel, ought to oppose ou^ selves
against it.

The other, that the entrance into the league with France, will not only be an
advancement of the Gospel there, but also elsewhere; and therefore, though it
yields ^ot so much temporal profit, yet in respect of the spiritual fruit
that thereby may ensue, I think it worthy the embracing; or rather to say
better, I think we have cause to thank God, that offers us so good occasion,
both to advance his glory, and also for her Majesty's safety. I doubt not but
your Lordship will do your uttermost, that this occasion offered may not grow
to be fruitless. And so most humbly desiring your Lordship to pardon these my
scribled lines, I leave further to trouble your Honor.

At Melun the third of August, 1571. Your Lordships to Command, Fr. Walsingham.


To the Right Honorable, and my very good Lord, the Lord of Burleigh.
THe Spanish Ambassador having audience the sixth of this month, declared to
the King, that his Master could not endure the great spoils made by certain
ships of the P. of Orange, harbored in Rochel, where they made open sale of
the said spoils they take, contrary to all good amity. Besides, he showed the
King, that he heard that C. L. had secret conference with his Majesty, who was
a Rebel, and sought to disquiet his Master by his indirect practices; therefore
he protested, that unless there grew some speedy redress thereof, there could
not but grow was betwixt him and his Master. To this the King answered, that
the Prince of Orange was a P. of the Empire, with whom he had good amity, and
therefore could not deny him the use of his Ports, no more then he does to all
other Princes his Confederates. And as for conference had with the Count Lewi^
of Nassaw, he told him, that he was misinformed. But if it were so, said he,
what just cause should your Master have to complain, or to think himself
injured, he being also a Prince of Germany, and neither Pensionary nor Subject
of his Masters; and therefore he may not look to give Laws to France: And as
for fearing us with wars, you do mistake us; let every one, says he, do
therein what best likes him. At Queen Mothers hands he found the like answer,
who is very much incensed against Spain, being thoroughly persuaded that her
daughter was poisoned.

They here of the Religion, do most humbly desire her Majesty, that in talk
with Monsieur de Foix, it would please her to use some speech of liking of the
Kings calling of the Princes and the Admiral to the Court; and that it would
further like her Majesty to say, that so rare a Subject as the Admiral is, was
not to be suffered to live in such a corner as Rochel: and though the King be
now very well affected toward him; yet they do assure themselves, that her
Majesty's commendations (in respect of the great good will and reverence the
King bears her) will very much advance his credit; for as I am informed
sundry ways, the King is glad when he may take occasion to praise her
Majesty, and to express how much he is bound unto her.

The King requested me, by Secretary Pynart, to recommend unto her Majesty one
Morris Chamails suit, whereof I send your Lordship herein enclosed, a copy of
the Bill he exhibited unto the King. I find them here reasonably inclined to do
justice with such expedition as this Country yields in such causes as I
recommended.

We have received order from the King to repair to Blois, where the Princes and
the Admiral are to meet him about the first of this next month. There are many
practices to overthrow this journey, but the King shows himself to be very
resolute. I am most constantly assured, that the King conceives of no subject
that he has, better then of the Admiral; and great hope there is, that the
King will use him in matters of greatest trust; for of himself he begins to
see the insufficiency of others: some, for that they are more addicted to
others, then to himself; others, for that they are more Spanish then French; or
else given more to private pleasures then public: There is none of any account
within this Realm, whose as well imperfections, as virtues, he knows not. Those
that do love him, do lament that he is so much given to pleasure; they hope the
Admirals access unto the Court will yield some redress in that case. Q. Mother
seeing her son so well affected toward him, labors by all means to cause
him to think well of her: she seems much to further the meeting.

The marriage between the P. of Navarre and the L. Margaret is not yet
thoroughly concluded, Religion being the only let: the Gentlewoman being most
desirous thereof, falls to reading of the Bible, and to the use of the
Prayers used by them of the Religion. The marriage between the P. of Conde and
the Marquis of List, is thoroughly concluded, as I hear. I refer your Lordship,
touching the private state of my diseased body, as also of my purs, unto the
bearers report, whom I shall desire you to credit. And so leaving further to
trouble your Lordship at this present, I most humbly take my leave.

At Paris this twelfth of August, 1571. Your Honors to Command, Francis
Walsingham.


To the Right Honorable, and my very good Lord, the Lord of Burleigh.
IT may please your Lordship to understand, that after C. L. had had sundry
secret Conferences with the King and Queen Mother; as also with certain chosen
Counselors, he sent unto me, desiring me to devise some means how we might
meet secretly; whereupon we agreed upon the means, and so came to conference.

First, he protested unto me, that upon the great good opinion he conceived of
me, by the report of those whom he did well credit, he did frankly discover
unto me, both what passed between him and the King, and also the present state
of their cause. First he showed unto me, that he declared unto him, that he
enterprise wherewith he had been made acquainted by others; as also, he was
presently to recommend unto him, might seem to be such as he could neither in
Honor nor Conscience embrace nor attempt; therefore he thought it fit for him
to declare unto him, all such necessary circumstances as were fit for him to
know in that behalf, as well for the satisfying of his Majesty, as also for
his own honor, who would be loath to be so evil an instrument, as to persuade
a Prince to attempt that thing that might not stand as well with Honor as
Conscience. First he showed unto me, that the cause of taking up of Arms in the
Low Countries, proceeded only, upon that the King of Spain sought to plant
there by Inquisition, the foundation of a most horrible Tyranny, the overthrow
of all freedoms and liberties, a thing which his father Charles the fifth, went
about to have established there; but seeing the same so much impugned by the
Inhabitants of the said Country, and that without their consent it could not
be received, unless he should violently by tyranny seek the establishment of
the same, contrary both to his Oath and their Privileges, he forbore to
proceed in that behalf.

After the resignation of his Government unto his Son, the Cardinal of Lorrain
practiced secretly with the Cardinal of Arras, wars being then between France
and the Low Countries, wishing them to advise the King of Spain to grow to
peace, discovering to him, that the King of France his Father was reduced to
that extremity, as he should be forced to yield to any thing that the said King
would request. Further, he signified unto him, that unless there might grow
peace between the two Princes, the Catholic Religion could not long continue
neither in France nor Flanders, so great increase was daily here of
Protestants, which could by no means be suppressed, but by establishing of an
Inquisition in both Countries: Hereupon, by the practice of the said Cardinals,
there grew a peace, how dishonorable for France, he referred to the Kings own
judgment. After the conclusion of the said Peace, then did the Cardinal of
Arras labor what he might, by sundry practices, to plant the said Inquisition,
seeking first by persuasion to induce men to like thereof: but as well Papists
as Protestants misliked it, alleging, that it was against the Kings oath, to
seek to establish a thing so prejudicial to their privileges, which they were
bound to maintain, whereof they could see nothing but mischief would ensue, and
general destruction of that Country; forasmuch as it would overthrow all
Foreign traffic, by which the Country was chiefly maintained^ when he saw it
would not be planted by way of persuasion, then sought he to do it by violence,
which the Nobility foreseeing, they jointly presented unto the Regent a Bill,
containing a declaration of the great and sundry inconveniences that would
ensue, if they proceeded in the establishing of the same. Further, they made
choice of two Noble men, whom with one consent they sent into Spain, to declare
in all their names, the great mischiefs that should follow if the King should
proceed therein; and that it lay not in their power to retain the people from
taking arms, so much were they incensed against the said Inquisition; and
therefore they desired that the allowing or disallowing of the same might be
committed over to the Assembly of the three Estates. Of these doubtful means no
redress followed, but still the said Cardinal and his fautors proceeded in
seeking to establish it, contrary to all order and equity. How afterward the
people took arms, how the Nobility that were jointly united to oppose
themselves against the said Inquisition, were after by practice and corruption
divided, what Tyranny has been used by the Duke of Alva since his coming
hither, and how insolently he has behaved himself, both toward his Majesty
and the Queen of England (although unhonourable for them both, in respect of
their greatness, at such a petty companions hands) how his brother the Prince
of Orange sought their delivery from so miserable a servitude, though it
pleased God at that time to make him the instrument, who only knows a sit
time of the deliverance of the oppressed by the said Tyrant, seeking by all
means to be rid of the same, did of late exhibit unto the Emperor at his last
Assembly at Spires, a book containing their griefs, requesting him, with all
humility, to be a means for their delivery from this their oppression (a thing
appertaining to his calling, and the place he bears in Christendom) To this
the Emperor, in respect of the hope he has of Spain gave a cold ear. They now
seeing themselves void of all help, their natural Prince being so carried away
by corruption of Council, from the due consideration that belongs to a good
Prince to have of good Subjects, as he neither regards his Oath, nor
maintenance of such Privileges as were confirmed by his Predecessors, nor the
dutiful manner of the proceeding of the Nobility in seeking by way of humble
petition redresses of their griefs, thinking themselves in conscience
discharged from all duty of obedience, they now throw themselves down before
his Majesty with all humility, beseeching him to take them to his protection,
and to procure their deliverance from the present Tyranny. Now your Majesty
sees the state of their cause (says he) you shall do well to weigh with your
self, whether the goodness thereof may encourage you to become Protector of
this people, reduced by Tyranny to great extremity by seeking their
deliverance. If you think in Conscience and Honor you may not, you shall do
well to forbear, for otherwise the success cannot be good: If you think you
may, then weigh in policy how beneficial it will be for you, and how much your
Father would have given to have had the like opportunity offered unto him, that
is now presented unto you Gratis, which if you refuse, the like you must never
look for. With this he showed me, that both the King and Queen Mother seemed to
be very well satisfied; and that the King said, that like Counselors by
violating of his Edict, had well nigh brought him into like terms with his
Subjects, whereof ensued the late trouble; and that therefore now he thanked
God that he had opened his eyes to discern what their meaning was. The King
thus imformed by him, touching such circumstances as might induce him to think
the enterprise both honorable and just: he then proceeded, as he showed me to
declare the easiness and great liklihood of good success of the same. First, he
showed me, that all the inhabitants of the Low Countries generally, as well of
the one religion as of the other, do mislike the Spanish tyranny, and do desire
nothing more then to be rid of the same. Secondarily, that all the Towns M. A.
are ready to receive such Garrisons as shall be sent thither by order from his
Brother. Thirdly, that other Towns upon his Frontiers whenever they shall see
any forces approach, will be ready to receive them. Fourthly, that the present
forces that the King of Spain has there (whom he may trust) are not in number
3000. Fifthly, that with a dozen ships beside those that presently they have,
they will keep the Seas, as no Spanish Forces shall come thither by Sea.
Lastly, that the Princes of Germany are most willing to join in the said
enterprise; so that the King will be content with Flanders and Artois, which
once pertained to the Crown of France; and that Brabant, Gelderland, and the
land Luxenburgh, which once were fees of the Empire, might be united again to
the same, and as for Zealand, and the rest of the Islands (said he) they wish
the Q. of England had them, so that she would be content to join in this
enterprise.

After he had made the King acquainted with these likelyhoods, he seemed very
well to like them, especially if the Q. of England might be brought to be a
party, and to join with him, and the Princes of Germany in the said
enterprise, and therefore wished she might be moved as from himself, to see
how she were inclined in that behalf; for, says he, if she being Lady of the
narrow Seas, do join in the matter with us. I weigh not the King of Spain, nor
all the confederates. He told me then that he showed the King, that (as he
thought) she had been moved in that behalf already, and that as he heard she
was not inclined to be a dealer therein, howbeit he knew not how her Majesty,
upon better consideration, might sithence like thereof. The matter being thus
propounded to the King and Q. Mother, afterward it came to be considered of by
certain chosen Councellers; who all liked of the enterprise, and saw great
reason not to neg^ect it: Only they saw two things to be provided for, before
they could advise them to enter into the same; the one, that he should first
establish some goo^ league with England, the Princes of Germany, and that he
meant presently to send ae Foix into England, whose friendship and confederacy
imported him very much, for that the Princes of Germany depended only upon
knowing how she would be inclined, for that without her they would enter into
no confederacy. For the help of the second, he said, the King meant to tax
generally through his Realm the Clergy with the payment of one years revenue.

This is as much as he imparted unto me, touching his proceeding with the King*
saving that he showed me, That it is secretly agreed on between him and the
King, that Strozza, who should imbarque about the midst of the next month,
shall do some enterprise in Spain, only to amaze the King there, whom the King
here means notwithstanding to disallow openly.

Touching their State, he tells me, they have much to do to bridle the people
of the Low Country from discovering of themselves, by committing some rash
enterprise; and that they find the Papists no less inclined then the
Protestants, to seek with hazard of their lives deliverance from their present
tyranny. They find lack of money the greatest let, having been much disapointed
by them here, the greatest help they have that way is from the D. of F. Before
winter they mean to do nothing, and then only their intent is to enter into
the T. M. then in the spring following (if God shall so direct their
intentions) they me^^ to ass^ile the Country two ways, with two several
Armies. After he had thus made me understand both his proceedings with the
King, (...) also their proceedings, the present state of their case, and how
they mean to proceed, he the^ desired me to propound to her Majesty on his
behalf these particular points following. First, whether her Majesty can be
content to join with him and the Prince of Orange in the enterpize.
Secondarily, whether upon the former assurance offered, her Majesty can be
content to lend unto them the sum they required. Thirdly, that it would please
her Majesty to suffer Hawkins underhand to serve them with certain s^ips, and
also to license him to furnish them with certain victuals to be transported
from thence, whereof they have present need. Lastly, that it may please her
Majesty to suffer certain Walloons, being presently in Rye to the number of
800. to embarque themselves to repair hither. For the first, he desires her
Majesty to consider how it will be no less honor for her to unite Zealand to
the Crown of England, then it was dishonor for her sister to lose Calais: and
further, that by having Zealand, she shall have the key of the Low Countries;
she shall have a place always for her ships to enter in unto to avoid thereby
as well the danger of the enemy, as of the tempest. Besides, she having
Zealand, shall be better able to gather the Princes of Germany, enjoying
Brabant, and the rest of the Countries (which were late federatories to the
Empire) to bridle F. for being overgreat. And lastly, that this enterprise
being done by Protestants, they receiving the honor thereof, shall be better
able by increase of credit with the King; to continue his good devotion toward
her, in respect of the rare favors which they have received at her hands,
which they both do and always will acknowledge. For the second, he desires
her Majesty to consider, how evil affected Spain is toward her: how he
thinks himself injured in respect of the arrest; how naturally they are
inclined to revenge, though outwardly (till convenient time do serve) they can
dissemble their malice: how he intertaineth at his great Costs a subject of
hers lately departed out of Ireland, as also other Rebels of hers that daily
repair into Flanders, who only are stayed from molesting her at home, in
respect of the fame that the Duke of Alva has of his Brothers enterprise; And
lastly, how he is become a Protector of the Q. of Scots her dangerous enemy
(which she knows to be true.) Now if the lending of so small a sum may
somewhat enable them to abate the pride of so great an enemy, and cause her
Majesty to spare the spending of ten times so much besides the hazard of her
estate and people; he desires her Majesty to weigh it in reason, whether the
disbursing may not stand with good policy. Touching the third, he says, that
by having those ships of Hawkins he shall be able to keep more Spaniards (who
being settled there may become dangerous neighbors) from landing in Flanders,
besides the victuals presently required, shall serve to furnish Strozza, whose
enterprise going forward, cannot but kindle war betwixt France and Spain,
though the King disavow him, he being a person of that quality here in respect
of his office, whereby at the least her Majesty may be looker on with her more
safety: For the last, he hops that her Majesty will make no difficulty, for
that it is to disburden the Realm of so many strangers.

After he had thus imparted unto me, those things which he would have me to
propound unto her Majesty; as also, such reasons as might induce her to like
thereof; I showed him, that I would do the duty of an Ambassador, I would
advertise them, and refer it to her Majesty to resolve therein as might
seem unto her best to resolve with her honor and safety; and that for my part
I could neither put him in comfort or discomfort. He requested me to beseech
her Majesty in his behalf, that it would please her to send her resolution to
those points with some convenient speed, for that their case required to know
her intention in that behalf out of hand; and therefore she would hold him
excused for his importunity, being pressed thereto by necessity. Furthermore he
desired me to advertise her Majesty, whereas he understood that diverse (under
color of serving his Brother and him by sea) had committed sundry ou^rages
upon her subjects and Merchants, whom he and his Brother does utterly dissavow,
wishing her Majesty to extend toward them such punishment as they deserve.
And for the avoiding of such inconveniences, they mind hereafter to send some
secret token to the L. Admiral, whereby they indeed that do serve them may be
discerned from them that falsely do usurp their names; leaving the same for a
color, having no other intention then to spoil as well friends as foes. Thus
leaving further to trouble your honor at this present, I most humbly take my
leave.

From Paris the 12 of August. 1571. Your Honors to Command, Fr. Walsingham.


To the Right Honorable and my very good Lord, the Lord of Leicester.
I Refer your Lordship to my Letters written to my Lord of Burleigh, touching
my conference with A. I beseech your Lordship so far forth as you may further
his requests, as those that tend to the advancement of Gods glory, and the Q.
Majesty's safety, I think it dangerous to advise a Prince to wars, for that the
issue of wars is doubtful: notwithstanding things may so fall out sometimes,
as nothing can be more dangerous then not to enter into wars; wars grounded on
ambition for increase of Dominion, are always unjust; but wars grounded on
necessity, for safety sake are necessary. I leave to your Lordship to judge by
consideration of the state of things, as well at home as abroad; whether
necessity does not urge us thereto at this present one supplying my place,
only beholding the state of things abroad, and not understanding the inward
secrets of home matters, may rather guess then presently know, what is meet in
so weighty a cause; notwithstanding I am bold privately to discover unto your
Lordship my folly, in setting down mine opinion of a matter, both without the
compass of my calling, as also my understanding. First, I conclude, that we
rest in evil terms with Spain, whereof there must grow redress either by
composition, or by sword. Redress by composition may seem scarce sure, as
that which will serve their turn but for awhile, they can disguise their malice
for a time. Redress by sword comparing our forces with theirs, may appear at
the first sight to be void of all possibility; but, if you consider the
oppertunity that this present time offers, that doubt to man's judgment may
soon be avoided, though victory (as well as other things else are) is in the
hands of God, who many times disposes the same contrary to man's judgment; but
foreseeing and judging of likelihoods, as men may foresee and judge, there is
great appearance, that the pride of Spain may be so presently daunted, as we
need not fear their malice. The remedy perhaps may seem more dangerous then
the disease, for, in seeking to abate the pride of Spain, we may advance
another, whose greatness will contain no less danger. For the answering
whereof, your Lordship shall understand that thus stands the case: The
Princes of Germany, who can be content to be parties in the enterprise, do
foresee, that if the whole Low Country might be united to the, Crown of
France, it would grow too great; they mean to capitulate with him to content
himself with Flanders and Ar^ois, which once pertained to the Crown. And as for
Brabant and other parts, which once pertained to the Empire, they mean to
reduce them to their old state, committing the government thereof to some P. of
Germany, which in reason cannot be but to the Prince of Orange. Holland and
Zealand they wish were united to the Crown of England, which they desire for
two respects; the one to make the enterprise more easy, by having her
assistance, the other, the better to bridle France; if he seek to exceed his
portion. If the enterprise might proceed in this order, both the remedy will
prove less dangerous, and also the success more likely to be proseperous.
These 3 united (all circumstances considered) to man's judgment, the matter
cannot but take; for whiles this is a doing in the Low-Countrys, Spain must not
look to be quiet in Italy? but if her Majesty will not be a party, then
neither can there grow unto her that honor, profit and surety that otherwise
were to be wished. If these then may take place, upon the likelihoods, two
mischiefs may thereby be avoided. First, the malice of him that is mighty, and
has good will to revenge. Secondly, the greatness of another, who perhaps
otherwise may grow a dangerous neighbor. A third mischief may be avoided, of
no less, or rather greater consequence; which is, that those who otherwise
will not perhaps live quietly at home, may be kept occupied by being employed
abroad. For the avoidance of these three great mischiefs, it seems, that to
enter into wars has necessity for ground. These (as I protested unto your
Lordship) to one that sees but the outward bark of things, may seem to carry
great consequence of reason, but to your Lordship, who sees inwardly into the
matter, it may appear to contain more danger then safety, howsoever it be, our
diseased state, through inward division, well considered, though her Majesty
be no dealer in the matter, yet it behooves her to encourage others, and that
she may (as heretofore she has done) take profit of others troubles; for
surely we must make this account, that their peace will be the beginning of our
wars. In my opinion we are rather to weigh inward, then outward mischiefs; the
outward greatness of France, cannot endanger us so much as the inward
dissension at home, which lacks but some foreign aid to bring the matter to
some dangerous trial; the case then stands so, as for the staying of our
inward mischiefs, we are to seek for outward remedies, which is, to grow by
other men's harms. I do not doubt, but that your Lordship will do what you may
so to deal with her Majesty, as that some of the C. requests may take place,
whereby the fire that is now a kindling may grow a flame, and we take comfort
of the heat thereof. I preceive nothing will so much advance the matter, as for
her Majesty to give some countenance to the same. The proud Spaniard (whom God
has long used for the rod of his wrath) I see great hope that he will now cast
him into the fire, that he may know what it is to serve against God. I would
your Lordship knew the Gentleman; for courage abroad, and counsel at home they
give him here the reputation to be another Ol: he is in speech eloquent and
pithy; but which is chiefest, he is in Religion, as Religious in life as he is
sincere in profession. I hope God has raised him up in these days, to serve
for an instrument for the advancement of his glory. I beseech your Lordship to
credit this bearer touching my particular state: To whom, leaving to trouble
your Honor at this present, I refer you. I beseech your Lordship to procure
out of hand, that I may know what her Majesty means to do in this matter.

At Paris the twelfth of August, 1571. Your Honors to command, Fr. Walsingham.


To the Right honorable, and my very loving Friend Francis Walsingham Esquire her
Majestes Ambassador Resident in France.
SIr, this bearer (my Lord of Rutlands servant) can more commodiously report
unto you the arrival of Monsieur de Foix, then I can now write, and so I refer
the report thereof to him. Yesterday your long Letters, sent by my Cousin
Dannet, came to my hand, even within a quarter of an hour before de Foix came
to her Majesty's presence. I fear the offers of so great Amity will diminish
or divert the former intention of the marriage, without which the French Amity
shall serve to small purpose, but to make us ministers of their appetites, and
those fulfilled, to cast us off. Surely I could have wished that the extremity
of the marriage had been seen, before these baits of Amity had been thrown
before us. I see those most liked by such, as I could not find to like of the
marriage: But all this is contrary to your self.

At Hatfield the sixteenth of August, 1571. Your assured Friend, William
Burleigh.


To my very Friend Francis Walsingham Esquire Ambassador for the Queen Majesty in
France.
I Have received your Letters written with Cipher by Dannet. The matter is of
great importance. I am most glad to see them at this point. I think her
Majesty shall be advised not to lose all these good advantages offered her,
specially when they tend both to the setting up of Gods true Religion, and
establishing of her own surety, with augmentation of her Crown. For my part, I
never found cause since her Reign, that moves me more to further it; and be
you assured, I will do all that is possible that somewhat may come thereof. You
shall understand as soon as is possible her resolution; but I think it will be
five or six days near hand first, by reason of the other matters which de Foix,
who had his access yesterday the fifteenth of this month, and was as
graciously used at her Majesty's hands, as ever I saw any Ambassador; he had
loving talk, and has already entered into this matter, and this day my Lord
Keeper, my Lord Chamberlain, my Lord of Burleigh and my self, are appointed to
confer with him. He stands stiff to have Religion for Monsieur, her Majesty
stands as stiff in denial, and so I think means to do. For this time I can
say no more.

Your assured Friend, To: Leicester.


To our Right Trusty and Well-beloved Francis Walsingham Esquire our Ambassador
Resident in France.
ELIZABETH R.

TRusty and Well-beloved, we greet you well; and though we think you had some
great desire to hear how Monsieur de Foix has here proceeded with us in his
charge; and the rather, because we understand, that within a few days after the
first Speech with us, and Conference with our Council, he dispatched Letters or
Message thither; yet surely, until this present, we could not ascertain you of
any thing certainly concluded with him, by reason that he being not satisfied
with our answers, does still persist in seeking to induce us to reform our
answer more toward his satisfaction, But now you shall understand, that he and
the Ambassador Resident having had sundry Conferences with us, and apart with
our Council, at all times the weight of the matter has chiefly depended upon
the cause of Religion: For they requiring a toleration, and we denying, they
offering to have it tempered and moderated, as our Council shall devise, to
avoid offense of our Conscience, and of the Dukes, the same was found always
either impossible, or so hard, as by no device such a mean in plain terms, by
words or writing, could be found to satisfy them or our selves: So as in the
end they desired, as we would be content to agree secretly, that he should not
be impeached in the secret use of his Religion, if we would not consent to a
toleration; and so you shall see by writing, which you shall receive herewith,
what has been said by our Council thereto; and with the same writing also two
answers to two other matters by them only propounded, because to the same
there was no answer satisfactory given in our former writings to their first
demands. In this writing now delivered to them, we perceived them most troubled
with a phrase added of great necessity for our purpose, and specially for
satisfying of our conscience, that the Duke shall not be molested for using of
any Rites not repugnant unto the word of God, which words being in a writing
delivered unto them first the one and twentieth of this month, was afterward
now in the last of August by their importunity, as now you see altered from the
words Verbo Dei to Ecclesiae Dei, which in our judgment is all one; and yet
finding themselves therewith better content then with the other, we yielded to
have it so altered. Besides this writing, because we know not how our answer in
the Article of Religion shall be there imparted, we have also by express speech
declared to Monsieur de Foix, that as we shall be well content that our answer
may satisfy Monsieur de Anjou for his honor, for that we have in some sort
yielded to him to use other Ceremonies then ours; so that as they be not
repugnant to the Church of God, and with such other cautions as in our writing
are further contained; so our meaning is to be declared plainly to Monsieur de
Anjou, that we cannot permit him at his coming to have the use of any private
Mass, which speech we have plainly uttered unto him because there should no
misconceiving be gathered of our answer, whereby the Duke might hope of a
sufferance; for that we cannot find it, without peril of our Estate, and
quietness to yield thereunto. And thus having imparted unto you how we have
answered him, we will that you also after the consideration of the same, and of
the answer given unto him in writing, which we herewith send, shall resort to
the King, and affirm the same to be our mind. And if you shall find them
doubtful how to interpret our answer, that is, whether we having our mind
satisfied in the cause of Religion, can be content to proceed in the marriage.
You shall assure the King, that the rest of the things being by him assented
unto, and ordered to be performed; we mean, sincerely to proceed in further
treaty of the marriage, according to our former answer. And if they shall so
move it unto you, we can be content that special Commissioners may be sent from
thence hither, to treat and conclude with us and our Council, as reason shall
require. And for that we have causes to think, that sundry there, and some
being of Credit, will seek to provoke the King to a misliking of our answer,
and to conceive that we have not had a sincere intention in this matter from
the beginning, you shall do your best, and so we warrant you, to assure the
King of the contrary, whatsoever malice shall devise against us: And where we
had occasion by some of your Letters to some here, to think that now at
Monsieur de Foix coming hither, though the matter of the Marriage should not
take effect, yet that some motion of a further league of Amity might be made
betwixt us and the King. You shall understand, that not only no motion has
been made thereof unto us, but upon indirect speeches used by some of our
trusty Ministers to de Foix in that purpose: he has earnestly declared, that
without prosecution of the marriage, he had no Commission to deal in any other
matter at all; but said, that he usted that the King his Master would continue
Amity with us, except contrary cause should be offered by us. Now therefore
considering you may see that we have not made any great difficulty in the
matter of Religion, which we cannot see how it may be yielded unto Monsieur and
his Domestiques, though the number shall be never so small without peril, by
discontentation of our best Subjects, and comfort to the worse, it shall be
your part to insist earnestly to let it be well understood how sincerely we
have dealt therein, and how free we ought to be from the calumniation of
certain persons that will never be content to say well of us, how well soever
we do. The occasion of the long abode here of Monsieur de Foix shall appear to
you, we doubt not, by the Letters of my Lord of Burleigh. As for satisfaction
of your desire to have some to assist you in service now this month, whilst
you shall attend the recovery of your health; upon the next answer to be made
us of these our Letters, you shall also have order for some to be assistant to
supply your place.

Given under our Signet the Second of September, 1571. in the thirteenth year
of our Reign.

24 August. and postea ultima Augusti, 1571.
Summarium little que serenissima Regina suasu and consili^ su^rum
Consiliariorum proposuit in Colloqui^ de tribus Articulis cum illustriss: Or
atoribus Christianissimi Regis.
Ad primum de Coronat. Ducis.
SErenissima Regina non potest sine assensu trium ordinum seu statuum regnisui
concedere, ut serenissimus Dux post nuptias celebratas coronetur ut Rex, verem
ut habiatur and coronetur ut Rex respectu matrimonii cum Regina sine aliquo
prejudicio juris and tituli suae Majestatis aut hered. aut success. ejus, si id
fieri potest communi consilio and consensu eorum statuum Majestas sua libenter
assensura est, and dabit operam ut serenissimi ducis honor and amplitudo eo
modo augeatur, and eo libentius quia per accessionem aliquam ad ejus
amplitudinem Majestatis suae splendour and gloria etiam incrementum capiet.

Ad secundum de conju^ctione in administratione regnorum. Secundo existimat sua
Majestas ut concedatur sereniss^mo duci ut ipse sereniss. Dux, una cum
serenissima Regina consorte sua, constante Matrimonio, stilo honor and nomine
Regio censeatur and gaudeat, eandemque serenissima^ Reginam consortem suam in
foelici regnorum and dominiorum administratione and gubernatione adjuvet
tanquam, maritus salvis tamen juribus legibus and consuetudinibus regni, ut in
tert^o Articulo prioris scripti intitulati explanatio Articulorum etc.
continetur.

Ad tertium de toleranda religione Ducis. Tertio, ubi ab oratore postulatum
est, quemadmodum a Rege Christianissimo mandatis se habuisse asseruit, ut
scripto authentico and valido facultas concederet dicto serenissimo Duci and
domesticis ejus excercendum suae religionis in Anglia quod cum propter multas
and graves causas a Majestate Reginae fieri non posse responsum esset, Agitatum
postea inter dictos oratores and consiliarios dicte Reginae, ut saltem privato
aliquo singrapho Reginae serenissimae serenissimus Dux certior redderetur
futurum esse ut nullo modo impedritur in hoc regno religionem suam excercere.
Quod cum ad Maiestatem Reginae relatum esset, ita consiliariis suis responsum
dari v^sum est.

Imprimis, quod existimatur Serenissimum ducem non futurum alienum a Religione
ecclesiae Anglicanae, si de ea been candide and rec^e informaretur, maxim
expedire etiam videbatur si de hac causa exercendae religionis nihil ageretur
in aliquo tractatu aut Colloquio, sed quae in ea apparebant difficultates and
controversy mutuo utriusque Principis colloquio componerentur. Sed cum id
Oratoribus nullo modo placere videatur non absurdum esse putabatur si hoc modo
utriusque menti and conscienti consulatur.

Si serenissimus dux temporibus usitatis divinorum officioru^ una cum
serenissim^^ Regina in oratoriis suis adesse volet, neque Religionis Anglicanae
institutiones and rations audire and ediscere temporibus congruis recusabit;
Eadem serems^ima Regina assentietur, ut neque ipsemet dux neque sui domestici
contra conscientiam suam aut illorum cogantur ritibus aut ceremoniis Ecclesiae
Anglicanae eo modo uti, quo subditi regni ex legibus obliga^tur, donec
instituti and alit^r persuasi fuerint. Porro idem serenissimus Dux and is
numerus domesticorum suorum, de quo postea convenietur, non molestabuntur per
leges hujus regni propter usurpationem aliorum divinorum rituum and
ceremoniarum Ecclesiarum Ecclesiae Dei non aperte repugnantium, modo it fiat in
loco certo, eoque privato and secreto, ut conscientiis suis satisfaciant, and
ut nulla ex ea varietate occasio manifesta detur subditis regni ad violendas
leges Ecclesiasticas.

Et cum multa alia petenda sunt ^ serenissimo Duce ut and per Christianissimum
Regem fratrem suum, and per seipsum pactis caveantur ut juramentis etiam
confirmentur quemadmodum and oratoribus non est negatum, nec tamen clausula
subsequens eodem modo ab ipso serenissimo Duce exigenda and obtinenda est, quo
presens hoc responsum in superioribus tribus Clausulis contentum a sua
Majestate Regia postulabitur.

Quae dicenda^ sunt ex part Ducis. Serenissimus Dux non diutius utetur ritibus
and ceremoniis haud consentientibus cum Legibus Angliae quam quoad institutus
and persuasus fuerit ut Ecclesiae Anglicanae ritus sufficientes esse existimet
ad Cultum divinum neque iis quidem consentientibus cum legibus Angliae ita
utetur ut aut bonis subditis regni ad publicam offensionem, aut malis ad
violandas leges prebeatur -- sed semper quum publicae offensiones huic aut
acciderint aut indubitate ad futurae videbuntur unde tumultus in regno metui
possint, se adomnes suae Majestatis benevolas admonitiones cum pro honor and
securitate suae Majestatis quam pro communi tranquilitate regni conservanda and
modo and forma se geret ut Reginae and Consilio suo par esse atque conveniens
videbitur. Idemque per omnia permittit se prestiturum pro omnibus domesticis
qui cum illo permittenter ad esse in aliquo suo cultu Religioso.

Postremo, quia Regiae Majestati visum est Oratores falsos esse, se non
habuisse potestatem iis premissis ut proponuntur plene assentiendi, aequum esse
etiam visum est suae Majestati ut illa responsa non tradantur tanquam ita
mature consult and determinata a sua Majestate, quin ut liceat suae Majestati
detrahere, aut ad ea aliquid adjicere impost erum, et eo magis quia non fine
multa persuasione and cohortatione consiliorum suorum ad astentiendum multis
praedictorum adducta est. Et id circo etiam Majestas Sua petit a
Christianissimo fratre suo Rege Christianissimo, ut quanquam haec, quae ^ sua
Majestate responsa sunt non sunt, per omnia Regi placitura, nulla tamen
Diminutio mutuae amicitiae prioris intersuas Majestates subsequatur, quia nihil
poti^s habet in votis sua Majestas quam amicitiam mutuam cum Christianissimo
fratre suo conservare atque augere.


To the Right honorable, and my very Friend Francis Walsingham Esquire her
Majestes Ambassador Resident in France.
SIr, as we here upon dispatches sent thither to you, do not hear of long time
of any answer from you, are unquiet in our minds for the desire we have to
understand the process of the causes in hand; so I am assured you have not been
out of trouble and care, in that you have not of long time heard from hence, in
what sort Monsieur de Foix has treated, or rather been handled; but this shall
content you to think, and therefore I do assure you, that the negotiation has
had almost as many changes, though not in contrarieties, yet in varieties, as
it has had days of conferences, and sometimes more: If I may truly report, that
in some one days act, one part of the day has not been so seasonable as the
other; and therefore judge you, if you had been advertised from one time to
another, how dissonant the same might have been in your ears, how deformed in
your eye; and percase as herewith you may be justly grieved, so would you ask
of me the just cause thereof if you were with me, which I would not refuse to
declare conjecturally, as I might, but to write hereof, I do forbear, thinking
that by other your friends Letters you will guess. Monsieur de Foix has had
seven or eight special conferences with her Majesty, and with us of her
Council. And at the first he found such favorable answers, as he accounted the
matter his own to call you truly the 3368 tu wholly added with a certain
circumscribld 4 s ^ 477 ^ ^ ^ t 418 and if any of them have principally or
indirectly impugned the same, as I cannot affirm truly therein, he nor they
shall have hereafter a quiet conscience. Indeed we have cause to think, that
some for proof practicing particularity, have troubled quiet waters, God give
them grace to repent their errors.

The answers have been since they were first given in words, altered in
writing; and directed so to be to the worse; and thereby the Ambassador have
been greatly perplexed to find the latter harder then the first; and yet now as
you shall see the words for the point of Religion, thus her Majesty is
resolved, and so she does pronounce to her Council, whom she sees earnestly
bent by all means to further this marriage for her own surety, and for the
avoiding of the inevitable Ruin of this Monarchy, that surely so as Monsieur
will forbear the mass, she will assent to the marriage; and this she confirms
with all good speeches to give credit; but yet all of us are not so persuaded,
not for doubt of her assertions, which surely are agreeable to her mind when
she utters them, but for doubt that others misliking the same, may indirectly
draw her from her determination. If you require of me what you may say, her
Majesty's Letters will warrant you for words, but what you may hope will
succeed, I can no more ascertain you, then I can my self, who am now to expect
at Gods hands blessing or vengeance, for it is likely his Majesty will no
longer dissemble his determinations: In the mean time, the beholding of this
cloud, the time to creep nearer by prayer for fear, and reverence of his mercy,
and to beseech him to direct the heart of her Majesty to choose that which may
be most to his glory. Monsieur de Foix has had good entertainment in all
external offices, well used by her Majesty, defrayed for his diet at the time
he has been near the Court; and in coming and returning, my Lord of Buck^urst
has very courteously and honorably accompanied him, during his being here;
and to increase his honor, I caused my Lord of Oxford to attend on him in
sundry places; and by the way from London hither to Wal^en, he dined at my
house, as I doubt not but he and the Resident Ambassador have seen my hearty
devotion to the marriage; and indeed, so is my judgment therein confirmed; as
I am not ashamed to utter my self; howsoever, it may be perilous to me when it
shall not take place; you see also, how openly I deal with you. I have declared
to her Majesty, the necessary occasion that you have this present month to
attend Physic, whereby the place you hold were meet to be supplied by some
such as her Majesty shall think convenient, but I cannot have her direction
fully to be declared: But she says, that upon the next answer to come from
you, she will give you either authority to appoint Beal in your place as your
Substitute, or she will send Master Killigrew thither. Monsieur de Foix has
very earnestly moved her Majesty to send some one person of credit to the
French King, to affirm and justify the reasons of her answer; or rather, if
the Marriage shall not take place, to enter into the Treaty of some straiter
alliance and confederacy, which for my part I thought very reasonable, and did
assent and move the same; but finding now that he has secretly named me for
that place, I do coldlie^ deal therein, knowing both my insufficiency, and
doubting of the success thereof; but whether any shall come, or who shall, I
surely cannot gess.

The Queens Majesty would have you to enquire what becomes of Liggons my Lord
of Norfolks servant, that has of long time been about Paris and the Court.
Here is some matter presently discovered, that my Lord of Norfolk should still
mind this matter of the Scottish Queen; for there is intercepted a good portion
of money in gold, that was (and by Letters in Cipher) directed to my Lord of
Harrife, for help of the Scottish Queens party in Scotland, and the same was
sent by one Higford the Dukes Secretary, who was by order from hence taken and
committed at London, and this day is examined by Sir Thomas Smith, who
yesterday went thither for that purpose. What will follow, I cannot now write,
but sorry I shall be that my Lord of Norfolk shall be found undutiful; and yet
if he be, I am glad it shall be known, and so I end with my prayer.

From Audeley-Inne by Walden the second day of September, 1571. Your assured
Friend, William Burleigh.
I send you something from Scotland, whereby you may see how small the Queen of
Scots party is in Scotland.




To the Right Honorable, and my very good Lord, the Lord of Burleigh.
IT may please your Lordship to advertise her Majesty, that according to her
order prescribed me by her Letters, bearing date the second of September, I
made report unto the King here of that which passed in sundry Conferences
between her Majesty and his Ministers Monsieur de Foix, and his Ambassador
Resident, as also apart with her Majesty's Council. His answer was, that he had
great cause to give her Majesty thanks for her honorable enter^ainment given
unto de Foix. until whose coming he could say nothing in answer of that which
had passed by conference. He protested, that he desired nothing more then
straight Amity with her Majesty; and therefore thinking marriage the best
means for the accomplishing thereof, it should be no small grief unto him if
the same should not take place, whereby that perfect Amity might ensue that
might be beneficial to both the Crowns: This was the effect of this present
answer. Her Majesty is very much beholding to the D 3. who stands most
earnestly in defense of her honor, against any that seek any way to touch the
same; she seems to think her self much bound to her Majesty, for that it
pleased her Majesty to vouchsafe once to write, I suppose a few lines of
thanks bestowed on her again from her Majesty, would win her to be a good
instrument to give advertisements of such things as are sit for her Majesty to
know. Queen Mother is much governed by her, and therefore she may be the better
able to do the greater good. And if may further please her Majesty to bestow
some ring on her, I think the profit that would grow thereof in time, will make
her Majesty think it well bestowed. Of late there is a great sum of money, to
the sum of 15000 franks, made here in Poictu by the Queen of Scots Officers, an
the same barrel'd up and sent to Paris, and from thence as I hear it shall be
conveyed into Scotland to those of her faction there; yet as I am informed,
that ill success that the money that they sent before had, makes them to stand
in doubt to convey it by sea, and therefore if they may conveniently, they
would rather make it over to London by exchange; whereunto (by your Lordships
order) if there may an eye be had, it will easily be discovered, the sum being
so great. The Admiral arrived here the twelfth of this Month. Touching the
manner of his receiving, I refer you to the report of this Gentleman Mr.
Lyster, her Majesty's servant, whom I have thoroughly instructed what I have
truly learned in that behalf. The day after his arrival, he sent a Gentleman
unto me with this Message, that (in respect of the place I hold) he was bound
for the great favor showed by her Majesty, generally unto them of the
Religion, in the time of their necessity, as also particularly unto his
Brother, to have come and visited me; but he desired me to consider what
suspicion would grow thereof, which might rather do harm then good;
notwithstanding he assured me, that her Majesty should always find him ready
to serve her, with the hazard both of life and goods, whenever any occasion
should be presented, to show the affection and good will he bears her
Majesty, in respect of the bond he owes her. Generally all those of the
religion, who are the flower of France, do make like protestation, assuring her
Majesty, that when occasion or trial shall be offered, she shall find them no
less ready to serve her, then if they were her own natural Subjects.

The Marriage between the Prince of Navarre is not so forward as Queen Mother
was in preparation at Paris, who had provided both Jewels and Wedding-garments.
The only impediment as I hear is Religion.

There departs shortly, toward the concluding of this matte toward the Q.
of Navarre, who is now gone to Arragon, to certain Baynes there, for her health
Byron and Bea^voys.

Co. Lo. left a man here of purpose to attend her Majesty's answer touching
those things that I propounded on his behalf, in my letter sent by Mr. Dannet.
The resolution of that enterprise stays only upon the expectation what her
Majesty will do; and it is feared, that the matter will be so long protracted,
as the opportunity of the enterprise will be let slip; which if it so fall out,
the unkindness between this Crown and Spain will be reconciled, which I fear
will not tend most to her Majesty's safety, and so do as many fear, as love her
Majesty here. The house of Guise secretly does travel by all means to break the
Amity with England, for that they think nothing will more prejudice the Queen
of Scots their Kinswoman then the same. Touching my own private estate, my
disease grows so dangerously upon me, as I most humbly desire her Majesty to
take some speedy order for some to supply my place. I hope my life shall stand
her Majesty in more stead then my death, and upon these extreme points
stands the defering of the cure; I hope therefore her Majesty will have
consideration of it accordingly. Thus leaving further to trouble your Lordship
at this present, I most humbly take my leave.

At Blois the sixteenth of September, 1571. Your Honors to Command, Fr.
Walsingham.


To the Right Honorable, and my very good Lord, the Lord of Burleigh.
IT may please your Lordship to advertise her Majesty, that within three days
after Monsieur de Foix arrival, the King sent for me; and after my access unto
him, he willed me first, in his name, to thank her Majesty for the honorable
entertainment given unto de Foix, which he did repute to be done unto himself,
for that it was done for his sake. Secondarily, he willed me to show unto her,
that he was glad to understand by him, and receive at so good restimony of the
great affection that her Majesty bears unto him; and of the desire she had,
not only to continue in good Amity with him, but also to increase the same.
Lastly, he willed me to show unto her, that her answer touching the point of
Religion is very hard; and that therefore he trusts, that the Gentleman whom
he is put in hope she will send over, shall have authority to qualify the
same; as also, to treat of some other matters to be propounded, that may tend
to the increase of further Amity, which he above all things desires, who shall
be unto him very welcome; and that he will strive with her in honoring of such
Ministers as shall come from her Majesty, whereby the good will he has to
honor her may appear. After he had ended in this behalf, he desired me to
recommend again unto her Majesty Moris Chamails the Britain, on whose behalf
he had lately written, and sent his Letters unto his Ambassador, to be
delivered unto her Majesty; and that he hoped for his sake, that the said party
should receive redress, and come to an end of his long suit, whereby he might
have more cause to yield like justice to her Majesty's Subjects, at such time
as they shall have recourse unto him for the same. In this behalf I understand,
that the Council here have promised him, that if by the Ambassadors means his
cause shall receive no end, that then he shall have a Letter of Mart given him.
I find him very importunate, and one that makes very lewd reports, how that he
has been put in fear of his life, and that therefore he dare not return to
follow his suit. I beseech your Lordship, that by your means, I may receive
some order from her Majesty how to answer him. I was sent unto by the Lord
Admiral to desire your Lordship to be a mean unto her Majesty, that whereas
there was delivered unto his late brother, the Cardinal, a Bill signed with
her Majesty's hand for the receipt of certain Jewels engaged, that it would
please her Majesty for that the said Bill is only signed, and not sealed;
which being sent unto me, they will deliver the other unsealed upon the receipt
of the same. This he willed me to show you that he does it rather to content
the Queen of Navarre, then that he thinks the other bill insufficient, who
thinks his said Brother to have used some negligence in this behalf. Thus
leaving further to trouble your Lordship, at this present, I most humbly take
my leave.

At Blois the 23 of September. 1571. Your Honor to command. Fr. Walsingham.


To Fr Walsingham Esquire the Q. Majesty's Ambassador Resident in France.
SIr, you see that our Northern Planets have their influences, to make changes
as others in the Meridionall have: howsoever Monsieur de Foix or the French
Ambassador shall advertise of the cause now happened concerning the Duke of
Norfolk, this is the truth, and so you may avow it. The money was taken being
by the Dukes commandment as he avoweth and confesses, received by Barker his
man from the French Ambassador, to have been sent to Banister, the Dukes man
dwelling about Shrewsbury, to one Lowther, and other of the Dukes servants
secretly kept upon the West-borders, and by him should have been sent to the
Lord Harries, and by him to Riddington. There was in the Bag also Letters from
the French Ambassador to Viraque in Cipher, hereof Monsieur de Foix, made
mention before his departure, and did think there was no other matter against
the Duke, which I would there had not, but since there was much other of great
danger, God is to be thanked that it is discovered as now it is. There is found
a long discourse about the D. sent from the Queen of Scots, in Cipher to him
the 7 of February last, by which the said Q. lays before the D. how she is
Councelled from Spain, to fly into Spain, misliking utterly of the French, by
reason of the doubt of the Q. marriage with Anjou. She does also use hard words
against the Queen Mother; she does also in this discourse conclude, that she
will make a semblance to the Spaniard of the liking of Don John of Austria,
although she assures the Duke of Norfolk of her countenance; she moves that
Ridolf may be sent to Rome, and to be directed wholly by the Duke of Norfolk;
with many more things of such sort. The Duke has confessed the receipt of this
from the Queen of Scots, but denies he was privy of Ridolfs going otherwise
then that he was earnestly required by the Bishop of Ross to instruct him, and
write by him to the Duke of Alva, to require aid of men and money for the
Queens party in Scotland; wherein he says, he did refuse to deal for the
peril thereof: He confessed that he had received four Letters from the Scottish
Queen within this Twelve months, and did answer them by Writing, and all in
Cyphering; but his were only of Thanks, and to move the Queen of Scots to
depend only upon the Queens Majesty; but herein the Duke can make none of us to
credit him: He says also, that before the sending of this money, he helped the
French Ambassador to send his Packet to Viracque in July: We have also found
his Cipher betwixt the Scottish Queen and him, but all his writings are conveyed
which he says were by him burnt: Now have we great cause to think that he was
privy to the dangerous practice whereof we found Ridolph to have dealt in with
the Duke of Alva, in offering him that a Rebellion should be moved here this
Summer, if the Duke of Alva would assist it; but of this the Duke will not be
known. But we do find more presently a smell that 258. Deep, whereas ^ 28 at
740 ^ are at this time much perplexed herewith, and secretly disposed to no
good; but there is wait laid upon them. Now for Scotland, the fourth of this
month, Huntley and Hamilton, with others to the number of 300 secretly stole
into Sterling in the night, by Corruption of one Bell of Sterling, who had a
postern of a wall into the privy Garden; they addressed themselves to the
lodging of the Earl of Lennox, the Regent Morton, Glencarn, Lord Rithill,
Mookgill, and suddenly without any great resistance, took them; and was
carrying them out of the Town with intent to have killed them; but rescue came
out of the Castle, and so they were all saved but the Regent, who was slain
with a pistolet by one Calder, who being taken, confessed that Huntley, and
Lord Hamilton did so command him; he is executed, and so also is Bell that
betrayed the Town; the Regent lived 8 hours and died stoutly and godly. The
Earl of Mar is by Parliament chosen Regent. The Earls of Argile, Cassills,
Egliton, and Crawford, the Lord Bloy, and Sr. James Finch are sworn to the
Regent. There are Letters on the way to the Queens Majesty from the now Regent
by Cockburn, who is also come into France. A. seems very sorry that the
matter of Deep, in which D. at this time is so backward, and still she hops
that you will set Deep ^ again, and so she bad me now write to you. The Q.
Majesty says, until she hear from you, she cannot tell whom to send
thither. The French Ambassador is earnest to have his money again; and I answer
his Secretary, that it must be demanded of them to whom he delivered it;
wherewith he is much offended with me.

At Markhall, the 14. and 17. of September 1571. Your assured friend, Will.
Burleigh.


To the Right Honorable Francis Walsingham Esquire the Queens Majesty's Ambassador
Resident in France.
SIr, after the writing of my other Letters, we understand, that the murder of
the late Regent, by Huntley and Hamilton, has irritated the Nation of
Scotland, that the party of the King is thereby greatly increased, and the
Nobility of that side have made solemn oath and band to be speedily avenged
thereof. The French Ambassador sent yesterday his Secretary to me, to let the
Queens Majesty understand that his Mr. had received Letters from the French
King, directed jointly to him, and to de Foix, as answering them two for their
Letters which they sent immediately after their first Audience, noting thereby,
that at the writing of those Letters, de Foix was not at the Court no^ looked
for, and therewith he motioned that he might speak with her Majesty for the
relief of the Queen of Scots, considering that she had her number lessened and
that also he might have his Majesty's money, lately intercepted being sent
toward Viracque; herewith her Majesty was so offended that he should meddle
with the Queen of Scots matters, as she commanded me to say to his Secretary
that she could not like his manner of entermedling at this time with the Queen
of Scots causes, considering her Majesty finds her doings not only dangerous
to her quietness, but bent also to depend upon others then the Fr. King; and
therefore she required him to forbear, and give her leave to consider in her
own Realm what is meet for her surety, and when time shall seem meet it shall
well appear, that she has done nothing toward the Q. of Scots, but in reason
and honor she might have done much more, and she has deferred the Ambassadors
coming to her Majesty until she shall be at Pichmond, which shall be about
the 27 of this month: you may boldly affirm that her Majesty is well able to
prove, that the Q. of Scots has by the advice of the Duke of Alva, fully
resolved to depend upon the King of Spain, and to match her self with Don John
of Austria, and her Son with the King of Spains daughter. All these things her
Majesty willed me also to signify unto you, at this time, and that as you had
occasion, you should generally signify there that her Majesty has just cause
to proceed, otherwise then hitherto she does to restrain the practice intended
to her estate by the Queen of Scots, and so she trusts that the Fr. King will
Honorably think of her actions, both with her own subjects and with the Queen
of Scots as shall be necessary for her own surety, and yet you may assure them
there that there is nothing done toward the Queen, but she is restrained to
have such free conference, and intelligence as of late time she has had with
her Majesty's subjects, for otherwise she is right honorably entetained and
well used. Now must I end for I am fully occupied in making my imperfect house
ready, for the Queens Majesty against Saturday.

At Theobalds my house in Chesthunt the 20 of September. 1571. Your assured
loving friend, Will. Burleigh.


To my very loving Friend Francis Walsingham Esquire the Queens Majesty's
Ambassador with the French King.
IT is long now since you had any Letter of mine, but so it happened indeed
that the messengers were dispatched as I could not have time, but because. I
know you were fully advertised of all things, I made the less matter, now have
I thought meet to advertise you again, though there is no new accident of the
marriage matter to write of, and I suppose my Lord of Burleigh has written
plainly to you his opinion how little hope there is that ever it will take
place, for surely I am now persw^ded that her Majesty's heart is nothing
inclined to marry at all, for the (...) ^as ever brought to as many points as
we could devise, and always she was bent to hold with the difficultest. For my
part i^ grieveth my heart to think of it seeing no way, so far as I can
think, serves, how she can remain long quiet, and safe without such a strong
alliance as marriage must bring, for other Amities may serve for a time, but
there is no account to be made of them longer then to serve the turn of each
party, and her Majesty's years running away so fast causes me almost to
despair of long quietness. We long he^e to hear how matters stand upon de
Foix return, her Majesty is till persuaded that they will yield in the matter
of Religion for Monsieur, and so doing* she seeme^^ that she will according to
her word proceed: but to say my conscience, I think she had rather he stood
fast to it, and rather increased some hard point then yielded in it: well I
commit the to almighty God, with my continual prayer for her long
preservation. Of the committing of the Duke of Norfolk to the Tower, I doubt
not but you have heard ere now: his cause goes hard even to his own
confession: because such causes be doubtful till they be brought to some
certainty, I will forbear till my next; but thus much appears, vehement
suspicion of more ill then I ever thought could fall out in him, but his
deserts crave as they deserve, and I believe her Majesty will proceed
according to equity, and justice, what cause soever she has to use little
mercy.

I have spoke very earnestly to her Majesty touching the relief of your
estate; she has promised earnestly forthwith to help you. Monsieur de Foix
therein played the part of a right honest Gentlemen, and a very friend, he has
declared to my Lord of Burleigh, and me, and also to her Majesty her self, so
much of your extreme chargeable living there, as surely besides that it did
much further the matter, he deserved thanks for such an unlooked for office at
his hands; truly he did it wisely and honestly for you. The Regent Lennox is
slain of late, Mar is chosen in his place, God defend all my friends from
that soil. The money that you heard my Lord of Norfolk did send toward
Scotland, was the French Ambassadors indeed, but it little helps the D. case.
I pray you give little Leicester thanks for his often writing to me; and
commend me to my Lord of Rutland and his wife. Thus having nothing else to
write but of her Majesty's good health I bid thee farewell,

this 20 of September. Your assured friend, To. Leicester.


To the Right Honorable Francis Walsingham Esquire her Majesty's Ambassador
Resident in France.
SIr, since Monsieur de Foix departure, these things have happened. The D. of
Norfolk is charged with the countenance of dangerous practices with the Queen
of Scots, as that he has sent money into Scotland to maintain her party in the
Castle; for proof whereof Letters are intercepted in Cipher by one Higgford his
Secretary, who is now in the Tower, and confesses that the Duke commanded him
to write to one Law. Banister the Dukes man; that he should see secretly
conveyed 600 l. to the Lord Harrise, to be by him conveyed to Liddington, and
Graunge. The Duke at the first denied all manner of knowledge thereof, but now
at his committing to the Tower he yields, and asks pardon thereof^ but yet
the money is said to have been by the Fr. Ambassador delivered to Bar^or the
Dukes man to be conveyed to Viracque, how this is true, time must teach: sure
we are, that they in the Castle have been paid diverse times with English
Angels and Royalls. There are also found about the Duke certain writings, by
which appears that the Duke was acquainted with the voyage that Ridolph made
to Rome, and to Spain, hereupon the Queens Majesty is grievously offended both
toward the Queen of Scots, and the D. and has strengthened her from
intelligence. At this time the matters of Scotland are also intricate, the
Queens party much diminished by the deserting of the (...) of Argile, Egliton,
and Cassill^, and yet by a stratagem on Monday last as night, the case had like
to have been much altered. The Earl of Huntley and Lord Hamilton with
Bucklough, and Fernichurst accompained with 40 horsemen entered by stealth into
the Town of Sterling after midnight, they took the Regent in his bed, and the
Earls Argile, Moret^n, Cassills, etc. and whilst these being prisoners were
at the Town gate to be carried away with their takers, the rest of the company
spoiling the Town they of the Castle of Sterling issued out, and so resued the
prisoners, saving that in the conflict the Regent and 16 more of his Gentlemen
were slain, as it is written. Thus it is written unto me, but I dare not affirm
it until I hear it again. As for the motion made by de Foix, that some person
might be sent thither to affirm his message, and to maintain that with the
Queen Majesty's honor, wherein by de Foix I was named, the Queens Ma^estie
does forbear until she may hear from you; for according to the answer that
shall be made, her Majesty will send a person either mean or great. By reason
that I was named I have had less occasion to motion it, but surely it had done
well to have fed the French humor, and many things may better be said by an
express messenger then by the report of an Ambassador Lieger, whose commission
grows by writing. Truly the more matters are discovered, the more necessary
it is seen that her Majesty should marry. The Queens Majesty returns
toward London, from hence to Hundon, and so to my house in Chesthunt, and so
to S. Iame's, and hence to Richmond. And so having commodity by this honest
Gentleman Mr. Clarke, I end.

From Lees the 28 of September, 1571. Your assured loving friend, W. Burleigh.


To the Right Honorable and my very good Lord, the Lord of Burleigh.
YOur Lordships of the 17 and 20 of September sent by Har I received the 28 of
the same, which came in very good time for that there is most earnest
soliciting here by the Ambassadors Lord Fleming, and Duglas, for present aid to
be sent into Scotland; therefore after I had well perused the contents thereof,
I took occasion by presenting the Earl of Rutland, at his leave taking, to
make Q. Mother acquainted with so much of the same as I thought ^it for her to
know. I showed her, that if it might so like her, I would declare unto her at
large the present state of England, as also my private opinion in some points,
not by Commission, as an Ambassador, but as a private Gentleman that desires
nothing more then good Amity between both the two Crowns, and therefore wish
all jealousy to be removed, for that there could be no perfection of
friendship where jealousy was a party. First, touching the state of England, I
made her privy what had passed between their Ambassador Monsieur de la Mot and
the Duke of Norfolk; touching the money, as also the packet conveyed by
Virague. I made her also acquainted with the contents of the discourse (...) by
the (...) of Scots^ to the Duke. I showed her further, that Monsieur (...)
sending for Audience, to have moved her majesty for relief of the Queen of
Scots did not best like her. In the end I concluded with that point that
concerned the Duke of Alva's advice given to the said Queen, as well for her own
marriage as her sons, as also not to depend any longer upon France. Then
touching my private opinion, I showed her, I was sorry first, that their
Ambassador should have intelligence with the Duke, who was discovered to be a
dangerous subject. Secondarily, That he should be so earnest in seeking the
liberty of the Queen of Scots unto the Queen my Mistress, a most dangerous
enemy: these things I fear, said I, may breed in the Queen my Mistress some
opinion that the friendship professed, is not altogether sincere; and therefore
I wished that the King and she in seeking the Queen of Scots liberty, would not
forget to have regard to the Queen of Englands safety, especially now, seeing
the Queen of Scots seeks to quit her self of his protection. To this she
answered, That as on the one side she was glad to understand that these
practices were discovered, so was she sorry that there should fall out any
thing that might breed any suspicion in her Majesty of any evil meaning on
their behalf, who wished as much good to her Majesty as to their own selves.
And as for de la Mots doing, I know, says she, as well for his duty toward the
King my Son, who would not have him deal in any thing that might any way
prejudice the Queen your Misterss, as also for the particular good will he
bears unto her, was altogether void of any evil meaning; and so I hope she
will interpret it. The money (says she) as I am informed by the Scots
Ambassador, was sent by him to de la Mot, to be conveyed to the Queen of Scots,
who as he showed quite was void of money. I then replied, That the money was
sent over to another end, as the Duke himself had confessed; and that therefore
the Ambassador, had misinformed her. She told me further, that the money was
none of the Kings; but part of that which she has yearly from hence by virtue
of her dowry. By this your Lordship may see that the Ambassador deals
somewhat cunningly in this behalf, to gratify the Queen of Scots.

Touching the soliciting of her liberty, she showed me that the King and she,
as well in respect of the ancient League with Scotland, as the alliance by
marriage, could in honor do no less then recommend her cause, which she
protested they never did with intention any way to perjudice her Majesty. I
then desired her first to consider whether the Amity of England might not be as
beneficial to France, as that of Scotland. Secondarily, Whether they had that
need at this present of the Amity and League of Scotland, as heretofore they
have had. For the first, I showed her that France in respect of the greatness
of some of their near neighbors, had need of the Amity of both England and
Scotland. For the second, I told her that England had no foot in France;
Scotland was rather chargeable then profitable to France. She replied, That the
King notwithstanding, in honor, could not but continue Amity and League with
Scotland, though he had not that use as before time. I answered her, That the
King might continue his League with Scotland by joining with the Queen my
Mistress, in the maintenance of the young Kings government there. To this she
answered, That the king could not in honor abandon his sister in Law. I
answered, That the Kings band toward his sister in Law, is not more then of a
natural father toward his natural child; yet if the child grow to be
dissolute and lewd, whereby he is shaken off by his father, the fault is not to
be imputed to the father, but to the child; even so, if the King in respect of
the indignities committed by his siste^ in Law, shall give over the protection
of her, the cause thereof is only to be imputed to her misdemeannor, unworthy
of her calling, and not to him. I desired her to consider further, that whereas
she says the King in Honor is bound to seek her liberty, that he is more
bound in honor to have regard of the Queen my ^istris, safety* First, for that
she is a Princess of life virtuous, in Government guided by Law and Justice,
in affection toward him sincere. Now if by the Queen of Scots liberty procured
by him, the State should be disquieted, what thing could happen that might
touch the King more in honor and conscience: and as for any assurance or
protestation that she might make to the King touching her peaceable behavior
toward the Q. my Mistress; First, I desired her to weigh that she was
ambitious, and therefore no Capitulation could serve for a bridle. Secondly,
That she is most guided by the advice of those of her kindred, who have been
the greatest cause of the disquiet of Europe, whereof she could be a witness.
Thirdly, how that now she means chiefly to depend upon Spain, who will be
always provoking her to the disquieting of England and France. These
considerations (said I) Madam, if you will well weigh, I hope they will give
you cause not to be over earnest in procuring any enlargment of liberty,
especially upon this late discovery of her evil meaning toward her Majesty.
In my private opinion, you shall do well therefore to remit the same until the
coming of the Gentleman whom the Queens Majesty my Mistress means to send.
So in the end she concluded, that she would confer with the King her Son, whom
she assured me would be loath to do any thing that might any way discontent her
Majesty, or tend to her prejudice. J. K. being by me so requested, dealt very
earnestly with her in that behalf, showing the unseasonableness of the time to
commend a matter so unacceptable, especially having intention to treat of some
straight Amity. Douglas in his return hither, passed by Flanders; he was
accompained from Antwerp to Bruxels by the Earl of Westmerland, and a dozen
other of the Rebels, where he had conference with the Duke of Alva, and was,
as he secretly reports to a friend of his, very Honorably used, and put in
comfort that there should be somewhat done shortly for the assistance of the
Queen of Scots faction in Scotland; and further, that he doubted not but that
there would come a time that there should also be somewhat done for her
delivery, which had not now to have been executed, had not the jealousy of
some French enterprise stayed him, Iunius the Co. Palatines servant, who had
his dispatch at the King hands the second of this month, showed me, that the
message he had in commission to deliver to his Mr. and the rest of the Princes,
was, that the said King was glad the said Princes were both content and
desirous to enter into some straight League with him, a thing necessary for
both their preservations, and to the end that the same might proceed, he
desired them that they would consider of the points and Articles to be agreed
on, as also of some convenient place for the meeting of their Deputies: Whereof
when he shall be advertised upon his return again, he would not fail to send
some personage of good calling, with Authority to conclude such points as shall
be agreed upon. After he had received his message, he showed me that he told
the King, that it were very necessary that the Queen of England were named to
join in this League; whereof he signified unto me, that both the King and
Queens Mother were most desirous thereof; and therefore wished that there might
be some means found, that her Majesty might be moved in that behalf: whereupon
he and I after some conference had what way were best to be taken, agreed upon
a Letter to be sent by me to his Mr. as the best means to bring the same to
pass; which Letters I caused Mr. Beale to draw, and sent to Mr. Iunius
according as we resolved; whereof I send your Lordship a Copy, to the end your
Lordship may see the course I have taken, which I hope, for that it tends to
her Majesty's safety, will not mislike her. Thus leaving further to trouble
your Lordship at this present, I most humbly take my leave.

At Blois the 7 of October 1571. Your Honors to command, Fr. Walsingham.


To the Right Honorable, and my very good Lord, the Lord of Burleigh.
IT may please your Lordship to advertise her Majesty; that the 22 of this
month the King sent for me, and at the time of my access he showed me that he
was given to understand that her Majesty meant to send certain Soldiers into
Scotland, which thing he would be sorry it should so fall out, for that then he
should be forced in respect of the ancient League, with Scotland to strengthen
the Queens party there by sending of forces thither, and that therefore he
desired her Majesty to forbear in that behalf, and that that matter might be
referred over to treaty, until the coming of him whom her Majesty means to
send, whereby all unkindness might be avoided; he willed me to desire her
Majesty to interpret this is message in good part, and to assure her that he
is void of all evil meaning, whose Amity he most earnestly desires;
notwithstanding he may not in honor forbear if he be urged thereto to assist
them in respect of the said League. I showed him, that I understood nothing of
any such meaning of her Majesty's sending of any forces thither, but if it were
so, it then proceeded upon the discovery of certain dangerous practices of the
Queen of Scots, whereupon her Majesty is enforced every way to seek to do that
thing that might tend to her safety, and therefore if any such sending grow
upon such respect he could not but allow thereof, protesting that good will
that he does to her Majesty: He answered me, that now his meaning was not to
recommend the liberty of the Queen of Scots, but only to recommend the liberty
of the Country. I told him in that behalf, I doubted not but he should find the
Queen my Mistress inclined to do any thing to agree to reason, and stand with
her safety: but if her Majesty should have any intention to seek the liberty
of the Queen of Scots, in my private opinion, I thought by no means he should
prevail, she now of late being discovered to be so dangerous an enemy, who
has as it were dismembered her Majesty's politic body by corruption of sundry
of her best qualified Subjects, which thing (said I) if your Majesty could
consider in the Queen my Mistress person, I am sure your Majesty would
forbear at any time, hereafter to recommend her cause. His answer to that was,
that he meant not now to recommend the same; and so he willed me to present his
affectionate commendations unto her Majesty adding further, that he hoped
shortly to see one from her here, to treat of such things as my tend to
increase of good and perfect Amity between them; he desired me to dispatch one
with some intelligence, to the end he may know her Majesty's answer. I am given
secretly to understand, that there are certain of the Guisian faction, that
have made offer unto the King to go and serve in Scotland of their own charges,
and that the King if he received not a good answer from her Majesty is
determined to employ them: there are some also of that faction that go about to
persuade him, that her Majesty means nothing less then to send any hither to
treat of Amity, and that all is but intertainment until she have made full
conquest of Scotland, the King notwithstanding these lewd persuasions, as I
learn, conceives a good and honorable opinion of her Majesty. As I was
writing, I was given to understand that the morning the King sent for me, there
was long debate had in Council whether he should recommend the Q. of Scots
cause or not. In the end, after long debating, through the earnest persuasions
of some, it was thought expedient to forbear in that behalf, and so concluded
that he should only recommend the liberty of the Country. I am put in great
hope that the King will be content to join with her Majesty in the
establishing of the young Kings Government. Surely, if her Majesty send hither
in time, whilst her friends enjoy the credit of the Court here, some parsonage
of good quality, whereby the King may think she makes some account of him. I
think her Majesty shall obtain any reasonable thing at his hands that she her
self can desire; for she is persuaded, that no Amity is so fit for him as that
with her Majesty, in respect that all occasions of quarrels are now taken
away. If it might so like her, I would wish, that her Majesty would in talk
with the Ambassador, use some words of excuse, in that she has so long
deferred the sending of the Gentleman that is here looked for; as also, two
words of assurance of the great desire she has of the increase of Amity with
the King: This I know, would content him, as also stop the mouths of those
that persuade the contrary. Thus leaving further to trouble your Lordship, I
most humbly take my leave.

At Blois the nineteenth of October, 1571. Your Honors to Command, Fr.
Walsingham.


To our Right Trusty and Well-beloved Francis Walsingham Esquire our Ambassador
Resident in France.
ELIZABETH R.

TRusty and well-beloved, we greet you well; we have presently sent the bearer
hereof, our trusty servant Henry Killegrew, to supply the place that there you
have, to be our Ambassador Resident with the French King our good brother, for
the time that you shall be occasioned to be necessarily absent about the
tendance to cure your self of such infirmities, as to our grief, we hear you
are subject unto, and glad therewith to hear, that if you may have some respite
and leisure from business to attend to your Cure, you are in hope to be cured
by certain Physicians that have taken upon them the charge thereof, whereof we
are both willing to further you, and do earnestly charge you, without either
delay of time, or care of our business to apply your self; for that by your
good service hitherto we do plainly perceive that our election of you has been
well answered, and the continuance of you in that service, is to be much
desired by the recovery of your health. And for that this bearer shall now
supply your absence, whom we know to be a faithful friend unto you, we would
you should instruct him in things meet to be known to him, and to give him
assistance of such of your servants, as shall be to him needful for this
purpose. And for our further knowledge in things presently to be prosecuted and
imparted to the King there, we have also given to him knowledge thereof by
special Instructions in writing, signed with our hand, have informed him, and
have willed him to make you partaker, and to use your advise in what sort to
communicate with our good brother the French King; and assoons as you may
recover your self, to return to your former charge, which we wish to be speedy
both for your self and our service. We require you so to do, and to give us
knowledge thereof; for our meaning is, as soon as you shall be able so to do,
this bearer Henry Killegrew shall return.

Given under our Signet at our Manor of Richmond the twentieth of October,
1571. in the thirteenth year of our Reign.

To the Right Honorable Francis Walsingham Esquire Ambassador for the Queens
Majesty in France.
SIr, though your leisure were more then it is, yet the coming of this bearer
my brother Killigrew, is able to discharge me of all my care to write; but yet
I cannot let him depart without my Letter, how short soever it is; you know my
brother so well, and love and trust him, as I perceive so entirely, as I think
none could come more grateful unto you; and surely so do I find him to love and
care for you, as none can do more to a natural brother. I am greatly perplexed
with the strangeness of 2 4. In Dover 7 0 d m t m o t m: for surely at this
time there grows daily more cause then other to have 57 Callice A M. And so
when you shall understand the state of things here you will judge. This bearer
can tell you who is likely to come thither; for surely there are many
impediments why I cannot, but the principal is, for that I am far unmeet to
treat of any thing out of England, being as I am known only meet to speak as my
mother taught me.

Of Scotland, this bearer can report to you, and so can he of the Scottish
Queen, of the Duke of Norfolk, and all the matter. He can also tell you of a
sudden alarm given to me, specially yesternight, by her Majesty, being
suddenly sick in her stomach, and as suddenly relieved by a vomit. You must
think such a matter would drive men to the end of their wits, but God is the
stay of all that put their trust in him.

At Richmond the twentieth of October, 1571. Yours assuredly William Burleigh.


To my very Friend Francis Walsingham Esquire Ambassador for the Queens Majesty in
France.
MR. Walsingham, this bearer is so fully instructed, as I shall need the less
to trouble you with any tedious Letter; for both touching our opinion of the
marriage, of the Amity, as also of the Queen of Scots, the Duke of Norfolk,
etc. I have at large delivered it to this bearer. And last of all, for your
self, I assure you I have most earnestly traveled with her Majesty, and let
her fully understand your estate, and how chargably your service there has
been already to you. Her answers be so gracious, and do promise so earnestly to
see you shortly recompensed. as I have no doubt but it will prove no less in
deed then in word, and to my power I will not cease to put her still in
rememmembrance of you. Thus with my hearty commendations, I bid you farewell.

In some haste the twentieth of October, 1571. Your assured Friend, To:
Leicester.


Instructions for Henry Killegrew Esquire sent into France to supply the place of
Francis Walsingham Esquire her Majesty's Ambassador Resident with the French King,
during the time that the said Walsingham shall be absent from the Court of
France, to recover his health for such infirmities as he is troubled withal.
YOu shall repair to our Ambassador Francis Walsingham, and let him understand,
as he shall perceive by our Letters now sent to him, that your coming is to
supply his room, for such a season as shall be needful for him to attend his
recoverie of his infirmities as he is molested withal; and as soon as you may,
for the speedy relieving of him, you shall repair with him to the French King
our good brother, or otherwise by his direction if it so be, that for his
infirmity he may not without some great hinderance repair to the Court with
you, and you shall deliver the Kings Letters, which for this purpose are
directed to our good brother the King, and to Queen Mother, for to credit you
in the absence of our Ambassador.

After that you are so notified and allowed of the King and Queen Mother, you
shall also at time convenient salute the French Queen and Monsieur de Anjou,
and also Angoulemse the Kings brethren, with such good usual speeches as may
seem agreeable.

You shall also let the King understand, that since the arrival of Monsieur de
Foix there at the Court, we have heard both by Letters of our own Ambassador,
and since that by the report of Monsieur de la Mot the Kings Ambassador, in
what good part the King has accepted our friendly and plain manner of dealing
with him in the negotiation of the matter for the which Monsieur de Foix was
sent hither; and how well Monsieur de Foix has reported our good usage of him
for the Kings sake, of all which we are very glad to see our good meaning to be
so well interpreted and allowed, for ever to that end indeed we did direct our
meaning and intention to make some demonstrations of our hearty good will
toward our good brother, especially by many things confirmed to us of late
time, not only in the honorable usuage of our Ministers and Servants, but in
so earnest prosecution of this matter of marriage of his brother the Duke of
A^jou. And considering we perceive by his Ambassador, that he will not enter
into any direct judgment upon our answer given to Monsieur de Foix, neither to
accept it, until that some special person of value and credit with us, may be
sent unto them to treat further thereupon: and that he does certainly look
that we will send some such person thither, upon the report of Monsieur de
Foix, who indeed at his departure, did entreat us so to do; yet he had no
certain promise of us for the same; but that we would first understand how the
King our good brother should allow of our answer, and so thereafter to do.

We now finding not only the expectation of our said good brother, but his
desire also that one such person might come from us, are minded within short
time to send forth such a one as shall be meet for that purpose to deal with
our said good brother, for declaration of our mind in that matter, or in any
other; which we mean to defer only until we may at more length, more largely
understand the whole intention and progress of certain dangerous practices
begun against us and our State by the Scottish Queen, and some of our natural
Subjects, which being lately discovered, does already manifestly appear to
have been of long time intended, and by Gods goodness stayed in such sort, as
before the execution thereof, we have knowledge of a great part thereof, and
doubt not by the continuance of the same goodness of God, both to understand
the rest, and to understand the danger intended; whereof when the whole shall
be further known to us, we will make our said brother private thereto, as to
one that for the assured friendship that we conceive in him, will be both glad
that God has defended us from such dangers, and also willing by his good
concurrency in friendship, to assist us in our State against the like. And yet
you shall say to our good brother, because he shall not be ignorant of these
matters, for such part as shall be to us discovered; you shall show him, that
whereas about two years past the Queen of Scots had practiced to have married
without our knowledge, with one of our greatest Subjects, the Duke of Norfolk,
wherewith for many great reasons we were justly offended, both against her and
the said Duke, having for that purpose restrained the said Duke, but from his
common liberty, leaving him the use of all his Lands and Goods, and meaning by
degrees to receive him to our grace, as we did in some part diminish the
demonstration of our offense, upon signification of his repentance, and
protestation never to deal in that matter, or any such like; and the like
declaration did the Queen of Scots make to us from the beginning, both by her
sundry messages, and specially by multitude of her Letters to us, which do
remain with us, written of her own hand. And though we had many sparks of
suspetion that their meaning was not fully agreeable to their Words, Letters,
Promises and Oaths, which made us not hasty in the full deliverie of the
Duke, yet now we have manifestly found by their practices with sundry others,
and by their own Letters, which we have in great number, that even from the
beginning that we did find fault with the said practices for marriage, and that
they did solemnly revoke their intentions with firm promises in writing never
to deal therein any further: They did not only secretly continue their first
intents of marriage against our will, but the rest also of our dangers that
properly we did at the beginning conjecture to have been joined to that
marriage, which now are so manifestly discovered, as no answer can excuse the
same; and that is in one word to express the whole, under color of restoring
her to liberty, to deprive us of our Crown, and erect her up in our place; and
that by force, not only by Rebellion to be stirred up in our Realm, but by
bringing in of Foreign Forces to assist that enterprise, against such power as
we should have had of faithful natural Subjects in our defense. This intention
of the Queen of Scots, you shall assure our good brother is not to us by
conjectures, as for the most part the greatest Treasons are, that they be not
executed, but by manifest writing of the Queen of Scots own hand, by confession
of such as be apprehended, and are guilty thereof themselves, and have
confessed it voluntarily, with tokens of great repentance: And in all these
their practices, we are much comforted to find it declared, yea, by the Queen
of Scots own writings, that she and her party much misliked the Friendship
between our good brother the French King and us; and specially gave charge,
that in seeking of Foreign Forces to invade our Realm, none of the French
Kings Ministers should be made participant, judging by plain speeches and words
in writing, that she the Scottish Queen would wholly follow the directions of
the King of Spain, and would procure her son to be transported thither; and to
entice their friendship, she would show her self willing to marry Don John of
Austria. This in sum, you may assure the French King we can in substance
manifest, even by the Scottish Queens writings to the Duke of Norfolk, which we
have diverse ways confirmed by writings and Confessions of others. And until
this whole Tree shall be fully discovered, as well in the branches as in the
roots, which we trust God will display before our eyes, we have thought meet to
impart in this manner so much thereof, praying our good brother to show herein
the office of a good perfect friend; that is, in case of all such danger as
this is, touching our life, our State, and the ruin of our Realm and faithful
Subjects, not to credit the false report of any, that to our prejudice shall
labor to deprave our doings in the procuring of our own safety and quietness
of our State, and the continuance of Peace in our Realms and Dominions. For
surely we do not herein any thing but in the sight of God we are bound in
nature to do for our selves, and in duty for our Realm.

At Richmond the nineteenth of October, 1571. Burleigh.


To the Right Honorable, and my very good Lord, the Lord of Burleigh.
IT may please your Lordship to understand, that finding the King absent from
Bloys, as also all those from whom I was wont to receive any light of their
proceeding here, whereby my abode there was to no great purpose, finding also
my disease to increase upon me, and the time fit for the cure to slip away; I
thought it good to repair to Pari^, having taken order before my departure for
the excuse of my going away without taking leave of the King, he being then
well near thirty Leagues from Bloys, at a house of Marshal Ville^ile, not far
from A^giers. At my access hither, I found Master Killegrew, who delivered me
her Majesty's Letters, by the which I have just cause to think my self most
bound to her Majesty for accepting my simple service; as also, for the care
she has of my health, by sending this Gentleman to relieve me. I have
conferred with him, and made him acquainted with my proceeding in this charge,
as also with the present state of this Country. The chief cause of my sending
at this present, is to advertise her Majesty of the late victory had by the
Princes Confederates against the Turk: The particularities whereof, as I
received them from the Venetian Ambassador, were these: That the seventh of,
etc.

It is much feared by those of judgment here, that this Victory, though
generally it may grow to Christendom profitable, yet particularly it may
prove dangerous to some, in that it is likely to increase the reputation and
greatness of Spain, which may breed some change here, and may cause the King to
relent over much to Spain; the reason of the fear is, that Queen Mother, who
directs all things here, is of nature fearful, and therefore they doubt that
those that incline to Spain, who are in best credit with her, will take profit
of the Victory, and make her an instrument to persuade the King to dissemble
the Injuries received at Spains hands, and to incline him to run one course
with him for a time. Of these fears I thought good to advertise, ref^^ring the
consideration thereof unto her Majesty. One Waldie, servant unto the Countess
of Emden, being sent from her unto her Majesty with certain Letters, is stayed
in the Town through sickness, whereby he cannot perform his voyage. He desired
me to convey over these Letters he has unto her, unto a servant of his
Mistris's resident in London, whom he means to make his substitute for the
delivery of the said Letters, as also to make your Lordship acquainted with the
causes of his stay: His Commission, as I gather by him, is two ends; the one to
desire her Majesty, that by her aid there may be some order taken for the
clearing of the narrow seas of Pirates; the other, to move her Majesty to grant
to the Subjects of the said Commonwealth, an exemption of a certain custom, in
respect of the favor showed her Majesty's Subjects. Thus leaving further to
trouble your Honor at this present, I most humbly take my leave.

At Paris the eighth of November, 1571. Your Lordships to Command, Fr.
Walsingham.


To the Right Honorable, and my very good Lord, the Earl of Leicester.
BY your Lordships of the twentieth of October, sent by Mr. Killegrew, I
conceive great hope of her Majesty's consideration of my chargable living here*
and because your Lordship has been a most earnest furtherer of the same, I
most humbly thank you; as also, for that it pleases your Lordship to promise
the continuance of your said furtherance, when occasion shall be offered,
wherein the same will stand you in any stead, which I will presume with that
boldness to use, as I hope your Lordship will employ me, wherein your Honor
may have any use of my poor service. The cause of my present sending is, to
advertise of the victory had by sea of the Christian against the Turk. The
Conflict was the seventh of the last month, not far from C^rfu, between Morea
and Lepanto: There escaped, as the Venetian Ambassador gave me to understand,
only four of two hundred Galleys, other particularities as then he knew not. I
send your Lordship also a little Pamphlet that they have put in print here
touching the said victory, of what credit, I know not. Whatsoever show the
King here gives of joy outwardly, inwardly he does not best like of the
victory, as that thing which adds too great an increase of reputation to the
King of Spain. I think therefore no time more fit to treat of Amity, then at
this present. I do not therefore doubt but that your Lordship will urge her
Majesty most earnestly to take profit of the time, by sending with convenient
speed him over, whom she means to use in this behalf. And so leaving further
to trouble your Honor at this present, I most humbly take my leave.

At Paris the seve^th of November, 1571. Your Honors to Command, Francis
Walsingham.


To my assured Friend Francis Walsingham Esquire Ambassador in France, and my
brother in Law Henry Killigrew Esquire and to either of them.
HAving this present occasion to send two of my Lord of Oxfords men to Paris,
at his Lordships request I thought good also therewith to send to you this
little Treatise therewith, newly printed in Latin, in commending or
discommending the Qu. of Scots actions, to further her Marriage with Bothwel. I
hear it is to be translated into English, with addition of many other
supplements of like condition.

The Queens Majesty has sent for my Lord Gray to come thither into France,
and if his health cannot serve him, Sir Peter Gray shall come. Her Majesty,
with furtherance of her whole Council, is certainly resolved to send one
thither. My Lord of Hunsdon is at Berwick by computation yesternight, and his
Commission is to set a good face upon the matter, to bring Grange and the
Castle to the Kings devotion; if he cannot, we of her Council are of opinion
that England shall enforce them. And yet it shall do well, that no such thing
be notified to the French King. My Lord Marquis dyed at Warwick on Sunday, the
loss of a good Counselor. The case of the Duke of Norfolk falls even out by
branches to be more odious. The B. of Ross is in the Tower, where he utters
many things right plainly, and yet you need not be known thereof. I pray let
the bearers hereof, if they shall have need of your friendship, find that your
friendship is readier for my commendations. I think to marry my daughter at
Christmas.

From Richmond the first of November, 1571. Yours assuredly, Will. Burleigh.


To the Right Honorable, and my very good Lord, the Lord of Burleigh.
BEsides Mr. Killig^^ws advertisements, as from the Court, I thought good to
give your Lordship to understand what they do here at Paris. The Marshal de
Coss has been here employed of late by the French King, in procuring a Loan,
which is granted, and the same is presently in leavying; the people murmur much
at it, and yet do not refuse to pay it.

Marshal Montmorency repaired to this Town the third of this month,
accompanied with 300 horse: The next day after his arrival, he and the Marshal
de Coss conferred with the chief of this Town about the plucking down of the
Cross, which was resolved on, and the same presently put in execution; the
Masons employed in that behalf, being guarded by certain Harquebus^ers: The
common people ease their stomachs only by uttering certain seditious words,
which is born withal, for that was doubted; the Protestants by the overthrow of
this Cross, receive greater comfort, and the Papists the contrary. Touching my
particular, I find it will be the latter end of the next month before I shall
return to my charge, for that I am diseased by three sundry Carnosities, which
will require the longer time in the cure. Thus much I thought good to give your
Lordship to understand, for that I fear her Majesty will think somewhat
otherwise in my long stay here. And so leaving further to trouble your Lordship
at this present, I most humbly take my leave

the seventh of December. 1571. Your Honors to Command, Fr. Walsingham.


To the Right Honorable Francis Walsingham Esquire her Majesty's Ambassador
Resident in France.
SIr the bearer hereof is one whom you may trust, as I am informed. And if he
shall require you to send any his Letters to be conveyed into Scotland, he is
content that they shall come into my hands, whereby I shall not be the worse
informed of things meet to be known: He can show you both of Scotlands causes,
and of Englands. Sir Thomas Smith is ready to depart thitherward from hence to
morrow, if the French Ambassadors Negotiation here with her Majesty this
afternoon whilst I am writing this Letter, do not prolong the same.

My Lord of Oxfords servants were constrained by contrary winds to tarry at
Callis, so as they came not hither before Sunday last, at which time came also
Fiasco, the Genevoise, who had likewise stayed at Callis for the same purpose;
and at his coming he makes all to be sound between Spain and France, and would
not be known of the Spanish Ambassadors passage into the Low Country, nor of
any thing done in Henault, and yet he did not understand by us here, that he
had any knowledge thereof from you. And so I end, wishing to hear of your
amendment by Physic.

At Greenwich the fifth of December, 1571. Yours assuredly, William Burleigh.


To the Right honorable, Francis Walsingham Esquire her Majestes Ambassador
Resident in France.
SIr, such sufficient persons of understanding, credit and acquaintance as this
bearer Sir Thomas is, may serve to excuse me from writing of any long Letters;
and therefore I mean to touch things by notes and peice-meals. He can tell you
of the Duke of Norfolks case, but percase not when, nor how it takes end,
neither can I help him to enlarge his knowledge, but I think the Queens
Majesty will therein deal more substantially then many do imagine. He can tell
you how straightly the Queen of Scots is kept, having now but ten persons of her
own of all sorts. She pretends a great fear of her life, and craveth a
ghostly Father, being Catholic. He can tell you, that the Queens Majesty
has plainly notified to the Estates of Scotland, that she will never suffer
the Scottish Queen to have her Government in Scotland; and at this present we
are in hand to make an accord betwixt Liddington and Graunge in the Castle, and
the Regent, etc. difficulties are rather particular then public. They in the
Castle look to have their Offices and Lands restored; and for surety, that
Graunge may remain Captain of the Castle: The other party are greedy to keep
that they have catched, as of Bishoprics and Abbeys, etc. I think next
avoidance might help, but greediness and mistrust keeps them asunder, and I
fear more the wilfulness of the Kings party, then the conformation of the
adverse. Now for the principal matter of Sir Tho: Smith, I have at such length
explained that in his instructions, whereof he will make you privy, as I need
not add any more, I. Dover A. was never ^ then now I am commanded to move you
to advise some secret ways with St T: Smith, how if K. be not at Court, he
might secretly procure to be there at Sr. Tho. Smiths being there; and also by
secret means Sir Tho. Smith may understand his opinion in the greatest matter,
as one whom we think of such dexterity in his actions, of such dutiful good
will hitherward, as no advice nor direction shall be given to our prejudice.
All this I write by commandment, and that after Mr. S. departure from this
place, so as I have not specially informed him hereof, and therefore I pray you
impart this to him; adding this caution, that Mr. Smith do not appear to any
others to deal with him; for so may he best serve the purpose.

Now Sir, you may think that I am not a little perplexed in this matter, when I
consider with my self the doubtfulness that you have signified unto me of
Callais ^, whereof I never made A. privy, nor any other almost, and now finding
here on the other a contrary intention, which surely is earnestly meant, and
not the less for the cause of ^, I am doubly troubled, and therefore the good
order, either to conclude or break off, must lie in the wisdom of the Ministers
there, to whom I wish the assistance of Gods Spirit. Sir, my infirmity, as Sir
Tho. Smith can inform you, has been so lingering upon me, as I have bin, though
not idle, yet an unprofitable servant, and thereby impedited to solicit your
suit unto her Majesty, wherein I will as soon as I may, employ my whole power as
if it were for my self. And so now I end, wishing to hear of your cure of your
infirmity with speed and surety.

At Greenwich, December. 7. 1571. Yours assuredly, Will. Burleigh.


To my loving Friend Mr. Francis Walsingham, Ambassador for the Queens Majesty
in France.
Mr. Walsingham, It is now somewhat long since I wrote unto you of our news,
the cause has been partly for lack of special matter, and partly being at all
times absent when your dispatches were made; but having presently some matter
of moment worthy the writing to you, I will not fail to deal plainly with you,
even as I think, and as the cause requires. Among other matters that Sir Tho.
Smith has in charge to deal with the King; he has also certain instructions
from her Majesty, which are also to understand how he shall answer, if the
matter of her marriage be any more propounded or talked of with him: and
because I have always heretofore seen in you a good inclination to further the
same, as a matter for her self, her estate and ours all, through the hope of
her issue to be preserved by, which, for mine own part, I was and am of like
opinion (God is my judge) only for the same respect, being verily persuaded,
otherwise hardly shall she her self be in safety for her own time, or her
people and Realm left in surety after her, except some such way be taken as
marriage, whereof finding now again an appearance of a full determination in
her Majesty to like of marriage, and to my judgment, resolved not to refuse
any reasonable conditions that to her honor shall be offered by that King for
Monsieur. I thought good to let you understand it, that if the matter be
renewed on their parts, that you may deal accordingly therein, who being in
despair of her good liking (as good cause both you and we here have had so to
doubt) might perhaps make the less account of it: and I supposing in dealing
with Mr. Tho. Smith, he will affirm thus much of her present disposition, which
I assure you she has so earnestly and assuredly affirmed unto me, as I verily
think, yet once again, that with good handling, good conclusion will follow.
And thus much her Majesty is pleased I should signify unto you and Henry
Killegrew, that you should appoint some trusty and discreet Messenger fully
instructed with all the proceedings hitherto past in this matter touching the
Marriage, to be sent to the Admiral, and to impart the same wholly unto him,
with demonstration of her trust and affiance in him, to give her the best and
friendliest advice, and let him know upon what points they stick at it: and if
he shall seem to be earnest, and to allow of the matter, and to have it go
forward, then would she have him at Court at this present of Mr. Smiths being
there, that he may the better from time to time be privy to their dealings, and
her determinations also, for that she does mean freely and frankly to impart
all things to him from time to time, that shall concern her therein, not
doubting he will have due regard every way of her Mejesties honor, and
specially to foresee that she be not abused or ill handled by sinister
practices of some that be great enemies to this matter: Her Majesty has her
self, somewhat opened her mind to the Count Montgomery, who this day has taken
his leave and is departed, and the sooner to deal with the Admiral hereabout:
and as you shall find the Admirals devotion in this matter, so shall it be well
done to use as speedy advertisement as you can to her Majesty thereof.

You have often times, Mr. Walsingham, wisely warned us and put us in mind to
seek some ways to stablish her Majesteries state, and the lacks declared both
want of friendship abroad, and of our doubtful state at home, it falls out
daily too manifest, and without some remedy, will prove a danger unrecoverable;
the means for help be easily seen and perceived, and I suppose yet not without
hope to be obtained, God grant us that foresight and wisdom that we willingly
refuse them not: Well, I can but pray for the best, and discharge my duty
according to the small understanding I have, that some good may take place,
which I shall never cease to wish to supply what else does want in me: and
therefore besides that her Majesty has here willed me to signify unto you,
which is for the imparting of the proceedings in the case of her marriage
heretofore, how it has from time to time past unto the Admiral there. I have
showed you what I conceive of her Majesty's inclination again toward the
marriage of Monsieur, which being a matter of greatest importance to her and us
also. I thought meet to let you know that the matter as it has been a long
while in a manner dead, may be with more discretion revived, and do not doubt
but that it will be opened by the parties there again, seeing her Majesty has
not yet clearly there denied it, nor they fully answered her Majesty's demands.
Other news we have none worth the writing, but of her Majesty's good estate,
which surely is such as I have not known been these many years. Thus with my
right hearty commendations I bid you farewell:

At Greenwich the 6 of December. 1571. Your very Friend, R. Leicester.


Instructions given to Sir Tho. Smith, one of the Q. Majesty's privy Council,
and Ambassador in France, and to Francis Walsingham Esquire her Ambassador ordinary
there, and in his absence, to her Majesty's trusty servant, H. Killegrew Esquire.
Given at Westminster Feb. 13. 1571. the 13. year of her Maj. reign.
YOu shall understand, that after consideration had of all your Letters and
memorials in writing of the Colloquie that had passed between you and our
servant Hen. Kill^grew with you on the one part, and with the President Bira^e,
the Bishop of Limoyes, and Mr. de Foix deputed from the French King to confer
with you on their part, from the 10 of the last month, unto the 20 of the same:
we caused certain of our council to confer with the French Amb. according to
his request upon the same matters, who did exhibit in writing the copies of the
proceedings betwixt you and the said Deputies, agreeable for the most part, to
those which were received from your self; and he did propound four points
comprehending the differences betwixt you and them, the judgment whereof was
referred, as he said, to the King his Master our good brother, and us,
pretending with many good words, that since the foundation of the Treaty, was
by your good means and the Kings Deputies with you there, made manifest to be
without any difference, which was a declaration of a natural good will in both
the P. to enter into some straight League of amity; he doubted not but that
these other particular differences (which consisted but upon words) should be
easily and speedily compounded. The first doubt, as he said, remaining
undetermined, was about the Article for mutual defense of either Prince,
against any other person that should invade either of them or their Countries.
In that you shall have these words inferted into the Article, Etiam si causa
religionis mutatio facta fuerit, whereunto with these special words the Kings
Deputies would not agree, neither, as he said, might his Master without great
inconvenience assent thereunto whereof he doubted not but he would have
reasonable respect, and not meaning thereby to forbear to be bound to do that
which the special case of these words might import. And so reporting many
arguments to our Council, whereof he had made mention unto us two days before
at his last audience, amongst the which, one was of most weight, as we took it,
That if such special mention should be made for the defense of Religion in a
public Treaty, the King should thereby offend not only all other Princes
Catholics his Allies, but also the greater part of his own States and
Subjects, which are of the Catholic Religion* as the King himself also is.
And yet nevertheless, the King was content (as he said) to have all other
manner of good and effectual words and speeches inserted in the said Treaty, to
bind the King to a mutual defense against all manner of invasion, for what
cause, pretext, or color soever it were, yea and that without exception of any
manner of cause. Hereunto was answered on our part, That considering there was
no other likelihood of any pretense to invade us, but upon the color of
Religion only, and that on the Kings part there were many other causes and
quarrels, as Titles to Dominions and Territories, and such like other might be
devised for invasion and disturbance of his estate, whereunto our aid or
defense should be requisite: It might be thought a very unequal Contract by
general words certainly, to conclude all his causes, and by forbearing these
special words of Religion, to leave us utterly unprovided of aid; and as to the
remedy to have other manner of words inserted, considering they should be but
general, it might be doubted, that while the Invasion should be made or
attempted against us for Religion, or but for pretext of Religion, and required
for the same, the King might then (with colorable reasons, being devised by
such as were over-vehement and passionate in the Religion of Rome, or in that
which is called Catholic) answer that he might not for his conscience
satisfy, or demand for aid in that behalf, and that could not be intended to
be lawfully (that is, by the Law of God) included in the general words. To
this, although the Ambassador replied in his Masters name, with the great
assurance of his intention to give us aid against any Invasion, though it were
indeed for Religion; which he said, could not be but a pretense of the Invader,
for that the Invasion of the Realm was to be regarded, and not any cause or
pretext: Yet the doubt herein remained betwixt them unresolved, and so the
Ambassador seemed not therein to be satisfied, saving that in some secret
speech afterward with one or two of our Council apart (although he would not
have report thereof made) he thought his Master might be induced by some secret
means to make some particular promise betwixt his Master and us, by writing
separated from the public Treaty for a special point of a mutual defense in
case of Religion.

The second part of the doubt moved by the Ambassador, was, for the form,
manner, time, and quality of the aid that should be mutually given; wherein he
pressed to have had the like manner as was contracted in Anno 1543. betwixt the
Emperor Charles, and the King our Father, at which time either of the
Confederates was bound to give such aid as might amount to the charges of 600
Crowns by the day for the space of 4 months, in one year, or else some other
aid in certainty, which he could not name; but it may be the Kings Deputies
there might mean such Treaties as had been before contracted between our Father
and King Francis, Grandfather to the King, where there is one example of the
Treaty of 1532. betwixt the said two Kings; in both which Treaties the aids
were born at the charges of the Confederate Prince, that was required by the
Prince invaded. To which motion of the said Ambassador, our Council made such
Answers by imparting to him the forms of former Treaties, made both with the
house of Burgundy, and with the French Kings, as he in the end seemed satisfied
with such form of aid to be mutually agreed upon, as you your self have
propounded to them in your Paper delivered the 18 of the last, in an Article
verbatim, taken out of a Treaty betwixt the Emperor Charles and the King our
Father, in the year 1548. being before that first devised in a Treaty at
Cambray, in the year 1529, and one principal reason to appoint that manner of
aid better then any other, was this: If the aid should be given in a certainty,
and at the cost of the Prince that was not invaded, upon every request of a
Confederate, there might great inconvenience follow, in that one Prince might
oftener burden his Confederate in demanding succors without great necessity,
and in greater numbers then needful, was, if the charges of the said succors
should be maintained by the Confederate that so sent them, and not by himself:
Whereas on the other part; if the Prince that should demand succors, should
bear the charges of them himself, he would never demand the same oftener, nor in
greater numbers, nor keep them longer in pay then should be needful. And
accordingly to this reason, it was declared to the Ambassador, That in all
Treaties betwixt this Realm and France, and also Burgundy, the like Covenants
were made in all Leagues, saving one time with the Emperor Charles 1543. at
which time the Treaty was made both Offensive and Defensive against the French
King; and yet in the same year 1546. the same clause for aid, was by Treaty
betwixt the said Princes, revoked, having not been at any time put in
execution; and the ancient manner of aid to be at the charges of the Prince
demandant: and with these, and such like reasons, the Ambassador seemed to be
fully satisfied.

The third matter of doubt moved by the Ambassador, was, for the cause of
Scotland, that is, in what sort that State might be comprehended in this
Treaty; and thereupon it was said to the Ambassador, That we had no other
intention in the matter of Scotland, but to have the hostility and civil wars
to cease, and the Government of the Realm to be established to the contentation
of the Nation; for which purpose we had sent to both parties at difference, to
accord upon an abstinence from war, so as they might the better Treat and
accord amongst themselves; which if they would not, we would be content that
any such whom the French King our brother should send thither, should jointly
with some of ours, employ themselves, with the credit and amity amongst us two,
to direct them to accord amongst themselves: and therein we had no meaning to
withdraw them from the ancient Intelligence with the Crown of France, but that
they might have and keep the amity with us both. With which answer and
resolution, the Ambassador seemed well content; requiring, as the King his
Master had forborne, at our request, to send any force to either party, whereby
to hinder any accord, so we would do the like; which was agreed unto him.

Lastly, He moved the matter concerning the Article for the resort of our
Merchants to some Ports of France, with such liberties and securities as they
had in other Regions, offering that the King his Master was content to yield
therein to any reasonable demand, to the benefit of our Subjects. To which,
answer was made, That the Case did belong to our Merchants, to consider what
was meet for them, who should be spoken withal, and thereupon answer should be
given. This was the sum of that which passed betwixt the Ambassador and such of
our Council as were appointed to deal with him, who were, the Lord Keeper of
our great Seal, the Earl of Leicester, the Lord Admiral, the Lord of Burghly,
and Sr. Walter Mildmay.

And now, although you may perceive by this Conference had with the Ambassador,
what be the things that we have cause to like or mislike, upon the questions
moved: yet upon some further instruction of you, we will summarily inform you
what we like of the substance of the Articles sent unto us from you, being
propounded as well by the Kings Deputies as by your self. First, to the
Articles in Latin, delivered by the French Ambassador, dated the 17 of
January, we mislike not of the first Article for the continuance of former
Treaties in their force, which is necessary to be specially for the saving of
our rights and pretenses to Callais, according to the Treaty therefore made,
and remaining yet in force; so as it be added to the end of the Article; with
Condition that nothing in any former Treaty be by this clause continued, that
shall be repugnant or derogatory to the Articles of this present Treaty. The
second and third prohibiting any aid to be given to any persons that shall
invade, and to make a League for a mutual defense against all persons that
shall invade upon any cause. We mislike not the Tenor of the said Articles, so
as the words added in the second Article of your Writing dated the 18 of
January, which are these, Etiamsi fuerit religion^^ causa, praetextu, aut
color, which we would have you earnestly press upon such reasons to be
inserted, as your self has already remembered; and therein we would have you
secretly to cause them of the Religion there, to understand of your demand, and
to help to further it; and yet if you cannot have the same words to be
specially inserted, then you may according to your own offers, insert into the
Article these words, ^ub quocunque praetextu vel color and quavis de causa
nulla omnino qualicunque excepta: and besides these, you shall in secret manner
move, and most earnestly press it, that some special promise may be made in a
secret writing betwixt the King and us, signed and sealed mutually with both
our hands, for that purpose expressly, if any Invasion should be made, as though
the same had been expressed in the Treaty; without which secret provision to be
made, considering the matter has been in question, we would be very loath that
you should accord. We do not like that which is devised by them, which
begins, Conventum est quod quotiescunque ullus princeps, etc. wherein they
would have aid given, if any person go about to change or alter any Laws or
Edicts against the will of the Prince; but we rather like to have the aid only
given in case of invasion, or purpose of invading: For by the words of this
Article, we may percase hereafter be required to aid that King in the breaking
of his own Edicts for Religion, in case he himself shall be thereto willing;
and that either of this Subjects, or any others shall attempt or alter the
Edicts that may be made against the Religion reformed.

The Article beginning, Conventum est quod fadus and liga, is not to be
misliked for continuance of this Treaty; although the third Article of your
writing beginning, Tempus vero durationis, seems plainer and better, and
agrees with the like in former times.

The sixth being imperfect, beginning, De tempore antem and modo, would be
supplied with the like Clause and Article at length, mutatis mutandis; and as
you have excerped out of the year 1546. and as in the last of your writing of
the 18 of January. Now for our opinion of the Articles presented by you to the
French the 18. we do like well enough of the Preface; and for the first
Article, you may perceive well enough what we would have added thereto; That
nothing should be continued in former Treaties, being repugnant to this.

The second for a Covenant of a League to be defensive, we think not amiss
thereof, although the second and third of the French contain them plain enough
in fewer words, so as the one or the other may serve.

To the third of yours, we like as before is mentioned.

The fourth beginning, Et quamvis supervacuum, may be forborne, considering the
substance thereof is contained in the second, delivered by the French the 17 of
January.

The last of yours concerning the manner of aid, we like best, as before is
said, according to the Article of the Treaty of An. 1549.

As to the third Article delivered by you the 18 of January in one writing to
the Kings party, concerning the Arrest to be made of the Subjects of other
Princes, if any other Subjects should be arrested in a strange Country for
matter of Religion, we would not mislike if you could obtain the same; but for
that we think it very hard to be granted by the French King, as the time is, we
will not (...) you much to press it. But as to the other matter of our
Merchants, we do (...) of the manner of Articles presented by you, and yet we
cannot presently (...) in what form to have the same conceived fit for our
Merchants, and for (...); and therefore except you shall be shortly advertised
from us how to (...); more particularly we would have you insert some general
clause in the Treaty for such a purpose; and besides that, also to move it to
the King, that there may be some Colloquie had here betwixt the Kings
Ambassador, here R^sident, having authority therefore, and such as we shall
appoint after conference had with our Merchants, to Treat with the said
Ambassador thereupon.

Some other doubts may appear in the Writing sent from you, whereof the
Ambassador made no ment^^n, and yet fit for you to understand or mind therein,
if you shall thereto be pressed: but except you be pressed thereto by the other
party, we think it good that you should not remember the same; but if they will
needs move the same unto you, then you shall answer as follows.

First in the paper entitled with the letter B. and brought to you by Monsieur
Pinarts brother the 16. there are two doubts moved in the third Article,
beginning (A este auxi) and answer made, though not satisfactory in the fourth,
beginning, Sur le premier.

For the first, we do not mislike, but that one of the Confederates should be
bound to defend the other being invaded; although the other Prince may pretend
that he has been thereto provoked by the Prince invaded: So as the provocation
be not first given by any open War, or Invasion made by the Prince that shall
require aid; for it is not consonant to reason that the one Prince Confederate
should be aided by another, where he himself that requires the aid, has by
his own Invasion of another Prince, provoked himself to be invaded: And if they
shall not like of that exception where the Prince invaded gave occasion by
former invasion; then you shall accord to have the words general, as have been
in former Treaties. And for this matter you may gather some light by the Treaty
called L'Esclarissement of the peace made in An. 1545. in the exposition of the
sixth and seventh Articles betwixt the Emperor Charles, and the King our Father.

The second seems doubtful to be answered, that is, considering the charges
of the aid shall be born by the Prince requirant; it may be permitted that the
succors given may continue in the pursuit of the Invader, out of the Country
of the Prince invaded: But therein it is reason that some time be thereunto
limited, that is, by the space of 6 or 7 days at the most, to be out of the
said Country, or rather some distance of a league or two; but if the Deputies
there treating with you, can be content to have the cause so conceived, as the
aid shall not exceed the limits of the Confederate Country, you shall like it
best. And so you may let it alone in general words as heretofore the same has
been in former Treaties, without raising up of such questions.

The fifth Article beginning Item a este en avaunt, we think it reasonable that
the Prince that shall defend the other, may continue their treats which he has
with the Prince against whom the aid shall be given, and suffer Traffic and
Commerce for their Subjects mutually, saving only it may be provided that he
shall not suffer any Armor nor Munition of War, or other like things to be
carried out of his Country to the offense of the Prince whom he shall aid.

As to the last Clause of the Writing concerning Scotland, we do not disallow
of the Answer in the Margent, made by you in Latin, but yet our meaning is not
to have any Article in the Treaty comprehending that matter. In this sort we
have thought meet to instruct you, and considering the former Treaties betwixt
us and the French King, shall continue and be confirmed hereby; we see no cause
to remember you of the inserting of any other necessary Articles which have
been heretofore comprised in former Treaties; so as nevertheless it be provided
by a special Article, that by this Treaty, nor by any part thereof, any thing
be derogatory to such other Treaties as we have, and be now in force with any
other Prince, and namely with the King of Spain: and as to the comprehension of
any Princes according to the ancient manner of Treaties, we would have you to
enquire the intention of the French Kings Deputies, whom they mean to
comprehend, and as near as you can to comprehend the same, saving only the
Bishop of Rome, and that Sea, and not forget the Emperor, besides in person the
Princes of the Empire, and the Electors of the same, and namely the Count and
Countess of Embden, and the Count and Sonetie of Hanze. And if they will needs
have mention made of Scotland, we can be content that the same shall be (if we
will not accept the name of the King) by the name Regnum Scotiae, or Regnum and
status Scotiae, we do for these purposes send you a Commission under our great
Seal of England, wherein we have joined with you our Ambassador Francis
Walsingham, and our servant H. Killegrew, who is there with you, wherein our
meaning is, that as soon as Walsingham shall come thither, he shall join with
you, and within some convenient time Killegrew may return according to our
first order given to him at his departure thither: And yet until Walsingham
shall come thither, Killegrew may remain as joined. And considering the whole
burden of the matter of learning, in conceiving the Articles of this Treaty,
shall rest almost wholly in this Treaty, we would that when you are proceeded
as far as you can, and as you think meet, that before you shall subscribe the
Treaty, you shall send the same hither to us to be more circumspectly perused,
and thereupon we will with like speed return it as we shall think meet, and so
may you reasonably declare your intention to the French King, pretending your
instruction of your self, and therewith to use the same as they may not suspect
it to come of any intention of delay.

At Westminster the 13 of February, 1571. Will. Burleigh.


To the Right Honorable, and my very good Lord, the Lord of Burleigh.
YOur Letters sent by the Scot, dated the 6 of this month, I have received; he
willed me to inform you, that since his coming hither, he has learned that the
King gives but a deaf ear to their causes, notwithstanding that they hope that
upon Graunges brothers coming, who is now at the Court, there will be somewhat
obtained for their relief, which if it take not place, then they mean to repair
to Flanders, where the Lord Seaton has received from the Pope 20 thousand
Crowns, who is putting himself in readiness to repair into Scotland. Further,
he willed me to show your Lordship that the L. Fleming looks for a Barque of
his own to arrive at New Haven about the end of this month, in the which he
means to repair to Scotland, with such forces as he can get, either by
consent from the King, or by stealth otherwise. This in effect is that which he
willed me to impart unto your Lordship. I find this he says, confirmed by
other Intelligence I have. Graunges brother (as I learn) means to protest to
the King, that unless they may have Men, Money, and Munition out of hand for
their relief, that then they shall be driven to yield to such composition as
will be made to the Queen of England, which will not much tend to the benefit
of France. After Sir Tho. Smiths assurance of her Majesty's intention, I
suppose the King will persuade them to fall to agreement among themselves,
without further intermedling in their causes.

From all the Ports both innormandy and Picardy, Cane only excepted, I learn
there is no preparation of ships: Shortly I hope to understand what is done in
Cane. And so leaving further to trouble your Lordship, I most humbly take my
leave,

at Paris the 29 of December, 1571. Your Honors to command. Fr. Walsingham.


To the Right Honorable, and my very good Lord, the Lord of Burleigh.
TOuching your Lordships by Sir Tho. Smith, according to her Majesty's order, I
have caused the King to understand, as well the trust she has in him, as also
how much she desires his presence at the Court, whereby Sir Tho. Smith may be
the better assisted by his advice; some like office I have also used towords I.
who has always been an especial furtherer of the cause. From him who lives
not far from this Town, I have received most earnest promise that he will do
his uttermost: and for that he is here employed by the King in the punishment
of those that committed the late disorder; he has written secretly to his
friends to the Court, to sound there in what state the matter stands; and as
they find, secretly to advertise Sir Thomas, he protests that he would be
loath to see her Majesty abused, as any Subject she has that loves her most
dearly: He has great hope that the matter will take good success, for that he
sees the state of both Realms does necessarily require so strait an amity as
marriage brings: He promises to use the more expedition in that which is
committed to his charge, to the end he may repair to the Court with the more
speed. Lineroles, who by the House of Guise and the rest of the Spanish
Faction, was made an instrument to dissuade his Master, was slain the ninth of
this Month, his death yielded no small further^nce to the Cause: I hope
therefore Sir Thomas Smiths first dispatch will bring the Olive Branch. And so
leaving further to trouble your Honor at this present, I most humbly take my
leave,

at Paris, December. 8. 1571. Your Honors to command. Fr. Walsingham.


Your Lordships of the 8, by Sir Thomas Smith, I have received, and according
to her Majesty's order expressed in the same, I have by means of a third
person, who heretofore has been employed betwixt us, caused the person you
know of, to understand the great trust her Majesty reposeth in him, as also
her desire to have him at the Court during the time of Sir Tho. Smiths being
there, whereby he may the better have the assistance of his advice. Touching
the matter it self, I know not how to judge of it, for that I have been two
Months absent from the Court; as I have cause to doubt, so have I cause more to
hope; to doubt, for that her Majesty's long deferring in sending, may have bred
some doubt here of her cold inclination that way, and so cause them to give ear
to some other offers, having small hope of this: To hope, first for that there
is no other match worthy the seeking elsewhere; secondarily, for that they
begin to fear very much the greatness of Spain, and therefore desire to be
strengthened by the Arm of England; and though that may be done by way of
League, yet they think the marriage the surest knot of amity. After Sir Tho.
Smith has had audience, it will then soon appear what is to be looked for in
that behalf. Lastly, for that Lineroles, the chief disswader of the Marriage is
lately slain. Marshal M. who is employed here by the King, in punishment of the
authors of the late disorder, means to make the more haste to the Court, to
the end to further the matter, whereof he hops there will grow success. Thus
leaving further to trouble your honor at this present, I most humbly take my
leave.

At Paris, the last of December, 1571. Your Honors to Command, Fr. Walsingham.


A minute of my Lord of Burleighs Letter to Sir Thomas Smith, of the 28 of
December.
SInce your departure from hence, there has no new thing of vallue happened;
but the discharging of the late Spanish Ambassador, who has both in Office and
out of Office, used himself very crookedly, perniciously, and maliciously
against the State; and namely and openly against me, not forbearing but in open
Co^cel, directing his Speech to me, saying, that I had been and was the cause
of all the unkindnesse that had chanced betwixt the King his Master, and the Q.
Maj. whereunto as it became me for truths sake, I answered with more modest
terms then he deserved, and referred my self to all the Lords in Council, to
report of me whether any thing had been said or done by me from the beginning
of these broils concerning him or his Master, or the Arrest that had not been
ordered and directed by her Majesty in Council, all which the whole Lords did
affirm, and my Lord of Sussex in the Italian tongue did very plainly, and very
earnestly confirm it; but yet his cholor would not be so tempered, and so he
was dismissed, and Mr. Knolls appointed to tend on him at his house.

This was done the thirteenth of this Month; and until the 24 he could not be
gotten out of the Town, and then he went to Greenwich; and on Saint Stephens
day to Gravesend, where he yet remains; but this day or to morrow he is to
remove to Canterbury, and John Hawkins (with whom he is well enough agreed,
notwithstanding the braw that had been for Hawkins spoil in the Indies) is now
appointed to pass him over at Dover to Callais, in a Ship of the Queens
Majesty's, and to confirm the continuance of his malice, where there was a
full determination made by Treaty, by one Monsieur of the Low-Countrie, and
Thomas Fiascio a Genevoise, for a mutual restitution on both parts, and the
same part in writing to have been sealed and subscribed; he has so handled the
matter, as by his addition of certain words, the whole is become void.

For if our Merchants should admit his device, they should be without all
surety of their Goods in Spain; and contrariwise, the Spaniards should first
have theirs arrested here, whereby it is likely that the intent of this Treaty
will break off, and therewith our Merchants are best contented: For now
considering the breaking off proceeds from the other party, it is intended
that there shall be a speedy sale of the strangers Commodities; and therewith
our own Merchants shall be duly recompensed.

At this present there is another come from the King of Portugal, to move an
end of all arrest, and renew the Traffic between this Realm and his; whereby
it is manifestly seen, that there shall follow a very good vent for all
Commodities that Spain was wont to expend.

As yet there is no accord known to us betwixt the Kings party in Scotland, and
them of the Castle, for that they of the Castle cannot have their reasonable
demands for the restitution of their Lands and Goods well assured.

The French Ambassador lately by the Queens Majesty's appointment, dealt with
my Lord of Leicester and me upon these Points following, which he said he was
willed to do by his Masters Letters of the first of this Month.

For offer of Amity by Marriage or League.

To complain of the intention of her Majesty to send force into Scotland to
aid the Kings party, with a kind of threatening, that the King might not endure
but aid the other party with force, and in speech hereof, a request that some
expedition might be made to procure the Queen of Scots restitution, with the
Queens Majesty's assurance.

To demand restitution of money that was intercepted, being sent toward
Scotland for Viraque, alleging that the one half was the Kings money, and
that though the Queen Mother had otherwise at the first spoken to Mr
Walsingham, yet she now understands the contrary by the Kings Treasurers who
sent it.


To these was answered.
To the first, That you had Commission amply to satisfy the King.

To the second, That nothing was intended to be done by force, if they that
were of the Castle would abide by their own offers which they had made to the
Queens Majesty by Messages and Letters, viz. That they would accord with the
other party, so as the Queens Majesty would provide, for their honors, lives,
and their Lands, and Goods, which her Majesty intended to do, and therein to
do nothing that should be prejudicial to the ancient League betwixt the French
King and the Crown of Scotland; and so was told him that you had Commission to
declare to the King; wherewith the Ambassador seemed very well content. As to
devise any way expedient for the Scotch Queen, absolutely was answered, That
the Queens Majesty would never assent thereto, neither would any Counceller of
this estate willingly permit any consultation to be made thereof, such was her
known malice to the Queens Majesty.

The third, for the money, we told him as plain a tale to the contrary, and
vouched the Bishop of Ross his Confession thereof; but the Ambassador would
still have us believe him, which he could not obtain.

This Treaty was long on both sides, and ended in good sort and friendly. In
the end he was earnest for his freedom of impost for 30 tonn; we said that he
should be free from as much as he should spend in his house; but that contented
him not: finally, considering the terms of towardness to friendship, he shall
have his own desire, whereby spending seven or eight tonn, the rest shall pay
for his expenses. Of all these things I have thought good to scribble to you
this Childermas day in my bed, and am bold to send this Letter unsealed in a
Letter of Mr. Walsinghams, because he shall not be ignorant.

I think the Duke shall be arraigned on Monday the 14 of the next Month.

At Westminster the 28 of December, 1571. Your assured friend, W. Burleigh.


To the right honorable and my very good friend, Mr. Francis Walsingham, her
Majesty's Ambassador in France.
SIr, You shall understand, that immediately after Sir Tho. Smith had taken his
leave of the Court, a servant of my brother Killigrews, named Geofery, came to
the Court with Letters from you and from the Court, and before this bearer can
come to you, I doubt not but you shall have understanding by Mr. Smith, what
charge he has; and therein here is now an earnest determination to spend time
no longer then honor will spare; and so I thin^ this bearer will say of his
knowledge, who surely makes good demonstration of his honest meaning to all
Parties, and therein he is to be comforted.

On Friday last, the Spanish Ambassador was sent for to the Council, and in
the Queens name, commanded to depart the Realm; the same has been oftentimes
intended, but never put in execution before this present, and now provoked by
intelligence of certain new practices within this Realm, to persuade the
Subjects that the King his Master would aid them with power this Spring, etc.
he has also lately searched for certain -- Barons Walls, he shall depart by
Dover into the Low Country.

I can write no more for lack of leisure, being occasioned to write at this
time diverse ways, and not unoccupied with feasting my friends at the marriage
of my daughter, who is this day married to the Earl of Oxford to my comfort, by
reason of the Queens Majesty, who has very honorably with her presence and
great favor accompanied it. I am sorry that your health is not more sperable
to be speedily recovered, but I trust after you have rested so in convenient
time the Medicines shall have more power to do their effects. My Lord Gray of
Wilton has had the like disease this Summer, and seems to be cured or eased
by the industry of an Italian Physician here in London, called Silva, he is
thought to be more experimented in Surgery then in Physic; for so is his
father who lies in the Savoy with the Duke; if you will send me some note or
description, and therewith a note of their method in curing of you, I would
confer with this Silva, and advertise you of my opinion. I wish to hear more
life of the matter of 57. And thus ending with my most hearty commendations,
etc.

From Westminster, December, 1571. Yours most assured, Will. Burliegh.


To the Right Honorable Francis Walsingham Esquire her Majesty's Ambassador
Resident in France.
SIr, Though I had no great matter to you, yet if I had my health, being now
subject to a combat with a Fever, whereof this day I have had an assault of a
second fit; I must be excused to hold my hand, where my head is not able to
command it, as this bearer can inform you. Since your Letters which came when
Sir Tho. Smiths were brought; I received from you two other of the 17. by which
I see you are advertised from good places, how things passed at the Court
there, and in that matter of the third person newly offered, his age, and other
qualities unknown, makes me doubtful how to use speech thereof. The
Ambassador has dealt, as he says, secretly with me: And I have showed no
argument to one hand or other; as I may learn further from thence, I will deal;
but fear occupies me more in this cause of her Marriage, whom God has
suffered to lose so much time, then for my next fit: and yet truly, I have
more cause then before time, for it comes of a great cold, and a Rhume fallen
into my Lungs, where it is lodged as yet without moving; but in respect of
other things I see and suffer, I weigh not my own carcass. The Queens Majesty
has been always a merciful Lady, and by mercy she has taken more harm then
by justice, and yet she thinks that she is more beloved in doing her self harm.
God save her to his honor long among us. Mather has in presence of my Lord of
Leicester, Mr. Treasuror, Mr. Mildmay, manfully charged Borgest the Spanish
Ambassadors Secretary, that his Master and he both enticed Mather to murder
me; and Borgest denying it, Mather has offered to try it, Con la spada, etc.

From Westminster the 23 of January, 1571. Your loving Friend, Will. Burleigh.


To Francis Walsingham Esquire the Queens Majesty's Ambassador Resident in France.
SIr, I have nothing to write worth your good hearing, for that I might write
is not to my liking; but Gods will be fulfilled. This day the Marshal of
Berwick and Mr. Randolph, are gone for Scotland matters: I mistrust not the
matter by their handling, but they lack that which others should handle; you
know what I mean; and yet here has lacked no solicitation. I have not been
able by a cold, to see her Majesty these eight days, and this day I am in
Physic thoroughly sick, and I write, as you see, like one unsettled; and surely
in mine opinion others, though very few, lack not to solicit by speech,
oportune and importune. The Spanish late Ambassador passed hardly over,
conducted by Hawkins to Callais, and like himself at Gravelin, he turned out
all the English men that he found; and yet he knows that here remains
Monsieur Sweringham at the request of the Duke of Alva. Here is no small
expectation whether the Duke shall die or continue prisoner. I know not how to
write, for I am here in my Chamber subject to reports which are contrariwise,
Mather and Berny, besides that they intended to kill me, have now plainly
confessed their intention and desire to have been rid of the Queens Majesty;
but I think she may by justice be rid of them. Mather denies not but that he
was a 8 2 0 6, and now says he is a 0 2 1 0 6. I wish him grace:

From Westminster, the second of February, 1571. Yours assuredly, W. Burliegh.


To the right Honorable Francis Walsingham Esquire her Majesty's Ambassador
Resident in France.
SIr, I heartily thank you for your frequent Letters, and especially for that
of the 9. whereby you will not be afraid of the Scotch preparation of force out
of that Country; indeed they should much disturb our proceedings there
privately; for Mr. Drury and Mr. Randolph, are there about this instant,
laboring to reconcile them of the Castle to the Kings side; but this French
Ambassador understands the matter to be only about the Treaty of abstinence
until la Croque may come, whose haste I wish were retarded with a fit of my
gout. The Queens Majesty is very earnest that you should return to the Court,
specially because she would have you join with Sir Tho. Smith in this Treaty;
and when I excused your absence for the recovery of your full healing; she
said, that she understood that you were healed almost one month past; and
thereto I said, that as you were healed, so was there as much need for you to
rest for the confirmation of your healing, or otherwise you should suffer a
relapse with as great peril as before. Well, quoth she, see you write to him
that it is my desire, and will him to find means to repair gently to the Court,
and there he may rest him: But for all this, it were better her Majesty should
mislike of your tarrying, if it be necessary, whereby you may after that serve
her better, then by going now to do one piece of service, thereby be made
unable to do the rest of many.

I cannot write you what is the inward cause of the stay of the Duke of
Norfolks death, only I find her Majesty diversely disposed, sometime when she
speaks of her Majesty's danger, she concludes that justice should be done;
another time when she speaks of his nearness of blood, of his superiority in
honor, etc. she stays. As upon Saturday she signed a Warrant for the Writs
to the Sheriffs of London for his execution on Monday, and so all preparations
were made with the expectation of all London, and concourse of many thousands
yesterday in the morning; but their coming was answered with another ordinary
execution of Mather and Berny, for conspiring the Queens Majesty's death, and
of one Rolph, for counterfeiting the Queens Majesty's hand twice to get
concealed Lands. And the cause of this disappointment was this, suddenly on
Sunday (...) in the night, the ^ueens Majesty sent for me, and entered into a
great misliking that the Duke should die the next day, and said she was and
should be disquieted, and said she would have a new Warrant made that night to
the Sheriffs, to forbear until they should hear further; and so they did: Gods
Will be fulfilled, and aid her Majesty to do her self good. I have signed
your Bill with your special money, which though it be great, yet being by you
expended, I would not but allow. This matter of Monsieur is here grievously in
secret taken, and surely as it was not here well used in drawing it out at
length, which was pollitiquely done; so has it not been there friendly
ordered; and yet I do not so show mine opinion of her Majesty's stomaking of
that part which now is to be dissembled where the amity is so needful. I can
write no more.

From Westminster, Feb. 11. 1571. Yours assuredly, W. Burliegh.


Barker being arraigned the last week, confessed the Treasons, and said, That
the beginning of his offense was, in that he regarded more the love and
pleasing of the Duke his Master, then of the Prince, and of his Country; and
so freely confirmed the Dukes guiltiness. The next day Higford did also confess
his fault, terming it a concealment of his Masters Treasons, and added, that he
did oftentimes dissuade the Duke from the same.

These two open acts have fortified the Dukes Condemnation.

To the Queens Majesty.
Pleases it your Highness, Yesterday the 21 of this Month, Mr. Walsingham,
Mr. Killigrew, and I, had Audience, first of the Q. Mother in her Chamber,
being by the young Queen, and Madam Margaret; to the Q. Mother I declared, That
I had received a Packet from your Highness to me, and another to the King her
Son, which I sent immediately, Yea (says she) we have received it. The Queen
my Sovereign (said I) takes in very good part the good inclination of the King
and his Deputies, toward a more straight amity, and likes well our doing
hitherto, so that we proceed to the perfecting and concluding; and has sent
unto us a Power and Authority under the great Seal of England, to conclude as
appertains; and so we are ready whenever the Kings Deputies will, to
proceed as we have began. To this the Queen answered, That she was glad that
her good sister took it well; and she may see (says the Queen) that we mean
good says, and would proceed indeed to the streightest amity and love that can
be betwixt two Princes; and if you will even to morrow, it were best to lose no
time; we (quoth I) are ready at all times, and would be sorry to protract any
time, for both the Queen my Mistress would gladly have me at home, otherwise to
employ me, and I my self would gladly be there; and therefore I pray your
Majesty let no time be spared, but from day to day let us be doing, until it
be perfected, which God willing, shall be shortly. Ye say well, and it is best
(said she;) but Madam (quoth I) there is a matter which I must show of among
other; there is one taken prisoner in Ireland, named Stakbold, who confesses
that the Card. of Lorain set him up to stir up a Rebellion in Ireland, to the
maintenance of James Fitzmorris a Traitor and Rebel. There you say this (quoth
she) and laughed, I am sure of the good will you bear to the Cardinal of
Lorain: It is true (quoth I) even for the good will I bear him, for I can bear
him no good will that attempteth any such thing, and especially against the
Queen my Mistress; but (quoth I) he indeed did it in the Kings name and yours;
the which thing, although the Queen my Mistress does know well enough (for the
good will that you both do bear her) not to be true; ye^ she willed me to show
it unto you, and to pray you to call de la Rocha, which is Knight of the Order,
and Gentleman of the Chamber to the King, who was the Conductor of it, who can
tell your Majesty all the proceedings, and that order may be taken in it, and
of this matter Monsieur L. Ambassador, Mr. Walsingham can tell you more. Then
Mr. Walsingham declared the case unto her, and that he had moved her in it
almost a year since.

I am remembered (said she) that there was such a thing about to be done by the
stirring of a Bishop that came out of Spain; it was the Archbishop of Cassils
(quoth I) in Ireland, as he calls himself. You know Monsieur L; Ambassador
(says she) to Mr. Walsingham, that the King my Son disavowed it, and stayed
de la Roche, that he should not go thither, and that he should revoke all his
Power: Yet (says Mr. Walsingham) there be twenty Harquebusiers, or thereabouts
remaining still, and have remained there ever sithence in a Castle; if it
please you to speak with de la Roche, he can tell your Majesty how it does
stand. He is here in the Court (says she) and goes away shortly, he shall be
spoken withal, and if any men be there, the King my Son knows not of it,
and they shall be revoked.

Then Mr. Walsingham said there was two Hostages taken of that Fitzmorris, who
were at Nantes in the Governors House, he prayed that they might also be
delivered; the Queen said she would send thither.

Then Mr. Killigrew delivered your Highness Letters unto her, which she read
very dilligently; and for that matter she writes to her Majesty, -- I am sure
will tell your Majesty's Highness.

From thence we came to the Kings Chamber, where I said to the King, that we
received a Packet from your Majesty, and another for him, which we sent to
Monsieur Pinart, and that your Highness was well pleased with our doings: I
have received the Packet (said he) and I am glad the Queen my Sister does like
of your doings here; I would it were done, says he, so soon as could be; and
if it be the longer a doing, so it be well done, it is well; for I would have
it substantially and firmly done as might be. I desire nothing more. I have
also (said I) such Power sent me under the Great Seal of England as is
required; howbeit without that, whatsoever I had agreed unto, ^ am sure the
Queen my Mistress would not have gone from it; but at the Subscription it was
then necessary to have had the power, the which I have now; and for other
matters, I trust we shall shortly make an end. And for the general matters
touching the Merchants to bring that Traffic into your Country, and the
benefit which the Low country had by it, and would not acknowledge it; but for
the particularities of the Privileges, and such things, because it would have
some tract of time, the Queens Majesty, if it did so please you, does wish
that you would send some power to your Ambassador Resident to Treat with her
Highness Council thereupon. You say well (says he) and my Ambassador has
written so to me; and I will send to you when you shall see the power that I
will send him, that you may judge of it; but when meet you next? To morrow Sir
(quoth I) if you please, and so from day to day until we make an end: Best of
all (says he) let it be even so.

Then I told the King, that even now at this time by chance, in examining of a
prisoner in Ireland, it falls out and appears plain, that the Cardinal of
Lorain had not done enough to raise up troubles to your Majesty in your Realm,
and to trouble England and Scotland, but he could not let the poor Realm of
Ireland alone to be in quiet, but there he would stir upon Sedition and
Rebellion also; at the which the King laughed heartily; and (quoth I) in this
he abuses your Majesty's name; and as of gift he would give the Counties of
Ormond and Oosory to one James Fitzmorris, a Rebel, and promises aid of men and
munition for them there to rebel against the Q. my Mistress. In my name (quoth
he) I never heard of it; Jesus! (quoth he) I could never think any trouble or
hurt to my good Sister. Sir, (quoth I) here is the Article of Confession of one
Stackbold, who affirms this: Here is at the Court, as I hear say, one de la
Roche, Knight of the Order, and Gentleman of your Chamber, who was the doer of
it, he can inform your Majesty at the full of the matter: Well, let me alone
(quoth he) with it, I will see it redressed well enough. Then Mr. Walsingham
somewhat more declared what had been done in the matter, and showed the King
what the Queen Mother had said to us, that de la Roche was now in the Court,
and therefore prayed him that he might be sent for, and see order taken in that
matter, as appertained to the good will which he had to the amity of both the
Realms, which the King said he would. After he said to the King that Mr.
Killigrew should now depart home, seeing he was come to his old Room, but that
we desired him to stay a day or two to hear our next meeting, and to see how
near we should come to agreement, and so to bring to the Q. Majesty some good
contentment. Whereupon the King said that thing should be ordered, and with
such expedition, that he should come home well-pleased, and bring the Queens
Majesty such word as she should therewith be contented, peradventure more then
she would think, and so departed for that day. This day we looked to be sent
for, but the King went on hunting, and pretense was made to us that the Council
has had the Bill which we delivered to the King in consideration, and that
they would have his Majesty's advice of the day, time, and place of our
meeting; after they had consulted upon it to the intent we might after we once
began, continually travel until the end were made. This is so much as hitherto
is done. Thus we commit your Majesty to Almighty God.

From Blois. Feb. 22. 1571. Your Majesty's most humble Subjects and Servants,
Tho. Smith, Fra. Walsingham.


To the Queens Majesty.
Pleases it your Majesty to be advertised, the last of February, when the
Treaty of the League was in manner at a point, and Master Killegrew was ready
to take his leave of the King and Queen Mother, we demanded audience, and came
all three to the Court; we were first brought into the Kings Chamber, where was
also the Duke of Alanson, and other Noblemen; where I first declared to the
King, That his Deputies and we were now almost at a point, and in all other
things we thought we should agree. He said, he had understood that, and was
very glad of it, hoping that this was but a beginning, and that the Amity
should increase daily, and bring forth more fruit. But Sir (quoth I) there is
yet the matter of Religion not fully agreed upon, without the which well
provided for, I know not how the League can go forward, or be sure. The King
said he could not have it put in the League, but it should be in such general
words made, that the matter of Religion should be contained. Sir (quoth I) that
cannot be, nor no general words can contain it, if the party that is bound will
say, that it is against his Conscience, or he meant it not. Why, says the
King, for that I will write to the Queen my sister with mine own hand what I
mean even to that; and that I will as well defend her in that case, as if it
were expressed in words. Sir (quoth I) if you will have it in an Article by it
self, and as concluded betwixt you, so as it be put it writing, and sealed with
the Great Seal of France, as the true interpretation of your meaning in the
League, then we can be content with it, although in the Treaty it be not
specially put in, but in general words; for being so made, it shall be of as
much force by the Interpretation as the League. Then Master Walsingham
declared, That it was more honorable for the King, and more assurance, that it
were put expressly in the Treaty; for then not only the Princes of Germany, but
also other Kings, which be of the Religion, would be right glad to enter into
it; and by that means only you should (says he) be able to countervail the
King of Spain, yea, and all the rest of Europe that should attempt any thing
against you; whereas if it be done in general words, or underhand, they will
not trust the matter so much, nor have so good color or occasion to desire to
enter into this League with you; and what or whom need your Majesty fear,
being so well proped up and fortified with this so strong a League. This may
be, says the King, hereafter, my Council tells me it should be dangerous for
me at this present, to have it in express words; but what makes it matter, I
mean it so, and what I once say, I will keep it, I will rather dye then not
keep my promise: Here I say it to you, and will write it to the Queen my
Sister. How do you mean Sir (quoth I) in a writing, after the fashion of a
Treaty, and sealed with your Great Seal of France, or but in a Letter close. In
a Letter close (says he) signed with my hand, where I will express the same
words are meant as you would have put in the League; and I will promise that I
will be ready to defend in that case, as well as in any other, and so I will
indeed; and that I say I will keep, to dye for it. Sir (quoth I) for you I do
think no less, and I am sure that the Queens Majesty our Mistress and we do
take your Majesty to be a faithful Prince, and constant in your words as any
is living; but when we speak Treaties, they be not made in words, nor in such
Letters missive, but after another authentical sort sworn and sea led; without
which order I cannot, for my part, take that it is substantially and orderly
done; and besides that, this Treaty is not personal, but is perpetual, and is
for you and your Successors. Why, says he, it is made for our two lives and
one year after, and then within that year, if I should dye, such a letter may
be gotten: And if my Son, or whosoever should come after me, should not keep
his promise, which he has spoken and written, I could wish him strangled, and
not alive. Says Mr. Walsingham, though the Queens Majesty should peradventure
be content with such assurance, yet some of her Council would not, and leagues
must be made not only to satisfy the Prince, but also the Subjects,
especially of such a one as this, which is a comfort, and assurance of all
parties. For when upon this hope, they shall traffic here abroad in your
Country and others, and see in the Treaty no assurance (for general words is
holden for no assurance) in this case they will be afraid to traffic or
travel abroad: And Sir, ye had need consider well of it; for as there be that
do favor this league, as we do, there be other I warrant you which be of the
Spanish faction, and would be loath it should go forward: and if they taking
this advantage, should persuade the Queen from it, and in the mean while bring
her some other offer; and then this break off, it would be hard to get it
again. Break off (says he) I had rather dye, I will satisfy the Queen my
Sister well enough, I do not doubt it, though you be never so stiff; I
understand she will be content with such assurance, as I tell you I do assure
you. Sir (quoth I) I do not know so much, and think verily she will not be
content; and until know more from her Majesty, I must still think so. Well,
says the King, ye have coursed me a while, now must I course you again; for
the Queen of Scots, I must have that my request put into the Treaty for her,
make what answer you will, she is my Kinsevvoman, and my Sister in law, and
she was my Sovereign; and you do know the league which is betwixt that Realm
and my Realm, I can do no less then have the same inserted into the league. Sir
(quoth I) as we have written to your Deputies, we have no Commissions or
Authority to treat of any such matter. Touching the late Queen of Scots, she
was your Sovereign, thanks be to God she is not now (with that he laughed)
and it is thought, when she was Queen here, she deserved not very well
neither of your Realm, nor of your House; and she is your Kinsvvoman, so is she
also to the Queen my Mistress; but if she were your daughter or your son, if he
or she would procure your death, or to have your Crown from you, would you
not see justice done on him or her that should attempt it. What is that (says
he) so I repeated it again, that if his son should attempt to depose him from
his Crown, or procure his death, that he should be content that justice should
rather be done, then to be still in that danger. Why (says he) I do not
require to have it put in the same league. Says Mr. Killegrew, fire and water
cannot be together, the one is contrary to the other; the league is made for a
perpetual and strait Amity betwixt you and the Queens Majesty of England, and
you would treat for the Queens most mortal and dangerous enemy; this cannot
stand together, you must take her now for dead, and you cannot tell whether
she be dead or alive, and why should you then require her to be put in the
league. And if it be so (says the King) what remedy, then there can be no
more suit made for her, and so we took our leave. And from thence we were
conveyed to the Queen Mothers Chamber, where was the Lady Margaret, and a
great number of other Ladies, where first I declared to the Q. that where she
had promised me, that for the Merchants that be in the Staple or Hanse, they
might have the exercise of their religion after the manner of the English
Church; now when we come to put it in the Treaty, the Kings Deputies will not
agree to it. They say they heard nothing of it. Yes (said she) I promised that
they might have it in their house, with the doors shut, and in the English
tongue. (Quoth I) I pray you let them know so much, for I do not think that ye
have told them. Yes (says she) but you must not have this in the Treaty, but
by another way. So (quoth I) Madam, you still cut us off something, as we but
half agree to every thing; but how shall it be, that I might once see the
manner of it, and judge of it. But for the greater matter we have with the
King, as touching the League, in the which except these words be expressed, we
think the league not to bear the meaning which we do take it should; and yet to
please the King, and to go so near as we could, we were content, if the King
will, with another Article or Treaty declarative, made apart betwixt his
Majesty and the Q. my Mistress, under the great Seal of England and France,
declare that in general words he does mean, also in the matter of Religion to
demand nothing else; but the King now speaks to us to do it by a Letter close
missive, the which for my part I do not esteem in such a case as this is, and
know not what it is, and how it can be. Why did you think (says she) that the
King my son would deceive you, the Q. your Mistress, my good sister, would be
content with it we know well enough. Madam (quoth I) we know not so much, nor I
cannot believe it for my part: But if she would, what is that for us that be
her Ministers, which must be (so much as our poor capacities will extend) that
we do wisely, surely and substantially in such affairs for her Majesty, as she
does put in our credit, till we understand her mind be otherwise changed, if
you understand her mind to be otherwise then we yet do know, she is our
Sovereign and Mistress, we must be content to obey. Other talk we had about the
matter, each of us three with her, much after that we had with the King; but
ever when she was brought to a strait, that was her shift, she knew well enough
her Majesty would be content with such a letter, and that so she was given to
understand: Till at the last I said, that except there were further assurance
for the matter of Religion, we could not, nor durst not subscribe the Treaty,
until we were better certified that your Highness would be so content, for my
conscience was against it, to leave so great a point upon so little a hold.
Then (as the King said) he would speak with his Council, and we should know
more. The Queen Mother said, she would speak with her son in the matter. Then I
required her, that she would do so much as call for Monsieur de Foix, and show
him how she was agreed for the Merchants, and that he would make haste with the
Treaty, as it was agreed upon, saving for the mending of three or four words;
for I saw now I must be fain to send into England, before I can subscribe it.
She said, she would not fail; but that (said she) if it be but that doubt, or
some such small thing, it might be let alone, till one should come out of
England. The King my son will send over the Marshal Montmorency, because the
Queen your Mistress desired it; and he desires again that she would send hither
my Lord of Leicester, whom he desires to see and honor for the good affection
that he bears to the Amity betwixt the two Realms, and to acquit himself for
the presents which he has diverse times sent unto him, and then she doubted not
all things should be done as your Majesty would desire. Nay, Madam (quoth I) I
know the fashion of leagues, it must be first agreed upon betwixt the
Commissioners, that no words be altered, then subscribed with the hands of both
the parties, your Commissioners delivering the part signed with their hands to
us, and ours next to them, then the Prince causes it to be made under the
great Seal of the Realm, and so causes it to be delivered each to others
Ambassador; he that comes to see it sworn to, may make a new League, if the
Princes will so, to alter that he cannot; for the Princes be bound to ratify
and swear to that, the which the Commissioners were agreed upon. And it were
not wisdom to send such personages as your Majesty speaks of to an uncertain
League, you may consider my Mistress will not do it. Well (says she) I will
speak with the King my self, and send you Monsieur de Foix, who shall treat
with you of all these matters. Then Mr Walsingham asked her, if any thing were
done as touching de la Roche and the matters in Ireland. And she said, yea; and
that de la Roche says it is nothing, and that there is not a French man there,
and that he will lay his head on it. I pray you send home word, that it may be
tried out, and if he do not say truth, that he may feel smart for it, and be
well punished. Then Mr. Killegrew took his leave of the Queen Mother and the
Lady Margaret, as he did before in the Kings Chamber, of the King and the Duke,
for so they name the Duke d'Alanson of all whom he had gracious and gentle
words, as he can show your Majesty he could not, for diverse respects,
conveniently have taken his leave before. The younger Queen is taken here to be
undoubtedly with child; for she has all the tokens of a woman that has
conceived, and they gess she has gone three months and more, whereof the King
and Queen Mother is not a little joyful. Thus we most humbly commit your
Highness to the tuition of Almighty God.

From Bloys the first of March, 1571. Your Majesty's most humble Subjects and
Servants, Tho: Smith, Fra: Walsingham.


To the Right Honorable, and my very good Lord, the Lord of Burleigh.
YOur Lordship by Sir Tho: Smithes Letters unto her Majesty, shall be fully
informed what has passed in Conference, as well with the King as his Deputies,
touching the League, to which I refer you. Of late I caused one, under the
color of a Catholic, to repair unto one Darbishire an English Jesuit in
Paris, for that I understood that there is a concurrency of intelligence
between him and those of Lorrain; as also with those of the Scottish Queens
faction. The party I sent, did seem very much to bewail the evil success that
the late practices took in Scotland, and that now he did fear their case will
grow desperate, especially for that Mathers enterprise was also discovered. To
this the Jesuit answered, that the evil handling of matters was the cause that
they took no better effect; notwithstanding (says he) be of good comfort, and
assure your self there are more Mathers in England then one, who will not
admit, when time shall conveniently serve to adventure their lives in seeking
to acquit us of that lewd woman (meaning her Majesty) For (says he) if she
were gone, then would the hedge lie open, whereby the good Queen, that now is
prisoner (in whom rests the present the right of this Crown) should easily
enjoy the same* For besides that all the Catholics within the Realm of
England are at her devotion; there are (says he) God be thanked, diverse
Heretics that are wellaffected toward her, which is no small miracle, that
God has so blinded the^ eyes, as that they should be inclined to her, that in
the end shall yield unto the^ their just desert, unless they return unto the
Catholic faith. The other replye^ that for his part, he could never hope to
see her at liberty, nor long to see her ke^^ her head upon her shoulders, and
therefore could receive no great comfort (...) way. Well (says the Jesuit) I
tell you truly, that I dare assure you she shall have no harm, for she lacks
no friends in the English Court. And as for her liberty says he) it stands
all good Catholics in hand, ^o much to seek it either by hook or by crook, as
no doubt but there are some good men that will venture a joint to bring it to
pass: For if she were once possessed of the Crown of England, it will be the
only way and mean to reform all Christendom, in reducing them to the
Catholic faith; and therefore you must think that there are more heads
occupied in this matter then English heads, and that there are more ways to the
wood then one; and therefore be of good courage, and ere ever one year be at an
end, you shall know more: Besides his villainous and undutiful language of her
Majesty, he used very lewd and bitter speeches against the Earl of Leicester
and your Lordship. This was the sum of their talk, which I conferring and
weighing with the former intended practices, made me think it worth the
advertisement, that her Majesty may see how much they build upon the
possibility of that dangerous woman, whose life is a step unto her Majesty's
death; for that they repute her for an undoubtable successor; or rather (which
is a more danger) for a right Inheritor. And though I know her mischievous
intentions are limited, that they can reach no further to her Majesty's harm
or prejudice, then shall seem good to Gods providence; yet is her Majesty
bound for her own safety and her Subejcts, to add to the same his good
providence, her just policy, so far forth as may stand with justice. And so
leaving further to trouble your Honor at this present, I most humbly take my
leave.

At Bloys the second of March, 1571.. Your Honors to Command, Fr. Walsingham.


To the Right Hononrable, and my very good Lord, the Earl of Leicester.
YOur Lordship at large by Sir Tho: Smithes Letters unto her Majesty, shall
understand to what issue we are grown to touching this Treaty: We can by no
means nor persuasions we can use, draw the King to any other interpretation of
his meaning touching the point of Religion, then by private Letters, for that
it should seem that their Ambassador from hence has assured the King here,
that her Majesty will be content therewith. For my private opinion, seeing
this League is to endure but during the lives of the two Princes, and that the
substance of all Leagues consists, chiefly in the sincerity of the matters,
and that this Prince has given great show to the world of great ^incerity, I
think the private Letter binds as much in honor, as any other Instrument or
Contract that can pass between them can do in Law: For if they should break,
the matter is not to be tried in the Chamber imperial, by way of pleading of
what value the instruments are, God and the Sword must be Judges, so that then
pleading must give place. But this my good Lord is for my private opinion; in
matters of so great weight as leagues are, I profess, altogether ignorance. If
her Majesty can content her self with this private interpretation of the Kings
meaning, then if it would please her Majesty, through your good motion, to use
some words of assurance toward the Ambassador there, of the great good opinion
she has of the Kings sincerity, and that she builds more upon his words,
then upon contract; I know nothing can more content him, for he desires to be
reputed a Prince that esteems his word and honor above his life; Besides, he
wishes himself to be in her Majesty's good opinion before all other Princes;
and does often take occasion to say, that he hops there will be no less
earnest good will and strait Amity between him and her Majesty, then was
between her Father and his Grandfather. To nourish this opinion of Amity
between them, I take it to be the office of all those who truly love their
Majesty's, as that League that tends greatly to both their sureties, being
knit together in perfect Amity; which beside their particular safety, will
breed a great repose in all Europe, especially for the cause of Religion. And
surely (my Lord) for the increase and nourishment of this friendship, nothing
can yield more furtherance then your access hither in ratification of the
League, a thing very much desired of their Majesty's here, as you perceive by
Sir Tho: Smithes Letter. The motion at the first being made by the Queen
Mother, seemed strange unto us for her to name a particular person, but when
she showed unto us, that her Majesty the last Summer desired the Marshal
Montmorency, whereunto they did condescend; and that they also mean to send him
now for the confirmation of this League, we had nothing to reply. They say that
the King, in respect of the good offices that you had done between the two
Crowns, the great honor you had used toward his Ministers sent hither, and
certain pr^sents that you had sent unto himself, desires very much both to see
you and honor you. Besides, she said, that your coming should be so grateful
unto her and the King her Son, as you might obtain any thing at his hands for
the contentment of her Majesty, so far forth as he might with his honor
grant. Surely, my Lord, though this voyage to your purse cannot but grow very
chargable, yet for the furtherance of the common cause of Religion, for the
increase of Amity between the two Princes and Crowns, and for their own
particular reputation, never was there offered to your Lordship greater
occasion, both generally and particularly to do good, then at this present.
Your Lordship can do more good in one hour here, then twenty such petty
companions as my self is can do in a whole year, or possible in all our lives
time. I would I could so well hope of her Majesty's leave, as of your Lordships
liking to take this journey upon you, and then I would assure my self of your
coming; and by the same, of as great good to ensue, as ever followed of any
others employment in this voyage, etc.


To the Right Honorable, and my very good Lord, the Lord of Burleigh.
IT may pleas your Lordship to understand, that Monsieur de la Mothe has
advertised their Majesty's here, that the Q. of Scots cause in England is not
so desperate as we make it, for that lately she has received so much increase
of liberty, as that she went a Hawking with the Earl of Shrewsbury; which
advertisement here, makes them more earnest in her cause then they were wont,
for that they doubt one day she will come to the possession of the Crown of
England, either by succession or prevention; and therefore the Council here do
advise the King so to deal for her, as may continue in her an opinion that he
is careful for her well own safety, and cannot but do justice, then call things
proceed well; and her Majesty may well perceive, that any favor showed unto
her, does not only breed disfavour, but also danger and hindrance toward her
self, whereof Mr. Killegrew can inform her Majesty at large.

The opinion of the wisest sort of the Gentlemen of the Religion that are here,
is, That the League it self shall not do more good, then the employment of two
honorable Personages for the ratification of the same; and therefore they
desire me most earnestly to move her Majesty to concur with the King in this
respect, who has to that end made choice of Montmorency, hoping that her
Majesty will choose one of quality somewhat answerable to his calling:
Besides, the King and Queens desire, as may appear by Sir Tho: Smithes Letters,
the said Gentlemen do desire much the Earl of Leicesters coming, as one very
grateful unto their Majesty's here; and therefore shall be able to do very much
good by the advancement of their causes, whose increase of credit cannot but be
beneficial unto her Majesty, in considering the great good affection they bear
toward her, in regard of the great honor and benefits they have received at
her Majesty's hands; and therefore their increase of credit shall breed
increase of Amity, a thing not unnecessary for her Majesty, considering how
she finds some of her neighbors affected abroad, and her Subjects inclined at
home. Besides, if her Majesty should not seem to be desirous of Montmorencies
coming, considering that he is no less willing to come, then his Master is to
send, it might give him occasion to think that her Majesty makes not that
account of him, that his great good will and devotion toward her deserves,
whereof he lets not to make demonstration outwardly as otherways; of the
which, besides mine own experience during the time of my charge here, Sir Tho:
Smith and Mr. Killegrew can give good testimony, and therefore I doubt not, her
Majesty will have good consideration thereof accordingly. Your Lordship at
large, by Sir Tho: Smith, is advertised how strangely the Article of Provision
for the King of Spain was taken by his Deputies. Surely if her Majesty persist
in that point, to have him specially provided for, I perceive then, that this
Treaty is at the best, for that they themselves confess, that the end of this
League is only to bridle his greatness; therefore to provide for his safety,
who seeks both their destructions, they cannot tell what to judge what it
means, especially seeing, that of late he has no way deserved at her
Majesty's hands any such favor. If therefore her Majesty do think that this
Prince is of any value, who is toward all men sincere, toward her Majesty
well affected, toward Religion pius Inimicus, she must not weigh him in one
balance with Spain, who is of word unsincere, in affection toward her
Majesty maliciously bent, and the common Enemy to our Religion. If her
Majesty mean to take profit of his friendship, the next way shall be, to
strengthen her self with the Amity of others in such sort, as she shall have no
need of it; for it is the nature of a proud man to make best account of them
that least esteem him, for whosoever yields to him, increases his pride,
which thing those that deal with the Spanish Nation find to be most true.

So long as the late Catholic League made remains in force, her Majesty,
nor any other Princes of the Religion, can promise unto themselves any thing at
Spains hands, but as much mischief as he can do them; which thing her Majesty,
with the rest, shall find to be true, by too dear an experience, if the same be
not helped by some counter league. The consideration whereof makes the German
Princes now (who otherwise are slow in their counsels and determinations) to
think it necessary for them to join in this counter-league; which thing your
Lordship may perceive by this enclosed letter, which lately I received from the
Count Palatine touching that point; whereas he refers me to his servant
Iuniu^, with whom I have had conference, I have committed the report thereof to
this bearer M. Beal.

Touching the Marriage in Treaty here betwixt the Prince of Navarre and the
Lady Margaret, Sir Tho: Smith, Mr. Killegrew and I, knowing how much the
success of the same might further the cause of the Religion; and finding the
greatest difculty to be the manner of the solemnizing of the same, we sent unto
the Queen of Navarre a Copy of the Treaty of the marriage betwixt King Edward
and the lat^ Q. of Spain, the Kings sister here, wherein it was agreed (as your
Lordship knows) that she should be married according to the form of our
Church. This Co^y of the Treaty, as the Queen of Navarre her self told Sir
Thomas Smith and me, stands her in very good stead, whom she sent for the 7
of this month to come and speak with her. At our access she told us, that she
did not send for us, before she did make Queen Mother acquainted therewith; not
(says she) in respect of my self, but in respect of her Majesty, toward whom
I would be loath to engender any jealousy, considering that she is growing to
so good Amity with this Crown: For as for my self, I am not afraid to make
known to all the world the great good will I bear toward her Majesty, to whom
I am as much bound as ever one Prince was to another. And because (says she)
you are Ministers to her Majesty here, I thought good to make you acquainted
in what state and terms the Treaty of the marriage stands betwixt their
Majesty's here and me (says she) there is no difference, but only the manner
of solemnization. I have alleged the Treaty which you sent me, whereunto they
take exceptions, such as are of no great value; and therefore (said she) I
cannot tell what to judge of the matter, because amongst the rest of the
exceptions, they say it was no true Copy of the Treaty. I have sent for you
Monsieur Smith (says she) to know, because you were a dealer in the same,
whether you will not justify it to be a true Copy, to whom Sir Tho: Smith
answered, that knowing the great good will her Majesty did bear her, and how
much she desired the good success of that marriage, as a thing that tended to
the advancement of Religion, and repose of this Realm, he could not but in duty
avow the same, and be willing to do any good office that might advance the said
marriage. She made us acquainted with diverse other particularities, which I
thought good rather to refer to the report of this bearer, then to commit them
to writing. The Copy of the Letter which I send unto your Lordship here
enclosed, sent unto her from her Son, which she delivered unto us secretly to
read, may show you how full of jealousy the matter is, and therefore until the
same be concluded, I hold it for doubtful. She finds here a great stay of
Count Lodovicus's advice, who surely is the rarest Gentleman which I have
talked withal since I came to France, etc.

Your Lordships to Command, Fr. Walsingham.


To the Queens most excellent Majesty.
Pleases it your Majesty, the thirtieth of March at night we received your
Majesty's Letters of the twentieth of the same, whereupon asking audience the
next day (because the King himself was yet in his Diet) we did speak with the
Queen Mother in her Chamber, where I began to declare unto her Highness, that
by Letters from her Majesty we had understood two things, whereof we were
sorry; the one, that your Highness having received the dispatch from us of our
negotiation here, as touching the league and amity, and willing to dispatch our
Currier again with your resolution, which we doubt not should be to her and the
K. contention, their Ambassador Resident required that your Majesty would not
write your answer or resolution unto us, until he had his Currier come, for
whom he looked every day. Says the Q. that is, because he would coucur with
you. I think so (said I) and it is well; and I trust we shall so concur to a
perpetual and strait Amity. I hope (says she) but yet he vvrote not so much to
us, that he spoke to the Queen to forbear his resolution to you, but only that
he looked for his Currier. The other is more grievous to us, because we take
the time lost, and some evil suspicion may be conceived; but I trust the Amity
is so begun between the two Realms, that there shall no suspicion have place,
after that the one has understood the other. Monsieur de Crocque arrived into
England, as your Majesty knows with Commission from hence to help Scotland to
a quietness in her self, and to concur with him whom the Queen our Mistress
should send for that purpose for aid, and even at the same time, were letters
intercepted of the Queen of Scots to the Duke of Alva, whereby she gives her
self, her Realm, and her Son to be in the pro^ection and government of the King
of Spain. And with that the L. Seton, who had been there, and sithence with the
Duke of Alva driven by a Tempest into a Haven, which by the Conspirators was
appointed where the Flemings and Spaniards should arrive, disguising himself
like a Mariner, went from thence and came as I told your Majesty, into
Scotland, and into the Castle of Edenborough with some other of the Queens
Majesty's Rebels; his papers and instructions being ^ound, declared that in her
Majesty's name he had assured the Duke of Alva, that with a small power they
might bring into their hands the young King of Scots, and so carry him into
Spain. Then gives comfort to other of the Rebels by other letters, that
shortly they shall return into Scotland. This Madam (quoth I) is enough to make
the Queen our Mistress to awake, and to look about her, and even at that same
time comes Monsieur de Crocque with the Kings letters, and requires the
Scotch Queen, to be set at liberty, and to be sent into France.

Madam (quoth I) I pray your Majesty consider of the case, and imagine you
were the Q. of England my Mistress, and that all these things at one time came
to your consideration, what would you think. Ah Monsieur L'Ambassador (quoth
she) we did know then of no such intent of the Q. of Scots, you may be sure, we
would be as loath that any such thing should be attempted and rather loather:
Madam (quoth I) I do not doubt, considering this good amity which is so forward
betwixt the two Realms. Well (says she) she is allied to the King and to me,
and brought up here, and we for our part could do no less then entreat for her,
what we could obtain at the Queen my sisters hands. She seeks another way to
ruinate her self, to hurt her friends, to deserve no pity nor favor, and sorry
we must be for her, and if she be so dangerous (as it appears) we cannot nor
dare not require liberty for her which is so perilous to the Queen my sisters
state: yet if it shall please her for our sake to give her her life, and for
the rest provide for her own safety as reason is she shall do a deed of price,
and in this matter we will trouble the Q. your Mistress no furth^^. Then (quoth
I) one other thing there is touching Monsieur de Crocque his power or
Commission (for so we call it) is not large enough, for he has (as he says)
but Commission to move them to Peace and Agreement. To the which now of late
they of the Castle do show themselves very obstinate, perverse and unreasonable
by reason of some offers from the Duke of Alva, and some hope peradventure
received from hence: For where before they were content to require the Queens
Majesty's aid to come to a good agreement with the adverse faction, so that the
surety of their Persons, Lands, Goods, and Honors might be provided for, now
they be so puffed up that they will not come to any abstinence of Civil war
amongst themselves. And surely the Queen my Mistress meant no other then to have
brought them into quietness among themselves. To the intent that the Realm
might after agreement within it self, enter into this League with the other two
Realms, making as it were for defense one whole Realm, and so I have always
told you Madam. It is so (says she) and we desire no other. Well Madam (quoth
I) if you then will concur with us, the matter will be soon at a point. Then
Monsieur Crocque must have a larger Commission then yet he has; for he says
he has but (as I said before) a Commission to make them to accord amongst
themselves, to choose a number of men to govern the Realm, and never make
mention of King nor Queen. Why (says Master Walsingham) that were a headless
Government, and when will they agree to it? he that knows that Nation, will
never think that will come to pass; and therefore that should be to make more
dissension amongst them, not to make a Peace. Madam (quoth I) that Commission
has no Order nor Authority, but as is said to continue trouble. But Madam, as
in all matters hitherto we have well agreed betwixt the two Realms of England
and France, I pray you let us agree in this. And if we speak reasonable, the
King shall concur with us; if not, let us hear answer to the contrary, and we
will answer. The Queen my Mistress has propounded this, that they shall all
agree to acknowledge the young King for King. For as the for Queen, she has
good cause not to trust her, nor you neither. Then for compounding, how one
shall agree with the other for their Lands, Offices, and Goods; that to be
agreed by the mediation of wise and indifferent men, whereof your Ambassador,
be it Monsieur de Croque or any other, to be an Umpire, and whom the Q. my
Mistress shall appoint to be another. So that they shall well know, that these
two Crowns as friends will make them by persuasion to agree to reason, if not
to join together, to make them take reason against their wills. Ye say well
Monsieur Amb. says she, and you speak roundly and plainly, as you were wont to
do; and I will speak with the K. my son, and you shall have answer. Madam (said
Mr. Walsingham) Monsieur Amb. says here plainly unto you. Yea (says she) so
he is wont, I know him well enough. Yea (says he) but while two shall be at
strife, if ye would set up again the Scotch Queen, whom (by reason) the Queen
our Mistres cannot abide, if in the mean time a third should come and set foot
in Scotland, would it not trouble you and us also? Yes, says she, and we
should be as loath to see that as you: Well Madam (quoth I) then take heed of
the pick-thank, for he is ready; I know whom you mean (quoth she) and he is
ready indeed, and loves to be meddling in every place, but I doubt not but the
Queen your Mistress and we shall agree, it is our desire, and that this amity
may increase to make us both strong, for all that Coast, I hope so (quoth I)
and would be loath that all labor for so little a matter should be lost. Lost
(says she) fear you not, your Queen can desire no reasonable thing at our
hands, but we will agree to it, you shall judge your self, and to morrow you
shall have answer God willing, but hear you nothing else of the other matter?
Madam (quoth I) I know not what you mean, but surely not^ing is spoken, not so
much as from Mr Killegrew nor of the league, but we look every day that our
Currior should be here, and then we shall be able to inform your Majesty. Ye
shall not marvail (says she) that I be so inquisitive, for gladly would I
learn somewhat of the Queen my sisters mind, and make this Amity Si estroicte
as may be. This is the sum of that which passed at that time. viz. the last day
of March betwixt the Queen mother and us. The next day the first of April
Monsieur de Foix came to our lodging at afternoon, and showed that upon our
talk with Q. mother, of the which she had at large declared unto the King,
because some things were in doubt; the King according to the promise of the Q.
mother had sent them to us both to be satisfied in our doubts, and to give us a
reasonable answer: betwixt them and Mr. Walsingham and me, all was repeated
again. The doubt your Majesty and your Council found, and the insufficiency of
his Commission was at all points debated again at full, each of us serving
others turn to make probable what we said, and they what they said. And first
we beat them with reason from the choosing of indifferent men, that should rule
neither in the Princes nor the Queens name, that we said was rather the
Aristocratia as they would have it. First the Scots will never choose such;
they of that Nation were never wont to be governed but under a King, yea and
hardly would their Kings govern, of whom the most part they have slain
themselves. Then they have elected already and Crowned their King, to whom by
right it is due: For as for their Queen, she is by them deposed. She is in
England, and worthily kept so straightly, that when it pleased her Majesty she
might justly have the reward of her deserts, and if they were too earnest to
set her up, or for her liberty they may peradventure be an occasion to shorten
her life, It was also brought in, that the League that France had, was not with
the person, but with the Realm and seat thereof. They said the King could not
with his honor, so long as she lived consent to the deposing of her, being his
Allie and confederate, nor to the setting up of her son, who is not a Kings
son, but has all his right from her only. Why (quoth we) then you do wrong,
will you interrupt the doings of the Realm, whosoever is King there, and
acknowledged King, to him are you allied. They came to this, that if the Scots
did universally agree to it, they must be content. And as for the Q. they had
heard and known too much by her, and although some excuse may be made for her
by the grief of her long imprisonment: yet she has gone about too much, and
against her own friends, and her own safety, and her sons, and the whole Realms
But (say they) Scotland is a free Nation, and we do claim no superiority over
them, and therefore the King cannot command them nor compel them, but by
persuasion and by entreaty what can be gotten by them to be done, that is
reasonable, and now that the Q. is prisoner with you, and not like to come to
them, why should they not obey the young Prince, whom if his mother were dead
they must needs obey, and why should not all be done in his name, as when we
had King John prisoner, did not all France obey to Charles the fifth his son?
To him (quoth we) as Regent: but now if the one shall obey as to the Prince,
the other as to the King, there shall be no rule nor order. Upon this was some
dispute between us. In fine, we concluded consulere in Commune, that they
should send such Instructions to Mr. de Croque for that purpose* to make the
Realm of Scotland so in accord, that they may perfectly agree to ^oyn with the
amity betwixt England and France, and that the Articles of his Instructions
might be such, as your Majesty shall think them reasonable for your Majesty's
surety. And those to be showed to your Majesty to judge upon, upon which your
Majesty shall also join for the same purpose, with the same or such Articles as
ye shall devise, that by common consent of both the Realms, such an accord
shall be made by the consents of the Scots themselves, or by the mediation
common of both your Ambassadors, That neither your Majesty, nor the King shall
be accounted to lose any thing of the old Amity of Scotland, but jointly to aid
them, to be of one accord, and in subjection to one K. that both your
Commissioners or Ambassadors shall declare that as Princes united in most
straight Amity, that which shall please the one shall please the other, and to
the contrary, who shall displease either, shall displease both. And if any
shall be so obstinate that they will not come to accord by good and reasonable
conditions, that they shall look for no aid from hence by any means but rather
the contrary.

(...) second of April because I and Mr. Walsingham both were somewhat sick
that night, both Mr. de Limoges and de Foix came to us, and said that Q. mother
having again conferred with the King, and they both likeing well our frank and
round dealing, willed them to show us what Articles or Instructions their
Majesty's had devised for the matter of Scotland to be compounded, because from
henceforth there should be plain dealing, and full union betwixt the two
Realms, and all one desire to quiet all parties that way: we seeing the
Articles, said that for so much as we could understand we liked them well, and
they had gone as far as yesterday they told us they could go. But to give
judgment of liking or not liking them, we referred to your Majesty. And if du
Crocque do show the same to your Majesty, we doubted not but whosoever the Q.
did send by her commandment, also should be shown to him or to the Ambassador,
the Instructions and Commission which your Majesty would send by him, so that
there may appear plain dealing and perfect union and intelligence betwixt these
two Princes, and that no other subtlety or craft was meant, but sincerely to
follow the true amity which now was begun, That both in heart, words, and
deeds, it was meant it should go forward to the benefit of all the three
Realms, and we trust to the great assurance and contentation of your Majesty.
And if it shall please your Majesty to hear our poor advice, that which is for
the assurance of your Person and Crown, as ye are a Prince lawful and natural,
and have a Crown Imperial, so to do it by your Laws, as Gods Laws and yours
will it to be done. Foraign Princes that be your friends will and must take it
well. Such as be not, shall rather laugh at you, and be glad of it that you do
it not, and when they shall see time, take occasion to endanger your Majesty
thereby. God long preserve your Majesty to his honor and your Majesty's
contentation;

From Blois the third of April 1573.

To the Queens Majesty.
PLease it your Highness to be advertised. At the last Mr. Walsingham and I
have concluded the League, not without some difficulty for the Scotch matters,
which from the beginning have most interrupted and troubled us, nevertheless we
have also passed over them in the end, we trust to your Highness contentation,
and all other things, whereof we had instructions by your Majesty's letters of
the second of April. We can perceive nothing in any wise, but that the King
here goes as sincerely and tam bona fide with your Majesty, as any Prince can,
and we suppose and trust certainly by Gods Grace, that this league shall be as
great an assurance and defense of your Majesty as ever was or can be. The two
Realms being so near and ready to defend if it be required, if Spain will now
threaten or show evil Offices, as it has done of late against your Highness
surety, it will be afraid hereafter, seeing such a wall adjoined. And if it
will not, it may sooner feel the smart of evil doing then it would: if the
house of Burgundy will be friend, whereof there is great reason to have much
doubt, yet nothing is done on your Majesty's part to break the amity. And
peradventure this will make him the loather, seeing so good, or near hand so
good, and peradventure in time a better vent granted here for your Subjects and
Merchants then that is. I thank your Majesty most humbly, that it pleased you
in my absence, to bestow on me the Chancelorship of the Order, the which must
needs be to me manifold times more welcome, because that without my suit, and in
mine absence your Highness of your gracious goodness did remember me. I pray
God I may have that Grace to do your Majesty that service which may be
acceptable to you as my heart does desire. Thus I commit your Highness to
Almighty God, with my daily prayer that your Majesty (...) long and most
prosperously reign over us,

From Bloys April 22. 1571.

By the Queen.
ELIZABETH. R.
TRusty and well beloved, We greet you well; where the French King our good
brother did of late send hither to us Mr. de Crocque with his letters,
signifying to us thereby, that upon such an agreement as had been lately made
between you as our Ambassadors, and his Deputies to have some Gent. sent on
either part into Scotland to cease the Arms there, he had for that purpose
chosen and sent hither the said du Crocque. And besides that, did by the same
letters, give charge to the said du Crocque to make request unto us
affectionately, to put the Q. of Scots into liberty, and to send her surely
into France, which he did earnestly move unto us in speech, adding another
desire by words of his own, that he might also repair to the said Q. of Scots,
and visit and speak with her; hereupon you well might think that we did find
all these proceedings very strange, and not answerable to such other overtures
of the inward friendship which our said brother has professed to us by many
other ways, nor consonant to such things as you have declared to the said King,
to the Q. mother, and other his Ministers on our behalf, concerning the
dangerous practices of late time attempted by the said Q. of Scots against us,
both for our person and Estate, and so we did in some part declare unto the
said du Crocque, and to the French Ambassadors. And yet we did not hereupon
refuse that he should repair into Scotland, although we did mislike of the
request made for the Scotch Queens liberty at this time, and did deny to him to
repair to her; but we did require him by way of advice until he might hear of
Scotland, in what terms the parties stood. So as we might before his going, by
conference with him consider, what means were best to use to bring the
divisions to an accord in Scotland: After which done, within few days we
understood that the L. Seaton who had been long in France for the Scotch Queen,
and after had been in the King of Spains Low Countries, with Commission and
Title to be the Queen of Scots Ambassador there, had by tempest of Seas been
driven into Harwich, and from thence passed disguised as a Mariner into
Scotland, and so entered into the Castle of Edinburgh, with no small comfort to
them to persist in their obstinacy to maintain Civil war, and by Gods goodness
(which in all causes we find always ready) there were afterward found in the
ship at Harwich, such matters in writing, to prove the earnest continuance and
prosecuting of the Scotch Queens practices against us, the intention, that they
in the Castle should by no means come to accord, and that our Rebels in the
Low Countries should shortly return into Scotland, that we were justly
occasioned further to consider of this matter, and to increase our doubt
herein, we were shortly after these things discovered, advertised out of
Scotland, that in very deed upon the Lord Seatons coming to the Castle, upon
intelligence of du Croques voyage thitherward, and the L. Flemings journey to
come by the West Seas with aid out of Britain, they in the Castle were become
very obstinate, to hearken unto the reasonable offers either for Peace or for
abstinence of war. Whereupon we did cause by consent of our Council, to be
imparted to the French Ambassador, and to du Crocque the substance of the
premises which moved us to doubt, whether the journey of du Crocque should be
meet for us to assent unto, without we should first impart our Conceptions to
the French King, and so required them to allow thereof, and that we would write
to the King, and according as we should receive answer from him, so they should
understand our further pleasure. At which time we understood that both the
Ambassador and he took this stay somewhat strangely, thinking that it might
likewise seem strange to the King their Mr. considering that the said du
Crocque coming thither was by agreement of you our Ambassador, and the Kings
Deputies. And though the same was not denied, yet in our part it was said, we
doubted not but when the King shall understand that new occasions with the
matter discovered, tending in this his matter of voyage rather to the increase
of the troubles in Scotland, then to the pacifying thereof, and likewise rather
to our manifest perils and troubles, then to our comfort and surety, he would
as our good brother and friend, especially at this time, being entering into so
straight a profession of friendship, as he makes show of, would allow of our
considerations of this stay, and by some new order from him, and Commission to
du Crocque, would provide for the remedies of the said inconvenience. Thus much
being passed, the said d^ Croque within two days after desired to speak
privately with one of our Counc^l by name the L. of Burleigh, and for some
considerations, it was thought good that he should speak also with some others,
and so did with the Earl of Suffex L. Chamberlain, and the L. of Burleigh, with
whom together he heard such reasons alleged for the stay of his journey until
the King might be thereof advertised, as in the end he did not show any other
misliking, but that he would willingly tarry here and send to the King his
Master, to understand his further pleasure, and wished that we would likewise
advertise the King by our Ambassador there. And thus you see how we have dealt
with du Croque since his coming, and what either the Ambassador or he shall
advertise, we know not; but besides this which we have written unto you, you
shall understand by a memorial in writing, which you shall receive from the L.
Burleigh, the further circumstances of the Conferences had at two several times
betwixt our Council and him, which when you have considered, with these the
premises before written, we would have you to impart the same to the King in the
best sort you shall find convenient to move him to interpret these our doings
to the best as reason ought to do. And in the end to procure that du Croque may
have larger Commission to treat of the matters in Scotland in such sort, as we
may accord thereto with our surety: For otherwise you may well say that the
labors of us both shall be but lost. You shall further understand, that since
the comhither of Mr. Beal with your last letters, and other writings of your
negotiation about the new Treaty, we have considered thereof, and have forborne
to resolve what our Answer shall be to the points by you suspended, until we
may have further conference with this Ambassador here, who hearing of the
return of our servants Hen. Killegrew and Beal, has required that we would
forbear to resolve, and to return our answer unto you, until he might have
commodity to speak with us, which he looks daily to have by the coming of a
Currier from thence, which he does hourly look for, and this is the cause why
at this present we do stay the return of Beal unto you, wishing you in the mean
time to give them no occasion to doubt, but that our answers of the Treaty
shall be found reasonable.

Given under our Signet, at our Palace of Westminster, March 20. 1571. In the
fourteenth year of our Reign.

To the Right Honorable, and his very good Lord, the Lord Burleigh.
SInce I wrote last to your Lp. there has here fallen out nothing worthy the
Advertisement. The matter of marriage between the Prince of Navar and the Lady
Margaret continues doubtful, whereof Sir Tho. Smith and I have more cause so
to judge, for that the 4 of this month it pleased the Q. of Navar to send for
us to dinner. Immediately upon our coming she showed unto us how with the
consent of the Q. mother, she had s^nt for us (as the Ministers and Ambassadors
of a Christian Princess, whom she had sundry causes to honor) to confer with us
and certain others in whom she reposed great trust touching certain
difficulties that were impeachments to the marriage, which thing she would
communicate to us after dinner. She said to us that now she had the Woolf by
the ears, for that in concluding or not concluding the marriage, she saw danger
every way, and that no matter (though she had dealt in matters of consequence)
did so much trouble her* as this, for that she could not tell how to resolve;
amongst diverse causes of fear, she showed unto us that two chiefly troubled her.

The first, that the K. would needs have her son and L. Margaret, the marriage
proceeding to be Courtiers, and yet would not yield to grant him any exercise
of Religion, the next way to make him become an Atheist, as also thereby no
hope to grow of the Conversion of the L. Marg^ret, for that she would not
resort to any Sermon.

The second, that they would needs condition with the L. Margaret, remaining
constant in the Catholic Religion, should have whenever she went into the
Country of Bern her Mass, a thing which in no wise she can consent unto, havin^
her Country cleansed from all Idolatry. Besides, says she the L. Margaret
remaining a Catholic whenever she shall come to remain in the Country of Bern
the Papists there will take her part, which will breed division in the Country,
and make her more unwilling to give ear to the Gospel, they having a staff to
lean to.

After dinner ended, she sent for us into the Chamber, where we found a dozen
others of certain Gent. of the Religion and their Ministers. She declared unto
us briefly what had passed between the K. Q mother, and her, touching the
marriage, as also what was the present cause of the stay of the same, wherein
she desired us severally to say our opinion, and that sincerely as we would
answer unto God The stay stood upon 3 points. First, whether she might with a
good Conscience substitute a Papist for her sons Proctor for the Fiansals*
which was generally agreed she might. 2ly, whether the Proctor going to Mass
incontinently after the Fiansals, which was expressly forbidden by his letter
procuratory, would not breed an offense to the godly. It was agreed, that
forasmuch as he was justly forbidden the same by his letter procuratory, the
same could justly minister no offense, for that he was no longer a Proctor
then he kept himself within the limits procuratory of the letter procuratory.

3ly, Whether she might consent that the word Fiansal might be pronounced by a
Priest in his priestly attire, with his Surplice and Stoal. This latter point
was long debated, and for the Ministers concluded, that the same, thought it
were a thing indifferent, could not but breed a general offense unto the
godly: she protested that she would never consent to do that thing whereof
there might grow any public scandal, for that she knevv, she said, she should
soincur Gods high displeasure: upon which protestation it was generally
^oncluded, that in no case she might yield thereto, her own Conscience
gainsaying the same* so that now the marriage is held generally for broken.
Notvvithstanding I am of a contrary opinion, and do think assuredly, that
hardly any cause will make them break, so many necessary causes there are why
the same should proceed. By the next I shall be able to advertise your L. of the
certainty of this marriage. What has been done upon the receipt of your Lps.
dated the 6 and 11 of this month, you may perceive by Sir T. Smiths letters
written at large. Of late I learn by one that lately is come out of Denmark,
that there is a great league grown betwixt the D. of Alva and the K. there,
and that there should be some practice in hand there, for some enterprise to be
done, either in Scotland or England. For the accomplishment thereof the D.
desires of the K. certain ships. Touching the said amity grown of late between
the K. and D. this Ks. Ambassador there, does advertise thereof, and shows
that the same comes about by the corruption of M. a Burgonian, who altogether
rules the K. He therefore advises the K here to enter into amity of Suevia,
who shall always be abl^ to bridle Denmark, and that he finds by advice had
from Suevia, that the K. will most willingly enter into league with him.
Standen who lately came out of Spain, and arrived here secretly the 23 of this
month, gave out some speech unto a Frenchman whom he trusted, of some hope
there would be in England of change or ever Summer ended. He staid here only
one night. I have written to Paris to have his doings observed, to which place
he is repaired. At our access unto the Q. mother I showed her what I had heard
out of Britain touching the L. Flemings doings. I therefore desired her M. to
move the K. to write to the Governor of Britain to have an eye unto him, and
not to permit him to do any thing more then his pasport bears, lest otherwise
it might breed some jealousy, which thing she promises to do. I know the K.
has lately written to the Governor of Newhaven to suffer none to imbarque for
Scot. nor to do any thing that may any way offend her M. I send your Lp. here
enclosed, that lately I received from Paris from a Spaniard of mine
acquaintance, who is both wise and religious, honest and learned. The only
cause why I send it, is for that it touches an imprisonment. I refer it to
your Lp. to judge thereof as you shall think good. I used the less have in
advertising, for that otherwise advice has been given in that behalf. The
Navar marriage is not yet concluded, notwithstanding there is great hope that
the same will take place. I forbear to send with the Ks. pacquer, for that I
attended the dispatch of Count Lodowicks man, thinking to have sent by him, but
after that he understood her M. had banished these lewd sea-robers, it caused
him to stay, and yet he means to send a gentleman to thank her M. for that
undeserved favor she had showed to these lewd Ministers. He has great
conference with Q. mother and Monsr. daily, which makes men to discourse
diversely. As soon as he is grown to some through conclusion he tells me, that
he will send a gentleman over to her M. The Admiral is shortly to be looked for
here, and great hopes conceived of the compounding of the discord between him
and the house of Guise. For the conclusion of the Navar marriage, there is 8
chosen, to whom the matter is committed, 4 for the K. and 4 for the Q. of
Navar. For the K* is chosen Birage, Count de Rets, Biron, Malalieur. For the Q.
Count Lodowick, Francourt her Chancellor, De La Nove, and her Secretary. They
are all as it is thought, so well affected to the marriage, as there is no
doubt made of some good conclusion, and so having nothing else to impart to
your honor at present, I most humbly take my leave,

At Blois, March 29. 1571. Yours to command Francis Walsingham.


To the Right Honorable, and his very good Lord, the Lord Burleigh.
YOur Lp. may perceive by Sir T. Smiths letter unto her M. what we have done
touching the enlargement of La Crocques Commission, if the doubt of the Q. of
Scots possibility were taken away, the K. here would be content to yield to any
thing that may tend to her M. safety, but the same still hanging in suspense
her M. must neither look for sound subjects at home, not sure friendship
abroad, By letters from Paris March 28, I learn that Higgins is returned
thither, who as I am informed, has been at Rome; he resorteth to the Scotch
Ambassador, as he was accustomed, to which place also Standen repaireth since
his return out of Spain, where they have their conferences. Higgius at his
departure from Paris protested secretly to a friend of his, that he would not
return thither in 1, or 2 years, seeing he saw no way with his Mr but one: his
sudden return shows there is somewhat a brewing. At present there is also there
Egmont, R^teliff, and Genny; they past lately out of Spain this way. One
Chamberlain, who conferred here with the K. Secretary of Spain, is now repaired
to the D. Alva. Stukely is returned into Spain, in company of I: Doria; he
received great honor from the K. and is put in hope shortly to be employed. I
send you by W: Williams advertisements out of Britain, touching the L: Flemings
doings; besides, I have twice moved the Q: Mother in that behalf I did also at
our conference with Mr. Limoges and du Foix, make them acquainted with the
matter, who did assure us there should be redress (...) out of hand.

From Bloys April 4. 1571. Fr: Walsingham.


By the Queen.
ELIZABETH R.

TRusty and right well-beloved, We greet you well. Since the receipt of your
Letters to us from you, both jointly dated the first of March, and other your
later Letters of the 8 directed to the Lord Burleigh, in which your later
Letters you did at length express your Negotiation in this matter of Treaty
with the points not resolved; we have had some cause to prolong our answer
otherwise then we thought at the first, partly at the request of the French
Ambassador here, who motioned unto us not to proceed to a final resolution of
the matters in doubt, until he might receive some direction from the King his
Master; which when he had, then were we also impeached from consideration of
the same, by reason of sudden sharp accident of sickness, which as it continued
with us some time; so nevertheless in 7 or 8 days, by Gods goodness, we were
eased, and do now take our selves to be very well recovered, both of the danger
and trouble thereof, ^ lacking nothing but some small time to recover the
strength which we lost with the sharpness of the sickness. And so now we have
after some conference had with the Kings Ambassador, resolved upon the matters
in doubt, and all the rest of the Articles of the Treaty, which you shall
understand to be in this manner following; Where you did move to have inserted
into the said Article, the Clause of the mutual defense, to be by special name
for Invasion upon color of Religion; considering upon debate thereof, the King
has offered to expound the same Clause, to be meant by a special Letter
according to a Copy sent to us by you, dated the 8 of March, and on the
backside marked with us. We do not mislike the Contents of the Letter, saving
we would wish the effect thereof to be written in Latin, as the Treaty is with
the Kings style, so as it may also have the great Seal annexed thereunto. The
like thereof we will for our part accomplish and deliver to this Ambassador.
And so have we caused our resolution to be declared to their Ambassador; and in
some part of the Letter we have added some words to make the same both plainer
and fuller, whereof we send you a Copy in English. And yet if you cannot
obtain it to be put in Latin and under the great Seal, we find no cause to
stay the Treaty for that, but to accept it as a Letter missive under the Kings
hand and signet, as it has been already offered.

The second matter concerning the aid which now is by the Kings Deputies
reduced to a specialty, although we could have been content to have had it
remain in generality, yet the same being no greater then it is, and the charge
to be borne by the requirant, we are contented therewith; and think it
nevertheless meet that the causes appointing the wages and stipends by either
of us, might be more particularly and certainly expressed for avoiding of
ambiguity, that is, that the Prince requiring the aid, and to pay the wages,
shall pay to every person, both Captains, Soldiers, and Officers, according to
their several qualities, both by Land and Sea, wages certainly expressed how
the numbers shall be accounted, whether fully, or with allowance of dead paies
or lacks; wherein because there may be diversities betwixt the usage of the two
Countries, the certainty would be set down according to our manner. As for
example, in the computation of the Band of 100. the manner here is to allow 8
dead paies to the hundred, and no more; which if they like they shall be so
accorded; or otherwise as they shall think it meetest, so as the Article may be
reciproque for us both, as well in charge as in number.

The third matter in question is for Scotland, wherein we have found great
difficulty, finding the Ambassador here more precise then we looked for, or was
reasonable, considering the foundation and scope of this Treaty is to make a
straight friendship betwixt the King and us; and directly now to the contrary,
we see the pressing of the matter for the Queen of Scots, as it is urged by the
Article offered unto you, which may seem to be of a strong Condition to be
inserted into a Treaty containing a Form Historical, or Narrative (as they call
it) and not conventional. The like also we find by the manner of du Crocques
proceeding here for the said Queen of Scots, neither of both being agreeable
with the scope of the amity pretended. And therefore we have caused the
Ambassador to understand how much we mislike this manner of proceeding, showing
him reasons for the same, which we need not report unto you, for that the
argument therefore is at hand to every indifferent person. And we have moved
him, that either the matter of Scotland might pass now in silence, or rather
the King would be contented that it may be Covenanted that we both shall defend
the Kingdom of Scotland as it is possessed by the King, as in all like cases in
favor of the King and Prince being in possession, that has been used by other
Princes neighbors and ^onfederates: But hereunto the Ambassador would in no
wise agree, using no other reasons of value, but that his Master shall thereby
be taken as one that has deprived the Queen of Scots his good Sister of her
estate; which indeed cannot justly be gathered, for that our meaning is not to
have it otherwise ordered, but to have the state of the Realm to be preserved
as we both find it, which we take to be in the possession of the King, being
already Crowned and acknowledged by the 3 Estates of the Realm in full
Parliament, and acceptance of the Realm shall alter, we must and ought to accept
it as we should find it. But this not satisfying the Ambassador, we caused the
writing which he required to be further considered; and hereupon have caused
another form to be drawn, agreeable to such part of theirs as we may like; and
leaving the other part not by us allowable, which has been showed unto him,
and after much argument, not utterly misliked, so as he might have some words
of his own inserted into the same, altogether prejudicial to our meaning, which
was declared unto him to be: and so we would have you to do the like, that
con^idering the King is possessed of the Crown for the present, and come to the
same by order of the Laws of the Crown, with the consent of the 3 estates, and
in Parliament; our meaning is, that he should be also defended by the form of
the Article by us devised. And so we send you the same Article in Latin,
although it was to him showed in French, which we would have to be inserted,
except otherwise they will be contented that the whole matter of Scotland be
put in ^ilence; and yet if they shall content themselves with the Article in
form by us conceived; then you shall move them to assent, that in some one
Article there may be a reservation made for the King of Spain and his Countries
by name; or if that cannot be contained, then we would have you to procure that
in a general Article, being the 23 in number, which Monsieur de Foix has noted
(Delendum) may be restored into the Treaty. Of which Article mention being made
to this Ambassador, he seems to allow thereof. The Article devi^ed for the
suspencion of the Law of -- Aubani for Goods of strangers dying in France, we
like very well according to the Copy brought to you the ninth of March by
Florence; which we return to you by these our Le^ters, so that you make the
word Francia, Gallica, or else add to the words, in Francia, sive alibi in
dominiis regis Franc^rum.

Lastly, We think it good that some special Article be conceived to bind the
King that all these things concerning the matter of Merchants within the
Treaty, should be enrolled and emologed in their Parlaments within some
convenient time, and the like to be done as the case shall require within our
ordinary Court of Records at Westminster.

As for Commission to be sent to you Francis Walsingham our Ambassador Resident
concerning some Treaty with the Merchants of that Country, as is required, We
will understand the manner of the Commission sent to this Ambassador, and so
give order for the like. This Ambassador has been very earnest with us that Du
Croque might repair into Scotland, and until we may hear what the French King
answers to you in that matter, upon the reasons as we did lately impart unto
you, whereupon we did stay him; we have no meaning to let him depart: For
certainly we perceive that if the L. Seton had not come out of Flanders, nor
his coming expected from hence, the matters of Scotland had been at an end
before this time, and now we go forwards. Since we had determined upon the
Articles of the Treaty, the Ambassador has dealt with him very earnestly to
have some change of words, which we newly sent to you to be placed instead of
the Article that du Foix would needs have had for the matter of Scotland, first
in the second Article and fifth, he would have praesentis status commutandi
conditio. And in the beginning of the eight he would have these words added,
Aut unus illorum seperatim, de consensu tamen alterius; but we did not accord
thereunto; whereof he seemed very doubtful how the King would assent to the
rest; and although it may be that he shall be also earnestly pressed therewith,
yet except you should see it stay the Treaty, we would not have you yield. But
otherwise we do not mean you should stay the Treaty for these few words. And
where in the former part of our Letter we have willed you that there may be a
special Article of reservation of Treaties with the King of Spain; if you find
that offensive to the expedition of the Treaty, then we can be content only
with the general Article of the 34. We require you to use all speed that you
can herein, for it may be we shall send the person that shall come from hence,
within eight days after we may have knowledge thereof* and then it may be that
the same shall meet with you, and Sir Tho. Smith, return you back with him in
Commission, whereof you shall certainly know our mind by the next.

Given under our signet at our Palace of Westminster, the second of April,
1571. in the 13 year of our Reign.

To the Right Honorable Francis Walsingham Esquire her Majesty's Ambassador
Resident in France.
SIr, I heartily thank you for your sundry Letters, all which with one Letter
and many thanks must be answered. I have imparted unto Mr. Smith such things of
public as I know he will impart unto you and the rest, as common to you both
by the Q. Majesty's Letters. I am very sorry to see you so decayed by service,
and of so good cause, I mean good sound service, so evil effect: but so blind
is Fortune, as sometimes she deals blanks instead of good payment.

I have not omitted to express your charge, your expense, your decay, and yet
your request to return without her Majesty's burden; but as the first have
been and are hurtful unto you, so the last, which is your return, shall be
most hurtful to her Majesty, and so she well considers. And so I trust she
will presently refresh you, though not restore you as I have desired; and so I
think you shall understand from Sir Walter Mildmay, your very friend, and mine
also in very deed most assured, who was present when her Majesty yielded to
some part of my request for you. You did very well to press the King as you did
in the case of la Roches practicing in Ireland, which is very true, howsoever
he denies it, and you may avow that he has the Rebels son, I mean James
Fitzmorris, son in Hostage at Britain, he would be hearkened for, and demanded
to be delivered. We hear daily of great preparations in Britain, upon pretense
of a Voyage into the Indies, or into Flanders, I wis they seek no Indians in
Ireland or in Scotland. As soon as it shall be determined who shall come from
thence, I will send thither, or deliver to this Ambassador a safe conduct, for
so the Ambassador requires. By my next you shall receive a Commission for your
self to Treat for the matter of the Merchants. And so now wearied, I end.

From Westminster the second of April, 1571. Yours assuredly, W. Burliegh.


To the Right Honorable, and my very good Lord, the Lord of Burleigh.
BY your Lordships of the second of April, I perceive that through your
Lordships most careful and friendly declaration made unto her Majesty of my
decayed estate, she does graciously consider thereof, and means to do
somewhat for my relief, that I may with the better courage employ my self in
her service: I hope her Majesty shall find my care and diligence in this
service such, as she shall have no cause to think any consideration had of me
evil bestowed. I crave no recompense, I only desire to return home in no worse
state then I went forth.

Touching the chief stay here made in the conclusion of the League, I refer
your Lordship to Sir Tho. Smith. Such as here do not affect the same, did what
they might to procure a new sending about the Scottish Earl, thinking that time
by delay, might have brought forth somewhat to have overthrown the whole. Both
Monsieur Montmorency and Monsieur de Foix, did deal very effectually and
earnestly to bring the matter to that good conclusion that it is come to. And
the King in the end showed himself very resolute in the matter, as he does in
all those things that concern his honor and benefit, and misliked the doubt
propounded by those that went about to persuade him to think otherwise then
honorably touching her Majesty's intention concerning the Scotch Affairs: That
Strozzas preparation should tend either for Scotland or Ireland, your Lordship
need not to fear; such as he is chiefly guided by in that matter, are very well
affected toward her Majesty. Of late there has been hard hold for the
overthrow of this enterprise; the King is resolute in the matter, otherwise it
had been quite broken. They of the Robe Longue do fear that it will breed a
pile betwixt this Crown and Spain; and they would be loath the King should now
enter into Wars, for that they doubt that the managing of the Affairs should
come then to the hands of others. They persuade -- 2 -- i^ diminish. They
persuade 4 that if 3 have good success therein, it will diminish his
reputation. These respects do make the said parties to become enemies to the
Wars, because lack of money is the only let that is alleged; they do all that
they may to hinder all such devices from taking place as lately have been
offered to supply that want. Amongst these difficulties it will be hard to
judge what will be the issue of this matter.

By the last advertisement out of Spain, they write that D. Medina Celi stays
his Voyage into Franders, only in doubt that Strozza should do some enterprise
in those parts; I am assured that they have seen A z. with 1 T t) 6 a.

Egremont, Ratcliff and Genney are departed from Spain, they giving out before
their departure, that they went to return into Flanders. This day there is a
Gentleman arrived sent hither from the Kings Agent in Flanders, who brings
word of some alteration there, the particularities I cannot yet learn.

The T. sent me word that he was glad that the League was concluded,
notwithstanding he willed the messenger to tell me, that unless the Queen my
Mistress did proceed roundly in cutting off the inward diseases at home, this
outward medicine would stand her in no stead; and hereof (said he) you shall
see by dangerous experience, unless the remedy be applied in time. The same
party (if your Lordship remember it) gave me warning of a practice for the
delivery of the Queen of Scots; and therefore it is the rather to be weighed;
and I judge it comes from the L. who has it from A. he will by no means make
me to understand any particularities: for fear of w. he dares not repair to me*
And so leaving any further to trouble your Honor at this present, I most
humbly take my leave,

from Blois the 22 of April, 1571. Your Honors to command, F. Walsingham.


To the right honorable and my very good friend, Francis Walsingham Esquire, her
Majesty's Ambassador in France.
SIr, Now that this Treaty is so well concluded to the apparent contentation of
her Majesty, and with the good liking of the French King, I wish all good
means used on all parts to nourish your planting, that first the glory of God,
and next the two Realms and Princes, may long see the fruits to grow thereof.

The matters of the Low Countries are now in farther terms to relieve
themselves of Pharaohs cruelties used by Duke Alva, then when you wrote last
hither of the Communication which you had with the Count. Here is all covert
means to let them of the Low Countries pass home, to the help of the liberty of
the Country; and I wish it were done rather by themselves then by others, that
percase would not suffer them long to enjoy their liberty when it should be
recovered, percase it will not be liked here. I cannot write more presently;
for I do this in haste, being absent from the Court, and have not your Cipher
about me. I have written of more matters to Sir Tho. Smith, who will make you
thereof partaker.

From my house in Westminster the 23 of April, 1571. Your assured friend, W.
Burleigh.


To Francis Walsingham Esquire the Queens Majesty's Ambassador Resident in France.
Mr. Walsingham, Like as I am to yield you my hearty thanks for your pains and
travel bestowed about the recovery of Clerk my boy; so do I most earnestly pray
you to present my humble thanks unto the Kings Majesty there, for the honor
and favor it has pleased him to do me in that behalf. I understand by the
Post of Roan, he is retained with the Cardinal of Burbon, in which respect,
because I have not my self any acquaintance with the said Cardinal. I have
written my earnest Letter to Monsieur D' Anville, requesting him to deal
earnestly with the said Cardinal for restitution of the boy, which I do not
desire so much for any account I make of him, as to make him an Example unto
other our servants, not to persume hereafter so to abuse their Masters. The
truth is, he was a poor man's son, being left unto me, I had some care to see
him well brought up in virtue and good qualities, especially in Music, wherein
finding himself to have a little cunning, away he is thus run from me (desirous
belike of more liberty) without having been any ways evil entreated, or for
any other cause in the world; the which if I should over-slightly let slip, it
would no doubt give too much encouragement to others his like after, to play
the like lewd part. Therefore as you began, so I pray you continue your
friendly travel therein, that I may have him sent over unto me again; which I
only desire (as I said) for example sake: For if I wished that the said Cardinal
or any other Noble man in those parts had any liking to him, I would most
willingly either send him again, or some other of that profession, perhaps
better quallified then he, and so I pray it may be signified unto them from me.
Thus with my hearty commendations I bid you farewell.

From the Court the 23 of April, 1571. Your assured Friend, To: Leicester.


To the Right Honorable, and my very good Lord, the Lord of Burleigh.
IT may please your Lordship to understand, that La Croques long stay bred in
them here some strange imaginations, as also the slow proceeding in the Treaty.
Touching Merchants Causes, I hope by the Ambassadors last dispatch, by the
which I received your Lordships of the 22 of April, all will be salved, whereby
this last Treaty lately concluded may yield that good fruit that is hoped for.
I send your Lordship here enclosed, Mr. Mounts Letters, to the Contents whereof
I refer you.

The Count Palatine by a servant lately sent hither, desired me to write unto
your Lordship, that he may be informed what Pacieco is, and whether he
appertain to her Majesty, as he pretends. This he desired me to procure with
as much convenient expedition as I might: I beseech your Lordship therefore by
the next, that I may understand what I shall write to him in that behalf.

These advises out of Germany and Swisserland, I received from ^ your Lordship
thereby may perceive, that the holy Fathers intention is not only to trouble
England, but all other places that profess the Gospel. For the avoiding to
trouble your Lordship with C. within the ^, I send you herewith enclosed; you
shall find what I know concerning Blasco.

Monsieur Montmorency stays his setting forward from hence, until I know the
certain day of my Lord Admirals departure from hence.

The King, as Monsieur Lansac told me (who came lately from the Court) about
the latter end of this Month will be at Madrill. So leaving to trouble your
Lordship any further, I most humbly take my leave.

From Paris the 9 of May, 1571. Your Honors to command, Fr. Walsingham*


Letters to my Lord of Burleigh.
MY very good Lord, what has passed between the King here and Q. Mother and
us, we have at large written to the Q. Maj. what has past between the Deputies
and us, You shall perceive by the whole draught of the League now ready to be
signed unto us: But because in the instructions we were commanded to sign it
before it were sent thither into England to be better considered, we thought
best to make the stay thereupon, that except the express words for Religion
were in it, we durst not sign it, and unless we did first understand her
Majesty's pleasure, whether so she would be content, there is no alteration
from the Article of 1546. in the Esclaircissement, which Article is also in
three Treaties with France, 1515. and 1546. saving they have specified the
number of Soldiers both by Sea and Land. The which we could by no means obtain
of them to leave it in generality. After that we had gotten of them that it
should not be sumptibus requisitis, which to bring to pas we had very much to
do. And seeing it is reciproque and no great number, we thought it not much
amiss: All the rest went easy enough, even that of the Merchants, and they
confessed that in these general words the matter of Religion is also contained:
So that if for the inquisition our matters be stayed, if the Queens Majesty do
require that aid for their deliverance, as is there expressed, the King is
bound to do it because there is -- Iusserit aut permiserit.

The greatest debating was for two things, The one to have Religion expressly
mentioned in the Treaty, the which I perceive some of the Deputies, partly
having benefices, and looking for more Bulls from Rome, and partly fearing that
some change may come, and then it may be laid to their charge, would needs
shift it from them, and let the King do it alone. And when once they had hope
given them by their Ambassador in England, that the Queens Majesty would so be
content to have it in general words, you might be sure we should never get them
further, but to be delivered as slightly as they could of that matter; ye shall
receive that fashion that we required in the figure O. delivered to Monsieur de
Foix, Feb. 28. ye shall receive also that which Monsieur de Foix delivered to
us, as a copy of a Letter whereby the King does think w^ should be satisfied,
noted and delivered to us the 29 of February; and to it we have put what fault
we do find with that Letter, although the Queens Majesty should be content
with that form. This is the issue whereupon we do now stand.

The other great debatement was for the Queen of Scots, which held us almost at
every meeting to have her mentioned in the Treaty, and that earnestly handled
of them the 23 and 26 of February, that I was fain once again to declare the
evil deserts of the late Queen of Scots toward the Queens Majesty, with her
other behavior at the whole length, because Marshal Montmorency was not at the
first Declaration; and there Mr. Walsingham and Mr. Killigrew helped me with
supply so far, that at that present they seemed to give over, and we in no wise
would have her mentioned in this Treaty; yet the 28 of February Mr. de Foix
brought to us a writing for her, which we send you noted M. to which you sent
him the next day a Coppie of the same noted with our answer N. The same day at
the afternoon we had audience of the King, where he was also earnest with us,
as you may perceive by our Letters to the Queens Majesty B. the Queen Mother
that day, as good chance was, had forgotten her self; but the next day, the
first of March, Mr. de Foix came to us and brought us a draught of the whole
League in French, because he said he was commanded to translate it into French,
that the King might understand it; and so he gathered it as he thought of that
which we were accorded, we perused it with our Pamphils, as Mr. Hall terms
them, schediae or adversaria, I mean those which one way or other by yea and
nay had gone betwixt us (some other tho will have them called pieces, as some
Frenchmen do name them) and we did not much disagree; and although he had made
a new Preface in such matters, we do not stick. I am old, I love not much talk,
and I would fain be dispatched honestly homewards; so the effect be there
indeed, and our Queen not deceived, I care for no more, that done, and referred
again for again, seeing they were offered unto us in Latin, he came to us with
a new Charge of the late Queen of Scots, in the Queen Mothers name, saying,
that by our other talk she had clean forgotten her; but to do that thing which
should do our friend (he meant the King his Master) good, and us no hurt, we
could not say nay; he for affinity and consanguinity, and that she was once
his Sovereign, was bound in conscience and respect of the world to require
so much, and to have it testified to the world that he had done those good
offices; we may answer as we would it should not touch us, they would take
our answer, whatsoever it was. I told him we had ansvvered first to the
Deputies in words, and had good causes why we could not do it, of which she
was one, after that we had given our answer to him in writing. Thirdly, we had
also spoken with the King, and made him a direct answer, that we could not
meddle in any wise with that matter in the League, we had no Commission, we
were precisely forbidden to meddle in that matter: And therefore I never spoke
more of that matter to have that put in the Treaty, for that will not be.

Upon that he began to amplify in another long Oration; for all his Reasons, I
was fain to say, he must pardon me, I know he is a good Rhetorician, and he had
Rhetorical ornaments at will to make; and so had I on the contrary side, if I
would bestow my time on that sort: We were the Queens Ma^esties Servants, we
have showed our Reasons so good that no man could deny that we should not agree
upto it: We have written the sum of our answer also, wherewith they ought to be
content.

Oh (says he) she has great kindred and alliance here in the Court, and they
will say that the King nor we have done our duties. Will ye see the answer
(quoth I) I thought once to send, mary I would not have it sent. This I send
your Lordship to see it N. noted, not to be declared (quoth I) because we would
be dispatched of such matters, yet as gently as we could, and with as little
evil speeches, especially of such persons. This I like well (says he) let me
have it I pray you; belike (quoth I) you would please Mr. d' Aumale and the
Cardinal of Lorrain with it. It is even for that (says he) they shall see
that the King has done so much as he can. No (quoth I) it shall not need, you
have our answer already: and if you doubt of it, you

It is no marvel though other would Inire gratiam cum anula and host ejus quam
aliquando regnaturam putant culpa sua, and we thought not good to leave in
their hands in writing, tam acerbum, de illa testimonium. But surely if her
Majesty go no better about to establish her Crown and surety, she does not
then follow Solomon, in making away Adonias and Ioab for the same purpose: And
I am afraid, quod erit novissimus error pejor priori. I thank your Lordship for
your Letters of the 16 of February by Edwards, and also of the 22 of the same
by the Post. Although you write not so many Letters as I, yet if you write so
much stuff, and answer all, it is all one to me; but in two things I yet find
fault; the one, that in the Letter of the 22. you wrote nothing of the Office,
and that you make no mention at all of the Duke of Alanson. They here look very
undoubtedly for some hope

The other grieveth me most of all, that now the League is full done (as I take
it) and almost as well as we can with, yet I must not come home, but tarry here
still in this Country, where I have felt since Candlemas, the greatest cold
that ever I felt, and most continual, except it were at Tholous, where it did
almost cost me my life, and there had made an end of it, if it had not been for
the strong matters which I do use for my stomach morning and evening, and yet
it is scarce able to resist the extreme cold of the weather, and now about 30
days continual frost and snow, and here is neither wood plenty, nor good
chimneys for fire, and in my bedchamber I can make no fire: Good my Lord
dispatch this Bearer with as much speed again as may be, as it is promised in
the Instructions.

This day the Queen of Navarr is looked for in the Court, and hoped that the
marriage shall go forward. The foolish Cardinal went away as wise as he came,
he neither brake the marriage with Navarr, nor got no Dismes of the Church of
France, nor persuaded the King to enter into the League with the Turk, nor to
accept the Tridentine, or to break off Treaty with us; and the foolishest part
of all at his going away, he refused a Diamond which the King offered him of
600 Crowns, yet he was here highly feasted; he and his Train cost the King
above 300 Crowns a day, as they said. Thus I bid your Lordship heartily
farewell.

From Blois March 3. by English account. Th. Smith.


To my Lord Burleigh.
MY very good Lord, I received your Letters by Monsieur de Crocques Kinsman,
after Mid-Lent-Sunday, which was dated the sixth of March: the King had then
entered into a Diet, which he keeps still in his C^amber. Some said it is
because he had some hurt in one of his legs, which I could never perceive but
he was one of the activest in all his actions as the Barriers, Justs, and other
such Martial feats, which were simulachra belli of all the rest in the Company.
Other (of whose opinion I am) think it is the Mothers drift to make him take
(under pretense of Physic) some rest from his inordinate hunting so early in
the morning, and so late at night, without sparing frost, snow, or rain, and in
so desperate doings as makes her and them that love him, to be often in great
fear. And the Queen possibly being now undoubtedly with child, to cause her
also to rest from that travel, that both he may get somewhat more flesh, and
the Queen to retain more surety of that which is conceived. Because of that Mr.
Walsingham and I wi^t not what to do; but Monsieur de Malvosire coming to us as
he is appointed, to see that we lack nothing, and suppeth and dineth commonly
with us, we told him merrily, that his Mistress (for so we call the Scotch
Queen) had played now a wise part, for she has opened her self again, and the
good favor she bears to Spain, to make a perpet^al broil if she could
betwixt England, Scotland and France, for she has practiced by Letters of
late, and since the Dukes trouble, which Letters are now come to light, and
known to have practiced with the Duke of Alva, to convey the young King out of
Scotland into Spain; the which thing I am sure you would like as ill as we.
Yea (says he) they may be counterfeit and made to hurt the poor Queen. No
(quoth I) the original Letters were showed to Monsieur de Crocque and de la
Mott, and yet by the same de Crocque, the King wrote to the Queens Majesty for
her deliverance and sending of her into France: What would she do here at
liberty, if being straightly kept, and the matter so plainly known, for the
Bishop of Ross wrote since he was in the Tower to her, that all was discovered,
which he could not deny: Well (says he) indeed I have heard of such a thing;
but will you tell the King (quoth I) that so much I have told you, and that the
Queens Majesty is not very well pleased, that she should write so earnestly
for her who will never cease to seek mischief and trouble to her Majesty and
her Realm, yea and set all the Princes together by the ears if she could; he
said he would: and when we would come home to walk in the Garden, at such time
as the Queen Mother does customarily walk there, he would find the means we
should speak with her; when he came again he brought us word that it was true
that he said, for de la Mott had written the same to the King, and the King so
told him that it was true, and said, Ah! the poor fool will never cease while
she lose her head; In faith they will put her to death, I see it is her own
fault and folly, I see no remedy for it; I meant to help, but if she will not
be helped, Ie ne puis mais, that is, I cannot do withal.

The 17 of this Month at afternoon, Mr. Walsingham and I went with Mr.
Malvosire into the Kings Garden at Blois, and after a while walking, the Queen
Mother came to us; to whom we declared, That of late there was Letters
intercepted of the Queen of Scots to the Duke of Alva, the effect whereof we
were willing to declare to the Kings Majesty or to her, which was indeed to
make a perpetual pique betwixt England, Scotland, France and Spain, for that it
was, that he should take and convey away by his practice, the young King, and
convey him into Spain. And so (quoth I) where now by Gods grace we go about to
make a perpetual amity betwixt England and France, and by that jointly to make
a good union and peace in Scotland, that the civil Wars might be compounded and
cease, and so these 3 Realms to be as it were all one for mutual defense; this
is a devise to make a perpetual pique, broil and jealousy amongst us all and
Spain.

Sait^ Mr. Walsingham, betwixt England and France, thanks be to God, no
quarrels be pretended: We demand nothing of you at this time, nor you of us.
The occasion why your League was so sure with Scotland to annoy us, now
there is no such cause standing so sure on amity, and therefore belike Spain
would make that a pique to trouble us vvithall both, and make us War and
trouble that ways.

Says the Queen, There is no doubt but they will do what they can, for the
King my Son is advertised that there is nothing that grieveth him more then to
understand of this good League and perfect Amity which is begun, and I trust,
now at an end betwixt us; they vvote not which ways to turn them to break
it. But Madam, (quoth I) these two things coming together, she to go about
that disturbing of Scotland and England, and that thing which should be as much
displeasant to you as to us, if your Majesty do well mark it, and at the same
time the King here to write for her delivery, and to come into France, and that
when the chief treating of amity is in hand, you shall not marvel though her
Majesty do take it ill, and I assure you that it is written to us, that but
that her Majesty has known of long time the good affection that you Madam and
the King your Son did bear to her, and that we that are here now Ambassadors,
and Mr. Killegrew, all with one tenor have written so much of the sincerity and
sound dealing of the King and you, and bound our credit therein, that good
faith was meant in all points, her Majesty would have doubted; and so we are
willed to tell you.

The King my Son (says she) meant no evil in it, she is allied to him, she
has many friends here; and I tell you she has one of the fairest Roses or
Diamonds in France; she meant her Dowry, which is, as is reported, 120000
Franks by the year, and therefore my son could no less do then write earnestly
for her; mary not to offend my good sister the Queen. We think surely that the
Queen your Mistress will show mercy unto her, she is of so good nature; and
then if she were here, she should be the less able to trouble you. Yes Madam
(quoth I) and you to, she is now kept streighter then ever she was, and has
not past ten, as I hear say, allowed about her of her own, and yet she can do
this, and still practice the disturbing of the Queens Majesty and her Realm;
what would she do being here at liberty, it would not be long before she
convey her self into Spain, and then I doubt whether you or we should be long
without War. Because you say so (says she) he that is the King my sons
Ambassador in Spain, now wrote of late that the Duke de Medina Celi is yet in
coming, and takes in men daily; but he does it with more leisure, because he
does attend to hear word of some attempt to be done in England, and then he
comes away strait. This they look for still there, whatsoever it be, and so
you may write to the Q. your Mistress.

Then she asked whether the Duke were executed; we said no, that we could
learn. No (says she) belike the Queen will pardon him. We answered, we could
not tell; I would (says she) she were in quiet from all these broils: do you
know nothing how she can fancy the marriage with my Son the Duke of Alanson?
Madam, you know me of old, except I have a sure ground, I dare affirm nothing
to your Majesty. Why (says she) if she be disposed to marry* I do not see
where she shall marry so well; and yet (says she) I may as a Mother, justly
be accounted partial; but as for those which I have heard named, as the
Emperors Son, or Don John d' Austria, they be both lesser then my Son is, and
of less stature by a good deal; and if she should marry, it were pity any
more time were lost.

Madam (quoth I) If it pleased God that she were married, and had a child, all
these braggs, and all these Treasons would soon be appaled; and on condition
she had a child by Mr. d' Alanson, for my part I cared not if ye had the Q. of
Scots here; for ye then would be as careful and jealous over her for the Q. my
Mistresses surety as we, or as her self is. That is true (says she) and
without this marriage (says she) if she should marry in another place, I
cannot see how this League and Amity would be so strong as it is. True Madam
(quoth I) the knot of blood and marriage is a stronger Seal then that which is
printed in wax, and lasts longer if God give good success; but yet all
Leagues have not Marriage joined with them, as this may, if it please God. I
would it had (says she) then surely would I make a start over and see her my
self, the which I do most desire of all things. Madam (quoth I) if I had now as
ample a Commission for Mr. de Alanson, as I had at the first for Monsieur, the
matter should soon by Gods grace, be at an end: Would you had (says she) and
if you had such a one when you are in England, would you not come over again to
execute it? Yes Madam (quoth I) most gladly to so good an intent I would pass
again the Sea if I were never so sick for it. Then says Mr. Walsingham, And
surely it was no Religion that made that stop in the marriage of Monsieur, but
some other thing: No surely (says she) he never showed to me any other cause.
I assure you Madam (says Mr. Walsingham) I can marvelous hardly believe it,
for at Gallion he was so willing and so well affected, that me thought it did
me much good when he spoke of the Queen my Mistress, or with any of her
Ministers, I perceived it in his words, in his countenance, in his gesture and
all things; but again, when he came to Paris, all was clean changed. It is true
Monsieur L. Ambassadeur (says she) and it made me much to marvel at it; but
even at Gallion all other things liked him well; but at the Religion he made a
little stop, but nothing so as he did after. Upon this I bare him in hand (for
it grieved me not a little, and the King my Son, also as you know) that of all
evil rumors and tales of naughty persons, such as would break the matter, and
were spread abroad of the Queen, that those he did believe, and that made him
so backward. And I told him it is all the hurt that evil men can do to Noble
women and Princes, to spread abroad lies and dishonorable tales of them, and
that we of all Princes that be women, are subject to be slandered wrongfully of
them that be our adversaries, other hurt they cannot do us; he said and swore
to me, he gave no credit to them; he knew she had so virtuously Governed her
Realm this long time, that she must needs be a good and virtuous Princess, and
full of honor, and other opinion of her he could not have; but that his
conscience and his Religion did trouble him that he could not be in quiet, and
nothing else.

Other communication there was, as is commonly wont to be in such meetings; but
this is the sum of that which is worth the writing, that passed betwixt us.

The 21 of this Month I received your Lordships Letters dated the 10. of the
same. The next day I spoke again with the Queen Mother in the Garden, and
showed her that the Queens Majesty did perceive that the King and she were
careful to advertise any such occurrents as might trouble her Highness and
estate, the which as she must needs take in most thankful part, so she had a
desire to acquit the same with as much carefulness as may be, and therefore
willed me to signify unto their Maj. such things as now of late be come to her
knowledge: And say that at Harvvich, which was the Port that Rodolph, and
other of that conspiracy, appointed that the Spaniards and Flemings should
arrive at from the Duke of Alva, if the Treason had gone forvvard. At that Port
arrived the Lord Seaton, whom she knevv well enough, and from thence with
two other of the Earl of Northumberlands men disguised, went into Scotland,
and now be in the Castle of Edinburgh; and this being understood, the Ship
was stayed and searched; and amongst other, the confirmation of that which I
told you before, was in the Scotch Queens Letters, that she gave her self and
her son, now the young King of Scotland wholy into the hands of the King of
Spain, to be governed and ruled only by him, and assure him that if he would
send any power, the young King should be delivered into his hands. For in the
Ship it does appear that the Lord Seton by his instructions is named the Scotch
Queens Ambassador toward the Duke of Alva. A goodly Ambassador (says the
Queen.) And there in his Ambass. he offers the young King to be delivered
into his hands, to be conveyed into Spain. And to animate him more to set up
again the Scotch Queen, and take the protection of her, that she has right
both by Gods Law and man's Law to be Queen of England and also of Scotland, and
that she has not only all those that be in trouble now, but a great sort more
in England on her part, so that the King by setting her up, should not only
govern both these Realms, but shall also set up in both again the Catholic
Religion.

Alas (says the Queen) that head of hers shall be never in quiet. This (quoth
I) touches us most, the next touches the King your son. I will show unto you
as I have it, my Lord Burleigh writes it unto me. In the same ship amongst
other was found a Letter of the Countess of Northumberland, who was one of the
chief stirrers in the last Rebellion. Her husband the Earl is now prisoner in
Scotland for the same purpose. The Countess in her Letter writes to her
husband, that the Duke of Guise has of late been with the D. of Alva
disguised, and she affirms to her husband for certainty, all the house of
Guise and that faction will follow in all points the direction of the King of
Spain. Says the Queen, he was not, for by reason of his Treaty of accord, (she
meant between the Admiral and him) which has been long time in doing, and yet
takes that small success; every four days we either hear from him, or send to
him, so that we know certainly where he is, and that he has not been there; he
might well enough send some other person; but somewhat there is we know well
enough (says she) that they incline somewhat that way of Spain, and it may be
nothing, for it is the Spanish practice to aid themselves with lies, and spread
abroad, that those and those be of the Faction, to bring other in, when indeed
it is nothing so; that used the Emperor Charles, and so brought some by this
means unto his lure before they were aware: and that is a shrewd art (quoth I)
to abuse rash fools. Yes (says she) but when at the last it is espied, it
makes them the more to be hated, and other the harder to be abused by them.
Then she left that matter.

Jesu! says she, and does not your Mistress see that she shall be always in
danger until she marry? That once done, and in some good House, who dare
attempt any thing against her? Madam (quoth I) I think if she were once
married, all in England that had any traitorous hearts, would be discouraged:
for one Tree alone may soon be cut down, but when there be two or three
together, it is longer a doing, and one shall watch for the other; but if she
had a child, then all these bold and troublesome Titles of the Scotch Queen, or
other that make such gapings for her death, will be clean choked up. I see she
may have five or six, says she, very well; I would to God we had one. No,
says she, two boys, le^t the one should die, and three or four daughters to
make alliance with us again, and other Princes, to strengthen the Realm. Why
then (quoth I) you think that Monsieur le Duc shall speed. With that she
laughed, and said, Ie le desire infinitement; and I would trust then to see
three or four my self at the least, of her race, which would make me indeed not
to spare Sea nor Land to see her and them. And if she could have fancied my son
d'Anjou, says she, as you told me, why not this of the same house, Father and
Mother, and as vigorous and lusty as he, and rather more, and now he begins
to have a beard come forth, so that I told him the last day that I was angry
with it, for now I was afraid he would not be so high as his brethren. Yea
Madam (quoth I) a man does commonly grow in height to his years, the beard
makes nothing: Nay, says she, he is not so little, he is so high as you, or
very near: For that matter, Madam (quoth I) I for my part make small account,
if the Queens Majesty can fancy him. For Pipinus Brevis, who married Bertha
the King of Almains Daughter, was so little to her, that he is standing in
Aquisgrave, or Moguerre, a Church in Almani, she taking him by the hand, and
his head not reaching to her girdle, and yet he had by her Charlemain the great
Emperor and King of France, which is reported to be almost a Giants stature.
And your Oliver Glesquim, the Briton Constable that you make so much of, and
lies buried amongst the Kings at St. Dennis, if he were no bigger then is
there pourtrayed upon his Tomb, was very short, scarcely, four foot long; but
yet he was valiant, hardly, and courageous, above all in his time, and did us
English men most hurt.

It is true, says she, it is the heart, courage, and activity that is to be
looked for in a man; but hear you word of the Queens affection that way? can
you give me no comfort? No I assure your Majesty (quoth I) for the Letters
were written the 11 of this Month, the same day or the next that our Currier
went with the dispatch from hence.

Thus, with much other talk in such sort, the time was passed that day betwixt
her Majesty and me. All the world does see that we do wish her Majesty
surety and long continuance, that her marriage and issue of her Highness body
should be the most assurance of her Highness, and of the Wealth of the Realm.
The place where, and the person whom, I for my part remit to her Majesty; but
what does her Majesty mean to maintain still her danger, and not provide for
her surety? I assure your Lordship I can see no reason. God preserve her
Majesty long to Reign over us by some unlooked for miracle; for I cannot see
by natural reason that her Highness goes about to provide for it.

Thus I commit your Lordship to Almighty God.

From Blois, March 22. 1571. by English account. Th. Smith.


To my Lord of Burleigh.
MY Lord, You must excuse us, if the Queens Majesty or any other body do find
fault that we send this man away, we do long so much for answer out of England,
it being 22 days since Mr. Beal departed from hence, and we thought but upon
15. the thing being here so desired of them, so necessary as we think for us,
that the fault we find there, we will not have found in us, but rather send all
that we have here, and be sick for grief that we hear nothing from you: then
you would excuse us there, by our like doings here. Your Lordship may be well
assured there is nothing more expected and looked for then the Queens Majesty's
resolution in these two points, whereof for the one, the League is accounted a^
sure, both of us and them; the other, for the marriage although in suspense;
yet in great hope, so much as they get in uncertainly in such a matter on their
side; for our parts, as we have said, we can say nothing whereof we are more
sorry and do lament in our hearts, to see such uncertain, so negligent and
irresolute provision for the safety of the Queens Majesty's person, and of her
Reign over us. God of his almighty and miraculous power preserve her long to
Reign over us. What shall we say more that is done heretofore even to this
day, is written fully, what shall be written fully, what shall be written for
you, and what God has disposed to be done, we cannot know till we hear from
you. His grace and mercy turn all to the best, and preserve her Majesty and
your Lordship with long life and felicity.

From Blois this Palm Sunday, 1571. Th. Smith.


To my Lord Burleigh.
YOur Lordships Letters of the 20 of March made us, both Mr. Walsingham and me
in the reading, for we read them both together in a marvelous agony; but having
the medicine ready, that her Majesty was within an hour recovered, it did in
part heal us again; but as your Lordship writes the care does not yet cease in
you, you may be assured it does as little cease in us: calling to our
remembrance, and laying before our eyes the trouble, the uncertainty, the
disorder, the peril and danger which had been like to follow, if at that time
God had taken from us that stay of the Commonwealth and hope of our repose,
that Lanthorn of our light next God, whom to follow, nor certainly where to
light another Candle; but if the Queens Majesty do still continue in
extremities to promise, in recoveries to forget; what shall we say but as
Italians do, Passato il pericolo gabbato il fanto: And you shall perceive by
our proceedings, what justly may be required, is easy to be done, and done if
her Majesty deceive her self, and with irresolution make all Princes
understand, that there is no certainty in her Majesty nor her Council, but
dallian^e and farding off of time; her Majesty shall first discredit her
Ministers, which is not much; but next, and by them, discredit her self, to be
counted as uncertain, irresolute, unconstant, and for no Prince to trust unto,
but as to a Courtier, who has words at will, and true deeds none. Your
Lordship must pardon me, for I have here kept so long, that I am now in an
Ague, both in body and spirit: nor seeing no cause why Mr. Beal comes not, nor
any reason showed neither in her Majesty's Letters nor yours, why he does not
come; as the humors in my body makes an Ague in my body, whereof I would it
should make an end; so this irresolution there with you I hope will help to
conclude, that I shall feel no more miseries, which I fear those that come
after us shall feel, Quia non videbimus tempus visitationis nostrae. Thus I
commit your Lordship to Almighty God. From Blois this Good Friday, 1571.

Because the French King does deal so plainly, faithfully, and frankly with the
Q. Majesty at this time touching the matters in Scotland, I pray move her
Majesty to deal as frankly with him, and let de Crocque be privy to your
Instructions, and let them be conformable to his; and if he shall think so
meet, you may add more to them, for they would have the Commission to be,
jointly to do, and with common consent, all things.


To my Lord Burleigh.
MY very good Lord, With much difficulty at the last we have concluded the
League, and ^r. Walsingham and I were fain to stand even to the breaking of all
together. The last Instructions seemed to us so precise for the Scotch matters,
we taking them as concluded between the Queens Majesty and Mr. de la Mot their
Ambassador Resident there, that he did not so conclude, nor had no such
authority, but that it was referred again to us. In fine, after five or six
days debating, the 14 of this month we came to this* We yielded to put out,
and in those words as be in the Instructions, as de la Mott required, and to
change one or two more which varied not the sentence, but made it more clear*
and remitting to us the last Article of reservation to the Scots; we remitted
also to them the 24. because we would once be at a point. And where reservation
is needless in a League defensive, where is ^o derogation to other Leagues
defensives; yet we would not that the Queens Majesty should seem any more to
relent to them, then they to her Highness. All the rest they accorded to us as
we would desire, and in all points as is required in her Highness Letters to
us, as ye may perceive by the Treaty, and by our demand in Latin; and that
which we followed* or gave us reason, why not; which we send unto you; indeed
that word present, is not so necessary nor effectual: for when we speak Statum
Scotiae; and if you put praesentem, and now it is in trouble, and doubt may be
made whether you would maintain the troubled State or no; and so present shall
be, Determinatio diminuens, as homo furibundus, seminectus, moribundus, moriens
and somniens, for so is a Commonwealth in sedition. And again, when you say
Contra publicas Soctiae Leges consuetudines and Parliamenta, it is understood
by common sense, praesentes, for Laws and Statutes abrogated or antiquated, be
not Laws; so they confessed unto us that they got nothing by putting out
praesentem, or praesentis; but that it lay not so open unto cavillations, as
though they should by special words maintain the troubled State, or allow the
Parliament, whereby the Queen was deprived, and the King allowed; although
indeed in tacit they would not deny but it was allowed; and in the plain sense
of the words wherein they said they did much for the Q. Maj. that they were
content to make no mention of the Q. of being so their friend and allie, but
gave her over to the Q. Maj. and in all things relent to her Highness desires,
so they may have any color to s^ve the K. their Masters honor. Likewise where
the maintaining of Rebels, done by the Scots, and the expulsion to expel them,
was set in the writing as a thing confessed, both by the King here, and the Q.
Maj. they would have the rehearsal made, as of her Majesty's relation; and yet
the thing done as her Highness requires, as you see in the Treaty. These
things when they come to conclusion, your wisdom knows be not to be sticked
upon; so that the Q. Mother with her Honor has done all that is desired of her
Highness. And as I hope and trust, the best League that ever was made with
France or any other Nation for her Majesty's surety. As yet we have not signed
the Treaty, but to morrow or the next day we shall have. There has been such
variance betwixt us for some words, and somewhat for slowness of Writers. Thus
in few words you have the reasons of our variances and agreements, so that with
the said, and other which your Lordship can adjoyn, all doubts and objections
if any, may be answered. And so I commit your Lordship to almighty God,

from Blois, April 17. 1571.

To my Lord Burleigh.
MY very good Lord, After the dispatch of our Post, this here enclosed was
brought to us to look upon, to know what we thought upon it; we answered, for
us we could not judge, but her Majesty had well considered of it, and we doubt
not, will either sign to the like as it is, or with some other amendment; but
because the League is concluded and signed, we have no more to do. D^ Florence
brought it, and was content to leave it with us, the which we thought
convenient to take of him and send it your Lordship by Cavalcant, somevvhat to
consider of it before, for their Ambassador shall present it to the Q.
Majesty, to have the like of her Highness. Mr. Cavalcant also does partly
understand the reason of it, which is to satisfy such as would be glad to
find any cavellation to mislike the League. And therefore for our part we
vvish that her Majesty should condescend to so much as conveniently her
Highness may do, because the King here deals so frankly and roundly with her
Majesty.

And straightly after that I had written so far, came Monsieur -- brother, and
brought us a copy of a League in French, and also of the reciproque Letters for
the explication of the general words thereof, to be understood also in matter
of Religion. This League in French serves for three purpose; the one, the King
here understands French, and not Latin; the other, for the aid of horsemen and
footmen. The Latin at this day is forced to signify the manner as it is now
differing, although it be the manner of the Romans: the French is proper to the
orders of the War at this day, which be better known by that Language now then
by Latin. Now you having both, the one may serve for the interpretation of the
other; although the very League is that which is in Latin, and signed with ^ll
our hands and Seals. Thus I commit your Lordship to Almighty God.

From Blois, April 22. at night.

To my Lord of Burleigh.
MY very good Lord, I most heartily thank you for your Leters of the 28 of
April, wherein I greatly rejoiced that du Crocque is sent at the last into
Scotland; the staying of him was not well taken here, for it bred some
suspicion as of no plain dealing; and the King here meaning surely, for any
thing I can yet perceive, nothing but sincerity and plain and faithful dealing
toward her Maj. is again for his part suspicious; but I will not swear for his
Council: within these three days there was a Letter of du Crocques to the
King, sent from the Court hither to Mr. de Montmorency and du Foix, who sent to
us immediately du Florence, complaining very much that du Crocque had written
to the King that he was in despair of his going into Scotland, he thought
verily the Q. would not let him go. This thing somewhat amazed us both; but so
soon as we received your Letters, which was yesterday the 8 of May, and with
them a Letter of John Woods, that du Crocque went into Scoland in May; we went
straight to visit the Marshal and du Foix, imparted to them the news we knew,
and especially that du Crocque was gone; we showed them also the Articles
propounded by her Maj. and their answers of the Castle, wherein they might
understand how sincerely the Q. Maj. meant. Before du Crocque came, they all
liked very well, yea and also that de la Mott and du Crocque did accept instead
of that 5 Article, and they doubted not both the Princes once binding
themselves together to set a quiet in that Realm, both the parties must needs
content themselves to yield to reason. And if the young King be established
there, as I have often written, the K. here, and the wiser of his Council do
desire no other. Marry he must not seem to be the doer of it, nor the condemner
of her cause. As for those Articles, neither I nor (...). Walsingham, as we
told plainly, and I am sure Mr. du Foix will say as much in England, did
neither allow nor disallow, for we had no Commission, as we said; and because
it was referred to her Maj. we could not but leave them whole and entire for
her Highness to judge upon. I marvel my L. Admiral is so long before he set
forward; Marshal Montmorency and du Foix, and all that should go with them, be
ready, and attend only to hear when my L. Admiral does set forward. A man would
marvel what a number of great persons both of the long and short Robe, do
desire to go with the Marshal and to see England, and what shift he is fain to
make to cut off his train, and shake them off that desire to go, let he should
have too many; he is surely a great Prince here, marvelous well beloved, and one
that loves the Q. Maj. and our Nation as much as any Noble man in France. I
hope the Q. Maj. will give him the Order at his being there, that he may follow
his father therein; he will esteem it much: and I know not how it comes to
pass, here is a rumor already spread, that he amongst others, was elected on S.
Georges day, and your Lordship also, whereof I pray God give unto you long joy,
and many years to wear that Order. I am glad the Treaty is liked. Now it cannot
be said her Maj. is altogether alone, having so good a defense of so noble,
courageous, and so faithful a Prince of his word, and so near a neighbor,
provided for and bespoken before hand against any need, partly that, and partly
the trouble in Flanders, which I trust God has provided to deliver his poor
servants there from the Antichristian Tyranny, shall make her Highness enjoy
more quietly both England and Ireland, and a better neighbor of Scotland. Thus
I commit your Lordship to Almighty God.

Paris, May 7. 1571.

To the Right Honorable, and my very good Lord, the Lord of Burleigh.
IT may please your Lordship to understand, that the last of this month the
Marshal Montmorency will be at Bulloign with his Train, who is glad to have the
commodity to pass over in her Maj. ships, Mr. de Battle is dangerously sick in
this Town, and is not in case to pass over at this present. The 19 of this
month, when we went to take our leave of the Marshal, he showed unto us that
certain Englishmen had made means unto him to go over with him, whom he
refused, unless they could bring testimonial from us that they departed the
Realm with her Maj. favor and license, notwithstanding I judge there are some
under the color to be of his Train, that will pass over; wherefore I thought
good to advertise your Lordship, to the end there may be some order taken in
that behalf. There is one Chambers a Scotchman, sometimes a Mr. of the Requests
in Scotland, who in Sir H^nry Norris his time was a great doer for the Duke of
Chastelheraud, he came over in Mr. de Foix Train, whom I made privy that he
was not very grateful to her Maj. and therefore wished him to leave him behind
him; he showed, that though heretofore he has not bin the best instrument in
the Scotch divisions, yet he now wishes nothing more then accord, wherein he
promises to do his uttermost, and thinks he may be able to do a great deal
of good; whereupon he has made choice of him at this present, for that he
thinks that if du Crocque do no good in the appeasing of the Scotch troubles,
that then the Kings pleasure is to employ him in that behalf; not withstanding
he tells me that his meaning was never to have him with him into Scotland, if
percase he shall be employed in that behalf, without making her Majesty privy
thereof; for that the King his Mr. has no other meaning but to consult in
common with her Maj. touching the best means to appease the said troubles; for
the best justifying of the said Chambers, he did protest unto me most
earnestly, that both the Cardinal of Lorrain, and the Bishop of Glasco, did
what they could by their friends in Court, to impeach that Chambers might not
go. If du Crocque do no good, I hope her Maj. shall find Mr. de Foix a very good
instrument in those affairs.

Touching Flanders matters, if the long gowns had not done somewhat to impeach
them, the matters had bin so forward, that the Spaniards had never landed in
Zealand to have hindered the siege of Middleburgh. I hope shortly to send you
word of somewhat done and put in execution to divert the said Spaniards, for
that I think it necessary for her Majesty to know how this thing past; I mean
to advertise often when any thing happens worthy of advertisement: Count
Lodovick departed this Town the 19 of this month, with whom I have placed Mr.
Morgan, who will advertise from time to time how things do pass: and so having
nothing else to advertise your Honor at this present, I most humbly take my
leave.

From Paris, May 21. 1571. Your Honors to Command, Fr. Walsingham.


To the Right Honorable Fr. Walsingham Esquire her Majesty's Ambassador resident in
France.
SIr, I have long forborne to write to you, partly for want of leisure, partly
for lack of special matter.

I doubt not, but others do certify you of our Parliament proceedings, wherein
there can be found no more soundness then in the common house, and no lack
appearing in the higher house, but in the highest person such slowness in the
offers of surety, and such stay in resolution, as it seems God is not pleased
that the surety, shall succeed. To lament that secretly I cannot forbear, and
thereby with it and such like I am overthrown in heart, as I have no spark
almost of good spirits left in me to nourish health in my body, being every 3d
day thrown down to the ground, so as now I am forced to be carried into the
Parliament House, and to her Maj. presence; and to lament it openly, is to give
more comfort to the adversaries. These are our miseries, and such as I see no
end thereof; and amongst others, shame does as much trouble me as the rest,
that all persons shall behold our follies as they may think, imputing these
lacks and errors to some of us that are accounted inward Counselors, where
indeed the fault is not; and yet they must be so suffered, and to be so
imputed, for saving the honor of the highest. I think to send you presently
the Commission to authorize you for treating of the Merchants causes, not
determined by the Treaty, but hitherto I am not informed how to instruct you;
for indeed I see no likelihood of any great moment thereby, so are our
Merchants affected to traffic by the Low Countries, or to Germany.

My L. Admiral means to be at Dover the last of this month. At some length I
have obtained the suit for you to the Q. Maj. which this day I will deliver to
M. Dodington, who surely has as much care of you, as if he were your brother,
or your servant. Le Crocque is in Scotland, where I think he shall do little
good. The matters of the Low Countries were hot awhile, but now the Flemings
are become cold. The Duke incroacheth upon them of Zealand, having by the
treason of the Townsmen in armor, recovered it, and put in Garrisons of the
Spaniard. Now notwithstanding Flushing, which is not well governed for lack of
a head, we have suffered as many of the strangers to depart from hence as
would, but that is but a simple help. If the Prince of Orange does not follow
this opportunity, his case will never be recoverable hereafter.

From S. James the 21 of May, 1572. Yours assured, Will. Burleigh.
I pray you send me a particular declaration of the states and degrees of the
principal persons that come with Montmorency.




To the Right Honorable, and his very friend Francis Walsingham Esquire Ambassador
for the Queens Majesty in France.
MR. Walsingham, I have received your Letter touching my boy Clark, I would
have him again by his own submission, for he has made often means, but in no
wise will I receive him so, for I stand to have him otherwise, that others may
fear to attempt the like, when they shall perceive the friendship that I shall
have there; for it is not so much for his excellency, or that I mean to make
store of him again, but rather to make him an example to run from his Master:
Therefore I pray you be most earnest to have him delivered. As for Religion,
upon my credit he never knew what a Papist was till he came there, from his
cradle he has been bred a Protestant, but his brother served me thus before,
which if I cannot, it will make me think unkindness, and show as little
friendship, if ever like cause serve on this side. Our news is, we are
presently in hand to attaint the Scottish Q. of treason, and yet we fear our Q.
will scant agree to it. Great suit is made by the nether house to have
execution of the Duke, but I see no likelihood. I have no leisure, therefore I
commit you to God.

In haste this 21 of May, 1572. Yours assured, To: Leicester.


To the Right Honorable his very good Lord, the Earl of Leicester.
YOur Lordships of the 21. I have received touching your servant; I shall not
need say more then was contained in my last Letters. Here at this present we
are altogether entertained with Flanders matters, having received certain news
from thence, that certain by order from Count Lodovick, are seized of
Valentiennes and Monts in Henault, where it is said the Court remains, and
that from thence he sent Mr. de la Nue in great diligence toward Bruxels with
six hundred horses, where if he hap to find the Duke de Alva, he hops to make
short Wars, the Town of Bruxels being better affected to the Count then to the
D. It is said here that Doway and Lisle should also be taken by certain
appointed by him for the purpose; but that is not certain. If the Duke of Alva
retire to Antwerp (as it is thought he will) then those of judgment here are
of opinion, that the whole Country will revolt.

The heads of those that he does employ of his Country are, Ianlis, de la Nue,
Buckanans, the number of his horsemen are twelve hundred, the most part of them
Gentlemen. Of footmen he has only five thousand, the most part of them
Gascoins. It will shortly be seen to what issue this Tragedy will come. If
occasion so fall out, I mean to advertise often, thinking it necessary for her
Majesty to know how things proceed there; and yet when I consider how things
of moment tending to safety proceed at home; I know not what to judge
necessary, unless it be for every man particularly to provide for the cross.
And so leaving further to trouble your Lordshop at this present, I most humbly
take my leave.

From Paris the 29 of May, 1571. Your Honors to command, Fr. Walsingham.


To the Right Honorable, and my very good Lord, the Lord of Burleigh.
AS I wrote unto your Lordship in my last Letters, that I thought it necessary
for her Majesty to know how things proceeded in Flanders, so I thought good to
put the same in execution at this present upon certain advertisements lately
come from thence. A Currier past this way, as I am credibly informed the 27 of
this month, sent by the D. of Longueville to the King, with this news, that on
Saturday last the 24 of the same, Valentiennes should be taken, and the next
day after Monts in Henault; and that from thence with great celerity the C.
Lodovick should send five hundred horse to Bruxels, under the conduct of Mr. de
la Nue, where if he hap to find the D. of Alva, it will grow to short Wars, in
respect of the intelligence they have with the Town, who undertook with the aid
of 100 soldiers, to take the D. prisoner: if he retire to Antwerp (as it is
thought he will) then is it likely that all the whole Country will revolt. I the
rather credit this news for that it agrees with the plot laid by C. Lodovick
before his departure from hence, who told me that he hoped to give the Duke of
Alva an alarm ere 8 days came to an end, in place where he should least look
for it. There will shortly be great guess given what will be the event of these
matters. The Prince of Orange most assuredly is onward on his way with 4000
horse, whose enterprise on the other side is like to have the better success
upon this good beginning laid by his brother. I hope things will be so ordered,
as others shall not grow over great, wherein I have been no evil instrument. I
send your Lordship by this bearer, a note of the names of those of quality
which do accompany the Marshal, as also the number, which I had sent before
with this bearer to deliver a note thereof to such as shall be appointed by her
Majesty to receive the Marshal at Dover.

M. de Battali^, who was the third Commissioned, is departed this world, who
before his death did much lament the dissembling of his religion, and advised
to resort to the reformed Churchs, and to bring up his children in the Religion
professed in the same.

I forgot in my last that Mr. Montmorency at the request of certain Italians,
whom he favors, moved me to write unto her Majesty that it would please her
to write a Letter unto his Master, desiring him to write unto his Ambassador at
Rome to deal with his friends there to procure the delivery of Guidi Giovetti,
who is imprisoned there by the Inquisitors; a thing, that his service done unto
the Crown of England, did as it were crave at her Majesty's hands, who he knew
being naturally pitifully inclined, would do any thing that might seem to tend
to his delivery. For mine own opinion, I think her Majesty's Letters unto Queen
Mother, would do a great deal more good, who by the Duke of Florence his means,
may bring it the more easily to pass, especially this Pope being his Creature.
And so leaving to trouble your Lordship any further, I humbly take my leave.

From Paris, May 29. 1571. Yours Honors to command, F. Walsingham.


To our trusty and well-beloved Francis Walsingham Esquire our Ambassador Resident
with our good brother the French King.
TRrusty and well-beloved, we greet you well. Where in the last Treaty
concluded at Blois betwixt our trusty and well-beloved Councellor Sir Th.
Smith, and you as our Ambassador, and the Duke of Montmorency, and other of the
Commissioners and Deputies of the French King our good brother, it was amongst
other things covenanted, That within four months after the date of the said
Treaty, the same should be by us ratified, authorized and confirmed by our
Letters Patents, signed with our own hand, and sealed with our great Seal, and
delivered to the Ambassador of the French King, having authority to require the
same. For this purpose we would first have you to understand of some of the
Kings Council, or of the Queen Mother, the Kings pleasure at what time you
might attend on him to receive the same ratification. For the receiving whereof
you shall say you are authorized by our Letters directed to the said King,
being in your custody (which we therefore do now send you) and so you shall at
time convenient receive it, and safely send it to us, affirming that we on our
part are also ready to deliver the like ratification to his Ambassador
whenever he shall require the same.

Given under our signet at our Manor of St. James, the 26 of May, 1571.

ELIZABETH.

ELizabethae Dei gratia Angliae, Franciae, and Hiberniae Regina fidei Defensor,
etc. Fideli and praedilectissimo Consiliario nostro Francisco Walsingham Legato
nostro apud serenissimum potentissimum and principem fratrem nostrum
charissimum Gallorum regem residenti salutem. Cum in tractatu qui inter Legatos
nostros ad praedictam Principem missos, ejusque serenissimi Regis Deputatos
intercedit de amicitia and pace renovanda and augenda, quae inter praedictum
regem and nos nostraque regna dominia and subditos existit certi articuli de
mercatorum nostrorum hinc inde comerciis and negotiatione propositi fuerint, de
quibus propemodum quidem inter utrumque convenit nisi quod ante praefatam rei
consummationem necessarium sit quosdam tam a nostro, quam a praedicti regis
part constitui, qui cum mercatorum prudentium consilio deliberent, sintne illi
articuli satis ad rem apt and ample compositi, an vero alios quosdam immitores
adjici expediat, quibus commercii and negotiorum, ratio commodius regi and
exerceri possit. Nos igitur de homine ad hanc rem idoneo cogitantes, deque tua
prudentia virtute, industria, and in res nostras fide confidentes, and
mandatorum procuratorum seu deputatum, nostru^ creamus and constituimus per
praesentes, ut cum consilio principalium nostrorum, si qui in illis partibus
fuerit, and cum Regis praedict. deputatis agas, tractes, unaque cum illis ea
consideres and statuas quae ad co^tinuendam and augendam commercii and
intercessus necessitudinium necessaria vid^buntur. Itemque de mertium,
vectigalibus, tributis, porteriis, impositionibus, iisque conditionibus quae ad
mercatorum and comertii libertatem, and securitatem pertinebunt rations ineas.
Deque iis omnibus nos certiores facias, ut re prope inspecta and considerata
quod e re fuerit decernamus and concludamus quod ipsum simile a dict 'regis
Legato hic fiet, qui simile vicissim ab ipso rege mandatum habiturus est. Et
generaliter ut ea omnia tractes and facias quae ad hanc rem necessaria erunt,
in tam amplis modo and forma, ac si in singulis magis speciale Mandatum
haberes. In cujus rei testimonium has litteras patentes ^ieri and sigilli
nostri impressione communi missimus.

Dat. in Regia nostra sancti Jacobi die mensis Maii, Anno Dom. 1572. Regni vero
nostri 14.

Instructions given to the Earl of Lincoln, Lord Admiral of England, and one of
the Lords of her Majesty's privy Council, appointed by her Majesty to repair
to the French King in Embassage, and at his arrival at Paris, or elsewhere, to
be assisted for the execution of the matter underwritten, with Sir Th Smith,
Chancellor of the Order, and Fr. Walsingham Ambassador resident for her Majesty
with the French King; at St. James, May 25. 1572.
THe said L. Admiral shall have with him both Commission under the great Seal of
England, authorizing him and S. Th. Smith, and Fr. Walsingham, and Letters also
to require the French K. to confirm the last treaty concluded at Blois by his
oath, whereupon he shall proceed first after his access to the K. obtaining by
the Ambass. resident for the demand of the said oath, as is meet for the honor
of the League of amity now concluded between their Maj. using therein all good
speeches to assure him, that according to such express words as are contained
in the same Treaty, for a mutual love and amity to be hereafter used and
maintained between them, her Maj. is fully bent in her heart to maintain the
same on her part, the rather because she does assuredly hope that the K. will do
the like: whereof his Maj. by his Ambass. that he has sent in the time of the
late Treaty and negotiation of the same, showed many manifest arguments of his
own special favorable directions of matters at sundry times resting in doubt
between her Commissioners and his Maj. to more reasonable ends, as appeared,
then otherwise would have (...) ordered by his Ministers. And so the L. Admiral
having in this manner assured the K. of her Maj. full and resolute determination
to embrace and hold fast this mutual amity; he shall say that his coming thither
is to visit the K. on her Maj. behalf, and to attend upon his leisure and best
opportunity to be present, and to receive the K. oath to be made for ratifying
of the said Treaty, according to a clause in the said Treaty for that purpose.
And when the K. shall have accorded thereunto, the said L. Admiral shall before
hand, percase by some private conference had with some of the Secretaries of the
State, how, and in what sort the ceremonies thereof shallbe observed, so as the
proceeding may be at the time at the solemnity thereof without any alteration.
And for the better proceeding herein, the Lord Admiral shall have with him both
Articles of the Treaties requiring the said oath, and the manner and form of
like oath given by the said K. heretofore in like cases. And the instrument
also to be demanded in writing, for testimony of the said oath, with such other
things as are thereto requisite, so as the like manner may be used as near as
may be agreeable to former usages; and that there be with him present to assist
him, S. Th. Smith, and the Ambass. resident, if they may be there to help. And
as for the place where the said oath should be given, the said L. Admiral shall
not refuse any that the K. shall appoint, foreseeing only that he be not by
reason thereof compelled to be present at any Mass to be said for the purpose;
but if it be in Church or Chapel, he shall not refuse to require to take it in
the same. Furthermore, although there is no other cause special of the sending
of the L. Admiral at this time to the said K but to require his oath; yet for
that there may be many occasions offered of speeches in the matters, where it
shall be looked for that the said L. Admiral should answer the said K. to his
satisfaction. Therefore he will in these things following, accommodate himself as
hereafter is mentioned; wherein the said L. Admiral shall as occasion shall
serve, take the help of Sir Th. Smith, who is also herein well acquainted. In
the matter of Scotland, although the said L. Admiral be privy in what sort her
Maj. has hitherto proceeded, so as he may by consideration thereof, conjecture
what is likely further to be her Maj. meaning: yet to make her case the more
plain, he may well hold opinion tht her Maj. means not any thing more then
that the Realm of Scotland may be brought to quietness, and remain free from
any invasion of any stranger, whereby the liberty of that Crown and Nation
should be impaired. And he may well remember of his own knowledge, how often
times since the Scotch Q. coming into our Realm, we have bin well disposed to
have obtained an accord betwixt her and her Subjects; but always when we were
most earnest to have done her pleasure therein, she was most ready to practice
against us, as it seems, not satisfied with the recovery of her own Country,
without the practice, also she might have ours, as by most manifest proofs the
said L* Admiral and Sir Th. Smith also can avow to be ready to be showed,
whereupon her Maj. has been forced for her safety and weal of her Realm, to
take another course. And therefore as for the government of that Crown and
Nation, her Maj. finding it certain that the 3 Estates of the same did in full
Parliament accept the Q. of Scots division of her Crown to her son, and that
thereby he was Crowned and invested according to the ancient Laws of that
Realm, and that he is so acknowledged by the said Estates and the whole people
(a very few persons for their particular quarrels excepted) her Maj. finding in
her such dangerous ingratitude, meaning in her self not to direct any other
orders in the said Realm, then she finds by her own Law, having also so good
and just occasion to detain the said Q. as she does. Upon these considerations
she has indeed concluded, and means hereafter to continue her favor toward
that K (the nearest kinsman she has, and in profession correspondent) to all
such as have acknowledged his authority, and so shall therein continue; whereupon
the said L Admiral who is well acquainted with this cause, shall also say to the
K. that if it please him to do the like for the K. he shall best thereby recover
a common peace to that Land, and the attempt of such as seek to withdraw that
Nation from the ancient amity that has been, and yet continues betwixt the
Realm and the said K. Crown, shall thereby be made frustrate, and as occasion
shall serve to this purpose, the L. Admiral may truly inform the King, how the
Q. of Scots of late time, both by sundry her own Letters to the D of Alva, and
by her Ministers to the K. of Spain, labored to entice the said K. of Spain to
attempt the same, with plain assurance that she will not in any wise depend
upon the French K. but has wholly given her self, her son and Realm so far
forth as she can, to the said K. of Spain; and to that end, has done her
utmost to move the said K. to send forces into England, to join with such as
she promises shall be ayding thereunto surprise her son, and to carry him into
Spain by sea; according thereunto the D. of Alva has sent several men to
peruse the ports in Scotland for that interprize. Of these and such like things
the said L* Admiral can and shall of his own knowledge, inform the said K. and
thereby move him not to be abused by any her other offers to him to the
contrary thereof; and shall plainly let him to understand, except he shall take
this plain way to restore that Realm to a common peace, the said Q. will do her
utmost to make it a prey to others.

As for the person of the said Q. of Scots, he may declare, how well she is
treated for her diet and other things meet for her health, howsoever the
contrary may be reported; so she may at her pleasure take the air on horseback,
so she does in company of the E. of Shrewsbury; and for her diet, it is such,
as her own Ministers do and will prepare, without respect of charge; only it is
prohibited, that no strangers shall have liberty to come to her, to practice
with them, as she has long time used; and yet it is found daily, that she does
not cease by letters and messages to solicit all manner for things for her
purpose, as by the interception now and then by her letters and messages is to
be seen, amongst which are found these her continual labors to procure her son
to be stolen and taken away into Spain, besides the continuance of her former
dangerous practices attempted against the Q. Maj. and her Realm. And howsoever
the Q. Maj. has used a notable clemency and remisness toward her, in not
using such revenge hereof as she well might, and she thinks no other Prince
would in like case forbear; yet the said L. Admiral shall show to the K. with
great earnestness her Estates now assembled in Parliament, have and do solicit
her Maj. both in respect of her Maj. and the whole Realm, to proceed against
the Scottish Q. by order of justice, for her attempts against her Maj. person,
and the state of the Realm, wherein her Maj. is so perplexed with the incessant
clamor and request of her people in this behalf, as indeed she is marvelously
therewith troubled; for as of her own nature her Maj. has bin always found
even in her own most private causes, and where her person has been in danger,
not given to show any vehemence, or to pursue avenge, so to refuse the
universal motion, the general advice and exhortation of her States, she
thinks it no small hazard of their love which they bear toward her; and what
may happen hereof, the L. Adm. may say, is doubtful.

And to the intent the L. Admiral may in this cause of the Q. of Scots,
particularly show how contrary to all deserts of gratitude and favor meant
toward the said Q. by the Q. Maj. she has been by her not only ungratefully,
but also most dangerously dealt withal; and thereby, as it were by extremity of
her malice intended against the Q. Maj. she has been forced to change her
course, and regard her own safety. The said L. Admiral may call both to his
remembrance and conference Sir Tho: Smith of these things and their
circumstances; that is, first of her secret seeking of the marriage with the D.
of Norfolk, without her Maj. knowledge, at that time that her Maj. was
traveling to compound her causes with her subjects; and after that her Maj.
had imprisoned the said D. for that attempt and that her practices in the same
were discovered, and therewith not unknown to her Maj. what comfort she had
given to her Maj. subjects to enter into rebellion as they did; and being
subdued and forced to fly, were openly maintained in Scotland, by the Scottish
Q. means. It is yet notorious, how her Majesty by sundry solicitations, partly
of her self, and partly of the French King and his Ministers, was content, as
it were, to bury the former notable injuries, and did newly e^ter most
earnestly to treat with her subjects for restitution, and left no good means
unassayed, neither by request nor threatenings to move them to accept her Maj.
earnestness; then which the Nobility of Scotland professing obedience to the
King her Son, that her Majesty plainly charged them, that if they would not
condescend to her motions for her, she would utterly abandon them, and rather
be a party against them: Whereupon they were entered into such hard terms, as
they answered, that they would so persist in their obedience to their King, as
they would venture their lives in the quarrel. And yet finally, by some
persuasions, they were induced to accord with her Majesty, that a Parliament
should be holden with such speed as it might be, and there these her Majesty's
motions were propounded, and certain persons should have authority to treat
hereof with her Majesty's Councillors: Whereupon her Majesty did look for
some good success, and before it could be granted thereunto to proceed, her
Majesty discovered daily most dangerous attempts of Treason, both against her
Person and Realm, wholly and only set forth by the said Queen of Scots. And
her Majesty found these new Treasons intended, and almost brought to their
mischievous perfection, by not only renewing of the former marriage with the
Duke of Norfolk, and by giving order for a Rebellion and Invasion of this
Realm. All which was by her devised, set forth and delivered to be executed
even in the very same time that her Majesty did deal so earnestly for her with
her Subjects, and was in hope to have obtained some reasonable end for her: So
also did she now discover the truth of her former practices in stirring of the
first Rebellion, only to have by force obtained the marriage, and with the
same force sought the Crown. All the which attempts the said Lord Admiral and
Sir Tho: Smith can orderly declare, and so they shall do. And they may well
say, That her Majesty cannot think any person to mean well toward her
safety, that would after these things thus notified, move her Majesty to hold
her former course in favor of the said Scottish Queen: And this has been the
cause why her Majesty has not (since this last discovery of these dangers) in
such sort answered both to the King and his Ministers upon their motions made
in her favor. And the Lord Admiral shall conclude, that seeing the case is
thus, that to show such favor to the Scottish Queen as is desired, is most
dangerous to her Majesty's Crown, and her Majesty cannot like of any motion to
hazard her own Estate: And besides, the things intended by the Scottish Queen
against her Majesty, it is apparent she does wholly give her self to the Duke
of Alva, and to the King of Spain; which as it is many ways fully to be
proved, so may the Lord Admiral say, That he can make it manifest by her own
hand writing; for which end he shall show to the King a Letter of hers in
Cipher to the Duke of Alva: All which the Lord Admiral shall show to the King,
to this end, that both he may see the just causes her Majesty has to hold the
course she does, and that he also will not molest her Maj. with any motions
tending for favor of the Scottish Q. so greatly to her Maj. danger.

And to the matter of le Crocques stay here for a time, before his departure
into Scotland, if any mention be thereof made by the King, the said L. Admiral
can tell the occasion thereof to have grown of the letters which le Crocque
brought from the King to her Majesty in favor of the Scottish Queen, for her
liberty and return into France, notwithstanding the king had been duly informed
by her Majesty's Ambassador, that her Majesty could not with her surety suffer
the same. And threfore at that time she could not think that le Crocques
negotiation coming with such letters, could tend to pacify the Realm of
Scotland for her Majesty's surety, when before his ^nlay he was found to have
charge from the Q. of Scots.

If any motion be made to the L. Admiral of a matter lately devised to offer to
her Maj. Marriage with the Duke of Alanson, the L. Admiral may well say, that
he has no charge to speak thereof at this time; but he may say, that he is
willed, if occasion be so given to him to report what he heard her Majesty
say, that he was not so well used in the Treaty for the other brother the Duke
of Anjou as was meet, in the time of motion made for Amity, both by that
marriage and otherwise; for that Monsieur de Foix being in England, and dealing
therein, her Majesty did proceed honorably and plainly with him, and with the
French Ambassador, that she would not assent to marry with him, or with any
other, that would not consent with her in Religion, contrary to the order of
the Realm; or at the least, that would use any other Religion in any sort, then
might stand with the Church of God; whereupon her Majesty was by them pressed
but to consent to a sufferance of some secret usage of his Religion without
offense of the Realm, until he might be otherwise induced and persuaded in
conscience.

It may be remembered, that when her Majesty's Ambassador made a report at de
Foix return of her Majesty's answer, the King seemed not willing to receive
that answer, but that he desired that some might be sent to commune thereof
with him, who should find that the matter should be made clearer of these
difficulties; whereunto when her Majesty did not fully consent, it was
afterward by the Ambassador Resident oftentimes pressed, that her Majesty
would send some special person of trust for her self to the French King,
promising her Majesty, that this matter should be facillitated, and made easy
to her contentation. According whereunto, her Majesty, upon many
solicitations, specially by the said Ambassador in the King his Masters name,
did send Sir Tho: Smith, to understand the Kings meaning herein, who can best
tell, how at the first entry he was answered with a direct contrary course to
her Majesty's expectation, and otherwise then was mentioned by any Ambassador
that ever treated therein with her Majesty, or that ever Monsieur de Foix did
ever speak or require; which was, that Monsieur de Anjou would in any wise have
the exercise of his Religion here in England, in like sort as he had in France:
A matter strange to be heard at that time, when her Majesty was provoked to
send one, with hope that in the case of Religion she should receive such an
answer as should content her Majesty. Of this matter the L. Admiral shall
inform himself more largely of Sir Tho: Smith, to the end that if the same be
communed of, he may both with the King and the Queen Mother so deal, as it may
be seen to them that her Majesty had cause to think very strangely thereof:
And were it not that she is entered into a straight Amity with the King, she
might justly challenge lack of friendship herein, but so as the King be not
ignorant, but that her Majesty has cause to think her self not well dealt
withal, she is content to pass it over, without keeping the same in memory to
nourish any unkindness. And so the L. Admiral shall use his speech, that the
King may not think his speech to move any new offense. Furthermore, the said L.
Admiral shall in all his speech with the King, and also with the Queen Mother,
let it appear how much her Majesty esteems sundry offers made to her by the
Kings Letters to his Ambassador here, of daily increase of this Amity now newly
established between them. And though her Majesty does not percase so often
answer these his kindnesses in words or writing, yet he shall be assured, that
whenever occasion shall be given to show the like affection in deeds, she
will not be behind him. Besides the letters to the King and Q. Mother, he shall
have also her Majesty's letters to the Q. of Navarre, whom he shall visit, and
most heartily salute in her Majesty's name; and let her understand, how glad
he^ Majesty is, and does thank God for the benefit of the Peace, which he has
given to her, and to all others, that now of a long time have for defense of
their consciences suffered great calamities with her, wherein surely her
sincerity and constancy has won to her no small honor in the world; but most
of all, the blessing of God to endure with her and her posterity. And next to
this, her Majesty does rejoice that she has so wisely and honorably
considered of the marriage of the Prince her Son with the daughter of F^ance,
whereby both the good love of the French King to her Estate shall probably have
continuance, and her self shall live by Gods grace, to see the good success of
her son in her own time, to her comfort.

The said Lord Admiral shall also give the Admiral of France, and others of the
Nobility joined with him, to understand how glad her Majesty is of the
continuance of the Pacification of their troubles, and does hope, that they
will let their sincerity and their good meaning appear so to the King, as he
may comfortably continue his favors toward them, and that their adversaries,
who have heretofore slandered their actions, as though they had not been
founded upon conscience, may be ashamed to have abused themselves; and so shall
the honor of God indeed, by their manifest and good conversations increase, to
the confusion of them, that by untruths have maliciously sought to keep the
same under, and to oppress it. And for the House of Guise, the L. Admiral shall
not forbear to salute them of his own part, according to their degrees, if he
shall see that they give countenance to him as to accept it. And if any of them
shall motion matters to him, as of the Q. of Scots, he may say, if she had been
counseled by her friends to have been grateful to her Majesty, or to have
forborne the seeking to offend her Majesty, she might thereby have done her
self good, and been the cause of quietness to the Country; but she has so
manifestly taken other courses, as surely either her friends that evil
counseled her, or her self, must be accounted the principal cause of her
trouble. And so he shall use his speech of her.

These instructions the L. Admiral shall communicate with Sir Tho: Smith and
the Resident Ambassador, and upon the sight of them Sir Tho: Smith shall
understand it to be her Majesty's pleasure, that he shall accompany and be
assistant to the L. Admiral in the time of the Kings giving of his Oath. And
when the L. Admiral shall have done his Commission, and delivered the rest of
his charge contained in these Instructions, the said Sir Tho: Smith shall no
longer abide in France, but shall return at his most commodity.

Postscript.
In the matter concerning the offer of the marriage of Monsieur Alanson, if
thereof any speech be used by the K. notwithstanding the former Instruction in
the articles above expressed, how to answer to the K. upon some consideration
thereof. The L. Admiral shall at the first say, that although he has no
chargeto treat thereof, yet he is willed by her Majesty to give them thanks
for the desire it seems he has to have alliance with her Majesty by
marriage, as not only showing her own disposition toward her Majesty, at
which time his youth seemed to be impediment; and now secondly for his brother
Monsieur d' Anjou, wherein also the inequality of years did at the first stay
her Majesty, wherein also she did overcome her judgment by persuasion, and
rested in the end upon the matter of Religion, which of all other things, is
the greatest stay that can be; and now the motion of the youngest brother cannot
in her opinion, by reason of the inequality of years, but make a full stay in
her Majesty, as she thinks the same ought also to work the like in the
judgment of the King, and of the Queen his Mother. And having said this, then
may the said L. Admiral proceed to say somewhat, as is above prescribed, of her
Majesty's misliking for the dealing in the cause of Monsieur de Anjou, using
the same nevertheless, as it breed no offense in the King.


W. Burleigh.


To my very Friend Francis Walsingham Esquire Ambassador for the Queens Majesty in
France.
SIr, I heartily thank you for your Letters of the nine and twentieth of the
last, and specially for that which you write to her Majesty. As to the matters
of the King of Spains Low Countries, we have great cause to bear a jealous
countenance thereto; for as being in the Spaniards hands, we lacked Traffic
with surety; so if the Maritine part come to those where you are, not only the
Traffic into those parts, for our Merchants will be regulated by them, but
our sovereignty upon the narrow Seas will be abridged with danger and
dishonor. And notwithstanding this, I see lack of disposition to provide the
remedy where it should chiefly be, and I trust with importunity, we that see
into the perils, shall obtain somewhat; if not, our consciences shall be quiet,
though our minds shall not. As to your Letters to her Majesty, forasmuch as
the Duke of Norfolk had suffered upon Monday, and your Letters came on Tuesday,
I thought it not amiss to tell the Queens Majesty that I had Letters from you
to her, which I thought were only to show her the opinion of wisemen, and her
Majesty's wellwishers in France, both for the Queen of Scots and the Duke of
Norfolk; whereupon she bad me open the letters, and so I did in her presence;
and she being somewhat sad for the Duke of Norfolks death, I took occasion to
cut off the reading thereof, and so entered into speech of the Queen of Scots,
which she did not mislike, and commended your care and diligence. As for the
party your dear friend, I did not speak with him, nor he never accompanied me,
nor once ever spoke one word to me of the matter, as he was wont to do in other
matters, I disallow not his private affection to the party, but his judgment I
do dissallow in preferring private to public. I do return to you the
Commission amended in your name, which was the error of the writer; you may
proceed thereto as you see time.

The French Ambassador has no Commission to require the like, looking for it,
as he says, when Montmorency shall come, whose delay proves an unreasonable
charge to great numbers to the Queens Majesty, having her offices of Household
at Dover, and her provisions thereby lost. The Earl of Pembroke, Lord Windsor,
and the Lord Buckhurst be at Dover with great and mighty trains: Besides,
hither are come such leavies of Ladies to attend, as husbands curse the delay.
The Queens Majesty is in health. The Scottish Queen shall be touched with an
Act of Parliament, but it will not draw her to any more fear to offend then
words will do.

From S. James the sixth of June, 1572. Your assured loving Friend, William
Burleigh.


To my very loving Friend Francis Walsingham Esquire her Majestes Ambassador
Resident in France.
MR. Walsingham, forasmuch as my Nephew Philip Sidney is licensed to travel,
and does presently repair unto those parts with my Lord Admiral, I have thought
good to commend him by these my Letters friendly unto you, as unto one I am
well assured will have a special care of him during his abode there. He is
young and raw, and no doubt shall find those Countries and the demeanors of the
people somewhat strange unto him; and therefore your good advice and counsel
shall greatly behove him for his better direction, which I do most heartily
pray you to vouchsafe him with any friendly assistance you shall think needful
for him. His father and I do intend his further travel if the world be quiet,
and you shall think it convenient for him, otherwise we pray you we may be
advertised thereof, to the end the same his travels may be thereupon directed
accordingly. As for the boy Clark, since I cannot obtain him as I desire, I
must content me. I wish I had one of my Lord Cardinals Monks, to see how
devoutly he should be kept here. But I pray you let it appear that it is great
unkindness for one Nobleman to use unto another. The boy has sought sundry
ways to return unto me, as well by Letters to his Friends, as by supplications
to my self, but I mind not to have him so. The cause that I did so earnestly
seek him, was to punish him in example of others, which if it will not be, I
will leave it for a time, and hope to give you knowledge where he is shortly,
trusting you will give order that he may be suddenly apprehended. And thus
being forced to trouble you with a tri^tle amongst so many great causes in
these days, with my commendations, I bid you most heartily farewell.

From the Court the six and twentieth of May, 1572. Your very Friend, To.
Leicester.


To the Right Honorable, and my very good Lord, the Lord of Burleigh.
IT has pleased my Lord of Lincoln to promise me, upon his experience had of
the intolerable charges here, through the daily increase of death, to confer
with your Lordship, in what sort he may best deal with her Majesty for
increase of my diet, considering otherwise that I shall not be able to hold
out, my monthly charges drawing now to two hundred pounds the month,
notwithstanding my diet is thin, my family reduced to as small a proportion as
may be, and my horse being only twelve. These things might seem unto your
Lordship altogether incredible, were there not so many Noblemen and Gentlemen
to witness the same by their experience lately had of the extreme dearth here.
I have made my Lord acquainted how much I am bound to your Lordship, and of the
fatherly care it pleases you to have of me; and that therefore I have besought
him, in moving or not moving her Majesty, to yield to such directions, as by
conference, it shall seem good unto you to give him, for that I would be loath
to procure any thing to be done, that may not fall out to your Lordship
contentation. And so leaving further to trouble your Honor at this present, I
most humbly take my leave,

From Paris the two and twentieth of June, 1572. Your Honors to Command,
Francis Walsingham.


To my very loving friend Francis Walsingham Esquire Ambassador for the Queens
Majesty in France.
SIr, I cannot let any your servants pass hence without some word. I have
looked for some knowledge of my L. Admirals arrival at Paris, and thereupon
stayed to send away this bearer until now that I hear by the French Ambassadors
Letters, how my Lord and you have been feasted and entertained, which they
here do give out with large speeches, but how indeed the same is warranted I
know not; sure I am, that they have been so feasted and entreated, as none in
my memory has been greater. The Queens Majesty before she gave her oath, made
a protestation, that she was not in mind to break any jot of the Treaty, and
though the Castle of Hume, and Fast Castle were not delivered, yet the fault
was not in her; for she had propounded to the Lord Hume, and to the Regent
also, her disposition to deliver it; but the Lord Hume, required that her
Majesty would keep it still, rather then deliver it, so as it bred not an
increase of their hateful dissension. And hereupon her Majesty has propounded
to the Regent to be content that the Lord Hume may have it, if he will be
content to acknovvledge the King; which the Lord Hume offers in words, but
the Regent says that the Lord Hume has promised to offer his obedience to the
King, to recover his houses, and then he will aid them of the Castle, and this
is indeed discovered to be true.

Besides this, Fast Castle was in my Lord Humes hands but as a Tutor to an
infant, who is come to full age, and follows the Kings part.

Truly you may thus report to the King, and assure him, that her Majesty
means not to keep the one, or the other, although she might pretend matters
against the Lord Hume, for the damage that he did to England, in keeping the
Rebels in those Houses, and invading the Realm.

From Westminster, in haste, the twentieth of June, 1572. Yours assuredly
William Burleigh.


The form of the Communication with the D. Montmorency, de Foix, and de la Mot,
which they had to finish matters expressed in the Treaty, June 1571. present
the Lord Keeper, the Earls of Suffex and Leicester, the Lord Chamberlain and
Burleigh, Mr. Comptroler, Sir Ralph Sadler and Sir Walter Mildmay.
THe French by de Foix required, That the Scottish Queen might have some favor,
upon the conclusion of this Treaty betwixt the Queens Majesty and the French
King, and that such favor might be showed, as might be granted with the surety
and honor of the Queens Majesty.

That a surcease of Arms might be made in Scotland, and thereupon a Parliament
in Scotland, and concord to be made for the State and Realm.

And if a Parliament could not be conveniently had, that then there might be
sent hither from both parties, some persons to treat here a London with
Deputies of the Queens Majesty's and the French Kings.

That some order might be made concerning the establishing of a Traffic for
Merchants in France, wherein the French showed themselves ready to assent to
assent to all reasonable requests; and for that purpose they produced and
delivered a Commission under the Great Seal of France.


Answers to these Points.
This case was not pursuant upon the Treaty.

The Scottish Queen had more favor then she deserved, or then did well stand
with the surety of the Queens Majesty. Her evil parts against the Queens
Majesty had been amply declared to the French, and to the D. Montmorency and
de Foix in France by our Ambassador. The Nobility also and People now assembled
in this Parliament, had considered that the Queens Majesty's surety could not
be preserved, without some severe proceeding against the Queen of Scots,
whereunto her Majesty had not yielded in such extremity. And so the Scottish
Queen had more favor indeed then either she deserved, or then was thought meet
by the whole Realm.

The second, for surcease of Arms; her Majesty had done therein as much as
possibly she could by her Minister Sir Will: Drury, which she has sent with le
Crocque; whereunto the Ambassador did assent with very good words of Sir Will:
Drury.

To the third, it was thought, that no Parliament should be holden whilst they
were on both sides in arms, and therefore the procuring of persons to come was
not misliked.

To the fourth, the Merchants should be spoken withal, who had but small liking
to any trade of Merchandise with France, by reason they had by experience some
evil usage of them in France, specially at Roa^.


Replies of the French, with some new matters.
As to the Scottish Queen, de Foix confessed, that he had no warrant to speak
for her, by force of the Treaty, but by a special commandment apart. And as to
specify the requests that be made for favor to her; they said, they meant no
favor to be showed to her, against the Queens Majesty's surety; and therefore
they desired only these things following, That she might have brought to her
all things necessary for her apparel, and money also for the purpose.

That she might have a convenient number of Servants about her. That her state
might not be impaired.

That the Duke and the rest might be licensed to send to her certain letters
from the French King and Queen Mother, so as the same might be done with the
privity of the Earl of S^rewsb^ry.

As to the Commerce, they agreed, that it might be treated upon by the
Ambassador Resident.


New Additions.
That according to the second article in the Treaty, they might have the Queens
Majesty's Letter answerable to the Kings Letters.

That the third Article, concerning the manner of redress of wrongs done by
Scots men upon England, that the same might be altered according to a writing
which was devised by them to insert in the place of the said Article.


Answers to the new Requests.
They should have the Queens Majesty's Letters.

The Article, as it is, ought to continue, and is reasonable, having respect to
Scotland, when private men do great injuries and spoils, which if the King of
that Realm cannot or will not amend, of necessity the Kings of England must
revenge upon the offenders.


To the Right Hononrable, and my very good Lord, the Lord of Burleigh.
YOur Lordships of the twentieth of June, sent by my servant Williams, I have
received, touching her Majesty's protestation before the giving of her oath.
For the not delivery of Hume and Fast Castle in Scotland, according to the
Treaty, I will not fail to inform their Majesty's, when fit occasion shall be
offered of the cause thereof. The Ambassador of Scotland, with the Lord
Graunges brother, since the Earl of Lincolns departure, has been often at the
Court, and are very importunate to have somewhat done for their Mistress: As
also, in persuading their Majesty's here, to consent to the establishment of
their Government of their said Mistress; what their importunacy has won, I know
not as yet, but surely I fear, as long as the woman lives, there will never
grow good accord in Scotland, nor continuance of repose in England, nor perfect
and sound amity between her Majesty and this Crown.

What is resolved here touching the enterprise of Flanders, this bearer is
thoroughly instructed, who is to impart the same unto your Lordship. And so
leaving further to trouble your Honor at this present, I most humbly take my
leave.

From Paris the eight and twentieth of June, 1572. Your Honors to Command, Fr.
Walsingham.


To the Right Honorable, and my very good Lord, the Earl of Leicester.
THis bearer comes so thoroughly instructed touching the state of the Country,
and the Flanders proceedings, as I forbear to trouble your Lordship to make
recital of that by writing, which he shall tell you by mouth. After your
Lordship has thoroughly debated with him, I hope it shall manifestly appear
unto you, that upon the good success or evil success of this common cause of
Religion. And besides, the same not well proceeding, her Majesty cannot
promise to her self any great safety, having so dangerous a neighbor, whose
greatness shall receive no small increase, if he overcome this brunt. I pray
God therefore that her Majesty may incline to do that which may be for her
safety. And so leaving further to trouble your Honor at this present,
referring you wholly to this bearer, I most humbly take my leave.

From Paris the eight and twentieth of May, 1572. Your Honors to Command, Fr.
Walsingham.


To the Right Honorable, and his very good Lord, the Lord of Burleigh.
MAy it please your Lordship to understand, that upon advertisement come hither
from Flushing, of the discords there for want of good Governor, they have made
choice of Monsieur Iunius, to go thither out of hand, with Commission to
establish some policy there, until the arrival of the Prince of Orange his
brother. He shall also have Commission for the sale of such goods as were
lately taken. For his better assistance in this behalf, desires your Lordships
letter unto Captain Morgan, there to assist him what lies in him, in the
execution of the said Commission; and that further, it would please your
Lordship to admonish him to retain his Soldiers in such order, as may answer
to the defense of a good cause. For that he desires very much to confer with
Mr. Killegrew, to make him fully acquainted with the state of their cause, he
means to repair to Dover, and there to imbarque, where he hops to meet with
him. I perceive by him, that if there be no assistance given underhand by her
Majesty, they shall be driven to yield to such inconveniences as shall be laid
upon them by this Nation. And further, that they shall be forced to consent to
have Strozi in Zealand, unless they may have some supplies elsewhere: For this
cause chiefly the Gentleman, who wisely respects the liberty of his Country,
and foreseeth the mischief that may follow, if the necessity be not relieved,
disereth much to confer with Mr. Killegrew, a thing most necessary, and would
himself repair to London, but the discords reigning presently in Flushing,
cannot abide a long delay of redress. And thus having nothing else whereof to
advertise your Honor at this present, I most humbly take my leave.

From Paris the second of July, 1572. Your Honors to Command, Fra: Walsingham.


To the Right Honorable, and his very good Lord, the Earl of Leicester.
I Hope your Lordship, upon report made unto you by Mr. Beal, of the present
state of things here, how matters fall out in Germany, and how necessary a
thing it is that the Enterprise of Flanders should not be slacked, both in
respect of the common cause of Religion, as also of her Majesty's safety, will
not suffer that the same shall lack any aid of assistance that your Lordship
can yield. Upon report come hither of the disorder at Flushing for lack of a
good head, there is choice made of Monsieur Iunius, whom your Lordship knows
is servant to the Count Palatine, to repair thither to reduce the loose and
disordered Government there to some better form of Policy; as also, to take
order for the sale of the goods lately taken, that the same may be employed in
the maintenance of the cause, and not converted to private spoil. And because
he may receive assistance in this behalf of such of our Nation as are there, he
desires me to procure your Lordships letters to Cap. Morgan to that effect; as
also, to advise him to keep his charge in such warlike Discipline, as may
appertain to the furtherance of so good a cause, which beside the reputation
will grow unto him thereby, his travel and hazard shall not be unconsidered by
the Prince of Orange.

Mr. Iunius means to imbarque at Dover for Flushing, where he desires to
confer with Mr. Killegrew before his imbarquing, whom he will make acquainted
in what state things presently are. As he himself is one of the Low Countries,
so does he wisely desire the liberty of the same, in such sort, as by removing
of one evil, they may not draw on themselves another no less prejudicial;
surely, unless some assistance be given underhand, necessity will enforce them
to yield to some great inconvenience. And so thinking this sufficient in this
behalf, I most humbly take my leave, leaving further to trouble your Honor.

From Paris the second of July, 1572. Your Honors to Command, Fr. Walsingham.


To my very Friend Francis Walsingham Esquire Ambassador for the Queens Majesty in
France.
SIr, now that D. Montmorency is gone, I thought good briefly to write somewhat
to you by this bearer the French Ambassadors servant, because none of yours are
here that I can learn of, nor any other so ready as this bearer is. The Duke
with all his train, to the number of forty, have been entertained here for
their meat and drink each in their degrees, as it is to be affirmed, that the
like has not been seen in any man's memory. The honor also done to him has
been such, as surely her Majesty could do no more; I mean, in her courteous
usage of him, in appointing sundry sorts of the Nobility of the highest sort to
attend on him, only the difference from my Lord Admirals intertertainment was,
that no other Lord but my Lord of Leicester did feast him, as in France was
done; saving I did upon Midsummer even feast him and all his Gentlemen with a
Collation of all things that I could procure, being not flesh, to observe their
manner.

As for his reward, though it be not so great as I wish it had been, yet this
it was, the D. had a Cupbord of Plate gilt, of -- a great Cup of gold, of a
hundred and eleven onces, and Monsieur de Foix had a Cupbord of Plate of --
This for their rewards.

Now Sir, before there going hence, they had done what they could in the matter
of the D. D'alanson, whereunto they had neither yea nor nay, but a delay only
for one month, which they interpreted diversely. They mentioned certain things,
which I do send you here in a Paper enclosed, with that which was answered. I
also send you in another writing other things at their departure, whereunto as
we gave them answers, so shall you also receive note thereof.

I am willed to require you, to use all good means possibly to understand what
you can of the Duke D' Alanson of his age in certainty, of his stature, of his
conditions, his inclination to Religion, his devotion this way, the devotion of
his followers and servitors, hereof her Majesty seeks speedily to be
advertised, that she may resolve before the month. And surely I cannot see in
her any lack toward this, but in opinion for his age, which defect, if it
might be supplied with some recompenses it were meet to be thought of. I could
wish we might have Callis to the issue of their bodies, and he to be Governor
thereof during his life, so as we might have security for our Staple there. I
wish also, that secretly the Queens Majesty might be assured, that (although
there be no contract, therefore) that he would here no Mass after his marriage.

If somewhat be not advised to recompense the opinion that her Majesty
conceives, as that she should be misliked to make choice of so young a Prince,
I doubt the end.

Now for our Parliament, I cannot write patiently; all that we labored for,
and had with full consent brought to fashion, I mean, a Law to make the Scottish
Queen unable and unworthy of succession of the Crown, was by her Majeste
neither assented to nor rejected, but deferred until the Feast of all Saints;
but what all other wise and good men may think thereof, you may gess. Some here
have, as it seems, abused their favor about her Majesty, to make her self
her most enemy. God amend them. I will not write to you who are suspected. I am
sorry for them, and so would you also, if you thought the suspicion to be true.

Your assured loving Friend, William Burleigh.


To my very loving Friend Francis Walsingham Esquire her Majesty's Ambassador
Resident in France.
MY Lord Ambassador, This day my Lord Admiral came to the Queens speech, and
reports well of his entertainment there. I am sorry that the opinion grows
here of the French Kings recoil from the Flanders enterprise, it breeds
coldness here. Some that are come home bear us in hand, that ^3 renews the in
o A. D. F. ^4 whereby the last matter B ^9 is hindered; I marvel much therefore
indeed ^ is more given to Millane ^4 then to ^5 And I am commanded to write to
you hereof, and to require some answer of your opinion, which I pray you do
with all good haste that you can. I see no means, by worldly means, but
Florence in ^3 God send it some way.

I have done my best, as by others, you shall perceive an end for you, with
your Mr. Worseley, whom I found wisely and wilful, but I provided convenient
medicines for him, and so his humors were altered.

Fare you well. From Westminster the fifth of July, 1572. Yours assuredly
William Burleigh.


To the Right Honorable, and my very good Lord, the Lord of Burleigh.
YOur Lordships of the second and fifth of July, sent by the Ambassadors
servant, I received the tenth of this month, by the which I was glad to hear
the particularities of the royal entertainment of the Marshal Montmorency, who
arrived the self same day I received your Lordships Letters. He omitted no
occasion to set out the great honor he received at her Maj. hands, and withal
so good, as never able to yield the like. The like speech passes from the rest
of his train, who all returned very well satisfied, and cannot speak too much
good of her Majeste. The day following after his arrival, Queen Mother sent for
me, and showed me how the King her son, who was gone to S. Germains, desired
her to send for me, and to request me on his behalf, to render unto her Maj.
most hearty thanks for the great honor and good entertainment given unto the
Marshal, which he could not but interpret as a manifest argument of her
Majesty's unfeigned affection and good will she bears him, the which he
desires to will me to assure her Majesty that she should find him ready to
serve and honor her during his life. Furthermore, she willed me to show her
Majesty, both on his behalf, and hers also, that they pray God to direct her
heart to yield to that resolution in the marriage lately propounded, as might
be to the increase and establishment of perfect Amity between the Crowns, which
thing they saw so necessary for both, as they could not but wish and desire
most earnestly. And yet notwithstanding they protested, that if they did not
think the issue thereof would fall out to her good satisfaction and
contentment, they would in no case wish nor desire the same. Touching the
particularities that her Majesty desired to understand, of the age, stature,
conditions, religion, affection toward her Majesty, and devotion of his
followers and servants; your Lordship shall understand, that first touching his
age, as I was informed, he was born the five and twentieth of April, 1555. his
stature and proportion of body, the Lord Admiral, Sir Tho: Smith, Mr.
Killegrew, and other of the Gentlemen that are here, can better express by word
of mouth, then I can set down by paper. Touching his conditions, since the
matter has been in motion, I have used what care and curiosity I might, to be
informed of them; I find generally this opinion conceived of him, that he is of
as good and tractable a disposition as any other, either Prince or Gentleman in
France; and withal, is both wise and stout, and subject to the French
lightness, insomuch as they do apply to him the French Proverb, Qu'il a de
plume en son cervean, besides, the general opinion I find the same confirmed by
the Admiral, Count Rochfoucouls, Tilligny, Bacquenaunt, and diverse others of
the best judgment of the Religion, with such earnest protestations, as for
mine own part, I cannot but credit the same, knowing what testimonies they have
given to the world of there zeal and Religion. And as for the Admiral debating
with him in this matter, he has protested sundry times to me, calling God to
witness, that if he did not think the match proceeding would prove both
honorable, profitable and comfortable, and for her safety, in respect of the
doubtful terms he stands in, he would not advise her unto it for any worldly
respect. And as for his Religion, they have great hope, grounded upon good
conjectures, that he is easy to be reduced to the knowledge of the truth; and
for mine own part, I have many great reasons to induce me to think, that if
there be no other impediment then the use of his mass, that he will be easily
induced to the same. Touching the affection toward her Majesty. I am credibly
informed, that where it has been objected unto him, that he would be glad to
have the title of a King; he protested, that if he were not moved with the
great and honorable report of her Maj. rare virtues, more then at any desire
he had to a Kingdom, he would never have desired the King nor the Queen his
Mother to have made any motion thereof. Many ways am I given credibly to
understand, that his affection is unfeigned and great. Touching the devotion of
his followers and servants to the propunded match. I am also credibly informed,
that they do also earnestly desire the same, especially those whose advice he
chiefly uses; who though they be not of the Religion, yet are they not enemies
to the same, and rather incline that way then otherwise, of the which a dozen
of them were discharged of his brothers service in respect thereof. This is
that in sum which truly and sincerely I can learn in that behalf.

Touching Callis, the Admiral made some overture at my request, as a motion
that proceeded from my self. He finds in their Majesty's no disposition to
yield thereunto. I used some speech thereof also with de Foix, and showed him,
how that nothing would yield so much furtherance as the same. We did at large
debate that matter Pro and. contra; in the end, he protested most earnestly,
that he thought he knew it impossible to be brought to pass; notwithstanding,
he could be content to devise any other thing that might breed satisfaction to
her Majesty's opinion conceived of some misliking that would grow by her choice
of so young a Prince. In this behalf, says he, I have said lately so much to
her Majesty, grounded upon good reason, that I see no cause but she should
rest therewith satisfied.

In debate of this matter, he asked me, whether her Majesty would not be
content (as I thought) having already foot in Flushing, and the match
proceeding, to have the King pass in the Contract and Article, to bind him and
his Successors to assist her, as well for the conquering of the rest of the
Island, which would be more profitable to your Country then ten Calis's. Of
this thing (says he) I have no Commission to make any overture, as that thing
that has not yet fallen into consideration, but only I propounded it by way
of communication, in respect of desire I have to devise some remedy for the
recompense of her Majesty's opinion. Notwithstanding, says he, I have some
reasons to lead me to think her Majesty's yielding content to her match, that
the King will be easily induced thereto. I showed him, that as I had no
Commission to make any overture, so had I no Commission to answer the same, as
a thing propounded unlooked for, notwithstanding, I agreed with him in opinion,
that Flushing would be more beneficial to us then Calis. To come to your Letter
of the fifth of this month, I find the conjectures touching the ^3 renews
the in o A D F ^4 altogether false and vain, whereof I am assured of the
contrary many ways, and do much marvel what reason should move them that so
bear her Majesty in hand, and so to think, having no other ground thereof but
such vain conjectures. Thus having made answer to such things, as by you were
propounded on her Majesty's behalf, I most humble take my leave.

At Paris the thirteenth of July, 1572. Your Honors to Command, Francis
Walsingham.


To the Right Honorable, and my very good Lord, the Lord of Burleigh.
YOur Lordship by this enclosed Letter sent from Ennius the Count Palatines
chief Counselor, unto Dr. Innius, which I had Commission to open; as also
another sent unto him from the Count himself, may perceive how the Prince of
Orange proceeds in his doings; as also, that the Forces of the Duke of Alva,
so much talked of, are not in so much readiness as was spoken of.

I do much marvel that the Duke of Holst, being her Majesty's Pensioner, and
knowing in what doubtful terms her Majesty stood with the King of Spain, will
in any way yield to serve the Duke of Alva. I hope your Lordship will deal
earnestly with her Majesty for redress thereof, the rather, for that it is
conceived that the said Duke will have some occasion to deny the same.

The sight of the said enclosed Letter which I send unto your Lordship to
communicate with her Majesty, has given them here no small encouragement to
proceed in yielding assistance as they made underhand. The stay of their
lingering in that behalf proceeded, for that they wished Don Iohnd' Austria on
his way toward Morsa, before they made any great demonstration to be any
dealers in the said enterprise: For the help and better disguising of this
matter, there was proclamation made, for revoking such of the Kings Subjects as
were already at Montz; as also, inhibition for any other to repair thither,
upon forfeiture of life, lands and goods; and another Edict also was published,
to prohibit the Kings subjects not to buy such goods as lately were taken by
them of Flushing. The King is so far forward in this matter, that no disguising
will serve, neither her Majesty in policy, considering underhand those that
are gone to Flushing may suffer the cause to be abandoned, especially for that
her Majesty lately, to the grief of as many as love her both at home and
abroad, has forborne the necessary use of the remedy offered to bridle the
Queen of Scots practices, which received there from Spain 13 in talk with me
about this matter, showed me, that he has declared his opinion since his
return, that it behooves both his Honor and the Queen my Mistress, to consult
jointly in the maintenance of the Prince of Oranges enterprise; for that
otherwise he saw many reasons to induce him to think, that it would be
dangerous to them both, specially for her Mejestie, considering the practices
that reign in her Country. And so ceasing to trouble your Lordship any further
at this present, I most humbly take my leave.

From Paris the thirteenth of July, 1572. Your Lordships to Command, Fr.
Walsingham.


To the Right Honorable, and my very good Lord, the Earl of Leicester.
SInce I last wrote unto your Lordship, there arrived here a Gentleman, sent
hither from the Prince of Orange; who brought word, that the eight of this
present the said Prince passed the River of Rhine with seven thousand horse,
and fifty Ensigns of footmen, and that about the fifteenth or sixteenth of the
same, he was to pass the River of Mose, at a Town called Ruremond, which Town,
together with another called Venlo, is at his devotion. It is thought that he
will march toward Holland, there to receive money for the payment of Reysters,
as also to plant Garrisons in such Towns as are revolted unto him.

There arrived of late here a Gentleman that is come from Constantinople, from
the Kings Ambassador there, who reports, that the preparations that the Turk
makes for the next year by sea are very great; that he promises this King of
money, if he will break with Spain; that he is content that the King shall be a
mean to accord the difference betwixt him and the Venetians. Other
particularities he brings, but these be those of most importance. The
Venetians, as I hear, do find themselves agrieved with the King of Spains
dealing toward them, therefore it is thought, that they will grow to accord
with the Turk, especially upon the evil success that lately they have had at
the siege of Caselnuovo.

They write from Antwerp, that Chiapina Vitelli should be hurt with a
Harquebush in winning of Moniz, and that he is in peril of his life.

For Italian news, I refer your Honor to these enclosed Occurrents. And so I
leave further to trouble you, most humbly taking my leave.

At Paris the eighteenth of July, 1572. Your Honors to Command, Francis
Walsingham.


To the Right Honorable, and my very good Lord, the Lord of Burleigh.
IT may please your Lordship to understand, that the eighth of this month the
Prince of Orange passed the River of Rhine, at a place beneath Cullen, called
Asburgh, and that about the fifteenth or sixteenth he determined to pass the
River of Mose, at a place called Ruremond, which Town, with another called
Venlo. situate upon the said River, is at his devotion. This news is brought
to this Court by a Gentleman sent hither by the Prince himself: His Army
consists of seven thousand horse, and fifty Ensigns of footmen. It is thought
they will march toward Holland, with intention to plant Garrisons in such Towns
as are revolted to him; as also to receive money there toward the payment of
his Army. It is thought here for certain, that Ianlis has either fought, or is
arrived in safety at Montz.

Upon advertisement come lately out of Italy, that Don John d' Austria is not
yet departed, they make fair weather with the Ambassador of Spain, who in
outward show does bear them in hand he believes all they say. There is great
suspicion that Florence 4 is underhand enemy to these wars, but dare not show
for fear of A. who does very much affect it, otherwise all had quailed long
sithence. Rome 3 is not free from suspicion. There is lately arrived a
Gentleman sent hither from the King Ambassador at Constantinople, who gives to
his very friends these particularities: First, that the Turk makes great
preparations by Sea for the next year, greater then any of his Predecessors
ever made.

That he offers the King here great sums of money to break with Spain.

That he remitteth unto the Kings hands the according of the difference between
him and the Venetians. Other particularities he gives out, but these are of
greatest weight. As I learn, the Venetians are so weary of Spains promises, as
they will not be loath to agree upon any hard conditions. From Antwerp they
write, that Chiapini Vitelli in viewing Montz, has received an Harquebush
shot, and is in danger of his life. The Ambassador of Florence does what he can
to excuse the loan of Wm unto the Duke of Alva. It is thought for the help of
this matter, that his Majesty can be content to lend as much to the contrary
party. And so for foreign news referring your Honor to the Italian
Occurrents, I most humbly take my leave.

At Paris the eighteenth of July, 1572. Your Honors to Command, Fr. Walsingham.


To the Right Honorable, and my very good Lord, the Lord of Burleigh.
IT may please your Lordship to understand, that the King dispatched one
Monsieur de la Mole servant to Monsieur le Duc d' Alanson, with Letters from
their Majesty's here unto the Q. Majesty, to render unto her thanks for the
rare entertainment and great honor done unto the Marshal; as also, to give her
notice of the marriage to be solemnized between the King of Navarre and the
Lady Margaret, I think also, he has Letters from his Master to her Majesty,
as also some charge to say somewhat to her on his behalf.

He gave me but Scarborough warning, and therefore your Lordship must bear with
these scribled lines. The Gentleman is a Provintial, and so of a very good
House, and a very well qualified Courtier, as I hear. Yesterday I wrote at
large unto your Lordship by Hollingshead, who is returned by way of Diepe: And
therefore I defer to trouble you with many lines at this present, I most humbly
take my leave.

At Paris the one and twentieth of July. Your Honors to Command, Francis
Walsingham.


To the Right Honorable, and my very good Lord, the Earl of Leceister.
BY a Gentleman called Monsieur de la Mole, servant unto Monsieur le Duc D'
Alanson, sent by the King to her Majesty with Letters, I had very short
warning given me, and therefore am driven to afford your Lordship the fewer
lines. The pretense of his coming, is with letters of thanks for the honor
done unto the Marshal; as also, to make her Majesty acquainted with the
appointed time for the solemnization of the King of Navarres marriage. But I
take it, the chief end of his coming is to present his Masters letters unto her
Majesty; as also, to say somewhat unto her on his behalf.

The Gentleman is a Provintial, and of a good house, and one, as I learn, very
well qualified.

Touching Flanders matters, I wrote unto your Lordship at large by
Holling-shead, who departed yesterday homewards by way of Diepe. And so leaving
to impart unto your Honor at this present, I most humbly take my leave.

At Paris the one and twentieth of July. Yours Honors to Command, Francis
Walsingham.


To the Right Honorable, and his very good Lord, the Lord of Burleigh.
IT may please your Lordship to understand, that a certain Scottishman called
George Torris, who appertains, as he says, to the Q. of Scots, has of late
robbed here in Paris one Emanuel d' Ambugo a Portugal, who heretofore about ten
years past, has been employed in message between the King of Portugal and her
Majesty, as by his passport may appear. Now for that he is given to
understand, that he is retired into England, he has desired diverse Gentlemen
of this Court to request me to write unto your Lordship, that by your good
means such as he shall appoint to pursue the party, may have authority so far
forth, as may stand with the Laws of the Realm, to arrest him, and such goods
and Jewels as shall be found to appertain to the said Portugal. To this effect
and purpose, he has likewise procured the Kings Letters here. And so leaving
further to trouble your Honor in this behalf. I most humbly take my leave.

From Paris the 22 of July, 1572. Yours Honors to Command, Francis Walsingham.


To the Right Honorable, his very good Lord, the Lord Treasurer.
TOuching the particulars of Ianlys overthrow, I refer your Lordship to such
incertainties as I have set down in the enclosed occurents. Such of the
Religion as before slept in security, begin now to awake and to see their
danger, and do therefore conclude, that unless this enterprise in the Low
Countries have good success, their cause grows desperate. They have therefore
of late sent to the King who is absent from home, to show him, than if the
Prince of Orange quail, it shall not lie in him to maintain him in his
protection by virtue of his Edict: they desire him therefore out of hand to
resolve upon something that may be of his assistance, offering themselves to
employ therein their lives, lands and goods. They see by the assistance given
on the other side, as by the Pope, Florence, Triers, Baviers and C^lleyn, who
are not otherwise interessed in the Low Country, or in this Cause, but in
respect of Religion, who proceed roundly and resolutely in the matter, that
unless her Majesty and the Princes of Germany in like sort join with this
Crown, there is great doubt what shall be the even of this enterprise: They
have therefore requested me to desire your Lordship, as you tender Gods glory
and her Majesty's safety, to see if you can induce her upon overture first to
be made by the King in this behalf, to join with him in yiedling assistance.
They think to make the -- so that they might be in some assurance that her
Majesty would give ear thereto. They have also dispatched one of late to such
Princes of Germany as favor the Cause, to provoke them to proceed more
resolutely and roundly in this matter, laying before them the evident dangers
that otherwise will ensue. By one lately come from thence they understand that
the said Princes begin to see the danger, and are well bent to do any thing
that may tend to remedy. The parties above written desire to know with some
speed how her Majesty will incline to the said overture, for that thereafter
they are to direct their affairs. As I was writing I received the copy of a
letter sent from Mounts, which I send to your Lordship here enclosed, by the
which you may both perceive the state of the Country, as also how many are
retired thither of Ianlys company. And so leaving further to trouble your Honor
at this present, beseeching God to bless you in your late honorable Calling,
with as good success as ever any that occupied that place,

I most humbly take my leave. From Paris the 26 of July, 1572. Your Honors to
Command, Fr. Walsingham.


To the Right Honorable his very good Lord, the Earl of Leicester.
YOur Lordship by these enclosed occurrents may perceive that Ianlys is
overthrown, whose -- it never could but breed danger to the cause, so could it
never breed more danger then presently upon the presently upon the Prince of
Orang^s first entry into the Country, a mean to discourage him and to encourage
the enemy. How much his well doing or evil doing imports us, I need not say
any thing to your Lordship, the thing being so apparent: how dangerous it were
to suffer him to quail, it is no less evident, how little hope there is he
shall receive relief from us, especially from the news of this overthrow, it
grieves me not a little to think of it, considering what depends thereon, and
I hope God will make my fear vain.

To suffer him to miscarry, knowing our own danger, were to lack both policy
and magnanimity. We cannot deny, but upon that that lately has been
discovered, that if God had not raised up the Prince of Orange to have
entertained Spain, a dangerous fire ere this time had bin kindled in our own
home. To assist him therefore, is to assist our selves, for that we are to run
one fortune with him, the difference is, that by miscarrying, the mischief shall
first touch him, and then consequently as many of us as profess one Religion
with him, for the supply that is given by the Pope, Florence, and diverse
Catholic Princes in Germany, shows that the quarrel is mixed, and consists
as well of Religion as o^ state. They fail not to make demonstration thereof,
and therein they show their courage and ^eal, contraiwise, we do things
underhand, and thereby do discover both lack of zeal and courage. No
Counselors enterprise accompanied with fear had ever good success, for there
can be no greater enemy to sound council then fear. The Gentlemen of the
Religion here, since the late overthrow of Ianlis, weighing what depends upon
the Pr: of Orange overthrow, have made demonstration to the King, that his
enterprise lacking good success, it shall not then he in his power to maintain
his Edict. They therefore desire him to weigh whether it were better to have
foreign war with advantage, or inward war to the ruin of himself and his
Estate: The King being not here, his answer is not yet received. They hope to
receive some such resolution as the danger of the cause requires; in the mean
time the M. desired me to move your Lordship to deal with her Majesty to know
whether she upon overture to be made to the King, cannot be content to join
with him in assistance of this poor Prince, seeing that as well in Estate as
Religion, it does so nearly touch her. Surely though it import the King very
much to look to it, yet it imports more her Majesty, who is to look for
nothing else (Spain overcoming this brunt) then the extremity of such mischiefs
as he can work her. (My good Lord, therefore as you never lacked to further
such causes as concern Gods glory and her Majesty's safety; so I do not doubt
but that you will with that care and courage which this weighty cause
requires, yield what aid and assistance you possibly may. And so leaving
further to trouble your Honor at this present, I most humbly take my leave.

From Paris the 26 of July, 1572. Your Honors to command, F. Walsingham.


By the QUEEN.
To our right trusty and well-beloved Francis Walsingham Esquire our Ambassador
Resident with our good brother the French King.
ELIZABETH R.

TRusty and well-beloved, we greet you well. Where at the being here with us of
the D. of Montmorency, he and du Foix, after their other ordinary matter of
ratification of the Treaty passed over, did many times very earnestly deal with
us, and in like manner with sundry of our Council, to move us to incline to an
offer of marriage; which the French K. and Q. ^other willed them to make to us
for the D. of Alanzon, and that we found the matter somewhat strange,
considering some things past not in good order, as you know in the matter of
like offer for Mr. de Anjon, wherein the said Mont. and his Colleague labored
much to satisfy us, but especially considering the youngness of the years of
the Duke of Alanson being compared to ours; so for those respects, although we
could give them no answer of comfort to content them, yet such was their
importunacy in reciting of many reasons and arguments to move us not to mislike
thereof, in respect as well of the strength of the friendship which this amity
should give to the continuance of this last League and Confederation, as also
of the worthiness of the said D. of Alanzon for his excellent virtues and good
conditions which they allege to be in him, with sundry other arguments
tending to remove the difficulties, and to gain our contentation and liking of
the said Duke. And in them, after their many conferences had both with us and
with our Council, when we perceived them very much perplexed to see our
strangeness from assenting to their desires, and how loath they were to have
any flat denial; we were advised to forbear from making of a plain refusal, and
to expect the return of the Lord Admiral, by whom, and by others of his
company, we might understand what might be further conceived of the personage
and conditions of the said Duke. And so our answer to them at their departure
was this, That we found such difficulties in this matter, specially for the
difference of his age, as presently we could not digest the same; but such was
the importunacy of our own subjects of all estates to have us to marry, as we
would forbear to give any such resolute answer as might miscontent the said
Ambassador; and as we knew would much grieve our people at this time, and so we
would take some further time to be advertised of the matter. And after one
months space we would make a direct answer to the French King, which also we
would first communicate to the said D. of Montmorency, to be by him, if he so
would, delivered over to the said King. And so with this answer they departed;
whereupon after the return of our Admiral, we have considered with him, and
with some others that were there, by whom we find that indeed the conditions
and the qualities of the said D. as far forth as they could by their
observation gather, or by report of others understand, were nothing inferior to
M. de Anjou, but rather better to be liked; but as to his visage and favor,
every body does declare the same to be far inferior, and that specially for the
blemishes that the small pox has wrought therein, so as his young years
considered, the doubtfulness of the liking of his favor joined therewith,
wherein no body that has seen him can otherwise report, although otherwise to
all purposes he is commended before his brother; we cannot indeed bring our
mind to like of this offer, specially finding no other great commodity offered
to us with him, whereby the absurdity that in the general opinion of the world
might grow, to commend this our choice after so many refusal of others of great
worthiness, might be counterprised, or in some manner recompensed. Wherefore
according to our answer made to the said Ambassador, we have determined that
you shall in our answer made to the said Ambassador, we have determined that
you shall in our name say as follows to Montmorency. Or if he shall desire
that you your self (considering the answer is not plausible) shall make it to
the King, then you shall so do, requiring him to be present, and to move the
King and his mother to interpret the same to the best, as indeed we mean it
plainly and friendly; and then you shall say that we have considered of the
matter of the Kings offer unto us of M. de Alanzon in marriage. And for the
same we do most earnestly thank the King and the Q. Mother, knowing manifestly
that the same proceeds of very manifest good will, knowing perfect
continuance of the amity lately contracted between us by this last Treaty. And
considering we have great desire to have the same amity continued and
strengthened, we are very sorry to find so great difficulties in this matter
that should be a principal band thereof, as we cannot digest the inconveniences
of the same, by reason of the difference of our ages to assent thereunto,
praying the K. and his Mother to assure themselves that there is no lack of
desire in us to continue, yea if it might be to increase this amity that makes
us think of the difficulties of this offer, otherwise then we think all others
do consider thereof, and most conceive, which proceeds almost only of the
difference of the age of Monsieur de Alanzon, and ours a matter that cannot be
remedied, either by the King his brother that desires the match, or by us, so
as the lack of not perfecting this band of amity after this manner, cannot be
imputed to either of us, nor to the party himself, of whose conditions and
virtues, truly you may say we hear so well, as we cannot but esteem him very
much, and think him very well worthy to have as good fortune by marriage as he,
or any other might have by us. And you may say, if you so see cause, that
although we might have known thus much as concerning his age when the
Ambassadors were here, and therefore might at that time have given them that
answer, and not thus to have deferred it until this time, yet to satisfy the
King therein, you shall say, True it is, that although we our selves were of
this mind from the beginning, to think the match inconvenient for his age; yet
at the being here of the Ambassador, we were continually labored by our
Council, and also by our Estates then assembled in Parliament, in laying open
before us the necessity of our marriage, both for our own comfort, and also for
the weal of the Realm; and some of them alleging unto us that there would be
no such difficulty in this matter of his years, but the evil opinion that might
be conceived thereof in the world to our lack, might percase be recompensed
with some other matter of advantage to us in our Realm, in the sight also of
the world, as being overcome with the importunacy of their reasons, we did
yield to take some further consideration of the matter; and to prove whether in
some time we could work our mind to some other purpose, or whether any such
further matter might be offered with this match, as might counterpoise in the
judgment of the world, the inconvenience of the difference of the age: But so
it is, that in all this time, we neither can find our mind altered, nor yet
hear of any other thing that might countervail the inconvenience; but so for
observing of our promise, and especially because we mean to deal plainly with
our good Brother and the Queen his Mother, we do make them this Answer, That
surely we cannot find our self void of doubt and misliking to accept this
offer, which is principally for the difference of his years, allowing
nevertheless of his worthiness for his virtuous and honorable conditions, as
much as we can require in any Prince to be our husband. And so we pray the King
and his Mother, that the Duke himself may understand our judgment to be of his
worthiness. And for the great good will we understand that he has born to us,
we do assure him that we shall for the same, esteem him at all times hereafter,
as well as any other Prince of his Estate, reserving only the band of love that
ought to accompany marriage.

Given under our signet at Theobalds, the 23 of July, 1572. the 14 year of our
Reign.

By the QUEEN.
To our trusty and well-beloved Francis Walsingham Esquire, our Ambassador Resident
with our good brother the French King.
ELIZABETH R.

RIght trusty and well-beloved, We greet you well. After we finished our other
Letters, and determined to have sent them away in such sort as you might have
had them in convenient time, to have delivered our answer according to our
promise made to the Duke of Montmorency. The French Ambassador here gave
knowledge that he had received Letters from thence, whereupon he required to
have audience before we should send to you, which we did accord; and thereby
our former Letters were staid contrary to our determinations, and so we would
it should be known when you shall find it requisite for answering to their
expectation for the time limited for our Answer; and therefore at the delivery
of our former Letters of credit, both to the King, and to Montmor^^^y, You
(...) say, that you are to show them our Answer as we did conceive it to be
given when those Letters were written. And upon the Ambassadors access after
that time, and delivery of Letters from the King, Queen Mother, and from Mr. De
(...), all full of purposes to further the matter of marriage, besides the
private earnest (...) with us also of the French Ambassador: to the same end,
we were occasioned thereby to do some further matter to our former Answer, not
being any ways so different as it does alter our said Answer; but in respect
of our (...) of the desire we see to be in the King and the Queen Mother, and
specially in the Duke of Alanson himself, not only by their Letters to our
selves, but by the Dukes Letters to the French Ambassador, we have thought
convenient to enlarge our answer in some part to lay open before the King our
conceit in the matter, which you shall say we do of very sincerity of good will
to be answerable with their earnest dealing with us to be nevertheless
considered and ordered by them as they shall think best.

After you have used this kind of speech to them, you shall say, That when we
think of this matter, we find no other principal impediment, but in the
difference of the ages, and the case of Religion. And as to this which is the
difficulty about Religion, we do not think that such, but the form and
substance of our Religion being well made known to the Duke, there is no such
cause to doubt, but by Gods goodness the same may be removed to the
satisfaction of us both. But as to the other which concerns the person of the
Duke, of his age, and otherwise, for as much as the difficulties thereof may
seem to consist rather in opinion then in matter, indeed we do thereto thus
yield to think that in marriage, when the persons are to think one of the
other, nothing does so much rule both parties, as to have their own opinions
satisfied; and seeing that in respect thereof nothing can make so full a
satisfaction to us for our opinion, nor percase in him of us, in respect of the
opinion he may conceive of the excess of our years above his, as that either of
us might by some convenient means with our own eyes, satisfy our own conceits:
A matter we know somewhat difficult, but yet such as in like cases has been
yielded to us, though by other impediments not perfected. And nevertheless, how
this may be granted or allowed by the King and the Queen Mother to be done
without offense, we do leave it to them in whom we perceive by our Ambassadors
speech their stay consisted, when the Duke himself both by his Letters to the
Ambassador, as otherwise has showed himself thereto disposed, that is, to come
hither in person, for the which we cannot but greatly esteem his love and
affection that he bears to us.

This you may say, is as much as we can conceive of the matter; and if it were
not for the desire we have to deal plainly in this matter, being so much
provoked by the great good will we find in them there, we would not in that
sort propound such a matter, neither do we otherwise propound it, but that it
may be friendly interpreted; and not to conceive that thereby we mean any abuse
to the disgrace of the Duke, whom we have great cause to love and esteem, but
that surely in this sort our opinion by sight may be satisfied, which otherwise
we perceive cannot be by report of any others, for that none of our own dare
adventure to deliver their advice for our own liking of him as the case is, we
plainly affirm, that so as the difficulty of the matter of Religion be provided
for, and that all other points concerning the marriage, may be performed as was
communed upon in the person of Monsieur de Anjou, we find ^o cause of doubt,
but that the King and Queen Mother shall obtain their desire. And after you
have declared thus much; and because it is likely that they will object, that
either this purpose of his coming over to us cannot be granted, in respect of
the honor of the King, for that heretofore no like usage has been in the
Marriages of the children of France with any strange Prince, or that they shall
doubt that this is by us in such sort propounded, as thereby to increase our
own reputation without any intent to marry him, though his person might not
mislike us. To such objections you may answer thus.

To the first you may say as of your self, that you are not so acquainted with
their own stories, and with the marriage of the children of France; yet you
dare affirm that you know there can be no example showed of the like of this;
that is, that either elder Son of France, or any younger was at any time to be
matched in Marriage with such a Prince, having such Kingdoms as we have, by
whom such an advancement might have grown as may by Marriage with us, both to
the Duke himself, and to the King and Crown of France; and therefore this
special cause can have no former example answerable to rule this; but this
ought to be followed with all manner of means, and all respects set aside.

And as to the second part that may be objected, you shall affirm certainly in
our name, that we have no meaning hereby to gain any particular estimation to
our self, but do plainly and simply seek hereby to procure the satisfaction of
our own mind in this difficulty, as touching his person, wherein no other of
our own dare deal with us, nor we can otherwise be satisfied. And for the
preservation of the Dukes estimation and honor, we shall be as careful as his
own brother the King shall be. And therefore you shall conclude, that howsoever
we have thus propounded our own conception in the matter, we desire not that
the King or the Queen Mother should do or consent to any thing that might any
wise seem for them dishonorable to the Duke.

Finally, if you shall perceive that they shall stick only upon the reputation
of his honor, that is, to come, and not be allowed for his person, you may, as
of your self, propound it as you see cause, that the matter of Religion may be
outwardly so left in dispense, as the breaking off, if any so should follow,
either on his part, or on ours, may to the world be thereto imputed. And
besides, that his coming may be secretly and privately, without any outward pomp
or show, whereof we leave the consideration to themselves.

Given under our Signet at Gorambury the 25 of July, 1572. in the fourteenth
year of our Reign.

To the right honorable and my very good friend, Francis Walsingham Esquire, her
Majesty's Ambassador in France.
SIr, I am privately so occupied, as I cannot write much, and if I had, I could
not write much more then the Queens Majesty has done in her Letters; by the
first you may perceive what was intended, and by the second what she would to
be amended. Surely she finds the Marriage to be necessary for her; and yet
the opinion of others misliking of the party for his person, does more hinder
her purpose then her own conceit. I see such extremities on both sides, as I
can make no choice for no Marriage, all evils must be looked for; and by
Marriage without liking, no good can be hoped; therefore to God I leave it. I
see your Negotiation shall be full of (...), God direct you. The Queen is very
irresolute to these. As to country matters, I can write no more; and now I am
out of the Office of the Secretary, and yet I cannot be discharged of my
ordinary cares.

From (...), the 27 of July, 1572. Your assured Friend, W. Burleigh.


To the ^ight Honorable Francis Walsingham Esquire her Majesty's Ambassador
Resident in France.
Since my last writing to you, there has been no news worth the writing, all
men's eyes and ears are now occupied in expectation of the events of Flanders
and the Low-Countrie: We say here that they of (...) be very strong, and have
sent over Sir Humsrey Gilbert with his Band of Englishmen, and some Frenchmen,
who has taken certain Towns of Sluse, and assieged the Castle. That Bruges did
consult whether they should receive the Protestants and Sir Humsrey, or no; and
does incline rather to receive them then the Garrison of the Duke of Alva.

The Queens Majesty has begun her Progress; and from Havering, instead of
Enfield, lay at Theobakls, my Lord Treasurers House three days; now is merry
at my Lord Keepers House, called Gorambury, beside St. Albans; and to morrow
goes to Dunstable, and the next day to Woborn, and ends her Progress at
Windsor the 24 of September. What Count Lodov^ck does about ^onsieur in
Henuaul^, we have not so often news as in the Maritine parts which are next us;
if you have any certainties, you shall do well from time to time to signify
unto us, and we will concord with you for the requital. Fare you well. From St.
Albons, July 27. 1572.

The Scots begin now somewhat to incline to an abstinence of War among
themselves, and to remit the matter to both the Princes of England and France.
S^th the writing of this Letter Mr Holingshead came to the Court even at the
closing thereof, and brought me a Letter from you of the 18 of July, and
certain Edicts, for the which I thank you.

Your Lordships always assured, Th. Smith.


To the right Honorable Sir Thomas Smith, her Majesty's principal Secretary.
IT may please you to advertise her Majesty, that according to the direction
of her Letters of the 23 of July, I imparted unto M. Montmorency, her Majesty's
resolution touching the offer propounded by him and du Foix; I made him also
acquainted with the Contents of her Majesty's Letters of the 27. touching the
interview, for the better satisfying of the opinions of either party.

To the first^ he said he was sorry that the resolution fell out to be such,
considering how necessary it was, the state of the time considered, to have
some sound amity, and perfect intelligence between the two Crowns, which could
no way have so well come to pass, as by the acceptance of the alliance
offered; and as, says he, I am generally sorry for it, so particularly in
respect of the good will I bear toward her Majesty, whom I see in great peril
without this help.

To the second he said, That though Monsieur le Duc was well inclined thereto,
yet in respect of the danger that commonly ensues by enterviews, he could in
no respect give his consent and advice, unless he were assured that there might
grow a liking.

Hereupon I desired him that he would so deal with the King and his Mother; and
that this her Majesty's resolution might be by their Majesty's accepted in good
part; wherein he promised to do his endeavor.

After conference had with him, I procured audience the next day, thinking it
expedient to let him have a days respit to deal with their Majesty's to frame
their minds to the well interpreting of her Majesty's resolution.

The next day repairing to the Court, and finding the King occupied at the
appointed hour of my access; I began with the Queen Mother, and first showed
her according to the Contents of the first Letter, what was her Majesty's
resolution concerning the offer propounded by the M. Mount and the du de Foix
on their behalf. To the which she answered, That she could not but be sorry for
the same, for that she saw it the only means to establish a perfect amity
between the two Crowns. Notwithstanding (says she) that the same will not take
place, the King my Son is determined in any case to continue good amity with
the Queen your Mistress.

Then I proceeded to the Contents of the second Letter, and showed her that her
Majesty upon the receipt of certain Letters from the King, her self, and Duc de
Anjou: Seeing their great and earnest desire of the proceeding of this match,
had enlarged her answer, moved thereto by an earnest and sincere good will to
show her self answerable to their earnest dealing. And therefore willed me to
tell their Majesty's, that in her opinion the principal impediments consisted
in the difference of their ages, and the cause of Religion; for the latter her
Majesty hoped that the same might be so accorded, as might be to the
satisfaction of both parties.

For the first: For as much as the difficulty might seem rather to consist in
opinion, then substance; her Majesty desires them to consider in Marriages, a
satisfaction of the opinions of the parties that were to match, was most
necessary and requisite; and that therefore seeing that there could grow no
satisfaction that way, but by an enterview, her Majesty could yield thereto,
if they should so like of it.

To this she answered, That if she were assured that upon the enterview there
might grow a liking, she would most willingly give her consent; but for as much
as experience taught, that of the meeting of Princes there follows rather
miscontentment then good liking, she should not in respect of the danger
thereof, yield her consent, for that she would be loath, and the King her Son;
and she desiring nothing more then good amity with her, that there should fall
out any occasion of miscontentment.

In the end, after long speech had of great desire she had of this match, and
of the great good will and love the Duke bears to her Majesty, she
concludes, that she hoped in time, considering how necessary it was for her to
marry, as well for her own safety, as for the benefit of her Subjects, that God
would so dispose her heart, as she should prefer public before private
Affairs.

This in effect is the sum of that which passed from her at that time: and so
departing from her to the King, I used the like speech unto him, as before unto
her: at whose hands I received like answer; which I suppose proceeded upon
conference with the M. before hand, and therefore they according in speech, I
forbear to make double repetition.

Touching their proceedings herein Flanders matters, it may please you to
advertise her Majesty, That upon advertisement from thence, that her Majesty
meant to revoke such of her Subjects as presently are in Flanders. The King
here, through the persuasion of his Mother, advised thereto by such as incline
to Spain, is dissuaded from overt dealing in that cause, who before was very
resolute in the matter. But now for as much as it is here conceived, that
without her Majesty's assistance he shall not be able to bear the brunt of so
puissant an enemy. The matter remains in suspense as yet, what will be done:
Commonly it is given out the King will not meddle.

Such as do wish well unto her Majesty, and are of the best judgment, to see
how much it imports her repose, the good or ill success of that poor Prince,
do hope that the advertisement of the revocation is false, her Majesty having
so lately discovered the King of Spains malice toward her, and therefore do
think her inclined in policy rather to assist then discourage. They say that
nothing can more hinder the poor Princes enterprise, then the said Revocation
upon his first entry into the Country, for that the people who were otherwise
well inclined toward him, and are fearful of nature, will thereby grow more
fearful, and so forbear to do that that may further the enterprise: because I
know not her Majesty's intention in this case, I forbear to affirm or deny any
thing in this behalf. For my own private opinion having been acquainted with
the malice of the Spaniards, I cannot, as duty binds me, but wish him further
removed in neighborhood from her Majesty. I pray God therefore to direct her
Majesty's heart, that may be for her Majesty's safety. And so leaving to
trouble your Honor any further at this present, I most humbly take my leave.

At Paris the tenth of August, 1572. Your Honors to command, Fr. Walsingham.


Sir, I beseech you to signify unto her Majesty, that the Count Montgomery
does show himself by sundry demonstrations, worthy of the favor and honor he
has received at her Majesty's hands. I beseech your Honor therefore to put her
Majesty in mind to use some such speeches toward his daughter at the Court, as
he may perceive that I do not forget to advertise her Majesty of the good will
he bears toward her.

To the right honorable Sir Thomas Smith, her Majesty's principal Secretary.
SIR, in this my private Letter I thought good to tell you, that how coldly
soever you are affected toward marriage, we mean not here to give you over,
but do think that time may work somewhat to the satisfying of our desire. They
think in the end, necessity must make you yield thereto in respect of your
safety, which is the best ground of the hope they have, they know well enough
the coldness of your affection, and therefore they hope that force will bring
that to pass which love cannot. This Sir, for marriage matter, I have earnestly
written both to the Lord Treasurer, and the Earl of Leicester, to procure a
stay of the revocation of those that are employed in Flanders, without the
which the whole enterprise is in hazard, in respect of the discouragement that
will grow thereby. And surely if the same take not good success, it is evident
what will be our danger to as many as will list to see; I need not use toward
you any persuasions, to put to your helping hand, which is forward enough in
this case, as one that foreseeth the mischief that otherwise will follow.

Whereas you write now that the Scots began somewhat to incline to an
abstinence; it seems very strange, considering the issue of our Parliament,
and the late enlargement of the Queen of Scots liberty, unless the Scots mean
thereupon to establish the Government in their Queen: if her Majesty had
accepted the provision of her safety by her subjects in Parliament, and not so
soon have yielded to any enlargement, those Scotch matters had been ere this
accorded; but we use to build with one hand, and overthrow with another: I can
rather lament it then hope after any remedy. And therefore to God I commit it.
And so leaving further to trouble your Honor at this present, I most humbly
take my leave.

At Paris the 10. of August, 1572. Your Honors to command. Fr. Walsingham.


To the right Honorable his very good Lord, the Lord Treasurer.
I Refer your Honor to Sir Th. Smiths Letters touching that which has past
concerning the delivery of her Majesty's resolution unto their Majesty's
thereof, the offer propounded by the M. Montmorency and M. de Foix. They easily
could be induced to hazard an enterview, if they thought there were any earnest
intention in her Majesty to marry; but the doubt thereof makes them stay to
condescend in that behalf; notwithstanding they mean not to give over the
matter utterly, but do hope that necessity in time may induce her Majesty in
respect of her safety, and the gratifying of her subjects to yield her consent,
seeing that the difficulty consists in opinion chiefly; I do what I can to
nourish this opinion in them, considering the broken state of Europe, and how
tickle her Majesty stands: if by an enterview there might grow any good, I
think I could easily bring it to pass; but the experience I have had how this
case of marriage is subject to many things, makes me to proceed warily,
according as I shall receive direction at your Lordships hands, who shall guide
my doings in this behalf.

Touching Flanders matters, the King had proceeded to an open dealing, had he
not received advertisement out of England, that her Majesty meant to revoke
such of her subjects as are presently in Flanders; whereupon such of his
Council here as incline to Spain, have put the Queen Mother in such a fear,
that the enterprise cannot but miscarry without the assistance of England, as
she with tears had dissuaded the King for the time, who otherwise was very
resolute.

Thus your Lordship sees how the bruit of your fear there, has bred fear
here; whereof I fear there will follow fearful effects, unless God put to his
helping hand.

The Admiral in this brunt, whose mind is invincible, and foreseeth what is
like to ensue, does not now give over, but lays before the King his peril if
the Prince of Orange quail, or at the least if the matter by composition may
not be induced to that good pass, as the Spaniards may be removed further off,
and the Country restored to its liberty, and yet remain under the Government of
Spain. And though he cannot obtain what were requisite and necessary for the
advancement of the Cause, yet does he obtain somewhat in conference with him:
He desired me to tell your Lordship, that there is nothing in respect of
himself, that he desires more after long troubles, unless he saw the danger
great and evident to as many as profess the Gospel, as also particularly to the
King his Master, and to the Q. Majesty my Mistress, whom he is bound to honor
and serve during his life; and if these Low Country matters be not reduced to
some good issue, he would not now expose himself to new perils. But the case
now standing as it does, and foreseeing the mischief that will follow, he says
he should be a Traitor to God and to his Country, and unthankful to her Maj. if
he should forbear to do what lies in him to prevent the same; and for that he
knows your Lordship does concur with him in the like desire, he does most
earnestly desire you to be a mean to stay her Maj. revocation of those that be
in Flanders, which thing will breed no less encouragement to the enemies, then
discouragement to those that seek to further this cause, the welldoing whereof
(says he) if I do not mistake, does as much import her Maj. as any one thing
that happened unto her since her coming to the Crown, and therefore requires
rather assistance then hinderance. Other particularities he willed me to impart
unto your Lordship, which for that I would be loath to trouble your Lordship
with Cipher, I have desired Mr. Killegrew, to make you understand the same. And
so leaving to impart to your Honor any thing further at this time, I most
humbly take my leave.

At Paris, August 10. 1572. Your Honors to command, Fr. Walsingham.


To the Right Honorable his very good Lord, the Earl of Leicester.
IT may please your Lordship to understand, that upon advertisement com from
the parties, that her Maj. meant to revoke such as are employed in the
Low Countries of her subjects, the King here through the persuasions of such as
are inclined to Spain, is grown cold, who before was very forward, in so much
as Commissions were granted ready to have been sealed, for the leavying of men
in sundry Provinces; but herein nothing prevailed so much as the tears of his
mother, who without the Army of England cannot consent to grow to any open
dealing. And because they are, as I suppose, assured by their Ambassadors that
her Majesty will not intermeddle, they cannot be induced to make any overture.
Thus your L. sees that fear and mistrust, unles God sets to his helping hand,
is like to overthrow all. To think that Spain will suffer us to overcome this
brunt, to live long in peace, has no reason for ground. To seek now
reconcilement with him in this his necessity, there is likelihood he will yield
thereto, for no man can speak fairer then a Spaniard when he is underfoot: but
to think when the necessity is gone, that he will forget what is past, surely
he knows not the Spanish nature that is of that opinion. For the greatness of
France, I see no such ambition here why we should have cause much to fear it;
Pleasure and youth will not suffer us to take profit of advantages, and those
who rule under us are fearful and irresolute. How perplexed the Admiral is,
who foreseeth the mischief that is like to follow, if assistance come not from
above, your Lordship may easily guess. And surely to say truth, he never showed
greater magnanimity, nor never was better followed nor more honored of those
of the Religion then now he is, which does not a little appale the enemies. In
this storm he does not give over the helm; he lays before the King and his
Council the peril and danger of his estate, and though he cannot obtain what he
would, yet does he obtain somewhat from him. I am requested to desire your
Lordship to hold him excused in that he writes not, for that at this time he
is overwhelmed with affairs. Furthermore he desired me from him, that if her
Majesty proceeded in revocation of those her subjects in Flanders, it will
breed such discouragement in those of the Country that are well affected to the
cause, as it will to all likelihood hazard the whole enterprise. He therefore
desires your Lordship, as you wish well to the cause and to the safety of her
Majesty, whose repose (whatsoever is said to the contrary) depends upon the
good success of this enterprise, to procure a stay to be made of the said
revocation. Touching Flushing, he tells me that the matter shall be ended as
there shall grow no just cause of jealousy, which shall shortly appear by some
offer that shall be made unto her Majesty of the same by those that are now
possessors of it. Other particularities he willed me to impart unto your
Lordship, which I requested Mr. Killigrew to make your Lordship acquainted
withal, for the avoiding of the tediousness of Cipher.

Touching the acceptance here of the answer unto the offer propounded by M.
Montmo. I refer your Lordship to Sir Tho. Smith's letters: As far as I (...)
perceive, they mean not to be discouraged with one Nay. And so leaving further
to trouble your Honor at this present, I most humbly take my leave.

At Paris the 10. of August, 1572. Your Honors to command, Francis Walsingh^^.
I have cause to render unto your Lordship my most hearty thanks for your late
earnest dealing with her Majesty for my revocation. I am also presently to
request your Lordship to renew the same, for that my charges here do grow daily
more intolerable, so that I am no more able to endure the weight of this burden.




To our trusty and welbeloved Francis Walsingham Esquire our Ambassador resident
with our good Brother the French King.
TRusty and welbeloved, we greet you well. Here has been with us Monrieur de
la M^^ with special letters from the King, Q. mother, and the D. of Alanson,
who with the Ambassador resident has here most earnestly (...) to us touching
the marrying with the D. of Alanson; and upon the report of your speech to the
King upon the two Letters we lately sent unto you, there appears some
mistaking either by you or by the King. For in the Kings letter to the French
Ambassador it is conceived that you should say, that we did will you by our
first letter to declare that the difference of the age of the Duke from ours
was such, as it was not possible for us to accord thereto; and yet you should
upon our second letter propound a motion of an enterview. Which two
declarations cannot but contain some absurdity, as we think yourself can
conceive. And therefore we have answered, that either you mistook our mind, or
our first letters, and so misreported them, as we cannot think you did, or else
the King mistook your words; and that where you were by us commanded to say,
that the cause was very difficile (which we think you did) for so do our
letters plainly direct you, it is likely that the King understood it, as was
thought you had said, impossible. And so the Ambassador resident will not have
us in any wise think but that the King or Q. mother mistook it. Upon their
further dealing in these matters at sundry times, who never omitted any
opportunity to advance the same, it was at length by them propounded to us,
that we should be content to accord that the Duke might come hither, and that
all other Articles which were treated upon of the Duke d'Anjou might remain
good for the Duke d'Alanson, saving that the difficulty in Religion might rest
in suspense, and be determined upon his coming hither as we two should agree;
whereby they seemed to provide, that the inconvenience which might ensue of the
enterview, if the principal matter took no place, might be rejected to the
article of Religion; and so the honor of the Duke, etc.

Hereunto we were loath to make any direct answer, but remember it unto them
what words both the D. of Montmorencie and the Q. mother used to you concerning
the great misliking of an enterview, as it seemed by their discourse of the
inconvenience what has followed of those enterviews: but what those be, and
whether they know of any like, our persons and other circumstances considered,
we cannot tell; and therefore we seem very loath that there should any motion
come from us of any enterview, le^t the principal matter should not take place,
and therefore we can make no certainty. There might indeed such inconvenience
follow as has been by them remembered; and yet being still pressed by the
Ambassador and (...), that if indeed we (...) a disposition to marry, as we had
been content to affirm for necessity of our Realm, though not for any
particular motion for our own person, then we would be content with this by
them propounded for an enterview; and therefore we did at good length make the
answer in the (...) of our Council, so well to show them truly that we did
continue in the same mind to marry for the benefit of our realm with any meet
person of Princely estate that should be offered unto us, with (...) conditions
as we might like also, To (...) this matter of enterview to the consideration
and wisdom of the King and Q. mother to be so ordered, as whatsoever might
hereof succeed, no inconvenience should ensue; and so with some large speech to
that end, we did conclude, that we durst not desire the enterview for the same
reason. After which answer made, and as it seemed by them very well allowed,
they required some brief note of the points of the matters might be given them
in writing, which we did cause to be conceived and delivered agreeable to the
Copy that herewith we send you. And howsoever they shall make report of our
answer, we would that you should not omit to persist directly in this; but loath
we would be that the Duke her son should come hither, if the matter should not
take place, lest more offense might thereof follow then we thought meet
concerning the perfection of the amity that is between us. And yet our meaning
is not hereby, that they should think that we are not so disposed to marry, or
that we are determined to mislike of the matter aforehand, or not disposed at
all to allow of him; but that only we are fearful, that if there should happen
at his coming some cause of misliking or forbearing to accept him, which surely
to us is uncertain, and without sight cannot be made certain, then some great
unkindness should follow by their misconceiving of our dealing, where now there
is no cause of kindness and friendship whereof we do not earnestly desire to
have continuance, without interruption in that behalf. As you shall find this
matter likely to proceed, so we would have you not only to advertise us, but to
have good regard that if you find any scruple thereof, that great unkindness
shall arise of his coming if the matter shall not take place, that before any
preparation be there made of his coming, you do advertise us with speed, for
otherwise the unkindness may happen to be greater in respect of the charges.

Given at Killingworth the 22 of August, 1572. T. Smith.


To the right worshipful Mr. Francis Walsingham, Ambassador Resident in France.
SIr, I am sorry that so good a matter should upon so nice a point be deferred.
We may say that the Lover will do little, if he will not take the pains once to
see his Love, but she must first say yea before he see her, or she him. Twenty
ways might be devised why he might come over and be welcome, and possibly do
more in an hour then he may in two years. Cupido ille qui vincit omnia, in
oculos insidet, and ex oculis ejaculatur, and in oculos utriusque vidend^
nonsolum ut ait poeta, foemina virum, sed vir foeminam. What force I pray you
can hearsay, and I think, and I trust, do in comparison of that, Cum prasens
praesentem tuetur and alloquitur, and furore forsitan amoris ductus
amplectitur; and says to himself, and openly, that she may hear, Teneo ne te
mea, an etiamnum somno volunt famina videri cogi ad id quod maximum cupiunt. If
we be cold, it is our part, besides the person, the sex requires it. Why are
you cold? Is it not a young man's part to be bold, courageous, and to adventure?
If he should have, he should have but honorificam repulsam. The worst that can
be said of him is but a Phaeton, quam si non tenuit, magnis tamen excidit
ansis. So far as I can conceive, Hac est sola nostra anchora, hac jacenda est
in nobis alea. In our instability unum momentum est uno momento perfectum
factum, as dictum stabilitatem facere posest; or else nothing is to be looked
for but still and continual dalliance and doubtfulness, so far as I can see.

Indeed as yet there is no revocation neither done nor meant of our men at
Flujhing or in Flanders, howsoever the brute is made there with you. Truth it
is, that certain more that would have gone over from hence were stayed, for
fear of too much disorder for lack of some good head, and wise and expert
Captain; but they that be there be neither yet revoked nor discouraged,
although the Duke of Alva by letters this last week required that they should
be revoked, but he is gently answered with a dilatory and doubtful answer. If
you there do tergiversari and work tam timide and underhand with open and
outward Edicts, besides excuses at Rome and at Venice by your Ambassadors, you
I say which have Regem expertem otii laboris amantem, cujus gens bellicosa
jampridem assueta est cadibus tam exterioris quam vestri sanguinis, quid
faciem^s gens otiosa and paci assueta, quibus imperat Regina, and ipsa pacis
atque quietis amantissima? And I pray you who has removed from thence with any
authority a society or preparation in such a matter, either to her Highness, or
to her Council. And this for that matter.

How far the Scots have gone, you may perceive by this enclosed; both the
parties have subscribed and sealed to it, and both the parties have written
letters of thanks to her Majesty for the pains taken by the Marshal of Barwick,
and have promised to stand to that order, which is very honorable both to the
King there, and to our Queen here; and not dishonorable to the Scottish King,
that in his infancy such a noble personage should accord to make quietness in
his Realm. Thus I bid you most heartily farewell.

From Killingworth, Aug. 22. 1572. Your assured friend, Tho. Smith.


To the right worshipful Francis Walsingham Esquire her Majesty's Ambassador
resident in France.
SIr, I know how faithfully you shall be both by her Majesty's letters and Mr.
Secretaries certified of her Majesty's pleasure. This Gent. la Mot has well
behaved himself here to the great contentation of her Majesty and her Court,
and I think also he well deserved. Surely the choice of him was good, and as it
seems the Queens Majesty is come nearer to the matter then I hoped. If there
may now any amendment grow to this usage, and that he would come, I assure you
I see no cause to doubt, for in that matter consists the only apparent stay.
^ur men in Zealand are evil used by the French there; and howsoever the Admiral
has lately born you in hand, I doubt our intention shall be disappointed, or
at worst as it is justly doubted that the Princes Captain at Flushing is
corrupted and become Spanish in secret sort, whereof I pray you advertise the
Admiral.

In Scotland the abstinence is not well kept by the Kings party as reason
would: The Town of Edinburgh is wholly at the direction of the Regent, and
contrary to the covenant he keeps his men of war there, whereof they of the
Castle complain. I think the Earl of Northumberland suffered death this day at
York; for it was ordered that he was brought thither under the conduct of Sir

Foster as yesterday for that purpose.

In Ireland the stirs of Munster are well overcome; the chief Rebels fled, and
the rest conquered. In Connaught some stir has been by the Earl of
Cla^^^icards son, for the which his father was imprisoned, but now delivered,
and promises to appease the troubles. This day the Earl of Ormond came hither
out of Ireland, who has there done great service. Now I end

at Killingworth the 22 of August, 1572. Yours assuredly, William Burleigh.


To the right Honorable Sir Thomas Smith, her Majestiess principal Secretary.
IT may please your Honor to advertise her Majesty that yesterday I sent my
Secretary unto Q. Mother, willing her in my name, first to render unto her and
to the Kings Majesty most humble thanks for the great care it pleased them to
have of my safety, and the preservation of the English Nation in this last
tumult, whereof I assured them I would not fail to make honorable report unto
the Queens Majesty my Mistres. And furthermore, forasmuch as there were diverse
reports made of the late execution here, and that I would be very loath to
credit reports, that it would please their Majesty's to send me the very truth
thereof, to the end I might accordingly advertise the Queens Majesty my
Mistress. To the first she said, that the King her son and she gave especial
commandment, that good regard were had of me and all English men, as that
thing which tended to the preservation of the good amity between the King her
Son, and the Queens Majesty my Mistress. And that if I could devise any
better means for the better safeguard, that I would but give them understanding
thereof.

To the second she said, that she doubted not but that Monsieur la Mott had
long since advertised the Queens Majesty of the late accident here.
Nevertheless to gratify me, that she would cause Secretary Pinnart to send me
an abstract of that, which before the King her son had sent to his Ambassador
there resident, the which also I send you here enclosed.

This being in effect that which passed between her and my Secretary. And
having at this present no other thing to write of, I leave to trouble your
Honor any further, and most humbly take my leave.

At Paris the 27 of August, 1572. Your Honors to command Fr: Walsingham.
The Duke of Nevers has showed himself much addicted to our Nation, having not
spared to come and visit men in his own person, with offer of all kind of
courtesy, not only to me, but also to diverse of our English Gentlemen. Besides
that, he did very honorably entertain three English Gentlemen, who otherwise
had been in great jeopardy of their lives.




To the right Honorable Sir Thomas Smith, her Majesty's principal Secretary.
MAy it please your Honor to advertise her Maj. that the first of this month I
was sent for by the King; and to the end I might pass with the more safety, he
sent to conduct me Count La^sacque and Manef^es, accompanied with a dozen other
Gentlemen. At my access unto his Maj. he showed me, that he sent for me to make
me understand, that whereas men might judge diversely of the late execution, who
were not advertised of the ground of his proceedings in that behalf; he had
therefore for the satisfying of the world, caused the process to be made of the
Admiral, and the rest of his Conspirators, which so soon as the same should be
finished, he would not fail to send unto her Maj. his good sister, whom he did
assure himself, would interpret in good part his doings, he being constrained,
to his great grief, to do that which he did for his safety sake; which if he
had not done, both he himself, his Mother and Brethren had been in danger of
their lives. Furthermore he showed me, that he desired nothing more then to
continue, or rather to increase amity with her Majesty, and therefore hoped
that she would not take occasion upon this late proceeding, to suspect the
contrary; for (says he) on my honor, and in the word of a Prince, I have no
other meaning. To this I answered, that her Majesty could not but accept in
very good part the sending of the process, as one that would be glad to
understand the ground of the matter: And if by the said process it should
appear that they were guilty, none should be more glad of the punishment of
them then her Maj. who preferred his safety before any particular subject of
what estate or Religion soever they were. For the other part I showed him, that
I hoped his Maj. who had made a straiter league with England then any of his
Progenitors, would not now be drawn easily to make light account thereof,
considering the profit that might grow to both the Crowns by the same.

Then I made him understand, that three of our Nation were slain, and that
diverse were spoiled; for the which he showed himself to be very sorry, and
said, that if the parties offenders could be produced, there should exemplary
justice be used. I showed his Majesty it would be hard to produce them, the
disorder being so general, the sword being committed to the common people. In
the end, after thanks given for the care he had of my safety, I departed from
him, and was conducted to Q. Mother, who used like speech, saving that she
showed me that the K. meaning was, the heads of the Conspirators being now
taken away, to continue his Edicts, and that every man should live in repose
and liberty of his Conscience. For that it was suspected that le Mote was
stayed in England, I showed their Maj. that it was the 20 of the last before he
departed, and that I hoped upon his return, they should rest very well
satisfied with such answer as he receives at her Majesty's hands. And so
leaving further to trouble you at this present, I most humbly take leave.

At Paris the second of September, 1572. Your Honors to Command, Fr.
Walsingham.


To the Right Honorable Sir Thomas Smith, her Majesty's principal Secretary.
SIr, it may please you to advertise her Maj. That albeit it was showed me, as
I wrote in my last, that the heads being taken away, the meaner sort should
enjoy by virtue of the Edict both lives and goods, and liberty of their
consciences; which thing also assured by print, as by the enclosed may appear,
yet notwithstanding, nothing thereof is performed, but all extremity used,
which manner of proceeding is by the Catholics themselves utterly condemned,
who desire to depart hence out of this Country, to quit themselves of this
strange kind of Government, for that they see here none can assure themselves of
either goods or life. At Lions, Bordeaux and Orleans, great and most barbarous
cruelty has been executed. At Orleans diverse of the Almains have been slain
and spoiled, the most part of them put to the ransom; for that justice takes
not place here, they forbear to require redress, but depart hence with great
desire of revenge.

They prepare Bastile for some persons of quality. It is thought that is for
the Prince of Conde and his brethren.

The Marshal Montmorency is commanded, as it is said, to keep his house, and to
forbear to make any Assembly: He is now at Chantilly.

The King is advertised that the Prince of Orange has taken Mechelin, and that
he now marches toward Montz, and that the Duke d' Alva shall be constrained
to hazard the battle, or to lose his Ordnance. It is said, that the King here
means to send to his support under the conduct of the Duke of Guise, 4000
shot and 2000 horse. And so leaving further to trouble your Honor at this
present, I most humbly take my leave.

At Paris the thirteenth of September. Your Honors to Command, Fr. Walsingham.


To the Right Honorable Sir Thomas Smith, her Majesty's principal Secretary.
SIr, it may please you to advertise her Majesty, that after I had closed up
my present dispatch, Monsieur Mansiere was sent to me from Q. Mother to request
me to continue my good devotion toward this Crown, and to do such good offices
as might breed continuance, and especially to further the marriage. To this I
answered, that I saw things fall out here in such sort, as I had small cause to
encourage me thereunto. And as for the marriage, I had some cause to doubt
whether the matter was truly meant or no, for diverse reasons. To that he
answered, that it were good the same scruples were taken away; and therefore
asked me, if I would be content to let the Queen Mother understand the reasons
that made me so to think. To the which I answered, I could be very well
content, if it shall please her Majesty to send for me, that I might
communicate them unto her. Thereupon she sent for me, and at my access she told
me, that she understood by Mannesiere, that there rested in me some scruple
touching the Kings and her sincere meaning concerning the late marriage
propounded, for the which she was sorry; for that in respect of the place I
held, I might yield no small hinderance to the same: She therefore desired me,
to know the reasons that moved me thereto, to which she doubted not but to
yield such answer as should breed satisfaction in me. Thereupon I showed her,
that true it was, that as it becomes a good servant, the jealousy of my
Mistris's honor and surety, made me to use some such speech toward her,
whereof when she should understand the reasons, I hoped she would interpret the
same in good part: Then I showed her, that this late strange accident had bred
in men dangerous discourses, opinions and mistrusts amongst the which I was not
free from my doubts and suspicions. And as touching this scruple of the Kings
and her sincere meaning touching this marriage, I had three reasons that moved
me thereto: The first, the violating of the late Edict, and present severity
used against those of the Religion.

The second, the strange dealing in the first match propounded.

The third, certain Discourses given out of the Conquest of England and Ireland.

Touching the first, I showed her, that the chiefest causes that moved the
Queen my Mistress to make account of the Amity of this Crown, was, that the King
suffered certain of his Subjects to enjoy, by the virtue of this Edict,
exercise of the same Religion her Majesty professed, which was the chiefest
ground of the League, which being taken away, the Amity could not but grow
doubtful. And this matter of an enterview, suspected to be but to serve for an
entertainment.

Touching the second, I showed her, that this late accident gives vehement
suspicion, that the first match propounded, was also but a kind of
entertainment to abuse those of the Religion.

Touching the Discourses, though they did proceed from mean personages, and
that I hoped their Maj. were free from any such intentions, yet the strangeness
of the late accident could not altogether rest free from suspicion. To this she
generally replied, That she hoped, that the late League was made, not with the
Admiral, and those of the Religion, but with the King; and therefore she
trusted, that though her son for his surety sake, had justly executed the heads
of the Religion, yet the said league should continue in his perfect strength,
for performation whereof, there should never be found lack in the King. You
know (says she) that there was good amity between King Francis and King Henry
the eighth, and yet they favored not the Pope alike. You know also (says she)
that notwithstanding the difference of Religion between my late husband and
King Edward, yet the same did not impeach the conclusion of a marriage between
the same King and my daughter. And as for the Edict (says she) the King my
sons meaning is not otherwise, but that the same shall stand in force.

To this I replied, that true it was, that the League was made with the King,
and not with the Admiral. Notwithstanding that the liberty of conscience was
not particularly granted unto him, but generally to those of the Religion, as
to the Amity between the said Princes, notwithstanding they were of contrary
Religion. I told her, that the time was now altered, for that then there was no
general league made at Trent, or at Bayonne generally against those of the
Religion, and surely Madam (said I) I fear, that this late severity executed
here, will make all Princes of the Religion, to repute the same a general
denunciation of War against them, which I fear will prove as bloody as ever war
that happened, whereof the benefit would chiefly grow to the Turk. Thereupon she
took occasion to inveigh vehemently against the Admiral, saying, that the
matter of Bayonne was a device of his to provoke such Princes as were allies
and friends to this Crown, to become enemies to the same. For (says she) the
Assembly of Bayonne tended to other end but to make good cheer; and to the end
you may see how little your Mistress was beholding to him; you may see (says
she) a discourse found, with his testament, made at such time as he was sick at
Rochel, wherein, amongst other advices that he gave to the King my son, this is
one that he willed him in any case, to keep the Queen your Mistress and the King
of Spain, as low as he could, as a thing that tended much to the safety and
maintenance of this Crown. To that I answered, that in this point, howsoever he
was affected toward the Queen my Mistress, he showed himself a most true and
faithful Subject to the Crown of France, and the Queens Majesty my Mistress
made the more account of him, for that she knew him faithfully affected to the
same: The said discourse was all written with his own hand. To the other two
reasons she answered nothing, but desired me that I would not be carried away
with reports of some seditious instruments, that desired nothing else but to
set Princes at discord. In the end, after long debating to and fro of the
matter, she desired me to protest unto the Queen my Mistress, that she and her
son desired nothing more then good amity; and because the same might grow to
more perfection, they desired the finishing of this marriage propounded,
whereof she hoped there would grow safety and quiet to both Realms. I then
desired her to satisfy me in two points: The one, of the difficulty of
Religion, considering their late severity may be compounded, if the enterview
should go forward. The other, in what sort they mean to continue in observation
of the said Edict.

To the first she told me, that for the difficulty in Religion, if there be no
other let (says she) I doubt not but it shall be so compounded, as that it
shall be to the contentment of your Mistress.

As for the second, the Kings meaning is, that they shall enjoy the liberty of
their conscience. What Madam (said I) and the exercise of their Religion to? No
(said she) my son will have exercise but of one Religion in his Realm. Then
(said I) how can it agree, that the observation of the Edict, whereof you
willed me to advertise the Queen my Mistress that the same should continue in
his former strength? To that she said, that they had discovered certain matters
of late, that they saw it necessary to abolish all exercise of the same. Why
Madam (said I) will you have them live without exercise of Religion. Even
(says she) as your Mistress suffers the Catholics of England. My Mistress
did never promise them any thing by Edict, if she had, she would not fail to
have performed it. To that she said, that the Queen my Mistress was to direct
the Government of her own Country, and the King his. To that I answered, that
I did not move those questions of any curiosity, but to render account to the
Queen my Mistress of the proceedings, who I knew desired that all things might
pass in such sort as might be to their honor.

A third doubt I propounded, how considering their late severity, they could
perform their promise with the Queen my Mistress, if she should be assailed for
the cause of Religion, in yielding assistance. To this she answered, that if
any; yea (says she) if the King of Spain, I will not stick to move him, shall
enterprise any thing against her for the cause of Religion, she shall not lack
for any assistance that this Crown can give her. Our desire is only to reduce
this Crown to a quiet state.

This speech I thought good to impart unto her Majesty, referring unto her the
consideration of the same.

Of late, though I received ill usage of the people, yet at their Majesty's
hands I find more favor then accustomed, whereof I promised to advertise her
Majesty. La Roche, who two years past was employed in the enterprise at
Ireland, was lately here at the Court, and from hence dispatched to Rochel,
which makes men to suspect some enterprise that way. And so leaving further to
trouble your Honor at this present, I most humbly take my leave.

At Paris the fourteenth of September, 1672. Your Honors to Command, Fr.
Walsingham.


To the right Honorable Sir Thomas Smith, her Majesty's principal Secretary.
SIr, it may please you to advertise her Majesty, that the tenth of this
month the King and Queen Mother sent for me to the Louvre; where first I spoke
to Queen Mother, who showed me, that la Mot has received such honor and good
entertainment at her Majesty's hands, as that she, and her Son the King, could
do no less then send for me, and desire me to render unto her Majesty most
hearty thanks for the same; and further, to show unto her Majesty, that
forasmuch as they desire nothing more then some straiter amity with her, which
they think can by no means come to pass so well as by marriage; and therefore
the Kings meaning was, that she and her son Duke d' Alanson should repair to
Bulloin or Callis, so that her Majesty will be content to repair to Dover, to
the end the enterview that has been propounded, might take some effect, by
some good advice that may be found out for the surety of both their Majesty's,
which thing shall be best considered of, how the same may come to pass.
Further, she willed me to tell her Majesty, that besides the great hope she
had that the same enterview will breed a hope of straiter amity between the two
Crowns, she desired the same no less, for the great good particular affection
she had to see her Majesty, whereof she would receive as great content, as of
any one thing that has happened unto her in her days. To this I answered, that I
would not fail to advertise her Majesty thereof. And thereupon, according to
the contents of her Majesty's Letters of the two and twentieth of August, I
took occasion to protest unto her, in her Majesty's behalf, that forasmuch as I
had before advertised of her and the Kings misliking of an enterview, in
respect of the inconveniences that has followed thereof, her Majesty could
not desire the same, but rather refer it to the Kings and her consideration,
lest if the principal should not take place, there might follow that
inconvenience that by them was feared. To this she answered, that she would
take the burden and blame upon her; and that whether the matter took effect or
not, the Kings meaning was to continue good amity with her Majesty. I replied,
that to see one in marriage, is a thing in it self considered honest and
allowable, and that if the parties desire who sought the same took no place,
there could grow to him no reproach thereof, but in opinion, which had no
reason of ground, for that marriages have their beginning from above. Upon that
I concluded, that for the Duke d' Alanson to see a Princess of her Majesty's
quality and calling, was a thing honorable; and that therefore whatsoever
success the matter took, seeing that marriages came from heaven, there could in
truth and reason grow to him no dishonor; and that therefore unless he could
put on that opinion, considering the issue to be doubtful, it were better not
to proceed any further, lest it might be an occasion of unkindness, which might
be unprofitable to both the Crowns. To this she answered, that she knew it to
be ttue, and that therefore they would refer the issue to God, with intention
to continue good friendship, whatsoever grew of the matter. So having ended
with her, I repaired to the King, who only willed me to give her Majesty
thanks for the good entertainment given to la Motte; as also to assure her,
that his intention and desire was no other, but to continue, or rather to
increase amity with her: And further to show her, that he would shortly send
the Admirals process unto his Ambassador, to show unto her Majesty. Duke d'
Alanson, who was there present, desired me to present unto her Majesty his
most humble and affectionate commendations, and to show her, that so great was
the honor that she did unto his servant la Mote, as he desired nothing more
then to have occasion to show himself thankful by doing her service; and that
therefore it would please her to make account of him as of one that is wholly
hers. In this time of trouble; he has often sent unto me, and offered me some
of his guard for my surety.

La Motte showed himself most thankful for the honor he has received, and
every man makes most honorable report of her Majesty; wherefore she may
think the good usage of him very well employed on him.

The Lord Levingston, and diverse other Scottish Gentlemen, who see here no way
to enjoy the liberty of their conscience, do desire passport, wherein I mean to
use less difficulty then heretofore I have done; for that they seem upon the
last accident, to desire most perfect Amity between the two Crowns of England
and Scotland, in respect of the common cause of Religion. I suppose, passing by
that way, and receiving good entertainment at her Majesty's hands, they will
rather do good then harm at home, by making them in the Country understand
what had passed here, and the danger that is like to follow, without perfect
union between the said Crowns.

Some of the wisest sort of them here, that before were enemies, and now are
become friends, do wish that her Majesty sought to make some reconciliation
between the Earl Morton and the Lord Lidington, and that her Majesty by some
pension did make both him and others assured to her. They think that her
Majesty by so doing, in disbursing of two or three thousand pounds a year, may
save the disbursing of many thousands, besides the avoiding of many dangerous
practices that are like to grow that way. This device might seem to savor of
the particular benefit, were not the circumstances of the present time
reasonable for the same.

The Ambassador of Scotland tells such of his Nation as are here, that the
Kings meaning is to make as great account of them as ever he did. That those of
the guard, for their better entertainment, shall have a Captain of their own
Nation; and further, that the Kings meaning is to erect again certain men of
Arms, under the conduct of some Nobleman of that Nation. I leave to her
Majesty to consider what this courtesy to that Nation means. Sir, I beseech
you to move her Majesty, that for the time that I shall remain here, which I
hope shall not be long, I may hear often from her, whereby I may the better
know how to direct my course.

This enclosed Letter of Montmorency, was sent me from Secretary Pynart,
whereby it may appear, that he was procured to write to their Majesty's. And so
leaving further to trouble your Honor at this Present, I most humbly take my
leave.

At Paris the fourteenth of September. Your Honors to command, F. Walsingham.


To the Right Honorable Sir Thomas Smith, her Majesty's principal Secretary.
SIr, it may please you to advertise her Majesty, That of late the King here
was advertised from his Ambassador Resident in Flanders, how that the ninth of
this month the Prince of Orange approaching near unto Montz, and being fully
resolved to fight with his enemy, commanded forth of his Army four hundred
footmeen, and five hundred light horsemen, the Prince himself and the rest of
his Army following them somewhat afar off, in very good order. On the righr
hand of his Battle there stood a mill, where he planted six pieces of
Artillery, as well to defend himself, as to offend his enemy with more
advantage. The Duke of Alva likewise sent out against the Prince five hundred
Spaniards Harquebushiers, and six hundred light horsemen, with Harquebushiers a
Crock, on the right hand of them he set two thousand Rutters, and on the left
wing as many. In this sort they came at length to hand strokes, the fight dured
a long time, to wit, from twelve of the clock at noon, to six of the clock at
night; but in the end, by means of the Prince of Oranges Artillery, the Duke of
Alva's horsemen were put in so great disorder, as they were constrained to
retire themselves into their Tents, not without great loss. The number of them
that were slain is not yet certainly known, although it is reported, that the
Duke has lost above three thousand men. This victory is thought to proceed of
250 horsemen, who issued forth of Montz during the Conflict, and set upon the
tail of the Duke Alva's Army, who also afterward joined with the Prince of
Orang^. Thus much I thought good to write, to the end her Majesty may
understand how things pass in Flanders.

Touching the state of this Country, there is nothing meant but extremity
toward those of the Religion. On Sunday last, which was the fourteenth of this
month, the young Princess of Conde was constrained to go to Mass, being
threatened otherwise to go to prison, and so consequently to be made away. The
Prince of Conde has also yielded to hear Mass upon Sunday next, being
otherwise threatened to go to the Bastile, where he is not like long to serve.
The Friday before Queen Mother told me, that no bodies conscience -- for (says
she) here is the King of Navarre, the Prince of Conde, and diverse others in
this Court, that live with liberty of conscience, and so shall continue;
notwithstanding (says she) that the King could be content, and could wish that
they were all converted and become Catholics. And I do perceive that ^ and
therefore I hope her Majesty will stand upon her guard, and strengthen her
self with the Amity of the Protestant Princes of Germany, who (as I hear) are
awake, and marvellously stomach this late cruelty, and do think that the danger
thereof will reach to themselves, if they do not seek to prevent it. I hope
also her Majesty will establish things in such ^ and will not suffer her to be
abused with her fair speech, having had so late experience of her faithless
dealing, when the King is once possessed of Rochel, which he hops to have
shortly. Strozzees voyage is then directly to Scotland. All the Hugonote lands,
which will amount to many millions, shall be sold and employed in the Conquest
of Countries, which I hope in God will prove an account without the host, if
God do not blind the eyes of the Princes of the Religigion, who joining
together, shall be able to make their parts good against any of those that
shall have will to do them harm. One Roulart a Catholic and Canon of Nostre
Dame, and also a Counselor in the Parliament, uttering certain speeches in
misliking this lawless kind of proceeding without justice, was apprehended and
committed to prison, and in prison murdered as disorderly as any of the rest,
wherewith diverse of the Catholics themselves were offended. This manner of
proceeding breeds general mistrust in them of the Nobility, and every man
fears Gods vengeance. And so leaving to trouble your Honor any further at
this present, I most humbly take my leave.

At Paris the sixteenth of September, 1572. Your Honors to Command, Fr.
Walsingham.


To our very loving Friend Francis Walsingham Esquire her Majestes Ambassador
Resident in France.
YOu shall understand, that after the receipt of your Letters mentioning the
hurt of the Admiral, which was the two and twentieth of the last, her Majesty
was greatly perplexed therewith, and within a very short time after, by means
of certain that fled hither from Diepe, that the said Admiral, with a great
multitude of the Religion, were suddenly murdered the four and twentieth at
Paris, in a most cruel sort, there was no small cause of the increase of her
Majesty's grief, and that so much the more, as she could hear no manner
certainly thereof from you, of whose person also, in such a horrible time, her
Majesty was very careful; and notwithstanding that the French Ambassador did
at London, to some of your friends affirm, that you were in safety; yet until
your own servant came, who stayed long at Bulloin for lack of good wind, with
your letters, and some knowledge of the fact, her Majesty was not quiet in
mind for your self: And likewise her Majesty understood, that they would have
to be conceived by a writing, which was by the Queen Mothers commandment sent
you, expressing the summaty of this fact, which seems to be described in a
disguised manner, to cover the execrable manner thereof: So that the Kings
Ambassador here, yesterday imparted first to her Majesty, and afterward to
her Council, the process of this murder, according to the same writing, with
some enlargement of the circumstances, is so foul a fact as could suffer to
make the King to appear void of all intention of evil: And yet not being able
to make the fact allowable in any order, he held this course here, that though
he could not in any wise approve the manner of the cruelty in such a general
execution as there was; yet to excuse the King, he set forth the Kings great
grief conceived, first, of the hurt of the Admiral, with his determination to
have done justice upon the Authors thereof, with other arguments of his resort
to visit and comfort the Admiral, being hurt. In which mind the King continued
until Saturday late in the night; at which time he says, that advertisement
was given to him that the Admiral and his Friends were determined not to
expect the order of the King for the punishment of the Fact, but would avenge
themselves, and that they would certainly seize the person of the King, Q.
Mother, and his Brethren; and so his person and theirs should be in danger, and
a new War should thereby be begun: and to confirm this to be true, in the Kings
sight it was also informed, that some such as were of this Confederacy with the
Admiral, had for conscience sake disclosed the same; and that it was made the
more probable to the King by reason of certain bold speeches used by Tilligney
to the King, as in the writing is contained. Whereupon (as the Ambassador
says) the King was so daunted with the present fear of his own person, and his
Mother and his Brethren, and with the imminent danger of the now civil war, as
being thus (...) with this extremity, and having no time long to deliberate
thereupon, ^carce the space of an hour, he was in this manner forced to yield
to another extremity; which was to suffer the parties that were enemies to the
Admiral, to proceed to the execution of him; although as the Ambassador says,
not with such a general fury as was used, for that he cannot deny, but he
thinks a great number of innocents to be slain. And after he had thus
imparted the matter, he requested her Majesty to show her compassion of the
King, rather then condemn him, making great assurance of the Kings innocence
herein, for intention of his own part, but only for his defense and safety
against the perils that were propounded to him by the Informationer, with like
assurance of his resolute determinations to continue perfect amity with her
Majesty, and not to suffer the Edict of the Pacification to be broken; and
therefore he most earnestly besought her Majesty, that by her answer to be
made, the King might find comfort of her in condoling with him for this so
miserable and lamentable an accident; and thereby the King his Master might be
the rather encouraged to search the truth of the matter, whether he was herein
abused by untrue reports, and so consequently both to punish the malefa^tors
and deceivours of him, and to continue the observation of the Edict, and of the
good amity with her Majesty, which surely if her Majesty should not in some
ways comfort the King by her answer, might give occasion to make him to lean
more to the counsels of the persons that were Authors and Executioners of this
Murder, then were expedient for himself, or for her Majesty here. In this
sort, at great length, the Ambassador proceeded, showing also outwardly, a
mavelous inward grief of mind for this shameful fact, professing himself
ashamed to be counted a Frenchman. But here much of this may be counted
suddenly uttered by him, time must try that hereafter; for this present time
cannot ^uffer any thing uttered by him or any of them, that were known enemies
to the Admirals Religion, to be free from suspicion of abuse or of danger.
Nevertheless, her Majesty did very wisely and Princely answer him in such
sort, as he made thereof to her Council very good report, and most earnestly
desired that the King his Master might understand by her Majesty's own Letters,
or by her Ambassador. The sum of her Majesty's answer was, That although upon
the first report of the general murder, so many being all under his protection
in his principal City, was very hard to conceive well of the King, yet it had
been her Majesty's former opinion of his singular integrity of his actions, and
namely of his many outward favors that he had since the time of the Admirals
coming to his presence, showed toward him and his friends, that howsoever this
fact of it self, with the circumstances of so many and horrible murders, did
outwardly charge the King with all manner of dishonor that might touch a
Prince, yet her Majesty, partly for reverence of his Princely estate, for her
love she did bear him, and finally, for that she had not yet received due
information from him, did determine with her self, not to pronounce any evil
judgment of the King, nor yet to conceive that which the most part of all
others did of him; but now she has heard by the Ambassador, in what sort the
King has willed him to declare the process thereof, she does much desire the
consideration of the Kings honor, the continuance of the Amity with him, she
most heartily wishes, that he might so use the matter in time, as the world
might find him excusable in one of these two sorts; that is, that either it
might be made manifest to indifferent persons, that is, to such as are not
known to have born deadly malice to the Admiral and his party now murdered.
That if the confirmations that were given to the King, of the Admirals evil
intention and conspiracy against him were grounded upon truth, and not upon
malice or pretext; and if (...) informations might be verified, then might the
King be excused in some part both toward God and the world, in permitting the
Admirals enemies by force to prevent his enterprises, although indeed the same
informations had been true, yet the manner of the cruelty used cannot be
allowed in any Kingdom or Government; and least, in that place where the King
might by order of justice have done due execution both to the Admiral and all
others that should have proved offenders: for it cannot be denied, that the
same forces that murdered so many, might have more easily attached them all,
or the principals, and brought them to answer to justice when the King would;
and of all others the Admiral, being on his bed lamed, both on the right hand
and left arm, lying in danger under the cure of Chyrurgions, being also guarded
about his private house, with a number of the Kings guard, might have been by a
word of the Kings mouth brought to any place to have answered, when and how the
King should have thought meet. But the fault thereof, as to the disorder in
proceeding, howsoever the information had been true, her Majesty forbeareth to
impute to the King, and leaves the same to the burden of others about him,
whose age and knowledge ought in such a case to have foreseen how offenders
ought to be justified with the sword of the Prince, and not with the bloody
swords of murderers, being also the mortal enemies of the party murdered. The
information whereof, for the recovery of the Kings honor, which is by the
facts of others herein greatly touched, her Majesty leaves to the King to be
considered, and wishes him commodity to do what shall be to Gods honor and to
his praise.

But on the other side, if such informations were so suddenly given to the King
against the Admiral, shall not be duly and manifestly, without subornation,
proved true, as therein surely the manner of the circumstances do lead all
indifrent persons to think the same not only falsely forged of the private
deadly malice to the Admiral and his parties, but also perillously devised to
weaken the K. Estate, and to deprive him of the great honor and surety that
daily was growing unto him, by counsels or services of the Admiral and his
friends now murdered, that her Majesty finds the case of so great
importance to be pitied, wishing him grace to have power, by faithful
Counselors and Servants, to make an example to the world of the same manner
of punishment of such detestaand traiterous attempts, whereby not only his
honor, which is now much blemished, may be saved, but principally himself, and
his person and surety, being in good time provided for; and if it shall please
him herein to require the use of her Majesty's advice, and of her assistance,
she shall not fail, but to show her self in this time a perfect friend to him
by all goods means that is in her power. And after many good speeches used to
the Ambassador; she concluded, That as the Ambassador required of her, she
could rather condole with the King this miserable accident, then to condemn
him, until she should see more cause by the manner of his proceeding, which he
should use hereafter for the recovery of his honor. And as to the Admiral she
confesses, That she was very sorry for his death, as for one whom she thought
a good Minister to continue amity betwixt their two Majesty's, and she had
cause to bewail the rest of the Noblemen for the like cause; but otherwise the
Ambassador could well tell, that in former times she did never allow the taking
of arms, contrary to the Kings Commandment; but now perceiving upon the Kings
receiving them to grace, and taking them to his protection, and that it was by
consequence of things ma^ifest, that the taking of arms was not against the
Kings Estate or Person, but to defend themselves in the profession of their
Religion, according to the Kings own Edicts and Grants, her Majesty did
greatly lament their death, and does surely persuade her self, that if the King
shall not use his power, to make some amends for so much blood so horribly
shed, God, who sees the hearts of all, as well Princes as others, will show
his justice in time and place, when his honor shall therein be glorified, as
the Author of all Ju^^ice, and the Revenger of all blood sheding of the
innoc^^ts. In this man^er, at the least, to this purpose, with some large^
discourse to the Ambassadors contentation, has her Majesty uttered her
meaning; and according thereunto will^th, that you her Ambassador shall take
convenient time to declare what she has thought meet; and yet you shall well
consider aforehand, how and in what sort you may communicate all this. So as
both he may well u^derstand i^, and reserve so much thereof to himself, as
shall seem meet to be kept from others, that have been Procure^s or Consenters
to this murder; For such, how near soever they be to the King in place of
service, or in degree of blood, may not be privy thereto. And therefore you
must also first consider, and seek to understand, whether indeed the King was
no otherwise induced to this, then as the Ambassador here reports; o^ whether
the report be not devised to cover the Kings honor to usward. For if he were
privy to the intention of the murder indeed, as God forbid that ever he was,
then this manner of dealing with him in many parts is to be forborne, as your
self can well judge, which is to be left to your discretion, using then but
such part thereof as may declare her Majesty's grief for the accident; and so
to use good words toward him of her Majesty's disposition to continue the
amity. But if ye shall truly perceive that the King is grieved with the
accident, and that he has a disposition to revenge it upon the Authors and
Executors, and that you find a good will to receive her Majesty's opinion, and
to use such advice as you shall give him ^ecretly, th^^ shall you deal inwardly
with him, with assurance of her Majesty's friendship to the utmost of her
power; and require him, that he will utter his mind plainly unto you, or
otherwise by some such of his own as he may well trust to impart it to us* and
it is to be left to your own consideration, how you shall deal with the Queen
Mother and others there; for it is not certain how far she and others have
entered into the matter, not with what honor they are carried. But according as
you shall see meet, you may impart unto her how greatly h^^ Majesty is
perplexed herein, what to think, and what assurance to make of the things
intended in this late amity. And you may also say unto her, that the Queens
Majesty cannot enough ma^vel, that she being of such wisdom as she is, and
having such experience as she had of the extreme hatred of the factions there
against the Admiral, did not a^ ^he first take order that the informations
should be examined, and the Admiral and others of his party suspected, charged,
tried, and so by order of justice pro^eeded, which had been honorable to the
King, and good in the sight of God, and so either the guilty had duly suffered,
^r the innocent blood h^d been saved. You shall also procure some good
assurance from them, such as may ^e had, for the safety of the English
Merchants now repairing to the Vintage; and therefore procure that some order
may be given from the K. both to the town of Bordeaux, and to the Governor
there; and to Str^zzi, and to the Conductors of his Army. And for your self, it
is her Majesty's desire, that you were here from that place, and so her meaning
is, to devise for your revocation; but presently it cannot, without some note
of the breach of amity be done. Nevertheless, you may do well, not only to keep
your home as you are desirous, but to carry you both to the K. and Q. Mother by
way of complaint, show your unwillingness to ^arry, and your (...) to be
^^voked thence for your surety.

Where we understand, that the English Gentlemen that were in Paris at the time
of the execution of the murder, were forced to retire to your house, where
they did wisely; for your care of them, we and their friends are beholding to
you, and now we think good that they be advised to return home; and namely, we
desire you to procure for the Lord Wharton and Mr. Philip Sidney, the Kings
license and safe conduct to come thence, and so we do require you to give them
true knowledge of our minds herein.

And if her Majesty could think that the French King would be content that you
might come home, with pretense to be absent from thence, whilst this Real^ were
in more quietness; and so to leave a Secretary there, and to return again to
your charge, she is well content you shall so do. And therein you may do will
to assay the Kings mind, and to advertise hither.

Fare you heartily well. From Woodstock the ninth of September. Your loving
Friends, William Burleigh. To: Lecester. F. Knowles. T. Smith. James Croft.


To the Right Honorable Francis Walsingham Esquire her Majestes Ambassador
Resident in France.
SIr, I see the Devil is suffered by the Almighty God for our sins, to be
strong in following the persecution of Christ's members; and therefore we are
not only vigilant of our own defense against such traiterous attempts as
lately have been put in ure there in France, but also to call our selves to
repentance. Of the Queens Majesty's answer to this Ambassador, I have at good
length comprised the same in writing, which comes now unto you signed by the
Council, which you are to use, according as the time shall teach you. For
although the Ambassador has seemed to gain so much credit with her Majesty,
as she thinks that the King is not guilty of the murders otherwise then he
reports. And further, that although the Ambassador says, that the King
willed him to assure her Majesty, that the Navy prepared by Strozzi, should
not any ways endamage her Majesty, we have great cause in these times, to
doubt all fair speeches; and therefore we do presently put all the Seacoasts
in defense, and mean to send the Queens Majesty's Navy to the Seas with speed,
and so to continue, until we see further whereunto to trust. I pray you do your
best to discover the intention of that Navy, and let us now frequently hear
from you as you may; and if I could have had my mind, you had been presently
revoked, and only a Secretary lef^ there. I desire to have knowledge o^ as
many of the Principals as were slain, and what Protestants did escape. We are
much perplexed with varity of reports, and your Letters or Messengers with
credit may much please us here.

Pynassy has been here, and is not yet departed; we had desire rather to
hasten my brother Killegrew, who departed hence toward Scotland on Sunday
last, to supply Drewries room with le Crocque, because my Lord of Hunsdon is
here, and therefore M. Drewry cannot be spared from Berwick. The whole Council
shall be here by to morrow, but beforehand we that are here will not be idle. I
cannot speak for my self to give order to the Realm. God keep you, and comfort
his afflicted Church. We know not but the Prince of Orange is much stronger
then the two Dukes, and that Macklin by him has been taken the 29 of the last;
and great likelihood is that Antwerp shall yield. Our men in Flushing agree not
well with the French, but now we think upon this misery, their French will not
^e so lordly.

From Woodstock the ninet^enth of September, 1572. Your assured loving Friend,
William Burleigh.


To the Right Honorable Francis Walsingham Esquire Ambassad^r for the Queens
Majesty in France.
SIr, yesternight, after your servant was departed, Faunt and my Cousin came
hither; and although I had before moved her Majesty that she would require you
to return, yet I could not then obtain it as I did this morning. And so now I
have obtained a Letter from her Majesty to the French King, which Master
Secretary sends you, as by his Letter you may perceive.

From Woodstock the twelfth of September, 1572. Yours assuredly William
Burleigh.


To the Right Honorable Francis Walsingham Esquire Ambassad^r Resident for her
Majesty in France.
THe lamentable Tragedy that has been there used of late, does make all
Christians look for a just revenge again at Gods hands, as it has pleased him
to fear us, and so pinch us in the mean time with the scourge of correction, by
the sufferance of his people thus to be murdered, but our sins deserve this
and more* but I trnst he will hold his holy hand over us, not to reward us
altogether as we deserve, but somewhat in his correction comfort us, that we
may see as well the fall of his and our enemies, as the blood of his Saints to
be so innocently spilt, even for his mercies, let him turn it ten fold upon
their heads, that they triumph not over much, to the utter hearts grief of his
poor flock. If that King be Author and doer of this Act, shame and confusion
light upon him, be he never so strong in the sight of men, the Lord has not
his power for naught; if he be not the Author, but upon the sudden fear and
practice brought suddenly to us, as his Ambassador would have us think,
although the yielding unto it be horrible, yet if frailty and fear has
constrained it, and that his heart with due repentance seek the right
satisfaction first of God, and then of the world, by prosecuting the enemies of
God and his Realm that so entised them to it, then may I hope that it was not
his own consent or liking. Otherways, if he continue in confirming the fact,
and allowing the persons that did it, then must he be a Prince detested of all
honest men, what Religion soever they have; for as his fact was ugly, so was it
inhumane, for whom should a man trust, if not his Princes word; and these men
whom he h^th put to slaughter, not only had his word, but his writing, and not
public, but private, with open Proclamations, and all other manner of
Declarations that could be devised for the safety, which now being violated and
broken, who can believe or trust him. But Sir, the Ambassador has inwardly
dealt of late with me, and (...) me believe that we shall shortly see that this
matter is not the Kings, and that he does (...) as he will make revenge of it.
God grant it be so, but you may easily understand it; and surely you shall do
well inwardly, as her Majesty has written unto you (but warily) to discover
it, even with himself; and if it may appear he stands in any fear of his
person, or doubts his force to assist him, I know her Majesty will venture
twenty thousand of her best subjects for him and with him in so good a quarrel:
For it is almost incredible, that one so young, and hitherto so plain, so
sincere, and of so good disposition, as you your self could not say too much of
him, could thus be transformed so suddenly, so dishonorable, from so good to
ill. Well, you may shortly see it, and I pray you let us hear from you as often
as you may. And so praying God to send you your health and safety, I bid you
farewell, trusting you will be a mean for my Nephew Sidney, that he may repair
home, considering the present state there.

In haste the 11 of Sept. Your very Friend, To. Leicester.


To the Right Honorable Francis Walsingham Esquire Ambassador Resident for her
Majesty in France.
SIr, this accident in France seems to us so strange, and beyond all
expectation, that we cannot tell what to say to it, and the excuse tam that we
wot not what to think of it. The matter appears all manner of ways so
lamentable, the King so suddenly and in one day to have dispoiled himself and
his Realm of so many notable Captains, so many brave Soldiers, so wise and so
valiant men, as if they were unguilty of that which is laid unto them, it is
most pitiful; if they were guilty, Cur mandati causa damnati sunt ac casi, in
such sudden and extreme dealings, Cito sed sera penitentia solet sequi. If it
were sudden, and not of long time premeditated before; and if so, the worse and
more infamous. Thus you see what privately any man may think of the fact; I am
glad yet, that in those tumults and bloody proscriptions you did escape, and
the young Gentlemen that be there with you, and that the K. had so great care
and pity of our Nation so lately with strait amity confederate with him; yet we
hear say, that he that was sent by my Lord Chamberlain to be Schoolmaster to
young Wharton, being come the day before, was then slain. Alas, he was
acquainted with no body, nor could be partaker of any evil dealing. How fearful
and careful the mothers and parents be here of such young Gentlemen as be there,
you may easily guess by my Lady Lane, who prays very earnestly that her son
may be sent home with as much speed as may be. And if my Lady your wife, with
you daughter, and the rest, with such as may be spared, were sent away home,
until this rage and tempest were somewhat appeased, you shall be the quieter,
and disburthened of much of your care. You would not think how mu^^ we are
desirous to hear what end these troubles will have, whether it rangeth further
into all France, or die, or will cease here at Paris.

Our Merchants be afraid to go now into France, and who can blame them; who
would, where such liberty is given to Soldiers, and where nec pietas, nec
justitia does refrain and keep back the unruly malice and sword of the raging
popular. Monsieur la Mote is somewhat spoken to in this matter, and now the
vintage (as you know) is at hand, and our traffic into Roan, and other places
in France is almost laid down with this new feat. It grieveth no man in
England so much as me, and indeed I have in some respect the greatest cause.

Fare you well. From woodstock the twelfth of September, 1572. Yours always
assured, Tho: Smith.
My Lady Lane has sent by your man thirty pound in gold, to pay her sons debts
there, and charges in coming home. I most heartily thank you for the book of
the past troubles in France: But alas, who shall now write worthily of the
treasons and cruelties more barbarous then ever the Scythians used. Both my
Lord Treasurer and I have been more then once or twice Suitors to her Majesty
for your coming home; and sometimes we had it granted and straight revoked, the
letters written, and immediately called back; you must I see endure for a time,
but I trust it will not be long.




To the Right Honorable Francis Walsingham Esquire Ambassador for the Queens
Majesty in France.
SIr, although, as may appear in my former Letters, that you were fain to be
left without hope of returning so soon as you would wish, yet yesterday Fawnte,
Argold and South coming out of France to the Court, did so amplify the cruel
disorders there, and thereupon your dangers in every man's ears, whereof your
friends made relation to her Highness, that finally her Majesty was content to
write this letter for your return hither, to the French King, whereof I send
you herewith a copy: And so she has somewhat provided for you; so shall you
understand that her Highness has been so awakened, that care and provision
also is taken for the defense of her Realm, if this fire in France should
attempt to come nearer hither.

Fare you well. Woodstock the twelfth of September, 1572. Your assured Friend,
Th. Smith.


To the Right Honorable his very good Lords, the Lords of her Majesty's most
honorable privy Council.
IT may please your Honors to understand, that your letters of the ninth of
this month, I received the seventeenth of the same; and having well perused
and considered of the contents thereof, and seeing a choice left unto you of me
touching the speech that from her Majesty was to be used both toward the King
and his Mother, as might express her Maj. grief for the inconvenience happened;
as also, to assure him of her Majesty's disposition to continue the amity upon
such certain informations as I could gather here of the manner of the Kings
proceedings in this late accident, and finding him to avow as well by speech as
by the continuance of most extreme severity toward those of the Religion, that
the said accident proceeded of himself, though her Majesty is otherwise
informed by the Ambassador; I thought therefore good both toward him and his
mother, according to the direction of your Honors letters, to use such
speeches as the time of my repair to the Court, which was the one and twentieth
of this month would permit; I was first brought unto Q. Mother, to whom I
showed that her Maj. willed me to say, That she was not a little stonished and
perplexed upon the hearing of the late miserable and most lamentable accident
in such sort as she knew neither what to say or judge of the matter, seeing
those murdered without pity and compassion, without regard had either of age
or sex, without ordinary form of justice, who upon the assurance of the Kings
word, laying all suspicion aside, did misdoubt nothing less then that which
happened unto them, who thought their lives then in most safety, when by proof it
appeared they were in most danger. How these things may pass, and the King
receive no touch and blemish in honor, is a thing which the Queen my Mistress
says she chiefly fears; besides, she has willed me to say unto you, That
she does not a little marvel, that you being a Prince of that judgment you
are, and so well experimented in matters of Government, knowing the passions
and factions that reign in your State, could be induced so easily to yield to
an execution not to be allowed in all men's judgment in any sort or
Commonwealth, as the parties to be executed before due examination had of such
informations, as in reason it appears were given against them; for as easily
might the said persons have been arrested as slain: And so being arrested,
afterward have been produced before the ordin^ry justice, to have received
(being found guilty) punishment according to their demerits; otherwise, being
found innocent, to have been restored both to honor and liberty; which kind of
proceeding might have saved the blood of many an innocent, which now through
the fury and rage of the people was shed, and the King had remained justified
in honor. She desires your Majesty to interpret this her plain speech in
good part, as proceeding from one that wishes well both to the King and you,
and cannot therefore but condole and bewail this accide^t, whereon depends
both your honor, and the repose of your Estate; notwithstanding, she hops
that the King will yield justification of this fact, as he shall remain
justified of God and the world. To this she answered, That she nothing
marvelled, that the Queen my Mistress was astonished with the accident, for that
the execution was performed with a great deal more cruelty then was intended by
the King; who (says she) is no Tyrant, nor was easy to be induced to do that
which he did, had he not been provoked thereto by the apparent danger which he
saw growing both to himself, and to me his Mother, and his Brethren, if present
execution had not been done; which shall well appear by the process which my
son means to send unto the Queen your Mistress. And whereas the Queen your
Mistress does seem to marvel, that I should be easily induced to yield to any
execution, a kind of speech that somewhat touches me, to be done before due
examination had of the informations, I being (as she says) so well acquainted
with factions reigning in this State: You may tell her, that present mischief
cannot abide delayed remedies; for (says she) we were informed, by persons not
to be suspected as drawn by passion or faction, being rather tied to the
Admiral both by Religion and Amity, yet moved in conscience to prefer their
Prince before any private person, for that those of the Religion, had they not
been prevented at the time that they were, had seized within two hours after
one of the gates of our Palace of the Louvre, and so consequently our persons;
which enterprise to have been executed, was agreed the same afternoon that the
Admiral was hurt: And that they had some such meaning, it may be gathered, for
that the Count of Montgomery the same morning that this enterprise should have
been executed, with a Troop of Horse stayed a good while at Pre de Clerces, to
attend what the other should do within. Hereupon I took occasion to say unto
her, That although I had no Commission to reply, yet I hoped her Majesty would
give me leave to say somewhat in the justifying of the said Count of Mongomery,
for that heretofore it pleased her to bear with the liberty of my speech. And
so I showed her, that Friday at night, after the Admiral was hurt, between nine
and ten of the clock, the said Count came unto my lodging, and amongst other
communication he said, That as he and those of the Religion had just occasion
to be right sorry for the Admirals hurt, so* had they no less cause to rejoice
to see the King so careful, as well for the curing of the Admiral, as also for
the searching out of the party that hurt him. No small argument (says he) of
the Kings sincerity, which kind of speech seemed to be void of all conspiracy
and miscontentment.

And touching his being au Pre de Clerces, I told her that an English Gentleman
who was lodged not far from the said Count, went unto him that morning that the
execution was done, in my name, desiring him to send me word what stir there
was in the Town. His answer was, That true it was, some stir was in the Town,
and the King had taken so good order therein, as all was appeased, and that he
had placed such guards about the Admirals house, as he was in safety. This
answer, Madam (said I) showed, that his intention in staying A^ pre de Clerces,
was void of any evil meaning. And as for his Troop, as I learn, it was under
forty horse, of the which all was unarmed, and of them, four only had Pistols,
which shows plainly that he was very slenderly appointed for the execution of
any Enterprise.

To this her only answer was, That she thought not the Count so guilty as the
rest: And further, she showed me, that sithence his departure he had written to
the King her son, as well Letters for his justification, as also of submission.
In the end she willed me to desire her Majesty to content her self with such
relation as should be made with their Ambassador there, touching their
proceedings here, as the King her son and she did rest satisfied with such
relations as were made of her proceedings in like cases there, by her Ministers
here. And so making great protestation of the Kings and her earnest desire for
to continue, or rather to increase the amity, she ended.

From her I was conducted to the King; at my access I showed unto him, that I
was willed from her Majesty to say unto him, That though she was much
astonished at the first report made of the great slaughter and horrible murder,
without regard either had to sex or age of those of the Religion, who laying
aside all distrust, and reposing themselves upon his words, did most
confidently throw themselves into the arms of his protection; notwithstanding,
such was the opinion she had of his sincerity, such the reverence she bare
toward his Princely state, and such the particular affection she bare toward
his person, as she resolved not to pronounce any thing in prejudice of his
honor, until she might be fully informed of the manner of the proceeding in
that behalf. I further showed him, that after by his Ambassador, her Majesty
was informed of the progress and success of the matter: She then, as one that
wished the conservation of his honor, and of the continuance of the good amity
between them, could not but wish also, that with all expedition he would make
it manfest to the world, that the information which was given unto him of the
Admirals evil intention and conspiracy were grounded upon truth, and not upon
malice or pretext; and if the information might be so verified, then should
his Majesty in some part be excused, both toward God and the world, in
permitting the Admirals enemies by force to prevent his enterprises.

Upon this he brake off my speech, and showed me, that he had cause many ways
to think himself most bound unto her Majesty his good sister; but at this
present, chiefly for that she staid from condemning him before she was informed
of the manner of his proceedings; also for the good advice she gives him to
seek to justify himself toward the world, which council (says he) I mean to
follow, as shall appear unto her by the process I mean to send unto her, and
also to the other Princes, that I had most cause to do as I did. And as for the
cruelty (says he) exercised both here in my Town of Paris, and elsewhere, it
is a thing that has happened against my will to my great grief. Of late (says
he) the like disorder has been committed at Roan, for the which I am very
sorry; and therefore for the redress thereof, I have all this morning been
devising with my Council for exemplary Justice to be done upon those which
shall be found to be offenders. Besides (says he) my meaning is to dispatch my
Governors into their several charges, to see such Ordinances observed as to me
shall seem fit to be set forth. He forbear to mention the Edict already made,
and now wholly violated, tending to the repose and tranquillity of the Realm. I
showed him that I had more to say unto him from her Majesty; and so I proceeded
and declared unto him, that her Majesty as one that wishes well unto him,
could have wished that although the said information had been found true, that
he had proceeded otherways, for that the manner of the cruelty used cannot be
allowable in any kingdom or government, and least of all in that place where
his Majesty might by order of justice have done due execution both of the
Admiral and others that should be proved offenders; for it cannot be (said I)
denied, but that the same forces that murdered so many might more easily have
attached them all, or the principals, and brought them to answer to Justice,
where his Majesty would. And of all other the Admiral being in his bed, lamed
both on the right hand and left arm, and lying in danger under the cure of
Surgeons, being also guarded about his private house with a number of his
Majesty's guard, might have been by a word of his Majesty's mouth brought to
any place to have answered when and how his Majesty should have thought meet:
but the fault hereof as to the disorder in proceeding, howsoever the
information had been true, her Majesty forbeareth to impute to his Majesty, and
leaves the same to the burden of others about him, whose age and knowledge
ought in such a case to have foreseen how offenders ought to have been
chastifed with the sword of the Prince, and not with the bloody sword of
murderers, being also the mortal sworn enemies of the parties murdered. The
information whereof for the recovery of his Majesty's honor, which is by the
faults of others herein greatly touched, her Majesty leaves to his Majesty to
be considered, and wishes him commodity to do that which might be to Gods
honor and his praise. To that he answered me (seeming with that kind of speech
to be somewhat moved) That the loss of life and kingdom goes near to a Prince.
Thereupon I considered the manner of the proceedings here, being fully resolved
to use all manner of rigor and extremity, and that therefore the advice that
her Majesty gave were bootless and can do no good, I shortning my speech
concluded with him, That her Majesty willed me to say to him, that she thought
it her part presently rather to condole with him this miserable accident, then
to condemn him, till s^e should see more cause by the manner of his proceedings
which he should hereafter use for the recovery of his honor. To this he
answered, that he thanked her Majesty; and so protested that he had no other
meaning but to continue good amity with her; and that though he sought to
reform his own Realm touching Religion, yet he hoped that the said amity lately
concluded should continue firm between them without alteration; for that the
King his father, and K. Edward my good sisters brother did not leave to be good
friends, notwithstanding the contrariety of religion. To that I said, that I
was well assured that her Majesty had no other meaning. I then moved him for
some order to be given both to the Governor of the Town of Bordeaux, as also to
Strozzi and the Conductors of his Army, that our Merchants that repair to the
Vintage might pass to and fro safely without any way being outraged, and that
also during the time of his abode at Bordeaux they might not be molested for
religion. To this his answer was, that there might be such order taken as they
should not at any way be molested by any of his subjects; and besides, that if
there could be a place of traffic agreed upon, they should enjoy the exercise
of their religion according to the late Treaty.

Then I showed him that I was to move his Majesty in a thing that particularly
touched my self, and so declared unto him, that about three months past, I
wrote very earnestly to diverse of my friends to move her Majesty either for my
revocation, or else to repair home for a time; which thing as her Majesty did
not then fully deny, so did she not yield thereto; but now the matter being
renewed unto her Maj. they laying before her besides my private affairs, the
great danger I live in here, through the disquietness of this State, and the
great hatred borne to our Nation, her Maj. has so far yielded thereto, as she
has for that purpose written this Letter which I am now to present unto your
Maj. So he took the Letter and read it; and after he had read it, he showed me,
that if he should consent to my departure, according to his good sisters
request, he must then also revoke his Ambassador; which thing (says he) cannot
but make it appear to the world, that the amity lately concluded betwixt us
were broken, or at the least not very sound, when we do leave the use of
necessary Ministers that may communicate between us such things as may increase
and continue amity. I showed, that her Majesty's meaning to call me home for a
time, had no other respect but to my particular safety, without any intention
to diminish amity, and that the example was not strange, for that Sir Nicholas
Throgmorton had done the like. To that he replied, that touching danger, he
should come in his own person to relieve me, rather then I should sustain any
harm: and as for the example, he said, that at that time there was not that
perfect amity that is now. In conclusion he desired me to press him no further
in the matter, until such time as he might hear from his Ambassador, for that
he did mean to answer her Majesty's Letter written in that behalf. And so for
that time I took my leave.

After my departure from him, Duke de Alanzon sent for me into his Chamber to
come and speak with him: At my access he showed me that he was very sorry that
both I and our Nation had in these troubles been so outraged as he understood
we were. I know (says he) you are wise, and can consider of the time. If
hereafter either you your self, or any of your Nation shall stand in need of my
friendship or assistance, you shall do me wrong to use the help of any other
but of me, for the honor your Mistress did unto la Mott, does bind me to be
her servant during my life, and an advocate for your Nation. And so he licensed
me to depart, desiring me to present unto her Majesty his most humble and
affectionate commendations.

Your Honor by the King and his Mothers answers, may see great protestations
of amity.

I am sorry that I cannot yield that assurance thereof that heretofore I have
done, wherein I may seem to have dealt over-confidently; but I know that your
Honors do consider that my error in that behalf was common with a great many
wiser then my self, and therefore I hope you do hold me excused.

Seeing now there is here neither regard had to either word, writing, or Edict,
be it never so solemnly published, nor to any protestation made heretofore to
foreign Princes for the performance of the same.

Seeing the King persecuteth that Religion with all extremity that her Majesty
professes, and now is like to be an instrument to execute any thing by this
people, offered unto him to the prejudice of her Majesty.

Seeing that they that now possess his ear, are sworn enemies unto her
Majesty, and nourishers of the late amity, are separated from him: seeing that
the Kings own conscience, so common a companion is fear with Tyranny, makes
him to repute all those of the Religion, as well at home as abroad, his
enemies, and so consequently not to wish one of them alive,

I leave to your Honors now to judge, what account you may make of the amity
with this Crown. If I may without presumption or offense say my opinion,
considering how things presently stand, I think less peril to live with them as
enemies, then as friends.

The King, Queen Mother, and Monsieur, have their Council apart; but first,
before things are communicated with the King, they are debated between Queen
Mother and Monsieur, the Duke of Nevers, and Tavannes. The Duke of Nevers has
well nigh daily conference with the Prince, Nuncio, the Ambassador of Spain,
and the extraordinary Ambassador of Venice, John Michal, and what they treat is
kept most secret; and for mine own part, I am now divided from all means to
discover any thing; so that I now stand her Majesty in no further stead here,
but to present unto her ordinary Palace news. There daily remain great number
of both horsemen and footmen toward S. Q. as it is said, to the relief of the
D. of Almain.

The Marshal de Cosse has Commission sent him, as I am informed, to execute as
many of the Religon within his charge, as have been known in these late Wars to
have served the Princes, and born charges; if the Marshal Montmorency had been
in this Town at the day of execution, both he, with all his brethren, the Duke
de Bulloign, and Marshal had been slain, as I am credibly informed.

It is said that both Spain and Portugal make great preparation by Sea.

It is thought that so long as Rochel holds out, Strozzi shall be entertained
from executing any other enterprise; and yet there is no word come that Byron
shall be received. It is thought that the late murder at Roan, will make them
of Rochel more resolute.

And so leaving to trouble your Honor any further at this present, I most
humbly take my leave.

At Paris the 24 of September, 1572.

To the right honorable his very good Lords, the Lords of her Majesty's most
honorable privy Council.
IT may please your Honors to understand, that the King here is advertised
sundry ways, as I learn, that the Prince of Orange and the Duke of Alva are
like to grow to an accord, which thing is both feared and misliked; at the
least they would have the world so to judge: their speech and meaning does now
so far disagree, as it is hard to grow to any grounded opinion touching their
proceedings.

It was held here for certain that Monts was rendered the 19 day of this month
by composition, that Count Lodovick, and the heads that were in that Town,
issued at such time as certain of the Duke of Alvas horsemen were distressed,
which was the 9 of this month. The Articles of the Composition are not yet
certainly known, but it is given out they departed with Ensigns displayed, and
bagg and baggage. As I shall further understand, so shall I further advertise
touching Flanders matters. And so leaving further to trouble your Honor at this
present, I most humbly take my leave.

From Paris Sept. 25 1572. Your Honors to command, Francis Walsingham.


By the QUEEN.
To our trusty and well-beloved Francis Walsingham Esquire, our Ambassador Resident
with our good brother the French King.
ELIZABETH R.

TRusty and well-beloved, we greet you well. De la Mott the French Ambassador,
on Monday the 22 of this Month, having asked Audience, came to our Court at
Reading, and there had long communication with us, the which seemed to us at
that time the more strange, being we had heard before of the daily murdering of
those of the Religion there in France, not only at Paris and Orleans, but also
at Lions and Roan, and diverse other places and Cities of that Realm, all the
which was done by the Kings appointment and commandment; whereupon when we had
heard what he could say unto us, he heard us so reply at that time, as we do
think he found himself unable to satisfy us: And nevertheless we told him,
that we would be further advised for our answer, which he should have within
three or four days; whereupon communicating his Negotiation with our Council
upon their French tongue, An answer was made, as appears by this here
enclosed, which is the copy of that we delivered to Nicasius to interpret in
French to the said de la Mott, as our full answer and resolution at that time;
with the which, as Nicasius reports, de la Mott seemed very well content and
satisfied. In the which yet you may perceive that diverse things are left to be
ascertained to us by you, wherefore you shall do well with convenient speed to
demand audience of the King, and there to declare both to him and to the Queen
mother, what has passed betwixt his Ambassador and us, and upon the points we
did at that time stand; and you may say, as touching any worthy punishment
executed upon his own Subjects, we have not to deal therein; but if they have
worthily suffered, we are sorry for their evil doings. But yet the King to
destroy and utterly root out of his Realm all those of that Religion that we
profess, and to desire us in marriage for his brother, must needs seem unto us
at the first, a thing very repugnant in it self, especially having before
confirmed that liberty to them of the Religion by an Edict of his, perpetual
and irrevocable. Of the which to whom that liberty was granted, if any were
partakers of any evil conspiracies against him, specially women and children,
who we do understand are not yet spared. And therefore if that Religion of it
self be so odious unto him, that he thinks he must root out all the professers
of it, how should we think his brother a fit husband for us? or how should we
think that the love may grow, continue and increase betwixt his brother and us,
which ought to be betwixt the husband and the wife.

You had in our former Letters unto you, things that we required you to
decypher by all means that you could, especially whether the King himself be
inclined and bent to all these cruelties, and the rooting out of true Religion,
or whether he be but overruled; to the which Article hitherto you have not
answered; and yet these things might give great light unto us how to direct our
actions in the conferences and talks with his Ambassador; and we would have you
to be earnest with him in that matter of Strozzi, praying him frankly and
roundly, what he means with that great Army of Ships and men of War, which
has been kept a long time close and undiscovered, to what intent, or to what
place it should be bent: You may say we have the more desire to know his
meaning and dealing herein, because that of lat^ they of Strozzies Company
there, have spoiled diverse of our Merchants, some of their Artillery and
Victuals, other of their goods and Merchandises, as was accustomed betwixt the
two Realms in times past, the which kind of dealing is very much contrary to
the amity, and to such things as by his Ambassador is propounded unto us;
wherefore as we do go roundly and plainly to work with him, to show flatly that
which we do think or doubt hereupon, so we pray him with the same flatness and
roundness to deal with us, for that is the way to make continuance of amity,
and also increase, and may induce us the sooner to come to a further resolution
of such things as be required of us. The Vidam of Chartres, of whom we have
great compassion, is come into this Realm, at whose humble and lamentable suit
we have been content to write this Letter to my brother the French King in his
favor, which you shall deliver with as good words as you may to the French
King, and require his answer.

If this our Letter do chance to come to you in Paris, or in the way coming
from Paris toward England, after you have obtained license of the King to come
away by favor of our Letters which we wrote unto him; yet if you be not too
far on the way, or very near the seacoast, we would you should return in
Post, or otherwise, to the Court, to have a direct answer of these Letters,
except that great and unfeigned danger of your self, do move you to keep on
your journey. In which case you shall commit the doing of this message, and
receiving of answer, to your Secretary, whom you shall leave behind, so that he
be a man able to do this charge.

Given at Reading the 28 of September, 1572. in the fourteenth year of our
Reign. T. Smith.


The Ambassadors Message in three Points.
THat the King was of necessity for safeguard of his own life forced to cause
such execution to be done upon the Admiral and his accomplices, as was done; for
that he and they had conspired the death of the King, of which matter the King
was very well able to make a verification, and that her Majesty should shortly
see by the process of the Admiral now in making, and that nothing was meant by
the King against the cause of Religion.

That the King was most earnestly disposed to keep the League.

That he desired to have the marriage of his brother of Alanzon to proceed; and
to that end the Queen mother was content to come into the Realm with her son,
at such place, and with such numbers as her Majesty here should allow.


Answers.
To the first, That although the killing of the Admiral and the rest might
probably move her Majesty to think ill thereof, and to be right sorry that the
King should suffer such an act to be done without order of justice; yet her
Majesty being advertised from the King that he was forced thereunto for safety
of his own life, and that thereof her Majesty should see good proof, by such a
process thereof to be sent to her Majesty, as should verify the same; her
Majesty is content to suspend her judgment against the King, until by the
process she may see the truth, and by the Kings further proceedings hereafter
for continuance of his Edict for tolleration of Religion, she may perceive what
to judge of his intention for the cause of Religion.

To the second, her Majesty thanketh the King for his so earnest an offer to
continue the amity according to the late League made; and does again assure the
King of her mind to keep it for her part; so as howsoever the King shall by his
deeds show his affection therein, her Majesty will do the like to her power.

To the third, her Majesty would that the King should ^nderst^^d, that she did
in the motion of the marriage, before this lat^ accident of the Admirals death,
plainly proceed with the Ambassador, and with la Mot, so she must plainly deal
with the King, That this ac^ident of murdering the Admiral, and of so general
a slaughter of them of the Religion there, has made such alteration in her
Majesty, and has moved such doubts in her mind how to interpret of the
offers of this marriage, and of this enterview, by coming of the Queen Mother
with her son, as her Majesty cannot but suspend her resolution therein, until
she may understand some further answer to things which the Ambassador had in
charge to deal with the King particularly, to understand his mind; of which her
Majesty as yet had received no answer from her Ambassador, nor any
signification that he has as yet had speech with the King thereof. And besides
that, as to his last offer, of the Queen Mother to come into any part of the
Realm with Monsieur d'Alanson, her Majesty cannot but interpret the offer very
thankfully, though she had not received from her Ambassador the Queen Mothers
meaning to be such; for her words to him were not further, but that she would
be content to com^ with her son to Bulloign, or to Callis, and that she desired
that the Queens Majesty would come to D^ver; and so then there might be an
enterview and communication upon the Sea, betwixt Dover and Calais, or
Bulloign, a matter that seemed surely very strange to her Majesty; and seeing
that her Ambassador had no such offer made for her coming aland within the
Realm, as the French Ambassador offers, her Majesty means therein to be
better advertised by her own Ambassador, who shall have charge therein to
understand her mind and the Kings. And upon knowledge thereof, her Majesty
will grow to a further resolution, to the which it will be a great furtherance,
if the proof were verified as is said, of the just causes given by the Admiral
and his Accomplices, for the execution of them. And that his further proceedings
with the observation of his Edicts for the cause of religion, might more
clearly appear to her Highness, whereby her Majesty, shall have good cause to
see what is meet for her to do in the further proceeding, both for the
enterview, and for the marriage: In both which her Majesty shall be very glad
to understand that she may have the same likelihood of the good to follow to
her self and Co^ntrey for continuance of the amity that was propounded unto
her, when it was last renewed at la Mots, before the death of the Admiral. And
her Majesty assures the King, that on her part she means to observe the
Amity by all good means as shall be to her possible, and shall be very glad to
find the like answe^able on his part, and therewith does presently require the
King to give her to understand, what his meaning may be in the keeping of so
great a Navy and Army n^ar Bordeaux and Rochel under the rule of Strozzi, which
is an occasion why her Subjects and Merchants, who were wont all the year, and
specially about this time, to traffic that way for wines and other things, be
now put in doubt and great fea^, and dare not adventure according to the
assured amity betwixt the two Realms; and the rather, because now of late
diverse of her Merchants have been spoiled about Rochel and Bordeaux by those of
Strozzies band, not only of victual and munition, but also of money and
merchandises, and some of them also of their lives.


To the Right Honorable Francis Walsingham Esquire her Majesty's Ambassador
Resident in France.
SIr, although I suppose you are now on your way hitherwards, for by Walter
Williams I sent you her Majesty's Letters for license of your return for a
time, yet if my Lett^rs can find you there, or by the way, I would not have you
ignorant of that which I can show you. I know by self how Ambassadors be to
know what is done in their own Country. The cruel murders at Roan is now long
ago written unto us when we thought all had been done; and by the same letters
was written unto us, that Diepe was kept close, and the same execution of the
true Christians looked for there, but as then not executed; howbeit, Sigoigne
did warrant all our Englishmen to be out of danger, and not to be afraid: But
what warrant can the French make, now Seals and Words of Princes being traps to
catch innocents, and bring them to the Butchery. If the Admiral, and all those
murdered on that bloody Bartholomew day were guilty, why were they not
apprehended, imprisoned, interrogated and judged, but so much made of as might
be, with-in two hours of the assumation; is that the manner to handle men
either culpable or suspected? so is the Journeyer slain by the Robber, so is
the Hen of the Fox, so the Hind of the Lion, so Abel of Cain, so the innocent
of the wicked, so Abner of Ioab: but grant they were guilty, they dreamt
treason that night in their sleep, what did the innocent men, women and
children at Lions? what did the sucking children and their mothers at Roan
deserve? at Cane? at Rochel? what is done yet we have not heard, but I think
shortly we shall hear: Will God, think you, still sleep? Will not their blood
ask vengeance, shall not the earth be accursed that has sucked up the innocent
blood poured out like water upon it: I am most sorry for the King, whom I love,
whom I esteem the most worthy, the most faithful Prince of the world, the most
sincere Monarch now living. I am glad you shall come home, and would wish you
were at home out of that Country, so contaminate with innocent blood, that the
Sun cannot look upon it, but to prognosticate the wrath and vengeance of God.
The ruin and desolation of Jerusalem could not come till all the Christians
were either killed there, or expelled from thence; but whether do I run, driven
with just passions and heats? The Scots, both the parties in words show
themselves desirous of accord, willing to come to reason, but indeed they seem
not so, as both Monsieur de Crocque and Mr. Killegrew do fear, the old Enemies
be so hard to compound, and the new possessions so hard to part from; but as
yet we cannot despair, till they both have met together, and heard jointly what
both the parties can say; which so soon as it can be done, Mr. Killegrew has
promised to write to me what is done, and what he thinks may be done. What
Strozzies hovering cloud, which has so long gone in a mist, will brew at the
last; and what design so long cloaked, will break out upon, is no marvel,
though they and we, and all the world doubt; and if it be to besiege Rochel,
and to execute more slaughter upon men, women and children Christians, as is
now suspected and certified; that thereabout it goes, and* as some say, is
Master of Rochel when that is done, what it will do, and whether it will go
further or no; and if it do, to what place, I tell you truly many do doubt.
Diverse of our Merchants resorting that way, have found small courtesy at their
hands, no more then if they had been men with Pirates. This makes our Merchants
that they dare not yet adventure for Bordeaux, and to doubt whether they may go
thither this year or no. And I would mervellous fain know what manner of
assurance you can make from thence.

Fare you well. From Reading the six and twentieth of September, 1572.

YOu may perceive by her Majesty's answer, that she will not refuse the
enterview nor marriage, but yet she comes near to them tam timido and suspenso
pede, that they may have good cause to doubt. The answer you see to de la Mot
is addulced so much as may, for she would have it so. You have a busy piece of
work to decypher, that which in words is designed to the extremity, in deeds is
more then manifest, neither you shall open the one, nor they shall cloak the
other.

The best is, we stand (I thank God) upon our guard, nor, I trust, shall be
taken and killed asleep, as the Admiral was; the greatest matter for her
Majesty and our safety and defense, is earnestly of us attempted, nor yet
achieved, nor utterly in despair, but rather in hope.

The Queens Majesty is in mavelous doubt for you, she takes as much care
for you, as any Prince can do for her Subject, and she thinks none can do
what she would have done there as well as you. You are happy in the one, and
her Majesty in the other: seeing you are advertised so well hitherto, God who
has hitherto delivered you, will not yet leave you; I doubt, and I trust I
need not fear.

I does me good to see the Princely compassion that her Majesty does take on
the poor Vidame, who is escaped by good fortune into England; her Majesty has
written for him to the King; the Copy I send you, you shall do well to press
the answer, and bring it with you. I dare say it will do you good if you can do
it, ^ae^ est vicissitudo rerum humanarum, haec est communis casus hominum. All
that be not bloody and Antichristian, must needs condole and lament the misery
and inhumanity of this time. God make it short, and send his Kingdom amongst us.

Fare you well once again, the seve^ and twentieth of September, which is
removing day to Windsore. Yours always assured, Tho: Smith.


The Copy of the Queens Majesty's Letters to the French King, for the Vidam de
Char^res.
TReshault, trespuissant, et tresexcellent Prince nostre trescher et tresaime
bon friar et cousin salut, Le Vidam de Chartres est retire en nostre Royaulme
et nous a done a entendre par un sien escript supplicative la cause de sa
venue a^ nous, et requirant de nous nostre favo^rable recommendation de son cas
enuers. vous et pour ce que l'avons tro^ve de cocur loyal et fidel envers.
vous, desirant tousiours sur toutes chooses le tenir en repose, et que par
toutes occ^sions que se presentoient non cesse de lover vos royalles virtus
comme vostre tres affectionne subject, don't en pouvons estre bons tesmoins.
Nous n'avous voulu fair moins, aians compassion de l'estat miserable anquel il
se tro^ve pour le present, que recommander affectueusment a vous sa cause qui
nous s^mble certes fort lamentable, et qui merit secours, aiant a celle fin
envoye a nostre Ambassadeur aupres de vous sa request, qui vous la declarera
plus amplement, en quoy vous prions trescher and tresame bon friar et cousin
luy donner bonne et favorable a^dience, et (...) bonne response au fin que avec
cela nous pussions comme en avons bon espoir consoler le pour desole Vidam,
and a nous y fair gran plaisir comme scait le createur a^quel prions, tresh
ault tresexcellent and trespuissant Prince nostre trescher and tresame bon
friar and cousin vous avoir tousiours a tressainte guard.

De nostre Chastea^ de Windsore le 28 de September. 1672.

To the Right Honorable Francis Walsingham Esquire Ambassador Resident for her
Majesty in France.
SIr, the last Letters of yours by me received, were those which young Mr.
Hopton brought hither, since which time, we have understood by report from
Roan, that on Thursday was sevennight there was a general slaughter made at
Roan of all that could be imagined Protestants, so as the very channels of the
street did run blood; we have heard diversely of Rochel, by some, that it is
sacked by Strozzi, by some, that it holds out, and that it is like so to do a
long time. As to the Ambassadors negotiation here with us, to seek to persuade
us, that the King was forced for safety of his own life, to cause the execution
to be done as it was, and that thereof we shall see the proofs by the Admirals
process, you may imagine how hard a thing it is for us to be so persuaded
against all our natural senses, and how they will accord these two jars we
know not. The Kings Letter first written after the Admirals death, does declare
it to be done by manner of sedition, and privately by the house of Guise, who
feared the Admiral and his would pursue against them the avenge for his hurt,
and the Kings own guard about the Admiral was forced, and the King himself
driven to hold his guards about him in the Louvre for his own defense; and now
yet it must needs be notified, that the King did for his own surety cause the
execution to be done. By the dispatch that you shall receive from Master
Secretary, you shall understand what answer is made to the French Ambassador,
and upon what sort her Majesty has forborne to resolve upon the enterview,
whereof her Majesty has no misliking, if it may appear that the King will
forbear from persecuting the cause of Religion ACHE Rome A B Glasis,
nevertheless, it will be very hard to persuade 3lca to like thereof. I have
imparted to her Majesty two things, whereof your wife had in charge to make me
privy of.

From Reading the five and twentieth of September, 1572. Yours assuredly
William Burleigh.


To the Right Honorable Francis Walsingham Esquire Ambassador Resident for her
Majesty in France.
I will now (my Lord Ambassador) trouble you with some trifles of mine own,
leaving other matters to other advertisements. I am very desirous to recover a
Rider, if any worthy the entertainment may be had, whether there be any more at
liberty that were appertaining to any of the late Lords that were murdered, it
may by some inquiry be known unto you, one of those I had leevest have, if he
may be had; if not, you know one Morret an Italian, that served sometimes Mr.
Denny, I am informed, that he is willing to come into this Country again, so
as his pardon may be obtained; the fellow when he was here was thought honest,
only his fact being set apart, which was not of pretended malice I know;
and therefore I can with a better will be a mean for him, if he will be
content to serve me. And for his behavior there, I trust you will understand
of it ^^^ce his coming, whether he have well ^sed himself or no; and whether,
as he is an I^alian, his hand be free from this last action or no; if he were,
and that you may know no cause to the contrary, I will be very glad to
entertain him, and will give thirty po^^d a year, meat and dri^k, and his horse
found in my stable, which offer, if you shall think too little, I will refer it
to you, praying your Lordship to do me thus much pleasure, as to deal in this
matter effectually for me, to procure either this fellow or some other that may
be a sufficient man of that profession; and as he shall be, I doubt not, well
contented and entreated, so shall I also think my self beholding unto you, and
the sooner I may hear from yo^, touching the same the better. So with my right
hearty commendatio^s,

I bid you farewell. From Reading the two and twentieth of September, 1573.
Your very Friend, To. Leicester.


To the Right Honorable Sir Thomas Smith, her Majesty's principal Secretary.
IT may please you to advertise her Majesty, that at the time of the receipt of
her Letters of the seven and twentieth of September, being through my late
sickness in that state of strength, as I could not without danger go out of my
lodging, I desired Monsieur Ma^^esir^, who at that instant was sent by Queen
Mother to visit me, that I had by Letters lately received somewhat to
communicate to her Majesty, which thing I could not do in person, without some
peril; and therefore desired him to know of the King and Queen Mother, whether
it were their pleasures that I should communicate it unto them by my Secretary;
or whether it would please them otherwise to send some hither to my lodging, to
receive that I had to say unto them; whereof when Monsieur Mannesire had made
relation unto their Majesty's, which was the fourth of this present, the next
day they sent Brulart, one of the Secretaries of the Estate, and the said
Mannesire, to receive that which I had to propound unto their Majesty's here
from her Majesty: So a^ their access, I communicated unto them, what was
propounded by their Ambassador to her Majesty, and what was her Majesty's
answer unto the same. I also showed them, how hard it was for her Majesty to
think, considering the great severity intended toward those who professed one
Religion with her, that the King should think his brother a fit husband for
her, or that there could grow, continue and increase that love that ought to be
between the husband and the wife. I also showed them, that she desired to
understand roundly and frankly what the King meant by the great Army of Ships,
and Men of War, which have been so long time betwixt Rochel and Bordeaux, under
the conduct of Strozzie; which she desired to know the rather, for that diverse
of her Merchants have been spoiled, some of their Goods and Merchandises,
others of their Artillery, and some also slain; for that the same kind of
dealing is very much contrary to the Amity professed lately.

Lastly, I did recommend the Vidams case, according to such instructions as I
received from him, delivering her Majesty's Letters unto Brulart, to prese^^
unto the King.

The seventh of the same, Brulart only came unto me with the King and Queen
Mothers answer: After some speech had that the King and Queen Mother were sorry
for my sickness, he showed me, that Monsieur la Mot and I did agree touching
the relation of that which passed betwixt her Majesty and him. And as touching
the first point, the King and Queen Mothers answer was, the process of the
Admiral was still in hand, which so soon as it shall be finished, shall be sent
to her according to his promise; notwithstanding, he had well hoped that her
Majesty, without any further suspense, would have given credit to his word, as
he would have done in like case.

Touching the second, his answer was, that he was glad, as well by la Mot as by
me, to understand that her Majesty did accept in so good part his assurance
touching his intention to continue good amity with her, and so she does concur
with him in like affection.

Concerning the third, that as he desired the continuance of Amity, so did he
desire the marriage propounded for the increase of the same; and therefore
wishes, that the enterview might proceed, as a mean to accomplish the same;
and that whereas la Mot declared, that the Queen Mothers intention was to come
over, that they misliked the same; for that her meaning was rightly conceived
by me in this sort, that if her Majesty would be content to come to Dover, she
would then repair to Callis or Bulloign, and conclude between them some certain
mean for the enterview.

And as concerning that point, whereas her Majesty does desire to understand
the Kings intention touching Strozzies Army; his answer is, that he has lately
given order for the disposition of the same, whereof two thousand of them are
drawn to other parts to furnish the Frontiers in Picardie, in respect of the
two great Armies that are in the Low Countries; and that the King had never
intention to employ them any way to the disturbance of her Majesty, whose
amity he means earnestly to embrace. And further, his answer was, That
whereas violence had been used toward her Merchants, as well in body as in
goods, that he was most sorry for the same; and therefore he had expressly
written to the Baron de la Guarde, as also to the Governors of the rest of the
Ports, to see her Majesty's Subjects well and friendly used, as appertained to
good amity; and that the King of late had caused a ship of Acerbo Velutellis,
one abiding in England to be released.

Touching her Majesty's request for the Vidam, his answer was, That as he would
be glad any way to gratify her Majesty, so could he not grant this her
request, without touch of his honor, to suffer any of his Subjects to live in
a Foreign Country, with a kind of defiance of his sincerity, and therefore he
hoped that her Majesty would not desire the Vidams benefit with his prejudice;
notwithstanding, for the gratefying of her Majesty, he can be content, that
the Vidam shall return home, and enjoy his livings here with such surety, as he
shall have no occasion to doubt his safety. This was the Answer that I received
at Br^larts hands, of such things as I propounded unto him on her Majesty's
behalf, to be communicated unto the King, and to the Queen his Mother.

Le Roches often repairing to the Court, makes me to suspect some enterprise
to be done in Ireland. The passages here be kept so strait, as by no means I
can employ any man in Britain toward the seaside, as well for the discovery
of the said le Roches enterprise, as also for the observing of Strozzies
doings; for though it be said, that the said Army is dispersed, yet know I not
what. I think it were good to employ some Western Barque that way, under the
color of merchandise, for the discovery of the doings.

The Duke of Guise of late, has often conference with certain of the Scottish
Guard, though sithence the late murder, he shows outwardly some
miscontentment. He was never in greater jollity then presently he is,
especially since the news of the Prince of Orange' s retiring.

They begin now to discourse here, that it would be a deed of charity for the
Princes, Catholics, not only to set the Queen of Scots at liberty, but also
to restore her to her right: Her Majesty is not ignorant what I have written
touching the opinion of wise men, what is to be done in that behalf for her
safety: If that sore be not saved, I fear we shall have a Bartholomew
Breakfast, or a Florence Banq^^t: So they term the late execution here.

Monsieur Grandmont has Commission from the King, to suppress all preaching in
the Country of Berry, and to plant there the Catholic Religion, which is a
verification of the Kings intention touching the observation of his Edict
irrecoverable for the tolleration of Religion.

For that I hear that all Scottish men are stayed at the Ports that come hence,
I will make some stay to give them passports: if the stay proceeded in respect
of carrying over of secret ^^^ters from hence, there will grow little help and
remedy thereof that way, for that the Scottish Ambassadors Letters do pass in
the Kings Pacquets: methinks the return of the Scots might rather do good then
harm, for that the most part of them detest their proceedings here; the report
whereof will do no harm to the furtherance of the accord. I would be glad to
understand her Majesty's pleasure, especially for the Lord Levingston. I and
mine, and diverse of our Nation, never received the like pleasure at their
hands, as lately we have done.

I have stayed for her Majesty's service here, Mr. Herbert, by whom I receive
good assistance; I would therefore he might receive some good words from her
Majesty to encourage him in the same, for he is one that has very very good
parts in him, and may hereafter grow a good and profitable servant.

Touching my return home, I hope her Majesty will have just consideration of
me, who do now remain here without her benefit, for a color of their Ministers
there, to practice that thing there which is to her danger. And so leaving
further to trouble your honor at this present, I most humbly take my leave.

At Paris the eighth of October, 1572. Your Lordships to Command, Fr.
Walsingham.


To the Right Honorable Sir Thomas Smith, her Majesty's principal Secretary.
SIr, I most humbly thank you for the care you have every way of me, and
especially in that you would not suffer me to be ignorant how things do pass
there with you, which gives me no small light to direct my course here; and
yet what direction can I receive, that may well guide me, where I find
neither faith nor constancy to build on; it should but minister unto you grief,
for me to amplify this matter, and no great contentment to my self: It is our
part now rather to think on some remedies for the mischiefs that are like to
come, then to rest amazed with the passed miseries. I am sorry to hear that
the accord in Scotland is not made; and yet so long as la Crocque remains in
Scotland, what cause have we to hope after it, seeing that upon this
alteration, the end of his staying there is rather to impeach then to further
the same, if we think otherwise, we do but dream our selves. I am sorry to see
the Ambassadors fair speech take such place as it does; methinks the late and
fresh experience we have had of that unsincerity, should teach us to take
profit of others harms. Surely considering how things do proceed here, and
weighing the great presumption there is, how that the tr^e Monarchies of Europe
are bent, not only to disquiet, but also to displace her Majesty, and to
substitute some other, it were no more then necessary policy to cut them off
from so convenient a footing place as Scotland is, which thing might easily be
brought to pass, if her Majesty would proceed roundly, weighing that the Scots
are not a little alienated from this Nation, upon this late accident: If her
Majesty would join pensio^s with persuasions, the thing in my opinion might
easily be brought to pass, not only to unite them under the Government of the
King, but also divide them from such League and Alliance as they have with this
Crown.

There is, Sir, as you know, another remedy, which as it has been long
sithence needful to put in execution, so was it never more needful then
presently. If her Majesty stick now to spend or put in execution all those
things that tend to her safety, she must not long look to live in repose, nay,
she must not long look to keep the Crown upon her head. The cause of her former
quietness, proceeded of her neighbors unquietness; which being removed, she
must now make another account. The Admiral is now dead, and the Duke of Guise
lives; the Prince of Orange is retired out of Flanders, but the Duke of Alva
remains there still: I need not to conclude, for that to man's judgment it is
apparent what will follow. Is it time now, think you, Sir, to stir, or is it
not time to omit any remedy that may tend to her Majesty's safety? As far as I
can learn, there is none yet sent to deal with the Princes of Germany, and yet
there is here almost daily conference between the Popes Nuncio, the Ambassador
of Spain, and them here, they omit nothing that may tend to our peril. I would
we were as careful not to omit any thing that may tend to our safety. It may be
said, that I fear too much. Surely, considering the state we stand in, I think
it less danger to fear too much then to little. It may be said also, that the
jealousy that Spain has of the greatness of France, will not suffer him to
endure to let France have any footing in England, and that like affection
reigning in France, if Spain should attempt any thing. I confess it to be true,
and yet I see no reason, but that they both may consent to advance a third
person, who pretends right to the Crown, especially being provoked thereto by
the Pope, which is my chief fear.

It may also be alleged, that the offer of the marriage shows that they have
no evil meaning toward her Majesty. First, it may be doubted, whether
considering how now adays their speech and meaning disagreeth, they offer as
they mean.

Secondly, whether their intention of offering the said Match, tend to our
benefit or no. I was not heretofore so forward in believing all friendly offers
to proceed of sincerity, as I am now ready to think the same to proceed of
abuse, only to lull us asleep in security; for any thing that I can perceive,
the best way not to be deceived by them, is not to trust them. The Gentleman
himself who is offered, I think honorably of him; and if I could think so well
of the rest, I would then believe that their outward speech did consent to
their inward meaning; but the case standing as it does, I know not what to
think. I cannot therefore in this doubtful case, but make her Majesty and my
Lords of the Council acquainted with these proceedings, and leave to them to
gather what may be their meaning here, Methinks Queen Mothers calling back of
her word touching her coming into England, does show that they but dally.

It is not likely that the Ambassador, without Commission, would otherwise have
made the offer, besides the cold answer made to her Majesty's request for the
Vidame, does show how they are affected.

To gratify the King of Spain, those 800 that came from Montz, were put to the
sword. Methinks if there were that good will that they profess, they should not
have sticked with her Majesty, in granting her request for the Vidam, a thing
both hononourable and profitable; all circumstances considered, I see rather
mischief to be looked for, then friendship from hence, and therefore I cannot
tell with what safety her Majesty may repair to Burd^aux, and yet advise the
contrary I would be loath, having no other ground but suspicion. I think the
danger will be the less, so long as Rochel holds out. And so leaving further
to trouble your Honor, I most humbly take my leave.

At Paris the eighth of October, 1572. Your Honors to Command, Fr. Walsingham.


To the Right Honorable, and his very good Lord, the Lord of Burleigh.
YOur Lorpships of September 25 I have received, beseeching you to pardon me,
in that I presently in answering of the same, am driven to use the help and
hand of another, being not yet, after my sickness, restored to that strength as
I can endure well to write. I perceive that your Lordship, by the contrary
here, is void of the Ambassadors speech, does well enough discern, that the
late cruelty here executed, is void of all manner of just defense; and
therefore in Gods just judgment is like to receive just punishment; and if the
same does not happen so soon as we desire, our sins is the let. They here are
so far imbrued in blood, as there is no end of their cruelty; for no Town
escapes, where any of the Religion is found, without general murdering and
sacking of them, and yet they protest all this to be done against their will,
though it be evidently known that it is done by their Commandment. This manner
of proceeding seems to all men so strange, as no man can tell what to judge
of it, openly no man dare but commend it, privately few are found that do not
utterly detest it.

I have not heretofore been so ready to commend their sincerity, as I am now
forced to set down their infidelity; surely I cannot see that all their fair
speeches and friendly offers tend to any other end but to abuse, which would
well appear, if they were seized of Rochel. In the mean while, I do not think
the contrary, but that they will provoke the Duke of Alva now, that the Prince
of Orange retireth into Germany, who of himself is enough bent, as your
Lordship knows, to execute somewhat long time practiced in England, to the
danger and disturbance of her Majesty. It is the opinion here of all men of
judgem^nt, that her Majesty is to look for any mischief that either Spain or
this Crown can yield. And therefore if she shall not now seek to quiet her
self, they do not see any reason for her long to hope to keep the Crown upon
her head. The matter of it self is so apparent, as he is of mean discourse that
does not so think.

The House of Guise, who since the late murder seem to have some
miscontentment, was never to the outward show in greater favor, nor in greater
jollity. He has often conference with such Scotishmen as are here of the Kings
(...)* and therefore I am sorry to understand, that they are not grown to any
(...) in Scotland, though her Maj. pay dear for it, as money may do much with
that nation. I would both the union were made amongst them, and they reduced
under the Kings Government, and divided from such alliance as they have with
this Nation. If these great Monarchies may have Scotland for their footing, I
fear the event will be over dangerous.

The Popes Legate, who is at Avinion, has sent hither in post his Secretary,
to know the Kings pleasure, what his resolution is touching his access; as I
hear, the King will not yield thereto; for the same will make it apparent to
the world, what the King of Spain and his intention is. They think they may
deal more covertly, bringing the matters better to pass, then by such open kind
of dealing.

I cannot decypher any thing, whether they proceed sincerely touching the
pretended match; for my opinion, I think of it, as of the rest of their
friendly offers, that these tend to nothing but to abuse.

Of late, since the news of the Prince of Oranges retiring out of Flanders,
they seem not to be desirous thereof as before. I judge, if they were once
seized of Rochel, they will begin to renew their suit for the Queen of Scots,
or rather attempt somewhat for her delivery. Their silence they use, makes me
to suspect the more, seeing the Queen of Scots friends bear such sway in the
Court.

I shall not need to recommend unto your Lordship my revocation, for that I
know your Lordship is careful of your self for the same. And so leaving further
to trouble your Honor at this present, I most humbly take my leave.

At Paris the eighth of October, 1572. Your Honors to Command, Fr. Walsingham.


To the Right Honorable, and my very good Lord, the Earl of Leicester.
IMmediately upon the receipt of your Lordships Letters of the two and twentieth
of September, I requested Captain Lassetty, whom your Lordship knows, and is
most willing to do your Lordship any service, as one whom he most honors,
and thinks himself most bound unto, to make enquiry whether there were any of
his Nation excellent in riding unplaced, and had any desire to go into England.
After search made by him, he found some unplaced, and in that profession very
excellent; but the entertainment they require is so unreasonable, and so far
exceeds your Lordships offer, as I dare not deal with them. They ask 300
Crowns a year, besides meat and drink, and the finding of their horse, and the
least they can be reduced unto is 200 Crowns. True it is, that such of the
Noblemen as entertain them, do give them no less wages: He uses toward them
what persuasions he may, to induce them to think that 150 Crowns in England
will go further then 300 here; but as yet, no persuasions will serve to make
them so to think: I say therefore, to conclude any thing with them I mind not,
until I hear further from your Lordship.

Of late, doubting that there is no good meant toward you from hence, and
having some cause to suspect some Irish practices, and knowing that Capt.
Lassetty does understand the state and weakness of that Country. I have
entertained him with some hope to be entertained of her Majesty; his
imperfections I know well enough, notwithstanding his service may be
profitable; and if it be to no other end, yet were the entertainment of him
necessary in respect of the harm he may do. At all times when any danger did
seem to grow toward her Majesty, he has requested me to present to her his
service: though that Nation be very much inclined to treason, yet surely I
think him in that point to stand much upon his honor Because I would be loath
long in vain to entertain him with that hope, I beseech your Lordship that I
may by the next hear what your opinion is in this behalf. Captain Massino del
Beni, whom your Lordship knows, who is now retired into Germany, requested me
to desire your Lordship to offer his service unto her Majesty, who in respect
of Religion, and the zeal and honor he bears toward her Majesty, would be
glad to sacrifice his life in her defense. If your Lordship think the same
might be received, then would he repair thither: if otherwise, he would be glad
to know it, because he means to take some other course to direct himself. I
am the willinger at this point to offer the service of Soldiers, for that I
fear her Majesty shall have just cause to use them, considering how slenderly
we are furnished at home, for now that the Prince of Orange is retired, her
Majesty may not long look to live in repose; I am sorry that the union of
Scotland is not already made, which I fear will be cause of both their and our
ruin. If that footing-place were taken away from our foraign enemies, our
danger would be the less. Money will do any thing with that Nation, as your
Lordship knows, which if her Majesty stick to disburse, she shall find
neither profit nor surety in it. The tempest that hangs over our head is to
man's judgment apparent so great, as if she overslip any remedy that may be
used, she must not long look to keep the State that she now enjoys. If the
great strength and power of her enemies be weighed with her weakness, the
danger cannot but seem the greater, if any thing be omitted to be done, that
may ^end to her safety. If England and Scotland be united, and such unsound
members cut off as have been the cause of inward corruption, both her enemies
shall have less will to attempt any thing against her safety, and she remain in
less peril of such mischiefs as otherwise are like to fall upon her. Violent
diseases must have violent remedies: if her Majesty do not not now think her
State to stand in extremity things at home well considered, both she and the
same are in more danger. I beseech your Lordship to pardon my passion in this
behalf; the suspicion I have of the evil meaning here toward her Majesty,
makes me to be thus carried away as I am. And so leaving further to trouble
your Lordship at this present, I must humbly take my leave.

At Paris the 8 of October 1572. Your Honors to command, Francis Walsingham.


Answers to the French Ambassador given by word of mouth by my Lord Treasurer
in the Council Chamber in October. 1572
FOr the Kings answer to the advice of her Majesty given in two points, viz.
that the King would cause the world to understand of his deed upon the Admirals
death, somewhat better then yet it did. Secondarily, that he would see that his
Edicts be better observed, her Majesty means not to reply thereto, wishing
that both in the one and the other the King find good success.

To the motion of the Enterview to be before the 20 of October, and i^ to the
Queen Mothers letter, is to be at the Isle of Iersey, seemed to her majesty so
strange both for the time and place, as if the Admiral had not showed the
Letters from the King and Qu. Mother to that effect, her Majesty should either
not have believed it, or that the Ambassador had mistaken the same, as without
long speech the Ambassador may easily perceive: for the 20 day of October is
not 14 days off from the time of the motion, nor one month from the date of the
Kings letter, and Iersey is a place so far distant, as neither King of this
land would adventure to sail unto for many causes, nor yet any Merchant would
take upon him to pass thither almost in that time. Besides, that the late
proceedings in France to the destruction of all sorts of her Majesty's
Religion, which also is not ceased to her Majesty's understanding, cannot but
argue this manner of motion very absurd, and besides engender in the subjects
of this Realm such conceits as it were a dangerous thing for Counselors to be
so careless of their Prince, as to give ear to such motions; and it is the
stranger now to make this motion by letters of the 23 of September, when the
French Ambassador the same 23 of September did say at Reading to the Queens
Majesty, that the Queen Mother was content to come into any place of this
Realm, which is now strangely changed, that the ^ueens Majesty should come to
her over the Sea to the coast of France, being more then three days sailing,
except she might have wind at her commandment. And in this matter also the
Queens Majesty can give no answer until she hear answer from her Ambassador to
her letters sent after the Kings letters were dated. As to the offer of
continuance of Amity, and renewing the League by a new Oath, the Queens Majesty
means nothing more then to continue the Amity. And for renewing of any Oath,
she knows no cause of her part to be required a new Oath, for that she has
not violated the same, nor means to do, and trusts as much in the Kings
part that he will keep it without any new Oath. As for the proceeding for the
establishing of a commerce in certain Towns in France, it is over-evident by
the late murder in Roan (which the King says was by the mean people) how
unmeet it were at this time to motion such a matter unto her Merchants, who be
now marvellously intimerated, and before these murders did hear not most
willingly thereof, because of diverse evil treatments that they have suffered
at Roan and diverse other places; and therefore this matter is to be suspended
until the Merchants may understand that the King shall have corrected the late
murders at Roan, that they shall not attempt the like another time upon them,
and that they may perceive that the King is so willing to do justice upon the
Catholics, which may have the murderers, that they may assure them, that
under his protection they may go safe, and not fear the rage of the furious
people.

As to the sending of the Earl of Leicester, or Lord Treasurer after the Queens
avouchment, her Majesty indeed is very sorry that there is such an alteration
of occasion of doing such an office; for as her Majesty before had intention to
have sent either one of them, or such other, as should be as agreeable to the
King, so now there is to all the world one great cause that her Majesty may not
with honor, nor with law of nature send any whom she loves to be in danger, as
it seems they may be, though the King have never so good a meaning: For by
the death of so many whom the King does not avow, nor yet punish the
murderers, what surety can strangers have, especially when the King
pretends, as by his own letters appears, that it is the fury of the
Catholics against those of the Religion.

As to the difficulties found by her Ambassadors return, and to leave a
Secretary there in respect of the danger wherein he is at this time, her
Majesty thinks that the King might otherwise think thereof; for when he
says, he will revoke also his Ambassador from hence, if hers should come for a
time: It is well known with what liberty and surety his Ambassador may and does
travel in this Realm, who may go when he will without danger, and without fear
of mind do his negotiation: where contrariwise her Ambassador dare not go out
of his doors without a guard, being to his great charge and disquieting. And so
the Queens request is to have her Ambassador from thence but for such a time as
the tempest may cease in France, and the murderers be in awe of the King by
Justice.


REQUESTS.
That the Kings Declarations maintained in his Letters for our Merchants good
usage at Bordeaux, and elsewhere, may be published in print, as his other Edicts
are.

That it may be also notified, that the King will have the English Merchants
restored to their goods which were left in the hands of his subjects that have
been murdered, for that many of them in Roan, and elsewhere, were by way of
Merchandise indebted to the English.

That for the hearing of English complaints for causes both in Normandy and
Gascoigne, there might be some extraordinary indifferent Commissioners to hear
the same with expedition; whereupon if the Merchants shall find favor and
justice, they may be the more easily induced to allow the Conditions of a
Commerce.


To the right honorable and his very good Lord, the Earl of Leicester.
IT may please your Lordship to understand, that by certain that returned from
Frankfort Mart, I understand that one of the Gentlemen that departed hence with
intention to accompany your Nephew Mr. Philip Sidney to He^delberg, died by the
way at a place called Bladin in Lorain, who by diverse conjectures I took to be
the Dean of Winchester, who, as I advertised your Lordship by Mr. Argall, I
employed to encounter the evil practices of your said Nephews servants. If
therefore your Lordship, he now being void, shall not speedily take order in
that behalf (if already it be not done) the young Gentleman your Nephew shall be
in danger of a very lewd practice, which were great pity in respect of the
rare gifts that are in him. Touching news, I refer your Honor to these enclosed
occurents, and the report of this Bearer, to whom I have given order to
communicate certain things unto you. And so leaving further to trouble your
Honor at this present, I most humbly take my leave.

At Paris the 17 of October, 1572. Your Honors to command, Fr. Walsingham.


To the right worshipful Francis Walsingham Esquire her Majesty's Ambassador
resident in France.
SIR, I showed to the Queens Majesty and my Lords of the Council, both your
letters to me written the 8 of this instant; the one contained your
negotiation, the other was a discourse both wisely written, and very well
liked. On Thursday last, Monsieur du Crocque was here, and had audience given
him by my Lord Treasurer, my Lord Chamberlain, and my Lord of Leicester,
because the Queens Majesty was not at time perfectly whole of the small Pox, as
the Physicians did say, although her Majesty and a great sort more, will not
have it so, now it makes no matter what it was, thanks be to God she is
perfectly whole, and no sign thereof left in her face. On Sunday he had his
answer given unto the Steward of his house, the sum and substance whereof I
send you here enclosed, whereby you may know his negotiation which was long in
words to make us believe better of that King then yet we can; and replied, as I
understand, liberally enough, although in that Prince and Country who have so
openly and injuriously done against Christ, who is Truth, Sincerity, Faith,
Pity, Mercy, Love, and Charity, nothing can be too sharply and severely
answered; Yet Princes you know are acquainted with nothing but Doulceur, so
must be handled with Doulceur, especially amongst and between Princes. And
therefore to temperate as you may perceive not that they may think the Queens
Majesty and her Council such fools, that we know not what is to be done, and
yet that we should not appear so rude and barbarous, as to provoke where no
profit is to any man I think, I for my part do not doubt but you will use this
answer as you were wont, gravely and wisely, for the King there will look to
have it, as well at your hands as at his Ambassadors.

You are careful (as wisdom does lead you) of the well-doing here in England,
which needs must be well esteemed of her Majesty and all her Council; and I
tell you, we are not so remiss and negligent as peradventure another that
knows not, would think. In time things be done unlooked for as well for
mischief, as that was in France, as to good and remedy, where God gives grace
and circumspection. Truth it is, that God disposes all whatsoever a man does
purpose, as Divines do say: and it is his gift, if wise men do provide for
mischief to to come; and yet whatsoever they do devise, the event does come of
him only, who is the God of hope and fear beyond hope and expectation; because
you shall understand, that even the Scots our neighbors be awakened by your
Beacons in France, I have sent you a Scottish proclamation herewith, Du Crocque
and Viracque have already taken their leave of Scotland, and be come to
Barwick. The 20 of this month they appointed to be here at Court. By that we
can see the Lords in Scotland draw nearer and nearer to an accord, that rather
it is in hope then in despair. These cruelties in France have helped not a
little, and now continuing much more will: You gave good advice that all
Scottish men should not be stayed, no more they be not; some of the late Comers
have given the rest in Scotland a good -- to make them awake, yet there may
also be false brethren come amongst them; which as reason is, shall be stayed
and sent back if they may be known. Yet it is true, That much water goes by
the Mill that the Miller knows not of; but man's wisdom must provide as much
as may be, as it would, always it cannot. The answer of the Ambassador may
justly seem to you to debar your coming home, and to prolong it longer then you
would: yet I assure you, your friends do not cease by all means possible to
provoke her Majesty so much as may be for your Revocation, and her Majesty is
as careful for you as any Prince may be for such a subject as you are, of whom
assure you her Highness makes no small account, and so it is reason.

You know that things go here slowly with much respect of irresolution; but for
my part I hope to see you here shortly, there shall no occasion be left which I
will not take to further it. Although your friends here be as forward as may
be, yet your wife cease not continually to cry on them.

Fare you well. From Windsor the 13. of October 1572. Your assured friend,
Thomas Smith.


To the right Honorable Sir Thomas Smith, her Majesty's principal Secretary.
SIR, it may please you to advertise her Majesty, that of late the King and
Queen mother have had sundry conferences with the Scottish Ambassador, to whom
there is repaired out of Flanders one English Gentleman called Tempest, and
another called Musgrave, servant unto the Earl of Westmerland, they both have
also access unto the Duke de Aumale, and to his Nephew the the Duke of Guyse.
Davy Chambers since his return out of England, has had also conference both
with the King and the House of Guyse, who has let fall these words, how that
the death and execution of the Earl of Northumberland has increased the number
of the Queen of Scots friends; and that she is now grown to have such a party
in England, as that five or six thousand shot, with some good Leaders, will
make her strong enough to encounter any forces her Majesty can make.

It is also secretly whispered in Court, that there is some new practice in
hand for the Queen of Scots delivery, the particularities I can by no means
decipher; but the circumstances of these conferences well weighed, the
conjecture is great, that there is somewhat a hatching.

Little Douglas who conveyed the Queen of Scots out of Loughtean departs out
of hand into Scotland; who besides other conference with the King, has had
long conference with the Queen mother, the Ambassador being present.

And so for other matters, referring your Honor to this Bearers report touching
diverse particularities, I most humbly take my leave.

Sir, I most humbly desire your Honor to further a most reasonable suit, that
this Bearer my Secretary is to prefer unto her Majesty, as well in respect of
his great travel already taken under me in her Majesty's service, as also for
that thereby he may receive encou^agement to continue the same, and in time
through the experience of his service, and the good parts that are in him, may
hereafter grow able to serve her Majesty in a better calling. For my own part,
I have no means to recompense him, as you, Sir, well know; and if therefore the
consideration grow not by her Majesty, neither he nor any other shall have
courage to serve in aservice both so dangerous and painful as this is wherein
he serves. And so not doubting of any furtherance you may yeid him, I leave to
trouble your Honor any further, taking my leave.

At Paris 18 of October, 1572. Your Honors to command, Fr. Walsingham.


To the right Honorable Sir Thomas Smith, her Majestiess principal Secretary.
SIR, I am glad by your Letters to receive some hope that there is good care
taken to prevent such mischiefs as may happen; notwithstanding until such time
as the root of the evil be removed, it is rather to dream of remedies then to
apply such as the disease requires.

I am glad to hear that there is some hope that they will grow to an accord in
Scotland: if that postern gate were shut up, and other inward medicines
applied, and her Majesty strengthened with the outward Amity of the Almain
Princes, she should be the more esteemed and feared of those that mean her not
great good. And though the remedies may seem chargeable, yet considering the
necessity of the same; and that they may avoid both great charges and no small
danger, I hope her Majesty will prefer safety before cost, especially when the
di^bursing of one pound may save a thousand.

Surely Sir, the more I observe their doings here, the more I increase my
jealousy of their evil meaning. They never spoke more fair to the Admiral,
then a few days before he died; nothing was demanded by him that was not
granted, insomuch that Tilligni said to a Gentleman, a friend of his a few days
before the execution, that their liberal granting of requests without any
difficulty, did make him to suspect some unsound and hollow meaning, and
thereupon alleged that Italian Proverb, -- They never used fairer speech then
presently they do, nor greater protestations of Amity; and because it is more
then was accustomed, and is now at such time as we have cause to suspect the
contrary, I cannot but be jealous of her Majesty's safety, so long as any thing
is left undone that tends to her Majesty's preservation. And so leaving
further to entertain your honor with my jealousies and fears, I most humbly
take my leave, beseeching you to continue your assistance in procuring my
revocation.

At Paris the 25 of October, 1572. Your Honors to command, Fran. Walsingham.


To the right Honorable Sir Thomas Smith, her Majesty's principal Secretary.
SIR, although I had no express commandment from her Majesty to communicate
unto the King and Queen Mother such an answer as was yielded unto those things
that were propounded by their Ambassador here, notwithstanding I thought it
convenient to impart the same unto Queen Mother, as she that has the Helm in
hand, to see in what sort the said answer would be interpreted at my access
unto her; I showed her at large, that the Ambassador had propounded four things
unto certain Deputies by her Majesty of her Council, she being through
sickness in that time, in state not to give audience.

To the first touching the Enterview

The 2d touching the confirmation of the league, with renewing of the Oath.

The third touching the establishing of Traffic.

The fourth the Kings requests to have the Lord Treasurer, or the Earl of
Leicester come over after the Queens delivery.

To these four Requests I made her acquainted with such answers as were made
unto the same.

To the first touching the time, she said, that she wrote unto the Ambassador,
that in respect of the young Queens delivery, (which she thought would have
been ere ^his time) the meeting could not be before the twentieth of this
month, and that therefore he should move it against that time, not meaning
that it should be so precisely set down, but it should be referred chiefly to
her Majesty's choice.

To the second, touching the place, she showed me, that forasmuch as she had
never intention to come over, the same being mistaken by the Ambassador, and
that the interview by Sea was thought inconvenient, hearing that the Isles of
Iersey did belong unto her Majesty, she thought that that was a convenient
place for the said Enterview, and therefore she caused the Ambassador to
propound it, protesting that the same was void of any evil meaning or
intention, and that there were Letters written to the Ambassador for that
purpose before the late execution here.

To the second, touching the renewing of the Oath, she said that the same
proceeded of advertisements from the Ambassador, that her Majesty should say,
that she could not tell what account or assurance to make of the late League
concluded; whereupon the King willed him to make offer unto her, that what she
could devise for the assurance and faithful keeping of the same, he would most
willingly put in execution; and thereupon willed him to offer, that if her
Majesty should think it requisite, the same should be confirmed by a new oath;
and as for my self (says she) considering the same had not been violated of
either party, I concur with your Mistres in opinion, thinking the same needless.

To the third, touching the establishing of Traffic, she said she saw some
reason to think her Majesty's answer reasonable; That the time seems now
improper; considering the late disorder at Roan; notwithstanding the Kings
meaning was to take such order as well for the punishing of offenders, as for
the well using of Merchants, as that they should have no just cause to fear, to
which purpose the King had written both to Caranges the Governor, as also to
the chief President there.

Touching the fourth, concerning the Kings request for the coming over either
of the Lord Treasurer, or the Earl of Leicester, she said that the same also
proceeded of advertisement from the Ambassador, that he thought that if their
Majesty's would require the coming over of either of them, after the Queens
delivery, that the same would be yielded to; whereupon the King gave him
Commission to move her Majesty in that behalf, he desiring nothing more then
one of them, to whom he knew he might communicate matters of weight as frankly
as unto her Majesty; and as touching any peril that might happen unto them, she
said that the King would take such order for safety, as they should be in no
less surety here then at home in her own realm.

To that I replied, that it would be very hard for her Majesty or any other to
be so persuaded in that behalf, for that it was not possible any disorder in a
State could be reduced to order without punishment, and that therefore neither
stranger nor their own subjects can make account to be in safety within their
government, so long as the malefactors should remain unpunished. To this she
said, that the injuries done by those of the Religion against the Catholics
were so great, as it was hard to bridle the peoples fury, especially upon the
discovery of this new Treason; notwithstanding such order was taken, that no
public person or Ambassador should be touched.

This was the sum of her reply unto such answers as were made by her Majesty to
the Ambassador there. I made her also acquainted with her Majeiesties answer to
the Ambassador touching my Revocation. To the which she said, That the world
would judge some alteration to be between the two Crowns if any such thing
should be done, without sending some other to supply my place. I then delivered
her a copy of the three Requests given to the Ambassador, there to be
exhibited unto their Majesty's here in the behalf of the Merchants, wherein she
promised that there should be such order taken, as should be to the contentment
of her Majesty, and the safety of her subjects, and that already the matter had
been considered of.

Being given to understand, that the Baron de la Guard was arrived here, I
requested her Majesty, that if it would please her to deal earnestly with him,
as well for the release of those English ships that were stayed already, as
also to give order that those that are now presently to repair to Bordeaux, may
pass to and fro in safety without any molestation, either with the Galleys or
of the other ships there. Whereupon she sent unto me the next day the said
Baron de la Guard, who after long circumstances used of the great good will he
bare unto her Majesty's Father, and to her Majesty her self, and to our
Nation, assured me, that the ships that were stayed were delivered: That he had
taken order before his departure from Brouage, that our Merchants should pass
freely without any molestation or trouble; and that there were already some
passed, whom only he did forbid that they should not touch at the Road before
Rochel: he showed me that he had received such strait commandment at her
Majesty's hands, for the well usage of our Merchants, as I might assure my
self they should have no just cause to complain. She requested me in the
conclusion of our talk, to write unto her Majesty, that she was given to
understand, that one Sorez their subject lately retired hither, did seek some
shipping there within her Majesty's Dominions, she therefore desired her that
she would take order for some restraint to be made in that behalf, for that he
is so ill an Instrument, as he would be glad to do something to breed unkindness
between the two Crowns, which occasion she said she hoped her Majesty would
avoid. Moreover she showed me, that diverse of her subjects did complain of
injuries done unto them by certain ships that lie about the Downs and the Isle
of Wight, and therefore desired me to write unto her Majesty, that there might
be some redress given in that behalf. And so leaving to trouble your Honor any
fnrther at this present, I most humbly take my leave.

At Paris the 25 of October, 1572. Your Honors to command. Fr. Walsingham.


To the right honorable Sir Thomas Smith, her Majesty's principal Secretary.
SIR, it may please you to advertise her Majesty, that the young Queen was
brought to bed of a daughter the 22 of October, whose Nativity was consecrated
with the blood of Briquemont and Cavannes, who the same day between the hours
of 5 and 6 in the evening, were hanged by Torch-light, the King, Queen mother,
and the King of Navarre, with the Kings brethren, and Prince of Conde being
lookers on. As Briquemont was going up the ladder the Under-Provost of the Town
said, that the King had sent him to know whether he could say any thing
touching the late Conjuration, which if he would confess, he would save his
life. Whereunto he answered, that the King had never a more faithful nor a more
truer subject then he was; but this I know proceeded not of himself, but of
evil Counselors about him; and so lifting up his eyes to heaven, he said, O
my God, upon whose Tribunal Seat I stand, and whose face I hope shortly to see,
thou know well that I know nothing, nor did not so much as once think of any
Conjuration against the King, nor against his Estate; though contrariwise they
have untruly put the same in my process; but I beseech my God, that he will
pardon the King, and all those that have been the cause of this my unjust
death, even as I desire pardon at thy hands for my sins and offenses committed
against thy Divine Majesty. Being then drawn up another step on the ladder, he
uttered only these words, I have somewhat to utter unto the King, which I
would be glad to communicate unto him; but (said he) I see that I may not; and
so shrunk up his shoulders, to forbear to use any further speech. As his
constancy generally was much commended, so was his death much bewailed of many
Catholics that were beholders of the same. Cavannes used no speech, but
showed himself void of all magnanimity, who before his death, in hope of life,
made some show to relent in Religion. Two things were generally much misliked
at this execution; the one, the presence of the King, as a thing unworthy the
Head of justice, to be at the execution of justice; the other, that Briquemont,
being a Gentleman, was hanged, a thing very rare in France, especially he being
reputed of his enemies to be innocent of that thing which lately had been laid
to his charge.

About an hour after the execution, the cruel and bloody people of this Town,
not content with their death, took them down from the Gallows, and drew them
about the streets, thrusting them through their bodies with daggers, and
shooting of dags at them, cutting off their ears, and omitting no other kind of
villainous and barbarous cruelty. It was thought also, that there should have
been another general day of execution, of as many as have been known at any
time to have been of the Religion; the stay whereof, I am credibly informed,
was procured by the Queen Mother, who with no small difficulty and
intercession, obtained the same at the Kings hands, who protested that the same
was but deferred for a time. The King is grown now so bloody minded, as they
that advised him thereto do repent the same; and do fear that the old saying
will prove true, Malum consilium consultori pessimum. At the time of my
Congratulation of the birth of the child, I used these speeches following to
the King:

Sir, knowing the mutual good will that is between my Mistress the Queen and
your Majesty, as between whom good and evil, pleasures and displeasures are
common, I could do no less, being her Minister here, but congratulate as well
the prosperous delivery of the Queen your Majesty's wife, as also the Nativity
of the young Princess your daughter, who is, as it were, a pledge of some
issuemale to follow, that may hereafter supply the Royal Seat that you
presently enjoy; which when it comes to pass, no Prince, Neighbor, Ally or
Confederate will be more glad thereof then the Queens Majesty my Mistress.
Whereunto the King answered, after private thanks given unto me for the office
of Congratulation, that I did use such speech as appertained to the good amity
between them; which was, That pleasures and displeasures should be common to
either of them; which as I look for no less a^ my good sisters hands your
Mistress, so she may assure her self, says he, at my hands; and I wish that my
Ambassador might have occasion to use like office of Congratulation toward her
as you do here toward me. I thanked his Majesty for wishing that wish, for
that it was a general desire to as many as truly loved her Majesty. As I was
taking my leave, he told me, that they of Rochel, against whom he did mean
presently to send his Forces, did give out, that her Majesty promises to send
them succors; which thing (says he) I do not believe, considering the good
intelligence that is between us. To this I replied, that if his Majesty should
give credit to any such thing, he should do her Majesty great wrong,
considering the late protestation I made unto him on her Majesty's behalf, that
her meaning was not to do any thing that may tend to the violating of the late
League concluded between them. As for the Brutes given out by them of Rochel,
who are now in desperation; I showed him, that men in that state are glad to
give out any thing that may draw others to join with them in assistance. He
answered, that he believed it was so. And so I took my leave of him. I was then
brought unto Queen Mother, unto whom I used like speech of Congratulation.
After which speech, I showed her, that the King had made me acquainted with
certain brutes given out by them of Rochel, of some aid promised by her
Majesty, which thing very honorably (said I) he protests he would not
believe. Whereupon she showed me, how it was true, that certain Letters were
lately intercepted, sent by them of Rochel, in the which there was mention made
that her Majesty underhand had promised to assist them, that the Count
Montgomery would repair unto them with the said assistance, but for my part,
says she, I know the Queen your Mistress to be too honorable and too wise to
intermeddle in any such matter, who I know will give the King my son leave to
deal with his subjects, as shall seem best unto himself. I showed her, that in
so judging of her Majesty, she judged rightly; and that I hoped she would give
more credit to her Majesty's late protestation touching the inviolable
observing of the late League, then to any brutes that should be given out by
desperate men. This was the effect of that which passed between us for that
present. About the seven and twentieth of the last there arrived here a Currier
out of Spain, sent from the Ambassador Resident there, who has brought unto
them very grateful news, especially Monsieur, as I hear, seems to be most
contented with the same. He has lately had great conference with the
Ambassador of Spain, who begins now to show great magnificency, and has
lately clad fourteen of his servants with Cloaks of Scarlet, guarded with
Velvet, and given them other apparel suitable thereto. Before the arrival of
the said Currier, there was some unkindness grown betwixt Spain and this Crown,
upon a complaint made by the Captain of Callis, of a Barque cast up this Summer
by the sluice, which is like, upon the next glut of water* to drown the whole
Gountrey of Oye; but now there is a promise made that all shall be addressed;
so that it is thought, that there was never so great amity between Spain and
this Crown, as presently is like to be. The Italians discourse, that the King
must leave no means unattempted to procure the having of the young King of
Scots for a match for his daughter; which thing they think, with disbursing of
an hundred thousand Crowns amongst the needy Scottish Nobility, will easily be
brought to pass. The Scottish Ambassador the eight and twentieth and nine and
twentieth of the last, had often conference with the Cardinal of Guise and the
Duke Aumale; his abode in Court was more then ordinary for an Ambassador, for
he continued there two whole days, which makes men to judge that the matter
was of importance, and therefore required present expedition. It is looked for
here that her Majesty should send some body to congratulate the nativity of
this young Princes, for all other Princess do the like.

And so leaving further to trouble your Honor at this present, I humbly take
my leave.

At Paris the first of November, 1572. Your Honors to Command, Francis
Walsingham.
It is thought la Crocque shall succeed la Mote, who labors most earnestly
presently to return.




To the Right Honorable his very good Lord, the Lord Treasurer.
TOuching the present estate of things here, I refer your Lordship to these
enclosed Occurences, and to my Letters directed unto Master Secretary. As they
have been always constant here in their doings, so were they never so
inconstant as at this present. Not two days before the execution of Briquemont,
they were resolved not to have executed him, and seemed very much to lament
that which already has been done, as a thing which has much weakened the
Realm, and made them odious to other Nations. The alteration now of this humor,
for themselves most honorable and profitable, is thought to proceed of
advertisements lately out of Spain, who promises great things; so that it is
now thought their cruelty will rather increase then assuage, which all men do
foresee will prove more profitable for Spain, then for themselves. The wisest
sort are now least acquainted with matters of great moment; such as are parties
and passionate, are they that bear greatest sway in the greatest matters, who
in respect of their private passion and revenge, care not what becomes of the
Prince and the Realm.

The long Gowns, who are men of the greatest experience, are only employed in
the expedition of ordinary causes. All men do look for some mischievous issue
of their kind of Government. There lacks but the Cardinal of Lorrains
presence to hasten the same to his full ripeness. If the mischief might only
reach to themselves, the harm were the less; but it is feared that their
neighbors shall participate some part of the smart of their folly; amongst
other, none is more threatened then poor England. I pray God therefore her
Majesty take profit of your Lordships good care and counsel, and then shall I
fear the less.

The Emperors death, which was made so assured, grows now to be doubtful,
for that Letters of the seventh of the last from Auspurg, make no mention
thereof. And so leaving to trouble your Honor at this present, I most humbly
take my leave.

At Paris the first of November, 1572. Your Honors to Command, Francis
Walsingham.


To the Right Honorable, and his very good Lord, the Earl of Leicester.
I Have not at this present much more to say unto your Lordship, then that that
is contained in my Letters directed to Master Secretary in these enclosed
Occurrents.

Briquemants death, through his constancy and earnest protestation made of his
innocence, has bred in all men a general compassion of him, as also, a general
misliking of the kind of his death; for that men of his quality and service,
whatsoever their offense has been, have not accustomably been hanged.

Generally all men do cry out and say, that the liberty of France is lost, yea,
and of some the most vehement Catholics, do wish both themselves and that
they have out of this Country.

Some here do persuade the King, to stand upon the greatness of Spain, and not
to suffer men to have that free access into his Chamber as accustomably they
are wont to have here. Surely if he continue his severity, it will not be much
for his safety to suffer men so freely to come near him.

What will be the issue of these Tragical doings here, God only knows, but
generally every man fears that all will go to ruin. In the mean time,
considering the late greatness of Spain with this Crown, I fear they cannot be
content to do that thing that may tend to their own ruin, but also they will
seek the ruin of their neighbors. I am therefore glad to hear that your
Lordship, with the rest of my Lords of the Council, do so carefully take order
to withstand the malice of those that envy your present quietness and repose.
And so leaving further to trouble your Honor, at this present, I most humbly
take my leave.

At Paris the first of November, 1572. Your Honors to command, F. Walsingham.


To the Right Honorable Francis Walsingham Esquire Ambassador for the Queens
Majesty in France.
SIr, I have nothing worthy to write unto you at this time, but because this
bearer promises to see you, I would not let him pass without my letters. What
was done in Scotland, he can best tell you; sithence de Crocque and Viracq^e
went from thence, they grow nearer to accord then they did before; yet what
they will do in the end, it is hard to say. Mr. Killegrew hops for the best;
wisdom would teach them, for all considerations, to agree within themselves,
and amongst themselves, and by themselves, and that they may do (as far as they
can see) now no more lets them. Here at home we stand looking somewhat to our
security against sudden attempts, and expecting what new occurrents time will
bring. The Parliament is prolonged until the twelfth of January, which should
have begun the first of November. When we hear again from you, you are like to
have another dispatch, and not before, as far as I can see. I and your friends
do not cease to call for a successor for you, but as yet her Majesty cannot
resolve on the person; and that once known, and he commanded and provided, you
may assuredly then hope upon your return. I am acquainted with these matters,
before that time arm your self with patience, and that time we will hasten as
we may. I pray you buy me the Commentaries of Mathiolus upon Dioscorides,
translated into French, and let it be bound there with two or three sheets of
paper before and in the end, That book was never wont to go from me, and now I
cannot tell how it is stolen from me: because it was noted with my observations
and notes, I had rather have lost a far better thing; and in London I cannot
buy any other, and therefore I pray you help me to one, and I will repay it
where you will appoint in French Crowns, with a hundred thanks. Fare you well.

From Windsore the thirtieth of October, 1572. Your assured Friend, Th. Smith.


To the Right Honorable Francis Walsingham Esquire her Majesty's Ambassador
Resident in France.
SIr, yesterday came Williams your servant to Windsore with your Letters and
Advertisements of that which he had to declare concerning Lions, Florence ^
wherein I see strange dealing for the party once offered to remain Prisoner,
until the truth might be tried, and so to lose his head, if the tale were not
true; wherefore I see it is good reason to be slow in credit to such matters.
Presently there is here one York, ^ come as he says, with Letters from Lions,
^ of credit to the Queens Majesty, and his message is to declare secretly the
danger of ^ and that if 3 would be so content, E would come to lie into hall 2
with such other fond devices, as for many respects the party is greatly
suspected; wherefore her Majesty has willed me with all haste to will you by
some good means to understand the truth of the party himself; that is to say,
of Glasco ^ and if he have not sent any such, then with speed to advertise, for
I think it will be necessary for 3 in honor, and for ^ in safety to utter the
matter, or the party to ^ Florence. This messenger pretends great devotion in
Religion, and we understand that he is of great levity, and fully meet for any
dangerous enterprise. I cannot write any more for haste of sending away this
Packet, because her Majesty would have speedy answer. I trust you shall
shortly hear of some comfort of a successor. The Queens Majesty is content
that I shall speak to Mr. Fr^^^is Carew to supply that place, with whom to
morrow I will speak, and that earnestly.

We are wont to have all evil news from thence, but now we have also very evil
news in our North parts.

The nine and twentieth of the last, the good Regent of Scotland dyed, as I
think, by a natural sickness, and yet the cert^^nty is not known. This will
make our cause the worse in Scotland, for I fear the conveyance away of the
King, and yet there is care taken for his safety, but I can almost hope for no
good using; our selves ^all by he^ps, and why the heaps fall not upon our
selves person^lly, I se^ nothing to the let thereof in our selves; God be
merciful unto us. Yesterday the French Ambassador sent me word to declare to
her Majesty, that the French Queen has brought forth a Daughter; and to know,
whether the Queens Majesty would be content to Christen it with her own name,
and to send my Lord of Leicester or me thither.

Her Majesty's answer was, That she would not desire to Christen it, nor would
send my Lord of L^^^ester o^ me; but if the King would des^^e her Majesty to
be God-mother, she would not refuse it, but would send some person qu^lified.
What will follow hereof, I know not.

From my house at Westminster, the third of November, 1572. Your assured loving
Friend, William Burleigh.


To the Right Honorable Francis Walsingham Esquire Ambassador for the Queens
Majesty in France.
MY Lord, I do thank you for the speedy answer to my former letters which I
wrote touching a Rider, and I perceive you used so much care as you have
already hearkened out one that is recommended very sufficient; but his demands
you think are very great, and so they be indeed: But as I am desirous to have
such a man, so am I loath to pay too dearly for him. I would gladly hear how
Mo^ret does employ him now, or whether you think him not a meet man for that
purpose. If he be of his wonted mind, he is very desirous to return again
hither, and to serve very reasonable; and I am given to understand, that he
has profited very well in his profession since his being there. If he be to be
had reasonably, and that you hear of his ability therewith of men of judgment
to be confirmed, I had rather have him then any other. If he be not, then this
I say for the other, whom I thank you again for, I will give him 150 Crowns a
year wages and his meat, and drink, and lodging in my house for him and his
man, and allowance in my stable for two horses; and if he prove a man to my
liking, I think, you do believe, I can find in my heart to be better worth to
him one way or another then 50 Crowns besides his wages. If you can thus agree
with him, the sooner he come to me the better; not doubting but that you will
in the mean time make good inquiry of his trade and life, and what his
conditions be. And if ever he have been honest, I trust to keep him so; and if
his nature be not too bad, I hope he shall be contented here with his usage, as
I mean he shall be treated. And so, Sir, I most humbly desire you to let me
have some description of the man by your next, and what you think he will do.
Now, Sir,

Touching our estate here: First, thanks be to God our Mistress is in very good
health, and I trust in God ere it be long will show some care over us all.

The matters in Scotland stand but in tickle terms between the parties, I mean
between the King and the Queens side; and so have they Agents -- for that the
King left them, who be now returned with better hope (I think) then in the end
they shall have cause to bring their practices to pass. Other particular news
of weight here is none at this present worth the writing, but that we are all
here yet quiet, and by Gods good assistance, I trust, shortly more certain hope
we shall have of the continuance of it. We your poor friends here are
continually laborers for your coming home; and surely, I trust, you shall
return ere it be long. For my own part, I will not cease till it be granted;
and in hope of that, I will forbear to write somewhat now, which when you come
home (if you will affirm) ^ will tell you. So my good Francis fare you well. In
some haste, the seven and twentieth of October. At Windsore.

I mean to morrow or next day, being at London, to visit your wife, cease
who not to call daily upon all your friends here by your letters for your
coming home. I like not my Cipher I have, I will make new, and send it you, and
then you shall hear of a matter worthy the writing. We hear here that
Montmore^cy is in some danger.

Your very Friend, To. Leicester.


To the Right Honorable Francis Walsingham Esquire her Majestes Ambassador
Resident in France.
YOur messenger that brought your dispatch of the five and twentieth of
October, arrived here the second of November, and my Lord Treasurer imparted
unto me such matters as you advertised him of, by whom again you shall
understand her Majesty's pleasure, for that I think his Cipher is better then
mine. I am loath to enter into some of t^ose things which I am very desirous
else to say somewhat to you of; but not doubting but his Lordship will signify
the whole, I will now forbear, and descend to smaller matters. And to answer
you for the two Captains you wrote to me to move her Majesty for; she is now
pleased to entertain the one, him that has most means am I lothest to name,
lest he might be suspected. In this mystery you know whom I mean, and shall
also by your servant: she is content with 50 l. yearly, whether it will like
him or no, I know not; if it do not, we will do what we can to increase it;
also, the other her Majesty yet is not minded to use his service. We perceive
the party Saint 4 is very coy in his dealing; but surely he is not to be
blamed, the world being there with you as it is. You shall hear of another
manner of matter, I am sure, by my Lord Treasurer, which is lately offered me
here, but we greatly suspect it to be some practice, or else the choice is not
well made of the party in my opinion. And you shall do well to understand it
with all expedition, as I am sure my said Lord does advise you thoroughly
therein; for it is of consequence, and it behooves us withal speed to know
whether it be right or wrong; if it be wrong, by my consent there shall be
right example made of the like, etc. The Regent of Scotland is dead, as we are
advertised this day. I suppose it to be very true: I trust her Majesty will
not lose the opportunity offered there.

If the Emperor be dead also, it will make a great change. I hope better for
Christendom, I mean, for good Christians. I have sent you a letter two days ago
by a Scotchman, one D^uglas; wherein I have sent you my mind touching the
Rider, whom I desire greatly to have, if I may reasonably have him. You shall
perceive by this Letter at large, that if I may have him for 150 Crowns a year
for himself, and to give him meat and drink, and his man, with a couple of
horse found in my stable: I think I shall be worth to him otherwise, half as
much more, if he like me well, as I mean he shall try me and I him for a year:
And if so he be content, the sooner he come, the better. God send him to be an
honest man, and I warrant you he shall be very well entreated. For his
sufficiency, I leave it to your good enquiry.

I trust shortly you shall be at home. I have not ceased daily, since your
wives arrival, to call upon her Majesty for it, and she is fully agreed
thereto, and has named some for your successor. I think Francis Carew shall be
the man, as it is yet resolved, or Henry Cobham; but one of them, I care not
who, shall be hastened for your sake, assure your self. I pray you show all the
favor and countenance you can to Benedict Spinola; he has a great cause there
in hand, which he has heard you have favorably furthered. He has required my
thanks, he is my dear friend, and the best Italian I know in England. Her
Majesty has written for him. Let his brother know, that I have written to
you, I pray you, if the Rider conclude, I am sure Spinola' s brother, if he be
there, will answer his brother here again. So good Francis fare you well. Your
good wife is in health.

In haste the second of November. Your assured Friend, To: Leicester.


To the Right Honorable Sir Thomas Smith, her Majesty's principal Secretary.
IT may please you to advertise her Majesty, that Standen arrived here lately
in post out of Flanders, where he stayed only five days, and had daily
conference, for the time of his abo^e there, with the Scottish Ambassador,
together with L^ggens; who at his return, which was by post, accompanied him
into Flanders. Those that observed the manner of their conferences, his coming
and returning by post, being accompanied by Liggens at his return, makes the
Sotchmen that wish continuance of quiet in their Country, to fear that there
is some dangerous practice in hand. The said Ambassador does now daily repair
to the Court, and has often conference with the Queen Mother at an
extraordinary time in the morning, when as commonly no Ambassador has access
but in the afternoon. Not long ^ince, in talk apart with his friends, he said,
that if the troubles of Scotland had not been, his Mistress had been at
liberty, and perhaps enjoyed a better Crown then Scotland is. He said further,
that if his Mistress had as many good friends in Scotland, as she has in
England, she had not long remained in prison as she does. Thus you see how
dangerous a ghest her Majesty harbors. The Spanish Marquis, who is come
hither to congratulate the Queens delivery, under the color of the same, as I
learned secretly, he has commission to treat secretly of three points. The
one, to cause the King to enter into the League.

The other, to the marriage between Monsieur and his Masters daughter.

The third, to propound some way for the Scottish Queens delivery.

Being procured thereto by the house of Guise, in recompense of the execution
done upon them of the Religion, whereby the King of Spain acknowledges to have
saved the Low Countries.

The Cardinal of Lorrain by his Letters, procured the King to write earnestly
to his Ambassador in Turkey, to cause him to travel, by all means, to compound
the differences between him and the Princes of the League.

The Almains do fear much the election of the Emperors second son in Polonia,
as that thing which will make the house of Austria too great. And so for other
matters referring your Lordship to these enclosed Occurrents, I most humbly
take my leave.

At Paris the twelfth of November. Your Honors to Command, Francis Walsingham.


To the Right Honorable, and my very good Lord, the Lord of Burleigh.
MY very good Lord, touching the Scottish matters, her Majesty desi^eth to be
advertised of, your Lordship shall understand, that I should know the party my
self, ever since my repair hither, who is of the Religion* and though not taken
heretofore to be very zealous, yet always reputed to be very honest. He had
been slain, if he had not been saved by ^ in this last broil, with whom he is
most assuredly in great credit. Steward at his return told me, that ^ meant to
send him into England with letters of recommendation unto ^ and at that time he
also requested me to recommend him by letters, which I promised to do; he
saying, that he would send for them.

Knowing the familiarity between the said party, and the other abovenamed, and
knowing the trust that ^ reposeth in him, I thought I could no way be better
informed of the truth of the matter then by him; for that I know, that if any
such matters were, he was acquainted with all: I sent for the said party, who
secretly repaired to me, and upon the first opening of the matter, he dealt
roundly with me, assuring me, that both he and the other sent before as men of
special trust, were employed by ^ but the latter only with Letters of credit,
which the principal himself shall avow unto me, if it were not for suspicion,
his doing being very narrowly observed. As for the Coyness used by ^ proceeded
only of forgetfulness, through a dangerous sickness he had not long before I
sent unto him. He willed me to assure her Majesty, that she might as well give
credit unto him, as to ^ himself. He told me he could not declare the contents
of the parties Commission, for that it was upon shutting of the gates, but
would find a time for that, I perceived he was one whom ^ trusted. He desired
that the matter might be communicated by her Majesty unto few, for that he did
assure me the D. had great intelligence in her Country. He requested me also,
that the letters of the party might pass in my packet, the same being so
disguised as they will never be known: This is as much as p^ssed between us. And
so leaving, etc.

At Paris the twelfth of November, 1572. Your Lordships to Command, Fr.
Walsingham.


To the Right Honorable Sir Thomas Smith, her Majesty's principal Secretary.
SIr, it may please you to advertise her Majesty, that the eighteenth of this
Month Monsieur Mannesire repaired unto me, sent from the King and Queen
Mother, to show me that they have made choice of him to be sent out of hand
unto her Ma^estie, to invite her to be Gossip, together with the Empress, and
the Duke of Savoy, who as it is thought, will be here in person. He told me,
that the King willed him to assure her Majesty, that there was no alteration
in him of good will toward her Majesty; and that in confirmation of the same,
he could do no less but desire her Majesty to be his Gossip.

Further, I gathered by him, he has some charge to feel her Majesty's mind and
inclination toward Monsieur Duc d' Alanson, from whom he has a letter unto
her Majesty.

Touching Monsieur Mannesire himself, he does all the good offices he may to
continue amity betwixt her Majesty and his Master, and is altogether altered
from Spain and the house of Guise, with whom I know he is quite out of
credit, for that he has not seemed the best to like of the late proceedings.
Here he is in good opinion both with the King and Queen Mother; and therefore
being in credit, and vvell-affected toward her Majesty, he may by receiving
good usage at her hands receive thereby encouragement also to continue his good
affection. The Legate is looked for here the four and twentieth of this
month: the end of his coming is to two purposes, as it is said; the one, to
procure the King to subscribe to the last Council at Trent; the other, to
suffer a levy of money to be made within his Dominions, termed by the name
Crusado, for the maintenance of the Turkish Wars.

They are advertised from the Ambassador at Rome, how that the Christians Army
is retired. Don John de Austria, being already arrived at Messina, and the
Venetians being at Corfu. And so having nothing else to advertise at this
present, etc.

At Paris the twentieth of November, 1572. Your Honors to command, F.
Walsingham.


To the Right Honorable Francis Walsingham Esquire Ambassador for the Queens
Majesty in France.
MR. Walsingham: First touching your revocation, her Majesty is fully resolved
thereof, and that all the expedition that may be devised, shall be used
therein, as you shall further understand from others. Your good wife was here
yesterday with me, who prevented me, meaning to have gone my self to her house
to have ^een her, for that she is so great as was (...) meet for her to travel
about. Such was her earnestness of your coming away, as she was come to me,
before I thought any body had known of my being in London; and coming from
Windsore, my Lord Treasurer and I met with your messenger young Nicasius. We
find still new tragical parts playing in that Country; among others, none more
strange, and more unnatural then his last, going in person to see one of his
Subjects and eldest Soldiers executed; an example used by no Christian, but
the most mighty God will not suffer long such Princes to dwell over his people.
As for his good intention to our Mistress and this Realm, when he shows
himself friendly to his own, then we will hope he may be friendly to his
neighbors. Since the death of the Regent of Scotland, we have not heard any
thing what is done there: You shall hear, as soon as we are advertised of any
thing worthy.

Touching the Rider I wrote of, I have referred to this bearer to declare my
mind unto you, to have a good one; I will be content to strain my self far. We
have no news here, only her Majesty is in good health; and though you may
hear of brutes of the contrary, I assure you it is not as has been reported.
Somewhat her Majesty has been troubled with a spice or show of the Mother,
but indeed not so: The fits that she has had has not been above a quarter of
an hour, but yet this little in her has bred strange brutes here at home. God
send her, I beseech him a long life. So I bid you heartily farewell,

the of November, 1572. Your assured Friend, To: Leicester.


To the Right Honorable Francis Walsingham Esquire her Majesty's Ambassador
Resident in France.
SIr, your Letters sent by Ni^asius his son, came to my hands yesternight
coming from the Court, and therewith I also received a small packet of some
advertisements; for the which I thank you, and shall to morrow impart it to her
Majesty.

Where of late I wrote unto you of a person come, as he says, from Florence ^
but yet I cannot, for certain respects, but be jealous for such practices; and
therefore I am willed to require you, to use some secret means how to
understand the truth; and to this end, I do send you herewith certain Letters,
which the party has written to Rome ^ which you may peruse and use, as you see
cause.

The party ^ remains here in London, as in ape and yet I doubt the P. will
smell of him. I have commanded these letters for to have the answer, as I
cannot write any more. I trust your old acquaintance Mr. Carew shall borrow
your room shortly.

From my house in Westminster the seventh of November. Yours assuredly, William
Burleigh


To the right Honorable Sir Thomas Smith, her Majesty's principal Secretary.
SIr, it may please you to advertise her Majesty, that the King dispatched
within these ten days Viracque, with a good sum of money, to entertain a party
in Scotland, until such time as he has propounded the matter here in France.
One William Seers, servant to the Earl of Westmerland, arrived here the four
and twentieth of this month, sent hither by the said Earl. Immediately upon
his arrival, Viracque went with him to the Court, which is at this present at
Monceaux. He reporeth, that in the North Country, from York, to the borders,
all the whole Country is at the Earls devotion; so that a few men employed
there by the King, may assure him, that her Majesty shall be kept so occupied,
as she shall have no leisure to send any supply to Rochel. I learn further,
that one Stephen Wilson a Scottish man, takes upon him to draw the Earl of
Argile to be wholly at the Kings devotion, so that the said Earl may receive
that estate and honor that his Father had at the King his Predecessors hands.
The Bishop of Glasco has had long and several conferences with the Legate
since his last arrival. If her Majesty do not compound the matter of Scotland
before Viracque his coming, she shall find more difficulty in the matter. It is
evident, how much money may do with that Nation; therefore it were well before
his coming, her Majesty took the benefit of the Market, for that many Chapmen
makes deerer wares.

Such Noblemen of Scotland as are here, were never so much made of. I am well
assured that the Duke of Alva not long sithence, did write unto the King here,
in recommendation of the practice that tended to the disquiet of her Majesty;
but what it was, or what answer was made, I cannot learn. At this present there
is not that entertainment used toward the Legate, that appertains to his
calling, and as heretofore has been used, which makes all men of judgment to
suspect, that the same is done for the nonce, to blind the eyes of all the
Princes Protestants. And that those speeches that were given out, that the
Marquis of Egremont departed without good satisfaction, for that he obtained
nothing of those things he propounded; and that the Legate is like to obtain
nothing of those things he is to propound, are but to abuse the world.

Things do not pass here as they were wont to do, through many hands; besides
the Duke of Nevers, not many Counselors that are made privy to the affairs of
most secrecy. As I learn secretly their Ambassador there finds himself
agrieved, for that he receives not that good countenance and entertainment
that he was wont to do. Though I have most just cause to think that there is
but little good meant toward her Majesty, whatsoever outward show is made,
yet in my poor opinion it were not amiss for her Majesty to use all outward
show and entertainment that may seem to appertain to good amity, and yet not to
omit any thing that tends to her safety. And so for other matters referring
your honor to these enclosed Occurrents, I most humbly take my leave.

At Paris the seven and twentieth of November, 1572. Your Honors to Command,
Francis Walsingham.


To the Right Honorable, and his very good Lord, the Lord of Burleigh.
YOur Lordships of the seventh I have received; the Letters enclosed I have
delivered to Steward, for that Glascow ^8 was not here; he therefore desired me
to tell Davison, that his absence is the cause why he has not answer, but by
the next he shall hear from him; in the mean time he bideth me tell him, nn ^3
that he is now without fear of danger, but that he has many good friends who
will suffer him to take no wrong. He tells me further, that he is resolved to
revenge the death of his friends, hap what may hap. He wishes ^3 to look well
to Scotland, and that Munnesire is sent but to abuse her Majesty with (...)
words. If Steward himself, of the ^9 shall learn any thing that touches (...)
I shall be advertised from time to time. I see more great cause now to nouri^h
this humor contrary to my opinion in my last Letters, for surely there are
great mischiefs a brewing. I am assured, that within these eight days Florence
(...) protested, that he should never be quiet so long as the exercise of
Religion continued in any one place of Christendom. I know further
particularly, that he said he will never forget New haven, until revenge be
made. I never knew so deep a dissembler; I am sure that the murder of the
Admiral should have been executed at Bloys, but that they saw him too well
accompanied.

It is agreed, that both he and Spain shall, for the avoiding of suspicion of
the Legates coming, entertain the ^3 with good words; and that Spain should make
some show to be glad to grow to some accord ^ did send expressly Gentlemen unto
me, to know in what state and terms things do stand here, being requested so to
do by the Princes of Germany, for that there are many contrary brutes there. He
sends me word, that they mean shortly to call a Diet, to consult for their
safety, and for the revenge. I have not yet dispatched the Gentleman, but mean
to do out of hand, in such sort instructed, as I hope shall rather heat then
cool them. I have requested H to be thoroughly advertised with all convenient
speed how things do pass there, etc.

Paris the six and twentieth of November, 1572. Your Honors to Command,
Francis Walsingham.


To the Right Honorable Sir Thomas Smith, her Majesty's principal Secretary.
IT may please your honor to advertise her Majesty, that the King here is
given to understand from the Count de Lude, who lies at Morte, how that they
of Rochel have of late taken the Isle of Rez, which has bred great content
here; for it is a place of great importance, by the having whereof they are
Masters of the Haven, and may thereby receive any succor by sea. They have also
taken in the same diverse ships. He does further advertise, that they have taken
eight or ten Britains laden with corn. Touching the Kings intention for the
besieging of Rochel, this bearer shall inform you at the full, who has talked
with one who knows what is resolved in that behalf. There is daily here
looked for the Master of the Emperors horse, being sent hither to congratulate
the Queens delivery, as also to bring word, that the Emperor has chosen
Monsieur and the Duke of Lorrain Knights of the Order of Toison. By letters out
of Germany they write, that it was determined upon the news of the execution of
those of the Religion here, to have slain as many Catholics of the French as
were found there; which afterward, upon better consideration, was stayed, for
that they thought the same would prove but a poor revenge; notwithstanding,
this Nation grows so hateful there, as for avoiding of danger, such of them
as travel in those parts, are driven to take upon them the names of
Burgundians. They write also, that there is hope that the Elector Brandenburgh,
shall be chosen King of Polonia, which news does nothing content those here.
Further, they do advertise, that the Princes of Germany are in great jealousy
of the Legates repair hither; and that thereupon they do put themselves in order
of defense, for that they think his repair hither cannot be but to continue
some dangerous practice.

A day or two after the Legate had made his entry, the Court of Parliament sent
unto him, according to the ancient custom, to see his faculties. To whom he
answered, that the intention of his coming was not to execute the office of a
Legate, but only to visit the King, and to treat with him certain private and
particular matters. Touching the manner of his receiving and entertainment
since his access to the King, this bearer shall enform you. They do all what
they can to make the world believe, that his coming is not grateful unto them.
The Ambassador of Spain does give out, that the five and twentieth of the last
month, Zutphen was taken by the Duke of Alva, and that eight or ten of the
Princes ships have been also lately distressed.

Pynart of late willed my Secretary to tell me, that whereas heretofore
Monsieur de la Mot had usually certain imposts of wine granted to him, he is
afraid that he shall be debarred of the same, or at the least some part of the
quantity cut off; which thing he wishes not to be done at this time, for that
it may give the King occasion to think, that his Ministers are not so grateful
toward her Majesty as heretofore they have been. Seeing that the Gentleman is
not to make any long abode there, being in hope of revocation, me thinks it
should be well done if he were used as he may return with good satisfaction.
And so having nothing further to impart unto your Honor at this time, I most
humbly take my leave.

AT Paris the fifth of December. Your Honors to Command, Fra: Walsingham.


To the Right Honourble, and his very good Lord, the Lord of Burleigh.
SInce I last wrote unto your Lordship, Steward repaired not unto me, for that
there is an eye had to such as resort to my house. He sends me word, that
Glasco 4 ^9 party increases in strength, which will well appear when the
season shall serve. His letters of advice this bearer shall deliver you. The
party that is recommended unto you from Berwick, tells me that James Kirkaldy
departs hence out of hand with such money as Viracque should have carried
into Scotland; for that he has gotten license to stay here for a month, for
that the King minds to employ him there as an Ambassador Resident. Further,
he tells me, that de la Mot has advertised the King, how that the Lord Athol
is won to be of the Queens party, which now sithence the death of the Regent is
grown far the stronger: And to the end that Liddington may travel more
earnestly in strengthening the faction, there is some offer made unto him of
some great pension; he says m^^eover, that the Bishop of Glasco gives him to
understand, that with some assistance of money, the Lord Athol, and the Lord
Argile being revolted from the Kings side as they are, they shall be more able
to make their party good against any force her Majesty shall send, until such
time as he has settled his things here. Touching Seers, the Earl of
Westmerlands man, I can by no means learn what answer he received at the Kings
hands. He tells me only, that he stayed here four days. These his
advertisements I have confirmed otherwise, and therefore I do the rather credit
them. They have written to the Ambassador, to use all the means that may be
possible, whatsoever it cost, to have the Queen of Scots spoken withal, willing
him in any case to beware to use in that behalf any Hugonot. The B. of Glasco
has lately diverse times conference for the devising of some good means for
that purpose; one whom he meant to employ in that behalf, discovered no less
unto me, who thinks that there is some practice for the stealing of her away.

They caused of late Briquemont and Cavannes a little before their death, to
subscribe to certain blanks, which they have filled up with such matter as may
best prove that there was a conspiracy pretended. Which blanks so filled up,
they sent by Fregoz and one Carpenter into Germany, to show some unto the
Princes there, for the better justifying of the late execution.

If Kirkaldy be well used by Mr. Killegrew, he will be no evil instrument: he
desires much the revenge of that that has been lately done here.

At Paris the fifth of December. Your Honors to Command, Francis Walsingham.


To the Right Honorable, and his very good Lord, the Earl of Leicester.
RIght Honorable, the King here is advertised, that they of Rochel have of
late taken the Isle of Rez, and diverse ships in the same, a thing that imported
the Rochellois much, for that thereby they have the Haven free, and at their
commandment, and may receive such succors as may come unto them by sea. This
Court is much agrieved with all, as well in this, as in other matters, that
things frame so untowardly and go backwards. The wisest sort do not stick to
say, that the greatest troubles are now but a beginning. If it shall prove true
that they write out of Germany, which is, that the Marquis of Brandenburgh is
like to be chosen King of Polonia, they may perhaps have just cause to repent
their late doings; but howsoever that fall out, we shall see that God will work
somewhat, whereby it may appear the blood of his Saints to be dear unto him:
Perhaps we did build too much before upon the courage and wisdom of them that
be dead: He can raise up stones to set forth his glory, so that we need not
doubt to see the revenge, unless our sins be the let. What is meant by the
King, touching the besieging of Rochel, this bearer shall impart unto your
Lordship, as also, the manner of the entertainment of the Legate, and how they
seek to make the world believe, that they are not content with his coming, nor
he with his entertainment. They say here, that the Kings side in Scotland is
much weakened, and the other side far the stronger; they have therefore
dispatched of late from hence, some to keep the Queens party in courage, until
they have settled things at home. I find therefore her Majesty shall have great
difficulty to settle things here in such sort, as may prevent such mischiefs as
hereafter may grow unto her that way. Her Majesty can of her self well enough
judge of the peril, besides, I know she lacks not good advice; and if sparing
be not the let, I hope all will do well. And so for other matters, referring
your Honor to the Lord Treasurers Letters and this bearer, I most humbly take
my leave.

At Paris the fifth of December, 1572. Your Honors to Command, Francis
Walsingham.


To the Right Honorable, and his very good Lord, the Lord Treasurer.
YOur Honor by Master Secretaries Letters shall understand, that the Isle of
Rez is taken by them of Rochel; that there is some hope conceived in Germany of
the Elector Brandenburgh to the Kingdom of Polonia. That the Ambassador of
Spain here gives out, that the fifteenth of the last Month Zatphen in
Gelderland was taken. That certain of the Princes ships are lately distressed,
and that the two Dukes are at Boisleduc. The Legates doings are kept very
secret, in so much that his Secretary is not made acquainted with them, for the
avoiding of suspicion. The Ambassador of Spain has no great conference with
him, but by a third person named L. Angr^lett^ Audit^re della Rota, who passes
daily to and fro between them; he is one in whom the Pope lays the chiefest
weight of his legation, in respect of his wisdom and experience. The Duke of
Savoys repair hither in person, makes men to think that the unity between this
Crown and Spain is like to grow great, for that he is termed here Lame du Rey
du esquire, and that therefore the matters of treaty between them are of great
weight. I know that sithence my coming to the Country, the King has openly
used some speeches of misliking of the said Duke, but this late change,
changes all things upside down. The doubt of the Turks great preparation for
the next year, is a great bridle of their intentions. For the removing of this
impediment, the last of this month they dispatched hence their Ambassador, to
make great offers both in Spains and the Venetians behalf, to draw him to an
accord. The Venetians, as I am credibly informed, have been these three years
past at the charge of 800 000 the month, and therefore would be glad to be rid
of so weighty a burden. And so having nothing else to impart unto your Honor
at this present, I most humbly take my leave.

At Paris the fifth of December, 1572. Your Honors to Command, Francis
Walsingham.


To the Right Honorable, and his very good Lord, the Lord Treasurer.
BEcause this bearer promised to see my letters safely delivered unto your
Lordship, I thought I would not let him go without them. The Legate stays
here until there come resolution touching that they have lately treated here,
which they have dispatched both toward Rome and Spain by two sundry Curriors.
The King is of late advertised, that the number of those of the Religion in
Lanquedoc is increased very much, and that there are joined with them 600
horsemen, and 1500 footmen, that are departed out of their Country of Bern,
who by the way have distressed the most part of Count Ioyeux Company.

They have taken also upon the edge of Languedoc, a certain place called
Sanins, where their Gunpowder is made: this increase of their number makes
the King irresolute what to do. Before these advertisements, he was determined
to have besieged Sancerre, but now he is advised to march toward them in
Languedoc. The new accidents that happen, make them to change their purposes.
Of late there is one arrived here from the Duke of Baviers, whose coming is
thought to proceed through the Cardinal of Lorrains persuasions, with
commission to make great offers to the King, from the Duke, to the end
encourage him, both to the embracing of the league, as also to proceed to the
rooting out of those of the Religion here.

Monsieur de la Mot has of late earnestly recommended to their Majesty's here,
certain requests commended unto him by my Lords of her Majesty's Counsel.
Whereupon Pynart ^ent unto me, to assure me, that there shall be such justice
done to her Subjects, as her Majesty shall have just cause to rest contented
therewith. And so having nothing else to impart unto your Honor at this
present, I most humbly take my leave.

At Paris the tenth of September, 1572. Your Honors to Command, Francis
Walsingham.


To the Right Honorable Sir Thomas Smith, her Majesty's principal Secretary.
SIr, It may please you to advertise her Majesty, that by advertisement lately
come to this Court from Rochel, the King is given to unde^stand, that Strozz^
has taken Marans, not far from Rochel, where he put to the sword two Companies
of Soldiers placed there by the Rochellois. Further, he is given to
understand, that de la Noue is entered into Rochel, being sent thither by the
King, having beforehand given oath, that he would faithfully travel to reduce
them to yield, who by persuasion has much wrought with them, as they are
content to grow to some capitulation, which proceeds chiefly through a
disagreement that is between the Rochellois and such strangers as are repaired
thither. Also it is said, that the Baron de le guard has taken three ships
laden with corn by them of Rochel.

These sundry news has put them of this Court in great jollity, for that they
hope shortly to reduce the Realm to inward quietness.

There are marched out of Burgundy a Captain footmen, and certain horsemen,
levied by the Duke of Guise, and the Duke of Aumale, whether they shall be
employed at Sancerre, or whether they shall march directly to Languedoc, it is
not as yet concluded.

The Duke of Guise arrived here the twelfth of this month, who is marvellously
well accompanided. The Cardinal of Lorrain his Uncle, is daily looked for here,
as also the Cardinal of Guise his Cousin.

By Letters of the fifth of this month out of Flanders they write, that the D.
of Alva does distribute his Army into Garrisons, and that the Roysters do
remain at the Forest of Arden, and in the Land of Luxenburg, where they commit
great spoils and outrages, being not yet paid; for that the D. of Alva
pretends, not to have wherewithal to discharge them. They write further, that
the Prince of Orange remains at Dortrecht, where he makes collection of
money for the levying of forces for the next Spring. From Cullen they write,
that there are certain Commissioners repaired thither, sent by the Emperor (as
it is said) to treat some accord between the Prince of Orange and the D. of
Alva; notwithstanding, they do give out other causes of their coming. By
Letters from Vienna they advertise, that the Emperor is repaired into Bohemia,
to procure the election of his Son; which being done, he means to repair to
Germany, and there to keep a Diet for the election of the King of Romans.
Further they advertise, that the great Turk of late has sent unto him a
present, commending him very much for the keeping of his promise, and the
observation of the accord between them, requesting him to continue the same.
Touching the election of the King of Polonia they write, that the Elector
Brandenburg is most like to be chosen, notwithstanding they have great hope of
Monsieurs election, which men of great judgment do think to be void of any
good ground. By letters out of Italy they write, that the Turk will have in a
readiness against the next Spring 400 Galleys, whereof they are very much
afraid, the rather, for that their own Forces by sea do decay; the greatest
part of their slaves for the furniture, being decayed by sickness this last
voyage. And so leaving further to trouble your Honor at this present, I most
humbly take my leave.

At Paris the eighteenth of December, 1572. Your Honors to Command, Fr.
Walsingham.


To the Right Honorable, and his very good Lord, the Lord of Treasurer.
BEcause Steward is absent from the Court, I can by no means decypher what is
the end of Monsieur de la Noue's travel. If there be no mystery in the matter,
then are others doing not so well grounded as they make men believe. So soon as
I shall be able to decypher any further of the matter, I will not fail to
advertise your Lordship. It is here said, that Monsieur de la Mot has
advertised, how that her Majesty's meaning is to execute the Queen of Scots:
Whereupon such as favor her do discourse, that it were good to stay the
Noblemen that shall be sent hither by her Majesty for the Christening, as a
pledge for the said Queens safety; that their Majesty's here should have such
intention, I know not.

The Legate, as I am most credibly informed, has, amongst other Articles of
his Instructions, commandment earnestly to commend the Queen of Scots cause to
the King here, and to devise with him, some mean for her delivery, whereby
England may be reduced to the Catholic faith.

The Scottish Ambassador has more often recourse unto him, then any other
Ambassador here, which makes me the rather to doubt some practice.

Hamilton, brother to him that killed the Regent, has sent this message unto
D. Chasteauherauld, following; that is, to do what he may to keep the Castle of
Edinburgh, and to maintain his party until Whitsundy next, assuring him, that
by that time they shall have assistance, both from the Pope, Spain and this
Crown. The party himself that is to do the message, made me acquainted with
all, which is now departed toward Scotland, and has promised me to declare no
less to Mr. Randolph, who knows him. And so leaving further to trouble your
Honor at this present, I most humbly take my leave.

At Paris the eigh and twentieth of December, 1572. Your Honors to Command,
Fra: Walsingham.


To the Right Honorable, and his very good Lord, the Earl of Leicester.
WHat hope they have here to compound with Rochel, and by what means, your
Lordship shall understand by Mr. Secretaries Letters; as also, what is written
from Flanders, Germany and Italy If Rochel may be reduced to compound, as they
hope for, they think it will be a means to cause the other Towns to yield the
sooner. It is said, that the Rochellois are drawn the rather to give ear to a
composition, for that they see there is no hope of Foreign succors; and yet
when a man considers what is past, a man would think there could grow unto
him no greater danger no other way then to grow to composition: I cannot
therefore think, but that there is some other mystery in the matter, more then
I can as yet decypher. The hope of composition does put them in great comfort,
that they shall shortly settle their inward troubles, which I fear will breed
some troubles to their neighbors. And so having nothing else to advertise your
Lordship at this present, I most humbly take my leave.

At Paris the eighteenth of December, 1572. Your Honors to Command, Francis
Walsingham.


To the Right Honorable, and his very good Lord, the Lord Treasurer.
IT may please your Lordship to understand, that after the closing up of my
Letters to Mr. Secretary, I was given to understand, that by a Currier lately
repaired hither from Rochel, they have received from Monsieur de la Noue
certain Articles of composition, propounded by them of Rochel unto the King.
Amongst the rest, I do understand: First, that they may have the free exercise
of their Religion, as heretofore they have had. Secondly, that they may keep
inviolably the old and ancient liberties of their Town. Thirdly, that instead
of Monsieur de Byron, they may have la Noue to be their Governor.

It is though there, that the King will consent unto their Articles, with
intention to observe them, as he has done others before. He thinks that the
Composition with R^chel will serve for an introduction to others that hold out
to do the like; the hope whereof does make them here very merry. For other
advertisements, out of Germany, Flanders and Italy, I refer your Lordship to
Master Secretaries Letters.

At Paris the eighteenth of December, 1572. Your Honors to command, Francis
Walsingham.


To our Right Trusty and Well-beloved Francis Walsingham Esquire our Ambassador
Resident in France.
ELIZABETH R.

TRusty and well-beloved, we greet you well; there has been with us Monsieur
de Mannesire, with the Letters from the King and Queen Mother, and the Duke of
Alanson: His credence was in three points: The continuance of the Amity. That
we should be God-mother to the Infant; and to pursue still the request of
marriage with the Duke of Alanson. To whom we answered: First, that as for
amity, having it of late by league so straightly made betwixt us, on our behalf
we never attempted nor minded to attempt any thing that should impair it, but
rather do study and wish to increase the same, if we could; and therefore you
may say, it is that, and the good will appertaining to that Amity, that made us
by you before, and now by de Mannesire, to declare what we have heard of our
good brothe^, which we are sorry to hear: First, the great slaughter made in
France of Noblemen and Gentlemen, unconvicted, and untryed. So suddenly (as it
is said at his commandment) did seem so much to touch the honor of our good
brother, as we could not but with lamentation, and with tears of our heart,
hear it of a Prince so near allied unto us, and in a chain of undissoluble love
knit unto us by league and oath: That being after excused by a conspiracy and
treason wrought against our good Brothers own person, which whether it were
true or false, being in another Princes Kingdom and Jurisdiction, where we have
nothing to do, we mind not to be curious; yet that they were not brought to
answer to Law and Judgment, before they were executed, those who were found
guilty. We do hear it marvellously ill taken, as a thing of a terrible and
dangerous example; and are sorry, that our good brother was so ready to
condescend to any such Council, whose nature we took to be more humane and
noble; but when more was added unto it, that women, children, maids, young
infants and sucking babes, were at the same time murdered, and cast into the
river, and that liberty of execution was given to the vilest and basest sort of
the popular, without punishment or revenge of such cruelty done afterward by
Law, upon those cruel murderers of such innocents; this increased our grief
and sorrow in our good brothers behalf, that he should suffer himself to be led
by such inhumane Councillors: And now sithence it does appear by all doings,
both by the Edicts, and otherwise that the rigor is used only against them of
the Religion reformed, whether they were of any conspiracy or no, and that
contrary to the Edict of Pacification so oftentimes repeated, they of the
reformed Religion, are either driven to fly, to dye, or to recant, or lose
their offices; whereby it does appear, by all actions now used by our good
brother, that his scope and intent does tend only to subvert that Religion that
we do profess, and to root it out of his Realm; at the least, all the strangers
of all Nations and Religions so does interpret it, as may appear by the
triumphs and rejoycings set out, as well in the Realm of France as others, which
makes that it must needs seem very strange, both to us, and to all other, that
our good brother should require us to be Godmother to his dear child, we being
of that Religion which he does now persecute, and cannot abide within his
Realm: And if we should believe the persuasion of others, and the opinion of
all strangers our friends, who be not our Subjects, we should in no case
condescend to any association in that or any other matter: But as we have
always hitherto had special love to our good brother in his younger age and a
desire to the consideration of his good estate and quietness, which we have in
deeds manifestly showed, never seeking any advantage of time against him* as
peradventure other Princes would have done; but ever sought to preserve his
Estate and his Subjects, of what estate or condition in Religion whatsoever
they were, exhorting them to unity and concord, and with loyal hearts to live
together in quiet under our good brother, without offering injury the one to
the other, glad of their agreement, and sorry of their division and discord; so
the late league of straiter amity made betwixt our good brother and us, to the
which he did so frankly and lovingly condescend, or rather procure it at our
hands, is so fresh in our memory, that we cannot suffer that in any jot it
should be diminiished, but rather increased daily, so long as our good brother
does show the like unto us; and that makes us to interpret all things in
better part then otherwise by any means they can appear, such is our love to
our good brother, and so can we be content to persuade our selves for the love
that we do bear unto him; and for the hope of his continuance in our begun
amity, without faintness or dissimulation: And this for the matter of Amity.
For continuance of declaration of which amity, we said to Mannesire, we would
not be slack in any good office doing, at the request of our good brother. And
so notwithstanding the doubts and impediments beforementioned, we intend to
send a worthy personage, a noble man of our Realm, to repair to his Court, and
to visit the King our good brother and the Queen Mother, and the rest who have
written in our behalfs, and to do that office which is required as
appertains, wishing that these spiritual alliances may be to us our comfort
and conservation of the amity begun betwixt us. To the motion of the marriage
with the Duke of Alanson, wherein de Mannesire seemed somewhat earnest; after
declaration of inconveniences that might come in that marriage, by the
diversity of age and Religion, which we termed in our talk extreme and true
impediments, we made this final resolution and answer, That forasmuch as we had
given to our Ambassador resident there, charge to demand and make relation of
certain things touching that matter, to the King and Queen Mother, to the which
you had no answer, but of the Queen Mother in a certain generallity; before
that we shall have a special answer to them, we cannot well resolve; the which
once being done, we shall the better understand what to answer for any other
proceeding in that request.


To the Right Honorable Francis Walsingham Esquire Ambassador Resident for her
Majesty in France.
SIr, I heartily thank you for your often advertisements; and also, that you
are so careful for our estate, the which, so far as I can learn, depends only
upon the providence of God, as it has done always, but is easily sustained by
the policy of men, and yet has sped better then any man would think, and so I
pray God it may do still. De Mannesire has been honorably received, and
friendly; and yet to say the truth, since those late and execrable murders of
the true servants of God there, the minds of the most number are much alienated
from that Nation, even of the very Papists, much more of the Protestants here;
and if in countenance and entertainment some coldness might appear, it must be
ascribed to our English nature, which as yet cannot dissemble so deeply as the
French can and has done; but I am sure De Mannesire has no cause to complain.

In Scotland, after the death of the Earl of Mar the late Regent, about the
four and twentieth of November they chose the Earl of Morton Regent, with a
great common consent of the Lords and B^rgesses in Scotland; who (as we hear
say) does very carefully and wisely endeavor himself to reconcile, as much as
may be, the Lords one with another, and to appease both the factions, which I
fear will not be but with some charge to the Queens Majesty, and some grief to
the French Ministers and Procurers, who can least abide quietness in that
Realm. Mr. Kill^grew is yet there still, who as soon as they appear to agree
within themselves, shall return (as he would gladly do) hither to receive some
thanks for his pains. I pray God for so much as he has deserved for his
integrity and diligence.

Our men be all come from Flushing, either before, or at, or since their
returning, the most part all sick.

Sir Humphrey Gilberts sickness is turned into a Quartain, some of them that
came with him be buried at London. I thank you for the Matthiolus you sent unto
me: I like it well, but yet if I could recover mine own I noted through with
mine own hands, I would like it far better, but he that stole it from me, does
think that I shall have it again of that price. I pray you buy me a case of
Instruments, such as be to be sold in the Palace; I mean, containing two
compasses or three a square, a pen of metal, and other things. I have two of
them already, one of the least, and the other of Copper or Latin, and the
manner of Iron: Now I desire to have of the biggest volume, which is with the
case a foot long, or thereabouts, and if more, it were not the worse; whether
the instruments be of Iron or Latin I care not. I have showed your man mine, to
the intent he might know what I mean. I have sent you by him five French Crowns
of the Sun to pay for my book of Matthiolus, and the case of Tools, and if it
come to more, I will pay whatsoever it be, with most hearty thanks. I am sure
you have heard of, and I think you have seen the new fair Star or Comet, but
without beard or tail, which has appeared here these three weeks, on the
backside of the Chair of Cassiopeia, and on the edge of Lactea via. The bigness
is betwixt the bigness of Jupiter and Venus, and keeps there to my appearance,
who have no instruments to observe it, and because of this cold weather also,
dare not observe the precise order of the fixed stars; such a one I never have
observed, nor read of, I pray you let me know what your wise men of Paris do
judge upon it. I know they will not think it is the Admirals soul, as the
Romans did of the Comet next appearing, after the murder of Julius Caesar,
that it was his soul.

It may be Astraea now peaking out afar off in the North, to see what revenge
shall be done upon so much innocent bloodshed in France at a marriage banquet
and rear suppers after it. It would be to me good yet to understand what your
Astronomers and Heaven-gazers there do judge of it. If I were not so much
occupied as I am, I would turn over all my old books, but I would say somewhat
of it my self, and gess by chance, even as wisely as they, though I would not
publish it but to my friends; for folly, the more it is kept in, the better.

Methinks I hear you say, what a mischief means he to write to me of new
Stars and Astronomers, and tells me nothing of my coming home* Sir, if I
should tell you any thing thereof, de die and tempore, I should but guess as
Astronomers do; but this I can tell you, all your friends have not only been
diligent, but more then importunate to bring you home; and your wife with tears
and lamentations: And the Queens Majesty seems to incline and grant our
requests; but when a pin is set fast in a hole, till we have another to thrust
that out, and tarry there it self, it is hard to get it out. Your successor
cannot yet be found; yes, find enough, but we cannot get one that will ^tick
fast till he might be thrust in indeed, and so you to be thrust out; and ye
know how long we be here a resolving, and how easy to be altered. At the
signing of her Majesty's letters to you this morning; I said to the Queen,
Madam, my Lord Ambassador looks now to have some word from your Majesty of his
return, it would comfort him very much. Why, faith she, he shall come. Yea
(quoth I) when the poor Gentleman is almost dismayed; your Majesty has heard
enough with what grief he does tarry there. Well, says she, you may write unto
him, that he shall come home shortly, we think with my Lord of Worcester. I
said, indeed my Lords train should be the more honorable, if he had one
Ambassador to go with him, and another to return with him. Yea, says her
Majesty, there be some make excuses that they would not go, but their excuses
shall not serve them. I thanked her Majesty, and came my ways; for she made
haste to go a walking with the Ladies, because it was a frost.

Fare you well. From Hampton Court this eleventh of December, 1572. Your
assured Friend, Th. Smith.
Her Highness appoints still upon Mr. Carew to be your successor, but he
makes great labor to the contrary by Ladies of the privy Chamber, and others;
but as I can perceive by this last speech, and others, he shall succeed you.




To the Right Hono^rable Francis Walsingham Esquire Ambassador Resident for her
Majesty in France.
THis bearer your servant, comes only with credit; for I have no leisure to
write but this. Mannesire has gotten knowledge, for which Glasco 9 sent
Marcellis le davison hither, as Davison this present night tells me; whereby
he says, that if Mannesire shall come hither before this bringer, then shall 9
Glasco and he be in great danger; and therefore Davison does write by this
bringer to Steward, as I think, and to 9 who as Davison thinks, will surely
come hither: For which purpose, he has required me to provide a passenger to
attend at Harwieh. Le the Port of 2 0 ^ 6 ^ ^ The rest of things your servant
shall show unto you; and this do I depeach, without knowledge of the Queens
Majesty, until I may have answer.

From Westminister this eleventh of December at Midnight, 1572. Yours
assuredly, William Burleigh


To the Right Honorable Sir Thomas Smith, her Majesty's principal Secretary.
SIr, her Majesty's of the eleventh of this month I have received, but have
not yet communicated to their Majesty's here such answers as were made unto the
things propounded unto her by Monsieur de Mannesire; both for that he is not
yet returned, as also, for that the Queen Mother, at this present, is not in
the best health, whereby Ambassadors can have no access to her as yet. Her
sickness is only a Catarrh, so that I think by his return she will be in state
able to give access: seeing the Government rests wholly in her hands, without
committing the matter unto her, as well as unto the King, it will be to no
great purpose, for that he receives his light from thence. The eighteenth of
this month, the King by mischance of another man's sword, received a little
hurt in his left arm, which is not great, but that every small hurt is great in
a Prince.

The hope of the Rochellois is yielding is now worn away, they having lately
received advertisements from them that Monsieur de la Noue can do no good, and
that they imprison as many as do persuade them to yield, as those whom they
hold suspected; so that now being out of all hope to obtain the same by
composition, they here consult of the means to obtain the same by force; and
therefore it is said, that Monsieur, and Monsieur le Duc shall march
thitherwards about the latter end of January. Yesterday, as I am credibly
informed, they received news that did not best content them out of Switzerland;
which is, that the last Diet holden there, they have concluded, not to suffer
the King to have any succors from thence, for that they suspect that the fire
lately kindled here, is to extend to themselves.

The Soldiers here do conclude, that without either Switzers or Almains the
King can besiege neither Rochel nor any other Town; for the Frenchmen are not
fir for the keeping of Artillery, nor to make the body of the battle of footmen.

The King does send into Germany, to see if he can appease the Almains, as also
to procure succors if he shall need them. He has received at their hands many
a churlish answer; and notwithstanding, without respect had of the difference
of their degrees, he for bears not to woo them.

The nineteenth of this month, there arrived here the Bishop of Valences
Secretary out of Polonia, who gives them great hope of the Election of
Monsieur; and yet some part of his tale gives men cause to judge, that there
is no great reason so to think; for that he says, by the reason of the plague
that there reigns, the Nobility to whom the election appertains, have not
yet assembled: so that all this hope seems to be grounded upon some
particular conference that the Bishop has had with some of the said Electors,
who perhaps when the matter shall come to through debating, will change their
opinion. Men of judgment here, that know that Country, do think, that if the
Bishop of Valence had had a million of gold, accompanied with his eloquence, to
be stow amongst them, he might then be able to do somewhat; but otherwise they
think, that eloquence without treasure will gain no Kingdom.

The Venetians of late have taken four French ships, and have put some of them
to torture, to make them confess the coloring of certain Turkish goods: as
which news the King was very much offended, and therefore has given them leave
of Marseilles to use all means of revenge.

From Antwerp they write, that the Duke of Alva, by the benefit of the last
frost, has taken certain Towns in Holland, which thing is not altogether
believed, for that the Ambassador here has received no letters for
confirmation of the same.

The news of the Earl of Morton to be chosen Regent, Boughan and the Lords of
Loug^leuin to have the Government of the King, does very much mislike them; and
therefore her Majesty has cause the more to like of it. And so leaving to
trouble your Honor any further at this present, I most humbly take my leave.

At Paris the two and twentieth of December, 1572. Your Honors to Command, Fr.
Walsingham.


To the Right Honorable, and his very good Lord, the Earl of Leicester.
MY very good Lord, I had very well hoped, that the reasons for my return would
have countervailed any that Mr. Carew could allege for his stay. I forbear to
express my grief, for that I am somewhat in hope some other shall be cho^en
that shall not slip his head out of the collar. I beseech your Lordship
therefore to continue your assistance in that behalf. Touching the hope of
having Rochel by composition, the wind is come about, they being now persuaded,
that there is no way to have it but by force; whatsoever her Majesty says to
the contrary, they cannot here but believe that they of Rochel receive
encouragement from her Majesty to hold out. The Switzers, as I am given to
understand, have concluded at a late Diet, held by them, to give no succor
this way, which falls out contrary to their way. Those people are not so
gross, but that they foresee the end, that the late accident here tends to. I
would others, whom it touches as nearly* would so think, The late election of
the Regent in Scotland, does altogether miscontent them here; and some
threatenings are given out that it shall not so long stand for good, for that
the same passed not with the content of both parties, but only by the choice
of one faction. So leaving further to trouble your Honor at this present, I
most humbly take my leave.

At Paris the two and twentieth of December, 1572. Your Honors to Command,
Francis Walsingham.


To the Right Honorable, and my very good Lord, the Lord of Burleigh.
STeward being made acquainted with the contents of your Lordships Letters,
tells me, that 9 means to stand upon the denial; and therefore requested me
with all diligence to dispatch this messenger, and in his name 3 to deny also,
if any question shall be moved in that behalf, That Davison never propounded
any such matter; notwithstanding, he desires that the ship may stay at 2 ^ ^ 6
ry 9 or 10 days; that if upon better consideration, reason shall move him to
alter his opinion, he may take the benefit thereof, if necessity shall force
him thereto. He wills me further to advertise your Honor, that 9 means to
send a Gentleman expressly with full mind unto Davison, with order to
communicate the same from him to 3 to whom he desires that there may be credit
given. I perceive by them, that they cannot tell well what to resolve, until
there be conference had with ^ if they mean not to take profit of the ship. I
have taken order with them to send one to the Port, to cause him to depart.
Because your Lordship is sometimes absent from the Court, I thought good to
send your Lordship the Copy of the Letter I write to Master Secretary; besides
the contents whereof, I learn, that Monsieur D'Aux is stolen away from
Constantinople, and is presently retired to Ragusa, where he remains; the
cause of his departure from thence is unknown unto the King, who is very much
offended withal. He has expressly sent a messenger unto him, to will him upon
his allegiance, to return unto Constantinople, and to continue his charge
there. Some do g^ess that the cause of his departure from thence was, for that
he feared, that the King would take some order for the murdering of him there,
as suspected of Religion.

The Cardinal of Lorrain has took upon him before his departure from Rome, to
promise the Pope, that the King here should enter into the League, which thing
is thought not fit at this time, until the King has appeased his troubles at
home.

It is thought that one chief cause of the Duke of Savoys coming, tends to
make some complot against Geneva; as also, to conclude some straiter amity then
heretofore has been between this Crown and Spain; the means whereof is thought
to be the marriage of Monsieur and the King of Spains daughter. They seem here
to be no less sorry for the E. of Derby, then for D. Chasteirault; what moves
them so to be, I know not. Though there has grown some alteration in her
Majesty's resolution touching my return, by the choice of Mr. Carew, yet I hear
there lacks no care in your Lordship to find out some other to supply the
room; for the which I have most just cause to render unto your Lordship most
humble thanks. And thus having nothing else to impart unto your Lordship, I
most humbly take my leave.

At Paris the two and twentieth of December, 1572. Your Honors to command, F.
Walsingham.


SIr, the day after Monsieur Mannesires arrival, which was the 23 of this
present, I had access unto the King, at what time I made him acquainted with
the contents of her Majesty's Letters. To the which he answered, that touching
the amity, he received no small contentment, as well by the assurance given
unto him by Mannesire, as also by me, that her meaning is to continue the same
without doing any thing that should be disagreeable thereto; and thereupon he
took great occasion to make great protestations of the greatest account that he
made of her Majesty's amity, saying, that he esteemed the same above any wordly
thing. In this point he was very long, wherein I make the shorter recital,
because I kno^ (...) how his outward speech and his inward meaning do agree.
Then I proceeded to show him, what her Majesty conceived, in respect of the
good will she bears him, touching the slaughter of the Admiral, and the rest
of the Nobility of the Religion here, without any form of justice, a thing
disallowed of all men, though it were true that a conspiracy were made. I
further showed him the redoubling of her Majesty's grief, as well to see such
as by no means could be privy to any conspiracy, given up even to the vile and
base people, whose execution was without respect of age or sex, in a most
barbarous sort, as also to see those that are alive forced by Edicts lately set
forth, either to abjure their Religion, to fly, or else to be murdered; a kind
of proceeding which shows, that his meaning is to root out all the professors
of the Gospel within his Realm; and therefore could not but make her Majesty
to marvel, that he should move her to be Gossip, he persecuting with such
severity those that profess one Religion with her. To these he answered, that
touching the slaughter of the Admiral, and the rest of the Nobility, he had
well hoped that her Maj. had been thoroughly satisfied by such demonstratio^s as
had been made unto her there by his Ambassador, of the cause of the same.
Touching those that ^ere killed by the fury of the people, he said, it was a
thing that he was sorry for, but could by no means remedy it. For the third, it
was the revocation of the Edict of the liberty of Religion. He said, that his
policy forced him so to do, seeing the in convenience that otherwise would
follow by the toleration of two sundry Religions. To this I replied, that
curiosity did not move her Majesty to use that kind of speech, but the good
will and affection that depends upon the amity lately concluded, who was
sorry to hear hard judgments of others touching such kind of proceedings;
whose opinions and advice, if she of her self should follow, she should then
not only refuse to be his Gossip, but also forbear all other kind of
intelligence with him: and that those that do so advise her, are not only her
own Subjects, but also her Neighbors abroad. Notwithstanding, I showed him,
that her Majesty, as one that has from his childhood been affected toward
him, who never took advantage of time to do any thing that might prejudice him,
as one in whom the late league has taken so deep impression of amity; as she
cannot but interpret in good part any friendly request tending to amity; and
therefore, for continuance and declaration of the same, all doubts and
impediments laid aside, she intends to send a Nobleman, as well to supply the
office required, as also to visit him. To this the King answered, that he could
not but think himself most bound to her Majesty, for accepting in good part
this office of his, which proceeds only of amity and good will, to that end
(as her Majesty says) that this spiritual alliance may be to both their
comforts. And for further confirmation of the amity lately begun between them.
And as for the Nobleman (says he) he shall be very welcome, and receive such
honor as appertains to one sent from a Princess, whom I esteem so much.

Touching the third point, concerning Monsieur D'Alanson, he said not much, but
only this, That the marriage betwixt her Majesty and him, is a thing that he
much desires, as that thing that would make a perfect uniting of their two
Crowns. After this speech, upon complaint made by me of the small redress that
our Merchants have at Roan, at such Commissioners as lately by him were deputed
for the remedy of such injuries as they had received in the time of the hurly
burly. He showing me, that Sorex and other Flemings were a rigging out, to the
number of fourteen sail, in certain Creeks and Ports belonging to her Majesty,
for to repair with the same to Rochel, wherein he desired her Majesty to take
such order as may be agreeable to the good amity and league lately concluded
between them.

This was in effect as much as passed between us at this present. To the Queen
Mother I could have no access, for that she is not yet rid of her Cathera.
Monsieur Pynart sent me word by my Secretary, that the Baron de la Guarde has
advertised, that fifty English sail were about to have entered the Haven of
Rochel, had not he stayed them. And whereat Pynart says, he does much marvel,
considering the protestation that lately has been made touching the
continuance of the amity. In answer hereof, I sent him word, that if they had
been minded to have entered the Haven, his forces could not have stayed them;
and that if her Majesty had intention to employ any of her ships that way, a
quarter of that number would serve. But this (said I) is but a cunning of his
to cause the King to be cold in yielding redress to certain injuries that he
had lately done to our Merchants, who for spoils sake could have been contented
to have his Master and the Queen my Mistress at variance. And therefore is glad
to send such vain advertisements.

Monsieur Mannesire, who reporeth very honorably of her Majesty every way,
desired me, in their Majesty's name, to hasten as much as I could the coming of
that Nobleman whom her Majesty means to send, for that the Emperors
Ambassador, who is already arrived, attends only his coming. Further, of
himself, he desires me to advise him not to bring any great train, for that
otherwise, he shall be very much troubled to have horses provided for them; for
that, says he, he comes in post a dozen Gentlemen, and half a score others,
shall be as honorable, as though he came with two hundred. The experience,
Sir, that your self have had in this behalf, cannot but make you to think
Monsieur Mannesires opinion to be good; as also, give the like advice. And if
he did transport some Geldings of his own, I would take it to be the best way;
for that otherways, as you have some experience he shall be hardly provided.

The Emperors Ambassador, who is Master of the horse, has not above twenty in
his train.

I make full account, according to her Majesty's promise, by her last letters,
to see my successor in company with the Nobleman that repaireth hither. And so
leaving further to trouble your Honor at this present, I most humbly take my
leave.

Paris the five and twentieth of December, 1572. Your Honors to Command,
Francis Walsingham.


To the Right Honorable, and his very good Lord, the Lord Burleigh.
IT may please your Lordship to understand, that since the writing of my last
Letter I have spoken with Steward, who knows not by whose procurement he was
set on, that discharged the Dagg against La Motte* but does ghess, the party
named in my last Letters should be the Author thereof.

For other matters, he says, all goes well; as you shall further understand
by one sent for the purpose, who imbarqueth at B. his name is R. he is of good
quality* and one that accompanied 8 I am warily dealt withal in the matter. And
for my self, I dare not desire to know more then they are willing to make me
acquainted withal. Steward tells me for certain, that there are of late 800
at least of Strozzies company cut in piece; which thing is kept very close, for
by others I can learn no such thing. There arrived lately here a Gentleman out
of Languedoc, sent from Monsieur D'Aumale, who reports, that they of the
Religion do hold, at least, in Town and Castle, to the number of chosen
Soldiers; which Town can no way be taken, but by famine, for that they cannot
possibly make any trenches about it, the soil and seat being rocky. Both the
Admiral and De la Aumile, do send the King word to send them both men and
money, or else there being there is to no purpose. Upon these advertisements
lately come from thence, it is now thought that Monsieur shall go to Languedoc,
and that Monsieur Le Duc shall be employed at Rochel: Howsoever they shall be
employed, it is held for certain that they depart from this Town about five or
six days hence, as well the two brethren, as also the King of Navarre with the
Prince of Conde.

I send unto your Lordship a lewd Letter written by Carpenter, in defense of
the late doings here; the original written in Latin, and afterward translated
into French. Diverse of those in Latin have been sent into Germany; but the
Authors lewdness is so well known, as it will but little help their case. They
have also sent of them into Polonia, for that the Bishop of Valence writes,
that the late accident here will be one of the greatest lets of that they seek
there. It is reported also by Letters lately received out of Flanders, that the
Duke of Alva is so dangerously sick at Nunege, Quere
as men do doubt of his recovery. Furthermore, they give out, that there has
been of late a Conflict in Holland, between the said Duke and the Prince of
Orange, in the which there were slain of the Dukes side 500 Spaniards; and, as
they say, a double number of the other: but as yet the certainty is unknown.
And so beseeching your Honor to impart these Letters to the Earl of Leicester;
for that through the hasty departure of this messenger, I had no leisure to
write particularly unto him. I leave, etc.

At Paris the second of January, 1572. Your Honors to Command, Francis
Walsingham.


To the Right Hono^rable Sir Thomas Smith, her Majesty's principal S^^retary.
SIr, it may please you to advertise her Majesty, that Monsieur Ma^n^sire gave
me to understand, how that their Majesty's here were given to understand from
the Ambassador there, that there should be certain ships, to the number of
fourteen, preparing to repair to Roc^el, and that though French men and
Flemings bear the name of them, yet were they not unfurnished of some English
Mariners; and that therefore they desire that it may please her Majesty to
give order for the restraint thereof, as to good amity appertains. To this I
answered, that I would not fail to advertise her Majesty thereof;
notwithstanding, I said, it would be very hard to restrain them, forasmuch as
at this present there are a number of mariners and ships unset a work, in
respect of the unkindness between Spain and England, which kind of people will
hardly be restrained. I willed him also to desire their Majesty's to consider,
how the like falls out in their Government here; for that diverse Gentlemen of
good quality, notwithstanding the League between the Turk and this Crown, and
notwithstanding an express inhibition of things, did serve this last summer
under those of the League, some be conducted by the Marquis d^ M^in, others
under the conduct of the Count Martine^go, the Kings Pensioner; the which thing
the Turk does interpret in good part, for that he knows that the same is done
without the Kings consent; the like consideration must their Majesty's have
also of her Majesty, who is not able so to bridle her Subjects, but that some
of them will hazard themselves, without having any regard to her Majesty's
commandment that unto their duties appertains. To this Monsieur Mannesir^
showed me, that he used like speech and persuasion toward the Queen Mother,
wherewith she seemed to be reasonably well satisfied

The sixth of this month he was dispatched hence toward C^llis, with cert^in
Coaches, to meet the Barl of Worcester.

They have often sent unto me to know, whether I heard anything of his coming,
wherein I have answered, that since the twelfth of the last I heard nothing out
of England, which seems strange unto them, considering that their Ambassador
has advertised, that my Lord of Worcester should be forward the second of this
Month. Touching Monsieurs speedy departure from hence toward Rochel, men of
judgment do think it rather to fear the Rochellois, to make them to condescend
to an accord, then indeed to have an intention to besiege them as yet,
considering that this time of the year is very unapt to besiege a Town situate
in a marsh.

Of late there has been some purpose held with me, whether I did not think
that her Majesty by some persuasion used by me, might be induced to be a
Mediator unto the K. Whereunto I answered, that I my self could hardly be
persuaded to be a dealer in that behalf, having that regard that a servant and
a subject ought to have to the honor of his Prince and Mistress, considering
what evil success such Compositions heretofore have had, as have passed between
them King and his Subjects, especially seeing those to enjoy the Kings ear, who
have both abused his ear and his honor, having had more regard to their own
particular passions, then to that reverence and duty, that becomes good
Subjects to bear toward their Prince. When I shall see (said I) such removed,
then I can tell what to answer in this behalf. Our Merchants at the beginning
here, since the last troubles, received good expectation, so far forth as
concerned the obtaining of the Kings Letters: but now that it ^^meth to
execution they find it but expedition in words; so that I perceive, it were
better for our ^erchants to lose that they sue for, then to continue their
suits. The Kings Letters Patents sent to Roan to certain Presidents, to see
such Merchants there restored to their goods, as sustained loss at the time of
the late troubles, are as much regarded, as if ^ had sent my Letters thither.
Our Nation is so evil liked here, as whatsoever fair speech they use, they
think it injustice to do them justice. Monsieur I a Mot, as I learn, has
sometimes written most earnestly to them here, to cause them to do better
justice then they do; notwithstanding, I see it prevails nothing at all. And
so leaving further to trouble your Honor at this present, I most humbly take
my leave.

At Paris the eleventh of January, 1572. Your Honors to Command, Francis
Walsingham.


To the Right Hono^rable, and my very good Lord, the Earl of Leicester.
THis bearer, besides the enclosed Occurents, has charge to communicate
certain things unto your Lordship by mouth; and therefore at this present, I
leave to tro^ble your Lordship with many lines, saving, that I cannot but renew
my old suit, most humbly beseeehing your Lordship to continue the furtherance
of my revocation. Touching a Rider, Captain Lassetty has written both to
Millan and Florence: from the last he has received answer, that one worthy of
entertainment will not be hired under 300 ^ the year, and such other benefit as
by our Lordship is offered: He looks shortly to have answer from Millan. I
fear your Lordship shall hardly be furnished of such a one as you desire of
that calling, unless it would please God to make one of that profession to be
of the Religion, who then would be glad to have such an offer, and to live in
so good a Sanctuary as England is. I do employ diverse in this behalf, and by
some I am put in hope to have your Lordships turn served. And so having nothing
to impart at this present, I most humbly take my leave.

At Paris the eleventh of January, 1572. Your Honors to command, Fra:
Walsingham.


To the Right Honorable his very good Lords, the Lords of her Majesty's most
honorable privy Council.
ACcording to your Honors order by letters of the six and twentieth of
October, I recommended unto the King here this bearers brothers cause:
whereupon he directed his Letters to certain Presidents at Roan, appointed by
Commission to see such of our Merchants as sustained loss in the last troubles
restored to their goods. At whose hands, neither by virtue of the Commission
directed to them, nor by the Kings particular recommendation, he could receive
any other answer, then that they had advertised the King touching such
information as they had received of the injury he pretended to be done unto his
brother; whe^^by it may well appear, that there is nothing less meant, then to
make restitution of the spoils as were made in the time of the disorders:
besides, this bearer, notwithstanding he had the Kings safeguard, which I
procured him, was sundry times like to have been assaulted (as he informs me)
by such as outraged his brother; and his host also where he lay was threatened,
because he received him. He making complaint thereof there, could have no
redress; and I making complaint of it here unto the King and his Council, found
as little. Ere he could receive answer what information was sent hither, he was
driven to attend a month. In the end he was answered, that one of the
Presidents deputed their Commissioner, was repaired hither, and had informed
them, how that this bearers brother was a lewd young man, and riotously
consumed his substance, and therefore used this as a mean to defraud his
Creditors, and that he only paid twenty Crowns for ransom, to such as had
imprisoned him; and that the cause of imprisonment proceeded upon certain
quarrels about a wife he had married at Roan, contrary to the will of her
friends. Whereupon I sent word to Secretary Pynart, who gave this answer, that
he might be well able to discern, by this kind of proceeding, what will they
have to do justice, in that the answer was not made at Roa^, where he might
have procured justification of his brothers behavi^ur; and that therefore in
appearance there is no other reason why the party should be driven to attend
answer here, but that they think only by such kind of delays, to make him
weary of prosecuting the matter. To this Pynart answered, that forasmuch as the
President was a public person, and of such integrity and uprightness, as he
could not be charged with any untruth or wrong done to any person; and ^n the
other side, Stallenge one that was touched in his life and behavior, he could
do nothing in his behalf. Nevertheless, he said, that to gratify me, he would
write again to the President, if I thought his Letter would prevail any thing
to the furtherance of the poor man's cause.

Your Honors may perceive by these answers, what good will they bear to do
justice, considering that they had authority granted unto them to have
determined the cause there: But this answer they used for a delay, to make him
weary of prosecuting the matter. I find them of late very slow to yield any
expidition, not only in this bearers cause, but also to such other of our
Merchants as lately I have preferred; and therefore considering how chargeable
it would be for him to continue his suit here any longer, and little hope there
is of redress in the end. I have advised him to repair to Roan, to procure a
testimonial, as well of his brothers behavior and conversation, as also of the
evil usage he received during his abode there; to the end, that having informed
your Honors thereof accordingly. Your Honors may take order, as to the same
shall seem fit. And so leaving to trouble your Honors any further at this
present, I most humbly take my leave.

At Paris the thirteenth of January, 1572. Your Honors to command, Fra:
Walsingham.


To the Right Honorable Francis Walsingham Esquire her Majesty's Ambassador
Resident in France.
SIr, I am sorry that I wot not what to write unto you, things do fall out so
here. Dr. Dale was warned to dispatch, and your revocation ready; When it came
to signing, no such thing meant. Dr. Dale wrote unto me, he had provided half a
score horse in his stable, men to go with them, and their own horses, their
liveries already bought, and he altogether ready at my Lord Treasurers warning
and mine; and now understanding, that he should not go, the effect of this
Letter, I showed this day unto her Majesty. She beshrewed them it was long of,
Dr. Dale could not go before Midlent or Easter, there was other matters which
she would trust to no new men, but to you, and to none other. Well, Madam,
quoth I, the poor man has been already at these charges, and chargeable it
will be yet to him, to put them away is loss, to keep them, charge; besides my
Lord Ambassador in France, your Majesty knows in what state he is, and the
poor Gentlewoman his wife. Yea (says she) that pity of her is that makes all
this haste; and I am sorry for her, but there is no remedy, he cannot now go
before Midlent or Easter. Well Madam (quoth I) seeing it be so, may it please
you, may he be sure to go at Easter, and may I write so to my Lord Ambassador.
Yea, says her Majesty, now you have my Commission; and so much I can say,
judge of it as you shall please, but I assure you my Lord of Leicester, my Lord
Treasurer, my Lord Admiral and I, and some other of your friends, have done
what they can for your return; but whether it be Fatis, or what else has
let, I know not, nor can guess, but I perceive what is the issue at this
time. You are a wise man, and can comfort your self with wisdom and patience;
and the rather, if the promise do hold, that by Easter you may return. My Lord
of Worcester brings full instructions for that he has to do, or may fall out
in communication, the which he must and will communicate unto you, and use
therein your advice. I send you some Occurrents out of Scotland. If you would
know what we do here, we play at tables, dance and keep Christmas. The Queens
Majesty, and all the rest of my Lords, thanks be to God, be in good health. My
Lord Privy Seal, what with age and sickness, is not thought long to abide in
this world, and the Earl of Kents health is almost desperate.

Farewell. From Hampton Court the twelfth of January, 1572. Yours always
assured, Tho: Smith.


To the Right Honorable Francis Walsingham Esquire Ambassador Resident for her
Majesty in France.
SIr, I am both sorry and ashamed that I cannot write of any matter meet for
satisfaction in your own case, as I would, and as I know you have had occasion
to expect, but the impediments thereof I know you shall understand by other
your friends, and therewith do assure you (that whatsoever any of them do
write) of my former care taken for you, and that I have now promised to follow,
I have as much or more, and will continue and persevere to the utmost of my
power, and so wish you as much patience as you have cause of grief. This bearer
finding me here at my house at Westminster, tells me, that he is dispatched
from the Court. I think i^ needless to advertise you of the coming of my Lord
of Worcester, and for that I think surely that Mr. ^^cretary does advertise you
of all things, I do forbear.

Glasco Daviso^ longs to he^^ from Lyo^s 9 the ship abode in the place
appoi^^ed 23 days. And so I end, trusting to see you here amongst your friends
within this ^ix weeks, at the least to be revoked at that time.

From Westminster the ^2 of January, 1572. Your assured friend, Will. Burleigh.


To my very loving friend Mr. Francis Walsingham, the Queens Majesty's
Ambassador in France.
THe cause of her Majesty's longer stay of your abode there, and not to send
presently D. Dale, is only in respect of some persons you have there to deal
withal, which you may easily conceive whom I mean, though I name them not; the
cause I write it not plain, is lack of a cipher, having worn mine to pieces
this progress time in carriage, and pray you to bear the more with this dark
writing: but it concerns such as you wrote a little of to my Lord Treasurer.
Her Majesty doubts greatly the state of that person, and has in expectation
that some great matter will proceed from them: and neither does she think Dale
to be a fit man to be employed, neither that the other will deal frankly with
him as with you. For my part I am persuaded that great matters will fall that
way, and surely you shall do well to enter the more speedily and deeply with
them for the knowing of their whole intent. I must but tell you mine own
conceit, I fear it be but a practice to dandle us; for so many are acquainted
here with the cause, I mean of that Nation: but it is impossible but that the
Ambassador here must know it. Besides, I see that the hope of the marriage is
still entertained here, and our Mistres made to think it is ever ^incerely
meant; which if it were indeed, and the other matters true of the parties
disposition, what could withold to put that in execution which were most like
for him to get it, for his own value must sue more for him then his friends
commendation, or else his party here will be little, as I think. But this
manner of dealing, I see serves to no purpose but wins them time, and
loses us all good opportunities, and hinders your retur^, where your friends
wish you, both for your self, and chiefly for her Majesty's better service. You
shall do well therefore for her Majesty, for I cannot imagine what good this
great suspense will do her, to seek by all means you can at their hands to know
their full mind, and the scope of their intent; for by these the dealing of the
Ministers here with her Majesty, has no cause to find any way direct or
substantial, she takes great hinderance otherwise, and no good shall come to
them neither, in this sort of proceedings. And as none here are privy to the
matter but my Lord Treasurer and I, so is it too great a burden so long to
conceal her Majesty's so great hindrance of her greater cause^, as the time
wants for lack of certainty and through understanding the intent and bottom of
this Cause, which surely hitherto gives more cause of suspicion of practice
then of good meaning. And yet if it were minded as they pretend, except they
proceed otherwise then I perceive yet they do, they shall rather hurt
themselves and us both, then further any good purpose that may bring hope of
that good success we would wish. Thus as well as I can utter my poor conceit
both for your self and us, and do wish you to deal accordingly with all speed,
and to return your answer thereof with all diligence you can; and thereupon we
will take occasion again to procure your return, which if staying might yield
service to her Majesty and good to the Country, I would no way hinder if you
were my brother: Otherwise finding no more cause then I do, you have no friend
here will further sooner the other. My Lord of Worcester has desired me to
write to you, that you would deal friendly and frankly with him, he disableth
himself and trusts to your advice in all such sort as belongs to his place.
I heartily require it for him, only it may suffice you to know he is a Papist,
and a favourer of all such, especially a ^. otherwise a good simple Gentleman,
and fit for the Christning. Show him, I pray, all the courtesy you can, as I
doubt not of it. My Lord Privy Seal is dead this morning. Her Majesty in good
health. So God be with you.

In all haste this 12 of January 1572. Your assured friend, To. Leicester.


To the Right honorable Sir Thomas Smith, her Majesty's principal Secretary.
SIR, if the cause of my stay here grow only in respect of her Majesty's
service, as by your Letters I am assured (though I have as much cause to desire
my return as any other that ever was employed in the like service) yet can I
with more patience digest the same, as he that thinks both his travel,
substance and life as well employed in her service as any other subject she
has. I hope when her Majesty shall find my stay here not needful, she will
tender my case, and yield to my Revocation.

Sithence the Cardinal of Lorains arrival here, the direction of Scottish
matters are committed to his charge. The Lord Levingston and the Lord Ogleby
look shortly to be dispatched hence, who receive at the Cardinals hands great
entertainment, and great promises of great good that they and diverse others of
their Nation shall receive at the Kings hands here. Amongst others they have
commission to assure D. Castelherault to be retored to -- the Kingdom here, and
that the Marshall Montmorency shall be otherwise recompensed. That the Lo.
Arboth shall be General of the Scottish men at Arms. That the Lo. Clade shall
have the reversion after Losses death, of the Captainship of the Guard. That
the Lo. Huntley and the Earl of Argile shall have the great Order sent unto
them, and assurance of great pensions. And though it seems by the occurrents
out of Scotland, that the said Earl of Argile inclines to the King, yet the
best there are of another opinion, and think him to favor the Queens part,
which they are resolved to maintain. I am advertised by one, at whose hands I
have received advertisements, that the Cardinal of Lorain has brought -- from
Rome for Monsieur to marry with his Niece, who as I hear, as he does hope after
the marriage, of Polonie, so he does not greatly like thereof, and would be
loath that Monsieur should be removed so far off. The Marshall Tavannes who was
held here for dead, is now in some hope of recovery. And so, etc.

At Paris the 21 of January, 1572. Your Honors to command. Fr. Walsingham.


To the Right Honorable, and my very good Lord, the Lord Treasurer.
YOur Lordships of the 14 of this month I have received, by the which I
perceived two sundry Letters which I sent you by the Vidams man, with certain
books, are not come to your hands, which makes me to mistrust some some wrong
measure, for that he departed the second of this month. The matter of most
importance contained in the same, was touching a Gentleman of ^ departed hence
to 2) ^ 6.) 4 with intention to imbarque there if the Barque were not departed.
Steward, who is gone to Rochel, as I sent your Lordship word by my servant
William Williams, promised before his departure to have come and seen me, and
to have had some conference with me, which he did not, but sent only his man
unto me with a fond Cipher requesting me to hear often from me. To whom I
answered, That the Cipher he sent me, was not for the purpose; and as for
writing often, I told him I could not tell what to answer until I might speak
with his Master, and that therefore I desired most earnestly to confer with him
before his departure, as well of that as of other matters; notwithstanding his
own promise and my request, he is now departed; so that considering his loose
kind of dealing, I cannot tell what to judge of the matter. If the party that
comes over do not deal more orderly and roundly there then I am dealt with
here, I think it were well if it were at some end, for that I fear the issue
will prove such as the parties are that deal in it, who are over young and lack
experience, that were fit to guide a matter of so great weight. I serve in the
same but for a distributer of Letters, and yet as it should seem, the chief
cause of Religion grows thereby. If I thought there were good faith meant
therein, or that by good guiding there might grow good effect to the benefit of
her Majesty, I should then with the less grief continue my abode here. Such
Letters as I received lately from Davison, I know not what to do with, having
no sure means how to convey them; for one of mine own cannot with safety
travel that way. And as for any of this Nation, I find none whom I may trust
in that behalf: and therefore until such time as I hear further from your
Lordship what liking you have of the overture that shall be made by them that I
sent over, who as I am informed by Steward, is to grow to some through
resolution, I mean not to deal any further with them unless I see they proceed
more orderly. Of this loose kind of dealing I thought good to advertise, to the
end you may rather grow to some through conclusion with the said party there.

At Paris the 20 of January 1572. Your Honors to command Francis Walsingham.


To the Right Honorable, my very good Lord, the Earl of Leicester.
YOur Lordships of the 12 of this present, I have received; and though I cannot
at large write unto you touching the contents of the same, through this Bearers
have for his own particular affairs, yet I thought to write these few scribled
lines in answer. Touching Stewards matter, which as I perceive is the chiefest
cause of my stay here, I assure your Lordship I know not what to think of it:
They deal very warily with me, and seem to have more will to deal with you
there, then with me here: I stand but in stead of a Post to rece^ve and to
deliver Letters. By one that departed from thence, I am showed, that you shall
be full informed what is their intention in that behalf. I fear the issue
thereof will be such as are the dealers therein. In my Lord Treasurers Letter
in respect of the Cipher, you shall more plainly know my meaning.

If my stay here imported her Majesty's service, I could not so importunately
seek my return, though I have more them just cause so to do, being rather
overpressed then overcharged. But seeing I do but serv^ here to entertain a
broken matter, having no great credit with the parties otherwise then in
general terms. I hope through your Lordships good assistance, her Majesty will
tender my cause by sending over my successor.

Now that the Cardinal of Lorain is arrived here, who bears the whole sway
in the affairs, they conclude somewhat touching Scottish matters. In the mean
time there is one lately dispatched hence with great offers to entertain the
Queens party, as your Lordship may perceive by the enclosed. And so leaving
further to trouble your Honor at this present, I most humbly take my leave.

At Paris the 20 of January 1572. Your Lordships to Command, Fr. Walsingham.


To the right Hono^rable my very good Lord, the Lord Treasurer.
IT may please your Lordship to understand, that B. who has great conference
with B. G. in matters of greatest importance, did discover to a friend of his,
who imparted the same unto me, that he learned at his hands, that the 19 of
this month, Queen Mother held a secret Council, at which was present only the
Cardinal of Lorain, and two others: In the which it was debated, what course
was to be taken for the appeasing of their troubles here. And after long
deliberation it was concluded, That until such time as England might be kept
occupied, there could grow no through redress here, without hazarding of the
whole estate, and that therefore it was requisite now to yield to them of
Rochel any reasonable kind of surety they would require, as also to other Towns
in France that would not yield. And rather then fail, to yield to them so far,
as to let them have the liberty of their Religion, to suffer the Nobility of
the Country that inhabit near the Towns, to live in the same, to keep such
Garrisons in the same as they may think fit for their surety, with condition
that the said Nobility shall deliver some of their children to be Hostages with
the King for his assurance that the said Towns shall be kept to his use. And
amongst others it was agreed, that the offers should be made to Count Mango to
retire himself to Rochel, with condition to yield his son to be a Pledge. These
offers they think to be so large, as they make full account they will be
accepted. This thing being done, it is then concluded to send under the conduct
of the Marquis de Maine 1000 shot, which thing shall be done as proceeding from
him himself, in respect that he is the Queen of Scots kinsman, and disavowed by
the King, who shall land at a place called Aier, and shall after they have
joined with the Qu. party, repair to Edinburgh, where Liddington and Grange
Kirkaldie have promised to deliver up the Castle unto such as the King shall
appoint, upon recompense to receive some living here in France, there leaving a
sufficient Garrison, they shall besides fortify themselves in the town of
Lo^ghbreton at Brochty besides Dundee, and at Haymouth: And that this being
done, the Duke of Guyse and Chevalies shall come over with other forces to
procure the delivery of the Queen of Scots: such of the Queens friends as are
in England, will incontinently take Arms, who do give out to them here, that her
party and forces are so great there, that having good Leaders and munition,
they shall be able to make their party good enough, and to deliver the Queen of
Scots in despite of her Majesty. In the mean time till the King has compounded
with those Towns that now hold out, they are resolved that the D. of
Chastelr^^lt and the ^. of Huntly shall seem to yield to any composition that
the Regent will have them, only to keep out that her Majesty shall send
thither no forces in assisting of the Regent; which thing they have
advertisements from their Ambassador that she has meaning to do. And for the
communicating of those matters unto the Queens party there, it is determined
that Viraque shall depart thither forthwith, he shall also have commission to
bear the Regent in hand, that the King here does not mislike of the present
government there, nor that he is chosent Regent, and to use all such like
speeches as may entertain him for a time, until such things here be settled. He
shall also have charge to offer him the entertainment of men of Arms to all
such young Gentlemen as are serviceable, as well to them of one part, as to
those of the other. Other particularities he said he learned of him, which he
might not utter, and were of great consequence. The Gentleman to whom this was
discovered being a Scot, is one whom I do very well credit, and for that he is
thought to incline toward the Queen of Scots, the party above named did deal
the more frankly with him; and because I thought it necessary for her Majesty
to understand so much, I thought good to send this Messenger of purpose
withal, and have promised for his recompense to have 6 pounds 13 shillings 4
pence. For that mine own men are not returned, I am driven to use him. If her
Majesty desire to hear often from hence, then must there be order taken for the
sending back of those I send thither. And so leaving, etc.

At Paris the 24 of January, 1572. Your Honors to command, Fr. Walsingham.
Viraque is already departed, and commanded to use all expedition possible.




To the right honorable Mr. Francis Walsingham, Esquire, her Majesty's
Ambassador in France.
SIR, as Dido said, Non ignara mali miser is succ^rrere disco: so I who know
what things they be whch Ambassadors do most desire, will not let you want that
intelligence which I can give you by your man. I send you the occurrents of the
Scot. By my L. of Worcesters instruction you shall understand what is to be
answered to all questions likely to be moved either to you or to him: yet that
all things might be perfect, I have sent you a Peer of my L. Treasurers sent to
me, because the French Ambassador showed the ^. ^ajesty, that the Emperors
Master of the Horse, who comes for the Emperesse, does intend to hold the
Child himself. The Queens Majesty to save money will have my Lord do so too,
except as in the Instructions.

The child's name, as the Ambassador told her Majesty, should have the name of
both the Godmothers, and so be called Mary Elizabeth; so neither shall strive
with others for the name. This is all I can say for that matter. And for your
return and successor, as much as I could know I wrote to you by your servant
Iacomo.

We have had intelligence lately from Rochel, that there was a servant of the
late Cardinal Chastillans put to death there for going about and conspiring to
betray the town of Rochel; and the same as he went to execution confessed, that
it was he that poisoned the same Cardinal in E^gland: whereby it may appear,
that this design of murdering had the plot laid long before, and a man may
doubt whether the Queen of Navarre passed out the same way.

I thank you for your notes which you sent me of the Comet, or new Star; but
in the placing of it your Astronomers and ours differ exceedingly. Yours do
place it in the 29 of Piscis, and ours in the 7 degree of Taurus, so they vary
one whole sign and 8 degrees. Your printed Book goes upon it (...) If any has
more boldly written of it in print, I pray you let me see it. Our men do not
deny but that he rises in that degree of Piscis, or the first of ^ but it is
one thing to rise with the degree of the Zodiac, and to stand in a place after
Sexion of the Zodiac: and our men do find him far above the Moon, and above
the height of the Sphere of Venus. Then it cannot be a temporary Comet. Now
things above the Moon do rise and die, which was never believed before, but
either a new star made, or an old star new seen.

Fare you well. From Hampton Court the 13 of January 1572. Your assured friend
Tho. Smith.


Part of my Lord Treasurers letter to me touching the enterview, and such
things as have passed for marriage.
FIrst, for the matter of Monsieur d' Anjou, and next to the Duke of Alanson, I
trust I need not make any other rehearsal then your self can gather by the
instructions you had when you were sent into France, after that Du Foix had
been here, who departed fully answered, saving in the Article of Religion,
which was also so tempered as that he pleaded no misliking, but but that it was
restrained with the words, that the Duke should use no Religion that was
contrary or repugnant Ec^lesiae vel verbo Dei; and how you found Monsieur
altered from the offers of du Foix, in that he would have his Religion wholly
as he had in France.

Now you can also tell how the Offer of the Duke of Alanson was begun, and how
prosecuted here by Monsieur and du Foix. And since that time this Ambassador
there could find the Queen Mother: It ought to be remembered with what absurd
Offers it has been handled: To have an Enterview it was required that the
Queens Majesty would repair to Dover, and the Queen Mother and the Duke should
come to Bulloigne, and the advice that they should meet upon the Sea in
October* All which was taken off, and utterly misliked as vain and ridiculous.
A more foolish motion was made, that the Queen would meet with the ^ueen Mother
at Iersey, such a device as argued either a gross ignorance in them that named
Iersey, as not knowing how far it was by Sea from England, or else a flat
mock, in offering a thing so unreasonable, and to say the truth, impossible.
And surely, it could not have been better acquitted then to have required the
Queen Mother ^o come into the Isle of Scotland to have spoken with the Queens
Majesty the next year, if she would make her progress to Berwick. Since these
follies passed, they have by the Ambassador generally pressed the Queens
Majesty to the Duke, but no special dealing has been for any enterview, or for
answer how he will accord in Religion, in which last consists the greatest
difficulty of treating, so as his person might by sight be first allowed. Thus
much of this matter.


To my very loving friend, Francis Walsingham Esquire the Queens Majesty's
Ambassador with the French King.
SIR* this day I received your Letters with two French Books; the one, of
Carpenter the Apostate; the other, by an unknown malicious French Writer,
taught by a rebellious crafty Papist of England, wherein though he meant
maliciously to the State, yet he rometh his choler and despite chiefly against
me and my Lord Keeper by Nicknames. God amend his spirit and confound his
malice. And for my part, if I have any such malicious or malignant spirit, God
presently so confound my body to ashes, and my soul to perpetual torment in
hell. I know not whether you shall be able to understand the Author; but if by
the Printer it might be found out, I would gladly bestow any reward upon the
discovery; if it cannot be found, then I wish that some means were used as of
your self to Queen Mother, that the print may be destroyed. For otherwise we
shall think our selves, considering the places we do hold in this estate, not
well considered by that estate.

I have not imparted any thing to my Lord of Worcester, but leave the order of
the whole to your direction. This licentiousness to inveigh against men by name
in printed books, that use not by books to provoke any, is in all good Estates
intolerable. God send this Estate no worse meaning servants in all respects
then we two have been, who indeed spared not labor nor care to serve our Queen
and Country; and if we had not, we may truly avow, neither our Queen nor
Country had enjoyed that common repose that it has done.

I am required to recommend my Lord of Worcester unto you which I need not,
because you know his Office and cause of coming; and besides, you shall find
him a Nobleman of great gentleness and thankfulness. And therefore you shall
find cause to show him all good Offices and favors. And if my hearty
commendations of his Lordship may do any thing in his gratification, I pray you
his Lordship may understand my good will, for in very truth I love him dearly.
And so I end.

From my House at Theobals, where are with me Mr. Ralph Sadler, and diverse
others, as Mr. Denny, your good friend. The 14 of January, 1572. Your assured
loving friend, W. Burleigh.
Sir, when I consider of this lewd Book, I think it will be replied unto you,
That it is reason that answer be made to such books as are published for the
condemning of the Queen of Scots: And so for my part I yield that Writers
answer matters. But to have the Duke of Norfolks cause brought in question, and
Us that are Counselors to the Queen, to be so maliciously and falsely
calumnied, may not well stand with the term of the Amity professed. But yet I
leave all to your consideration and wisdom.




Instructions for the Earl of Worcester.
ELIZABETH R.

FIrst, you shall make our Ambassador there resident Mr. Francis Walsingham
privy of the office, which at this time you have to do, and the Letters which
you have to deliver, and confer with him of the manner of the Court, and the
use at this present; and as he shall be able to inform you, and you of your
wisdom and discretion do understand, with all convenient Honor, Amity and Love
you shall deliver our Letters, and do such offices as to our Embassage does
appertain. And if the Emperors Ambassador hold the child himself, you may also
do it; but if that you shall perceive that any device or other sinister means
shall be given about to bring you to their mass, or any other superstitious
ceremonies, which the order of our Realm does not allow, you shall not consent
nor assist it, but rather absent your self, and understanding that before, with
honorable excuse require the Queen Mother, that the Queen of Navarre, to whom
we have in this case written our special Letters, to be our deputy for you; or
in the absence or let of her, any other Princess or Noblewoman, whom it shall
please the Queen Mother to appoint and address to it, according as we have also
written to the said Queen Mother. And you shall not need to break neither with
the King nor Q. Mother, nor any other, or any matter, but of such courtesies
and other Court-like entertainment as shall be ministered unto you. But if it
shall happen the King or Queen Mother, or any such person, to go further with
you, and to feel you with words in any of the points hereafter mentioned, we
think it honorable for you not to show your self ignorant of our mind therein,
nor how things have proceeded heretofore in those matters, and how they stand
at this present. And therefore we have thought good to inform you, in those
points whereupon it is most likely they will make some mentioning and
questioning with you, to know our further resolution and mind therein, that as
in all other matters likely to be moved unto you, you shall do well first to
confer with our Ambassador there, by whom you shall understand how things have
gone hitherto. And for this time you may say, besides all other things, whereof
they be already fully advertised of our mind, we think it now reason that the
matter of Religion be first esclared; for because that there in his Realm there
has been made great alteration in that point, since the late communication
thereof; and therefore it is now reason that we should the more carefully
provide, that the difference therein should breed no disturbance, disquietness
or doubt in ours. And as the said King has held a stiff hand to maintain only
one Religion in his Realm, although he with open Edicts did profess the
protection of two, and the defense of them both indifferently; so it behooves
us rather, who did maintain but one only in our Realm, and never yielded to
the other by any Edict, or Protection, or favor, now at this time not to
change our course, but to profess all one thing, which we have done since we
came to our Crown, and to suffer no permission or winking at of any other
Religion then that which we and our Realm has always held and maintained, and
by Gods grace intend always to do; and so much the rather we have cause to
require it at this present time, because that in the dealing with Mon. D'Anjo^,
in the treaty with Mon. De Foix, matters were made more easy and temperate,
to the which we did the rather incline; when it should come to the knitting up,
that Sir Tho: Smith now our Secretary was sent, then such things were required
as never before were expected, as open Mass, a Church, a Chapel proper, and
all such solemnity of other ceremonies and abuses which our Realm and policy
cannot suffer, whereupon necessity was for us clearly and plainly to break
off; and least the same inconvenience should follow, or that protracting of
time should be thought but a dissembled entertainment of other cause then we
have in mine, you may say, that we pray the King and Queen Mother, to cause
first this point of Religion to be clearlie esclared and opened, that upon that
we may more clearly judge what is to be done of us to the proceeding any
further of that matter of marriage. And you may say more, that it is that point
that we have thus long attended, that our Ambassador there Resident should have
certified us from their Majesty's so, that before we have answer from them of
these points, by reason we cannot proceed to go any further in this matter, in
which heretofore we have not been answered, and the answer thereof lies in
their hands.

As concerning the demands, that such as of late were fled hither sithence
these late troubles, that we should rather admonish them, or command them to
avoid the Realm, as Rebels to the French King our brother: You may say, that we
do understand of no Rebellion that ever they were privy unto, and can perceive
nothing, but that they are well affectionated to their Prince; but when such
common murdering and slaughter was made generally throughout France, of those
who professed the same Religion, that it was natural for every man to fly for
his own defense, and for the safety of his life; and it is the privilege of
all Realms, to receive such woeful and miserable persons as do fly to it only
for defense of their lives. And for their return, the chiefest of them have
been spoken unto; and they make their answer, that the same rage of their
enemies, which made them first to fly hither, does still continue the cause of
their tarrying here; for as they then did kill with fury, and as it may appear
the greatest number of those that were killed without the commandment or avow
of the King; so it is most like they would execute still their malice, if the
persons were there against whom it was then, and is yet inflamed;
notwithstanding any letters declaratory, or other prohibition by the King, as
it is manifest and notorious that very many have been publicly, and are
almost daily slain and murdered in France, that be of their Religion, since
these contrary Edicts were published, and cried by sound of trumpet. And
therefore until they may see that the quiet of the Realm be better established,
the fury of the people and the bloody murderers appeased, they will live here,
and obey the Kings Edicts. They think themselves unsure there, and prayed us of
our mercy to have compassion of their misery. And if so be the King (you may
say) would suffer them to enjoy their revenues, whether they remained here, or
went into any other Country, you may say, that we suppose they would be as
faithful subjects to him as any other in his Realm, for other we epsy none in
them. And if we can perceive at any time, that they were otherwise minded, or
should attempt any thing for the disquietness of his person or Realm; you may
say, we will not suffer* them to remain within our Realm. And as for the
Commerce and Traffic of our Merchants, there was, nor is in us any
difficulty, why not thereby, as by all other ways, the Amity and League
should not in all points be perfected? But such things have since that time
happened in that Realm, that even to this day our Merchants be in horror and
fear to meddle therein; especially to go much within the Land, since such
liberty is given or suffered into the hands of the popular, to kill or murder
whom they could, without punition therefore or justice; nevertheless, we are in
hope, that in time the King will peovide, that he shall be better obeyed, and
that his sword of justice shall rule, and not the unbounded lust of the
populer, to the which no wise man or careful of his life, will hazard himself,
we could not but as a good Princess and mother of the Commonwealth, bear with
our Subjects in this fear so probable. Nevertheless, we shall give order that
our Secretary and others, who do favor the cause, shall be joined in
Commission to treat with his Ambassador here, and as shortly as time will
serve, and as our Merchants do by little and little get more boldness to
traffic there, and no part of that which was begun for the more streighter
Amity, betwixt us and our Realms be left unperfect and unaccomplished on our
behalf.

For Scotland, you may say, that Monsieur de Crocque' s going away so soon,
wherefore we were very sorry, because he tarried not until the peace was
concluded, we suffered our servant Henry Killegrew to solicit the conclusion
of peace. And although there appeared great likelihood from time to time to
follow of an universal peace, and very reasonable conditions offered; yet they
of the Castle, as appears, not minding to have any peace, would not agree to
them; wherefore, as it appears, they are like again to have civil Wars, a
thing most displeasant to us, being their next Neighbors; and for our part, we
think they have misused both him our good brother and us; the King to employ
Monsieur de Crocque; and us, the Marshal of Berwi^k first, and now Henry
Killegrew, whereas it appears they meant nothing less then agreement,
especially two or three of them in the Castle, who have offered unto them all
humanity, their lands, livings and offices, and whatsoever could be
reasaonably desired, yet will not condescend for common quiet to acknowledge
their King, and to deliver him that hold, having as good offered them for their
own suerty, which in common peace should seem needless; so that for ought that
can appear unto us, we think it not fit that we or our good brother should
suffer such outrage at their hands, or our two travels being Princes, to be had
in so little reguard; besides that, we have kept in our hands the Castle of
Hume at our charge, being to us no profit or commodity, but that we desire to
bridle both the parties, to come to an accord: For being by the League bounden
to deliver it, but any of the Scottish if we should have delivered it to any of
the adverse party, though the peace had followed, we know not how to compel
them to render the same to the natural Lord thereof, to whom we most desired to
render the same, although he had smally deserved that kindness at our hands; if
we had delivered it to him before, we doubted there should have bin occasion to
make him hold out more obstinately from the Agreement and Peace, who as it
appears, is too much obstinate without it. And as we have diverse times by our
Ambassador there, and writing, declared to them, that as soon as they were come
to a full Agreement and Peace within themselves, we would most willingly render
the same Castle, and the Territory thereof to the said Lord Hu^^: So you may
say, that our good brother shall well perceive, that if yet they will grow to
common peace within themselves, the Castle of Hume shall be straight restored
to the Lord Hume, as it has been often declared both to him and them before.
And if he and the rest will not come to Peace and Accord, peradventure we shall
deliver it (as we may well do) unto them of that Nation, out of whose hands the
Lord Hume shall have enough to do to get it, which is nothing in our default,
which desires them most earnestly to have them at quiet and peace within
themselves, and to be ruled by justice, so should our Subjects near adjoining
to them be in more rest, and have better justice upon the Outlaws and Thieves
who do offer daily injury to our Subjects without redress, because of the civil
troubles. And if any mention be made unto you of the Scottish Queen, either for
her life, or for her deliverance, that you should be a mean to us for her, You
shall answer, that her attempts be known to have been such, both toward us and
our Realm, as you cannot gladly hear her spoken of; and that you could not
think your self a good Subject, if once you should open your lips for her; and
therefore you shall require, that they will no more speak to you of her, nor of
any such matters.

Given at our Manor of Hampton Court, the eleventh of January, 1572. in the
one and twentieth year of our Reign. Thomas Smith.


I think it shall not be against the Queens Majesty to offer, that if Hume
Castle shall be delivered to the Kings party, that there shall be assurance
given to restore it to the Lord Hume, when he shall recognize the King as
heretofore he did.

William Burleigh.


To the Right Honorable Francis Walsingham Esquire Ambassador Resident for her
Majesty in France.
MR. Walsingham, I have received your Letters sent by Williams, I perceive it
is hard to recover a Rider, but to pay too dearly for him, I will stay
therefore till better occasion shall serve, and do heartily thank you for your
good remembrance and travel therein.

I wrote of late to you, which Letter I hope be come safely to your hands; the
rather, for that I write somewhat openly for want of a ready cipher, for these
causes, I have since considered more of the person and the matter: and surely I
can no way persuade my self, that the cause you should stay for, is any way
sincerely meant there, but rather a mere practice to entertain us here, and to
discover of the other side, what may be under the hope, that by that means many
may be drawn unto, for no other way but this have they left to beguil the
world, especially us; and those they seek to destroy, seek narrowly and deeply
into it; and in the mean time consider how slightly the great post haste matter
was slipped off, that our ship tarried so long for; what was it else but a plain
work to hold us with such a sudden amazed chance, the same in their opinion, we
should believe their case to be as dangerous as they would make it. Weigh also,
the pretty escape of the disguised attempt of the party, that seemed to be in
so great peril, who can believe other, then that it was a made matter, to
continue a belief, whom they think they have inchaunted at their wills. Let us
examine also, the instruments what they be, those of the most arrantest sort of
Papists, those here never counted, settled, or informed in Religion. Besides,
the process of the doings over both sides, does show no good end toward, but
even a stratagem it will prove in my opinion; and therefore I am the more
careful that we may so espy it, and so use it, as it may return upon their own
necks. For my own part, I promise you I did suspect it, the first time of his
opening of the matter, for truth will seek no angles. Truly he was fain to seek
all his brains, to make any matter worthy of credit, for these suspicions were
found even at the first, he was diverse in his tales, his Letters delivered
assuredly were counterfeit, and so was driven in the end to confess in a
manner, albeit in a sort they were after confirmed there from you to his better
credit: for first, he avowed, they were all the parties own hands; Next he
said, after the Letters were compared with others of the parties, the Letters
were of his own writing, that escaped a late, but the superscription the
others; Lastly, he could not tell it for certainty, for that it was sent to
him. But the message was surely delivered by the person himself, which we after
perceiving the party there to avow, did alter the minds of some, albeit for my
part it would not enter into me; Since how great suspicion again is given, I
refer to your self. The matter known to many of his Country men, as well as to
you, and yet a show to be kept secret from the King, who will believe it?
again, his often sending his own servants, and never none met withal who can
think it likely?

Also, the parties chief instruments there to be employed, being so great a
Papist, and not to take such a matter as was lately offered him in worse part
then he does, who will believe there can be plain dealing in this case. O it
were a happy turn to make some small trial what we were there, and that we
might have occasion to trounse his companion here for his pains; and yet to pay
them with their own rod, and seem to crave thanks for discovering to the King
there such a dangerous practice, which we may easily and well do. And I dare
venture my arm to be cut of, that it will fall out a plain practice, and in the
end the King may take his advantage against her Majesty when he list, and say
justly, that she was willing to offer him such an injury, by entertaining such
practice. I am bold to discover thus much of mine own conceit to you; you may
use it to as you see cause. But truly, I for my duties sake do not spare to
inform her Majesty what I think of it; albeit she is yet somewhat loath to
discredit the party there, she is born in hand his love is great. Now also a
little further, as your friend, I will be bold with you, I pray you consider
accordingly of it: We find certainly, that oft-times your advertisements be
made more common even of the greatest, then is thought convenient. You know
what opinion is here of you, and to what place all men would have you unto,
even for her Majesty's sake; besides that, the place you already hold is a
Counselors place, and more then a Counselors for a time; for oft-times
Counselors are not made partakers of such matters as you are acquainted
withal, and do advertise hither, so much the less are others to be acquainted
with your secrets: And the more boldly this, for that it has been friendly
told me, and in this sort, That you have written sometimes more largely to
some private friends, then almost to her Majesty's self; if it be so, then I
pray you accept this friendly; if not, yet I will tell the parties and their
names. And even upon this your last advertisement, which you committed to your
messenger, to deliver to my Lord Treasurer and me, the same was also
communicated to others, being no Counselors, and by your Letters referred to
receive the understanding at the Messengers hands; and I will tell you what
followed, and this we speak upon knowledge, before we had either imparted your
Letters to her Majesty, or scarce read them all, I assure you the Count
Montgomery was advertised (being this day here in the Court) of the matter,
which if it should grow further, may happily turn to that Gentleman's
destruction; besides, the like secret matter which you committed to be
delivered to my Lord Treasurer and me upon the slaughter when you durst not
write, was likewise communicated unto others, which came also to our knowledge,
for it was in open talk within ten hours after we had it; yet upon our honor
we had not delivered it to any Counselor living, one or other; wherefore you
may see it is not good to trust messengers nor to impart any of your weighty
causes, how near or dear soever they be to you: for I assure you they go from
friend to friend, and my self have had them brought to see; and yet I must say,
I saw no matter of so great weight, albeit* I saw that such were fitter to
receive almost no letters, then to send them abroad. This I assure you, Mr.
Walsingham, I do upon mere good will and honest friendship toward you, and so
I pray you take it. And I desire you to commit this letter to Vulcan. And being
weary, I commit you to God.

In haste the eighth of January, 1572. Your assured Friend, To: Leic^ster.


To the Right Honorable Francis Walsingham Esquire Ambassador for the Queen's
Majesty in France.
I Have received your letters of the of this month, and my Lord Treasurer has
imparted unto me his Letter, which was sent with the Cipher, as also since, two
other of the four and twentieth of this month, which all contain matters of
importance, specially this last, which is to be foreseen* and for my part, I
believe the advertisement to be very likely and true, the further you may grow
into the certain knowledge thereof, the better service you may do. I perceive
the King does earnestly prosecute the reformation of his Subjects: how God will
prosper him, methinks he should greatly fear, for his victory does not consist
in his great numbers. My hope and prayer is, that our mighty God will show his
wonted mercy and grace toward innocents, and his poor afflicted flock.

Here has been of late a Gentleman for the party you wot of, one that I know,
and have seen him here before, though he be not forward in Religion, yet is he
a faithful Gentleman, and of great trust with his friend. The matter does stand
very tickle, and methinks they deal far more unsafely, then if they had dealt
by you, and yet is it the cause of your stay only. I am glad to hear of the
good fortune of the Rochellers, God send it to be true; as also, that the King
is of no better credit with the Almains and Switzers. I wrote of late to you of
some length, but it has pleased Mr. Secretary to forget the sending these ten
days. I pray you send me word whether it has been opened or no. If I thought
you should tarry longer there, I would send you a Cipher, but I think
otherwise, and therefore in that full hope I will forbear. I thank you very
much for your mindfulness of the Rider; if he be good, your bargain is very
reasonable. My Lord of worcester has great judgment in those matters, but I
durst trust Claudio my old friend, that he would not abuse me. What you promise
on my behalf, shall be performed toward him to the uttermost. Thus having no
news, but of our Mistris's perfect good health,

I bid you farewell. In some haste the nine and twentieth of January, 1572.
Your very Friend, To. Leicester.


To the Right Honorable Francis Walsingham Esquire her Majesty's Ambassador
Resident in France.
SIr, the Instructions of my Lord of Worcester have in them such a clause, that
if he be not provoked to answer to any of those points mentioned in them, he
should not minister occasion of talk on them, and possibly they will say
nothing, and yet with you they will be busy, which if it come to pass, there
is no doubt but you can and will answer to the effect of those Instructions,
and further, as occasion shall be ministered.

But in one point, that is, for the breach of the abstinence in Scotland, which
then was not certain, and now is certain, hard it is if they be not questioning
with you; for I am sure de la M^t will not be without his intelligence from
Scotland, nor negligent in advertising to France: And upon occasion of time,
whether you be demanded or not, it is thought meet that you take occasion to
show the King, that to the grief of the Queens Majesty, the Scots have not
agreed, but be broken again into hostility within themselves; which although
tou^heth jointly the Fr. K. and her Majesty, because they two being Princes of
so great authority, and so conjoined in love and amity, and both by mutual
consent by their Ambassadors, laboring to bring them to unity, peace and
concord within themselves, should be so illuded and scorned of a few petty
companions, that having all things offered unto them that they could desire
reasonable* and more; yet they would still maintain war in their own Country,
and in the tender age of their young King, whom to set up and Crown they were
the first doers.

This injury you may say, touched the King, as well as the Queens Majesty,
because jointly they both like Princes in most amity agreed in their Leagues
together to pacify and unite Scotland in it self, which now by discord
intestine being disunited, is brought almost to extreme poverty and misery. The
other cause touches more her Majesty, because they being her Neighbors next
adjoining, and bordering upon her Subjects, while the Realm of Scotland was
united, and peace within it self, if any of their Thieves and Outlaws had
injury by theft or murder, any of her Majesty's Subjects, upon complaint,
redress was had, the Malefactors punished, and he who had the injury restored,
and so was it on both sides reciprocally. Now in this Civil dissension,
miseries, robberies, stealth and murders be committed daily, and then the one
part or the other bears them out; so that it were almost as good to have a
border war betwixt England and Scotland, for the poor men that do dwell
thereabouts, as civil wars betwixt the Scots themselves; and therefore this
breach betwixt the two parties must needs grieve her Majesty's Subjects more
then the French King, being so far distant; and so consequently her Honor, who
indeed does take it and not without cause, heavily, for that they have not
esteemed better her Majesty's good will, and desire, that she had all their
strifes and debates among themselves compounded and accorded, and that they
have set so light by the authority of the French King their brothers and
heirs. The young King is her Majesty's near Kinsman, and her Highness desires
not only to have him preserved, but also his Realm; if it could be in quiet,
peace, and good o^der, and abundance, which without inward peace, cannot be
had; and must needs think evil of these few petty companions, being gotten into
the Castle of Edinburgh which for their wilful obstination and private
benefits, shall keep that Realm still in that dissension and trouble, in
contempt of such Princes as the French King and her Majesty is, whose design
tended to nothing but to make unity and concord among them there. And
therefore if Hume Castle and Fast Castle, which her Highness has detained
hitherto in that hope, upon accord to have rendered them to the Lord and owners
thereof, from whom they were before by just war taken. Now her Majesty sees
no longer cause to detain, but to render them according as is comprised in the
Treaty, not to them who have so evil deserved of her Majesty, their own King
and Country, by their perverse obstinacy; and of the French King also, but one
of the same Nation, who acknowledges their King, and is desirous of unity,
peace, concord and good government in that Realm, and of this her design her
Majesty thought meet to make her good brother the French King first privy
unto, for the love that she does bear unto him, and according to the Amity and
Intelligence betwixt the two Realms. I am glad to have this occasion to send
this bearer John Farry your man unto you; for I assure you I do pity your
case, that so many of your men be here together; peradventure occasion may
serve shortly to send you another, yet methinks you forget me, to send so often
to others, without any letters to me. Fare you well. From Somerset House the
nine and twentieth of January, 1572. by English account. I thank you for the
case of Tools, I yet have not leisure to understand them all, nor looked not
for so many, nor on that sort: When I shall understand the properties and use
of them, I shall have more cause to thank you.

Yours always assured, Tho: Smith.


To the Earl of Leicester.
AFter the enclosing up of my other letters, I received at one instant two
sundry Letters of your Lordships; the one, of the eighth and the other of the
nine and twentieth. Touching the first, your Honor does concur with me in
opinion, as I conceive by the same, that the matter which is the chiefest cause
of my stay, is but a mere entertainment, the matter through misguiding, is
never like to come to issue. If they mean otherwise, which is most likely, why
should her Majesty endure to be any longer abused? As your Lordship finds
the party that deals there halting, and diverse in his tales, even like
unconstancie and doubleness do I find in him here, that deals with me. To
disguise the matter, they borrow certain names out of Amadis de Gaul, wherein
they deal most aptly, to add to a fained thing, fained names. They judge us to
be very gross, and do think that every fair and colored speech is able to
abuse us: I cannot be otherwise persuaded, but some here that rule all, are
acquainted with the matter; for otherwise, the party that last came over would
never have meddled in the same. God send it a better end then I look for. For
your Lordships good advice in the latter end of your letter, I most humbly
thank you, and do think my self much bound to you for the same, as for any
other favor I have received at your Lordships hands since I entered into this
service, The best recompense I can make unto your Lordship, as I know, is to
take profit thereof. True it is, that sometimes in requital unto some of my
Friends, who have given me large entertainments of the state of things, whereof
otherwise I have been ignorant, I have also largely made them partakers how
things passed here, and somewhat more largely then I have communicated the
things unto her Majesty, because it passed the bounds of my function here,
which is only to advertise. Notwithstanding, seeing the same is not used with
that secrecy as is fit, I will avoid hereafter to offend. Touching the Counts
being acquainted with the matter of secrecy, your Lordship shall understand,
that the party that made me acquainted, withal, delivered me certain Letters
sent from the place you wot of, which I caused my men to deliver unto him, by
the which he came to the knowledge of the matter. Now to come to your Lordships
latter letter, I see great cause to confer the likelihood of my letters of the
four and twentieth of the last; for that there is great hope conceived here,
that by large offers they have lately made to such Towns as hold out, they will
grow to a composition, which in the end will be neither good for themselves nor
for us, howsoever the Ambassador there speaks by the absence of some from
hence. I cannot be able to discover any more touching the Scottish affairs, then
already I have done. And now that the Court removes, I am cut off from all
means to have any great intelligence, either for that matter or others,
especially for that I shall be constrained for lack of ability, to remain here
still, being unfurnished of all means to follow the Court: And then seeing my
remaining here shall be unprofitable unto her Majesty, and to my undoing, I
hope her Majesty will no longer defer my revocation, which I doubt not your
Lordship will further as much as you may. And so leaving, etc.


To Sir Thomas Smith.
SIr; after the closing up of my other Letters, I received yours of the nine
and twentieth of January. Touching the contents of the same, I will not fail
upon the next convenient occasion to deal with her Majesty here concerning the
Scottish matters, though I be not provoked by them, because I am directed so to
do.

Notwithstanding, in my poor opinion, as I mean here to say nothing, but to do
somewhat that may tend to the continuance of the troubles there, until such
time as there own things being settled at home, they proceed in prosecuting
their other practices; so were it not amiss for her Majesty to use like
silence, and to provide to withstand their malice; but herein I am to do as I
am commanded.

The Scottish Ambassador is advertised by the ship late arrived out of Scotland
into Flanders, how that James Cancald is arrived at a place, if I do not
mistake it, called Aberdeny in the Earl of Huntleys Country, to which place
Viracque who lately departed from hence, is appointed to repair.

The Lord Levingston desires most earnestly to have a passport to pass through
England, for that he is weary of this Country, and would fain be at home. He
promises to communicate to her Majesty, at his arrival at the Court, such
things as she shall not repent the granting of the same. And if s^e shall have
any doubt of him, he will be content to remain their Prisoner: for mine own
opinion, I think it not amiss to grant it him, for that I learn by some of
credit that he communicates his secrets to, that he misliketh their doings
here, and the pretended enterprise toward our Island, as one that tends to
the overthrow of Religion, and the ruin both of England and Scotland. I have
promised by the next to give him a resolute answer: and therefore I beseech you
to put her Majesty in mind of the same. Now to come to mine own particular, I
had well hoped my stay here should not have been so long protracted, and that
my miserable case should have been otherwise weighed; especially seeing my
state here should breed but a hinderance to my self, and no benefit to her
Majesty: For now the Court removes from hence, I shall be driven to remain
here, and not to follow the same for lack of ability, having neither furniture,
money, nor credit. I beseech you, Sir, therefore to lay my case before her
Majesty; who, I hope, will so graciously consider the same, as I shall be
presently relieved, and others receive no discouragement to accept like
service. And so leaving further to trouble your Honor at this present, I most
humbly take my leave.

At Paris the sixth of February 1572.

To the right Honorable, Francis Walsingham Esquire the Queens Majesty's
Ambassador in France.
SIR, I have received your Letters of the 20 of this month, with the ticket
after your accustomed manner concerning ^ and was on Friday last with the party
on whom you made mention to be from ^ he spoke with Glasco. ^ and Davison with
him. I see there was a great mistaking of our doings; for by Davisons writing
of a ship sent to ^ imagining that Hall 3. had a meaning to provoke Glasco ^9
to come hither; whereupon this last Gentleman came to enquire of Hall ^. some
assurance if ^. should so do, to enquire^. This you must think must needs
appear very strange. Whereupon before Davison I did declare that all that was
done came of him with earnest and lamentable requests to have Glasco ^
preserved; because he said that ^ had gotten such knowledge of the same, as the
same would tend to the ruin of ^ and so the party that now was sent is
departed well certified of the truth, but not satisfied of his request.

It is good to deal warily herein, for some cause to mistrust that Davison and
all his partners do nothing herein without knowledge of ^ and therefore it is
in such sort herein ordered, as there can be no advantage taken, I trust: And
so also you may look to your doings, as I see you are disposed, by the occasion
of the fond handling, that you see I am much perplexed with the dishonor done
to my Lord of Worcester, her Majesty's Ambassador on the seas before Bulloign.
Wherefore by his own report I know you shall know the truth better then I yet
do know. I could wish my self a meet person for the service upon the seas to
avenge it. I have received your French lying book, which might trouble me, if
my life had merited such vile and spiteful poisoned speech: but I trust God
will suffer the good to think of me as I have deserved. I have imparted to the
French Ambassador my misliking of this lewd Book, in that it has been
translated by -- a man of note in that Court: and he shows himself to procure
the suppression of it. What he will or can do herein, I know not.

After the writing of the former part hereof, your later Letters of the 24 were
brought to me; by which you advertise of the like likely Council there
intended for the appeasing of those inward troubles in that Realm, and of the
pretended favors to be showed to them of the religion in odium t^rtii,
according to which devises has already been begun here by this Ambassador with
the French King here; and such is his vehemence of speech, and fair offers, as
he has brought the most of them to hearken to his pipe. I have let her Majesty
see and consider of your letters, saving some concerning our occurrents here. I
will move her Majesty to be more earnest then yet she has been. There lacks
no no solicitation for your revocation; and until my Lord of Worcesters
return, it shall be hard to obtain any resolute answer.

If the French King shall follow toward Rochel, I would wish you to procure
means to tarry in some convenient place near Paris, and to send a Secretary to
follow the Court, with some pretense of lack of your health. But hereof you
shall best counsel your self. And so I end. From Westminster the 29 of January
late in the night. After I had supped here at my house, all the Lords of the
Council, and by their means 20 Lords more, to the which I had commodity by the
Queens Majesty's being here at Somerset House.

Yours assuredly, W. Burghley.


To my Lord of Burghley the 11 of February.
THis Letter I received the day of my Lord of Worcesters departure, and because
I doubted your Lordship would not well read the same, I thought good to copy it
out; what the effect thereof should be, I know not, it seems to me but a
Riddle. The party that brought them was as vain as vanity it self: he showed me
that La. Motts departure without taking of his leave, was, for that he durst
not repair unto me, being very much suspected. I told him he needed not fear so
much, for that he dealt not with me in any matter, but that he might repair
unto me any time safely without any danger for any thing that I know. I have of
late discovered one that carries a box of Linen to the Queen of Scots, who
departs not this town these three or four days, I think your Lordship shall
see somewhat written in some of the linen contained in the same, that shall be
worth the reading. Her Majesty under color of seeing of the fashion of the
Ruffes, may cause the several pieces of linen to be held before a fire,
whereby the writing may appear; for I judge there will be some matter
discovered, which made me the more willingly grant the Pasport.


To my Lord of Burleigh.
I Should do my Lord of Worcester wrong, if should not impart unto your
Lordship both his dutifulness and discreet usage of the -- La. of
Northumberland. His sister sent unto him at the time of his abode here, to the
end your Lordship may make her Majesty acquainted with all. First, as soon as
he heard of the said parties coming, his Lordship made me privy thereof, and
showed, that though she was his sister, yet in respect of her undutifull usage
toward her Majesty, he did respect her as a mere stranger, and so meant to do
until such time as her peace were made. He would not so much as vouchsafe to
give ear to any Messenger or Message sent from her, and therefore willed him to
forbear to repair unto him.

The like usage toward the said Messenger, did Charles Somerset use, utterly
refusing to speak with him. And leaving, etc.

At Paris the 12 of February, 1572.

To Sir Tho. Smith.
SIR, According to your direction of your Letters the 29 of the last, I showed
the King of the great grief that her Majesty had conceived, that the travel
both of his and her Ministers took no better effect touching the appeasing of
the matters in Scotland, as a thing dishonorable for them both, to be deluded
and scorned by such petty companions as those are that are in the Castle, to
whom was offered as much as they themselves could desire reasonable, and more;
yet so are they carried away with their particular passions, as they desired
nothing more then to maintain still War in their Country, not having such a
respect to the tender age of their young King as they ought, especially seeing
that they were the first and chief doers in deposing of the Queen, and setting
up of him. I showed him also, That though the Kings civil War and hostility,
touched both their Majesty's generally, as they that desired the repose of that
Realm, yet it touched the Queens Majesty more particularly, for that during
the time of these civil troubles amongst them, her Majesty's Subjects that are
borderers, are marvelously charged by outlaws and thieves, whereof no redress
can be had by reason of their inward troubles amongst themselves.

I declared unto him also, that her Majesty in regard of the kindred betwixt
the young King and her, could not but wish his Realm to be in quiet and peace
in this his minority; which thing would not be brought to pass so long as these
petty companions in the Castle, through their own wilfulness, obstinacy, and
private respects, shall keep that Realm still in dissension and trouble, in
contempt of both him and her Majesty, whose design tended to no other end but
to make unity and concord amongst them. And therefore the King to this
answered, that he was sorry that their intentions in according of them, took no
better effect. And as for Hume Castle, he said, that though by the League it
was not expressly mentioned to be delivered to the L. Hume, yet the meaning of
it was so: Whereunto I replied, that the meaning of the clause in the League
touching the rendering of Hume Castle, had not respect to any particular person,
but generally to set that Country free from all foreign forces, and that
therefore her Majesty might render the same to whom she would of that Nation.
To that the King replied, that he had rather it should remain in the Queens
Majesty's hands, who (says he) is a Prince honorable and sincere, then to be
delivered into the hands of any of the other party. But herein (says he) I
will advise my self with my Council, and within a day or two make you
acquainted with mine answer. I told him according to my Lord of Worcesters
Instructions, that her Majesty delivering the same would capitulate with those
to whom it should be delivered, to restore the same to the L. Hume when he
shall recognize the Kings authority, as heretofore he has done. The King took
occasion upon these Scottish matters to recommend unto the Earl of Worcester,
the Queen of Scots case: To whom my Lord answered, that such was their
dangerous and unkind dealing toward her Majesty, as he should forget the duty
of a good Subject, if he should once open his lips for her, and therefore
desired his Majesty to pardon him, in that he refused to be a dealer in that
behalf. To this the King answered, That he did not desire any favor to be
showed unto her, otherwise then might be with the Queens Majesty's safety. At
our access unto Queen Mother, she desired my Lord, that whereas there has been
long in Treaty a marriage between her Majesty and her Son M. Le Duc, de
Alanzon, that he would therefore move her at his return, that the same may grow
to some conclusion, as that thing which she hoped would prove profitable unto
her Majesty, and beneficial unto her Realm and Subjects. To this my Lord
answered, That the cause why the same grew not to some conclusion, either off
or on, proceeds, for that they have not made answer to certain things
propounded by the Ambassador here Resident, unto them; whereunto she answered,
That she did not remember any thing whereunto they were so give answer;
whereupon I took occasion to show her, that there were two points to be
answered, The one concerning Religion, the other concerning the interview: For
the point of Religion, I showed her, that her Majesty in respect of the
alteration that has lately happened in this Realm, and that which passed in the
Treaty of the Marriage between her and Monsieur de Anjou, had cause to accord
that point first, as that thing which touched generally the quietness and
repose of her Realm. Touching the interview, I told her, that for as much as
her Majesty could have no other way satisfaction then by the same, the point
of Religion once accorded, some convenient means for the accomplishing of her
said interview, was to be devised. To this she answered, that her Son was of
the same living that the other was, and of the same Religion, and therefore
hoped should have no less favor then the other should have had touching the
point of Religion, for that it is a thing dishonorable and unchristian for a
Prince to change his Religion upon the sudden. To this I replied, that for mine
own part, I did not remember, that while I had the dealing in the matter, any
liberty in that was accorded to Monsieur de Anjou: And if it were, Madam, said
I, we see that a thing is tolerable -- in the other. In conclusion my Lord
requested, in that she desired to grow to an end in this matter, that she would
roundly set down in her Letters, what the King and she required touching that
part of Religion. To this she answered, after some denial made thereof, saying,
that their Ambassador should signify in that behalf, that she would be content
so to do. And touching the interview when matters of Religion should be once
accorded, she doubted not but there would be means found for the bringing of
the same to pass, as should be to her Majesty's satisfaction. I made her
acquainted with the matters of Scotland touching Hume Castle, whereunto I
received like answer at her hands, as at the Kings, which was, that after
conference had with their Council, I should understand what was their mind and
resolution in that behalf; whereupon these Scottish matters she took occasion
to recommend to my Lord the Queen of Scots, to whom he gave like answer as
before. In the end, as my Lord was ready to depart, she showed him that she was
given to understand that there were certain ships a preparing in England, by
certain Rebels there, whereof she desired her Majesty to give redress, as
appertained to good amity. Whereunto my Lord answered, that she might be
assured that her Majesty had never any intention to tolerate any thing that
might tend to the breach of the same; so that if there were any preparation of
ships in hand, as he knew not of any, he was well assured her Majesty was
nothing privy thereunto, as also that her Majesty's Subjects were no dealers in
the same, who has forbidden them expressly not to intermeddle.

Why then, said she, if they be strangers, she ought to banish them, and not to
permit them to attempt any thing to the prejudice of this Country, considering
that she is as well bound to yield up aid, requiring the same at her hands; as
we to grant the like unto her upon like occasion; and therefore she desired him
to put her Majesty in mind, that some order might be taken for the remedy of
the same, which he assured her he would at his return.

This was as much as passed at the time of my Lords taking of his leave. The
morning my Lord departed, Queen Mother sent for me, and showed me, that by
Letters sent from Monsieur De la Mot, they were given to understand, that her
Majesty let fall some speech, that she could not think, that the continuance
of the Treaty of Marriage with Monsieur le Duc should be sincerely meant, he
being now retired from hence, and employed by the King at Rochel: she therefore
for the satisfaction of her Majesty, requested me to desire the Earl of
Worcester to signify unto her, that there is nothing that the King and she
desires more then the accomplishment of the said marriage, and that to the end
that the Earl should see the Duke, the King stayed him here until Twelf-tide.
About which time they attended my Lords coming, whereas otherwise he had
departed together with Monsieur his brother before Christmas; and, said she,
if we had known the certainty of the Earls coming, he should have come hither
in post, to the end he might have seen him. I took occasion hereupon to tell
her my private opinion, if it would have pleased the King not to have employed
him in these wars against those of the Religion, he should be in better opinion
with her Majesty, and more grateful to her Subjects. To this she said, that a
young Prince that has courage and desire to do his Prince service, could not
with his honor remain behind, seeing his other brother employed. I have made
my Lord acquainted with such Occurrents as are here, to the end he should
impart them to her Majesty by mouth. And so leaving, etc.

the 12 of February, 1572.

To Sir Thomas Smith.
IT may please your Lordship to advertise her Majesty, that the King departed
hence to St. Germains en Lay eight days past, and that Queen Mother remains
here still, whereof the King has great need, and the same found hard to be
recovered here. Touching their proceedings against Rochel* there repaired
hither of late diverse Curriers, who use great silence, which make men to doubt
that things fall not out to their liking. I learn notwithstanding, that there
is in the Kings camp great scarcity of victuals, and a great number of
Soldiers, through cold, and want of other necessaries are dead, and do die
daily. That the Duke of Nevers has taken upon him, with the help of certain
Italian Engineers, to make certain Fortresses in the midst of the Haven, to
impeach all such as by sea would bring to the Rochellois any succor. For the
two Fortresses lately made at the Entry of the said Haven, six ships
notwithstanding passed by, laden with corn and other munition, as it is
reported. The common opinion is, that it will be impossible by any device to
make the said Fortresses that the Duke pretends to make. There is secret
whispering here, of some intelligence given by Pacues, of an intended
enterprise by Montgomery in Picardie; and that hereupon the King has given
order for the impeachment thereof. The Cardinal of Lorrain has within these
two days taken up the enchange of certain Treasures of the Town, 300000 franks,
to what end I know not: He is now retired from hence to Rome; the cause of his
departure, as it is thought, is to remove the suspicion from the Protestants,
that they suspect nothing of the great conferences had at sundry times between
Queen Mother and him. Here, since the departure of the King, upon the good
assurance that has been given me by diverse, of the good offices that the Lord
Levingston will do in Scotland at his return, I have taken upon me to give to
him a passport, with condition, that if her Majesty shall not like thereof,
then he to return hither back again, who promises to yield such satisfaction
to her Majesty, as she shall not repent her of any favor she shall show him.
The Gentleman fears, that if he should not depart hence before Easter, he
should be constrained to yield to their superstition, or to hazard his life in
refusing the same, which is the cause why I grant him the same pasport without
hearing from her Majesty.

Schomberg is lately sent hence into Germany, as it is thought to two purposes;
the one, to observe their doings there; the other, to make some levy of both
horsemen and footmen, if he shall see any preparations of succors for them of
the Religion here.

There arrived lately a noble Gentleman, sent hither by the King of Portugal,
to congratulate the Queens delivery; and (as it is said) to renew the offer of
succor by sea. It is said, that the Baron de la Guard is dead, and that
Monsieur le Duc d' Alanson desired to have the charge by sea, whereto Queen
Mother would by no means consent, as Mannesire showed me.

It is also reported, that Monsieur De la Noue has discharged himself to
Monsieur of his promise made to the King, and professes to live and dye with
those of Rochel. And so leaving, etc. hoping that her Majesty will take order,
by sending over Mr. Dale, that I shall be the next Messenger my self, I most
humbly take my leave.

At Paris the 26 of February, 1572.

To Mr. Secretary.
SIr, this Gentleman, the bearer hereof, whom I dispatch in all haste, shall
show you the particularities of the late skirmish happened between the Camp and
those of Rochel, to the end you may impart the same unto her Majesty: In the
which skirmish D. d' Aumale and Schavigur were slain, two of the chiefest
executors of the late murders here. God of his good beginning does give us
some hope that the blood of the innocent shall not beunrevenged. They of
Sancerre the night after the breach was made, which was about the latter end of
the last month, issued out of the Town, and gave the Camp a Camisad^, who kept
very negligent watch, so that they entered into their Trenches (as it is said)
and slew 200 at the least, and three or four Captains of good conduct. Hereupon
it is said, that Sha^ers, who is the General for the King, is commanded to levy
the siege, and to repair to Rochel. I am credibly informed, that there should
be certain Letters entercepted, sent out of Germany from Count Lodowick,
amongst the which there was one directed to Count Montgomery, wherein was
mention made of assurance of succors to be given to them of the Religion here,
out of Germany. I have diverse causes to conjecture, that the party which
brought these Letters was directed unto me. This interception makes them here
much doubt Germany.

Sir, Mr. Dale had need to bring with him over a greater train then he shall be
well able to maintain, if her Majesty look to hear often from him, and if his
servants shall be stayed ordinarily, as mine are. And so, etc.

At Paris the tenth of March.

To my Lord Treasurer.
IT may please your Lordship to understand, as I was upon my departure from
this town toward the Court, I received this enclosed from my Scretary
Thevewes; the things contained in the same, are here very rife, and confirmed
with great earnestness; and others, notwithstanding some here of judgment
considedering what good success they have lately had at Rochel, how much their
enemies are therewith appalled, and how the giving out of these bruits may
serve the Kings turn many ways, do not credit them; for my own opinion I assure
your Lordship, I know not what to judge. I have seen within these few months
so many strange and unlikely things come to pass, as I do rather suspend my
judgment then utterly not believe it. If her Majesty do not hear from me with
that speed that were requisite, when there falls out here matters worthy
advertisement, I am justly to be excused, for that I have none to send, my
servants being all staid there, and not one sent over; which thing if it be not
by some device remedied, I know not to what use an Ambassador will serve. And
so having, etc.


To the right honorable Francis Walsingham Esquire, her Majesty's Ambassador in
France.
SIR, you may think it strange that I have writ no oftener to you then I have
done, and that I have no sooner dispatched your successor unto you; but I think
you know well enough the style and order of the Court. Yesterday was the first
day that I could get your dispatch signed, and the same night I sent word to
your wife, and sent word to Dr. Dale who has been with me in the morning, and
prepares to take his journey straight after the holidays toward you, whereof
I thought good to give you warning by your servant; for before her Majesty had
signed, I durst never adventure to affirm any thing for fear of contrary winds,
the which is no news in this Court. Well, now I trust you be pleased, if with
nothing else, yet at the least, with your return. Montgomery is gone from
hence, whether he has taken shipping or no, I know not, but I suppose he has.
With his tarrying so long here, the Queens Majesty was fain to send to
apprehend the Pirates of all nations thereabouts, who under the color of the
Prince of Orange, and the Count Montgomery, robed all manner of Englishmen and
strangers; some of them are like to pay for it, and the rest be gone, or will
be glad to go; for it was time for justice to awake. Of Casteauneufs coming
hither, on D' la Motts errand, I think my Lord Treasurer has written unto you,
who is privater of it then I am, and the answer. The pretense was to bring
recommendations and excuse from the Duke of Alanson of his absence at my Lo. of
Worcesters being there; the cause not pretended, what preparation was here to
help Rochel. And he might easily see there was none by common consent and the
Princes avow. What Montgomery for commiseration, or love of private men,
especially strangers, can get, is hard, and I fear by the event will not appear
so much as is thought and spoken of, and were expedient at this time, if any
great thing should be done. Scotland is very well come forward to an universal
agreement, since Du^Crocque and Viraque went away. The Duke and Earl of Huntly
be come in from them and all their followers, to acknowledge the King and his
Regent. None holds out but Grange and Liddington, who keep the Castle.

(The King and the Lord Regent not being able for fair means to get them to the
unity of the whole Realm, offering unto them all reasonable conditions that
they can demand, so that they will leave the Castle, and to keep no longer
Edinburgh (which is the London and Paris of Scotland) in subjection unto them,
yet cannot be heard; and therefore is required of the Queens Majesty to bring
them to order; the which the Queen may do for any league, treaty, or promise
heretofore made, and so I think will do, if there be no remedy, Du Viraque who
is thought to be sent to keep them still in dissension, by good hap and
contrary winds was driven with six ships of Scotland into Scarbrough-Haven,
stayed there by there by the Lord President. In the mean while was the Duke and
the Earl agreed with the Regent, and the Scottish Ships departed. He is now
thought to be in the way to come to London, for so my Lord president appointed,
but not yet come. A man of his taken in Scotland, has confessed, that he was
sent back under another pretense to cast into the Sea the most part of his
writitings: the which he did, which declares good plain dealing.

The Lo. Leviston is now come to London, pretending his desire to have his
Conscence at liberty; but not yet trusted that he means the quiet of
Scotland, words have escaped him and his Companions by the way, which have not
fallen to the ground.

Farewell from Greenwich the nineteenth of March, 1572. Your assured friend,
Tho. Smith.


To my very loving friend, Francis Walsingham Esquire Ambassador for her Majesty
with the French King.
SIR, your letters brought to me were of the 11 of March dated at St. Cloud,
and the next former were of the 25 of February, for which I thank you, that you
do so carefully advertise me of the state of things as I find you have done,
when I have been more answerable then now I can be. The reason of my frequent
absence, is the intervall of times, when here I am no less mindful of your
causes, both such as belong to her Majesty, and such as belong to your self,
then any other to my power is or can be, and even now on Wednesday last her
Majesty has signed all things meet to revoke you, and to send another in your
place; wherein I know you have found cause to think the time long, and so have
your friends been lately grieved with it; but I trust now to see you shortly to
your contentation. You shall understand that the French Ambassador has of late
time been very earnest with her Majesty in certain causes; as first, in
offering by all good speeches the continuance of the Amity, and with
complaining as grievously that the Q. Majesty's offering of Montgomery to be
aided as he is, with money, etc. must needs move the ^ing to think his Amity
contemned. And with some sweet minatories, he intrated that he might be stayed,
etc. He also renews the marriage matter, and thereto requires a resolute
answer, as a thing necessary to be ended the one way or the other, for honor of
all parties. He also has seemed greatly offended with the stay of Viraque at
Scarborough.

He has made suit, that for the Queen of Scots, some there in France, meaning
two or three, might come hither to bring the said Queen money, and account of
her Estate. In the end came hither an Agent named Chasteau Neuf from the Camp
before Rochel: his coming was, as we perceive, to dissuade Montgomery from going
to Rochel, but he brought loving letters to her Majesty from M. le Duc. To
these things briefly you shall know the Answers. His offers of Amity have been
thankfully accepted, and it has been told him that his Majesty is more bound
to the Queens Majesty for her perseverance then any other upon like cause. For
though it be manifestly seen, and fully discovered by such as are arrived in
Scotland out of France, having been dealers with the King in France, and others
there, how the King is disposed against the Queens Majesty, and this Realm to
offend it, when his own troubled causes shall be settled; and how he persecuteth
the Protestants, being of the Queens Religion; yet her Majesty has resolved to
persevere in her League, meaning first to see the breach come indeed first from
the French King, then she doubts not by Gods Grace to preserve her, and her
Realm, whereunto she also finds all her people so willing to withstand all
forces force, as she has much ado to detain them from adventuring in great
numbers to pass to Rochel of their own charges, and those are not of the
popular, but Noblemen and Gentlemen of Ancient and great livelihoods; who
surely have offered of their own charges to find an Army of 20000 footmen, and
2000 horsemen for six months in Gascoyn; and so earnest they have been, that it
is already known to themselves, both where the men are to be had, and the
money; only they desire but a permission, and truly her Majesty hearing
hereof, has showed her self much offended herewith, and with great charge for
fear of her indignation of the same, the Ambassador confessed he had
understanding, whereupon he was constrained to confess how much his Master was
bound unto her Majesty. All this you may notify unto the King and amplify
it; for it is true and meet to be uttered. As for the stay of Montgomery, it
was said that he desired to depart the Realm, considering her Majesty refused
to aid him, and therefore her Majesty thought it a cruel part to stay him, whom
she was not disposed to aid. And for his manner of departure, the Ambassador
could tell how much he was grieved with that her Majesty had caused all such as
were on the Sea for him and Rochel, to be apprehended, and all that which they
had taken from other the French Kings subjects to be restored as indeed the
like general speedy restitution has not been made in my time; so as therewith
also the King has cause to commend her Majesty's observation of the League.

For the Marriage her Majesty caused me privately to confer with the
Ambassador, and her Majesty has willed me to let him know, that you shall make
the Answer, and yet he shall be acquainted with it, and so this it is, her
Majesty would have you to let the King and his Mother understand that she
cannot accord to take any person to her husband whom she shall not first see.
Secondly, she cannot assent that any person which shall be her husband, shall
with her Authority and assent use any manner of Religion in outward exercise
that is in her Conscience, contrary and repugnant to the direct word of
Almighty God, and so consequently prohibited by the Laws of the Realm,
whereupon these two Consequences do necessarily follow, that in this case of
Marriage with Monsieur de Duc if he will obtain her his wife without sight of
him, her Majesty cannot be had, and yet therein her Majesty is very loath that
he should think that she desires his coming, but as himself shall find it
meet by the advice of the King his brother, and the Queen mother, to whom she
remitteth the consideration hereof, with this assurance, that she means in
good faith to marry with him, if upon his sight the one may like of the other,
and that for the cause of Religion, as he and she may so accord as that which
he shall demand be assented unto without offense of her Conscience, or without
trouble of her Estate, and that that point of Religion is thought meetest to be
left at large to be communed upon betwixt themselves, so as if it should mishap
that one of them might not fully like of the other as to a conclusion of
marriage, that the refusal or breaking up might be imputed the cause of
Religion, and so either party might honorably be discharged to the world, and
no occasion grow thereby of unkindness betwixt them. This is the substance of
her Majesty's resolution, whereof to make the Ambassador here privy, she
seems not to mislike thereof, and in the end concluded with me that she took
this course to be agreeable to the same resolution, which was delivered at
Killingworth the last of August to him and La Mott. And so I think it in
substance the same, whereof I do herewith send to you the last two Articles of
that Answer in French, as then it was given; to which news you may refer this
new Answer.

And now to add of mine own, you shall understand, that I see the imminent
perils to this State; and namely, how long soever she shall by course of nature
live and Reign, the success of this Crown so manifestly uncertain, or rather so
manifestly prejudicious for the State of Religion, that I cannot but still
persist in seeking for marriage for her Majesty, and finding no way that is
liking to her, but this with the Duke, I do force my self to pursue it with
desire, and do flatter my fancy with imaginations that if he should come
hither, her Majesty would not refuse him; and for his Religion, methinks if he
may be otherwise liked, he would not lose a Queen with a Kingdom, for a Priests
blessing of a Chalice. I cannot imagine that his Religion is rooted, that it
may not be transported. Now if I am deceived, yet for the time it eases me to
imagine that such a sequel may follow* but you have cause better to guess
hereat then I; for I guess at nothing but at the Queens Majesty's disposition,
which I take firmly to be bent to marriage; but you on the other part may
guess, whether he may be liked, whether he may be induced to be qualified in
his Religion; yea, whether his marriage be meant seriously and sincerely on
that part; and upon these conceits you have cause to imagine more certainly
what ought to be looked for or desired then I can. But now turning my paper I
will leave and end this matter, praying you heartily to impart unto me your
conceit herein, if thereby you see cause to stay my course, you see how long I
have tarried in this matter; for the rest of the point (for Viracques) sending
for me to come to the Scottish Queen, and for the matters of Scotland, I doubt
not but Mr. Secretary has enlarged his knowledge therein to you. And for more
surety, because at the writing hereof he is gone into Essex, I will upon the
closing up of my Letter impart by speech some part thereof to this bearer
Walter Williams, to excuse me of longer writing. Notwithstanding Gordens
denial, to be privy to the Book lewdly augmented with a blasphemous Prologue, I
understand out of Scotland, that he is therewith well acquainted, wherefore I
pray you search it better out, and let me understand what is now become
thereof. And thus I end

on Good Friday at night, the 20 of March 1572. Your assured loving friend, W^
Burleigh.


Response de la Roigne d'Angle. au Sr. de la Mott Fenelon Amb. du Roy
treschrestien Fait par Mr. Le Grand Tresorier le 18 Marc. 1573.
QUe se Maj. voyant que le Roy tres-christien son bon friar and la Royne sa me
re perseuerent en le honest desir de demander son alliance, encores que de
puis le mois de Aoust dernier plusieurs chooses soient entrevennes de la cost,
par les quelles ell' a une grande occasion de ne suiure le propos. Neant moins
a le prochas elle return maintenant aux mesmes terms on les chooses en
estoient dem^ures le 20 du dit mois d' Aoust lors que elle seant en son con^eil
a Kellingworth present le Sr. de la Mott fist une form de response au dit Sr.
Ambas. suivant la quelle elle dit de noveau.

Que pour le bien de ses subjectes, lesquels monstrent de preveoir beaucoup de
grandes dangiers en ce Royaume si elle les de laisse sans quelque lignee
prouvenant de elle, et sans successeur, a fin de les satesfaire quelle est
firmement resolve de se marier de quelque bon et grand lieu, selon elle si elle
peult trouver quelqu'n qui a elle et son estate soit convenable.

Et sur le offer que les Maj. tres-christienes luy font de Mr. le Duc d'
Alanson le friar et fills, elle trouve que la party est fort honorable si
toutes autres chooses y pe^vent convenir, don't estime qu'il en consiste une
bonne party en l'enterveue d'eux deux, tant a cause de l'inequalite de l^aage,
que pour le rapport que ceux qui ont veu M. le Du^ ont fait de son visage, a
fin de veoir s'ily aura mutuel consentement enter ^ux. Car ainsi at elle
tousiours respondu a toutes autres Princes, qui l'ont recerche ce qu'un chascun
scait bien que beaucoup ont faict, qu ^elle ne achepteroit jamais aucun pour
mary si elle ne l^eust primierement veue.

Que neant moins pour le miscontentement et autres displaisirs que pourroient
succeder de la dit entreve^e si d'adventure les chooses ne sortient a effect, ^t
craignant pour cela quelque diminution d'amitie en lieu qu'elle la veut
augmenter, elle ne scait que desirer la dessus advis remettant a les Maj.
tres-christienes le ^it point d' entreveue, scachant trop bien qu'elles ne
consillerent rien a leur friar et le^ils qui ne soit selon son honeur, esperant
qu'il n'en sera aucun mauvaise interpretation, tant qu'elle proceed simplement
et sincerement, encores qu'il y puisse avoir les honores et amies, si fault il
que les affections de deux costs soient absolues, en quo^ le gre de null autre
ne puist servir sinon celui des parties.

Qu'elle entend que ce pendant qui toutes les articles qui ^nt este consentu
par cy devant et trouves bons pour sa Maj. au prop^s de Mr. demeurant entiers
pour Mr. muant seulement les reserve l'interpretation ou esclaircissement des
doubts sur le article de la Religion, ceque sera remi a estre determine par
elle et Mr. le Duc a l'entreveue.

Qu'elle voit bien quant l article y aura maintenant plus de difficulte qu'il
n'eust e^ au paravant par les evenements de France, considerant le course qu'il
semble que le Roy tien contre les subjects pour le Religion agreant acelle d'
Angleterre, mesmement a luy recorder celle party de sa Religion que consiste
principalement en sa mess attendu le scandale que toutes les consellers disent
qu'il pourroient en ce temps advenir de luy permetre pour estre chose trop
contre a la Saint parolle de dieu et aux loix establies pour la Religion
receus en Angleterre, de sort que outre le scrupule de sa propre conscience
elle estime que bien peu des si^ns le luy vouldront conseiller, ayant cause de
present d^y estre plus soigneux qu'ils n'ont estre parcy devant.

Que neantmoins sur ceque le dit grand Tresorier dict qu'il luy a remonstre
qu^encores qu'elle ne deust trouver en Mr. le Duc toutes perfections qu'elle
desireroit, d ^autant qu'il y en a plusieurs grandes et louables, et qu'il est
de tres illustre et royalle extraction, et que cest a present qu^une party,
tant honorable luy est offert avec tant serieux moiens tant par le Roy et sa
mere comme par la continuelle pour suitte par messagiers et lettres de Duc
mesmes comme tousiours, et que le tout court a elle de se marier, par ainsi
qu'il ne fault qu'elle, s'arreste a petites difficultes, qu'elle dict quelle se
veult encliner pour l ^amour de ses subjects (nonobstant qu'elle y vit aucunes
chooses non du tout a sa satisfaction) d'endurer aucuns defaultes et qu'elle ne
vouldroit fair si ne foit pour la necessite de son marriage a contenter son
Royaume.

Qu'elle ne nie point ce que le dict grand Tresorier luy a pareillement
remonstre touchant le point de la Religion: que plusieurs chooses, moiennant
qu'elles ne soient directement contre le parolle de Dieu, comme il dict estre
quelque part de la mess, se peuvent laisser aller par connivence, qu'autrement
on ne les ottroient pas et qu'il y a moins de scrupule et moins de scandale de
ne le contredire, que si par express declaration on les authoriseroit, par ou
le dict Sr. Tresorier pense qu'en tells et semblables moindres chooses sa
conscience se pourroit acquiescer esperant que Monsieur le Duc s'estant
accoustume avec l'exercise de la' Religion d' Anglet* trouveroit avec le temps
plus de raison de s'en lover que peut estre de la Religion de France. Car il
est manifest qu'en le plus part des chooses celle d' Anglet. ne vary point de
la Remain, forsque en Language, qu'est ce qu'elle peut respondre et ainsi leur
fair dire par son Ambass. de par de la.


Et le grand Tresorier adjouste.
Que suivant ce que dessus estant fort press par le dict Sr. Amb. a dire
quelque chose de ce qu'il pensoit, Il dict, qu'il ne pouvoit aucunement penser
si non que si Mr. le Duc trouve bon de prendre la post avec une moderie
compagne pour venir par de ^a en ce prin temps comme en May ou semblable temps
pour veoir la Royne, ce qu'il pourroit fair sans le prejudice de luy
considerant la grandeur de sa Maj. et qu'il n'a aucun estat Souverain ains
l'honeur d'estre Duc et friar du Roy et comme une june prince desirant aussy de
travailler et veoir le pais. Il pourra en ceste sort venir a Greenwich, ou en
quelque autre lieu icy pres de Londres a Kent, ou bien la part ou la Royne
lors se trouvera, qu'il auroit bonne esperance que l'affaire se conduiroit a
une bonne et heureuse conclusion: Car accordant qu'il se peult trouve autant
agreeable comme plusieurs out fait rapport puis n'agueres, en ce que la Picotte
de la petite verolle soit toute effacee ny voyont difficulte importance que
celle de la Religion. Et quand le mutuel consentement se trouvera aux persons
il esperoit que la Religion ne l'empeschera, et qu'ily aura encores de
conseilliers qui voudront ainsi adviser que Mr. le Duc le puisse contenter avec
une tell tolleration pour l'excercize d'aucuns points de la Religion que
n'offenceroient l'estat de ce Royaume.


Des autres propos du dict Sr. grand Tresorier s'est comprins.
QUe la dicte Dame a la coeur et sa affection entiers verse le Roy en la Royne
sa mere a vouloir demurer a jamais le bonne confederee, ainsi qu'elle pense
bien aussy qu'^ux de leux costs luy correspondent. Mais qu'il ne voit pas que
ce la puisse lon^uement durer non obstant sa present urage intention a
preserver et garder la traicte de sa part, attendu les deportements de la
France, lesquels luy semblent que tendent fort a deprimer les Protestants, la
ou ce Royaulme ne pe^t fair que le porter faveur, ce que sera occasion, si le
marriage ne succeed que peu a peu toute la seurte de la ligue se ira perdre: et
ny aura traicte, ny serment, ny commerce, ny lettres, ny bonnes parolles que
luy puissent regarder. Car il vouloit dire librement que comme il pensoit par
les opinions des plus sages, que la Royne sa maistresse ne pourroit fair qu'en
fin elle et son estat ne fussent contraicte de suiure les deliberations et les
generales resolutions que se prendront par les Princes Protestants pour la
defense de la Religion et pour assister aux attempts de ceux qui voudroint
invahir ce Royaume, don't pour toucher le paix a touts inconvenients que
pourroient sur venir en l'amitie et bonne ligue qu'est de present enter leur
Maj. et enter leur deux Royaumes. Il ni voir aucun rien de plus expedient que
de le confirmer et estraindre d'advantage par ce marriage.


A Copy of the Lord Treasurers Letter to the French Ambassador.
MOnsieur I Ambassador, according to your motion, I conferred with her Majesty
upon the alteration or qualification of some points in the writing which you
sent me, as concerning the matter of Religion to be tolerated for Monsieur le
Duc, and after some long speeches passed herein, her Majesty collected in a
few words, that she would it should by me be imparted unto you, meaning to
abridge the length of the form. First, That the King has known her disposition
to marriage, and upon what cause since the first motion for Mr. d' Anjou, and
therein how she always resolved not to marry without mutual sight and liking,
nor yet to have the matter of Religion to be a cause of trouble to her state,
and of the same mind she has been, and yet is for Monsieur d' Alanson. Now
what is to be done further by Monsieur le Duc, she leaves that to the King and
him; with this, that if he should thus think beforehand, if he should come
percase liking should not ensue, that then he should conceive such offense
thereof, as his good will should turn into hatred, her Majesty thinks it not
meet that in such case he should come at all, but if only the matter of
Religion should breed such difficulty betwixt them, as howsoever the one should
like of the other, yet in respect of the satisfaction in that behalf the
marriage should not take place, it were honorable enough for both or either of
them, though upon the enterview the marriage did not succeed. And therefore no
offense ought to follow, or an alteration of good will, which is, that her
Majesty desires to be conserved, whatsoever happen of the matter of marriage.
Thus after much long speech passed between her Majesty and me, praying you
according to the knowledge, that she is assured you have of her sincere meaning
by conference with her Majesty you will also deliver it to the King.


To the Lord Treasurer.
IT may please your Lordship to advertise her Majesty, That upon the receipt
of your Lordships Letters of March 20, I communicated to Q. mother, her
Majesty's Answer touching the marriage matter, which I thought to begin withal,
and concerning the other three points to say nothing but as occasion shall be
ministered by her.

For the marriage I showed her that her Majesty could not speak more clearly
in the matter then heretofore she has done, which was that she could not
accord to take any for her husband whom she should not first see.

Secondarily, That she cannot assent that any man that shall become her
husband, shall with her Authority and assent use any manner of Religion in
outward exercise, that is in her Conscience contrary to the direct Word of God,
and so consequently prohibited by the Laws of her Realm.

To the first of these two points she answered, that the King and she could not
consent to his coming over without surety that the marriage should proceed.

To the second, She said that it was neither honorable for him to abandon his
Religion upon the sudden, neither could her Majesty require to have a husband
to live without exercise of his Religion, and as for those words, whereas she
says that he cannot consent that he shall have any manner of Religion,
methinks said she the words be very dark, and therefore I would be glad to know
of you what they mean.

To that I answered, that I had not Commission to interpret them, but in my
private opinion, her Majesty's meaning was to debar him of the exercise of any
Religion repugnant to the Laws of the Realm. Upon these two points there passed
between us long debating. I showed her how necessary the contentation of the
eye was in marriage, and that her Majesty by none that heretofore had seen
him, could receive any such satisfaction as were requisite. Further, I used
diverse Arguments to prove unto her, that if the matter did not succeed, yet
could there not grow any dishonor unto him otherwise then in opinion.

For the second, I showed her that as her Majesty had at all times cause to
stick upon this point of Religion, so never more then at this present,
considering what lately had passed here, which had generally bred in her
Majesty's subjects great jealousy of this Crown seeing them so earnestly bent
to oppress those that profess the same Religion that they do.

In the end she desired me in this behalf to show unto her Majesty touching
the interview, that the King and she could not consent that the Duke should
come over unless he might be assured to speed, for that otherwise he returning
without speeding, should receive great dishonor, which might hinder some
honorable offer lately made unto him. And after other Covenants that depend
upon the conclusion of the said marriage, which heretofore in the other Treaty
were reduced to a reasonable accord, shall be so secretly debated here, by some
choice persons elected for the purpose; with her Majesty's Ambassador here
resident at the same time, as shall not be made common to the world, and then
the same being agreed upon, and assurance being given unto the King and her, by
some Letter of her own hand writing, that her intention is to proceed to the
consummation of the marriage, he should not fail to come over; and yet should
he give outto the world, that he adventureth to come over upon no other
assurance then upon good hope. I showed her, that in this point the Queen my
Mistress as I took it, was fully resolved not to receive any to her husband
before she shall see him. Notwithstanding Madam (quoth I) I will make her
acquainted with your requests in this behalf.

And as for Religion (says she) we only require that he may have some secret
exercise for himself, and some few of his that he shall bring over with him,
with this Caution, that her Majesty should depute some whom she should think
fit for the purpose, to see that none of her subjects should resort to the same.

I showed her that I would make her Majesty privy to these her requests though
(said I) as far as I can perceive, I see her Majesty resolved to accept
neither of them. So proceeding in further talk, she showed me, that she hoped
howsoever the marriage took place, the Amity notwithstanding lately concluded
would continue. I showed her, that if there grow any violating thereof, the
cause should rather proceed from them then from his Majesty, though Madam I
know that there are bruits given out here to the contrary: but I hope Madam the
King and you rest satisfied, if your Ambassador has made you truly acquainted
with her Majesty's proceedings. To that she answered, that the King and she was
to think themselves beholding to her Majesty, notwithstanding that they would
have wished that Montgomery had not received at her Majesty's subjects hands
that he does, though we know that Inhibition is made by her Majesty to the
contrary. I then showed her, that to the end she might understand how much she
was beholding to my Mistress, I would (with her leave) make her privy to such
reasons as might have moved any other Prince but my Mistress, who is
consequently bent to make good Amity with them, to yield to C. Montgomory all
assistance. First I showed her, that diverse of her subjects of great quality,
courage, and likelihood, had laid before her Majesty sundry reasons to induce
her to think that the fire lately kindled in France to the ruin of those of
the Religion there, if through Gods goodness it be not quenched, is also so
meant that it shall extend toward her; saying, that if she forbear to support
them, and suffer them to quail, she would be the cause of her own ruin and of
her Realm besides; laying before her danger, they have laid before her also
honor and profit, and have showed her that now is the time for her to recover
such Provinces in this Country as appertain to the Crown of England. And for
the better encouragement have offered her to find her an Army of 20000
footmen, and 2000 horsemen for the space of six months.

Further I showed her, that late it has been discovered by such as are in
Scotland arrived out of France, having been dealers with her Majesty and
others here, how they are disposed when their own troubled causes shall be
settled, to attempt somewhat against her Majesty.

Lastly, I showed her, how her Majesty has been put in mind how little
account is had of the recommendations heretofore made by her and the Princes of
Germany of those of the Religion here, seeing them persecuted with such
extremity, contrary to the assurance given by their Majesty's unto such their
Ministers as did recommend them, which may give just cause to think her Amity
is little esteemed. All these courses notwithstanding which would move any
other Prince, such is her affection toward this Crown, as she is fully
resolved to persevere in her League, meaning first indeed to see the breach
come from the King, and then she doubts not in Gods goodness, but that she
shall preserve her self and her Realm against him or any other Prince that
shall attempt any thing against her, finding all her subjects most willing to
withstand all foreign forces, whatsoever is given out by certain Rebels.

To this she answered, that she knew by advertisement come from the Ambassador,
that there was great solicitation made by her subjects, as also great offers,
and that therefore they acknowledged themselves much beholding to her Majesty
for her intention to persevere in good Amity.

Now whereas you say, there has been discovered by certain apprehended in
Scotland, some intention of ours to disquiet her Majesty, I protest says she,
that both the King and I know of no such matter, and that the parties that so
do say, do belie^ us. What Commission they have received from others of this
Realm I know not; but if it may be proved that they have received any, they
that have given them Commission shall receive such punishment as the Q. your
Mistress can desire. Our intention, says she, touching the matters of Scotland,
was never other then to persuade them to accord; and to acknowledge the ^ueens
Majesty their Mistress, for their Governor.

To this I replied, in so doing they break the League, for that it was contrary
to that which was concluded in the same; for that it was agreed, that neither
the one nor the other should give Law unto Scotland, but should join in
maintenance of that Government. That they among themselves should agree upon to
be most for their safety which thing may give my ^istris just occasion to
suspect that which is discovered in Scotland, the rather to be true. Then she
seeming to be sorry that she uttered so much, that she could do no less but say
somevv^t to recommend her c^use, (...) the alliance, and yet wished any accord
rather th^n they should ^^str^y one another. Upon this occasion she fell in to
some purpose about the staying of Viracque, and said that it was strange
Ambassadors should be stayed, who were always persons privileged within
the Dominions of their Confederates.

To that I ansvvered, that it might seem more strange to the Queen my Mris.
considering that it was agreed that the matters in Scotland should be treated
in common, that any should be sent secretly thither, her Majesty not being made
privy thereof, which gave her Majesty a great occasion to suspect that which
was discovered by certain taken in Scotland, to be true; seeing such dealing
under hand, the Queen my Mistress (said I) was rather persuaded that Viracque
had been sent over by some of this Realm who envyed the good between the two
Crowns, then by the King, and therefore shall be sorry to hear him be avowed to
be his Minister.

To this she answered, That the Queen my Mistress had been made acquainted of
their intention to send Vi^acq^e long since by their Ambassador to the end to
join with Mr. K^llegrew in the treaty of accord. I told her that I thought that
they should find their Ambassador had failed to let her Majesty understand so
much, for that as I am informed she understood nothing of his going thither
until such time as she heard of his st^y. And as for his stay, Madam (quoth I)
though he avows himself to be the Kings Ambassador, yet her Majesty has given
order through^ut all her p^rts, that all her persons whatsoever they pretend,
unless they be notoriously known to be Merchants, or have pasports or
Safe Conduct, shall not only be stayed, but also sent up to the Court, and
therefore this stay being generally upon good consideration considering the
present state of Europe, neither he nor any other that either has been or
shall be stayed can complain of any violating of any privi edge, etc. that
appertains to any Ambassador; She seemed to be very much entangled with this
matter, and had not therefore much to say for the staying of him. Afterward
falling into Montgomeries matter, I declared to her Majesty also at large, how
much he was aggrieved with that her Majesty had caused all such as were on the
Seas for him and Rochel to be apprehended, and all that which they had taken
from others, the French Kings subjects, to be restored, and that with such
speed, as the like speedy and general restitution has not been in my time
heretofore. Whereby, said I, your Majesty has just occasion to commend her
Majesty's observation of the League; which thing she acknowledged to be true,
and therefore as they had cause, did think themselves beholding to her
Majesty. This in sum was the effect which passed between her Majesty and me.
And so leaving, etc.

At Mouel, the first of April 1572.

To the Lord Treasurer.
FOr satisfying of your Lordships request, touching my private opinion of the
marriage. The great impediment that I find in the same, is the contentment of
the eye. The Gentleman sure is void of any good favor, besides, the blemish of
the small pocks. Now when I weigh the same, with the delicacie of her Majesty's
eye, and considering also that there are some about her in credit, who in
respect of their particular interesses, having neither regard unto her
Majesty, nor to the preservation of our Country from ruin, will rather
increase the misliking by defacing of him, then by dutifully laying before her
the necessity of her marriage; and that in true choice the satisfaction of the
ear imports more then that of the eye; specially, that seeing to one of her
quality, there is not allotted that choice that is to other common personages,
I hardly think that there will ever grow any liking; for the Gentleman himself,
(his favor excepted) he has many of those good parts that I would desire to
be in one whom I would wish to be her Majesty's husband, if the other
impediments were removed. And as for his Religion, I do not doubt, upon
conference had with some, but that he would be reduced to any conformity, so
that the sticking in that matter proceeds rather from others then from
himself, and yet they not moved thereto of conscience. But for other respects,
whether this marriage be sincerely meant or no, is a hard point to judge, where
dissimulation takes so deep root. In my opinion, I think rather no then yea,
not for that they desire it not only as a thing both honorable and
profitable, but also necessary, in respect to have a vent for the separation of
the brethren: But because they are altogether persuaded that her Majesty has
no intention to marry, a thing partly proceeding from her own disposition, and
partly through the disswasion of others, who are not unknown to them, and
therefore partly do use the same but for an entertainment, in respect of their
troubled state at home. Such presumptions as I have to lead me so to think, I
hope shortly to impart unto your Lordship, etc.

The first of April, 1572.

To Sir Thomas Smith.
SIr, it may please you to advertise her Majesty, how that the twentieth of
this month there arrived one here, sent to the King from the Marshal
D'Anville; who reporeth, that the said Marshal has lost at sundry assaults at
Sancerre in Berie fifteen hundred footmen, besides fifty Gentlemen, of whom
there is very good account made. Amongst the rest, there is very great moan
made for the loss of Monsieur D'Candales, a Gentleman of a very ancient house,
and one who married with Montmorencies sister. He reports further, that there
is in D'Anville's camp great scarcity of victuals, which proceeds for lack of
payment; so that if in time the King take not some order for the redress
thereof, the said Marshal shall be constrained to break up his camp.

Upon this discouragement of D'Anvile, the strength and number of the
Protestants increases daily, they having at this present, as it is reported,
of Castles and Holds almost a hundred, and of good fighting men eighteen
thousand, yet dispersed in the said Holds, but like to assemble when the season
of the year shall serve for the purpose.

The 21 of this month word was brought to the Court, how those of the Kings
Camp that lay before Sansarra, as they gave assault to the Town the day before,
sustained a great repulse, and lost six score of their best Soldiers, whereupon
they are driven to raise the siege.

By Letters sent from Rochel, of the 21 of this present, the King is advertised
how the Count de Retz is hurt in the rains of the back with a harquebush shot
out of Rochel; and some say, he can hardly escape it^* others, that he is not
in any danger, and yet the pellet cannot be gotten.

By Letters also of the 26, sent from Rochel to certain private friends, they
are advertised, that there was no battery laid there before the 24, although it
has been bruted, that it is long sithence that Monsieur had beaten down a
certain Bastion, called L'Evangile.

Though it is reported of La Noue, that he should bring with him to Monsieurs
Camp thirty Gentlemen, yet the Queen Mother her self at my last access, told
me, that there arrived with him but twelve, amongst the which she named none of
name unto me, but only Rochnart. By others I learn, that La Noue escaped very
hardly out of the Town with the safety of his life. It is said, that the King
shall have 6000 Switzers, notwithstanding that it was otherwise concluded by
the Cantons in the last Diet; and therefore being contrary to their conclusion,
it is thought there will grow some trouble among themselves. When they come,
the Kings determination is, to make a Camp volant to go from place to place,
with intent to detain all such of the Religion as are thought to be men of
Conduct.

Upon the news of Montgomeries preparations, there is order taken along the
Seacoasts of Britain, Normandy and Picardie, to withstand his landing. They
make full account that it is not possible for him to enter the Haven of Rochel,
in respect of the passage that is quite stopped with stones and timber;
howbeit, others of judgment say, that if he bring forces enough with him to
withstand the Kings Galleys, the springtide will favor him all this month,
as that the stopping of the Haven cannot be any impeachment unto him; and that
if he once enter, Monsieur shall be driven to leavie his siege; for that I am
credibly informed, he has not in his whole Camp above 7000 Soldiers. By the
letters of Italy, as also out of Germany, it is said, that the Duke Elector of
Saxony, is arrived secretly at the Emperors Court; what should be the cause of
his repair thither, men do rather ghess at then know; all men conclude, that it
is for matter of great weight and importance. The Marshal Montmorency is
departed lately from the Court, some men say, neither with his own
satisfaction, nor yet with the Kings; others affirm the contrary. By letters
sent from Antwerp, of the twentieth of March, it is reported, that there was a
sore conflict at sea betwixt the Prince of Oranges men and the Duke of Alva's,
in the which, those for the Duke of Alva had the worst, and were constrained to
retire themselves within the River, to a certain place called Berge, where they
are besieged by the Prince of Orange's ships, so as it is thought they can
hardly escape. In this conflict, besides diverse others, a Spaniard being
General, was slain.

I am secretly given to understand, that the King here is offered by the
Princes of the League support of money, upon condition that the next year he
will enter into the League, if by his mediation the peace of the Turk and them
of the League shall not follow. And so for Italian news, referring your Honor
to these enclosed occurrents, I most humbly take my leave.


To the Earl of Leic^ster.
YOur Lordship by Mr. Secretaries Letters shall understand at large what
success the Marshal has had in Provence, how he has prospered at the siege of
Sansarra, and what is lately done at Rochel, who as yet continue still resolute
never to yield: Notwithstanding le Noues abandoning of them. I am very sorry to
condemn that Gentleman, though he be generally condemned by others, until I
hear what he can say for himself. If he be not well able to excuse this his
doing in this behalf, I will learn thereby the less to build upon any man, who
I perceive when God withdraws his staying hand are more weak then weakness
itself. This Example therefore and others, are to teach us to build upon God,
and to weigh man as he is. They are much perplexed here with the Count
Montgomeries preparation; they have therefore given order all along the
seacoasts, to withstand his Landing, fearing that if he once land, he will
draw great numbers unto him. They give it out, that it will not be possible for
him to enter the Haven of Rochel, through certain ships sunk in the channel.
But if he enter, it is certainly thought that Monsieur shall be driven to leavie
his siege. Upon the event of his Entry wise men shall be able to judge what
shall be the issue of this trouble here. Howsoever, he speed, I believe most
assuredly, this Realm shall not be free from trouble, until there be vengeance
taken for the innocent blood shed here, and peradventure God will have it to be
the work of his own hand, for that we are so ready to depend rather upon men
then upon him. I am glad that the accord in Scotland is in so good forwardness;
for I fear, if their own troubles here were settled, we should not long be free
from troubles that way.

Touching a Rider, your Lordship shall understand, that there is by the
procurement of the Italian Captain, one stayed for you in Italy (for that here
is none worth the having) who is both skilful and honest. If your Lordship will
have him, then must you send into Italy a Bill of Credit for so much money as
may defray his charge into England. C. Massino shall inform your Lordship of the
means how to send to the Gentleman that has provided the said Rider, who is
acquainted with the matter by the Italian Captain; and therefore shall repair
to your Lordship to know your mind in this behalf.


To the Right Honorable Francis Walsingham Esquire Ambassador Resident for her
Majesty in France.
AFter my hearty commendations. At the last, we have not only gotten your
revocation, and Doctor Dales dispatch signed, but have also set him forward,
and am glad that you shall now come out of that bloody Country, and so be all
your friends. The news of James Kirkaldy was not altogether true; but true it
was, that by treason of the Soldiers he was two or three days in Blackness,
and the Keeper thereof Alexander Stuard, and his brother prisoners, but by the
same slight was the ^ day taken away again, and Alexander Stuard and his
brother delivered, and so James Kirkaldy brought prisoner to the Regent, and
all the money which he brought out of France, and was unspent, which was 33000
Crowns, delivered to the Regents hands, and the Castle of Blackness to
Alexander Stuard, to keep it to the Kings use; since which time also, the Duke
of Chastelherauld and the Earl of Huntley be come in, and sworn to the King for
themselves, and all their kinn and followers; and very friendly agreed with the
Regent, who has behaved himself in all his actions very wisely and very
moderately. There is none left now but Lidington and Grange, in the Castle of
Edinburgh, which refuse the King and the Regents authority in all Scotland, who
must either yield, or else they will be pulled out by the ears. De la Noues
revolting does seem strange, and makes some men to suspect that he has been
of longer time such a one. I trust you shall come now into a quieter Country.
And so I bid you most heartily farewell.

Your very Friend, Thomas Smith.


To the Right Honorable Francis Walsingham Esquire Ambassador for the Queen's
Majesty in France.
SIr, the best news I can send you is, that Mr. Dale your successor takes his
journey hence on Wednesday next. I dare say you will wish him a speedy passage.
Since I wrote to you by Walter Williams, this French Ambassador has had new
conference with her Majesty, to have procured some alteration for his
advantage, of such speeches as I delivered to him in conference of the matters
of the Duke of Alanson, whereof I wrote to you: And because he would obtain the
same, he offered his dispatch, which I thought he would have made before me;
and now you may see how late it is, for on Friday last he was here with her
Majesty, and in the end her Majesty yielded she would consider with me what
might be altered upon the former answer, which he had put in good length in
writing, whereof I send you the Copy, the same being drawn by the Ambassador,
as you may ghess, to his advantage, yet agreeable with the substance of my
speeches. Hereupon the Queens Majesty considering the writing, and finding it
of some length, willed me to return it to the Ambassador, and to write to him,
as I did, the Copy, as I first conceived it in English; so I did send it him,
and now ye may see what is passed in this matter, wherewith the Ambassador does
send this his servant. He did also on Friday solicit Viracques dispatch,
whereunto her Majesty assented: but since that yesterday her Majesty had
Letters from Berwick, by which she understands, that his coming into Scotland
is so much misliked, both of the Hamiltons, Huntley, and the rest. The Regent
will not license him to come in, so as his journey shall be lost, and to tarry
at Berwick were not convenient, so I think this is not to depart so soon. The
Ambassador says, that the Duke his Master writes vehemently to move the
Queens Majesty about ayding of the Count Mountgomery, wherein her Majesty
has thoroughly answered him, that he is departed without any her aid, directly
and indirectly; and truly he departed with great mislking, in that all his
French ships were taken as Pirates, the men to the number of (...) imprisoned,
and many died, some hanged, and all their prizes taken from them; so as you may
avow that the C. had cause of no small offense. And if he have any favor
without her Majs. kowledge, it is by some bargain made by Merchants of France,
with the English Merchants, for money to be given for salt, etc. Hereof the
Ambassador desires that you will inform the King, that his report may accord
with the same. We do also stay the Lord Levingstone for like respect as we do
Viracque. And thus I and, not doubting but Mr-Secretary writes of other common
things.

Yours assuredly, William Burleigh.
James Fitz-morice the Rebel, with all his sequel, submitted himself to Sir
John Parrot in Ireland; so that all Munster is free from Rebellion. Here h^th
been a murder committed about Shooters-hill, somewhat to the reproof of this
place; and herein I have used such care, as the party is taken, being one Brown
an Irish man, who had served, and is put from my Lord of Oxfords service.




To the Right Honorable Francis Walsingham Esquire Ambassador Resident for her
Majesty in France.
SIr, now comes your Successor so long desired: I doubt not, but both for his
own comfort, that he may willingly enter into that charge, which for the Queens
Majesty's service, you will sufficiently instruct him how he shall best serve,
and therein so deal with him: And if in conference you find any rawness and
imperfection, you do not forbear, but like a Tutor, teach him to inform; for so
I know he shall be greatly bound to you; and so it is necessary. Let him also
understand, whom he may trust, and so to use them, that it good will and
conscience be, they take no harm; wherein I have straightly charged him to be
religious. Procure the Queen Mother to think well of him. I am very fearful
that he shall do well for many causes, but for none more then to avoid the
Queens Majesty's displeasure, which I am assured of, for that I did choose him
to relieve you. If he should not content her Majesty in this service, he has
required me, that you would give leave, and persuade, that your Secretary might
continue with him a while. Now I end, because he is going.

From London the first of April, 1572. Yours assuredly, William Burleigh.


By the QUEEN.
To our Right Trusty and Well-beloved Francis Walsingham, our Ambassador
Resident with our good Brother the French King.
ELIZABETH R.

TRusty and well-beloved, we greet you well: Whereas you often made suit unto
us to be revoked from that charge, albeit we could have been well pleased that
you should have tarried there still, for the great sufficiency that we know in
you, and the faithful and discreet handling, for our service; yet we have
thought good, at your friends requests and desires for your return, to yield
unto your suit: And therefore we let you wot, That seeing you are so desirous
to return home* we have made choice of our trusty and well-beloved Valentine
Dale, Doctor of the Law, and one of our Masters of the Requests extraordinary,
this bearer, to be your Successor there; and to that end have written our
Letters to the King our good brother, and to the Queen Mother; Wherefore our
pleasure is, That you do not only repair with him unto them, with the delivery
of our said Letters; but also, before your departure from thence, participate
unto him all your instructions, and such other things as you shall think meet
and expedient for him to know for the furtherance of our service: And also, as
you can, bring him acquainted with those by whom he may have best understanding
of that Court, and the affairs necessary for us to be known. And that you do
leave with him such vessel, plate, and other furniture that you have of ours,
taking his writing under his hand and seal, of the receipt of the same for your
discharge. These things done, we are pleased^ that you make your repair unto us
with some convenient speed, as you shall think meet.

Given under our Signet at our Manor of Richmond, the nineteenth of March,
1572. in the fifteenth year of our Reign.

Response faicte aux Messieurs les Ambassadeur de France 20 August, 1573.
PRemierement que le Message qu'a este env^ye d'icy a l'Amb. de la Royne
resident en France, on a este mal rapporte on mal entendu par le dict
Ambassadeur. Car il ne s'accorde pas avec ce qu'en a este faict dans les
Lettres du Roy treschresti^n escripts a son Ambassadeur. En ce seroyt vrayment
une grande absurdite, si sa Majeste premierement a son Ambassadeur eust mande
dire, qu'il estoit impossible que le marriage eust en effect, et puis apres
incontinent eust demand ou parle d'une entreveue; vray est que par les
premiers le dit Ambassadeur avoit charge de dire que pour la difference des
aages sa Majeste trouve la chose fort difficile de'accorder tell marriage; Et que
pour raison de ces difficultes son entendement ne se pouvoit de fair de
doubts qu'on y trouvoit, si ne se pouvoit trouver quelque aid expedient pour
recompense: Et ce fut la sum des premieres Lettres comme il pourroit
apparoistre par la copy: Les secondes que suyvoyent les aid incontinent apres
avoyent cecy en sum a l'Ambassadeur qu'il avoit en charge de dire que sa
Majeste voyant la continuelle solicitation du Roy et de la Royne mere du Roy
en ce cas de marriage, Et mesmes plus fresches Lettre bayllees par
l'Ambassadeur du dit Sr Roy environ le 23 Iuin a la maison de Monsieur
Tresorier, trouve bon apres avoir escript sa premiere lettre de adjouster
encores cecy a la second, a find fair^ apparoistre, l'esgard qu'elle avoit
des as^iduelles requests du dit Sr. Roy. Cest quelle trouve deux principax
empeschements, enter aultres, l'une la cause de la Religion se pourroit
remedier par quelque conformit^ procedant du Duc mesme. Ainsi l'autre pourroit
sembler estre difficile plust osten opinion qu'en substance. Et qu'anssi elle
veoit pour le plus souvent que rien ne govern plu^ aux mariges ou doibt bien
considerer comment une pourroit estre agreeable a l autre que de satisfaire
leurs opinions par la veue de l'un et l'autre and especialement en ce cas icy,
considerant que ceulx que ont ve^, le Duc n'osent affirmer s'il pourroit estre
agreeable ou non a sa Majeste combien qu en plusieurs chooses ils se prisent
fort, and semblablement sa Majeste, y adjouste encores pour estre aussi declare
par son Ambassadeur que d'autant quelle pensoit cecy estre chose qu'on luy
accorderent pas facilement combien toutesfois qu'on l uy a faict personage
d'aussi grand estat qu est le Duc D Alan^on quelle le remectoit a la
consideration, du dit Roy et Royne: don't elle luy done charge de dire, qu'elle
n'avoit pense d'en fair mention si premierement n'eust appar ceu par les
Lettres tant du dit Duc mesme, que de la dite Dame Royne mere escripts a
l'Ambassadeur icy le desire que le dict Duc avoit de soy mesme de venir de
parde^a pou veoir and pour estre veude sa Majeste. Et en le fin sa Majest^
done charge a son Ambassadeur de conclurre en ceste sort. C'est s'il n'^ust
este pour le desire qu'elle a de proceder platement and o^vertement en ce^t
affair, en qu'elle se veoit tant provoquer par la grande affection du dit Sr
Roy et Duc envers elle, elle se fut deport^e d'en fair aucune mention, comme
elle esperoit qu'on n'eu feroient aultre interpretation que bonne et que on ne
soub^onneroit que sa Majeste auroit aucun intention d'abuser le d. Duc. Et
pourtant quant a l'entrevene sa Majeste le laisse a la consideration du Roy et
de la Royne mere, and a l'amour and r'asis jugement lesquells elle scait
tresbie^ qui ls ne ferieont rien que ne soit a l'honneur du dit Duc le friar
and sils pour ce qui'llny semble chose qu'elle n'offeroit desirer de peur de
quelque discontement que pourroit ensuiure si ces chooses ne sortassent a la fin
desiree, mesmement veu que la Royne par ces parolles and Ambassadeur en France
sembloit grandement doubter, pour ce que les entreveues des Princes out eues
quelque fois une mauvaise issue que quelque in convenient ne sui voit a la
diminution de l'amitie mutuelle la queile, sa Maj. desire estre continue in
plustost augmentee que diminuee. Au rest que touts les articles quant au
marriage de Mons. le Duc d'Alanson mutatis mutandis forsque l'interpretation ou
esclaircissement des doubts sur l'article touchant la Religion l'es quelles
seront remises a estre determinees par sa Majeste and l'dit Duc en l'entrevene.

N Ous Francois de Burbon Pr: Daulphin de Auvergne de St. Iergean et du pais
puysan pair de France, Marquis de Mazieres, Cont^ de Bar sur Seine et aizoile
Baron de Mirebeau, Governeur et Lieutenant General de sa Majeste, et balliages
d'Orleans, Chartres, Blois et pais adiacens, Artus de Cosse Count de Segond,
Marshall de France, Loys de Lusignan de St. Gelais Sr. de Lansac Chevalier
Chr. de deux ^ordres du Roy, Counseillier en son Conseild* estat, and prive du
Roy^, Cap. de cent homnes d'Armes de ses Ordonnances, Governeur et son
Lieutenant General au pais de Rouen et Eureux, Tannerguy le venuer Barthram de
Salignac Sr de la Mothe Fenellon Chr'des dictes deux ordres et Conseillier ^s
dicts Conseills d'estat et prive Michel de Chasteauneuf. Sr. de Mauvisire
Chr'de l'ordre St. Michel Gentilhomme de la Chamber du Roy Cap. de cinquante
hommes d'armes de ses Ordonnances Conseillier en son conseil prive Governeur de
la ville and Chasteau de St. Disiers et son Ambassadeur Resident en ce Royaulme
Barnabe Brisson, Sr. de Granele Conseillier du Roy en son dict Conseil prive et
president en sa Cour de Parliament Claude Pynart Sr. de Carmailles Premier
Baron de Va ois Conseillier du Roy en son Conseil priv^ Secretaire d'estate and
de ses Finances Pierre de Claise Sr. de Cour^nces et Marchiamont, Conseillier
en son dict Conseil priv^ Chambellan Conseillier de Mon Sr. le Duc d'Anjou et
d'Alanson son friar uniq et Jacques de Vray Sr. de Foulorte ausi Conseillier de
Mon dict Sr. le Duc et Secretaire des finances, Attestons estre vray qu'au
parauant que rediger en form de contracte les articles y devant traictes enter
les Srs. Commissaires et deputes de la ser. Royne d'Angleterre et le Sr. de
symger ausi Commissaire de dicte tresillustre Duc d'Anjou le 24 jour de
Novembre, 1579. pour le faict Icelle dame Royne a expressement declaire et
reserve, qu en virtu du dict contract elle n^ entendestre obligee and estrainte
a l'accomplissement: et consummation du dict marriage jusques a ce que la dicte
dame Royne and le dict tresillustre Duc se soient mutuellement esclaireis et
satisfaicts d' aucunes, chooses particulieres enter eux dout sa dicte ser.
Majeste and sa dicte altess certifieront par escrit le dict Roy tres-christien
de dans six sepmaines prochames et soubs ceste reservation susdicte et non
autrement a este le dict contract de marriage, sign et pass par le Srs.
Guilliaume Cecil Sr. de Burleigh grand Tresorier d'Angletterre Mre. Curateur de
tous Pupilles et des Charges de la couronne d'Angleterre. Edouard Conte de
Lincoln Sr. de Clinton et grand Admiral d'Anglet^rre et Cap. General des arms
de la Mer, d'icelle sere. Royne, Thomas Conte de Sussex Viscont de fitzwater
Sr. d'Egremont et de Burnel Cap. de tous les gentilhommes pensionaires d'icelle
sere. Royne Iusticier de toutes forrestes, parcs et chases de dela, la riviere
de Trent, son Chambellan, Fran^ois Conte de Bedford Sr. de Russel Rob. Conte de
Leicester Sr. de Denbigh Chr. de l'ordre St. Michel grand Esquier de la dicte
sere. Royne, tous Chr. de l'ordre de la Iartiere d'icelle dame Royne,
Christofer Hatton Chr. son Vice-chambellan et premier Cap. de ses gardes et
Fran^ois Walsingham ausi Chr. primier des deux principaux Secretaires de la
dicte sere. Royne et Chanchellier de susdict order de la Iartiere Commissaires
Commiss. et deputes par icelle dame Royne.

En tesmoign de ce que dessus nous avons ensemblement sign ces presents a
Londres le 11 jour de Iuin l'an 1581. Francois Burbon Artus de Cosse. Loys de
Lusignian. Tannergus le Veneur. Bertram de Fenelon. Michel de Chasteauneuf.
Brissan. Pynart. Uray. W. Burleigh. Ed. Lincoln. Tho: Sussex. Fra: Bedford.
To: Leicester. Chr. Hatton. Fra: Walsingham.



A Tres Christien Roy de France.
ELIZABETH R.

TRes-hault, etc. comme en la reservation faict sur le contraict de nostre
marriage le xi jour de Iuin dernier pass il soit expressement declare que ne
serions obligee ny estrainte en virtue du dict contraict a l'accomplissement on
consummation du dict marriage si nous et Monsieur le Duc vostre friar ne vous
donnious a entendre dedans six sepmaines prochemement en suivantes entier
esclaircissement et satisfaction mutuelle sur quelques particularites; et ayons
depuis pour satisfaire a nostre promise depesche verse vous et le dict Sr. Duc,
nostre serviteur le Sr. de summer fourni des Instructions bien amples pour
traicter avec vous sur quelques points d'importance dout nous attendous plus
prompte response pour selon icelle vous esclaircir sur les dites particularitez
dedans le term prefix; mais d'autant que les chooses que vous avez proposees
tant a nostre Ambassadeur, qu'a nostre dict et serviteur summer sont de plus
grande consequence que de pouvoir estre, plemement consider^s dans si peu de
temps, ayant delibere de depescher bien ^ost par devers vous un personnage
instruict a plein de nostre intention et volunte quant aux dictes chooses par
vous proposses: nous n'avons cependant voulu ob^ettre (a fin que ne recevant
nostre response au temps prefix vous n'estimiez que nostre intention n'est de
nous tem. au contraict) de vous tesmoigner par la present suivant le desir qu^
a nous avo^s de vous donnier entiere satisfaction et contentement de tous nous
de portements, que sera la ^in.


Instructions for Sir Francis Walsingham Knight, her Majesty's principal
Secretary sent into France to the French King, and to Monsieur the Duke of
Anjou 22. of July 1581.
ELIZABETH R.

FOr that you are thoroughly acquainted with all the Negotiations passed
concerning the marriage desired by Mr. and do know the causes of the
prolongation of the conclusion thereof, not to have proceeded of us without
just grounds, there shall be less need to enlarge these instructions by
writing, but to make rather a memorial for you of the matter in your own
presence concluded for answer to such things as of late has been delivered by
the French King, to Summers for which purpose we have made special choice of
you for the better satisfaction of the French King* And our meaning is, that
you shall make the Duke acquainted with this your message, and to cause the
French King to accept the same your action in good part.


The matters propounded by the French King be these.
1 A request (upon a supposition made by the French King, that the marriage was
accorded) that we would assign a day within which the marriage should be
consummate; and in some speech he also named a day.

2 An offer that the marriage being promised and the day assigned, that the
King would upon knowlenge thereof, enter with us into a League offensive and
defensive, and ratify the same; and cause it to be delivered at the instant of
the consummation of the marriage.

3 A motion that a secret agreement might be made apart betwixt the King and us
for the matters of Low Countries.

To these three you shall show the Duke what we have resolved for answer to the
King, whereof we have willed you to make him acquainted, and you shall move him
by such Reasons as are both true and known to your self, how loath we are to
deliver any thing to his misliking, if the necessity of the time and the matter
did not force us thereto.

Therefore to the first request of the French King, grounded upon the
supposition that the marriage is accorded, you shall show him how that it is
otherwise to be understood, for that the whole Treaty indeed is suspended by an
act accorded by the Commissioners, whereof you can make him a particular
declaration, and for the purpose you shall show him the cause of our long
prolongation of the time therein limited, which also we do give you authority
by word in our general Commission further to enlarge as you shall see cause.

And to the request for assignation of a day for the marriage, you shall
declare, that for diverse considerations, we cannot find it good either for
Monsieur or for our selves to assent to the marriage with him as the case
stands, whereby he being already entered into an open war against the King of
Spain, should by marriage bring us and our Realm also into a war, which in no
respect our Realm and subjects can accept with the marriage^. but the same
would prove very ungrateful to our people* and engender a misliking of us both,
as you may well enlarge that point the rather considering it is seen how hardly
many have been brought to allow of the marriage without any war.

And therefore upon this point we nevertheless thus concluded, that though the
marriage cannot be allowable with a war for those respects, yet considering how
necessary it is for the Crown of France, as well as for ours, yea, for all
Christendom, that the King of Spains greatness should be impeached, and this
account of Monsieurs should be prosecuted in the Low Countries, we shall be
content (though we do not marry) to join with the French King to aid Monsieur
with a reasonable portion, so as it may not be so overtly, as thereby to
pr^voke a war upon us and our Realm, and herewith you shall set forth the
necessity of the continuance of Monsieurs actions now in hand, as if he will
answer, that he will lean to our marriage, you shall answer that there cannot
be so much profit either to himself, or to the French King and his Realm, or to
us and our Realm by the marriage, as by the continuance of this action to the
abating of the Spanish Kings greatness, which if it be not interrupted
speedily, will so encounter both France and England, as neither the marriage,
nor any conjunction of the forces of France and England can hereafter stay or
remedy.

And if it shall be objected by Monsieur, that the offer to aid him secretly
will serve him to no purpose, For that he knows that the King his brother
will either not aid him at all, or will not aid him otherwise then secretly, as
will not serve him to purpose, so as he must be forced to leave his enterprise,
you shall still maintain our offer to be reasonable. But if you shall find
Monsieur so earnest to mislike thereof, as you shall perceive him resolute to
leave off the enterprise, except we will join with the King in such manner of
aid as his brother will be content, then you may after some pawsing say, that
if upon conference with the French, it shall appear that he cannot be content
with our secret aid We would be content rather then the Dukes actions should
utterly quail to yield to join with the French King by League and Contract
both to aid him, as shall be thought reasonable betwixt the King and us. And
also some other ways to impeach the King of Spains greatness, but if the Duke
could be contented with our secret aid, we think it should be no hinderance to
him, and yet a great contentation to us, for so we might avoid the offense of
our people, and so you shall earnestly entreat the Duke to be content therewith.

As to the other two points for making of a League offensive and defensive, and
for a secret agreement for the matters of the Low Countries, we shall be ready
to make with the King his Brother, a League offensive and defensive, and for
the matters of the Low Countries, we will therein do as before is expressed, if
the secret aiding may in no sort be accepted by the French King.

And thus leaving to your discretion how to persuade Monsieur, that th^s not
assenting to the marriage, proceeds not of lack of Love or Good Will toward
him, but of mere necessity to avoid the just offense of our people, you shall
use all good persuasions to temper his misliking thereof, with the assurance of
the continuance of our love toward him in all his fortunes hereafter to follow.

And now when you shall return from Monsieur to the French King, you are for
answering the first point, to show our mind thereto with the like Arguments
and Reasons, as before is contained, in that you shall have said to Monsieur,
which need not here to be repeated in writing.

And if the French King shall not allow of our foremost offer for our secret
aiding of Monsieur in his actions, but will refuse the same peremptorily, and
so procure Monsieur to leave his enterprise for lack of our further yielding,
then you shall yield to the second before remembered, that we will rather then
the enterprise should fail, and thereby the King of Spains greatness increase,
join with the King as is remembered. But except Monsieur shall object against
the manner of our aid in secret sort, as is before remembered, you shall not
need to yield ours to offer to Monsieur that second degree, nor make any
mention thereof, for after that being opened, and the French King being
therewith acqnainted before your access unto him, it shall be in vain to stand
with the French King upon the offer of the first degree for a secret aid; so as
if you shall be urged by Monsieurs answers to fall to the second, to yield to
an open aid, then you may only repeat the first to the King, and therewith to
add, that if that manner of aid shall neither content the French King nor
Monsieur, then we will assent to join with the French King in such manner as
shall be found reasonable for us both, and for the cause. And so our meaning
is, that you shall if you can possible, in this sort put of the marriage with
yielding to this latter open sort of aiding, if the secret aid shall not be
allowed, and therewith you shall declare by this our Answer, the other two
points for a League offensive and defensive, and for a secret accord for the
Low Countries, to be in a sort answered.

But for more particular instructions of you, how to proceed in these two
latter matters, you shall have for them, both a Commission general for your
self, and our Ambassador, and Summers to treat thereupon, and with the said
Commission you shall have some other particular instructions, such as the short
time may yield, And whenever you shall enter to treat thereon, after
knowledge had from you there shall be more particular matters called to
remembrance and sent unto you.

But now if you shall after all good Reasons used to persuade the staying of
the marriage, with the offers to join with the French King, and both with
aiding of his Brother, and if it be moved to you, or otherwise thought
reasonable to be by you mentioned to join also in the ayding of D^n Anthonio
pretending to be the King of Portugal, that notwithstanding this your
proceeding, that the King will yield to none of these but with the marriage, as
hitherto by his former Answers have appeared, he would not you should persist
in setting forth the necessities of the Crown of France, both presently and for
time to come, as also you shall confess the like for England, to begin timely
to abate the King of Sp. greatness, and that though there had been never
marriage spoken of; yea, that wheresoever Monsieur may marry in an other place,
yet it shall prove a great error both in the Frinch King and us, to leave the
King of Spain to increase to such greatness, as hereafter neither the force of
France, nor England, no nor any that may be confederate with them, shall be
able to withstand any thing that the King of Spain shall attempt.

And if these Reasons cannot prevail, you shall leave off, declaring your great
grief that the forbearing of the marriage, grounded upon the evident misliking
of our subjects, should be the cause of the forbearing to do so great a good to
Christendom, as the conjunction of the King and us might bring, though the
matter took not place, and so you shall end and speedily advertise us of your
proceedings.


Instructions for the treaty of a League offensive and defensive, betwixt us
and the French King, and for other things depending thereupon.
ELIZABETH R.

WHen it shall appear upon your other treating with the K. according to such
other instructions as you have, that it shall be required and found convenient
that there be a League made for a strict Amity between us and the French King
and that the same shall be found good for us both, in respect of the King of
Spains growing overgreat, to continue a peaceable neighbor; you shall require
first that the Treaty made for a mutual defense betwixt the French Kings
brother Charles the ninth and us, and which also has been confirmed by a
special clause in the Treaty, that shall now be newly made, and thereupon shall
it be considered what other new Covenants that are not already contained in the
former Treaty, shall be made to make our Amity streighter against any that
shall commit any hostile act by invasion of any of our Countries, which we now
possess or have possessed any time these 20 years; and to that end you shall
move an assent, that from henceforth we and the King shall, during our lives,
be united in heart and mind, for confirmation of our honors, persons, states,
dignities, kingdoms and dominions, to either of us belonging; so as from
henceforth we and the King shall be against all persons friends to friends, and
enemies to enemies, notwithstanding any former Leagues or Confederations with
any other, or notwithstanding any Councels, Persuasions, or Motions to be made
to either of us by any Potentate or person spiritual or temporal, to the
contrary of the tenor of this League.

Item, You shall Covenant, that if any King, Potentate or other person shall
offend or procure offense to us in our person, honor, dignity or estate; or
shall take away or impeach and (...) any of our Kingdoms or Countries, the
French King shall repute and accept the same offense as done to himself or his
Countries, and shall in like manner with all his power impugn the same as
though the offense were made to himself, and we also shall be bound in like
sort to the French King, mutatis mutandis.

Item, It shall be mutually covenanted, that all Traitors and manifest Rebels
against either of us, shall be declared and used as enemies or Rebels of the
other, and that no residence or traffic be suffered for any of them in the
others Counttries.

Item, It shall be covenanted that if any person shall invade as an enemy, the
Countries of any other that upon signification thereof duly made, the Prince
certifyed, shall declare the invader to be his enemy, and so shall continue in
all manner of actions an enemy to the invader, and his Country and Subjects,
until the invader shall have satisfied the Prince invaded, and that no
satisfaction or composition, or accord shall be made by the Prince invaded
without the assent and liking of the other Prince Confederate.

Item, If for defense of either party a greater supply of force shall be
requisite then is contained in the Treaty made with Charles the ninth, the
Prince that shall have need to require a greater supply, shall signify the
same to the other not invaded, and the party not invaded, shall upon request
yield all other succors that he can, at the reasonable charges of the party
invaded that shall so require a further aid.

Item, It is good to convenant that neither of the Princes shall at any time
hereafter give aid to any enemy of any other Prince with whom now they are in
peace thereby to provoke the other third Prince to make war or invasion for
that cause of aid given; but that before the aid shall be given, the Prince
meaning to give such aid, shall first advertise the other confederate; and have
his allowance thereof. In the word of ayding shall not be meant any other kind
of aid but such as shall make the enemy aided, thereby able to use open
hostility against the third Prince.


To Sir Henry Cobham, and Mr. Summers.
AFter my very hearty commendations, for as much as her Maj. pleasure was that
I should first make my repair to Monsieur, before I came to the Kings presence,
and the state of my business stands so, that I cannot well dispose of my
journey, before I have had some conference with you touching the charge
committed to me and you, I have therefore thought good to pray you to meet me
at Clermont on Saturday at night where God willing I mean to be, how painful
soever the travel may be to me, for that the necessity of her Majesty's service
so requires, and so I leave you to God,

Bulloign July 27. 1581. Your assured loving friend, Fr. Walsingham.


To the Rght Honorable, and my very good Lord, the Lord Treasurer.
MY very good Lord, I arrived here this Thursday morning somewhat distempered
in body, as well for want of two nights sleep, as by reason of our posting to
Dover, this violent travail, agreeing not very well with me who have now been
used to long rest of body; and therefore I have been driven to stay here all
this day to refresh my self, whereby I might be the better able to go forward
with speed, meaning God willing, to be at Clermont, a place four Posts distance
from Paris upon Saturday, where I have appointed Sir Henry Cobham, and Mr.
Summers to meet, and to the end I may before my going to Monsieur, receive some
light and particular information from them of the present state of things here,
for the better furtherance of this service, I am driven to make more haste in
my journey, for that the term of the prolongation of the Reservation ends
upon Thursday next. Since my coming hither, I understand that the Ministers
here were forbidden about six weeks past, the exercise of Religion, by
Crevecoeur the Gunner Master, whereupon they have dispatched one to the King to
be an humble suitor unto him in their name that they may be permitted to use
their freedom and liberty in that behalf accordingly as by his Edicts and
Proclamations it is granted unto them, which is all the news that I can as yet
write unto your Lordship out of these parts.

After I had finished these Letters I received the enclosed from Sir Henry
Cobham by the which your Lordship may perceive that my coming puts them in
more hope then will be answered with effects according to their expectation, if
the contents of the said Letters be true, a little egging one with a resolution
to assent to an open assistance (though it were performed with a less sum)
would set the two great ones a work, and keep them from uniting of themselves
against our Sovereign, a matter greatly or rather assuredly to be feared; and
therefore in respect of a little charges not to be stuck at; the Instructions
signed by her Majesty, do give me Authority (in case the King shall
peremptorily insist upon assistance, in such sort as without the same he will
refuse to enter into the intended action against Spain) to yield hereunto: but
her Majesty's own speech since the signing of the Instructions has restrained
me in that behalf. I would therefore be glad to know her Majesty's pleasure
therein, lest that if upon my denial of yielding to an open assistance, there
should ensue a breach of the Treaty, the blame hereafter might be laid on me,
having warrant from her Majesty to yield therein, and so for the present
having no other matter to impart to your Lordship, I humbly take my leave,

Bulloign July the 28 1581. Your Lordships to command Francis Walsingham.


To the Right Honorable Sir Francis Walsingham.
THe Queen mother in the absence of the King, being now at St. Germains (but
ready to return) has taken order in such sort as your Honor shall be lodged
in Madame de Carmualles house which is by their Majesty's appointment furnished
very honorably, as your servant this bearer has seen. It seems the King is
determined to cheer you and all yours, according to the appointment they make,
the care thereof is assigned to Monsieur La Mothe Fenellon, as likewise for the
receiving of you, the which I have signifide to Mr Burnham. But it seems they
look not for your present repair hither, because Arnolde has informed them you
are by the Queens Majesty appointed to pass first unto Monsieur: Therefore (if
it please you) methinks it is somewhat requisite you did send one before,
whereby I may assure them of your certain resolution therein: Their Majesty's
are most glad of your coming having received good hope of the Queens resolution
for the ending of the great cause and Amity which they long to understand. I
have been informed the King revoketh his Ambassador leiger Monsieur Sangrade
from the Spanish Court, leaving a private Gentleman to be Agent. The King has
monied Monsieur, and has accorded to him a placet the which they inform me
will be worth one hundred thousand Crowns and more. It is further said, the
King shall give Commandment for to Attache and Arrest the three hundred
thousand Crowns which were in a readiness in Lions for to be transported
through Savoy into Flanders, for the use of the Prince of Parma. The Quen
mother hunted the Bu^k yesterday at Bois de St. Vincent, and this day also at
St. Maure the Woolf; Monsieur is this day at Provence five leagues besides
Chasteau Thiery. It is advertised that the Emperor does by little and little
amend of his disease, having been carried to his Garden to take the air, but
no assurance of his full recovery. The Cardinal d* Este is returned to Rome,
having been met with the Duke of Sora, the Popes son. They do prepare ten
Galleys at Naples, besides others at Genua to transport the Empress into Spain:
Prospero Colonna is appointed General of the Men of War, which are levied in
the Dutchies of Milan and Tuscan. There has been a quarrel betwixt the
Spaniards and Gentlemen Millanoises. The King of Spain has been received in
Lisbona and held there his estate called Cortes. There is a deprivation passed
against the Bishop of Guarda for following the party of Don Anthonio. The
Abbot of Bisegno Agent for the Catholic King at Rome, has with the Cardinal
of Como solicited the Pope for to entreat the French King to withdraw his
brother from the enterprise of Flanders, so as the Pope is resolved to send two
Legates to the French King, to continue the peace between the French King and
the Catholic King. Onchibli is departed from Constantinople with twenty five
Galleys toward Africa. They advertise out of Spain, that the Corn does fail
them this Harvest, so as they doubt of famine, etc.

Your Honors to Command, Henry Cobham.


A son bon ami Mr. Francois de Walsingham.
M Onsieur de Walsingham j'ay une extreme contentement quand la Royne m*a voula
tant favouriser de vous avoir choisy pour fair ce royage verse le Roy mon
Seignieur et friar me faisant bien par cela cognoistre les effects de ses
bonnes voluntes, me comblant de tant d'obligations, que je ne m'en pouroy
jamais retirer si ce n'est par le continuel desir et inviolable affection que
je ay de luy fair service. Et ce suistres-aise de m'estre trouve y a propos
que n'estant que fort peuesloigne de votre chemni vous me passies veoir sans
perie de beaucoup de temps vous priant que se suit La Fere en Tartinois ou je
seray aujourdhuy a coucher et croyez que vous seres le tres-bien venu comme
iceluy que tient l'un de primiers bieux apres de celle que je honor et estime
plus que Princess que soit sus la terre et que tiens pour l'un de mes mieux
amiss. Vous attendant en bon devotion de supplieray le Createur qu'il vous aid
Monsieur de Walsingham en sa tes Saint et digne guard,

a Chasteau Thiery le dernier jour de Iuliel 1581. Votre bien affectione ami
Francois.


To the right honorable Sir Francis Walsingham.
SIR, The sending of this away by Mr. Mills to you, moves me to accompany him
with a few lines. We here have nothing to write unto you about the Negotiation,
but do now from this day forward look to hear from you; whereupon I think her
Majesty will have some matter to be occupied withal. We hear nothing of
Monsieurs proceedings; but the Spanish Ambassador warns that the Prince of
Parma is so strong, and so bent to fight with Monsieur, as he pretends that
at the least Monsieur will forbear to adventure his own person. He did
yesterday by her Majesty's appointment, speak at Leicester House with my Lord
of Ley and me, to expostulate for her Majesty's refusal to speak with him,
requiring to know the cause; and being answered, That we doubted not but that
he oftentimes had been made privy, that it was for that her Majesty had not
received any Letters from the King Catholic for her satisfaction in the case
of Invasion in Holland, etc. He says, that he never promised to procure
Letters from the King, neither was he ever required of her Majesty's behalf;
but the Speeches were always delivered to him, that her Majesty would not
speak with him until she might be satisfied of those things in the case of
Holland; but says it was not required that he should send to the King for any
such satisfaction, and yet he did for his own part write to the King; and upon
answer from the King, he did let her Majesty understand that the Collection of
the Soldiers, the Arming and Victualing of the Ships, and men, were wholly by
the directions of the Pope, whom he could not deny; and he had also cause to
think that her Majesty meant not that he should procure Letters from the King,
for that Mr. Wilks said that her Majesty would send a Gentleman to the King,
or else write to him by the way of trade: And for confirmation hereof, he said
that he heard that a kinsman of the Earl of Arundels and Master of the ^ whom
we took to be Tilney, was named to go into Spain. By the way he says that you
told him in presence of the Council at Nonsuch, that her Majesty had no League
with the King of Spain, but the States of the Low Countries; I told him I was
assured he mistook you; for you might say that the League, which was the
greatest, was with the Emperor Charles, and so with the King of Spain, in
respect of the Duchy of Burgundy and the Low Countries; but he flung away
after his hot manner.

Now to end these matters, for the discovery of a multitude of Popish subjects,
I think Mr. Beal writes to you of a number of choice persons, who being at
least but fined upon that que Dam noble will yield a great sum of money. My Lord
Gray and Tyrwick were about a Peace the 29 of July, finding my Lord Deputies
forces ready to enter one way, and Sir Nicholas Malt, by another way, offering
to my Lord Deputy to abide his Order for the matters between Odonell and the
whole Country he has wasted, pretending to set upon Odonels son, begotten of
Tirleghes wives daughter, which he had by Mac Connel, by Ashton that came from
Ireland, we secretly understand that the new Earl Arrig, with a great number,
are determined to keep Darbique from his intentions against the Religion, and
the King does secretly assent thereto; whether Ashton be deceived, time will
prove. The King has sent to Seffade 200 soldiers, to enable him to compel his
people to answer to Justice upon demand of England, and great promises are made
in the Kings behalf to keep amity with her Majesty. And thus, almost wearied,
I end, expecting shortly to hear of your progress in your Embassage, which they
there may enterprise a regress, or a recess. Her Majesty is in very good
health, thanked be God.

Greenwich, where I am tied by your absence, and yet do little good, Aug^st 6.
1581. Your assured friend, Will. Burleigh.


To her Majesty, August 6.
IT may please your most excellent Majesty, I have imparted in my Letters
directed to my Lord Treasurer, the substance of that which passed in
conference, both with the Duke, and certain Commissioners appointed by him to
conferr with me touching the said matters, which by your Highness order^ I was
directed to communicate unto him. The day following, at such time as I took my
leave of him, I had long conference with him, the principal points whereof I
thought meet to impart to your Majesty's self. At my access unto him, he took
me aside into a place between the wall and his bed, and caused me to sit down
by him, telling me that he was not now to confer with me as a brother of
France, but as a servant to the Queen my Mistress, with a confident servant of
hers, and therefore would deal frankly and plainly with me. And so at the first
he declared unto me that he was very sorry to understand, as well by my
speeches, as by the report of the Commissioners appointed to conferr with me,
that your Highness had taken so hard a resolution in a cause he had so long
pursued, and whereof he hoped presently to have received the fruits of his
travel; that his affection was not so light or so loosly settled, as that he
could resolve with himself to give over the matter, so neither could he believe
but that I had brought some matter of more comfort unto him: Whereunto I
replied, that it was hard to give Law to affection, and therefore did leave it
to his own best judgment, to take such course therein as he thought meet. But
as touching the having of any Commission to deliver unto him any other matter
then that I had already imparted unto him; I did protest unto him I had not.
Then he declared unto me, that seeing I had no other Commission, he would
forbear any further dealing with me in that case; and so proceeded to let me
understand how resolute I should find the King not to assent to League without
Marriage; besides, he said he feared that this resolution of your Majesty's,
might make the King grow cold in the action he had taken upon him. I thereupon
showed him, that I hoped when the King should duly consider such reasons as I
was directed to lay before him for the necessity of the League, being, as he
was, a Prince of judgment, and assisted with no ill Council, he would not
reject so honorable and profitable an offer, unless it were to gratify him,
thinking that by standing upon the point of the marriage to be accompanied with
the League, and otherwise not to take place, he should the rather draw your
Majesty to marry, upon doubt of such perils as otherwise might fall upon your
Estate. Whereupon he protested unto me, that he had dealt very effectually with
the King sundry ways by his Ministers and friends, to induce him to proceed to
the conclusion of the League, and could never draw him to yield thereunto; I
then told him I feared I should hold him a very cold advocate in that cause;
notwithstanding I prayed him as one that professed to be so greatly devoted to
your Majesty, to let me understand what were the principal causes that might
move the King to forbear to proceed in the League, for that by knowledge of
them aforehand, I should be the better able to Treat with the King, he then
showed me, that (besides the factions of the Court, and the practices of such
as were corrupted by Spain, who did propound sundry impediments.)

There were two principal matters that were put into the Kings head, that
wrought a stay in him in that behalf: The one, the doubt he had of your
Majesty's perseverance in the performing and due observation of the said
League, fearing lest when he should be imbarqued, your Majesty would slip the
Collar. The second, That some persuasions have been used toward him, that
England and the Low-Counntreys making profession of one Religion, after that
Spain and the Crown of France should be imbarqued in a War, would become
lookers on.

To the first doubt I showed him, that I heard his Highness would be
respondent for your Majesty, that you would not take so dishonorable a course,
as to abandon your associate without some special cause given. The other I said
was very weak, for that no man of discourse or judgment, could think that
England and the Low Countries, would minister unto France so just an occasion
of offense, whereby France and Spain growing to some composition, might upon so
just ground, take some dangerous revenge.

He then did declare unto me, that the Court was divided into factions, and
that such as were inclined unto Spain, did seek by all means to make the King
jealous of your Majesty's friendship: For removing whereof, he said he had
traveled with his friends to the uttermost of his power, but that the nature of
the King his brother was such, that what he had once conceived, he would not
easily be removed from it, and therefore was to be left to be wrought in time,
whereof he had some good experience, touching this his enterprise upon the
Low Countries; wherein though at some times he had found him favorable and
forward enough to countenance him in the action; yet soon after, through the
persuasion of such as had affected Spain, he found him altered, in so much,
that what could be drawn from him, was rather by force, then any good affection
he seemed to bear to this enterprise, which difficulties notwithstanding, upon
Declaration made by me, how evil it would come to pass for the affairs of the
Low Countries, if the League between your Majesty and his Brother should not
go forward, for that the better sort, and such as do affect this League,
would be discouraged, and the contrary part much enlarged He answered me, That
he would do any thing that might be for the Queens service.

I delivered also to his Highness, the care that your Majesty has of his
safety, and therefore that you wished that he should not go this Voyage in
person, but commit the conduct of it to some other sufficient personage of
quality, and meet for the enterprise; and moreover, that your Majesty could
not but advise him to seek to be advised and assisted with good and sufficient
Councellers fit for the ordering of so great an enterprise. After thanks
rendered for your Majesty's care of him, he said that the Noble men and
Gentlemen which were com to accompany him in this enterprise, did it rather of
affection they bear to his person, then to the cause, and therefore he could not
but go in person with them, especially seeing ^here is no one amongst them to
whom the conduct of the action might be committed with the security of
obedience due to him, and freedom of jealousy, as in a matter of so great
consequence more to be desired. As for a sufficient Council to be about him, it
was his greatest care; and therefore he desired your Majesty would be a means
to the King his brother, that he might have the Marshal of Cosse to attend upon
him: Whereunto I answered, that your Majesty had been already mindful
thereof, and I would not fail to solicit it at mine access unto the King. Du
Uray returning to me (after the report that he and his associates appointed to
confer with me, had made to conferr with his Highness) told me, that whereas
they had persuaded him, seeing your Majesty's resolution was signified, to
forbear to prosecute it any further; they found his affection so settled, that
he minded not so to give it over, and how that they perceived by him, that
after he had once taken order for the matters of Cambray, he will make a voyage
over to your Majesty, to lay down before you his own reasons himself, with
this affection, notwithstanding that if his reasons and persuasions shall not
be found meet to take place, he will never hate where he once loved, but will
for ever embrace the amity of your Majesty and the Realm. Also your Majesty
by these Letters written to my Lord Treasurer, shall understand what passed
this day between Queen Mother and me at the time of my audience, which I
thought meet to impart unto the Duke, who being then in bed; when I had
finished with Queen Mother, I desired that I might have the honor as to speak
with him at his bedside, which it pleased him to assent unto; who after I had
let him understand the substance of that which passed between his mother and
me, praying his assistance to remove the impediments that I saw she did stand
upon, which was to have the League accompanied with the marriage, for that it
greatly imported the action he had in hand, that the League were presently
proceeded in. To this he answered, That the matter of a League partained to his
brother; the matter of marriage, says he, is the only matter that concerns
me, which notwithstanding the small hope I put him in, yet was he resolute not
to give it over: And thereupon fell into very earnest request with me, that I
would plainly let him know whether I had not some further matter to deliver,
then that I had yet imparted unto him, touching the marriage, whereof when I
assured him I had none to impart unto him, he did then declare unto me as he
did before, that I should find the King very resolute, not to embrace the
League without the marriage; I did then show him, that I hoped that if he and
his mother with that affection that the cause it self did merit, did join
together, they might so dispose the Kings mind before hand to give better ear
to the League; then his Highness did put me in comfort, wherein I showed him
that I should hope he would deal the more effectually, if he could lay aside
his affection, and look into the cause as a politic Prince ought to do,
preferring the public (especially his honor being so far engaged, as it
was) before his private desires; but in the humor I found, now I showed him
that I greatly suspected the Kings resolution grew through his persuasion,
wherewithal he was very merry, and did let me understand again, that it was
very hard for a man upon the sudden to lay aside an affection which he had
harbored in his breast so long a season.

Touching this subject there passed many pleasant speeches from his Highness,
which he delivered with a singular grace as any person that ever I knew. I
presume the rather to write these particularities to your Majesty, for that by
some speech that passed from him, I perceived I should do a thing very
agreeable to him to acquaint your Majesty withal. Amidst these public
matters, I may not forget with all humility to signify unto your Majesty how
infinitely I think my self bound unto you for the gracious usage of the
she-Ethiopian, your comfortable Postscript in the Earl of Leicesters Letters,
other your most gracious and favorable speeches given out publicly since my
departure, of the good opinion it pleases your most excellent Majesty to hold
of your poor and unprofitable servant, which though the undeserved favors
cannot increase my wonted care, yet do they minister unto me a most singular
comfort, by making my service less burthenous through your Highness gracious
acceptance of the same. The Lord bless the rest of your Majesty's years with
that happiness of Government which hitherto through Gods goodness you have
enjoyed, and confound those which wish the contrary.

Your Majesty's most humble Subject, Fran. Walsingham.


To the right honorable my very good Lord, the Lord Treasurer.
MY very good Lord, It may please your Lordship to advertise her Majesty, that
on Wednesday last, being the 20 day of August, I arrived at the Castle of Fere
in Tartinois, a house of Montmorencies, about the 11 in the morning, somewhat
sooner then the Duke looked for me, through the negligence of the Gentleman
whom he sent to visit me at Meaulx, whom I prayed to advertise the said Duke
that I meant to be at the place above mentioned, the selfsame morning I arrived
there, notwithstanding I found before my coming thither, a Lodging very well
furnished, prepared for me, and order given for my Diet, and for the placing of
my horses in the stable belonging to the said Castle; immediately upon my
repair thither, the Duke sent his Chancellor Mr. le President Reyne, and
Kingsey his Secretary, to excuse the Duke that there was sent no body to meet
me. After that diverse Gentlemen, as Farmangues, and other of quality came by
his order to visit me, so that there lacked no good will in his Highness to
make it appear that he was most ready to honor such as should be sent unto him
from her Majesty. I do the rather dwell upon the setting forth of the manner
of the entertainment, lest perhaps some other might advertise that, forasmuch
as there was no body sent to meet me by the way; the Ministers sent from thence
be not received here with the like regard and care as they are there; I do
assure your Lordship, that no man could have more care to excuse the omitting
of the ceremony, in that there was none sent me by the way, then the Duke had:
Besides, in this time his Highness is to be excused for omitting of ceremonies,
being overcharged with affairs, having especially to direct an Army compounded
of voluntaries; about three of the clock the same afternoon, I had access unto
him, and after I had acquainted him with the points propounded by the King to
her Majesty's Ambassador, and Mr. Summers, before I did let him understand what
answer was made by her Majesty to the same, he showed me that the King his
brother was most resolute not to proceed in the amity until it might appear
what might become of the marriage; and therefore he advised me to think how I
might be able to satisfy him therein, for that otherwise he saw no likelihood
that the other two points touching the League and the secret Treaty should take
any effect: Wherein I replied, that I doubted not but that the King his brother
being a Prince of wisdom and judgment, would be satisfied with reason, wherein
I prayed his assistance, though for some respects I thought him a very unfit
advocate to plead in that cause, and thereupon declared unto him the causes
that made her Majesty to forbear to assent to the marriage: Whereunto he
answered, That he hoped that his constant pursuit of the marriage so long a
season, omitting no means that in his judgment might seem meet to advance the
same (wherein he did appeal to the world his proceedings therein, being
publicly known) should not take so evil effect as now, when he most assuredly
looked to reap the fruits of his travel, he should receive repulse to his own
great dishonor, but more to his grief.

And whereas her Majesty alleged the War he was entered into for the relief
of the poor afflicted in Flanders, as a matter of very evil satisfaction to her
Subjects, he said it was no new matter, but such as before had been propounded,
as he was before informed by her Majesty's Commissioners at the time of the
Treaty: And for that at that time it did breed no breach or stay of the Treaty,
but that the same went forward, he hoped that would not now be alleged for an
impediment.

Secondarily, He said that the pursuit of those Wars, considering how evil
affected the King of Spain was toward her, and the necessity that the poor
afflicted in the Low Countries had of present relief, in whose fortune her
Majesty was interessed; it seemed strange unto him, that a thing so beneficial
to her Majesty, should be a hinderance to the marriage.

Thereto I replied, That I thought it very necessary, before I answered the
said points, to assure him that the allegation of the said impediment grew not
for want of good will in her Majesty. For when she did with the eye and
affection of her natural body, look into his constant love born toward her,
accompanied with many apparent effects, that did show that it was not feigned,
as the hazard he came in, passing the Seas, the employment of sundry
messengers, especially men of that quality, as lately were sent over, and the
goodness of his own nature, whereof her Majesty at his last being with her,
grew to have so great a liking, as she rested greatly afflicted and perplexed
in mind, because that in respect of those impediments that concerned her
pollitique body (which did so greatly import her, as the alienation of her
Subjects good wills from her, in case her Majesty should be accompanied with a
War) she could not proceed as she did desire.

Touching the two points, for the first, I showed him, that though at the time
of the Treaty, mention was made how ungrateful it would be to her Subjects, to
have her marriage accompanied with a War, yet was it never otherwise conceived,
neither by her Majesty, nor by the Council, but that the charges of the War
should be born by the King himself, and by the States of the Low Countries,
considering her Majesty was to reap no benefit by any such conquest as should
be made, otherwise then such as did depend upon the issue of her body, which
being a thing that was to grow from above, was doubtful, and ministered no
matter of present benefit in requital of the present charges: Besides, it would
seem strange that the first day of her marriage, the Treaty should be violated
by the uniting of her Highness fortune with a husband, that contrary to the
said Treaty, should throw her into a War which might minister further cause of
miscontentment, and breed an unnecessary and dangerous jealousy, by carrying
them into some doubt, that as the Treaty was broken in one point, so there
would ensue some further breach thereof, a matter of very dangerous
consequence, considering that in the due observation thereof, consisted the
preservation of their Liberties.

Touching the second, I showed him, that if the League offensive and defensive
might take place, and the secret Treaty, that this enterprise for the relief
might very effectually go forward without the marriage: And therefore her
Majesty did greatly marvel to see the King so resolute, as that without her
marriage he would have no League, when it is apparent to the world, whatsoever
become of the marriage, that it were most necessary that such a League should
be made, as well for common defense, as for the preventing and staying of the
over-greatness of Spain.

In the end, after much debating to and fro, he showed me that he was greatly
grieved, considering the assured hope he had put on, that the marriage being a
thing that he desired above any thing in the world; even now when he looked it
should come to a full conclusion after so long a pursuit, so many messengers
being employed, a Treaty thoroughly concluded by persons of quality, it should
now grow from a conclusion, to a kind of dissolution, that he hoped I was come
hither with matter of more comfort then he should receive thereby.

Thereupon I prayed his Highness to look well into the cause, wherein if he
could lay his own affection aside, I doubted not but he should very apparently
see that her Majesty esteemed nothing more then the good will and love of her
Subjects (the true strength and glory of a Prince) had great reason to resolve
as she did, considering that the chief end of her marriage (which was to
content her people) should be now performed with a far contrary effect, which
could be no less grievous to his Highness, if the marriage should proceed,
having protested always, as he has done, that unless it might be with her
Majesty's contentment, and the good liking of her people, he would never desire
it; and so concluded with him, that I hoped after he had well digested the
matter, he should then see that her Majesty had just cause to grow to that
conclusion which I had delivered unto him, and he no less cause to content
himself withal: I prayed him that at my next access unto him, for that the
place was so furnished with Gentlemen, and not that silence used that was fit,
I might have audience in some private place, for that many times we could
hardly, one hear the other, in respect of the noise.

About half an hour after my departure from him, he sent his Chancellor the
President Mr. de Preureaulx, and Combelles unto me, who did let me understand
they were sent by his Highness to me, to confer with me about that which I
propounded unto him in her Majesty's name, letting me know from him, that the
Duke found it very strange, that afte^ the matter of marriage had been drawn
unto so great length, even now when he did look for an execution of that which
was accorded by Treaty, there should be an impediment produced first by Mr.
Summers, and now by me, not new, but such as before the time of the Treaty, was
thought upon, besides that her Majesty was not ignorant how Monsieur had long
before entreated the cause of the Low Countries, having from time to time made
her privy to his proceedings therein, whereof she never made show to have any
misliking, especially as a matter tending to the hinderance of the marriage.

Thereupon I did at length let him understand the causes why the same marriage
has depended so long in Treaty, the manner and course of proceeding with the
Commissioners at the time of their being there, and how her Majesty seeing her
marriage subject to so great difficulties, and thereby doubting greatly what
issue the same would take, could hardly have been induced to have assented to
the coming of the Commissioners, but upon hope that if such difficulties as
were by her to be propounded, accompanied with her Marriage could not be
salved, the said Commissioners might then have proceeded to the Treaty of a
more straight League, that thereby their travels might not be fruitless. And in
this behalf I did let them understand that her Majesty found her self grieved,
that the Commissioners had not authority to treat of the League without
marriage, especially that considering that not past four or five months before
their coming over, there was some overture made by certain Commissioners
deputed by the King to treat with her Majesty's Ambassador resident, which she
did look should have been prosecuted at the time of the repair of the said
Commissioners, and lest the same should have been forgotten, or neglected, she
did send one especially to the Ambassador resident, to require him in her
Majesty's name to advertise the King, how that in respect of the doubt she had
what issue the Treaty of marriage might take, she found it necessary that they
should have authority to treat of the said League, which falling out contrary
to her expectation, made her proceed, for the desire she had to send the said
Commissioners away contented, to the conclusion of the Treaty, lest otherwise
they might have seemed to come hither in vain. And so much before the signing
of the said Treaty, she did declare unto the Commissioners, so that thereby
they might well perceive that this Treaty (besides the reservation) did not
proceed in so clear a course, as they perhaps had been informed. And as for
their objection, that her Majesty was acquainted with the action of that War,
before that Monsieur did embrace that enterprise; I showed them, that though
she was acquainted with the enterprise, yet did she not think that ever she
should have been urged (as lately she was) to be a partaker of the charges of
those Wars, which could not but breed a coffeehouse in her Subjects, who
looked not into the pollitique cause that might move both Princes to concur in
seeking to abate the King of Spains greatness, but would ascribe the cause to
the marriage, which being accompanied with other discontentments, was not to be
made more grievous by the charges that the Wars of the Low Countries (the
marriage proceeding) was like to throw upon her Majesty. After this reply,
they proceeded further, and did let me understand, that whereas the hope of
this marriage has drawn the King to yield further in the allowing of this said
enterprise, then otherwise he would; So the Duke feared that the said King,
upon knowledge of her Majesty's resolution in the case of marriage, would grow
cold therein: Besides, diverse others that were ready to assist him sundry
ways, especially with Treasure, encouraged thereto by an assured hope of the
marriage, they feared that now they would upon doubt thereof, draw backwards,
whereby they did see the said Dukes cause very greatly perplexed upon this her
Majesty's resolution; and as for the offer of the League, seeing the King (as
far as hitherto can be gathered) resolute not to proceed therein without
marriage, they saw no great cause of hope to be relieved that way, and so
concluded, that besides the hinderance that the said enterprise should receive
by this her Majesty's resolution, they did not see how their Monsieurs honor
and her Majesty's could be salved, without great touch to them both, the cause
being so far proceeded in, as it was, all men being in expectation, that either
the same should have taken place, or else break off upon some substantial
matter, as might have yielded satisfaction to the world, whereby both their
honors might have been free from such slanders as are like to be thrown abroad
throughout all Europe.

In answer of these points I let them understand for the first, That touching
the Kings growing cold in the cause, I could not conceive how he, being a
Prince of judgment, and assisted with wise Council, seeing how perilous the
King of Spains greatness would be to the Crown of France, could wax cold, in a
cause that so greatly touched him, seeing the remedy offered, might be
performed as as well without marriage, as by marriage. And to enforce this
matter, I did lay before them diverse reasons to show the perils might ensue,
both to the Crown of France and England, if the said League should not take
place; and also some other thing put privately in execution for the preventing
thereof: and therefore did let them understand that there was not so little an
account to be made of her Majesty's motion touching the League, as by them it
seemed there was; for that heretofore upon like occasion, the Crown of France
has desired the association of the Crown of England; and therefore it would be
thought strange, the same being now offered, it should be refused, when never
the like cause was offered to move them to embrace the same. And as touching
other men's withdrawing of their promised assistance, especially of Treasure, I
did let them understand, that as her Majesty by her Letters had offered to the
said Duke, to assist him, as I supposed they were made acquainted withal, with
such means as were agreeable to her estate, so should he find her ready to
perform the same; and as for the doubt conceived, that after so far proceeding,
there could be no satisfaction yielded to the world, I did let them understand,
that though they did not think the impediments alleged by her Majesty, to be
of sufficient force to yield satisfaction; yet I doubted not but that all wise
men that do without passion, consider how necessary it is for all Princes to
tender the conservation of their Subjects good wills toward them, seeing that
by proceeding in this matter, the same should be put in hazard, for such causes
as I had declared, both to the Duke and them, would upon understanding of the
said causes, rest satisfied; and so in the end concluded with them, after well
near three hours conference, that we were not now to look backward, and to call
in question such errors as perhaps had been committed in the prosecuting of the
cause, but to think of some such necessary way to be taken, as may best serve
to further the Dukes honorable enterprise, and to knit the two Crowns in
perfect amity. The day following I had a second audience, the substance whereof
I have thought meet to impart unto her Majesty, with such Letters as I do
presently send unto her, for that I know her Majesty does look that I should
reserve something to be imparted to her self. The Vice-Count of Turayne, a
Gentleman very dear unto Monsieur for many respects, and one whose advice he
does use in matters of great trust, did let me understand the morning I
departed, that now the matter of marriage seemed to stand in doubtful terms;
they are in very great doubt this War which Monsieur does now embrace, is in
danger to quail, for two reasons; The one for that the King, by whom the action
is to be countenanced, if any good success be to be looked for in that,
doubting lest her Majesty will draw her neck out of the Collar, after that he
has once broken with the King of Spain, whereof he is very jealous, will
undoubtedly leave Monsieur in the Briers, when he shall see so little hope in
the marriage, which he only reputeth as the surest bond, for the inviolable
observation of the intended association against the King of Spain. The other,
for that diverse who now offer to assist Monsieur, both with money, and
otherwise, for the advancement of this enterprise, in hope that the marriage
should have taken place, whereby he shall be able to satisfy them hereafter,
seeing his principal support likely to fail him, by these means will also
withdraw their helping hands from him, and then he shall be constrained with
dishonor, and loss of his reputation, to relinquish the action. He did then
let me understand, that hitherto he had received no help nor assistance from
the King his brother, as by Sir Henry Cobham was advertised, and that his only
support was procured to him by the Queen his mother, but the same so small, as
it was not of any moment to the purpose of that he wants. And therefore he
prayed me to consider of the matter, as of a thing of great weight and
importance; and herein the Queen my Mistress (says he) was her self not a
little interessed, being likely, that if the Duke shall abandon the enterprise
of the King of Spain, her professed enemy, having none to oppose themselves
against him, he is likely, by man's judgment, very shortly to become an
absolute Conqueror, which, of what consequence it was likely to fall out for
her Majesty, all men of judgment were able to look into, besides the danger
of some enterprise likely to be set abroach for the revenging of civil troubles
within this Realm, if the action go not forward, which will fall out very ill
for those of the Religion, being at this present reduced to a very weak estate,
by reason of their late rendering of their Towns of assurances. All which
inconveniences were likely to ensue, without some present support from her
Majesty, which he thought might be performed with the loan of 100000 Ducats,
wherewith Monsieur should be able not only to relieve the Town of Cambray, but
also to keep the field three months together; and yet notwithstanding his great
want, and the weight and importance of the cause, cannot he be persuaded
himself to become a suitor to her Majesty for such a supply, for that being
fully persuaded to prosecute constantly the matter of the match, he thinks
this request would hinder his purpose therein, fearing lest he should therein
give her Majesty occasion to think that he sought the match to another end,
then by him was meant. These speeches the Vice-Count delivered unto me, as if
himself without Commission (as he said) from Monsieur (though for my part I did
not think but that it was done with his privity) requesting me very earnestly,
I would effectually recommend the motion of the supplying of Monsieur with the
said sum, for the setting forward of his enterprise, wherein he said the cause
required present resolution, lest for lack of support, the enterprise should be
given over; and thereupon desired to know in what time that I hoped to have
answer; I showed him within ten days, he did assure me that the Duke would
accept in better part the loan of 100000 Ducats now, then if her Majesty
should freely give him a million at another time, so earnestly does he embrace
this enterprise of the Low Countries; and therefore said he, to have his
necessity relieved at this present, through her Majesty's goodness, should bind
the young Prince to remain continually at her devotion, and to do her always
what service he might. This in substance was the speech the Vice-Count
delivered me, he seemed to be greatly perplexed that the enterprise should
stand upon so doubtful terms, considering what did depend thereon. The
Chancellor and the rest of his Council did very much doubt the issue of the
matter, for lack of support, being otherwise furnished with such forces, as
they doubt not shall be able to over-match the enemy, so that by paying of
them, they might be kept under discipline, which otherwise the army being
compounded of voluntaries, they fear, will be subject to infinite and most
dangerous disorders, her Majesty, I doubt not, considering how greatly the
yielding of support, imports her, will take some such like resolution
therein, as the weight of the cause meriteth. Besides, if it so touch not her
Majesty in surety as it does, yet the Duke well deserving of her Highness
(which is as great as ever any Prince did show by effect) require some Princely
consideration of this present necessity, especially her Majesty having by her
late Letters, put him in comfort thereof, when any just occasion should be
offered wherein to employ her, as well for the satisfaction of the Vice-Count,
as that the cause it self requires it. I pray your Lordship that I may receive
speedy resolution herein. Having thus far proceeded in this Letter, being
departed to a place called Carlay, about ten Leagues distant from Fere, I
received the enclosed from Queen Mother, by the which, as your Lordship may
perceive, she desired me, if I were not departed, or (...), to return back
again: Whereupon I thought good (in hope tha^ by (...) I should be able to
receive some such (...) as might lead me to judge what would be the issue of
those things (...) committed to (...) charge) to (...) bearer. So according to
her request* being returned hither yesterday, I had (...) yesternight to repair
unto her this mo^ning by eight of the ^^ock, where at the time of my access,
after I (...) made her acquainted with the substance of my ch^^ge, touching the
Kings three Propositions propounded to her Majesty's Ambassador, and Mr. (...)
and her Majesty's several answers to the same, with such (...) did induce her
to resolve as she (...) ^he did then (...) unto me, that the (...) her son
being very desirous to know her Majest^^^ (...) touching the (...) (especially
the Duke his brother being so (...) forth (...), as he was in the enterprise of
the Low-(...), being (...) within eight (...) of the enemy, and the most part
of his (...) assembled) though^ good she should repair hither during (...) my
being here, to the end he might be informed what hope there was (...) be had of
the marriage, without the (...) he saw that his brothers enterprise would throw
him into a War, whereof (...) was to bear the only (...). Whereupon I did let
her understand that (...) the marriage, I could say no ^ore to her then that
which I had (...) both unto her, and to the Duke her son. And as touching the
doubt (...) ^he King and she conceived, (...) he should be (...) to bear the
(...) of the Wars alone, I showed (...), that if it pleased her to call to
(...) the offer that had been made by the Ambassador resident, and Mr. (...),
as also renewed by me, both unto her, and to the Duke, both the King and she
(...) have cause to rest satisfied, for that the said League proceeded, and the
other secret League, for the matter of the Low Countries, there was such remedy
offered, as (...) the King (...) she (...) have no ^ause to (...); I did (...)
let her understand, that the question was. Whether it were (...) to take some
course for the resisting of the King of Spains greatness. (...) being
confessed, I showed her, it was then fit to consider whether the same might not
be done without marriage, seeing the said marriage (...) to be accompanied with
so many difficulties, as there could be no present resolution taken (...)
whereunto she answered, that there could not be so great a^ (...) for the
maintenance of the association they were now to enter in by League as there was
by marriage: For said she, the same (...) that moved the (...) to (...) to
proceed to the conclusion of the (...), which is the misliking of the people,
in respect of the (...) that the (...) bring withal, may also draw her to
leave off the association, and some (...) that the Crown has always car^ied
unto Spain. Whereupon ^ dec^ared unto her, (...) it was hard to make sound
friendship, which I thought might be performed best two ways, The one to show
how little cause she (...) to affect (...), the other to set down before her
such reasons as might (...) the King and her, to believe that the (...)
proceeding, the same should be sincerely observed on her (...), unless there
should be given some great cause by (...) contrary. For the first, I showed her
that the King of Spain, (...) long after that her Majesty did enter into the
possession of the (...), being solicited in a kind of sort by her Majesty's
Ambassador sent (...) him to renew such Treaties as had passed between the
House of (...), and the Crown of England, he could not be drawn to assen^
thereto, since which time, as he was unwilling to renew the said Treaties; so
has he not slackened to yield such fruits of enmity against her Majesty, as
were publicly known to the world, as might appear by his Ministers dealing in
furthering of the marriage between the Duke of Norfolk, and the Queen of Scots,
the practicing of the Rebellion in the North, his nourishing since that time,
and maintaining of those that were then the principal Rebels being retired out
of England. And lastly, the attempt of Ireland, colored with the Visor of the
Popes Authority. These things being then considered, I did leave it unto her
Majesty to judge what cause the Queen my Mistress had to seek to reconcile her
self, or to trust Spain. Touching the reasons that might induce them to think
her Majesty would inviolably observe the intended league. First she was to
understand that the Amity that we made most account of, was that which this
Crown had with the house of Burgundy, and not with Spain; and therefore, those
Countries being alienated from Spain, and now reduced by a composition between
the Duke and the States of that Country, under the Government of her son, and
traffic being there established, whereby there remains there commonly Goods
appertaining to her Majesty's subjects to the value near of half a Million, I
did leave that unto her Majesty to judge whether it were not a good caution
for the performance of that which should be promised on her Majesty's behalf.
Secondarily, If that would not serve to remove the diffidence, then might there
be Hostages, given interchangeably on both parties, whose promises her Majesty
would not violate for the greatest kingdom in Europe: Lastly, I showed her that
I doubted not but that the Duke her son would become cautionary for the due
observation of the same. I prayed her then, as I had laid before her such
reasons as might induce them to stand more assured of the Queen my Mistresses
performance of the said League, then it seemed they were, so I might (without
offense) put the Queen my Mistress to stand in doubt of them: First, It was
known that diverse great personages of this Realm were more affected to the
Amity of Spain then England, whom the world thought would omit no means that
they might put in execution, to dissolve (or rather to hinder) before the
Conclusion of the said Association. Secondly, Spain challenges as of right (in
respect of assistance given in the time of the Civil war, when the Count of
Aremberg was sent into this Realm to that purpose) to have the Amity of that
Crown preferred before England. Lastly, The consent in Religion between Spain
and France (which shall not lack any perswations that the Pope and other
Catholic Princes can use to dissolve or hinder the intended Amity) may give
just cause to the Queen to be doubtful of the performance on their behalfs of
the said Association, then any reason that may be alleged on the other side,
Concerning the Queen my Mistress, I prayed her (that if the King and she did
find it necessary to abridge the King of Spains greatness, and could
confidently enter into the intended Association) to consider that there were
two occasions privately offered, that required speedy resolution. The one the
assisting of Don Anthonio, the other the prosecuting of the enterprise in
Flanders; for the first, I showed her that the Queen my Mistress had assented
to the preparing of certain ships, with condition that the King her son would
concur in the action, or that she might be assured by the intended League to be
assisted in case Spain, in respect of the said support, should attempt any
thing against her; Now forasmuch as the King and she seem to be resolute, not
to enter into the League without marriage, I saw apparently, that the
enterprise (which was privately to be put in execution, or else would privately
serve to no purpose.) would be quite overthrown. Touching the enterprise of
Flanders (so honorably attempted by the Duke her son, tending so greatly to the
benefit of this Crown, when the States shall see the said League not to take
place, whereby it was not likely to be accompanied with success that otherwise
it might be, the League going forword, it would be no less coffeehouse to
them, then encouragement to their enemies. Besides, I did let her understand
that it behoved the Queen my Mistress (if they did not embrace the League but
upon such condition as she could not in reason agree unto, to take some other
way for the establishing of her own estate, not doubting but that she would be
as well able to withstand the malice of Spain as any other of her neighbors.
To this after she had declared how earnestly the King her son did affect the
marriage, considering he had no issue himself, and had but one only brother,
upon whom and such issue as he should have, depended the continuance of the
house of Valois, she prayed me to consider whether the King had not just cause
to insist upon the said marriage, and as for the League, she said she had no
Commission to wade therein, but a matter that depended only on the King; and
therefore, because it required (for the reasons by me alleged) expedition,
she advised me to make haste toward him, I then prayed her, that for as much
as I did understand, she did not mean to be at Paris in five or six days, she
would dispose his mind by Letters, to embrace the same; which she promised to
perform accordingly. Touching the Companies that are to follow the Duke, I can
as yet deliver your Lordship no more, but this in generality. That he is to
have six thousand footmen, and two thousand six hundred Lances, which as the
report goes, are sufficiently appointed, and in such good order as the like
have not been seen this many years in France; Their meaning is to join with the
States Forces that are now in Flanders, doubting nothing more then that the
enemy will not encounter with them, but withdraw himself into his holds, I am
promised a particular of all the Forces, as soon as it comes to my hands; I
will with the next dispatch send it to your Lordship.

Your Lordships assured, Fr. Walsingham.


To the Right Honorable Sir Francis Walsingham.
SIr, your servant Bonham this bearer came hither yesterday, being Wednesday
the ninth of this month about of the clock, at which time I was on the North
side of the water, to have gone to Theobalds, but by good fortune, I had word
of his arrival, so as I returned, being not gone from the waterside, her
Majesty had two or three days before spoken of you, marvelling that she could
not hear from you, I answered always, (as now it proved true) that the Letters
or bearer should bring with them reasonable satisfaction; For I knew certainly,
that you would be careful to delay no time of sending, I delivered to her
Majesty your Letters directed to her, showing her also that I had others
directed to my self, but she said she would first read her own, first Monsieurs
Letter, and next yours, and so she having done, asked me what you had written
to me, for said she, I find nothing in mine concerning the matters for which
he went, then I told her I would read yours to her, But she using breath in
speech, said she would have me make report thereof, which I said I could hardly
do, because you had written at such length what had passed in Colloquie, first
betwixt Monsieur and you; secondly, between certain of his Council and you at
several times: Lastly, between the Queen mother and you, and so in the end she
was content to hear the whole Negotiation, adding her self, that by your
Letters to her, you had spoken to Monsieur, being in his bed after his Mothers
coming thither. She added also, that she perceived that Monsieur would come
hither and receive his answer himself after his journey of Cambray. Concerning
the Negotiation, she says, she would not have had you to have made direct
mention of the league, but that incidently it should have fallen out upon their
objection, that if her Majesty would not consent to the marriage with the war,
that then the war should cease. Then thereupon, she says, you might have
thereto answered, that in respect of the King of Spains greatness in growing,
it were good that there were such a league made betwixt the French King and
her. To this I answered, that your ord^r in proceeding was warranted to you,
both by your instructions; and also, the same grounded upon the order of the
French Kings answer to her Ambassador, which was in three points. The first, to
know the day of her marriage, which being agreed unto, they would enter into a
league offensive and defensive. And lastly, to a secret Treaty for the matters
of the Low Country. For orderly answer whereunto, you were instructed to that
which you did; herewith I think she was satisfied at your well-doing: But I
found her touched with some fear, that this league and secret treaty should be
very chargeable unto her. I told her, that there would be no great matter
managed that was free from charge; and if she had no need of assistance to
withstand her perils (which she knew, and so does all the world besides, see it
manifestly otherwise) she needed not to have sent you at this time. Then also
she spoke of her aid to Don Anthonio, doubting how to use the matter, both
because the season of the year passes away, and that she could not be assured
what course the French King would take therein, without whose entering into the
action, she would be loath to adventure any thing; and yet she added, that the
French Ambassador told her two days since, that the King his Master had willed
him to thank her Majesty for the favors and supports that she gave to Don
Anthonio; but in the end, for the matter, she would stay until she should hear
from you, what the French King will do therein. For the greatest important
matter in the Letter expressed by the Viscount of Turayne, I dealt with her
Majesty earnestly therein; and having made my Lord of Leicester first
acquainted with your Letters, next my L. Chamberlain, and then Mr.
Vice-Chamberlain, I required the assistance of the said two letters, as a
matter most necessary for the French cause in hand, as that which being
neglected, neither a league offensive, nor yet hereafter any secret treaties
could remedy. Whereunto she told me (as my Lord of Leicester said, she told him
the like) that you had Commission to satisfy Monsieurs need therein; but
presently, upon seeking to persuade her, that words were no satisfaction, but
that deeds must do it, and such a thing could not be perfected with words nor
thoughts, no, nor in short time; she answered me, that you had warrant from her
to yield to that which was required, when you had found the Kings disposition
desperate to help his brother: For, quoth her Majesty, if he should any way
open my good will herein to Monsieur, before the French Kings mind were fully
known, then the whole burden should fall upon me; as for more proof, says
she, you may see by the speeches of Monsieurs Councillors, alleging, that
Monsieur had money lent him by diverse, upon hope of the marriage, as though the
marriage should serve for all this charge; and thereto her Majesty, with some
sharpness of speech, added, that she knew and saw it now true, that the Queen
Mother in counsel had before pronounced, that if the marriage could be
concluded, the Queen of England should be put to the whole charges. This is the
substance of that I can wring from her; for that she says, until she hear from
you of your Negotiaon with the K^she has nothing here to (...) of. But she
wished me to write to you as before is mentioned; and she means also to write
some letters to Monsieur to give him some comfort, as I think, Marchemont had
Letters, and (as I hear by report) the contents are a report of your dealings,
and of Monsieurs resolute answers to you, that the King his brother (would in
no sort consent to any thing without the marriage) and so they stand like good
Chapmen, without falling in their bargain from the principal; but by this time
you can best judge what will follow. The Queens Majesty asked me, whether if
in no letter from you to me, you had recommended Monsieurs wisdom. I said, by
no express speech. I marvel thereof (quoth she) for to me in this letter he
does greatly commend him, and so did by reading pronounce very great
commendation of him by you, but I saw not the words written, I answered, that
always you, above any other of her servants, had ever commended him most. I
pray you remember to send ^s a Callender of Monsieurs Captains and Leaders,
with the numbers likely of all sorts, and what his monthly pay may be in
charge, and how he has been furnished of money toward this leavy. I am sorry
to see so large a time spent from the beginning of his preparations until this
time, and yet I think far off to put in execution that which he pretends: I
fear the Queen Mother finding the marriage desperate, will practice with the
Duke of Parma to withdraw his siege, and that the Town may be relieved, and so
Monsieurs Honor saved; and thereupon Monsieur may leave his general
enterprise, wherewith the Spaniards ought to be contented; For thereby shall
they have their wills in the Low Countries; and so also the Queen Mother may
save her son free from gunshot, and put up all her pretenses, and live without
offense to the King of Spain. Thus much of the French matters. From Ireland, I
have not heard but once since you went, My Lord of Kildares man in the Tower,
has, by some fear of the Rack, confessed all to be true wherewith he was
charged, which is to be kept awhile secret, until some persons may be
apprehended.
which was by a letter from Waterhouse, that the Lord Gray had advertised them,
they should send no victuals into Odonels Country, but only to Carlinfoord:
For when the Lord Gray came to the Black-water, Tirch. fled, breaking his two
Castles, and sent my Lord Gray word, that he would be at peace with Odonel and
all others, by his Lordships order: Whereupon the Lord Gray sent Justice Dowdal
to him, to treat hereupon, but more I have not heard. My Lord of Ormond finds
himself greatly grieved upon his discharge; not, as he says, for his
discharge, but that he has been wronged, in not advertising how great prizes
he has done. In Scotland, the King pretends to keep Amity; yet by Ashton
secretly I learn, that he will be wholly guided by her Majesty, whereof she
conceives hope. I pray God she be not deceived therein; and hereby I fear her
Majesty will be the flower to hearken to the assistance with France, and yet
her Maj. utters not to me these Scottish matters, but I learn them otherwise.
The Lord of Huntley is arived in Scotland, and offered to -- Lord Ferihurst is
fully restored, and both these well accepted with the King. We have gotten from
Campian knowledge of all his peregrination in England, as in Yorkshire,
Lancash. Denbigh, Northampton, Warwick, Bedford, Buckingham, etc. hereof I am
sure Mr. Beal will write unto you, who has herein with Mr. Hamon taken great
pains: We have sent for his hosts in all Countries. And thus I end, doubting I
shall wea^y you with reading, as I am almost with writing.

This tenth of August, 1581. Your assured loving Friend, William Burleigh.


To the Right Honorable, and my very good Friend, Sir Francis Walsingham.
SIr, after I had yesternight, being Thursday, written and sealed up my
Letters, I understand lately, that ^ has informed her Majesty that Monsieur
found himself greatly discontented with the manner of dealing with him, in
making the marriage so desperate, as it seemed to him you came of purpose to
break it; and only to solicit the league with the K. upon which matter this
forenoon her Majesty told me, that she misliketh of your manner of
proceedings, as though you did not express the causes why she could consent to
no marriage, but abruptly showed that she would not marry, and so forthwith to
deal with Monsieur for a league. To this I made answer, Madam, it is to be seen
in Mr. Secretaries Letters to me, which I read to you, that he did so proceed
to open your mind for forbearing to marry, as your self did determine with us
all, and as he is warranted by your instructions; for, Madam, he did not say,
that you would not marry with him, but that as the case stands, he being
entered into a war, you found it not good either for him or your self, to assent
to the marriage; for so by your marriage, your Realm jointly with your marriage
should enter into a war; so as your speeches according to your instructions,
were not absolute to deny the marriage, but to show that the marriage could not
content her subjects with a war joined therewith; and so using as many reasons
as I could, I ended, that I could not see that you had done any thing, but that
I my self in your place would have done the same. And I did put her Majesty in
remembrance, that all her resolutions (with us of her Council) was, that you
should so deal, as to acquit her of the marriage; and if there might be, a good
amity made, and by a league betwixt France and this Realm, to abate the King of
Spains greatness (which I did object, required a present action) and to that
end you should so proceed, as there might appear no hope of marriage: For as
long as France could perceive any hope thereof, they would not assent to any
league. To this her Majesty could not but assent; but finally, she changed her
opinion, in saying, that if she should make a league, whereby a war might
follow, she said, she had rather be at the charges of a war with the marriage,
then without a marriage. But, says she, let Walsingham know my mind to be
this, that I would gladly enter into a league with the French King, only with
these conditions, that if I were invaded, he should help me, and if he were
inwaded, I would help him, and so to abate the King of Spains greatness. She
said, she would concur with the French King to do that, by aiding of Monsieur;
and also the King of Portugal underhand. Against which I objected, that
although she might in some sort aid them both underhand, yet surely the French
King could not aid his brother underhand. Whereupon she concluded, that if by
necessity she must enter into an open war, she would rather choose to be at
charge with a marriage, then without it. Finally, she said, she would write a
few words to you her self; which I prayed her might not be discomfortable; and
so she said, it should not be: But howsoever it be, use and practice your
wisdom as long as you mean to do well, not to be your hurt. I have made my Lord
of Leicester acquainted herewith, to whom, at the time of my writing, her
Majesty had not imparted thus much; but when she shall, I think he will
friendly answer for you, and so he has promised me to do. Since the sealing up
of my two letters, her Majesty sent me word by Mr. Killegrew, that concerning
the motion made by Viscount Turayne, you should let Monsieur understand her
Majesty's intention therein according, that she did signify to you her mind,
without that you should that you should name any sum in certainty, since the
writing hereof she has willed me that you should not offer that part above
mentioned (for entering into an open war until she should hear from you first
for she desires most of all to have a League defensive and offensive without
war (but upon first cause by the king of Spain) and to join in aid secretly
underhand. To the which if they will not assent without open ayding; then you
shall so advertise, for as her mind now seems to be, she will rather marry
with the war, then have the war without the marriage; Even now at the closing
up of this Letter, her Majesty sent me this little Letter to you, and so I
have directed it, wishing you not to be troubled therewith,

Greenwich this 11 of August. Yours assured, W. Burleigh.


To her Majesty August 10.
IT may please your most excellent Majesty, the continuance of Gods goodness
toward your Highness, has not the least appeared in this resolution that the
King has taken to join with you in streighter Amity, being as your Majesty
knows (considering the earnest Protestations that have been made here to the
contrary, as a thing no way to be yielded unto, unless the same might be
accompanied with marriage) a matter thought altogether impossible to be brought
to pass; and so much the greater is this benefit to be esteemed in that they
seem to be resolved to continue the prosecution of the Marriage, whereby your
Majesty of necessity (if your state hereafter shall induce you hereunto) are
left at your own choice to proceed therein, or to relinquish the same; as I
doubt not but your Majesty will be thankful to God for this so great benefit,
so I hope your Highness (for that this League cannot be accompanied without
charges) will prefer safety before Treasure, assuring your Majesty, that there
shall want no care in me, or my associates to reduce the same charges to as
tolerate a proportion as may be, I hope also your Majesty will have both
gracious consideration, and speedy resolution touching the Viscount of Turaigns
advise, for an offer to be made unto his Highness of present support of a
hundred thousand Ducats, upon such resosolution as your Majesty shall take
therein, we are to attend here either good or evil success of this Treaty,
Monsieur Pi^ac sent a Gentleman unto me, to let me understand how greatly he
was grieved to hear, that a Prince of your Majesty's virtues and worthiness
(whose good opinion he did esteem before any worldly Treasure) should have
entered into some sinister conceit of his devotion toward you, and to the end
that his desire to clear himself in that behalf, may the better appear unto
your Majesty, he prayed me to conveigh unto your Highness this enclosed. The
desire I have to dispatch this messenger with speed, makes me to forbear to
trouble your Majesty any further, beseeching God to continue his blessings
toward you, whereby we your poor subjects may enjoy the continuance of that
happy Government, we have most happily lived under, during your Majesty's Reign.

Paris August 10. Your Majesty's most humble Subject, F. Walsingham.


To the Rght Honorable, and their very good Lord, the Lord Treasurer.
OUr very good Lord, may it please your Lordship to let her Majesty
understand, that upon Thursday the eleventh of this month in the afternoon, at
the time of our access unto the King, I the Secretary declared unto him her
Majesty's Answer to the three points, according to mine Instructions, with
reasons and persuasions to make him like thereof; after the King had heard them
very attentively, he answered to the first, That he was sorry to hear the
Answer so far from his expectation, for that he trusted to be fully satisfied
therein to his contentment, as a thing he desired most in the world; and (for
the singular affection he bears to his brother) he rejoiced in it as much as
in any good thing that might happen to himself, and thought his brother to be
the happiest of all other, to match with a Princess of that Virtue; and that he
himself having no children (and yet God might send him some) esteemed of his
brother, as of his son and his heir; and that with his brother her Highness
should marry himself, and all his means, wishing her Majesty would believe
with what affection he embraced that marriage; but that seeing her Majesty
finds now that difficulty, and amongst other the misliking of her Subjects
to this marriage, he took it to be one of the Malheurs that happened to him;
and that he cannot express the grief he has carried ever since he has heard
of this alteration, by the Queen his mother, and that if his soul might be
seen, his grief should well apear therein. But yet laid, that he trusted her
Majesty would give him and his brother more comfort then this; and that her
Highness would procure the good liking of her people therein, praying us all
very earnestly to be a means, and to do good offices to her Majesty in that
behalf. Many other speeches he uttered of great affection in this point, to
have the marriage go forward: as to the other two points, for a League
offensive and defensive, and for a private Treaty for the matters of the
Low Countries, he said, that though there were good Amity and Intelligence
already between her Majesty and him, yet he was most desirous to enter into a
streighter Amity with her Highness, for the better assurance of his good will
toward her, and that he would in both these matters confer with the Queen his
mother, and then would appoint some to come to us, to let us understand his
further determination therein; adding again his former desire, that the first
matter so well begun might not be thus ended; for he had a special confidence
in her Majesty, that she will not suffer it so to do, and then prayed us all
again particularly as he had done before: thereto I the Secretary said, that
her Majesty should be speedily advertised of this his Answer and request,
praying his Majesty, that because these other things required speedy
resolution, and among other the case of Don Anthonio, it would please him to
deliver his pleasure so soon as might be, whereunto he consented. Then we went
to the Queen his mother, being in her Chamber, where I the Secretary remembering
unto her what had passed between her and me before, and how I had at this time
proceeded with the King, and what answer his Majesty had made, I prayed her to
procure the Kings resolution therein with speed, which she promised she would
do; this was the effect of our Negotiation at this time; whereof we have
thought meet to advertise her Majesty in the mean time; until we may further
understand of the Kings Deputies, how other things will be answered and offered
to be treated upon. And so we take our leave of your Lordship,

from Paris this tenth of August 1581. Your Lordships to Command, Fr.
Walsingham. Henry Cobham John Summers.



To the Right Honorable my good friend Sir Francis Walsingham.
SIR, Your servant Watson brought hither at dinner time this day, being Sunday
the thirteenth, your Letters, that is your common Letter; dated the tenth from
you; the ordinary Ambassador, and Master Summers; containing your Negotiation
with the French King, and your private Letter dated the eleventh, with another
of your own to her Majesty, and one from Pinart as her Majesty informed me;
by the Treaty with the King, it seems the King refuses not to have a Treaty
of streighter Amity, and yet he carpeth upon the marriage; by your Letter to
her Majesty, as she tells me, you think there may be a Treaty without the
marriage, but not without charge. And therein her Majesty says, she had as
good be as charge with a marriage, as without; and therefore, she has again
willed me to write unto you, That if Monsieurs action may be continued toward
the Low Countries, she can be content to be at some reasonable charge by
Contribution with the French King to maintain the same, so it be underhand, to
bring her into no war, otherwise she will not you shall consent without making
her privy, and having her answer, and for a Treaty offensive and defensive; she
can also be content therewith, but not thereby directly to enter into a war; in
this sort she has willed me expressly to write unto you, not allowing any
Argument to the contrary, whereof I made diverse; and those apparent necessary:
for by these means the King of Spains greatness shall grow to such ripeness as
hereafter no open force shall withstand it. And it is not likely that the
French King will aid his brother which he cannot to any purpose do secretly,
where her Majesty will do it but underhand; For the matter mentioned by the
Viscount Turraign, both my Lord of Leicester and I have deal^ very earnestly
with her, and she has answered my Lord of Leicester that she has given a full
order to you for the same, but by me she answers that you know her meaning to
be, that if the French King shall not aid his Brother, she will not see him
abandoned; But I desired to know how she would aid him; and the Viscounts
motion imports both necessity and speed to be relieved, she answers, that
until she may hear from you, what the French King will do for his brother, she
will answer no more particularly. This evening she willed me to advertise you
that she is in great doubt that the Queen mother will induce Monsieur to leave
the enterprise of Cambray, with an intention to compass the marriage, and then
she says, if the marriage shall not follow, Monsieur shall be dishonored, and
the King of Spain shall prosper; hereof she commanded me to write to you, that
you should have thereof good regard. In this sort I am commanded to write unto
you, but in what sort you shall deal to remedy this inconvenience, neither by
her Majesty can I direct you, nor of my self can I inform you; but I know you
will do your best, as the place and time shall serve, and more cannot be
required. Her Majesty would have Master Summers to return, and so she willed
me to signify her pleasure; and yet I told her that he was in Commission, and
might hardly be spared: but yet she commanded me so to write; if his being
there cannot be spared, you may do well to write so, otherwise I do leave the
matter to your consideration, I know it will greatly grieve you, not to have a
good Answer to the matter for the Loan moved by the Viscount, but surely all
means are used here to help, but none prevail as yet. The Letter written from
Master Cobham the ninth of August, consisted on two points, very contrary; the
first showed the French Kings allowance to have Don Anthonies case furthered
here; as also it was there. The second contained matter of great appearance,
that Monsieur should be withdrawn from offending of Spain; and contrariwise, to
marry, which two points cannot concur. Master Beal has the ciphered Letter of
Twyns to procure to be interpreted, but as yet it is not done, and so with my
paper I end.

From Greenwich the 13 of August 1581. Yours assured, William Burleigh


To the Right Honorable, and my very good Friend, Sir Francis Walsingham.
SIR, since my writing yesternight, though the Letters be not gone, yet her
Majesty by way of repetition has willed me again to warn you, that you be not
overtaken with this, that her Majesty doubts that the Queen mother will
withdraw Monsieur from the Low Countries actions, meaning thereby to obtain the
marriage, which her Majesty cannot allow in any sort to have the action left;
how you shall be able to order this, you must there seek the way. For ayding of
Monsieur, these are her Majesty's words, that if you find the King not willing
to support his brother, rather then the action shall fail, you shall say that
her Majesty will not see him destitute, but the sum she will not name till she
hear from you, we are desirous to hear how the King will deal to aid Don
Anthonio for her Majesty here is in such a suspense, as at this present, the
journey stays; namely, because besides her 5000. l. there is demanded 2500.
l. more, which she will not yield, and neither Drake nor Hawkins will go onward
further: and upon some scruples, Mr. Bingham, York, Fenton, and Ward, do
forbear, her Majesty says, you know some cause why Mr. York should not be
trusted, She speaks of a practisement by him in the Thames mouth, whereof she
has willed me to write to you, that you should call it to memory, I renewed my
opinion that you could not spare Mr. Summers, whereunto she answered, that if
you could not, you should do as you thought best, although she said she would
that he returned.

Greenwich this 13 of August. Yours assuredly, William Burleigh.


NOs Franciscus Walsingham eques auratus, serenissimae Reginae Angliae
primarius Secretarius, ac praenobilis Ordinis Garterii Cancellarius: Henricus
Cobham Eques item auratus and ejusdem serenissimae Reginaeapud Christianissimum
Regem Legatus residens, and Johannes Summer Armiger, ejusdem serenissimae
Reginae Clericorum sigilli unus, Omnibus ad quos presents litterae
pervenerint, salutem. C^m pro authoritate nobis in hac part data a serenissima
Regina Angliae Domina nostra clementissima, reservationem eam, quae erat a sua
Majestate in 12 dies rejecta, per literas suas ad Christianissimum Regem
scriptas de data ix diei mensis Julii proxime praeteriti, propter quasdam
causas maxim urgentes, prolongavimus in december alios dies continue, post
praefatos 12 dies finitos, sequentes: Testibus literis nostris ex opido Lusarci
datis 31 dicti Mensis Julii proxime praeteriti quibus 10 diebu^ cum par nobis
esse non queat, ad ea exequenda quae a dicta serenissima Regina Domina nostra
clementissima habemus in mandatis; neque voluntati suae Regiae quicquid
injuriae facere, aut committere pro observantiae nostrae in eam officio
debeamus. Nos supra nominati Ambassadores, Commissarii and, deputati dictae
serenissimae Reginae sufficienti ad id, praeter caetera, authoritate muniti,
cupientes quantum in nobis est, incommodis quibuscumque praecavere, temporumque
momenta sic disponere, ut toti, tam serenissimae Reginae Angliae Dominae
nostrae Clementissimae, quam Christianissimae Majestatis, voluntati,
desiderioque fiat satis, praefatis 10 diebus alios 10 dies adjiciendos putamus
and adjicimus, quibus pro part dictae serinissimae Reginae dictam
reservationem prorogatam and continuatum esse cupimus, ita quod durante dicto
termino dictarum x dieru^ post dictos x dies finitos tractatus ille cujus
gratia dicta reservatio facta fuit pro part dictae serenissimae Reginae, in
suo robore permaneat sine ulla laesione aut diminutione quacunque. In cujus rei
testimonium has litteras nostras manuum nostrarum subscriptione munivimus.

Datae ex Urbe Parisiorum 12 Mensis Augusti 1581. Francis Walsingham Henry
Cobham. John Summers.



To the Right Honorable, and his very good Lord, the Lord Treasurer.
IT may please your Lordship to advertise her Majesty that the next day after
our Audience in the afternoon, there repaired by the Kings Commandment unto us
Mr. Chivergni Villeguier, President Brissac la mothe Fenelon, Secretary Pynart,
and Du Uray, where Mr. Chivergni in the name of the rest did declare unto us,
that they were sent by the King to let us understand the great hope he
conceived of me the Secretary, serving her Majesty in that place of trust, I
should have brought her Highnesses full resolution for the proceeding in the
marriage, considering how far forth the matter had been already proceeded in,
the benefit that would have ensued thereby, as well for her Majesty's own
Realm, as for the knitting the two Crowns in an Amity indissolluble, that now
finding the matter to fall out otherwise, his Majesty was greatly grieved
withal, for that he did not see how there could be any sound or perfect Amity
without marriage. To which speech, after I the Secretary had declared unto them
at length, the manner of the proceeding in the prosecution of the marriage, and
the Reasons that did move her Majesty to take that resolution as she did
presently send me withal; We showed them that we found it very strange,
considering the speeches used to us the day before by the King, by the which he
declared, that he was content that the Treaty of the League should proceed,
without annexing thereto the condition of the marriage, that there should now
fall out an alteration thereof; and therefore prayed them to acquaint us with
the reasons of the change, whereby we might advertise her Majesty thereof, who
might think great lightness in us to give her an assurance of a thing
proceeding from the Kings own mo^th, which afterward should not fill out so in
effect, Upon which speech Du Uray made a very long discourse touching the
earnestness of his Masters affection, the full assurance he made of the
marriage, and the touch of credit that would grow unto him, if the same should
not take effect. And did declare unto us, that the Duke his Master had given
express commandment to be an humble suitor to the King, that he would not
proceed to the Treaty of the League, before assurance given, that the marriage
should take place: thereupon the rest of the Commissioners in excuse of the
King did declare, how that Du Uray had not delivered his charge unto his
Majesty, until the morning following* in audience, who if he had understood
before his brothers request in that behalf, could not have yielded that that
Treaty should have been proceeded in without the marriage. Then I the
Secretary showed the Commissioners, how that I found Du Urays speech strange,
for that the Duke himself at the time of my being with him, did promise that he
would not oppose himself to any thing that her Majesty did desire, and so
concluded, that though he could not be a furtherer of the League without
marriage; yet would he not hinder the same.

Then Pynart as he said by the Kings commandment, and his mothers, did let us
understand, that whereas they did find that the principal difficulty;
whereupon the stay of the marriage grew, proceeded through the enterprise, that
Monsieur had in the Low Countries, their Majesty's being desirous that the
marriage should take place, had dispatched that afternoon Monsieur de Bellieure
to the Prince of Parma, to procure that the said Prince might withdraw his
siege fom Cambray, and that the Town might be left in a newtrality, as a member
of the Empire; and further to persuade, that there might be a general
abstinence of war for the space of five or six months in the which time there
might be some composition treated between the King of Spain, and his Subjects.

That the King and his Mother were in good hope that the same might be brought
to pass, which they did the rather desire, to the end Monsieur might in the
mean time go over into England, and finish that which had happily been begun.
Upon this overture we did let them understand, that if there might be such a
peace procured as might be accompanied with safety, none would be more glad of
it then the Queen our mistress: Notwithstanding we did signify unto them, that
there were many apparent reasons to show that the same was not likely to take
place but to the great prejudice and peril of those of the Low Countries; and
therefore prayed them to call to remembrance how that her Majesty at the time
of his Ministers being in England did protest unto them (at such time as they
did let her understand that Monsieur should give over the enterprise of
Flanders, for that they saw it was an impediment to the marriage) that she
should be loath, considering how much it would touch him in honor, and how
dangerous it would be for them of the Low Countries in case he should give over
the same, that her marriage should be accompanied with so dolorous effects. And
as she did then protest upon the overture made to give over the enterprise, so
we her ministers seeing the danger that might g^ow many ways by the intended
Treaty with the Prince of Parma, serving better for the suffering of the King
of Spain to grow to his greatness, then for the relief of the poor afflicted in
that Country, could not in reason, and our particular opinions, (having no
Commission to deal therein) see any likelihood that the same might take any
good effect: And therefore prayed them, that unless they saw some other cause
that might move them to take that course, they would forbe^^ so to do.

This matter did minister unto us argument for the space of two hours at the
least; which for avoiding tediousness, we think meet to omit. And i^ the end
grew to this conclusion with them, that either it would please them that we
might proceed in the said Treaty, or else that they would procure us audience,
that we might understand from the Kings own mouth, the revocation of that he
had assented unto, letting them also understand, that we did mean presently to
advertise her Majesty of this change, to the end that thereupon she might give
order for the stay of the Ships prepared for Don Anthonio, being well assured
that her Majesty upon this alteration, would forbear any further proceeding
therein; which we did the rather to let them understand, for that it might
provoke them to persuade the King to maintain his former resolution: Whereupon
they withdrawing themselves apart, did afterward let us understand, that they
would make report unto the King of that which had passed between us; and in the
mean time did earnestly pray us, that we would forbear to advertise her
Majesty, as also not to dissuade the going forward of the support appointed
for Don Anthonio; whereunto, after most earnest request made by them, we did
assent, with condition, That we might receive answer by ten of the clock the
next day, and therein we did the more willingly yield, for that they did put us
in hope that we should receive answer from the King to our contentment. The
next day Monsieur de la Mot, Bu^zar and Pinart came to us, and told us, that
the rest of their Colleagues, and they had communicated with the King, the
Negotiation passed the day before between them and us, and that they had
remembered to his Majesty, his Speech delivered unto us, which we conceived to
be this, That he was pleased to appoint some to Treat with us touching a (...)
Amity to be had with her Majesty, seeing there were such difficulties that did
accompany the marriage: That his Majesty answered, That the alteration grew
upon two causes, the one of a motion made to him by me the Secretary, for a
further prolongation of certain days to conserve the validity of the
reservation, the last prolongation being to expire within a day or two, which
motion gave him hope that the marriage might take effect. The other upon a
request made by Du. Uray, in the name of the Duke his brother, that the League
in no case might be proceeded in without the Marriage; which the King, seeing
the matter touched so greatly his brother in affection and honor, could not
deny his request. And to the end he might understand his further mind therein,
he thought good to send Pinart unto him out of hand, to acquaint him what had
passed hitherto in the matter, since our last audience, upon whose return we
should then understand the Kings further pleasure, praying us in the mean time
to have patience, and to interpret the Kings answer touching the alteration, in
good part, assuring us, that this delay would rather further then hinder the
matter we sought.

To these two allegations, I the Secretary did reply, That as for the first,
concerning my motion for a further prolongation, the same grew only upon this,
that understanding as well by Monsieur, as by the King himself, and Queen
Mother, that their meaning was, that the pursuit of the Marriage should be
pursued still, in hope that her Majesty might in time remove by her wisdom,
those difficulties, for the which she could not presently for diverse important
causes, proceed in the same. I thought good, for the more validity of the
reservation, to propound a further prolongation thereof, considering that the
last was to expire within two or three days, and therefore the King could take
no just cause upon any motion, to revoke his former resolution. And as for the
second, concerning a request of Du Urayes, made in the Duke his Masters name,
for the stay of the said Treaty, unless it might be accompanied with marriage.
I alleged, that it seemed very unlikely, that at the Queen mothers being with
the Duke, which was two days after Du Uray was sent from the said Duke unto
the King, he propounded no such request unto her for the stay of the Treaty;
for if he had, it was likely she would have acquainted the King withal; and
thereupon his Majesty would have framed his answer accordingly: Which we
finding not to fall out so, cannot but greatly marvel at this change; whereunto
they replied, that though the Queen mother had indeed charged Du. Uray
therewith, yet he insisted still upon the same, as a matter he had received in
commandment from the Duke his Master, and could not dispense with it without
order from him. We then finding by them, that we could not prevail to induce
them to assent to proceed to the Treaty, until they heard from the Duke,
thought good to forbear any further pressing of the matter, and to attend Mr.
Pinarts return; and to the end we might know Monsieurs intent in that behalf,
we thought good to send Mr. Summers forthwith (as well to persuade with him to
remove his impediments, as also to acquaint him with such speeches as are given
out here (...) an intended marriage with Spain, whereby we might as well ^ound
him in the one, as in the other) In this conference we did let them understand
of some cause we had to mistrust (especially upon this voyage of Bellieure)
that they were loath to separate themselves from the amity of Spain, praying
them therefore, that if they were so disposed, we might know the truth thereof,
letting them understand that the cause of our coming, was not to dissolve any
amity they had with (...), or any other Prince, otherwise then should stand
with the Kings honor, and his surety. Whereupon they made great protestations,
that the King had great cause for sundry respects, to look into the King of
Spains greatness, and therefore prayed us to lay distrust aside, not doubting,
but in time the King would deal, we should see, very honorably; the cause
whereof Pinart did assure us with most earnest protestations, as a man that was
acquainted with the secrets and inwards of the Kings own soul.

At the end of our conference upon the Speeches, I the Secretary, delivered
unto them, how that her Majesty understanding of this alteration with the
King, for entering into the association, would cause the preparations for
Portugal to stay; Pinart desired very earnestly in Queen mothers name, that in
no case they might stay, but be furthered with all convenient expedition, and
that she would take it as a singular favor done to her self by her Majesty,
in case she would go forward therewith, as she had begun, assuring us that
there were at Bourdeaux, certain ships in a readiness likewise, to set forwards
toward the Isles, to be employed in this service.

Your Honors to command, Francis Walsingham, Henry Cobham, Io. Summers.



A Memorial for Mr. Summers.
FIrst you shall declare to the Duke, That whereas the King had yielded to
proceed to the Treaty without marriage; the same resolution was altered by a
request made by Du. Vray in his name, that it might not be proceeded in without
the said marriage; whereupon our Negotiation in that behalf, is stayed until
the King and the Queen his Mother shall by Secretary Pinart, understand his
determination touching the continuance of the said stay by Du. Uray procured,
that whereas I the Secretary, at the time of my being with him, did pray his
Highness, considering the proceeding in the League, did require expedition,
that it would please him to recommend the same unto ^he King. He did then
declare unto me, that though he could not recommend the same in respect of the
doubt, and conceived that it might impeach the marriage, which was the matter
he chiefly sought; yet considering he found by me, that it tended to the
advancement of her Highness service, he would not impeach or hinder the same,
we are therefore to pray his Highness it would please him, for the satisfaction
of the Queen my Mistress (hav^ng advertised her of his promise made in that
behalf) to let us understand the cause of the alteration thereof, that it shall
be meet to lay before him the benefit that may grow by the said League unto the
enterprise that he has in hand, by comforting his own party in the
Low Countries, by discomforting the adverse party, as also that it will serve
to very good purpose, to remove the jealousnesse here within this Realm, and
thereby to continue the present peace, whereby he may the better prosper in his
present actions; that we do not see how it may greatly hinder his intended
pursuit of the Marriage, but will rather further the same, for that it will
breed a good satisfaction in her Majesty's Subjects, and to put them in hope to
receive more fruit of the Marriage, when they shall see these two Crowns to be
knit together in amity against their common Enemy the King of Spain. That we
hearing of certain bruites given out at Paris, not by mean and base persons,
but by such as do pretend to know how matters of importance d^e pass, how
that there should be some overture made hy his Highness, of a marriage with
Spain; which we for our parts can in no case believe, considering the earnest
protestations that have been made by the King, his Mother, and himself,
touching his intention, for the continuance of the pursuit of the Marriage, and
therefore did think meet, in respect of the Honor that we think our selves
bound to bear toward one that has so well deserved of the Queen our Mistress,
to acquaint him therewith, to the end we may receive from himself, some such
matter as may yield satisfaction to her Majesty upon the hearing of the said
bruit; That we esteem him to be a Prince of so great honor (so long as he
shall pursue the Marriage with her Majesty) not to entertain any other.
Besides, knowing how greatly those Marriages knit between persons in nearness
of blood, are condemned in the opinion of the world, being both against the Law
of God and Nature, we cannot be persuaded that he, being a Prince of that
integrity, and one that is guided by conscience in all his actions, can be
drawn thereunto. That it is also given out, that in consideration of the said
Marriage, the Prince of Parma will be induced to withdraw his siege from
Cambray, as also to yield to a surceasance of Arms with the States of the
Low Countries, for the space of five or six months, that in the mean time
there may be some way found for the pacifying of those Countries, and the
reducing of them to the obedience of the King of Spain, with the preservation
of their Liberties: That we have cause to believe some part of this, for that
at our conference here with the High-Commissioners, it was declared unto us,
that Bellieure was sent unto the Prince of Parma, for that purpose, that if the
same might be brought to pass for the surety of the States, none would be more
glad of it then the Queen our Mistress, who has desired nothing more then the
repose of that Country, that herein we cannot but let him understand, how men
of judgment do see this project is only laid to stop the pretended course
for the impeaching of the greatness of the King of Spain: For they that
consider how greatly the States are alienated from the King of Spain, and how
resolutely the King is bent not to yield to them in matter of exercise of
Religion; so no reason that ever there can grow any good by any such Treaty,
unless it be unto the King of Spain.

And therefore we, as those that wish him all honor, do pray to God also,
that it fall not out so, that some part of that project do not tend to his
disadvantage. August 14.


Private Memorials for Mr. Summers.
YOu may, besides the Points contained in this Memorial, add such other things
as you can call to remembrance, and shall think meet for the advancement of her
Majesty's service.

If you shall find the Vice-Count of T^raigne there, you shall do well to
impart our proceeding unto him, here with the King, and to pray his assistance
(if he shall like to deal in the Cause) to remove the impediments, that the
Treaty may proceed, considering the benefits that may ensue thereby, as well to
the furtherance of the Dukes actions, as to remove the jealousies here within
the Realm. You may also declare unto him, that touching the sum of money which
he desired me to procure at her Majesty's hands for the Dukes support, that her
Majesty having been moved therein, is very wil^ing, upon notice given, that he
stands in need thereof, being not otherwise furnished by the King (as her
Majesty has been certainly informed that he was) to see him supplied of some
convenient sum. And therefore if it please the Duke to advertise me thereof,
I will not fail to do mine endeavor to procure that the same may be sent
over with as convenient speed as may be.

And in this behalf, if you shall perceive at your coming there, that the Duke
is in no such necessity, or that the Prince of Parma will retire his Forces,
whereby the victualing of the Town of Cambray may be performed: Then may you
forbear touching the offer of the money.

You may also declare unto the Vicecount, that by the Lettets sent of late out
of England from Marchiamont, the D. may be put in more hope of the marriage,
then I could put him in at my being there; and thereby he may perchance
conceive that I did not proceed so far forth as I had Commission, in respect of
some particular mislike I have of the marriage; you shall therefore pray him in
my name, to use what persuasions he may, to remove any such opinion from the
Duke, in whose good opinion I do desire to remain, assuring him, that when the
truth of my proceedings shall be known, it will be found that I have dealt
sincerely, and accordingly, as I did protest to the Duke my self. And if you
shall see any just occasion (in such conference as shall pass between you and
the said Duke) to deliver any speech for my particular defense, I shall then
pray you to deal with him therein, as in your good judgment and discretion
shall be thought meet.

Fr. Walsingham.


To the right honorable my very good Lord, the Lord Treasurer.
MY very good Lord, by the general Letter and Copy of that I writ unto her
Majesty, your Lordship may conceive as much as we are able to decypher of the
causes of their alteration here with us; but the greatest cause of stay and
hanging off for hearkening to our motion is a doubt, they conceive that her
Majesty will not resolutely imbarque her self into any such certain proportion
of charges (as both this action of the Low-Countrys, and other charges, which
in time may be found necessary) will require: Spain and the Pope make great and
large offers, which are not lightly hearkened unto: Now if we shall not (in our
treating, be able to countervail them either with as good, or with some such
certainty as may be to their liking, our conference will be to small purpose;
and in my simple opinion, it were much better that we were revoked, then that
further employment of time and charges should be fruitlesly expended; and
therefore I beseech your Lordship to be a mean to her Majesty, that we may
have some certainty set downn ^o us, which in our conference with them, we may
deliver to them, and that we may particularly know to what sum, and for what
time her Highness can be pleased to extend her aid, and whether in case it be
demanded of us, and they will have it so concluded, she can be content to enter
into open War against the King of Spain, or not; for in these two points
chiefly, will all their treating consist, wherein if we shall not be able to
resolve them, your Lordship can easily conceive what end our Negotiation will
have: I am given to understand, that in case her Marriage shall not take place,
then the King will enter into a League Defensive only, adding to the Treaties
already in force, such other matters as shall be thought necessary for common
defense.

I pray your Lordship therefore, that we may know her Majesty's mind in this,
and what shall be thought necessary meet to be added to the former Treaties.
And so I humbly take my leave of your Lordship.

Paris the 13 of August, 1581. Your Lordships, Fr. Walsingham.


To her Majesty, August 13.
IT may please your most excellent Majesty, I know you cannot but find the
Kings alteration of his former resolution very strange, and therefore would be
glad to know the true cause of the change, wherein I would to God I could
satisfy your Majesty of, with truth, to think that the same proceeded of two
causes alleged by the King, whereof we have in our general Letter unto the
Lord Treasurer, made mention, I have many reasons to lead me to be of contrary
opinion, and have rather just cause to think that the ground of the change grew
upon advertisements received from thence, being put in hope, that either your
Majesty (they insisting still upon the League with marriage) will yield
thereto, or else in respect of the doubts they are put in, that the marriage
not taking place, your Majesty will not go so resolutely forward in the
prosecution of the War against Spain (in case it should be found so expedient)
to enter into a public and open War: If your Majesty have conquered the
diff^culty in your own nature, as also other difficulties of Estate, touching
the marriage, and shall be disposed to proceed to the effectuating thereof,
then we your poor Ministers here, do hope that we shall not receive that
disgrace, as that your resolution therein shall rather be delivered by others,
then by us: On the other side, if that your Majesty shall not be disposed to
enter into an open action against Spain with this Crown, in respect of the
charges, then were it good that any further proceeding therein were forborne, to
give them occasion by the entertaining thereof, to think that your Majesty
dallieth with them (both in marriage and League) cannot but greatly exasperate
them against you; how your Majesty shall be able alone to bear the malice of
Spain, France, and Scotland (for such a concurrency against you, is to be
looked for) I do not see otherwise then to depend upon Gods goodness.

The consideration of this matter does minister necessary questions in State,
The one, Whether it were not better for your Majesty to join with France
against Spain, or to have them both with Scotland against you; The other,
Whether it were not better to convey the Wars out of your own Realm, by the
intended association with this Crown, or to have this Crown, with the rest of
the evil affected neighbors, to assail you within your own Realm. The solution
is very easy; for as in cure of a natural body, being diseased, it were evil
advice ^o council the application of inward medicines, when outward will serve;
so were it less dangerous to attend a War at home, the inward corruption being
thoroughly looked into, when that the same (by some provident course, by your
Majesty taken) may be put off; the only difficulty rests only upon charges,
which if the likelihood were, would grow greater then your Estate or Crown
might bear, then were it reason for your Majesty to forbear the same, for that
Ultra posse non est esse, and to stand upon your own defense: But if the
charges may be reduced into such a convenient proportion as the Crown may bear,
then were it very hard that treasure should be preferred before safety. I
beseech your Majesty, that (without offense) I may tell you, that your
loathnesse to spend even then, when it concerns your safety, is publicly
delivered out here. We find also the doubt thereof, by the Commissioners
particular and private speeches with us, to be a principal impediment, why the
King here is loath to join in association with your Highness. For the love of
God, good Madam, look into your own estate; and think that there can grow no
peril so great, as to have a War break out in your own Realm, considering what
number of evil Subjects you have; and therefore your Majesty cannot redeem the
peril that is like to grow thereby at too dear a price. I hope your Majesty
will bear with my boldness, and interpret the same to proceed of a care I have
of your Highness preservation in that happy estate you have lived in these
Three and twenty last years, which I pray God to continue your Majesty in,
double those years. According to your Majesty's commandment, I moved the King
for the Marshall de Coss to attend upon Monsieur in the Voyage (the rather at
your Highness request) he would see his Brother assisted not only with the said
Marshall, but also with diverse others, whose counsel and advice in those
martial Affairs he doubted not should serve greatly to the furtherance of his
directions. And thus craving pardon for my length in writing, I humbly beseech
the Almighty so to bless your Majesty with the prosperous Reign of many years,
as that your Enemies may have cause to envy your happiness, and your faithful
Servants and Subjects cause to rejoice and render unto him therefore their
humble thanks. And so, etc.

Your Majesty's humble Subject, and faithful Servant, Francis Walsingham.


To the right Honorable my good Friend Sir Francis Walsingham.
SO often as I have opportunity I write to you, and now perceiving Mr.
Vicechamberlaine sends this bearer to his Nephew at Paris, I thought it not
good to let him pass without my letter we do now rather howerly then daily
look to hear from you, what passed between the persons deputed by the King, to
treat with you after the speech with the King the ninth of this month. I hope
you have received my Letters sent by Walton your servant, and therefore I think
it not needful to repeat the whole contents thereof, but her M. suspendeth all
resolute answers, till she hear from you, In no wise she would have the
enterprise of the Low Countries lost, but she will not particularly warrant you
to offer aid. She alleges that now the matter is so far gone, the King will
not abandon it; Her Majesty fears that the Queen mother will contrarily
withdraw the Duke her Son from it, and then will say, That the Queen must marry
with him, because she alleges no impediment but misliking of her people, to
have a Husband beginning a War. Her Majesty also is very cold in the cause of
Don Anthonio, alleging that she liked it but by opportunity of her Council;
and now that all things are ready, as ships, Victuals, Men, etc. the charges
whereof comes to 12000 pound, she has been moved to impart two thousand pound
more as a thing needful for the full furniture of this Voyage, wherewith she
is greatly offended with Mr Hawkins and Drake, that the charges are grown so
great, above that was said to her, when the five thousand pound was demanded of
her.

They, for Answer, say, That the number of ships is increased, by a ship dearly
provided by Mr Bingham, without their knowledge; hereupon her Majesty not
content to give one penny more, they were willed to abate the number, and
consequently the charge to rest at 12000 pound; but they say all provisions are
ready, and answer given as they cannot possibly. In the end Drake and Hawkins
will make shift for 2000 pound, and her Majesty so answered, yet will not
suffer them to depart, until she be well assured from you, that the French
will aid Don Anthonio, for she fears to be left alone. She also is informed
that the Fleets from the West Indies arrived in Spain the 27 of July, and also
that the Island of Terceras is rendered to the K. of Spain: All these things
(though these advertisements are not very certain) do marvailously stay her
Majesty from assenting to their departure, and yet she loses all the charges
spent in vain, the poor King utterly lost; and therefore her Answer yesterday
was, that the voyage should continue in readiness, but not depart until this
Evening, before which time she looked to he^^ from you. I wrote, how upon some
jealous^e conceived, and upon some Articles presented to my Lord of Leicester,
by Bingham, Fenton, and York, they, with their own good wills are discharged;
but Mr Bingham and Fenton are promised all their charges. Thus imagining that I
should have some Letter from you, before these will be at the Seaside, I end;
and yet I could not omit to write. Since your departure we never heard from my
Lord Deputy till even now, that Mr Carew of Anthony is come, by whom we
understand that my L. has honorably reduced Tirghley to peace, and
Commissioners assigned to hear the difference between him and Odonnell; my L.
Deputy is Umpire. Tirghley pretends all obedience, alleging that the
southern Rebels have solicited him to Rebel, but he would never assent
thereto.

Greenwich the Eighteenth of August. Your assured Friend, W: Burghley.


To the Right Honorable Sir Francis Walsingham.
SInce the closing of my Letter written within this hour, her Majesty hearing of
Mr Vice-Chamberlains, man's going, sent for me, and willed me to let you know,
That she marvaileth she hears nothing of your moving the King for aid for his
Brother, which she says is a principal matter she willed you to do. And she
says, considering Monsieur and his friends will doubt of your good (...) to
the Marriage, you shall by earnest dealing with the King for assisting (...),
qualify their other doubt. I told her Majesty, (...) own knowledge you seemed
to favor the Marriage, no (...) your going, in respect thereby to strengthen
her against the King (...) Spain, more then I could perceive her Majesty for
her own part willing to have it furthered. And besides, that your self
objected, That to divert you from this service, that your Message being to
procure a League and no marriage, you said the former Opinion conceived of your
unwillingness to the Marriage, should be by Monsieur and his Friends supposed
the cause or instrument of the breach of the marriage.

To conclude, I find her Majesty in words, more inclined to the marriage, then
at your departure. But how long this inclination will continue, I know not.

Greenwich, August 17. Yours assuredly, W. Burghley.


To the honorable Sir Francis Walsingham.
SIR, Because this Bearer, your servant, is by you commanded to come without
delay, I cannot by him, send any thing of moment, for that your Letters came
not before this forenoon by John Wills, by reason of contrary winds, as he
says, that kept him two days from England; and all this day, since her
Majesty received your Letters, my Lord Chamberlain, and my Lord of Leicester,
by a former appointment, were at Westminster to examine the Lord Vaux; Sir
Thomas Tresham, and Mr. Griffin, of which three, the first two are
close-prisoners in the Fleet, who deny Campians being with them, but they will
take no oath; the other confesses plainly and simply. By this occasion her
Majesty forbeareth, without advice, to make any censure of your Letters, or to
give me any charge what to write to you. She says, until she shall hear what
Mr. Bellieure shall do with the Prince of Parma, and Pinart, and Mr. Summers
with Monsieur, she cannot guess what will be the event. She denies that any
one here, had any cause to give comfort to the marriage. But truly, I think
some have had such a conceit, and whether they have sent it over since, I know
not; you shall do well to write to her Majesty, or to me, of the state and
proceedings of Monsieur with his Army, for she finds fault therewith.

August 18. Yours assuredly, W, Burleigh.
Postscript.
I pray you in my name, to thank Sir Henry Cobham for his Letters to me,
excusing me for not writing for want of leisure and matter.




To her Majesty, August 16. 1581.
MOst gracious Sovereign, The particular Letter it pleased your Highness of
your Princely favor, to voughsafe to write unto me, did minister unto me two
singular comforts, The one, that your mislike conceived of my dealing with the
Duke, is in part quallified. The other, for that it has pleased your Majesty
to lay open unto me your disposition touching the charge committed unto me,
whereby I may use the same as a load-star, the beter to direct my course.

Touching the first, I hope, when your Majesty shall be thoroughly informed of
my proceedings, you shall find that I swerved not from your instructions I
received, nor yet had cause that indiscretion might lead me to take another
course. The principal cause why I was sent over, as I conceive it, and as I
trust your Majesty can call it to remembrance, was to procure a streighter
degree of amity between the King and you, without marriage, and yet to carry my
self in the procuring thereof, as might not altogether break off the matter of
marriage; yet the success of my travel fell out so, through Gods goodness, as I
did assuredly, not without good ground, make account that the amity would have
taken place, had it not been crossed by some practice (as your Majesty may
perceive by some former advertisements) not yet discovered; and yet both the
King, his Mother, and Monsieur, resolute to continue their former determination
for the prosecutiou of the marriage, which if I had made the case so desperate
as I perceive your Majesty has been informed, then surely would they not have
continued their disposition to follow the matter: I was sundry times pressed,
both by them and their Ministers, to yield a resolute answer, whether I had
power to say that your Majesty would not marry. Whereunto I answered, as I was
directed, that I had no such authority, otherwise then to lay before them the
impediments that made your Majesty doubtful to proceed in the marriage, which
was to have the same accompanied with a War. This then being true (as the
effects do show) I hope your Majesty in the goodness of your own Princely
nature and uprightness, in your judgment will rest satisfied: For otherwise,
If ^, or any other like Minister employed, shall be condemned unheard* it
cannot but minister great cause of grief and discouragement. Touching the other
benefit received by your Majesty's particular Letter, by which you have so far
forth opened your self, as if you shall of necessity be thrown into a War, you
find it more agreeable with your surety, to have it accompanied with marriage,
then without.

I cannot but let your Majesty understand, as I declared to you before my
departure, that if your Majesty shall be content to yield to marriage, I am
fully persuaded that the King will be induced to covenant with you, that you
shall be discharged of such burden as the (...) may cast upon you, which is
the only matter that we have presently to deal in, considering, that now your
Majesty has so far forth opened your self to Monsienr Marchiamont, as to let
him understand, that if the impediment of the charges that the War may cast
upon you, may be removed, your Highness sees no cause why the marriage should
not proceed: For this thing being known to their Majesty's, all hope to procure
the League without marriage, is excluded. I beseech your Majesty therefore, we
may receive your speedy direction in this case, as also what other thing you
would have annexed unto the marriage, besides the removing of the impediments
above mentioned.

And so with all humbleness do beseech God of his great and infinite goodness,
to bless all your Ma^esties proceedings with that happy success as may be to
your Highness particular content, and the comfort of your best affected
Subjects.

Your Highness poor Subject and Servant, Francis Walsingham.


To the Right Honorable, and his very good Lord, the Lord Treasurer.
MY very good Lord, finding in a Letter written to me by Monsieur Marchiamont
(whereof I send your Lordship a copy) that her Majesty has so far forth
opened her self, as that she has signified unto him, That so the burden of
the charges that the War may cast upon her, be born by the King, she sees no
impediment why she should not proceed to the marriage. I see our Treaty of
League without marriage utterly overthrown: so that now there rests nothing
for us to do here, but to persuade the King to take upon him the burden of
the War, as the only impediment in the marriage; and therefore we are to pray
your Lordship to procure her Majesty's Warrant under her own Hand, in plain and
clear terms to proceed therein: And if there shall be any thing besides, that
her Majesty shall desire to have annexed to her marriage, that is not
contained in the former Contract; then we beseech your Lordship, that we may
understand her Majesty's further pleasure therein: for until such time as we
shall hear from her Majesty, we have nothing to do here, the League without
marriage being utterly broken off.

Your Honors to command, Fra: Walsingham.


To the Right Honorable, and his very good Lord, the Lord Treasurer.
MY very good Lord, I have cause (...) think my self infinitely bound to your
Lordship for your honorable standing for my defense, touching my proceedings
here, which my Lord of Leicester has testified unto me that you^ Lordship has
performed in most friendly sort. If her Majesty upon this new resolution taken
with Marchiamont, be not resolved to marry, then is she entered into a very
dangerous course: For as in mine other Letter I have written to your Lordship
all hope of League is taken away, which as your Lordship may perceive by former
advertisements was in a very great forwardness to have taken effect, whereof I
had never doubt: so that it might have pleased her Majesty to have kept a
consonant course there. In like sort, as your Lordship can well remember was
Sir Francis Bryans Negotiation crossed at Rome. I cannot but pray to God so to
bless her Majesty's resolution to marry, with that good effect that may be to
her own comfort, and the benefit of her Realm.

Your Lordships, Fr. Walsingham.


To the Right Honorable Sir Francis Walsingham.
SIr, I thank you for acquainting me with that you write to her Majesty,
whereof you sent me a copy, but until this afternoon I had it not; whereas the
original from your self was delivered to her Majesty, the delay (as Mr. Mills
told me) of the delivery grew, for that your Cousin had not time to deliver it
yesterday to Mr. Mills, who also was absent. But having now read it, I see you
have great cause why her Majesty should be well content with your actions, in
all occurring with the course appointed you; and lo now this evening, without
using any token of sight of your letters, I repeated to her Majesty, that the
course you held to procure the League, without marriage, was specially
committed to you to obtain, against which it was certain, that Monsieur for his
particular (and all his Ministers for his sake) would spurn, and so in doing
your duty, you were subject to their misliking. Hereupon I found he^ to assent
to that I said. But she added, that she wished that Monsie^r might have been
persuaded thereto. I answered, that she her self should not be able to persuade
him to content himself, and much less her Ministers. This afternoon, finding
her Majesty unwilling to send the Fleet to the Azores, whereby charge should
grow without profit, it was motioned, that in the mean time that her Majesty
should be assured of the French Kings actions to concur with hers, two or three
of the ships, with a Bark, should forthwith repair to the Tercera with some
Captains, Soldiers, Powder and Munition to comfort the ^slanders to stand
fast, and to direct to be furnished for the defense of the Island, until more
forces might come; a matter, as my Lord of Leicester says, Don ^nthonio
desires. Whereupon this evening, Sir Francis Drake and H^wkins are gone to
him, and so I think the ships shall away to morrow, if it alter not. By the
next you shall know, though the French King to our Ambassador there, and by his
own said, that he would aid Don Anthonio, yet these being but words changeably
by a Prince, if now he shall reveal to you his mind, it is reasonable to say,
that though it will require some longer time to contract a treaty hereupon; yet
if it please him to write a letter to her Majesty, to assure her that he will
join with her in aiding Don Anthonio, and if for her action, the King of Spain
shall offer offense to her Majesty or her subjects, he shall repute the
quarrel his own jointly with her, in defense of her, and offense of the King of
Spain, such a writing may animate her Majesty to that, which I think otherwise
she will not resolve. Her Majesty m^^neth to send the Lord Howard to. Monsieur
to visit him.

Yours assuredly, William B^rleigh.


To Mr Secretary.
SIR, when I had made up your Packet, being come late this Evening, about the
many matters spoken of in one of my Letters: The ^ueens Majesty sent Mr
M^ldmay to inform me to w^ite as follows. This day the French Ambassador,
with the Fr: Portuguese Consul Perdon^, were with her Majesty with Letters
from the Qu. mother, of great earnestness to her Majesty to aid Don Anthonio
(by that name, but not by that of the K. Anthony) whereof the Fr: Ambassador
made reason for the Q. mothers pretense) but from the French King her Majesty
had no Letter; Thereupon her Majesty is scrupulous, doubting to give occasion
of a War to be born by her self alone, and the more She doubts, finding the
Fr: King so precise in his Brothers cause. We find in a Letter of Tuyns here
decyphered, that the King sent Gondy to him with ample Commission to carry away
the 300000 Crowns, wherewith the Prince of Parma became so lusty: Her Majesty
would have you decypher in this matter of Portugal. T^is day Don or King
Anthonio has pressed the Q. Majesty to have restitution of his Diamond, and
by Mr Weldmore he would have sent to my Lady for it; but I mean my Ladies
answer shall be, that it was left with her by you, and that without your
commandment she may not deliver it, except such money be paid as she knows
you have borrowed upon it. Her Majesty will not have it detained for her ^000
l. which I see she could be content to lose, so he were satisfied. Surely Mr
Secretary the cause has been but lightly conducted, and many things
overcharged. For I have seen a Note of yours, amounting not much above 3000 l.
and it is brought almost to 14000 l. and the King Anthony regards nothing
therein done, but remitteth his payment to the Island, or rather to the pay of
the King of Spa: Indies; yet we here do what we can to content him. I hear that
the Count Vimioso will be here within these two days; he is altogether French,
and will seek to draw this King into France, where his life I fear will be
vendible.

From my House the 24 night of August, at eleven of the Clock. Your assured
Friend, W: Burghley.


To the Right Honorable Sir Francis Walsingham.
SIR, where by my last Letters I made doubt unto you of the going forth of the
Ships in the Voyage intended, as before your going over you were acquainted
with; yet now at the last her Majesty is resolved that 4. only shall go
forth under the charge of William Hawkins, whereof the Primrose is the chiefest.
And least occasion should fall out of service by Land, Capt. Norris is
appointed for that purpose. It is thought meet, that such Victuals as were
provided for the other Ships, and cannot well be kept, should forthwith be
uttered and sold. Nevertheless, the ships to be in a readiness upon a short
warning, as further shall be advertised from you of the French Kings
resolution. Her Majesty seems resolutely bent not to exceed 5000 l. whereby
your charge is the greater, which I have assayed to qualify, as if it had been
my own case. And thus constrained to be shorter then I would otherwise, for the
dispatch of this Bearer, etc.

Greenwich late in the night, August 24. 1581. William Burleigh.


To the Lord Treasurer.
IT may please your Lordship, after the long stay from proceeding in our
Negotiation, upon such reasons as in our former letters we have advertised. Du
Vray came unto us on Friday, to acquaint us with such answer as he had received
from the Duke his Master, touching the furtherance of the league desired. The
sum of the speeches that he delivered unto us being this, That the Duke was
contented that the treaty should go forward, as a thing found necessary by her
Majesty, so that it might be no prejudice to the marriage. And for that the
Duke his Master rested assured of her Majesty, that she had no such meaning,
as by the one to prejudice the other, he did let us understand, that by the
said Dukes order, he had imparted so much unto the King; and that he thought
upon the return of Monsieur Pynart, who was looked for that evening, we should
know the Kings further pleasure touching our proceeding. This report of Du Vray
we thought good not to advertise before the (...) Mr. Summers from the D by
whom we did look to be thoroughly (...) of the truth; who returning this last
night, delivered as much to us from (...) Duke, as your Lordship may perceive
by his reports set down in writing sent down herewith. This day la Mot and
Pynart sent unto us, to let us understand, that the King means to morrow in
the morning to confer with his Council about the cause we are come for, praying
us to excuse the delay, that the King (by reason of letters from the Duke his
brother, and others from the Duke du Main) was so entertained, as he had no
leisure to consult touchi^g our said cause. As for the manner of our proceeding
in the Treaty with the French King or his Ministers, we mean to observe the
course prescribed by her Majesty, as well contained in our Instructions, as
also in your Lordships letters of the 13 of this present. And as touching the
contents of the said letters, whereas her Highness conceives by a letter
written by me the Secretary the 10 of this present, that a treaty, without
drawing her Majesty into charges, will not be effected, which causes her
Highness to put on a resolution, that it is as good for her to be at charge
with a marriage, as without. In which behalf, for that the one seems to us to
depend upon the other, and both of them doubtful, we neither receive perfect
direction for the marriage, nor for the charges without the marriage;
especially what sum her Majesty can be content to yield unto, in case the
contribution shall be accorded to be done underhand. We humbly pray your
Lordship, that we may speedily have her Majesty's resolution herein; for that
otherwise the treaty will be drawn into great length, both to her Majesty's and
the Kings charge here; besides that, we know that it will breed some misliking,
and will be found strange, that we should have autho^ity to deal in general
terms only, without entering into particularities, but must be driven to send
over for resolution in such points as might well be considered of before hand,
we are the rather moved to pray your Lordship to move her Majesty in these
points, for that we are given to understand, they mean to grow here to
deliberation in Counsel, whether it shall be fitter for Monsieur to continue
the prosecution of his action in the Low Countries; or else having discharged
his promise, by releeving of Cambray, to give over further proceeding therein.
In the debating whereof, such as are affected to Sp^in (as we are informed)
mean to lay before the King such reasons as may induce him to think it not fit
to concur with his brother in assisting him in his action, in respect of the
great charges which the following thereof will require. Besides, diverse other
inconveniences that may accompany a war against such a Potent Prince as the
King of Spain. Others, that consider the danger that may grow to this Crown, if
his greatness be not impeached, do mean on the other side, to persuade him to
join with her Majesty upon the present occasions given, for the abating of the
said greatness. Now to the end the King may stand assured how her Majesty will
proceed in that behalf, it is meant that we shall be effectually dealt withal,
both for the manner of the attempt, and also for the charges; wherein, if we
shall not be able to yield sufficient satisfaction, it is to be doubted that
the resolution will fall out that Monsieur shall be persuaded to give over the
enterprise, whereunto, without support, and by the great offers likely to be
made unto him, he shall be of necessity forced to yield and run some such
course as shall not be good for her Majesty's safety. Thus much we have thought
good to impart unto your Lordship, referring the same to her Majesty's
consideration, praying your Lordship to procure her speedy resolution, which
may be without alteration, or else it shall be thought here that all our doings
are but dalliances.

Paris 21 of August. Francis Walsingham. Henry Cobham. I. Summers.



To the Lord Treasurer.
MY very good Lord, your letter of the 17 sent hy Mr. Vice-Chamberlains man. I
have received the contents, whereof I mean to send by the next. Sorry I am to
see her Majesty so apt to take offense against me, which falls not out
contrary to my expectation, and therefore I did protest unto her, after it had
pleased her to make choice of me to employ me this way, that I should repute it
a greater favor to be committed unto the Tower, unless her Majesty may grow
more certain in her Resolutions there: Instead of Amity, I fear her Highness
shall receive enmity, and we her Ministers here be greatly discomforted, having
no certain direction what to follow. The Kings charges here are great for my
Diet, amounting to One hundred pound per diem: And the charges of his
Ambassador that he last sent over, stood him in well near 60000 Crowns, now in
the end of it prove neither Marriage nor honorable Amity, he may besides the
dishonor, think his charges hardly employed. To think that the Amity (such as
may bring surety) will be compassed, we here see no reason so to conceive. Now
her Majesty finding it more for her surety to have the charges accompanied with
marriage then without, I pray your Lordship that we may have warrant to proceed
accordingly, and then by experience her Highness shall not find that any
particular passion bears that sway with me, as I find She conceives it
does. Whereas her Majesty would have me to signify my knowledge touching Mr
Gilbert York, surely for mine own part, I cannot but report well of the
Gentleman, and therefore her Majesty has received information some other way:
The Marshall de Coss is greatly condemned here, for that he did not accompany
the Duke: he required at the Kings hands a Warrant, not contenting himself with
a verbal commandment. The King answered him, That he might as well without
Warrant accompany his Brother in this Voyage, as to take a Pension of him of
12000 Francks yearly, which no Marshall of France ought to do. Besides this
pension, he has in Abbeys and other benefits bestowed on him, by the Duke (as
I am informed) 15000 Francks. The rest of the Marshals Monsieur does not
desire. And so, etc.

August 21. Your Honors to command, Francis Walsingham,


To Mr Secretary.
SIR, when I had imparted to her Majesty all the Letters brought hither this
24. from your self alone, and from Sir Henry Cobham with you, and Mr Summers;
and also the contents of Mr Summers Negotiation with Monsieur, of all which
particularities nothing did or could content her Majesty, more then that
Monsieur was entered into C^mbray, according to his honorable intention and
promise; so as her Majesty rejoices greatly with this his fruits of so great
an enterprise. And whereas by Mr. Summers report of the Dukes own mouth, as
also by that you have sought to understand, that he is not relieved by the King
in this his action, being so chargeable unto him, so as if he have not some
present relief otherwise, then as the Duke himself has told Mr. Summers, he
shall be forced to desist from any further action in the Low Countries. As also
you by your Letters do signify, that you fear it will be so concluded by the
French King and his special Spanish Council, that some peace may be made, and
Monsieurs honor saved by the revictualling of Cambray, and so his promise
being therein acquitted, he may retire and disperse his forces: Upon
consideration whereof her Majesty finds it strange, that Mr. Summers gave no
more comfortable words to Monsieur, upon the declaration of his request of, and
from her Majesty, in such earnest sort as Mr. Summers himself does report it:
But said, he had no Commission to deal in that matter, but that he would not
fail to report his Highness request faithfully to her Ambassador, whereas
contrariwise you Mr. Secretary did in a Postscript of your letter of the 17 of
August, write to me, that Mr Summers, who was then with the Duke, had
Commission to offer him support in case he should see his necessity great, or
not likely to be otherwise supplied: so as her Majesty ^aith, that either Mr.
Summers was greatly to blame not to utter such speeches to Monsieur, or else he
had not instruction from you so to do; which to be done by him, or otherwise
her Majesty says plainly, you knew her mind and pleasure. So that she is
greatly grieved, that for lack of comfort given him, he may in the mean time be
forced to hearken to some other sinister persuasions for some patched peace.
Wherefore, as it may be possible, her Majesty has willed me with all haste to
send this packet to you, to will you without any delay to give Monsieur
knowledge, that her Majesty has regard of his cause, and has at this present
instant hour at noon, of the 24 of this month, when she heard of Mr. Summers
his motion made to him, given order, that as soon as money can be told, and how
that by the advice of Marchiamont it may be safely sent, he shall have a
support from her Majesty to continue his action, and not to give it over,
being so honorably begun, and now so fortunately entered, by his entry into
Cambray for want of support; and so I assure you, Sir, for your satisfaction, I
am commanded by her Majesty to cause a support to be ready for this purpose,
to the value of ^ thousand pound. As for your other matters, concerning your
proceeding in a treaty for a league, her Majesty has willed me to repeat that
which you have had knowledge of, both by your in^tructions, and otherwise,
since that now the Treaty of the marriage remains in suspense, and that the
King will be contented to Treat of the rest; you are to consider, that the
first matter is to Treat of the general League offensive and defensive, whereby
if the King of Spain should offend either her or the King, the other should not
only aid the party offended, but also offend the offender, wherein there is no
cause to speak particularly to what quantity or sum her Majesty for her part,
or the King for his part, should be contributory, as it seems to her
Majesty, by your Letters you require to have a particular resolution. But for
contribution of any sums of money, that is to be treated of with the King upon
a secret Treaty apart, in which sort it shall be thought convenient both for
the French King, for the abating of the over-greatness of Spain, in what sort
Monsieur in the Low Countries should be supported, and also in what sort and
manner the King and her Ma^estie might aid Don Anthonio to recover his Kingdom
of Portugal. And of this secret Treaty you have especial instruction to deal
with the King, which would be accelerated, and not delayed, as it has been by
the French, upon a continual pretense to have a resolute answer for the
marriage, which now being by Monsieurs consent put in ^uspence, ^o as the other
Treatys may proceed. It is now then time that this latter Treaty were dealt in,
as well for the necessity of Monsieurs actions, to be continued and maintained,
as the aiding of Don Anthonio, whilst the Island of Terceras being of most
moment, does, as you hear, continue for the said King Anth.

And whereas you would have her Maj^stie now aforehand answer you what sum of
money, or other aid she shall offer to these several ^ctions, she wills me to
write, that it is impossib^e, or at least inconvenient for her to name any
thing in certainty; until she shall hear from you further knowledge of these
things following.

First for aiding of Monsieur, what shall be his enterprises, of what monthly
charges, and with what numbers, and then how much thereof may be probably paid
by the States, according to the compact they made with Monsieur; and then what
probably himself may of his own contribute. And lastly for supply of that which
shall be wanting, what the French King will yield, who in reason, both for his
brother, and for respect that the Countries, to be acquired unto h^s brother,
are to remain to the Crown of Faance, ought to yield a treble support, and the
rather also for that his charges and his Civil Wars are now at an end, the
rather by the means of the travail of the Duke his brother, in the procuring of
the last Peace; and these parts being by you well considered and debated, so as
you may see reason to lead you to think these computations probable, then her
Majesty shall find ground to consider how far she may proceed to contribute,
which presently (...) can neither limit nor guess.

But because you think the lack of your knowledge to answer hereunto, and the
expense of time to send to her for Answer, will seem unto them there, strange:
You may assure them, that when her ^ajestie shall understand the circumstance
of the matters, she will yield speedy Answer, and give a reasonable
contentation, according to her interest therein, which cannot nor ought not to
be so chargeable as percase will be demanded of her; for that herein her Crown
shall receive no benefit. Therefore to conclude the like consideration would be
had of the state how Don Anthonio may be relieved, wherein there has been no
delay of her part, otherwise then that she would be well assured, that for
yielding Re^ief unto him (which both the French King and Queen Mother have
often solicited) she might not receive offense of the King of Spain, but that
the French King would join therein, which her Majesty as well for the charges,
as to withstand the offense: And yet in both their matters you must remember,
that her Majesty never yielded to proceed otherwise, then that by secret
Treaty she and the King, both might accord thereupon to do all underhand, as it
might be; and if any offense should be attempted against either of them for the
same, then by virtue of the general League, they should mutually aid one
another. And if there shall be any motion made to you to have any open War
made jointly by both the Princes, for the abatement of the King of Spain: You
may well answer, that you have no Commission for the same; and yet you shall
advertise her Majesty how, and by whom, the same shall be mentioned unto you,
that she may better consider thereof, for great incertainties may happen
thereof, if her Majesty should fall into open War, upon hope of a mutual aid
of the French King, except there were some greater bond by other means then by
Treaties and Leagues by writing, her Majesty might percase lack such aid in
time, as were convenient and needful for her. And therefore I think that true,
that in one of your Letters you do conceive of her Majesty's meaning, that if
her Majesty should be forced to join with the French King in an open War, it
were better to be assured by marriage of the Prince, to join with her, then to
depend upon the incertainty of the French King alone, having no bond but a
Treaty upon words and writing.

After her Majesty had read hitherto, she willed me to reitterate more
largely, two reasons to you, why her aides ought not to be such as percase will
be demanded, The one, for that she has no party interest in Monsieurs actions,
as France shall have. The other, for that Queen Mother has an interest for
Portugal, and not her Majesty.

I need not to add these, but to obey her commandments, as I have done in all
my Letters.

Greenwich, August 24. at night. W. Burleigh.


H Enry par la grace de Dieu Roy de France and de Pologne, a tou^ ceux que
presents lettres verront salut. Comme nostre tres chere and tres ami^e soeur
and cousine la Royne d'Angleterre ait comis and depute aulcuns ses
Comissionaires and Ambassadeurs pour traictes avec le nostres de quelques
points and articles qui restent, and desirent pour le commun bien de nous noz
royaulmes and subjects plus ample expression et augmentation des traictes faits
enter noz Commissaires and les siens, pour lier et estraindre plus que jama^s
une parfaicte et sincere amity enter nous et la dite dame Royne, et aussi de
certains articles concernants le traicte de marriage conclu enter les uns et les
autres de nos dits Commissionaires l'onzieine jour de Iuin dernier pass^, et
parcillement pour continuer selon qu' il sera a propos la reservation faicte
par form de s^^xet^ et ca^tion, avaunt que de signer le traict de marriage,
scavoir faisons que nous desirans commetre de nostre part des premiers et plus
dignes de nostre cons^ill et autres bons personages a nous se fealles pour
traicter des chooses susdites. Avec les Commissaires et Ambassadeurs de nostre
bonne soeur et co^sine a plain, confians des persons de nous ames et feaulx,
le sig. Vicount de Cheuergny Messire Philippes H^rault Conseillier en nostre
conseil d'estat et prive grade de noz seaulx et Chancellier de noz deaux
ordres. Rene de Villequier Chevalier diceulx deux ordres Conseillier en noz
dicts conseills, Cap. de cent. hommes d'armes, de noz Ordonnances, premier
gentilhomme de nostre chamber, Governeur and nostre Lieuten. General a Paris et
a L. Isle de France. Monsieur Pompone de Bellieure aussi Conseillier en noz
conseills, Barnabe Brisson, et Barthram de Salignac etc. Claude Pinart, etc. et
Jacques Du Uray, etc. et ultres a ce no^^ mouvans nous les avons commis et
deputes, commettons et deputons et leuravons (et au cinq, quatre au trois
d'entre eulx, en l'absence ou empeschement des autres) done et donnons plan
pouvoir, puissance auctorite commission et mandement special de traicter pour
nous et en nostre nom des chooses et affairs susdites et chacun d'iceulx avec
les dits Commissaires deputes de la part de la Royne d'Angleterre nostre bonne
soeur, et pour cest effect fair passer accord^r et conclurre tous les articles
et traictesque besoin sera et fair en cest ^ndroict et tout ce que en depend,
ce que nous fercons et fair pouvions si presents en person y s^rions ja^ois
qu'il y eust chose que requist mandement plus special qu'il n^ est contenu en
cas des presents, par lesquelles nous promettons en bonne foy et parolle du
Roy avoir agreeable tenir firm et stable tout ce que sera faict contenue et
accord par nosdits Commissaires es chooses susdi^es et en chacun d' icelles,
sans jamais y contreueinr ny souffrir y estre contrevenu en aulcun maniere;
Mais les agreer et approuver par nos ^lettres patentes comme sera tenue de
part nostre bonne soeur et cosine la Royne d'Angleterre. E'n tesmoing de quoy
nous avons faict mettre nostre seel a ce^dites presents.

Done a Paris l'an de grace 1581. et de nostre regne le 8. le 23. d'Aoust.
Pinart. HENRY R.


A Messieurs de Walsingham, Cobham, et Summers.
M Essieurs de W. C. et S. Ambass. de l^ Royne d'Angleterre Madame ma bonue
soeur et cousine. I'ay veu l'escrit que m'aves faict presenter sign de vos
mains le jour de hier, pour la prolongation encore de vingt jours de contenue
en la contre lettre faicte accordee et signee en Angleterre par mes
Commissaires et depputes et ce^x de madite bonne soeur en passant le contract
de marriage d'entre elle et mon friar le duc d'Anjou, la quelle prolongation
desdites vingt jours I'accorde volontiers et ay bien agreeable.

A Paris le 23. jour d'Aoust, 1581. Pinart. HENRY R.


Memoire des poincts qui furent accordes en la conference enter les
Commissaires du Roy tres-christien et ceulx de la seren. Royne d'Angleterre 27.
d'Aoust.
P rimierement que le traicte fait au temps de nostre friar de bonne memoire le
Roy Charles 9. sera confirm, avec addition de quelques articles pour le remede
de depredations.

Que le traicte offensive sera seulement pour la conservation d'estats sans
nommer aulcun person.

Que si un aultre prince aura assaily l un des confederes, l'autre l'admonester
a de se deporter de l'entre prince, et de fair reparation de touts qu'il aura
faict, et en cas de refus le dit prince confedere denoncera la guerre a celuy
qui aura assailly.


Memoire des poincts que furent proposees mais non accordees.
P Remierement si apres la denunciation de la guetre les princes confederes
doibvent assaillir, le premier assayllant avec leurs forces conioincts ou a
part si avec les forces conioinctes, avec quel nombre on le do^bt fair? de
quelles sorts de gens? de pied ou de cheval? pour combien de temps. On les
do^bt entretenir et au dispens de qui cela doibt fair, si c'est av^cles forces
separe^s le nombre des forces qu'il fauldra emploier, quel nombre par mer, et
quel nombre par terre? ou si tous par mer ou tous par terre, et pour combien de
temps on les enter tiendra. Ascavoir si les forces de quelles on an est^
d'accord pour la defensive ne sembleroyent sustisantes pour secourir le prince
confedere qui sera assailly ne pourra librement fair choix ou du secours du
dit nombre d'hommes, ou d une sum d'argent qui puisse pour en souldoyer un
parei nombre.

Les Comissaires deputes pour la S er. Royne de Angleterre, n'ayant re^eu
aulcuns instructions touchant les particularit^s qui se po^voyent presenter sur
ce traicte, par se qu'on a trouvee chose d^fficile de les leur donner, jusque^
a ce qu'intention du Roy fut entirement cognu, respondent a ce qui leurfut hier
propos^ se^lement, conform a ce qui leur semble raisonable, jusques a ce
qu'ils auront sur ce re^eu plus ample mandement de sa Maj. N'ntendants
sustraindre ou obliger aulcunement a la conclusion du contenu en la di^te re
sponce.


Responce sur les dites propositions.
Q Uant au premier point, il leur semble, que d^ autant que la traicte est
couche en terms g^neralles sans specifier aulcune person, il sera pour tant
l'avise de rien conclurre quant au particularite des forces qui se doibuent
employer conjointement. Car devant qu'on puisse considerer le nombre et la
qualit^ des forces que seront necessaires, avec plusieurs aultres
circumstances, il fauldra s^avoir de quelle puissance. L'enemy est, ou il
viendra mieulx a propos d'employer les dites forces, A raison de quoy il sera
bien difficile de se resoudre en cest endroict. Ains s'en fauldra remettre a ce
qu'on ordonneron les princes confederes mesmes, apre que l'^uvasion aura este
faicte. Quant aux forces que seront employees a part, il fault considerer si
les forces d^ont on est desia d'avord pour la defe^sive, ne soffiront pour
estre furnis ou prince confedere durant l'espace de quatre mois avec condition
que si ^lles sont employees aupres l^ expiration du dit temps ce sera aux
despens du Pr. confedere qui sera assailly.

Quant a fournir une sum d'argent au lieu de forces come le Pr. qui sera
assailly le vouldra demander, les dits Srs. Commissaires en advertiront sa Maj.
pour en s^avoir son intention, et neantmoins il leur semble que sa Maj.
s'accordera plus tossed de donner secours a'hommes que d'argent a fin que ses
subjects se puissent excer^ier au faict de la guerre.

Ils sont aussi d'opinion, que quant aux forces que sa Majestte fornira, il
seroit bien a propos de les emploier par mer, d'autant qu'ils pourront
endommager bien commodement l'enemy tant par descent sur terre, qu'aultrement,
et fault joy considerer qui sile prince-confedere se vouldra servir desdites
forces apres le temps ici limite, ce sera a ses propres despens pour le temps
dout on sera d'accord. Avec condition qu'en certains mois de l'ann^e qui sont
mal propres pour la navigation, sa Maj. pourra a sa voulonte choisir siselle
vouldra qu'ou les employe ou bien le rappeller. Et se doibt aussi entendre que
les dites navi^es sendant qu'ils seront au service du prince confedere, qui les
demandera, ne passeront les bornes de lamer, oc ean, et seront accomodees de
port; victuailles et aultre chooses necessaires selon qu'on en sera d'accord.


DEFENSIVE.
NO aid to be given to any Invader.

Mutual defense (at the expense of the party requiring aid) against any Invader
whatsoever.

In what sort aid is to be yielded.

Within two months after the aid desired by Letters.

For defense by land, 6000 footmen to be landed in France, or more, so they
shall be thought meet.

In defense by sea ^ ships thoroughly furnished with all things necessary, with
1200 soldiers, and victualled for two months.

The aid is to be kept as long as the party requiring shall stand in need of
them, and do pay them.

Liberty to buy Powder, Shot, etc. in the others Countries and Dominions,
Summons to be made for Arrest made by any Prince, of English Merchants, and
goods, and the Summons not obeyed, to proceed to counter Arrests.


Offensive and Defensive.
Upon any invasion made by any third Prince, the Confederates are mutually to
proclaim the said King invadent, enemy.

After Proclamation, they are to invade him.

The Invasion is to be made in such and such places, etc. and likewise by sea.

The Invasion agreed upon, it is to be made at either of the Confederates
expenses.

The Invasion is to be made with such and such numbers.

The Invasion made by one, is not to be left off, nor any Truce, or Peace, or
Treaty of Peace to be made or hearkened unto, without the privity and consent
of the other.

For mutual defense, the order agreed upon and set down in the last Treaty,
shall stand of full force and power.

Free passage to be given through either of their Countries, to the Prince that
is by consent appointed to invade the enemy.


A Note of such things as are to be resolved by her Majesty touching the
League offensive.
1. WHat other things her Majesty's pleasure is should be added to the said
League, then by us has been remembered, contained in the Copies now sent.

2. Whether her Majesty can yield to the support of the 6000 men named in the
Treaty defensive for the space of four months, at her charges; and if we be by
the Commissioners pressed to assent that her Majesty shall bear the charges
any longer time then four months, how far forth she will yield in that case;
and if they shall require greater numbers then are above specified, then to
what numbers we shall yield, and for how long time to be continued at her
Majesty's charges.

3. If in case the said Commissioners not content with our answer, shall insist
still upon joint Forces to be yielded to the Princes Confederates, as by them
was propounded; we desire to know how far forth we shall yield therein, and
whether her Majesty in that behalf will be content to contribute a third or
fourth part. either in men or money, and whether it shall not be meet to have
the said joint forces to be limited by a certain number, as also to a time in
which they shall be employed.


A Note of such things as are to be resolved by her Majesty touching the
secret League.
1. WHat sum of money her Majesty will be content to contribute, and in what
sort openly or secretly.

2. To what sum we shall press the King to yield unto in proportion of that
sum which her Majesty shall be pleased to supply, whether double or trebble,
more then her Highness shall be content to contribute.

3. How long her Majesty will be pleased to contribute the said sum, and upon
what considerations, whether by way of loan, or otherwise; and if by way of
loan, what caution she will require, and whether it were not meet to covenant
with him to procure the bonds of the States ad majorem cautelam, within some
convenient time, for the repayment of the same.

4. Whether her Majesty could not best like that this secret Treaty between
the King and her, should pass only by mutual promise contained in private
Letters under their own hands.


To the Lord Treasurer.
IT may please your Lordship to advertise her Majesty, that as by our last
Letters to you of the 21 of this present, we advertised of the Kings and
Monsieurs consents, that a League should be treated of without speaking of the
marriage. So the same day Messieurs, Villquier, la Mott, Bellieur, Brisson,
Pinart, and Du. Uray, coming to us from the King, said, that his Majesty
desiring much the Queens Majesty's amity, and to have the same augmented by
Treaties by marriage, and by all other good means; and finding some impediments
in the matter of the marriage, he had sent them to confer with us about such
other means as might best serve to increase the amity: And so after diverse
speeches used to them again, to signify his H. reciproque inclination in that
behalf,

We entered into talk of League defensive, remembering the last made at Bloys in
King Charles his time, which they said, if we found not to be sufficient, it
should be altered or enlarged: And that they thought it good for both the
Realms to add an Article to it, to meet with dissentions and disorders
committed on the Sea; whereof they had heard very many. Somewhat they also said
touching a Staple to be established at Roan, as is mentioned in the said
Treaty; but after they had heard good reasons, which moved against the occasion
of that Article, they said little to it, but earnestly desired that other for
the maintenance of good intelligence, and sure Trade between the Realms and
Subjects. Then something was also propounded for a League offensive; where it
was also remembered, that there were two kinds of Leagues offensive, the one
where two Princes or more do combine themselves against another Prince by
name, the other in general terms, for conservation of Estates. And for as much
as France and England were at this time in amity with all Princes, that League
for conservation of Estates, was thought but to be Treated of, and argued, and
so no Prince could have just cause to be openly offended therewith. And so
without further entering into particularities until our next meeting, they
departed.

On Wednesday the twentithird, they came again, and having showed their
Commission, it was propounded, That for a League offensive, they said it was to
be first accorded, that either Princes should be friend to friends, and enemy
to enemies, after invasion made upon either of them.

And for a second it was propounded, That if either of the Princes Confederate
should be assa^led, the Prince assailed, should be bound thereof to advertise
the other Prince his Confederate, who should send straight to the Prince that
has assailed, to warn him to cease his Invasion, and to repair forthwith the
wrongs done, or else in case of refusal, that the said Prince Confederate will
denounce War to him that did assail, as he shall do indeed, if the Invader
will not retire and repair the wrongs within seven weeks.

This motion being found indifferent for both parts, I the Secretary delivered
to them certain other Notes taken out of other Treaties, which they said they
would answer at our next meeting. Your Lordship does herewith receive the copy
thereof.

Here it was propounded by them, That if either of the Princes Confederate
should be invaded by another Prince, and that the Prince invaded shall require
his Confederate to declare open War, and to enter into open acts of hostility
with him against the Invader, as bound by League (after due admonition and
summons made) who shall bear the charge of the Forces of the Prince required,
whether shall he bear them alone, or the Prince requiring to bear a portion
thereof, according to his quality and greatness. These things being very
considerable, we deferred to answer them until our next meeting, and so did
provide to answer, as your Lordship shall see by notes sent herewith.
Beseeching your Lordship to procure her Majesty's resolution and answer to us,
and that by her Highness direction and warrant, these, and other points that
shall be thought meet, may be resolved upon, to be agreed unto here, to come to
an end, without unnecessary spending of time and charges. The next day, the 24.
whilst we looked for them according to appointment, they sent us word, that
upon occasion of Letters which the King had received that day from his
Ambassador in England, the King had deferred their coming until the next day,
and then they came and said, We might well remember, that from the beginning
of this Negotiation, and long before, the King desired nothing more then the
marriage, which would bring with it all other good things, for Leagues and
straight bonds of amity, such as her Majesty would desire, and that since
their being with us, his Majesty had received Letters from his Ambassador Mr.
Mannisiere on the 24. and another the 25. dated the 22. of this month, by the
which he gave the King very great hope of the marriage, upon speeches
proceeding from her Majesty in a long conference had of late with her
Highness; whereupon the King had commanded them to tell us, that seeing that
matter was now in so good terms, he thought good to stay further proceeding in
the Treaty of a League. But to end first that which was first begun, and in
such forwardness, which was the Marriage, and that they thought we should have
commandment from her Majesty very shortly in this behalf; whereunto it was
answered unto them, that though we heard nothing thereof from her Majesty, yet
we would believe what they had said, as written to the King from his
Ambassador, and that until we might understand her Majesty's pleasure herein;
we thought that this Negotiation for a League might well proceed, to bring it
to some good point, and to win so much time, seeing the King had consented and
desired to have such a League with her Majesty; Mr. de Chevereny said, that
the time would not be so long ere we should receive her Majesty's pleasure, and
that they could not proceed any further in the Treaty, seeing this was the
Kings pleasure. Then it was said by Pinart, that the Ambassador had then
written (as so spoken by her Highness to him) that she had rather marry a mean
Gentleman of France, then go now from that which was so far proceeded in
between her Highness and Monsieur. Thus we being put off from our Negotiation,
and at a stay, knew not how to proceed any further in any thing, until we may
understand her Majesty's pleasure, which we beseech you to procure to be sent
unto us in some certainty, that an orderly and honorable course may be holden
to grow to an end. At this time Pinart (as so commanded, he said by the Queen
Mother) did very specially recommend to her Majesty's consideration, the estate
of poor Don Anthonio, and to remember the great charges he has been at in
providing shipping in England, to be sent and to join with the French Kings
ships under Captain Carles, who he assured they had advertisement, was gone to
the sea seven days ago, thinking to meet with Don Anthonio's ships (rigged in
England) at a Cape which he could not name. And that unless the same depart not
out of hand, all the charge will be lost, and that the King shall be fain to
venture his ships alone, if no other aid join with them. He showed there an
advertisement came that day from the Isle of Tercera, that the French have
landed there, taken the Isle, and certain ships, and put to the Sword 800
Spaniards, among whom were they whose names were here in a scedule, and that he
thinks they are gone to meet with the rest of the Spanish Fleet. And thus, etc.

Paris, the 27 of August. Fr. Walsingham. Henry Cobham John Summers.


To the Lord Treasurer.
MY very good Lord, I send your Lordship here enclosed, the last Article
contained in mine instructions for the League, which we have forborne to add
to those heads of a League, which we exhibited to the Commissioners, for that
we find it somewhat dark, and therefore do pray your Lordships explanation
therein: For as we conceive of it, it will restrain the French King from aiding
of the Duke his brother, which I think is not meant, considering her Majesty's
promise to assist the Duke in the action.

I beseech your Lordship that we may have speedy resolution by way of Post, or
otherwise, as by your Lordship shall be thought meet, to such things as we send
your Lordship by this dispatch.

After I had proceeded thus far in my Letter, thinking that our conference with
the Kings Commissioners, would have bred some good accord touching the most
parts of those points which were by us propounded unto them. Upon the hope the
King is put in by Letters lately come from his Ambassador resident there, our
further conference is staid, as your Lordship may perceive by our general
Letters, which if it be not so thoroughly resolved on as the Ambassador
conceives, and as he has reported to the King his Master (whereof we her
Majesty's Ministers here stand in doubt, having no confirmation thereof) Then
surely this report will do a great deal of harm many ways, and ministers to
the persons named in mine other Letters, matters of strange discourse. Besides,
we that serve here, cannot but be infinitely grieved, to see the weighty cause
we have in hand, subject to so many interruptions, especially of the alteration
of proceeding upon occasion given from thence.

It were well her Majesty did capitulate with the Ambassador in these great
matters, not to advertise any thing without first making her privy thereunto,
as also that upon any such resolution taken with him, we here might be
acquainted withal, to the end there might be concurrency with us. Touching her
Majesty's pleasure for the return of Mr. Summers, I hope when her Majesty
shall consider the weightiness of the cause we deal in, and the number and
sufficiency of the persons we are matched withal, her Highness shall see more
cause to send some other well chosen Civilians to assist us, then to withdraw
him from us. Upon the perusing of a Letter that the Ambassador resident wrote
unto me, much to the same effect he had written to the King, I thought good to
send to Pinart, to acquaint him with the contents of the said Letter, which (as
I gave order to be declared unto him) carried no other substance, but a report
of such speeches as her Majesty had delivered to the said Ambassador the same
evening that he waited on her Majesty when she road abroad to take the air,
wherein her Majesty did rather lay open unto him how she stood affected to the
marriage, then delivered him any resolution, and that it was so, it might well
appear hereby, for that her Highness does not use to give her resolution in any
matter of importance, without the privity of her Council, and acquainting her
Ambassador on this side therewith, to the end there may be a concurrency
between her Majesty's Ministers, and the King, which being otherwise in this
case, I could not but rest doubtful of the substance of the report. And
therefore was desirous if it might stand with the Kings pleasure (considering
the great charges his Majesty's is at with us, and the time that passes away
fruitlesly) the Treaty might go on until we might receive further matter from
her Majesty. To this Pinart answered, that he thought the request reasonable,
for that it was grounded upon great probability, and would therefore the next
morning move the King in the matter, requiring in the mean season, that as much
might be delivered to some other of the Commissioners, as had been to him,
especially to Chivergni Villequire, which was offered to be done by the
messenger I sent; but they being in conference with the Queen mother, and
therefore for that time not to be dealt withal at his motion, it was delivered
to Bellieure, (whom they found in the utter Chamber of Queen mother) who in
like sort found the message and request teasonable; and concluded with Pinart,
that the next morning the King shall be moved in it; when Pinart delivered this
answer to my messenger, he told him withal, that the King upon the receipt of
this letter from his Ambassador, had put on a resolution not to proceed in any
League offensive, unless the marriage were first fully accorded, and that being
done, he would make a Treaty offensive, not only against one Prince, but
against all whatsoever. With this I thought good to acquaint your Lordship
notwithstanding I find them full of alterations, to the end that in case the
King should dwell in this resolution, I might receive her Majesty's pleasure
for my return* humbly praying your Lordship to use the matter so, that it may
be no cause of stay in her Majesty with this dispatch. For my own opinion, I
think that the King will stay in this resolution until he may hear from his
brother, to whom Du Uray this day has dispatched a packet, the 26 of August.

Francis Walsingham.


To the Lord Treasurer.
MY very good Lord, whereas I perceive by your letters of the seventeenth of
this present, that her Majesty does marvail that she hears nothing of my
moving of the King to assist his brother; it may please your Lordship,
therefore to let her Highness understand, that at the time of my first access
(unto the King) I did very effectually recommend the same in general terms unto
him, and did receive from him assurance that he would have care of his brother,
as in honor and in nature he was bound, thinking at the time of our conference,
when we should enter into the dealing for the secret Treaty, the time would
then have served most aptly to have furthered the same in a more particular
sort, which being stayed, as your Lordship knows by a request made by Du Uray
in the Duke his Masters name, and being given to understand by good means, that
the King protested, that unless he had been assured that the marriage would
have taken place, he would never have suffered his brother to have proceeded so
far in the enterprise of the Low Countries. I thought it out of time to use any
persuasion in furtherance of the assistance to be given to the said Duke,
unless I might have had some Authority to assure him of the marriage.

Besides, If he should have demanded as it is probable he would, what support
her Majesty would have yielded for the good will she professes to bear toward
his said brother, I was restrained to put him in any comfort thereof, by her
Majesty's special direction for that, as your Lordship knows her pleasure
was, I should make no offer of support unto the Duke, unless I were assured
that the King would not aid him; as also for that her Majesty did conceive that
if the said King should know that his brother should be supported by her, he
would then forbear to yield any relief.

The case then stands thus, as I was neither able to assure him of the
marriage, without the which, as it seemed, he was altogether unwilling to
imbark himself any way, nor acquaint him with her Majesty's determinations to
assist his said brother, whereby to have provoked him to have concurred with
her Majesty, being restrained as your Lordship sees by her Majesty, for the
reasons above mentioned, to make any offer of assistance in her Highnesses
behalf. I hope her Majesty, upon due consideration thereof will rest satisfied:
it is a great grief to any minister that shall be employed in any matter of
that weight, as those that are committed to any charge to have no certain
directions. I would to God her Highness would resolve one way or other touching
the matter of her marriage, the uncertain course that is now held in that
behalf; besides, that it does offend the Prince here, and discredit her
servants that deal therein, especially being persuaded as they are, that I have
more authority then I have, does minister unto the Secretaries of foreign
Princes matters of discourse, greatly to her Majesty's dishonor, and extreme
grief of us here that are acquainted withal, as that when her Majesty is
pressed to marry, then she seems to affect a League and when a League is
yielded unto, then she likes better of a marriage. And when thereupon she is
moved to assent to marriage, then she has recourse to the League, when the
motion for the League, or any request is made for money, then her Majesty
returns to marriage, as these things are delivered out here in discourse
among the said Secretaries; so are they all so conveyed and distributed into
other Conrts through Europe, whereof her enemies will make their profit to
throw her into the hatred of all the world; it shall be therefore most
necessary for your Lordship and the rest of the Council, whose advice she does
use in this cause to move her Majesty earnestly to grow to some earnest
resolution in that behalf, as a thing that does import her greatly, both in
honor and safety,

Paris August 20. Francis Walsingham.


Au Duc d'Anjou.
M On seigneur, ayant tout a ceste heure receu lettres de la part de sa Maj.
par lesquelles suis adverty que sa dite Maj. a accordee de fournir a vostre
altesse la sum de 100000 escus, n'ay voulu laisser l'opportunite d'en
advertir icelle en toute diligence, en estant pour ma part bien joyeula, ne
desirant chose plus au monde, que de fair tres humbles services a s'on
Altesse, et esperant que ce bon fondement, que sa Majeste a mais, se combler a
d'aultres fruicts a vostre souhait. Au rest il plaira a v^stre Altesse d'estre
adverti, que par le moyen d'icelle estant les commissaires de la Maj.
tres-christiens. Et nous autres entres bien avaunt au traicte des l'amitie
perpetuelle que sa Maj desire veoir establie enter ces deux couronnes comme
chose fort a propos et duisante a l'advancement des affairs que vostre A. a
presentement en main, et y ayant travaille en sort qu'estions bien pres a
couronner l'ouurages, tout soudain le 25 de se present mois par le commandment
du Roy le dict traicte se rompt, et demeure en suspens a l'occasion de quelque
advertisement, que par ses lettres l'un va donner Monsieur de la Muanissiere,
comme si la Maj. de la Royne ma maistresse auroit conclus enter elle et luy de
donner vostre A sans plus de remises promise reale, de marriage, entendant
proceder si rondement et de bonne foy, que la consummation ne demeureroit
gueres a paracheuer, don't peu le estre que Mr. Du Uray a desia adverty. V. A.
Chose que nous sembloit bien estrange n'en ayant receu mot de la part de sa
Maj. comme n'en avons encores per ses dernieres qui furent escriptes deux
jours. Apres celles de son ministre ne se veult en oultre eslargir en l endroit
du dit traite, premier que v^oir le dit marriage tout touch et arresttee de
sort, que demeurons maintenant oysifs, et demeurerons si nonque V. A. sera
servir de fair cest honneur a la Royne nostre Maistresse et a nous ses
ministres et vostres tr^shumbles servit eurs si bien que de moyenner envers la
Maj. tres-christienela procedure du dit traicte, comme chose bien duisante a l
advancement du dit marriage, et ne pouvant en sort du monde l'empescher ou
retarder. Que sera la fin en apres avoir tres-humblement supply V. A. vouloir
donner foy et credit a ce porteur en quelques particularitez qu'a icelle il
dira de ma part et l'avoir aussi tres-humblement ceusti a icelle l^s mains. Ie
pry le creator vous avoir et tousjo^rs tenir.

Mon signeur en sa tres-saincte et tres-digne guard Escrit a Paris ce 27 jour
d'Aoust par moy vostre fidele serviteur Francis Walsingham.


To the Lord Treasurer.
MY very good Lord, the contents of your Letter written unto me the 24 of this
present, and received the 26. I conceive to consist principally in the points
following. First, that her Majesty's pleasure is, that speedy knowledge should
be given to Monsieur, of the regard her Highness has of his cause, and of the
support it pleases her to yield him, to which points is added the dislike she
conceives, that at Mr. Summers being with Monsieur, and understanding the
necessity he stood in, he had no direction to make him a more comfortable
Answer.

Secondarily, That in the Treaty of a general League offensive, there is no
cause to speak particularly in what quality or sum her Majesty should be
contributary.

Lastly, That in the secret Treaty, no offer should be made in her Highnesses
behalf, before the particularites of the forces that shall be employed, and of
the charges (that Mousieur himself, the King and States will be at) be
delivered and set down unto us for Answer, whereunto it may please your
Lordship to understand, that immediately upon the receipt of the Letters, as
soon as I could dispatch the messenger, I sent to Monsieur to acquaint him with
her Majesty's good meaning toward him, and by what means, and with what
expedition it should be made over unto him, and as touching the dislike for
that the Answer unto the Duke was not more uncomfortable. It may please your
Lordship to inform her Majesty, that at the time of the sending of Mr. Summers
unto his Highness, because I could not be thoroughly informed (according to the
directions received from her Majesty) how far the King meant to enlarge
himself toward him, and finding also in all former letters received from
thence, I was willed not to be over forward in promising of assistance, without
good intelligence first had of the Kings intention in that behalf, and being
not ignorant what conceits her Majesty has taken of my service since my being
in these parts. It made me to deal the more warily in the Commission I gave Mr.
Summers, and yet was it not such (as your Lordship may perceive by the enclosed
Copy) but that the Duke might take comfort thereby.

Besides, your Lordship can be a witness with me, how upon the motion made to
me by the Viscount Turaign, touching the necessity the Duke stood in, how
earnestly I dealt for private support to be yielded him, so as if by occasion
of want he should have been constrained to have given over the enterprise, or
had carried it otherwise then her Majesty would, I were not to be charged with.

Secondarily, Whereas in a general League offensive, it is thought that there
needs no particular Contribution to be spoken of. Your Lordship may see by
our last dispatch, that such a motion is already made unto us, and that thing
thought needful, having besides the presidents of all former Leagues offensive,
thought it will be long before the Contributions shall be employed; yea,
happily never. And therefore seeing it is material for their satisfaction, and
a matter of no new president, we could do no less but desire to know her
Majesty's pleasure therein, which we hope to receive by the next dispatch.

Lastly, For the particularties of the secret Treaty, our opinion is, that a
certain proportion set down, such as her Majesty can be content, were very
necessary, and greatly for the furtherance of the service intended, whereby in
our Treaty with them, we might frame our course the better in seeking to be
informed of their several Contributions. For to stay the resolution whereof,
until the certain numbers be set down, wherewith the service of the
Low Countries shall be prosecuted (which is a matter very hard, and found by
experience, that it never holds in any certainty) will draw the Treaty into
an unnecessary length.

Besides, We are persuaded that it will be much more chargeable for her
Majesty, in case she should capitulate with them to furnish them either with
men or money, according to such proportions as they shall set down; for that
there cannot but grow some variance for the numbers of men, and for the time of
service wherein they shall be employed; whereby her Majesty shall be driven to
pay for greater numbers, and for longer time of employment, then in Reason and
Equity she ought.

And herein experience does teach us, that in former Leagues of Association,
there has risen always great controversies about the above named
Circumstanstes. For the avoiding whereof, it were necessary some certain
Contribution were set down, and without yielding Contribution, it will be but
in vain to enter into any speech of the League, though for the Reasons
contained in your Lordships letter, it ought not to be great, considering that
besides the benefit that this Crown does receive to have the King of Spain kept
under, they are like to ^eceive some particular benefit otherways, which if it
be true, as Du Uray informs me, the same also being confirmed by President
Neve and Secretary Q^insey at my being at La Fere, the benefit is only to
redound unto Monsieur in the state that he is now; for when he shall come to be
King of France (if that (for default of issue in the King) should happen) they
of the Low Countries have capitulated with him, that they may be at their own
choice to choose their Sovereign.

But herein such direction as it shall please her Majesty to giv^ us, we will
follow, putting your Lordship only in mind, that the longer tract of time it
shall receive, the more subject shall it be to practices: Whereby upon great
offers to be made, they may be drawn to run some other course. And therefore
the more expedition is used, the better success it is likely to take. And as
touching the Argument which her Majesty's pleasure is, we should use to induce
them to think that she ought not to be burdened with any great charges touching
the matter of Portugal, considering the Queen mothers pretense, we will not
fail when we shall have to deal therewith, to proceed accordingly, though I am
persuaded that the said Queens pretense is used but for a color to justify
such assistance as they shall give, rather then in hope of any benefit they
look to receive thereby, otherwise then that the King of Spains greatness shall
be abated. And so etc.

Paris this 28 of August 1581. Fr. Walsingham.


To Master Secretary.
SIR, Since the departure of John the Currier hence, this is done: Mr. Summers
is ordered to ride to Monsieur, he has secretly to carry with him so many
pistolets as come to -- And there is just as much more to be provided, which is
here hard to be gotten. My Lord of Leicester moved Palla Vicine to procure it
by exchange at Paris, which he took upon him; but when I was curious how he
would do it, he answered me, that every Crown would cost me four pence at the
least, and yet he could not so answer it; but for a small sum; and secondly,
for the time, he could not answer me, but that he must pass it forth to
Antwerpe, and then to Paris; he also was moved to ride to Paris himself, but
the charge thereof must be laid to the former, so as the sum would be
slenderly pinched with such abatements. Hereupon I stayed proceeding with him,
and have for the first half made means here, and have gotten Paul Swallore,
Alderman Martins man to take charge of packing, the wait is more then two spare
horses can carry, and now I am resolved to divide it into four portions, and to
commit to four the several portions to be carried upon a Pillion; and so they
may pass in post, whereas otherwise being charged upon two horses, they could
not ride post with it, I am now to pray you to advertise me what you can do
there, to have the rest paid there, if the like sum shall be paid here with
security by Exchange, and what the charge will be, or else whether you think
the same were not best to be sent in specie thither to Monsieur himself, which
I think the best; seeing therein are two inconveniences, danger by sea, to pass
for La Motts knowledge, and by Land by false brethren, or Spaignoilists; for I
fear such secrecy will not be kept of the next, as I trust hitherto in this. I
have such crooked dealing here with Lopez, for that the King urges the speedy
delivery of the Jewel without satisfaction for your charge, as I think Mr.
Mills will advertise you, the Queens Majesty for her part, is content to stand
to courtesy, or to loss, for the 5000. l. From Scotland we hear commonly evil,
that the King shall acknowledge to have by evil counsel of his subjects,
usurped the Crown; and therefore he will resign it to his Mother, and she to
grant it back to be possessed jointly. We hear also that the Earl of Arraign is
fully bent to make a Band of the Protestant Nobility to the contrary hereof. I
think my Lord of Leicester will write hereof to you, for he has dealt here in
very wisely by means of Robert Ashton, that was my Lady of Lenox servant at
this time. I have paid this bearer Philips 20. l. in name of his travel.

Greenwich the 27 August. 1581. W. Burleigh.


To the Lord Treasurer.
MY very good Lord, Finding by the enclosed, that the Duke desires that all
expedition may be used in the transportation of the money, I thought it very
necessary to send away this messenger with all speed, whom I did employ in this
journey toward him. And therefore found it expedient to send him unto you, to
the end he might make report both of the state of his Camp, and of the present
enterprise he has in hand.

If your Lordship mark the Letter well, you shall find it written with very
great judgment, and in most thankful sort. If this young Prince continue the
course he has begun, there are few or none that promise greater things in our
days then he.

The pain he takes, as this bearer can show you, is intolerable, and his
patience (having to deal with so strange and ^nquiet humors as serve under him)
is admirable.

It offends the better sort here to see such Treasure spent here in
preparations of Masks and other vanities, and this poor Prince forced unless he
were otherwise relieved, to give over an enterprise so many ways profitable to
this Crown.

Amongst other things I gave this bearer (in his Instructions) charge to know
the Dukes pleasure, whether I should make the King and his mother privy to the
Loan, and in what sort I should deliver it unto them.

In answer whereof, he has willed him to let me understand, that he refers
the same to her Majesty's best consideration; for mine own particular opinion,
considering that the matter cannot be kept secret, I think it meet they should
be both made acquainted withal, for that it might nourish or rather increase in
the King a jealousy, already conceived of some inward intelligence, not to the
best purpose between her Majesty and the Duke.

Besides, it would serve to very good purpose to remove the opinion that both
he and his mother have conceived that her Majesty's friendship consists
altogether in words, who hitherto has showed more friendly and better effects
then they thought both nature and policy ought to lead them, to deal otherwise
then they do. This day I had long speech with Queen mother, both about tha
Portugal causes, as also about our stay of the proceeding in the Treaty, for
the first, I do find by her that the King will attempt nothing by way of
Occurrency with her Majesty without the marriage, and as for our further
proceeding in the Treaty; I also learn by her that he is resolute to stay until
he hear from his Ambassador: hereof I will enlarge unto your Lordship more at
length by the next, the conclusion of her speeches were an earnest
recommendation of the marriage, without the which she said she saw there could
be no sound friendship; she also renewed her former request touching the
support to be yielded to Don Anthonio letting me understand that the four ships
were departed from Bordeaux with six hundred men at the least; and therefore
prayed me most effectually to recommend the same to her Majesty.

Whereas I perceive by your Letter of the one and twentieth, sent by the Lady
Marquesses brother, that her Majesty is offended, for that she is not more
particularly informed of the state of both Armies; I shall desire your Lordship
to be an humble suitor in my behalf unto her Majesty, that it will please her
Highness to conceive better of my service here, then I perceive she does. And
as for the fault her Majesty finds, there lacks no care in me, nor in the
Ambassador resident here, to seek by all the means we may, to get knowledge, of
the particularities she desires to be informed of. But we find here so great
uncertainties, as if we should advertise what we hear, we should revoke one day
what we hear another; and therefore are loath to inform until we can attain to
some certain knowledge of the true state of things, and where her Majesty
conceives that we may be informed of the Dukes ministers here, I find them
not hitherto so thoroughly instructed, or at the least not willing to impart
their knowledge to us, as I perceive her Majesty is persuaded they are. And
therefore as this bearer can show you, I have prayed the Duke to give order
that by his Ministers here we may be informed from time to time of his
proceedings, which he has promised shall be performed. I am privately given to
understand that our Treaty shall stay any further proceeding until her
Majesty's full resolution to the marriage be known. And therefore I pray your
Lordship to procure her Majesty's direction, in case it fall out so, what
course we shall hold.

Paris 27 August. Francis Walsingham


To Master Secretary.
SIR, I am sorry heartily at this time I cannot procure you any such resolute
Answer as I desire, and know the causes do require; I will not write to you of
the incertainties here, as I take patience here in soliciting, so you must in
the lack of that were meet for you, the Letters that have been writ to you in
common, have been altered twice, and yet scantly go with allowance; but that
her Majesty has since commanded me to add these things as well to the Letters,
as to the Answers of the two papers for the two Leagues. For the general League
her Majesty will not be bound to any number certain, but will aid according to
the form of an Article in the Treaty of Cambray, which form she has chosen
upon this ground: She commanded me to press all the Treaties, I could, both
with the Emperor and French King, and to repeat to her the diversity of ayds,
which I did, and though the greater number contained with number certain, some
at the cost of the Prince invaded, and some, but yet few, at the costs of the
confederate not invaded, with reference to his power, and with charge of his
Conscience; her Majesty very earnestly took hold thereof, and so she would have
you proceed; and though the example I sent you be out of the Treaty between the
Emperor and King Henry the eight, yet you shall find in the Treaties between
H. the 8. and Francis the French King, Anno 1525. made by the L^: Bogect of
France, a like Article of uncertain aid; and in like manner, you shall find
the like in the Treaty Anno 1546. between H. 8. and Francis the French King.
And so her Majesty being not by us here, to be persuaded otherwise, you are to
accept her Answer as she will have it. After also that she has directed an
uncertain Answer to the Articles of the private or secret League which I do
send you, as I conceived her mind, and as her self did read them; yet she
commanded me to write unto you, that she knew not why she should be at any
certain charge, either for Monsieur or D^^ Anthonio. For as for Monsieurs
Actions, she would therein give such support as she should please without
coertion.

But yet she added this thereto, That if by that her answer she should think
that Monsieur for lack of support should leave his actions in the
Low Countries, she will yield to aid him, though presently she will not declare
to what quantity. And for supporting of Don Anthonio, she knows not why she
should be bound to any certain charge, considering the Queen Mother, how she
has in other sort favored Don Anthonio, then percase his Ministers will
report. For she did cause such preparations to be made for him^ as amounts to
thirteen thousand pound English (you may turn it in speech to above forty
thousand Crowns, and all this charge lost by lack of good answer from the King.
For his conjunction with her Majesty in this aid, and that her Majesty
nevertheless did offer to the said Don Anthonio the price of any five of six
good ships, but he would not accept them. And in them he had bought and hired
certain ships and barks, to the number of eight, which he does now mind to send
away; and likewise he himself desires passport for himself to depart, which
her Majesty does yield unto; and to tell your self truly, he is solicited
hereto by the French Ambassador, I pray God he may find good dealing there,
that he be not sold there away. Her Majesty would have you to have regard to
the defense of her in any thing that may be there cast abroad on the said Don
Anthonio's behalf: So as you must answer for her Majesty therein, that the
lack of the intended voyage has not grown by her means, Thus full warily must
I yield, for in these unpleasant mat^ers I am weary of a small working, I hope
her Majesty will be better dis^posed to give you some further authority, or
else surely, I could wish you at home.

Greenwich the second of September, 1581. Postscript.
I pray you heartily excuse me to my Lord Ambassador there, that I write not
now privately to him, nor yet to Mr. Summers, whose excuse is well allowed of

W. Burleigh.




To Master Secretary, Sir Henry Cobham, and Mr. Summers.
AFter my hearty commendations: upon the receipt of your Letters of the 26 of
August, written from you there jointly, I did impa^t the same to her Majesty,
and to my Lords of the Council that are here. And for that one of the most
special matters in your letter concerns the stay of your proceeding forward
in the Treaty already begun, for a League offensive betwixt her Majesty and
the French King, which is alleged on the Kings part to have grown by report of
his Ambassador here in his Letters to the King, as is mentioned in your
Letters, her Majesty denying, that she used any speech either with the
Ambassador or any other tending to that purpose, whereof your letters make
mention she thought good to send for the Ambassador, and to charge him
therewith; and so she did yesterday in the afternoon; whereupon he showed forth
the Copy of his letter to the King, which also I did see wherein her Majesty
finds no such matter as proceeding by any speech of hers, to move him to
write, as it is reported to you she should: And so he does also deny, that he
has written in any like sort to the K. but as I do gather by his letter, he
uttered his own opinion to have Mr. continue constant i^ the matter of
marriage, thinking that thereby he might prevail, because in speeches with her
Majesty, he found her very careful of him, and of his estate, and very sorry
that he should adventure his person in such sort, as it appears he shall in
the Low Countries; and so with many other like speeches of his own conceit,
without affirmation of any such thing to proceed from her Majesty, as has
been alleged there to you to be written by him, he does confess that his own
principal desire is to have the marriage take place, but does not affirm any
thing certain of her Majesty's speech delivered unto him, to move him to give
any assurance by his writing to the King, or to Monsieur, neither yet to move
them to despair thereof: And to this end, her Majesty has required him to
certify the King how he has been herewith by her Majesty charged, and in
what sort he has answered for discharge of her Majesty; so as hereupon her
Majesty hops, that the King will give order to his Commissioners to continue
the Treaty begun with you, which her Majesty would have you earnestly to press
forward, as a matter profitable as well for the French King, and his Countries,
as for her Majesty, and not to interpret the proceeding therein, to tend to
the breaking off the marriage, which you can tell upon what terms and just
causes, her Majesty has suspended, being therein not satisfied with any
direct answer from the French King, to clear the doubts and difficulties
committed to the charge of you Master Secretary, to deliver both to the French
King and Monsieur. Now concerning your several articles sent, contained in your
papers: First, of the general articles propounded: Secondly, of so many as you
have already accorded; and, Thirdly, of certain points not fully answered by
you, but reserved until you might receive some further direction from her
Majesty for the same, you shall understand, that all these your writings have
been here perused by such of the Council as are present, and report thereof
here at the Court made to her Majesty, with their several opinions, which
shall most properly appear by marginal notes in every of the same; and if so be
it shall chance, that you cannot obtain of the French King that his
Commissioners, and you her Majesty's Commissioners, shall proceed in the Treaty
for a league, as you did begin; and as the French did twice yield thereunto,
that is, at your first coming to him from Monsieur; and secondly, after that,
by Pynart for the King, and you Master Summers for her Majesty's part, returned
from Monsieur with his contentation, that the Treaty might pass, so as nothing
thereby might be prejudicial to the cause of the marriage. Then you may say to
the King* That your abode there is but superfluous, and more chargeable for the
said King, then serviceable, and therefore you shall desire him to license you
to return, which you may say, will be by such as mislike of the good amity
between her Majesty and the King, be interpreted to the worst, and will give
them more comfort then were convenient at this time. And if notwithstanding,
this allegation and reason yielded, they will not proceed in the Treaty, her
Majesty's pleasure is, that you shall return; and so also, shall Master
Summers, except you your selves see any cause probable for your abode, until
you may advertise us, and know our pleasure. Her Majesty commanded me to write
to you, that it is greatly misliked, is greatly misliked, that you have not
more particularly and more earnestly moved the French King to give supprt to
the Duke his brother, in a cause so honorable for the honor of France, and
the Crown thereof. And her Majesty understands, that the King himself may
think you, as her Majecties Ministers, careless herein of Monsieurs well doing.
And as I have heretofore written to you hereof, so did I impart to her Majesty
your answer that you had moved to the King at your first coming thither, and of
the French Kings answer. But her Majesty thinks, you might have solicited
such a matter, both more earnestly, and more often. And so now I do notify
unto you her Majesty's opinion at this time, concerning the cause of Don
Anthonio King of Portugal. You shall declare either to the French King, or
Queen Mother, if they shall give you any cause to speak thereof, that there
has been no lack nor default in her Majesty, that he has not been in other
sort relieved: For, as your self knows, before your departure it was by us
agreed, what support he should have had of ships, and men, and munition,
according to his own desire and demand. And to that end, great sums of money
have been laid out, as therein you have a part of the burden, and accordingly
the ships and men, with victual and munition, was ready two months past; and
as you also know, it was by the King Don Anthonio agreed, that he would not
press us to grant him this support, thereby to provoke the King of Spain to
some hostility against our subjects trading in his Countries, except the French
King should join with us in this action, and thereof give us assurance.
Whereupon Don Anthonio sent himself a Count of his, and other Messengers, to
solicit the same to the French King; but so the matter has fallen out, that
we never could have any perfect answer from the King; whereby we might be
assured, that he would join with us in this support. But his Ambassador here
has said, that the King his Master especially thanketh us for our courtesies
and reliefs toward Don Anthonio his Kinsman, and exhorted us to proceed, and
he said, there should be ships of* France for his aid. And in like sort the
Queen Mother required our Ambassador there, to advertise us the like
disposition in her; but all this time we had no direct answer of assurance,
that the King would give him support. Whereupon, with very great charges, the
preparations of the ships and men in wages, and in expense of victuals, has
continued almost two whole months; and thereby the said Don Anthonio has lost
the whole opportunity of the time of the year, over-slipping the recovery of
the good Isle Madera, and of other Isles of the Azores, saving Terceras, which
by Gods goodness was preserved by the Islanders, and indeed not by any aid of
the force of the French men: For in very deed, at the time of the repulse of
the Spaniard, which was on St. James day, there were no French men there, but
only An. Scabiny had been there before, and was gone Westward, as was
supposed* to make some profit of the straglers of the Italian fleet; for
otherwise, he was not able to encounter the Fleet it self, nor yet to offer
fight with the Kings Armado, sent under Pedro de Valdes; besides this, by this
delay, for lack of good answer from thence, this King Anthonio doubts of the
constancy of a great number of his subjects in Portugal, who secretly hoped
upon his support; and so now in the end, though we could have no answer from
thence, whereby her Majesty might be build with assurance of the French Kings
conjunction to adventure the King of Spains offense, yet she did offer to the
King ^nthonio the service of certain good Vessels, well armed, victualled and
furnished with men and munition largely, to repair now in the latter end of
August. But the King prudently (considering, that the time was past for this
year, to recover any more Isles then he has already; and that such as hold for
him could not be by the enmity assailed from henceforth, until the next year)
did not accept our offer, but finding the default of answer from the French
King, to have been the cause of our stay, he meant only to send away a few
ships which himself had bought and armed here; for the which her Majesty has
already yielded him a passport. When you shall again deal with the King to
have care of his Brother now entered into the Low Countries, whose actions, for
the honor of that Crown, are to be maintained; you may show him that we think
he was not well counseled by such as moved him to yield to * Tanis the King of
Spains Agent, that 300000 or 400000 Crowns were by his special license carried
from Lions to the Prince of Parma, which if the King had stayed but one month
or twenty days to give license as he did to Tanis, there had manifestly
followed in the Prince of Parma's Army such a disaster, as is notoriously
known, before the coming of that money; that the said Army was ready, for want
of pay, to have broken, and especially all the Almaignes had revolted to the
service of Monsieur le Duc, which by the aid of that money was altered, to the
disadvantage of the Duke his Brother. And you may say to the King, that by
considering of this, her Majesty doubts, that there are some in credit with
him, that regard not in their counsels, what should be the means to stay the
greatness of the King of Spain, which causes her Majesty to be more doubtful
how she shall deal in any action tending to stay the said greatness, except she
might evidently see some more appearance of the French Kings determination to
the same end, which in this cause of his Brothers actions in the Low Countries,
both ought and might best appear by some honorable good support, to be given
to the Duke his Brother.

Greenwich the second of Sept. 1581. Will. Burleigh.


To Mr. Secretary.
SIR, notwithstanding your later letters of the 28 of August, importing many
reasons to move her Majesty to give some better answers in particularities;
yet her Majesty reading them, and being reasoned withal, will admit no other
answer then was directed by the letters written, though not sealed up before
your last. What may further move her Majesty hereafter, I know not, but I see
it common to great and small, not to think of adversity in time of prosperity,
and so adversity comes with double peril. At this present Don Ant^onio is come
to take his leave of her Majesty; he will press to have his jewel, and so that
you may be satisfied, I agree to it, and so sometimes does her Majesty; but in
conclusion, he would have the jewel answer for all the losses, which of the
13000 l. I think will be about 3600 l. whereof 170 l. is desperate impressed, and
wages and victuals spent, the rest falls out in the resail of the victuals. I
appoint Mr. Mills to be in commission about this dissolution and sail, who will
better satisfy you then I can. And so, etc.

September. 2. William Burleigh.


The Article only enlarged in words.
I Tem, it is good to covenant, That neither of the Princes now confederated,
shall at any time hereafter the conclusion of this Treaty, give open aid to any
enemy of any third Prince with whom at the conclusion of this league they are
in peace, thereby manifestly to provoke the other third Prince for such aid so
given; to make war or invasion against the Prince that shall give such aid, for
that cause of aid given; but that before the aid shall be so openly given, the
Prince meaning to give such aid, should first advertise by his letters the
other Confederate, and have his allowance thereof in writing. In which word of
aiding, shall not be meant any other kind of aid, but such open aid as shall
make the enemy aided thereby able by such aid to use open hostility, and to
make war against the third Prince.

Will: Burleigh.
Her Majesty does not mislike of this Article, but yet she can be content it
be forborne.




The Queens Majesty commanded me to set down a case upon the Article herewith:
I Tem, to covenant with the French King, that he shall not give open aid to
any enemy of the King of Spain, thereby to provoke him to make war upon the
said French King, but that he shall first advertise her Majesty thereof, and
have her allowance, otherwise her Majesty shall not be bound to aid the French
King, or to make war upon the King of Spain. In like manner the Queen of
England shall not, etc. Ut supra, mutatis mutandis.


An Answer of such things as are desired by her Majesty's Commissioners to be
resolved, touching the League offensive, consisting in three points.
To the first:

AT this time here is no other thing remembered necessary to be added.

To the second,

Her Majesty thinks it better for you to offer a covenant, such as you shall
find contained in a treaty betwixt Henry the eighth, and Charles the fifth,
1522. in the second Article; the sum whereof is, That if any Prince or other
person should offend the Emperor Charles in his Person, Dignity or States, or
shall take any thing from the said Emperor, in that case he shall repute the
same offense or wrong as done to himself, and shall repel the same with all
his power, and shall yield at his own charges aids convenient to withstand the
same, and to the reciprock the Emperor was bound; but for tempering these
words which are in the Article, Totis vir^bus and potentia sua propulsabit, her
Majesty would have these kind of words added, Prout commodo id fieri possit,
habita ratione temporis and loci, ac etiam fa^ultatis suae; and the cause that
moves her Majesty to have rather such an Article of a general resistance,
then a particular Covenant for numbers of men or money, is even as your selves
made you answer to the first: For until the manner of the Prince Invader be
known, and thereby consideration had what manner of aid defensive shall be
needful to withstand the same invasion, or to revenge it, the resolution cannot
be particularly set down what numbers shall be requisite. But if the French
Commissioners shall mislike of such a kind of Article; you may say, the like
has been between Henry the eighth and Charles the fifth; and yet if that will
not satisfy, it may be further covenanted, That upon notification of the
invasion, and of the greatness thereof by the Prince invaded, the Prince not
invaded, shall give such aid at his expense, as reason shall move him, and
therein, as in former treaties, has been expressed as in the fourth Article of
the Treaty of Cambray, Anno 1529. The Copy whereof is now sent unto you.


Articulus 4 defensionis and auxilii Cameraci, Anno 1529. 30 Augusti.
ITem conclusum, concordatum, and conventum est, quod pro tuitione
conservatione and defensione personarum praedictarum, illustrissimorum,
principum regnorumque Angliae, and Hisp. ac patriarum terraru^, Dominiorum,
Castrorum, Civitatum, Villarum, and Territoriarum Hibern. Calisiae, Flandriae,
Hollandiae, Zelandiae, Hannoniae, Artesiae, Limburgi, Lucemburgi, Namurci,
Frisiae patriarum Transisulaniae, Trajecti, and Machliniae, contra invasores
perturbatores, hosts agressores quoscunque; dicti illustrissimi ac
potentissimi reges contra eos Principes ac Potentates, quocunque
consanguinitatis aut affinitatis vinculo connectantur, and quacunque dignitate,
five spirituali five temporali praefulgeant, vel alios quoscunque, cujuscunque
status, gradus aut conditionis essent, qui regne praedicta, terras, Dominia,
civitates, Castra, Territoria, villas, oppida, and loca quaecunque praedicta ad
alterum praedictorum illustrissimorum Principum, eo quo praedicitur modo,
pertineant five spectent, impugnare aut invadere nitantur, aut moliantur, seu
bellum aut guerram fa^ere, aut movere praesumpserint, aut attemptaverint: se
invicem mutuis auxilliis militaribus gentium, armorum, tam equitum quam
peditnm, ac navium, armatorumque una cum machinis and instrumentis bellicis
atque etiam auxiliis comeatuum, curruum, plaustrorum, jumentorum armorum,
caeterarumque rerum ad bellum seu defensionem necessiarum, ad expensam
principis open requierentis and interpellantis, quoties opus and necesse
fuerit, adjuvabunt. In quorum auxiliorum praestatione, quantum ad mutuum
attinet, militum and navium, armatorum ac instrumentorum, ac machinarum
bellicarum, caeterorumque praedictorum habenda erit ratio facultatis illius
partis quae ad defend. and praestand. opem requiretur five interpellabitur, ut
scilt. ad amplius subditorum and auxiliorum non astringatur, aut teneatur
praestare quam tunc commode facere poterit, consideratis temporibus and locorum
opportunitate rerumque suarum statu, ex jure principis conscientiae sic
interpellati, onerabitur: quantum vero ad impensas and stipendia militum aut
navium armatarum attinet, Illa taxabuntur and moderabuntur habito respectu ad
forum victualium quod in partibus illis, ubi milites praedicti degent aut
militabunt, and naves excercebuntur tunc temporis, continget; secundum locorum
and temporum sterilitatem and ubertatem. Qui quidem milites and naves armatae,
ei, cui sic competunt, fideliter servient quam diu eos duxerit and retinendos
putaverit, iisdemque stipendia, ut prefer^ur, fideliter perioluerit.

To the third, This is answ^^^ (...)

Hic articulus fuit expressis verbis repetitus and confirmatus in tractatu
dilucidationes Anno 154^. per Epis. Winton. Epis. Westminster. and Ed. Carum militem.


An Answer to those things are that desired by her Majesty's Commissioners to
be resolved touching the secret League, consisting in four points.
To the first,

HEr Majesty for answer hereunto says, That she cannot resolve upon any
particularities, concerning the said first three Articles, until it shall be
understood upon what points this secret league shall be made, nor until it
shall be informed, according to my late writing, what may be thought, what will
be the monthly charge of Monsieurs actions, and how the same may be born by
Contribution of the States of the Low Countries, according to their compact
with Monsieur; and thereupon also, what shall be further thought necessary for
a supply of the said charges, and how the same may be answered by Monsieurs own
expenses, and how much his brother the French King will yield unto; to whom,
for the honor to the Crown of France, this case does specially belong: And
when her Majesty shall understand from you some probable estimation hereof,
she may then, having your advice, also resolve of such proportion as shall be
meet for her to yield,

To the fourth.

Her Majesty likes best to have this Treaty secretly handled, for sundry
respects, which will hardly be kept secret, if all the free Commissioners that
now treat with you, should treat also of this secret league.


Postscript.
Her Majesty would have the latter answer to the fourth forborne; and for the
former to the third, her Majesty delivered to me a speech, altering from that
answer, as I have particularly written to you Master Secretary the 2 of
September.

W. Burleigh.


TO HER MAJESTY.
IT may please your most excellent Majesty, The Laws of Ethiopia, my native
soil, are very severe against those, that condemn a person unheard; but most
sharp against such as judge amiss of those that sit in Princely Chair, as gods
here on earth. To tell your Majesty what others conceive upon the late stay of
our proceedings here (as by the Letter it pleased your Majesty to vouchsafe to
write unto me, it seems you conceive) who cannot think that such effects
should grow of naked and weak causes) I hope is not to condemn, when I either
look into your Majesty's own Princely judgment, who for your own
Highness-sake, ought to have care to preserve your Ministers credit; or
consider mine own duty, which teaches me not to condemn those that I am bound
to defend, I should then be worthy of the most sharp punishment that either the
Ethiopian or Draco's Laws can yield, if I should wittingly, by wrong supposal
grow to so hard a censure, as to think that your Majesty should prefer in
matter of trust, a stranger before a servant, that in loyalty will give place
neither to subject nor stranger. I cannot deny, but I have been infinitely
grieved to see the desire I have had to do your Majesty some acceptable
service (in the present charge committed unto me) so greatly crossed. But I
will leave to touch my particular, though I have as great cause as any man that
ever served in the place, I now unworthily supply, being at home subject to
sundry strange jealousies, and in foreign service, to displeasure, though I
dare make the greatest enemy I have the censurer of mine actions and
proceedings in such foreign actions as have been committed unto me. If either
ambition or riches were the end of my strife, my grief would be the less. But
now to the public, wherein if any thing shall escape my pen, that may breed
offense, I most heartily beseech your Majesty to ascribe it to love, which can
never bring forth evil effects, though sometimes it may be subject to sharp
censures. And first, for your Majesty's Marriage: if your Majesty mean to
remember, that by the delay your Honors uses therein, you lose the benefit of
time, which (if years be considered) is not the least to be weighed; if you
mean it not, then assure your self it is one of the worst remedies you can use
(howsoever your Majesty conceives it, that it may serve your turn) And as for
the league we were in hand withal, if the King would have assented that the
same should have proceeded in general terms, according to such direction as we
have lately received from your Majesty, I am for sundry causes led to think,
that it would have proved unprofitable; as generally I know that there is a
president to confirm the same; but if in that time a King of Scots, pretending
a title to the Crown of England, was like by matching with Spain, to have
wrought that peril toward your Majesty's father, as he is toward you, he
would not then have stood upon generality, as your Majesty does now. For in
diseased bodies, there is not always like use of medicines; sometimes when
your Majesty does behold in what doubtful terms you stand with Foreign
Princes, then you do wish with great affection, that opportunities offered had
not been slipped. But when they are offered to you (if they be accompanied with
charges) they are altogether neglected. Common experience teaches, that is as
hard in a pollitique body, to prevent any mischief without char ges, as in a
natural body diseased, to cure the same without pain. Remember, I humbly
beseech your Majesty, the respect of charges has lost Scotland; and I would
to God I had no cause to think that it might put your Highness in peril of the
loss of England; I see it, and they stick not to say it, that the only cause
that moves them here, not to weigh your Majesty's friendship, is for that they
see your Majesty does fly charges otherwise then by doing somewhat underhand:
It is strange, considering in what state your Majesty stands, that in all
the directions that we have now received, we have special charge not to yield
to any thing that may be accompanied with charges. The general League must be
without any certain charges. The particular League with a voluntary, and no
certain charge, as also, that that is to be attempted in favor of Don
Anthonio; the best is, that if they were (as they are not) inclined to deal in
any of these points, then they were like to receive but small comfort for any
thing that we have direction to assent unto. Heretofore your Majesty's
predicessors, in matters of peril, did never look into the charges, when their
Treasure was neither so great as your Majesty's is, nor Subjects so wealthy,
nor so willing to contribute. A person that is diseased, if he look only upon
the medicine, without regard of the pain he sustaineth, cannot in reason and
nature, but abhor the same; if therefore no peril, why then it is in vain to be
at any charges; but if there be peril, it is hard that charges should be
preferred before peril; I pray God the abatement of the charges toward that
Noble man that has the custody of the bosom-serpent, has not lessened his
care in keeping of her. To think that in a man of his birth and quality, after
twelve years travel in charge of such weight, to have an abatement of
allowance, and no recompense otherwise made, should not work coffeehouse no
man that has reason, can so judge: and therefore, to have so special a charge
committed to a person discontented, every body sees it stands no way with
policy, what dangerous effects this loose keeping has bred (the taking away
of Morton, the alienation of the King, and a general revolt in Religion,
intended only by her charges) does show. And therefore nothing being done to
help the same, is a manifest argument, that the peril that is like to grow
thereby, is so fatal, as it can no way be prevented. If this sparing and
improvident course be held still, the mischief, approaching being so apparent
as they are, I conclude therefore, having spoken in heat of duty, without
offense to your Majesty, that no one that serves in place of a Counceller,
that either weighs his own credit, or carries that sound affection to your
Majesty as he ought to do, that would not wish himself in the farthest part of
Ethiopia, rather then enjoy the fairest Palace in England. The Lord God
therefore direct your Majesty's heart to take that way of council that may be
most for your honor and safety.

September 2. F. Walsingham.


To the Lord Treasurer.
MY very good Lord, the day following my conference with Queen Mother, La Mot
repaired unto me, sent from her to give me thanks for the speech I had used
toward her the day before, and prayed me that I would further some good and
speedy resolution of the marriage: He did acknowledge in talk that passed
between us touching my Negotiation with the said Queen, that that point which I
touched concerning the employment of Monsieur in the Low Countries, for the
avoiding of the devision that might grow between the two brethren, is a matter,
that those that wish well unto the King, and desire the continuance of the
repose of that Realm, had great care of, which was not the least cause that
moved them greatly to desire the marriage, which not taking place, they saw his
employment in the Low Countries very necessary; letting me understand, that
they found it strange that they heard nothing of (...) of any intelligence that
passed between the Prince of Orange and the Duke, (...) greatly, to the end
that the said Duke might be known of the people of the Low Countries, he might
be drawn to make his residence at Antwerp, (...) some of the inward places of
the Country. I see it a general opinion among (...) wisest sort here,
considering the general evil satisfaction that the people have of the present
government, that it will be very hard to maintain good concord between the two
brethren, in case the Duke should reside here within the Realm. And it is most
assured, that the affection that the Nobility here do bear to Monsieur (which
has appeared by his late Army, compounded of voluntaries, the same consisting
principally of Noblemen and Gentl.) has greatly increased the Kings jealousy
toward him, and has not been the least hinderance of that support, that
otherwise the said King might have been drawn to have given. The Duke of Guise
is of late crept into a very inward credit with the said King, which ought to
move her Majesty to be more careful of the matters of Scotland, for that
there are daily consultations in the Dukes house, especially since
advertisements are come hither out of Scotland, that the King does submit
himself to any such direction as his mother shall give him, even so far forth
as the yielding up of the Government to her, if she shall think it meet.
Douglass attends some answer from her; touching some things that he has not
long since sent unto her, upon the return whereof they are to grow to a through
resolution for the causes of that Realm: I find confirmed by diverse, that a
general hope is conceived of alteration of Religion in that Realm, ere a year
come about, in furtherance whereof, they promise to themselves great support,
both from the Pope and Spain. And yet have we neither power to provide
Scotland, nor to prevent that the greatness of Spain may no way hurt us; yea,
rather such as have been perswaders both in the one and the other, have reaped,
instead of thanks, displeasure.

Paris, September 3. Fr. Walsingham.


The substance of the Speeches that passed privately between Queen Mother and me
the Secretary in her Garden at the Teilliers the third of August 1581.
1. THe principal matters I dealt in with her Majesty in this conference was,
first to show her whereon the stay of the ships in England, prepared for
Portugal, proceeded.

2. The causes that moved her Majesty to conceive that the King was not so
forward now in seeking to prevent the Spanish greatness, as by former overtures
he seemed to be.

3. That it was strange that the Duke her son dealing in a cause so many ways,
profitable for the Realm, and honorable for himself, should be so coldly
assisted as he was.

4. And lastly, I prayed her that she would be a mean to the King, that we
might proceed in the Treaty, considering the stay thereof grew upon no such
cause as ought to hinder so profitable a matter for both Crowns.

For the first, after I had let her understand how willing her Majesty would
have been to have satisfied her request contained in her last Letter delivered
by Mannesiere, touching the said preparations; I did acquaint her with the
whole course of the proceeding in that cause, and did show unto her, that Don
Anthonio had no cause (as it seemed she was informed) to find himself agrieved
with her Majesty, neither for the stay of the ships, nor for any charges that
he had been at about the same; for touching the stay that grew from hence, he
had rather cause to mislike with the King her son, then with the Queen my
Mistress, for that the same aid was promised conditionally, so that the said
King would concur in the action, which he refusing to do otherwise then in a
naked sort, by recommending the same to her Majesty, it appears manifestly
that the stay has grown from hence; and as for the charges, I showed her, that
whereas it was given out that he should sustain 100000 l. loss at the least, I
was well assured that it would not amount to much above 10000 l. To this she
replied, That the King had already made appear unto the world, how ready he was
to assist Don Anthonio, by sending of 500 men the last year to Vienna, and by
the 500 men sent this Spring to the Isle Tercera, and of late by the four ships
dispatched from Bordeaux under Captain Carlo to the said Isles, which says she
does show manifestly how willing the King is to assist him, though he would be
loath to enter into any such open action as might tend to the violation of the
Treaties between him and the King of Spain, without he were assured that the
marriage would take place. Thereunto I replied, that the King might deal
therein with much better color, and less danger then the Queen my Mistress,
for the first, in respect of her pretense to the Crown of Portugal; for the
second, for that the Subjects of this Crown have not so much goods in Spain, as
her Majesty's have; besides, they might otherwise be relieved, for that the
King of Spain his Subjects, both Spaniards and Portugals, have great store of
goods here.

Notwithstanding these Arguments, she insisted still upon an earnest request,
that it would please the Queen to be content to suffer the ships to proceed in
their voyage.

Then I asked her whether she could assure her Majesty, that if any such
arrest should happen to the King for the indemnity, for her Subjects would do
the like here, as also otherwise to concur with her in common defense, in case
the King of Spain should attempt any thing against her. For (said I) if her
Majesty without some assurance, should be thrown into War with the King of
Spain, and have her Subjects goods arrested, and after should complain unto you
of the same, and desire the Kings aid, you might with good reason answer her,
That you did not otherwise recommend the cause unto her, then by referring to
her good judgment, to do therein as might be without the prejudice of her
self, or of her estate; and so concluded with her, that unless it would please
the King by some particular Letter of his, to assure the Queen, that in case
any such inconvenience might happen, he would repute it done to himself, and
jovn with her in common defense, if any such thing should be attempted against
her. Whereunto she answered, That if the marriage might take place, the King
would very willingly assent thereto, or any other thing her Majesty could
desire; but otherwise she thought he could very hardly be brought to yield
thereunto.

I did then show her, that for some difficulties the marriage was accompanied
withal, it was thought meet by the King, the Duke, and her own assent, that it
should be suspended for a time, and in the mean time the Treaty might be
proceeded in, which might yield a mutual assurance of common defense to both
Crowns. For (said I) if this mischief which is like to ensue, the Spanish
greatness, should not receive present remedy, it may grow uncurable, and
therefore to have it depend upon the marriage, which in respect of the
difficulties, cannot so easily grow to a present resolution. It seems that
the proceeding in this case may be compared to a Physician, that being moved to
yield some present remedy to a dangerous disease that can abide no delay of
time, deferreth the same until he may receive some druggs out of India, or
some other far part.

To this she said, the fault was in her Majesty, for that the matter depending
only upon her assent, all other things being agreed on, the remedy might easily
be put in execution. And so fell into some long speech, both of the desire she
had that the same might take, the great benefits that might grow thereby, both
to her Majesty's own Realm and person, as also to all Europe, and the full
assurance that the Duke her son did make (considering how farrforth her
Majesty had proceeded therein) that she would not now frustrate the assured
hope that he had received of the effectuating of that he had desired above any
thing in the world. And because (said she) there depends so many good things
upon the conclusion thereof, the King my son has thought good by his
Ambassador, to press her Majesty to some present resolution therein.

After I had put her in remembrence of such difficulties as I had laid before
her in former speech, to show that the marriage could not receive present
resolution: I did also let her understand, that it was a thing that was to grow
from above, and had his hour appointed, before the which it could not take
place; and therefore the same being uncertain, might perhaps receive later
resolution then the disease required, and that therefore in the mean time,
other remedies might be well enough proceeded in, which could breed no
hinderance in the Marriage, and were most necessary, whatsoever become of the
same.

Then I proceeded to the second point, showing that the Queen my Mistress did
of late note a great coldness in the King touching the overture made for the
impeaching of the King of Spains greatness, and that the Reasons that moved her
so to do, were these. First that the last year both her son and she upon the
death of the late King of Portugal, did declare unto her Majesty's Ambassador
Resident here, how necessary it was both for themselves and her Majesty, to
have an eye to the King of Spains greatness, and to that purpose did require
that the said Ambassador might have Commission to treat with such as they
should appoint in that behalf, which being assented unto, and thereupon a
conference following and overtures made to that purpose, the conclusion was
referred to be treated of by such Commissioners as should be sent by the King
from hence thither, at the time of whose repair, her Majesty did look that
there would have been some proceeding therein, which falling out otherwise, was
found very strange. Secondly, that daintiness that the King did make to concur
with her Majesty in this matter of Portugal, and the sundry impediments that
the Duke has received in this occasion of the Low Countries, instead of
furtherance (being the principal means to abate the King of Spains greatness)
And lastly, the permission made to the King of Spains Ministers for the passage
of certain money to be conveyed through this Realm to the Prince of Parma:
These things I told her, did give her Majesty just cause to think that the King
had no disposition to break with Spain, in seeking to impeach his greatness,
and therefore prayed her she would deal plainly with the Queen my Mistress,
letting her understand what her intention was in that behalf: For said I, the
Queen my Sovereign is a Princess that desires to live in repose, and to
maintain good Amity with the Princes her neighbors, and had not waded so far
in this behalf, but only upon the Kings motion. And therefore if the King does
now see no such danger to grow by the King of Spains greatness, as before it
seemed he did, her Majesty I know would forbear any further dealing in that
behalf, who being furnished with ships for her defense by sea, and her subjects
being well armed by land, and carrying the earnest love and affection toward
her, they do in respect of the happy government they have enjoyed under her
Highness, should I doubt not but be able to withstand the King of Spains
malice, in case he should attempt any thing against her. Besides, I did let her
understand, that whereas it was publicly given out here, that her Majesty was
greatly weakened by the alteration in Scotland, and the taking away of the Earl
Morton, as also that there were of her own Realm persons of great quality
alienated from her, in respect of Religion. For the first, that diverse of those
in Scotland, that for some particular quarrels that they had with Morton, were
glad to concur with those that sought to make him away, yet are so affected to
the Amity of England in respect of Religion, as when any thing should be
attempted against her Majesty, Morton himself would not have been more ready
to oppose himself against any such attempts then they will be. And as for the
great personages that though I did assure my self that none of them carried so
evil meaning as to attempt any thing against her Majesty, but rather would be
content to hazard their lives as duty commanded them, yet if they were so evil
disposed, the subjects of the Realm being generally so well affected to her
Majesty as they are, and grown to that judgment now, as they affect not the
persons of those great ones, as in former times they have done, but do rather
look into the cause then behold the persons they should not be able to draw in
great numbers after them to the execution of any undutiful action. To this
(after she had heard me attentively) she replied that at the time of the
conference between the Kings deputies and her Majesty's Ambass. Resident, then
they did as it were assure themselves that themarriage should take place; no
other impediments being then alleged but the troubles of this Realm, which by
the mediation of the D. were in good way of speedy composition, and in hope
thereof they were willing to have taken any course that her Majesty should have
thought good, and do still continue in the same purpose and mind, so as the
same might take place, without the which she said she did not see how the King
her son should be thoroughly backed, in case he should enter into any action
against the King of Spain, for that there might be many persuasions and devises
used to dissolve such Treaties as should only consist of Ink and Paper. And as
for the enterprise of Portugal, she said that if the King of Spain might be
kept from the possession of the Isle of Tercera (which might keep him as well
from enjoying such benefits as might grow out of the conquest depending upon
the said Crown, as also from the Indies in his own possession) Portugal would
rather be a burden to him then otherwise. And as for the Dukes enterprise, she
said that the King her son (this Realm being greatly weakened by civil wars) was
loath to enter into a war with the King of Spain, unless he might be assuredly
well backed, which no way they could make account of without the marriage;
whereupon she took occasion to show that it would be a very honorable course
for the King and the Queens Majesty to seek by way of mediation to compound the
troubles between the king and his subjects, and the Low Countries, whereto if
the king should not assent, then might the two Crowns with more honor concur in
the action, by seeking to restore them to their liberties, whereunto I replied
that the Queen my Mistress had made it apparent to the world that she had
sundry ways sought (when the time served more aptly then now) to bring it to
pass. But for the present, whosoever does consider to what extreme degrees of
alienation from the King, the said subjects of the Low Countries are grown
unto, having beaten down his Arms, and renounced his Government, how impossible
it is to draw the Prince of Orange any ways to trust the King, or the King to
be reconciled unto him, in respect of a book written by the said Prince,
wherein the Kings honor is greatly touched, shall see no reason to hope for any
reconciliation, and that the Authors of that device do propound the same but
for a delay to serve the King of Spains turn. To this she replied nothing, and
did also let pass the permission given to the King of Spains Ministers for
passing of money without saying any thing to it, whereon I forbear to press, for
that I was informed that the same was done without her privity, to the other
points of her reply, I did only touch two things, the one that at the time of
our Conference between the Ambassadors and the Deputies there was no mention
made of marriage, and so I showed her that this impediment has been found out
but of late, the other that I marvel, seeing she her self did confess that it
did greatly import to keep the King of Spain from the Island of Tercera: that
the King her son made so great difficulty in so necessary a matter, to concur
with her Majesty. To the latter point she says as has been alleged before,
that the King had already given order for certain ships to be sent thither, and
prayed that her Majesty would be content to do the like. In which point I
concluded, that though I would (according to her request) move her Majesty in
that behalf, yet I did show her that I did greatly doubt that her Majesty would
hardly be drawn to assent thereto without some letter of assurance from the
King unto her, as had been before moved. And so leaving the matter of Portugal,
I descended to the third point touching the cold assistance given to the Duke,
letting her understand that I had special charge from her Majesty from time to
time, to recommend both unto the King and unto her his cause; and therefore
being given to understand that notwithstanding the earnest motion made on her
Majesty's behalf unto the King, at my first audience he was weakly furnished of
two principal matters incident to the enterprise he had in hand, that is of
Treasure and martial counsel, I prayed her to have due consideration both of
the person, and of the action; of the person, for that he was her son, and such
a one as was like to yield as great honor as ever did child to mother, and for
the action, if the damage were considered, that the Low Countries have brought
to this Crown, since it was joined with Spain, having within the space of 24
years given them two notable overthrows, as also ministered within three years
time, toward the charges of the war 360000000 florens. It shall then appear
that to reduce that Country to yield yearly 3000000 toward the abating of the
pride of him that gave the said overthrows to remove so potent an enemy from
them, and to transport the civil wars into a foreign Country out of this
Realm, that both the action and the Author is worthy of maintenance; and
therefore must needs follow that, if so great benefits be neglected, it seems
that there hangs some secret judgment of God over this Crown, I did also put
her in remembrance how happily this foreign employment of the Duke her son did
fall out, to put by a thing that might have proved no less grievous to her
Majesty, then dangerous to the Realm, and that was the division that might fall
out between her two sons, a matter that hardly would have been avoided if
either he should live in the Court or out of the Court within this Realm,
considering that this said Realm in respect of the civil troubles, is full of
persons discontented, and also of such as have no other virtue to get credit,
then by breeding of dissentions, and though for the present it was known that
there was good liking between the two Princes in outward appearance, yet it is
evidently known unto the world, that the King heretofore has stood in some
jealousy of him, which sparks being not thoroughly extinguished by evil
disposed persons, might easily kindle again. With this speech she seemed to be
greatly moved, and letting me understand that she had care thereof, and did
what she might to procure him that support that was necessary, acknowledging
the enterprise to be both honorable and profitable. But (said she) the King
without the assurance of the marriage will not be drawn into any open breach
with the King of Spain, which he should hardly avoid if he should assist his
brother in such sort as was meet: she did also in a sort acknowledge that
though heretofore there had been some jealousy between her two sons, yet now
there was great good will and love between them, notwithstanding that by some
evil instruments there might be some disunion bred between them, she did for
the avoiding thereof amongst other respects, greatly wish that the marriage
might take place, In the end of my speech I did lay before her such Reasons as
might induce her to use some mediation toward the King, for the removing of
the impediment of our Treaty, for that the same could no way prejudice the
marriage, whereunto she answered, that the King was resolved touching the
continuance of the stay until such time as he might hear from his Ambassador.
This in effect was that which past between us

August 30. 1581. Francis Walsingham.


To the Lord Treasurer.
MY very good Lord, I received by the last Messenger, two Letters from your
Lordship, the one of the last of August, and the other of the second of this
present: For the first, I am very sorry that the King of Portugal is so greatly
grieved as he is, and yet if the answer made of the conference by those that
were appointed to deal with Don Diego de Rotelia, and Don Emanuel de Silva, be
by him well remembered, he has more cause to blame France, then he Q. Majesty,
being at that time resolved that the preparation should not go forward unless
the French King would concur, as also, that he himself should bear such loss as
should fall out through the said preparation. And whereas he finds himself
grieved, for that his loss falls out to be greater then he looked for
(whereof the greatest part of the blame is laid upon me) surely no man is so
much to be charged therewith as Doctor Lopes, who sundry times in the Kings
name, desired me that the preparations might be greater then was first agreed
upon for that the King doubted that those forces would not be sufficient. And
for the defraying of the charges, he did assure me, that the King did mean to
procure some money out of the Low Countries upon Jewels. Seeing then that this
increase of charges grew upon the Kings own motion, he cannot in reason be
offended either with her Majesty, nor with any of those that have been dealers
in the same; notwithstanding, it were a very Princely part (considering into
what a perplexed estate the poor Prince is thrown) for her Majesty to take
upon her the discharge of the loss that is sustained in the said preparations,
whose estate I do not think yet so desperate, but that God will one day raise
him up again to pluck down the pride of him who is the sworn enemy both to God
and her Majesty; I do utterly mislike of his repair hither, seeing no reason
that should move him to attempt the same, considering how he has been dealt
withal, especially upon the Kings denial to write his Letters to her Majesty,
if my first advice touching his repair into the Low Countries had been
followed, both the^sles of the Asores had been preserved, and also the East and
West Indian Fleet defeated. This day there is come advertisement out of Spain
that the Fleet is arrived from the Moluccaes, who besides the bringing of great
quantity of Treasure, have brought advertisements that the said Islanders have
yielded to the Kings obedience, I am very glad that the poor Prince rests so
well satisfied of my dealing toward him, for I was in doubt that the Count
Vinni^so, who is a very vain man, had sought to cause him to conceive otherwise
of me then I deserved; notwithstanding that it is apparent to all the world,
that the stay for the preparations for the Islands, has grown from hence (no
man being better acquainted with all then himself) yet does he blame her
Majesty, being carried away with a vain hope that the King here is greatly
disposed to assist his Majesty when he shall repair thither, which in the end
will prove bnt an abuse, and I pray God it be not with the peril of his person.

September, 1581. Fr. Walsingham.


To the Lord Treasurer.
MY very good Lord, by the general Letter your Lordship may perceive what
resolution the King is grown unto touching the Treaty; which (considering the
naked direction we received, in case the Treaty had held) falls out very
well. Surely, unless her Majesty shall hereafter be better inclined to prefer
safety before charges, it shall be but in vain for her to have any dealing
with foreign Princes; and I would to God her Majesty had no need of foreign
assistance: Notwithstanding, I see she is not disposed to redeem her peril
otherwise then necessity shall lead her (who is one of the most dangerous
Pilots that can take the helm in hand, for where necessity rules, election and
council can take no place) and though dealing underhand heretofore has
accidentally (in respect of the weakness of the Princes her neighbors)
continued her Majesty in a peaceable kind of Government: yet now that Scotland
is aliened from her Highness, and the King well near of years fit to match with
the daughter of some Prince (that may stand with him for his pretended title)
her Majesty is to look for another kind of reckoning. That house that is most
affected here to the said King, and does above others embrace his cause, never
carried greater sway then it does presently, upon such causes as I will open to
her Majesty and your Lordship at my return. I hope to depart hence on Thursday
next, and in the way to visit the Duke de Anjou with whom I think meet besides
common duty, in respect of the good will he bears to her Majesty, to
confer, before my departure out of this Realm. And therefore being doubtful
where to find him, and how long he will stay me, I cannot certainly let your
Lordship understand at what time I shall return to the Court there.

September. 13. Fr. Walsingham.


To the Lord Treasurer.
IT may please your Lordship to understand, that on Sunday the tenth of this
month we had audience of the King, where I the Secretary did remember unto
him, how far we and his Deputies had proceeded in the Treaty of the League
defensive and offensive by his consent: where, by means of letters from his
Ambassador in England the same was broken off, for such causes (as it was said)
as he had written; whereof her Majesty being advertised from us, and she
having conferred thereupon with the said Ambassador, found by the Copy of his
Letters (which he showed for his excuse) that the same was not in such terms as
had been reported to have come from him, as we thought his Majesty had been
advertised from his said Ambassador by his last dispatch: And therefore her
Majesty had given us in charge to pray his Highness in her name, that we might
proceed with his Ministers in the treaty of that League, being so necessary for
both Realms, for the causes which his Majesty had heretofore propounded. The
King answered with long speeches, how much he desired her Majesty's amity, and
especially to see the effect of this marriage, upon condition to be shortened of
six years of his life: and how happy he would think himself, if it might please
her Majesty to think his brother worthy of that favor therein: The great good
which such a conjunction would bring to both Realms: and further in effect, the
like speeches of affection as he had used before time: and in this matter
continuing still upon the point of the marriage, as the strongest bond of
amity of all other. And as for a league, he said, there was a already a league
defensive between them, which he was content to enlarge for the more assurance
of his good will in any thing that might be found to lack, or were meet to be
added thereto: But as for a league offensive, he did always wish and mean that
it might go with the marriage. Thereunto in answer diverse reasons were used to
move him to proceed to the Treaty begun; and among other that there was, none
so strong a bond as that which was grounded upon necessity, and that the cause
of the necessity thereof at this time was not unknown to him, that by the
concluding of such leagues, the marriage was not put back; that the great
benefit that this Realm was like to receive by it was not small, by assuring a
Country unto it, where, and by the help whereof, this Realm had taken great
loss of late years, by two overthrows in the King his fathers time, letting him
also understand, that her Majesty (seeing the Duke in an enterprise so
profitable for this Realm, and honorable for himself, instead of assistance to
receive rather overthwarts and impediments) had just cause to confirm her
opinion touching the difficulty propounded, for the stay in not proceeding in
the marriage; for seeing that if the same had proceeded, the greatest burden
of the war must have lighted on her self, the ability of the Duke and of the
Sates being not such as was able to encounter the forces of so puissant a
Prince as the King of Spain; And therefore seeing his Majesty upon answer from
his brother, had consented that such league should be treated upon, without
speaking of the Marriage; and Deputies appointed by him, the same well begun,
and some particularities for a league offensive agreed upon; her Majesty and
all the world may find this alteration now to be very strange. Hereunto, after
he had used many speeches of the former substance, in general terms, without
answering any particularities, offering himself and all his means to be at her
Majesty's devotion whose good will he sought with his soul and affection, he
concluded, that there was no such surety in a league offensive, as there was in
the marriage; which proceeding, all should be as her Majesty pleased; and that
if he had been otherwise understood, either he did not deliver his mind so
clearly as he did mean; or else his meaning was mistaken of us, and of his
Deputies; for that he did never mean but that the league offense and the
Marriage should go together, and not otherwise. Having heard this his Majesty's
conclusion, and repeated it unto him, I the Secretary said, That seeing his
Majesty was so resolved, her Highness had in that case commanded me to return
home my service, being more needful there then here, for causes which I
remembered unto him; and that he might think himself of some ^it time to treat
further of these matters, praying his Majesty to appoint when I might receive
his commandments to her Majesty, and to take my leave. He said, he would
gladly have us at this marriage of the Duke of Ioyeuse, the eighteenth of this
month; but seeing her Majesty had commanded me to return, it should be when I
would, using many speeches full of affection to her Majesty, to be uttered at
my return to her Highness. Then we went to the Queen Mother, and rehearsed unto
her what had passed by the King: Whereunto she used in substance the like
speeches the King had done; adding more plainly, that they feared such a league
being made defensive and offensive, the marriage would be clean broken, with
diverse other speeches, wherewith I think not needful to trouble her Majesty,
until my return. At this time I the Secretary prayed Queen Mother to think well
of these matters, being of such importance against the time, that I should come
to take my leave of the King and her, and so for that time we departed. And for
that we might doubt of some alteration, we did forbear to send away this
Corrier, until we had taken our leave, which was upon Thursday the twelfth of
this present; at which time there passed nothing from the King and Queen Mother
but ordinary complements, and specially recommending the Marriage.

Paris the 13 of September, 1581. Francis Walsingham. Henry Cobham. John
Summers.


Reservatio 12 Septembris.
NOs Fransciscus Walsingham, etc. Henricus Cobham, etc. Johannes Summers, etc.
Omnibus ad quos presents pervenerint salutem, ut supra: Denuo tres integros
Menses adjiciendos censemus, quos mensis Septembris die 12 incipere
intelligimus. In cujus rei Testimonium has literas nostras mannuum uostrarum
subscriptione munimus.

Data ex urbe Parisiorum 12 September. 1581. Francis Walsingham, Henry Cobham,
Io. Summers.


FINIS.
AN ALPHABETICAL TABLE of the most Remarkable Things.
A
ALva Duke 40, 45, 46, 48, 137, 139, 268, 269 Offers 30000 Ducats to ransom the
Earl of Northumberland, 75. Plots against the Queen 299 Ambition indures no
bridle 143 Anjou Duke Hen. 25. See Hen. 3. and Marriage. Anjou, and Alanson
Duke Francis, offered for an Husband to the Queen, 195, 196, 257, 297, 331,
333. Unhandsom, 343. Of good parts, 413 Against Rochel, 308. A great Servant to
the Queen 360, 361 Answers to the French Ambassador, 271 By the Lord Burleigh
concerning the Match with Duke Francis. 335. See 348 Antonio of Portugal, 354,
379, 388 393, 394, 398, 421. 434 Anvile Marshal of France, 343 Aremberg Grave
370 Argile Earl, 4, 36, 299. A Traitor, 302. Always false, 312 Arran Earl 412
Arras ^ardinal 123 Athol Earl, 302 Aumale Duke 275, 295, 306 Austrian House,
the Popes Champion, 121 Austria Don John, 137, 221, 288.
B
Bedford Earl 13 Bellieure Monsieur 381 Beni Massino 271 Birac 95 Biron Baron
27, 258 Bisegno Abbot 358 Bothwel Earl 13, 151 Boughquien Lord 302
Brandenburgh Marquess 301, 303 Bricqmault Mons 34 Bricquemont hanged 278, 379,
282 Brulart Secretary of France 265 Buckhurst Lord, 18, 20, 31, 42, 49, 68. 69
Bull of Rome against the Queen 49 Bullen Duke 258
C
Calliac Mons. 21 Cambray besieged by the Prince of Parma 381, 384, 385 Campian
the Jesuit taken, betrays his friends 373 Candale Mons. 343 Capteni Thomas 94
Carew Francis 283. 285 Cassels Archbishop a Traitor, 58, 73 74, 75, 77
Cavalcant Mons. 66, 69, 82 Cavannes Mons. 7. Hanged 279 Cecyl Sir William,
Baron Burleigh 51 An enemy to Popery 72 Zealous for the French match 81 115 234
153 Wearied with an idle Parliament 94 Complains of the Queens mercy 164 For
the English honor, ill used in Libels 327 328 Sincere 133 336 Hated by the
Spaniards 162 164 Charles the Fifth 123 Arch Duke 98 Charles the Ninth of France
5. Pulls down the Cross at Paris 151 The greatest dissembler of his age 49 82 83
118 122 124 125 135 143 144 161 169 173 220 251 252 306. Bloody 279 Chartres
Vidam in England, 260 263 265 Chastel Herault Duke 4 296 303 315 333
Chasteauneu^ 333 334 Chastilion Cardinal 51 Clanlicard Earl 238 Cobham Sir
Henry 22 67 71 285 356 Colignie Admiral of France 6 122 135 154 233 234 His
advice to his King 241 Colonna Prospero 357 Commissioners to treat concerning
the French Match 348 Como Cardinal 358 Common Prayer Book of England not
endured by Papists 97 Conde Prince 6 17 122 240 Forced to go to Mass 245
Conference between Sir Francis Walsingham and Mons. de Foix 90 Betwixt Queen
mother and Sir Francis Walsingham 429 Duke Montmorency, and the English Lords
214 Cross Marshal of France 151 258 388 Will not obey the Kings verbal command
396 Cotton Sir Thomas 57 Croque 165 177 181 202 203
D
Dale Doctor 310 311 333 Darlie Lord, Husband of the scots Queen 13 Derby Earl
303 De Foix Mons. 62 65 67 69 109. In England 129 218 317 318 De l'Archant 89
De la Guord Baron 266 280 305 332 De la Hay a faithless French man 57 De la
Roche 33 34 95 167 168 Denmark King 183 Drake. See Fran. 379 Dun Briton Castle
taken 78
E
Edinburgh the London of Scotland 334 Elizabeth Queen of England, favors not
the rebels of other Princes, careful of the French of the Religion, 2 3 19 23 A
Monarch 3 Accountable to none for her actions 10 Had a Negative voice (as it
seems) in Parliaments 203 215 219 Seems to desire the Match with Henry of
France 29 40 Will not allow him the exercise of his Religion, 65 66 89 98 110
111 113 129 130 132. See 330 335 339 340 See 115 116 138 155 199 Will not have
the second Marriage go on 374 Pretends the dislike of her subjects, to avoid it
354 Against any worship but of her own Church 99 Irresolute as to the
execution of the Duke of Norfolk 165 Enterview Betwixt the Queens of England
and France propounded 271 272 277 For the young King of the Scots 178 Her
civility to the Navarrois Queen, Admiral, etc. 210 211 How she takes the
Massacre 247 248 259 Sick of the Smal-Pox 274 Likes not the proceedings of
France against Law 297 Protects the French fugitives, and why 319 344.
intercedes for them 263 265. Too sparing, 372 375 379 387. See Walsingham.
Abhors a war 374 377 Forward to advance the revolt of the Low Countries 379 381
388 Cold in the cause of the Bastard Don Antonio 379 388 Aides him 383 Emden
Countess 149 England, no Country once so free from impositions 21 English, how
thought of by the French, 325 Zealous Subjects for the Queen 335 341 Escars 8
Este Cardinal 357
F
Felton sets up Pius his Bull against the Queen 49 Feria Duke 59 Ferrara Duke
42 43 Fernihurst Lord 373 Fitzmorris James 42 167 168 347 Flemming Lord 78 139
181 183 Flushing Rebels 217 Francis the Second of France 12 Francis of Anlanson
and Anjou, See Anjou Duke. French greatness dangerous 127 Disorders in
Government 240 246 Spoil the English 265 Their falsenesse and dissembling 276
Desirous to get Leicester and Burleigh into France 277
G
Galloway Bishop 77 Gilbert Sir H^mphrey 299 Glasgow Arch Bishop 299 302
Grandmont Mons. 267 Graunge Governor of Edinburgh Castle 151 152 Gray Baron,
Deputy of Ireland 359 373 389 Guarda Bishop 358 Guise house 36 for the Scots
Queen, 192 240 Duke 267 269 275 295 314 428. Cardinal 280
H
Hamilton Earl 138 Hanging of Gentlemen not used in France 279 282 Harris Baron
134 Hawkins Sir John 126 379 Henry the II King of France 12 Henry the III
forbids exercise of Religion to the Hugonots 356 Earnest for the match with his
brother, and the League 376 Will have no League Offensive without it 440 His
great charges in the Treaty 397 Henry the IV Prince of Navarre 16 245 Hosteni
Duke 221 Hugonots of France 2 3. run themselves into the Kings nets 122 Their
Lands on sale 245 Great servants of the English Queen 135 Love not the Cross
151. See Massacre Hume Lord 214 320 329 Hunsdon Baron 151 Huntley Earl 138 312
315 333
I
Jenlis 223. defeated in Henault 225 Jersie Island 272 Jesuits mortal enemies
to the Queen, 172 173 Inn Keepers of Kent 21 Inquisition 123 Instructions for
the Earl of Worcester, 318. For Sir Fra. Walsingham 352 For a League with
France 355 Joyeuse Duke 294, 440
K
Katherine Queen Mother of France, 6 12, 35. per tot, etc. Killigrew Henry 145
Kirkaldie James 302
L
Languedoc Hugo^ots rebel 294 Lansac Mons. 24, 49, 239 La Valette ^ Leagues how
made 171, 414. With France, public and secret, 355 Not liked without the
Match, 364, 365, 388, 366, 367, 368, 399, 392. Causes of it 372, 374, 403, 422,
423. Leicester his good and pious sentences; 47, 51, 69, 82, 105, 116, 324. To
be fastened for the Match, 104. Slights the Earl of Worcester, 312 Lennox Earl
138 Levingston Lord 4, 77, 244, 312, 326, 334 Liberty under the English
Princes, heretofore as great as any where 61 Lidington Lord 152, 137, 244.
Lincoln E^^le Lord Admiral, sent into France 201, 205, 219. Lodowick Count of
Nassaw 54, 121, 123, 176, 184, 333. Notably cheated by the French King. 125,
258 Longaville Duke 50 Lorrain Cardinal 8, 38, 73, 74, 77, 123 167, 168, 314,
331. Duke 88, 301 Loughleuin Lord 302 Low Countries the pretense of their
Revolt 123
M
Maine Duke 395 Malicorn Mons. 27 Mannesiere Mons. 240, 265, 287, 288 297 298
299, 301, 304, 305, 307. Mary Queen of Scots 4, 10, 11, 12, 13, 137, 139, 152.
Not to be spoken for 321 Margaret of France reads the Bible, 122 Martinengo
Count 306 Mar Earl 138, 299 Marriage treated betwixt Henry of Navarre, and
Margaret of France, 122, 135. Doubts in it 182, 183 Betwixt the Queen and Henry
of Anjou designed 55. Instructions concerning it, 61, 62, 63. See 68, 69, 70
Articles of it, 83, 84, 85, 86, 131, 132. Counselors employed in it, 66 83.
Carried on inconstantly, 133. Not taken in earnest by the French, 67. Betwixt
the Queen and Francis of Anjou, 218 226 227 229 230 330 331 336 339. Eagerly
pursued, 360 361 362. See 390 Marriage Solemnity betwixt Princes of different
Faiths 175 Medina Coeli Duke 189 195 Memorials for Mr. Summers, 384 385 Mendoza
thrust out of England for practicing against the Queen 163 Mildmay Sir Walter
Monluc Marshal 8 Montmorency Duke 8 97 102 108 151 188. In England 201 218 231
240 Monts in Henault besieged 245 taken 258 M organ General 217 M oreton Earl
77 138 244 299 Beheaded 431 Moth Fenelon French Ambassador 30 90 138 141, etc.
Murder on shooters hill 347
N
Navarre King turned by his wife 91 Queen 24 176 182 183 Nemours Duke 50 Nevers
Duke 238 258 300 New star 299 Norfolk Duke 134. His plots discovered 137 140
148 Norris Sir Henry 19 18 19 20 22 23 Northumberland Earl 3 75 Executed 237
Noue Mous. 184 297 301. Persidious 332
O
Odonnel 359 373 Ogleby Lord 312 Olivarez Conde 40. More grave then wise 56
Orange Prince 48 122 144. To have been (...) of B^abant, etc. if the Spaniard
could have been beaten out, 128. See 225 226 240. Retires into Germany 267 269
295 333 Ormond Earl 238. Discontented 373 Oxford Earl 134. Married to the Lord
Burleighs daughter 164
P
Parliament of 1571. impertinently busy 94. Bloody 203 219 Parma Prince 381
384 Perrot Sir John 347 Philip the second of Spain entertains the Queens
fugitives 58 59. How he carried things toward the Queen, 369 370 Pinart
Secretary of France 23 31 122 305 309 375 Plots upon Ireland 58 Poigney Mons. 4
Popes Authority in England destructive to the Crown 4. Designs again England 36
Princes have no other bridle but Religion 91 Princes of Germany of the Reformed
Churches. 301
R
Rebellion in the North colored with Religion 3 Rhee Island taken by the
Rochellers 301 Religion is a constant persuasion confirmed by time 191. Cannot
be more then a pretense to invade what is another man's 155 Ridolf 95 137 Rochel
in rebellion 280 297 301 302 Besieged 331 Rolph a counterfeiter of the Kings
hand 266 Romero Juliano 27 Ross Bishop 5. 77. restrained 107. in the Tower 151
Roulart Canon of Nostre Dam murdered 246 Rutland Earl 39 42 141
S
Saint Andrews Archbishop taken 78 Sancerre besieged 332 348 Savoye Duke 287
293 303 Schomberg Baron 332 Scots, Lords come to treat concerning their Queen
without a Commission 77. Everlasting Rebels 101. Yet will not live without a
Prince of their own 178. Gracious in France 244. Will do any thing for money
249 320 324 329. Seton Baron 27 36 95 177 181 Sidney Sir Henry 82 Sir Philip in
France at the time of the Massacre 250. of rare parts 273 Skeldon 36 Smith Sir
Thomas 51 54 134 152. employed in France 153. Thinks Charles the Ninth a
faithful Prince 169 180 261 318 Summers Henry 354 Sora Duke 356 Spaniards of
what carriage 56. Ambitious, enemies to England 121. Conquer Portugal 358
Spanish greatness dangerous 354 355. Money arrested 81 Spino^a Cardinal 59 Story
Doctor will not swear allegiance; Hanged 105 Strozzi Peter 95 188 189 217 251
294 359 Stukeley 36 41. Knighted by the Spaniard 56 59. in disgrace 105 Suffex
Earl 5
T
Tauannes Viscount 258 Tercaera holds for Don Antonio 421 Tilignie Mons. 276
Time a great advantage in the minority of Princes 298 Throgmorton Sir Nicholas
45 287 Treaties of Princes. Of the Queen with Charles the IX. 155 156 157 158,
etc. 185. With Henry the III; passages and propositions in it 399 400 401 423
Tresham Sir Thomas 390 Turein Vicount 367 385
V
Valentinois Bishop 302 Valx Lord will take no Oath to the Queen 290 Venetians
at sea 312 Victory at Lepanto 149 150 Viracque Mons. 137 315. taken 334 342
Vitelli Marquess of Colona 44 48 223 Vimioso Conde 394 434
W
Walsingham Sir Francis Ambassador in France 1 etc. Received by the King 22 23.
Much mistaken in his French Creed 82 83 104 118 122 144 173 252. Calls Charles
the IX sincere, pius inimicus, etc. 175. Confesses his overmuch confidence 257.
See 270 Thinks the French King the only dissembler 300. Sets spi^s over the
Lord Seton; acts without war^ (...). Earnest for the match 96. Persuades to war
with Spain 127. Would turmoil all other Princes, and why, 128. Undermines a
Jesuit 172. Desires only not to lose by his service 188. His opinion of the
Spaniards 234. Ill used in France 242. Called off 253. The Queen^ great opinion
of him 263 and love 275. Advises against the Queen of Scots life 267 268.
Fearful every where of the Queens sparing 303 etc. 357 426 427. Too open 322.
Poor in France 326 327. Sent again into France 352. Blames the Queen, and why
408. Calls the Scots Queen bosom Serpent 427. returns 440. War, when, and what
just 127. Necessary where 128 Westmoreland Earl 3 143 275 299 Williams Sir
William 313 Worcester Earl 307. Abused by Leicecester 312. His instrnctions for
his French Embassy 318. Dishonorably dealt with by the French 327. Will not see
his sister the wife of a Rebel, 328 Writing to the Scots Queen in linen, 328

