GODS PROTECTING PROVIDENCE MAN'S SUREST HELP AND DEFENSE In the times Of the
greatest difficulty and most Imminent danger; Evidenced in the Remarkable
Deliverance Of diverse Persons, From the devouring Waves of the Sea, amongst
which they Suffered Shipwreck.

And also From the more cruelly devouring jaws of the inhumane CANIBALS of
FLORIDA.

Faithfully related by one of the persons concerned therein; JONATHAN DICKENSON.

Psalm. 93: 4. The Lord on high is mightier than the noise of many Waters, yea
than the mighty Waves of the Sea. Psalm. 74: 20. The dark places of the Earth
are full of the habitations of Cruelty. Printed in Philadelphia by Reinier
Jansen. 1699.

The Preface
Ingratitude toward men, after signal fawours received, is, amongst all
civilized people, looked upon with a just detestation; insomuch that the moral
Gentiles in ages past, thought they could give no worse a character of a
Person, than to call him ungrateful. How much more then are Christians
(especially in a time of such Light, as now shines) engaged, to shun this fin
of ingratitude, toward their GOD, whom the sensible know, to be the Fountain
of all their mercies: And surely, next to the infinite mercy showed them for
Christ's sake, in causing the days-spring from on high to visit their Souls;
remarkable outward deliverances, ought in a more than commonly remarkable
manner, to be the objects of their gratitude, to their great Deliverer. I must
confess, thanks giving (which is what we poor Mortal^ can return, for the
manifold favors we daily receive from him) has it is rise in the heart; and as
out of the abundance of the heart the mouth speaks, how can those who are
truly thankful in heart; but render the calves of their lips; in telling to
their Friends and acquaintance, how great things GOD has done for them: Nay,
they are so affected, with such eminent appearances of the Protecting hand of
Providence, for their help, preservation and deliverance; that they are not
vvilling to confine it to them only, but to publish it to the World; that the
Fame of their God may be spread from Sea to Sea, and from one end of the Earth
to the other.

The following relation being large, I shall endeavor to be short; only, some
of the things which seem to me most remarkable' I would more particularly
recommend to the Readers observation.

1. The hearts of all men are in the hand of God, he can turn them as he
pleases. When these Man-eaters fury was at height, their knives in one hand,
and the poor Shipwrakt People's heads in the other; their knees upon the others
shoulders, and their looks dismal; on a sudden; the Savages were struck dumb,
and their countenances changed, that they looked like another People; the
Casseekey (or King) becoming as a safeguard to the distressed, from the injuries
of his own men: Nay, such confidence put he in them, that he would trust them
to remove the money, he had taken from themselves, before he would trust his
own. When they were got from these to another place, where they expected more
safety, they found themselves disappointed* fresh dangers presenting
themselves, as dismally as before, Yet God prevented any further mischief, than
the stripping them of those poor rags the others had left them, and some other
abuses, which by that time were grown familiar to them, and were looked upon as
light afflictions. The Casseekys Wi^e being made an instrument for their
delivery, she and some others having some thing of tenderness of heart in them,
though amongst such an inhumane crew.

2. Many were the particular deliverances upon occasion of injuries offered.
Once, an Arrow shot at them narrowly escaped them. Another time, some going to
shoot Arrows at them, certain of their own company caught hold of their Bows
and arms; Nay, though some of them shot, yet their arrows mist. Not to mention
the frequent dangers they were in, upon every slight suspicion of their being
English, of which more anon: And well might these poor sufferers be in
continual fear of their lives, since about a 12 month before a parcel of
Dutchmen who had likewise suffered Shipwreck, had been killed and devoured;
and moreover, of the many Vessels supposed to be lost on that Coast, these are
the first company, that are known to have escaped. Neither is it so wonderful
that they are thus cruel to strangers, since they are unnatural to their own
aged People; they having no more compassion on them, than to make them Slaves
to the younger. Yet are these Man-eaters as cowardly as cruel; when the
Spaniards came up, the sight of a rusty muske^ presented toward them, would
make several of them fly.

3. The dangers they were delivered from, arose not only from men, but the
Elements also God permitted to threaten them, and afflict them. One time rowing
in their Boat, the Sea swelled, so that it was dangerous continuing there on al
night, and as dangerous, to ende^vour for the (...) yet Providence failed them
not, but conducted them (...) thither, as though there had been a lane (...)
through the Breakers. Another time, by reason of a great Flood (...) were
forced to remove their lodgings several times, and for diverse days, were in a
continual apprehension of being drowned, at length were preserved upon an
Oyster-hill. Not to mention the frequent dangers they were in, by reason of the
extreme cold, too tedious to touch at here. Wherein this however is remarkable;
that God can both administer strength in the midst of weakness, and also take
away strength, and cause weakness to seize, whenever he pleases: Here was an
old man, a Woman with a sucking child, and another with child Persons,
seemingly, very unlikely to encounter such hardships, all escaped, and diverse
Negro's, used to more hardiness, perished.

4. As to lodging, I shall say little, any discreet person may imagine, how
hard it was to people well brought up, to lie on a floor, swarming with
abundance of many sorts of creeping things, occasioned by the throwing the
berry stones on the floor, and letting all the nastiness they made lie there,
which bred these vermin; and yet perhaps might be accounted good lodging, in
comparison of the cold ground, where on they often lay afterward unsheltered,
exposed to the bleak blasts of the rigid North-West-Wind.

5. Their Food mostly scanty, the best of it such, as (I am ready to think) the
meanest Negro, here would not touch with his lips: Sometimes the gills and
gutts of fish picked often a dunghill, sometimes the scraps the Indians flung
away, and the Water they boiled their Fish in, though never so undecently
handled. At first their sorrows were so great, and their alarms so many, they
could not eat; afterward their diet so uncouth, they could not away with it;
until at length hunger had so far prevailed over them, that they could eat
with an appetite, the Palmetto berries, the taste whereof was once irksome, and
ready to take away their breath: Nay so send were they of them, that the
getting about a bushel accident^^ly, was looked on as a great prize.

6. Their being forced to mask themselves under the name of Spaniards, though
few of them could speak any Spanish, was an other hardship: mostly because the
Natives often suspected them to be English, and thereby they were continually
in danger of their lives. Whether their cruelty against the English, proceeds
from their being under no apprehension of danger from them, and so may think
themselves lawless, in what they do against our Nation; Or whether it proceeds,
from any particular disgust offered them by some English, I shall not
determine: However it would do well, for those that are not under their power,
to avoid giving them any just cause of offense, least their Neighbors suffer
for their faults: One of these Savages could complain, that, some years past,
he had been taken off by some of our English Sloops, from whom ^e escaped by
swimming, and was therewith disgusted, insomuch, that could he, by his si^ting,
have found o^t that they were English, it might have proved of ill consequence
to them.

7. The courtesy of the Governor of Augusteen, who clothed these naked people,
fed their hungry stomachs, and caused them to be conducted safely to Carolina,
is not to be passed by without due notice; especially being a man of another
Nation, as well as of a different Religion, and what is more, of such an one,
as does not teach its Votaries, so much compassion, toward those they count
Heretics. Neither let me forget the Governor of Carolina, whose Generosity
completed, what the Governor of Augusteen had begun, in assisting and
cherishing these our afflicted Friends and Country folks; With which I shall
conclude these Remarks, to treat more particularly, concerning that faithful
Servant of the Lord Robert Barrow, who was one of this Company.

This man of God, whose habitation was in one of the Northern Counties of
England, was early convinced of the blessed truth of God, prosessed by the
People called Quakers, and soon after had a discensation of the Gospel
committed to him. He lived in his Native Country, in esteem amongst his
Neighbors, for his godly conversation, and honored in the Church of God, as
an Elder who had abode faithful in his testimony, both in preaching the
Gospel, suffering for the same, and behaving himself ansvverably thereunto. And
in the Year 1694 the Spirit of God (from whom he first had his commission)
requiring him to come over into these parts, to Preach the Gospel here also, he
was not disobedient to the heavenly call, but gave up to do the will of God,
though in a cross to his own, as appeared by an expression of his, before he
left England, Which was to this effect, That he had rather immediately have
laid down his natural life there, if by so doing he could have kept his peace
with God, than to have crossed the Seas to America. Well^ hither he came, and
after he had thoroughly visited these parts, he took ship for the West-Indian
Islands, and at length was returning from Jamaico, to this Town of
Philadelphia, when these calamities mentioned in the ensuing Journal be^ell
him. How he behaved himself under them, is therein expressed, with what
patience he was carried through them, with what faith he overcame, even the
very worst of men, so that it may be said, He was more than a Conqueror over
those bloodthirsty Canibals; looking to Him Who was invisible, and by his grace
seeing beyond them and their cruelty; by Prayer wrestling with God for a
blessing, even the blessing of being delivered out of their barbarous hands,
and laying his bones amongst faithful Friends; and so effectual were his
fervent prayers, that they prevailed with God; and so gracious was his God unto
him, that He sealed an assurance upon his spirit, that his prayers were heard,
and should in due time be ansvvered, before he was yet off his knees. And
doubtless, he was made a strength and a comfort, to his companions in
affliction, whose remembrance will not be easily blotted out of their minds.

One remarkable passage I cannot well omit, Which demonstrates, he had well
learnt of him who is a God of truth, to speak the truth from all occasion^;
(...) with with the h^zard of his life ^or as the Reader may observe is the
Series of this follovving relation, thie^e poor people, for the safeg^rd of
their lives, had assumed the name of Spaniards, some on that account asserting
what was wrong, others concealing the truth, yet this honest hearted man, being
directly asked the question, Nickaicer, Nicka^^r? ((...) word for Englishman)
could do neither; but in simplicity answered, yes; being asked so concerning
another, he (...) gain ansvvered, yes. Yet, though for his plain dealing he was
stripped of his cloths, which till then he had saved, God suffered not these
Savages to touch his life, or the lives of any of his company.

Thus he passed through this afflicting trial, and at length arrived at this
place, on the 1st. day of the 2d. month 1697* though in much weakness, having
been taken very ill or the belly ache and Flux at Augusteen, of which he never
recovered, but still grew worse and worse, to his dying day. It was about the
8th. hour in the evening, when the Barkentine he was passenger in, arrived at
this place: Diverse Friends went on bo^rd, in order to get him ashore, but he
being in a very vveak condition, they could not remove him at that time. He
declared his great satisfaction, that the Lord had granted his request, that he
might lay down his bones in this place; that his heart was strong, and be hoped
he might first see Friends again at the Meeting. He made mention of the
goodness of God to him, and that his presence had attended him in all his
exercises.

The next morning being the 2d. of the 2d. month, diverse Friends went on board,
to help the Vessel up to a Wharf, in order to get him on shore, in which time
he spoke as before related, Gods Power attending him. About the 7th. hour,
diverse Friends carried him in a Hammocker (being wrapped up in a blanket and
cloths to keep him warm) to the house of Samuel Carpenter. where he declared
the goodness of God to him, and that his heart was yet strong, and his memory
and understanding good; after whch he was shifted and then slept a considerable
time.

Being awaked, he (...) very comfortable and previous expresions, which some
who were (...) afterward committed to writing, what they could (...) and are
as follows. He enquiring what was (...) of George Keith's People? Was
ansvvered; That they were strangely divided, many of them become (...) and the
honest hearted amongst them returned to Friends. He (...) to this purpose, They
(...) the Rock they had rejected. And tha^ (...) please God (...) many ways*
by suffering (...) Neighboring Governments, to tempt or persuade us, to setup
or establish the National ministry here; ye^, he (...) it, and not touch
therewith. And (...) also much endeavor, to persuade (...) establishing and
maintaining a Militia amongst (...) which he also desired us not to touch with,
and that if we kept faithful to the Lord, He would desend and preserve us, and
that we needed no such means of preservation, for if our ways did please the
Lord, he would make our Enemies to be at peace with us. And he further said
That Prophe^^ was fulfilled, and a Remnant were wilnesses of it, That Swords
should he beat into Plonghshares, and (...) into Pruning Hooks; and that those
who make use of the Sword, should perish with the Sword.

Speaking concerning some Friends of the Ministry in Old England, he said: Many
Friends about us that were rich men, and had public testimonies, were much
(...) with their Wordly concerns, which was a great hindrance to their public
service, and I would be often speaking to them about it: For (said he) I found
it to be hindrance to me, and so I gave it all up into my Son's hands, be
allowing me and my Wife so much a year, and then I was at liberty, and had the
World under my ^eet; Which I would of ^^he telling them.

He often said, That this place (...) Gods Plantation, That in Jamaica and
Carolina there were (...) few (...), but that this place had a great Fame
abroad, wherever he had been, for an honest, laborious and good people.
Whereupon he exhorted us many times To keep up our fame, and told us the means
how By being f^^^^full to God, and keeping in love one which another^ and by
forgiving our ^respasses one against another: Often exhorting us to love one
another, mentioning that expression of our Savior By this shall all men know
that ye are my disciples, if ye love one another. He likewise pressed us To
meet often together; using this Schripture as a motive thereto, For they that
feared the Lord Met often together, and spoke often one unto another, and a
book of remembrance was written. He further said, The Lord had given him the
desire of his heart in coming hither, and that, if he dyed here, he was very
well satisfied, and he believed his Wife would also be well satisfied; and that
as the Lord had given her to him, and him to her, so they had given one another
up; and that when he came from her, it was as if he was going to his grave;
That neither Gold nor Silver, Riches nor ^^mour, should have parted them, but
that he did it only in obedience to the Lord, and to keep his peace with God.

He said, that had been convinced about 4. 5. years; and had born a faithful
testimony against the hireling Priests, and had been in Prison seven times for
his testimony, and the Lord had always been his Preserver and Deliverer, by
ways that he thought not of; And so Friends ( said he) will He be to you, if
you be faithful to him; And that several who had been committed Prisoners with
him, had used indirect means to get at liberty; but it was always my
resolution ( said he) not to bow a knee to Baal; and yet the Lord wrought my
Deliverance. And further he said several times, That in his late Afflictions,
he had seen more of the wonders and dealings of the Lord, than ever he had seen
before, or ever should have seen, if he had not gone through them, and that he
felt the Lord with him, which did out balance all.

Speaking of his patient bearing his sufferings, and how he was supported by
the Lords power under all, and of his inquiry of the Lord about it, the Lords
answer was: LET PATIENCE HAVE ITS PERFECT WORK. Speaking how sick he was at
Jamaica for about twenty weeks, yet (said he) I mist but one meeting. He also
said That he desired of the Lord, that he might not dye by the hands of those
Barbarians; For (said he) They thirsted, or longed as much after our flesh, as
ever we did after Victuals.

On the 3 d. day of the 2 d. month, some Friends coming into the room to visit
him at the sight of them he seemed to rejoice, and putting forth his hand, was
ready to embrace them in much love, and in a very tender frame of spirit. The
Friends expressed their gladness to see him, but said, They were sorry to see
him so very weak; to which he replied, Although my body be weak, my mind is
sound, and memory good: And further said The Lord has been very good to me,
all along unto this very day, and this morning has sweetly refres^ed me. And
further added, The Lord has answered my desire; for I desired content, and
that I might come to this place, to ^ay my bones amongst you. And afterward
said, It is a good thing, to have a conscience void of offense, both toward
God, and toward man.

On the 4th. day of the 2d. month, being the 1st. day of the week, about the
5th. hour in the morning, he desired a Friend to write for him to his dear
Wife, To remember his dear love to her, and to let her know of his travels, and
being here, and that the Lord was with him; That his outward affairs were
seiled, and that She had wherewith all to live on. He further said, diverse
Friends being present, That the Lord was with him, and all things were Well,
and that he had nothiug to do, but to Dye. And accordingly on this day he
departed, and on the 3d. day following, being the 6th. day of the 2d. month,
was buried in Friends burying ground, in this Town of Philadelphia.

And now having brought my relation concerning this good man, to the last
Period of his life, I might very well here put a period to my Preface; but that
I foresee, some persons may be ready to say: Here is an account of very strange
passages, but of what credit is the Relator? May We depend upon his Authority,
without danger of being imposed upon? To ^uch I answer. He is a man well known
in this Town, of good credit and repute, on whose fidelity and veracity, those
who have any knowledge of him, will readily rely, without suspecting fallacy.
But, that in the mouth of two or three Witness^s every thing may be
established; besides him and his Wife, a person whose residence (when at home)
is in this Town, viz Joseph Kirle, the Master of the Barkenti^e in which they
suffered shipwreck, a man of an honest character amongst his Neighbors, had
the perusal of it, before it went to the press, and approved it. With which I
shall conclude; wishing my Reader much satisfaction in the reading of it: But
never the unhappiness, of experiencing in proper person, the truth of it.

A Journal of the Travels of several Persons, with their sufferings, being
cast away in the Gulf (amongst the Cannabals) of Florida. etc.
Persons Names viz.
Mariners
Joseph Kirle Commander of the Barkentine, Reformation. Richard Limpeney Mate.
Solomon Cresson. Joseph Buckley. Thomas Fownes. Thomas Jemmet. Nathaniel
Randall. John Hilliard the Masters Boy. Ben. the Masters Negro.
Passengers.
Robert Barrow. Jonatha^ Dickinson. Mary Dickinson. Jonathan Dickinson a
sucking Child six months old. Benjamin Allen.
Belonging to Jonathan Dickinson.
Negroe-Men.
Peter. London. Jack. Caesar. Cajoe a Child.
Negro Women
Hagar. Sarah. Bella. Susana. Quensa.
Venus an Indian Girl.


The twenty-third day of the sixth-month, called August 1696. Being in Company
w^^h twelve or thirteen Sail of Merchantmen ^^^derth C^^voy of the Hampshire
Frigot Captain (...) Commander Sailed from Port-Royall in Jamaica, we being
bound for Pensilvania.

Port-Royall, meeting us off Portland; gave in Account of the French-Fleet's
being at Cape-Antonio.

This Evening we lay by off Black Rivers mouth in order to go the nex^ morning
(...) Bl^^field, out i^ being calm ^or many Days, (...), the Current drove ^o
westward of the Island.

Hamps^^re-Frigo^t land then beat to windward again.

Sav^na La Mar, and lost our Anchor.

Blewfield Road to water.

Blewfields ^^tending our passage thro^gh the G^lph.

Cape Antonio (...) and about a League to the Lastwa^^s (...) Cape. was a ^ire
making a great (...) appeared on the Bay, making (...) put on (...); but having
a (...) Gale and no^ kno^ing who they were, ou^ Master would not.

This day made the Table and of the (...) and his evening stood over (...) Mile
from us* (...) we were got amongst the French-Fleet tacked (...)

Indian Girl being j^st as I had bound up the Master's leg taken with Fitts
which continued some hours and then she died. This Evening we stood over for
Cape Florida, having the wind North-Easterly.

Cuba, and about Sunrising we espied the two sail that we saw before they
standing as we stood: Therefore we supposed them to be some of our company; we
wronged them in sailing, and by noon lost sight of them. About Four this
Afternoon we espied a Ship to the Eastward of us (we being about four Leagues
off shore* and about Fifteen leagues to Eastward of the Havana) supposing her
to be a Frenchman therefore stood in for the shore, (...) gained on us: when a
Turnado sprang up and a great shower of Rain followed which (...); ^ereupon we
racked and stood over (...). Night came on that we saw no (...) that ^ail,
having the wind fair.







feared the sad Consequences that follow^d: yet having hopes ^ill we go^^ our
sick and Lame on shore, also our Provisions, with spar^s and Sails to make a
(...). I went with one Negroe to view the Land and seek the most convenient
place for that purpose; But the Wilderness Country looked very dismal, having
no Trees but only Sand, hills covered with shrubby Palme^o, the stalks of which
were prickly that there was no walking amongst them; I espied a place almost a
Furlong within that Beach being a Bottom; to this place I with my Negro soon
cut a Passage, the storm and Rain continuing: Thither I got my Wife and Sick
Child being six months and twelve days old* also Robert Barrow an aged man, who
had been sick about five or six months Our Master who some days past broke his
leg, and my kinsman Ben^amin Allen, who had been very ill with a violent Fever
most part of the Voyage: these with others we got to the place under the
shelter of some few Bushes which broke some of the wind but kept none of the
Rain from them; I got a Fire made: the most of our people were getting
^rovisions a shore; our Chests, Trunks and the rest of our Clothing were all
very wett and cold.

About the Eight or Ninth hour came two Indian- Men (being naked except a small
piece of platted work of straws which just hid their private parts and fastened
behind with a Horse-Tai^^ in likeness made of a sort of Silk-grass) from the
Southward* running fiercely and foaming at the mouth having no ^eapons except
their knives: and forthwith not making any stop; violently seized the two first
of our Men they met with who were carrying Corn from the Vessel to the Top of
the Bank where I stood to receive it and put it into a Cas^^: they ^sed no
violence for the men resisted not, but taking them under the Arm brought them
toward me. (...) was very ^urious and bloody. They (...) their ^air ^yed in a
Ro^e (...) in which st^ck two bones shaped one like a broad Arrow; the other a
spear head. The rest of our men followed from the Vess^^; (...) what they
should do, whether they should get their Guns to kill these two; bu^ I
persuaded them other wise, desiring them to be quiet, sh^wing their inability
to defend us from what would follow; but to put our trusts in the Lord who was
able to defend to the uttermost. I walked toward the place where our Sick and
Lame were, the two Indian men following me, I told them the Indians were come
and coming upon us. And whilst these two (letting the men loose) stood with a
Wild Furious Countenance, sooking upon us I bethought my self to give them some
Tobacco and Pipes, which they greedily snatched from me, and making a Snuffing
noise like a Wild-Beast, turned their Backs upon us and run away.

We Communed together and considered our condition being amougst a Barbarous
people, such as were general^y accounted Man-Eaters, believing (...) were gone
to Alarm their People. We satt our selves down, expecting Cruelty and hard
death excep^^^ should please the Almighty God to work Wonderfully for our
Deliverance. In this deep Concernment some of us were not left without hopes;
blessed be the Name of the Lord in Whom We trusted.

As We were under a deep Exercise and concernment, a motion arose from one of
us that if we should put ourselves under the Denomination of Spaniards (it
being known that that Nation had some Influence on them) and one of us named
Solomon Cr^s^on, speaking the Spanish Language well, it was hoped this might be
a means for our delivery: To which the most of the Company assen^ed.

Within two or three hours after the departure of the two (...), some of our
people being near the Beach o^ (...) returned and said, the Indians were coming
in a very great number, all running and shouting: About this time the Storm was
much abated, the ^ain ceased* and the Sun appeared, which had been ^id from us
many days. The Indians went all to the Vessel taking forth whatever they could
lay hold on, except Rum, Sugar, Molassoes, Beef and Pork.

But their (...) (for so they call their King) with about thirty more came down
to us in a Furious manner, having a dismal Aspect and foaming at the month:
Their Weapons were large Spanish Knives, except their (...) who had a bagganett
that belonged to the Master of our Vessel: They rushed in upon us and cried,
Nickaleez, Nickalee^; We und^rstood them not at first: they repeating it over
unto us often; At last they cried, Epainia or Spaniard: by which we understood
them that at first they mean^ English; but they were answered to the latter in
Spani^^ yea ^owich they replied, No Spainia No, but all cried o^^, Nickaleez,
Nickaleez* We fitting on our Chests, boxes and Trunks, and some on the ground,
the Indians surrounded us. We stirred ^or moved no^; but sa^^ all or most of us
very calm and still, some of us in a good frame or spirit, being freely given
up to the Wi^^ of God.

Whilst we were thus fitting, as a People almost unconcerned these bloody
minded Creatures placed themselves ^ach behind one kicking and ^hrowing away
(...) ^ushes (...) were nigh (...) had placed himself behind me, standing o^
the Chest which I satt upon, they all having their Arms extended with their
knives in their hands, ready to execute their bloody design, some taking hold
of some of us by the heads with their Knees set against onr shoulders. In
this Posture they seemed to wait for the Casseekey to begin. They were high i^
words which we understood not. But on a sudden it pleased the Lord to Work
Wonderfully for our preservation, and instantly all these savage men were
struck dumb, and like men amazed the space of a Quarter of an Hour, in which
time their countenances Fell, and they looked like another People. They quieted
their places they had taken behind us, and came in amongst us req^iring to have
all our Chests, Trunks and Boxes unlockt; which being done, they divided all
that was in them. Our Money the Casseekey ^ook unto himself, privately hiding in
the Bushes. Then they went to pulling of our Clothes, leaving each of us only a
pair of breeches, or a ^old Coat, except my Wife and Child, Robert Barrow and
our Master, from Whom they took but little this day.

Having thus done, they asked us again. Nicka leez, Nickaleez? But We answered
by saying P^nsilvania.

We began to enquire after St. Augu^^een, also would talk of St. a Lucea, which
was a Town that lay about a Degree to the Nor^hward: Bnt they cunningly would
seem to persuade us, that they both lay to the Southward. We signified to them
that they lay to the North^ard. And we would talk of the Havana that lay to the
Southward These places they had heard of and knew which way they lay.

At length the Casseekey, told us, how long it was to (...) Lucea by Days
travel; but cared not to hear^ as mention St. Augusteen They would signify by
Signs, We should go to the Southward. We answered That we must go^o the
Nothward For Augusteen. When they found, they could not otherwise persuade us,
they signified that we should go to the Southward for the Havana, and that it
was but a little Way.

We gave them to understand that We came that way and were for the Northward;
All which took place with them. We perceived that the Casseekey's heart was
tendered toward us; for He kept mostly with us and would the remaining part of
this day keep off the Petty-Robbers, which would have had our few Rags from
us. Sometime before Night we had a shower of Rain, where upon the Casseekey
made signs for us to build some shelter; upon which we got our Tent up and some
Leaves to lie upon.

About this time our Vessel lay dry on shore and the Indians gathered them
selves together Men and Women, some Hundreds in numbers. Having got all the
Goods out of the Vessel and covered the Bay for a large distance, opened all
the stuffs and Linnens and spread them to dry they would touch no sort of
strong drink Sugar ^or Mol^ssoes, but left it in the Vessel. They shouted and
made great noises in the time of Plun^er. Nicht coming on, the Ca^seekey put
those Chests and Trunks which he had reserved for himself into our Tent; which
pleased us, and gave an Expectation of his company, for he was now become a
Defender of us from the rage of others. The Ca^seekey went down to the
Waterside amongst his People and returned with three old Co^s that were wett
and turn, which he gave us; one where of I had. We made a fire at each end of
our (...) un it being la^ke but hearing hid^ous noises and fearing that they
were not satisfied, we expected them upon us. The Chief Indian (or Casseekey)
lay in the Ten^ upon his Chests. And about Midnight we heard a Company of
Indians coming from the Vessel toward us, making terrible shouts, and coming
fiercely up to the Tent, the Casseekey called to them; which caused them to
stand. It seemed, they had killed a ^^gg and brought him: So the Casseekey asked
us it we would ea^ the Hogg? Solomon Cre^son, by our di^re, answered him that
we used not to eat at that time of the Night: Wereupon they threw the Hogg down
before the Tent, and the Casseekey sent them away. They went shouting to the
Sea-shoar, were there were some hundreds of them Revelling about our Rack.

Solomon opened the matter to the Casseekey; who answered We mu^t go to his
Town to the Southward.

This occasioned us to press him more urgently to let us go ^or St. a. Lucea
(this place having a Spanish name, supposed to have found it under the
Government of that Nation, whence we might expect r^lief) But the Casseekey
told ^s that it was about two ^^ three days You^^ ^^ither and that when we came
th^re, we should have our Troats and scalps cut, and be shot, burnt and
Earen. We thought (...) information was but to di^ert us; so that we were mo^^
earnest to go but he sternly den^y'd us, saying, We must go to his Town.

About Eight a Clock this morning the Casseekey came into our (...) and set
himself amongst us asking the old Question. Nick^l^er Nickal^^ directing (...)
one particular of ^s, who in simpl^city answered* ye^. Which caused the (...)
to ask the Said Person, if another person which he pointed to, was Nickaleer?
He answered yes. Then he said, To^us (or all) Nickaleer, and went from amongst
us. Returning (...) a short time with some of his men with him, and afresh they
went greedely to Stripping my Wire and Child, Robert Barrow and our M^ster who
had eschaped (...) now. Thus were we left almost Naked, till the Feud was
something abated and then we got some what from them which displeased some or
them. We then cut our Tents in pieces, and got the most of our Clothing out
of it: Which the Indians perceiving, ^ook the Remain^ from us. We Men had most
of us Breeches and pieces of Canvas, and all our Company Interceeded for my
Wife that all was not taken from her. About Noon the Indians having removed all
their Plunder off the Bay, and many of them gone, a Guard was provided armed
with Bows and Arrows, with whom We were summoned to March? and a burden
provided for every one to carry that was any ways able. Our Master with his
broken Leg was helped along by his Negroe Ben. My Wife, was forced to carry her
Child, they not suffering any of us to relieve her. But if any of us offered to
lay down our burden, We were threatened to be short. Thus were We forced
along the Beach Barefooted.

We had saved one of the Masters Quadrants, and Sea-mens Calender, with two
other Books. As We Walked along the Bay (the time^ suiting) our Mate Richard
Limpency took an Observation, and We found our selves to be in the Latitude of
tvventy-seven Degrees and Eight Minuits. Some of the Indians were offended at
it: When he held up his Quadra^^ to observe; One would draw an Arrow so shoot
him; but it pleased God hitherto to prevent them from shedding any of our Blood.

One passage I have omitted. Two of our Mariner's named Thomas Fowns and
Richard Limpan^y went fort this morning from our Tent down to the Bay where the
Indians were, and viewing of them at some distance an Indian Man came running
upon them, with his Knife in his hand, and took hold of Thomas Fownes to Stab
him; but the said Tomas fell on his Knees, using a Spanish Ceremony, and begged
not to kill him; whereupon the Indian desisted, and bid him be gone to the
place from whence he came. The said Thomas at him return acquainted us how
narrowly he had escaped.

After We had traveled about five miles along the deep Sand, the Sunn being
extreme hott, we came to an Inlett. One the other fide was the Indian-Town,
being little Wig-wams made of small poles stuck in the ground, which they bended
one to another, making: an Arch, and covered them with Thatch of small
Falmetoe-Leaves: Here We were commanded to sittdown, and the Casseekey came to
us, who with his hand scatched a hole in the Sand about a foot deep, and came
to Water, which he made Signs for us to come and drink: We, being extreme
thirsty, did; but the Water was almost Salt. Whilst we sat here. We saw great
fires making on the other side of the Inlett, which some of us thought was
preparing for us. After an hour's time being spent here at lenght came an
Indian with a small Cannooe from the other fide, and I with my Wife and Child
and Robbert Barrow were ordered to go in: The same Cannooe was but just wide
enough f^r us to fit down in. Over We were carried, and being landed, the Man
made signs for us to walk to the Wig-wams; which we did; but the young Iudians
would seem to be frighted and fly from us. We were directed to a Wig-wam, which
afterward we understood to be the Casseekey's: It was about Man-high to the
topp. Herein was the Casseekey's Wife and some old Women sitting on a Cabin
made of Sticks about a foot high covered with a matt they made signs for us to
sit down on the ground; which we did the Casseekey wife having a jo^^g child
sucking at her breast gave it to another woman, and would have my child; which
my wife was very loath to suffer; but the would not be deny^d, took our child
and suckled it at her Breast viewing and feeling it from top to toe; at lengt
returnid it to my wife, and by this time was another parcel of our people come
over; and sitting down by the wig-wam side our Indian brought a fish boiled on
a small Palmeto leat and set it down amongst us making signs for us to eat:
but our exercise was too great for us to have any inclination to receive food.
at length all our people were brought over, and afterward came the Casseekey.
As soon as he came to his wig-wam he set himself to work got some stakes and
stuck them in a Roce joining to his wig-wam and tied some sticks whereon were
these small Palmetoes tied and fastened them to the stak^s about three foot
high; and laid two or three Matts made of Reeds down by this shelter; which; it
seems he made for us to break the wind off us; and ordered us to lie down
there; which we did, as many as the matts wonld hold the rest lay on the ground
by us. the Casseekey. went into his wigwam and sealed himself on his Cabin
Cross legged having a Basket of Palmetoe Berries brought him, which he eat very
greedili: after which came some Indians un to him and talked much* night came
on: the moon being up an Indian, who performs their Ceremonies stood out,
loocking full at the moon making a hideous noise, and crying out Acting like a
mad man for the space of half^n hour; all the Indians being silent till he had
done: after which they all ma^e fearful noise some like the barking of a Dog,
woolf, and other strange sounds. After this, one gets a logg and setts himself
down, holding the stick or logg upright on the ground, and several other^
getting about him, made a hid^ons noise, singing to our amazement; at length
their Women joined Cousort, making the noise more terrible, this they continued
till Midnight. Toward morning was great De us: Our Fire being expended ^ We
^vere extre^m cold.

This morning the Casseekey looking on us with a mild Aspect, sent his son wi^h
his striking staff to the Inle^^ to strike Fish for us; which was performed
with great dexterity; for some of us walked down wi^^ him and though we looked
very earnestly when he true his Staff from him, could not see a Fish; at which
time he saw it, and brought it on shore on the end of his staff. Sometimes he
would runn swif^ly pursueing a Fish, and seldom mist when he darted at him. In
two hours time he got as many Fish as would serve twenty Men: there were
others also fishing at the same time, so that Fish was plenty: but the sense
of our Conditions stayed our hungry stomachs: for some amongst us thought they
would feed us to feed themselves.

The Casseekey went this Morning toward our Vessel; in his absence the other
Indians looked very untovvardly upon us, which created a jealousy of their
Cruelty yet to come.

This Afternoon We savv a great fire nigh the pla^e of our Vessel; vvhereupon
We concluded that^ our Vessel and our Boat were burnt: Whereupon We were
almost confirmed that they designed to destroy us. About Sunsetting the
Casseekey came home: we spoke to him he ansvvered us, and seemed very affable;
which We liked Well. Night drawing on, and the Wind shifting North Ward, We
removed our shelter, and added the Matts to it to break the Wind off us. Which
blowed cowld, and laid our selves on the sand. About an hour Within Night came
a parcel of Indians from the southward being all armed with bows and Arrows
and comeing near our Ten^ some of us espy^d them where upon they squatted down.
This seemed a fresh motive of danger, and we awakened those of us that were
fallen a sleep, and bid them prepare, for things seemed dangerous we suppposing
they ware come to foward our destruction or to carry us to the Southward they
sat thus a Considerable time; at length they distributed themselves to the
wig-wams, thus would danger often appear unto us and almost swallow us up, but
at times we should be set over it, having a secret hope that God would work
our deliver rance having preserved us from so many perils.

Sometime before Night Robert Barrow was Exhorting us to be patient, and in a
Godly manner did he expound that Text of Scripture: Because thou have kept the
word of my patience etc. Rev: 3 Chap: 10 ver: after which he ended with a most
fervent Prayer desi^^ of the Lord that whereas he had suffered us to be cast
amongst a barbarous and heathenish people, if that it was his blessed will, He
would preserve and diliver us from amongst the^ that our names might not be
b^ried in Oblivion; and that he might lay his Body among^t Faithful Friends:
And at the close of (...) Prayer; He seemed to have an Assurance that his
Petition would be granted. In all which some of us were livingly refressed and
strengthened.

Casseekey, that we might go to the Northward for Augusteen. His answer was,
We should be all kil^d; but at length we prevailed, and He said, on the Morrow
we should go. Hereupon he took three Negroemen (one of Joseph Kirle rand two of
mine) and with a Cannoe went up the sound.

This day the Indians were busy with what they had taken out of our Vessel, and
would have inployed all of us to do, some one thing, some another for them;
but we not knowing the Consequence endeavored to shun it, and would deny them
demands

But some of our Men did answer their desires in making and sewing some Cloth
together, stringing our Beds, mending of Locks, of the Chests etc. Whatever
they thought was a miss they would be putting upon us to mend, still we wholly
refused. At which time I heard a sayingh that came from one of the Chief
Indians, thus [ English Son of a Bitch] which words started me; For I do
believe they had had some of our Nation in their possession, of whom they had
heard such an expression: I passed away from the Wig-wam with m^c^ trouble.

This ^ay being the first of the Week, we having a large (...) and a Book of
Robert-Barcley^s, some one or o^^er was o^te^ Reading in them: But being most
of us sat together, Robbert Barrow desired our People to wait upon the Lord: In
which time Robert had a ^^rd in season unto us, and afterward went to Prayer,
all the Indians comeing about us, and some younger sort would be mocking; but
not to our disturbance: The Elder sort stood very modestly the whole time:
After Prayer ended, they all with drew quietly: But some of them (especially
the Casseekey's eldest Son) would take great delight in our Reading, and would
take the Bible or other Book, and give to one or other to read, the Sound of
which pleased them, for they would sit quietly and very attetively tohear us.

The Casseekey having been gone most part of the Day with three Negroes in our
Boat comeing over the Bar into the Inlett. We rejoyc't to see our Boat, for we
thought She had been Burnt. Our Negroes told us; They went up Sound with the
Casseekey, and landed near the place where our Tent had been: The chief
Business was to remove the Money from one place to another, and bury it. This
Old man would trust our People, but not his own. After that was done, they went
to the place where our Vessel was burnt; they lanched our Boat, in which the
Old Casseekey put his Chests, wherein was our Linen and other of our Trade:
Also they got a small Rundlett which they filled with Wine out of a Quarter
Cask that was left and brought Sugar out of the wrack which was not consumed
with the Fire. By this time came the Caseekey and other Negroe in the Cannooe.
He told us. On the Morrow we should go with our Boat: This was cheerful news
unto us. All the time some Ind^ans had been out, and brought home some Oyst^rs,
and the Casseekey, gave us some, bidding us take, what we had a mind to. A
fittle before Nicht the Casseekey, opened his Chest and boxes; and his (...)
^^ok what (...) in them from him: But he seem^d (...) ^y generous to my Wife
and Child, and gave her several things w^^ch were useful to Her and our Child.

Our (...) was very Leaky; so we got her into a Creek to sink her, that the
water might swell her.

Casseekey would have a Negroe-Boy of mine, named Caesar, to which I could not
tell what to say; but he was resolved on it. We got down to the Waterside, and
sent all our People over that where to travel: And Joseph Kirle, Robert
Barrow, I, my Wife and Child with two of our Mariners went in the Boat, and
rowed along shore Northwards; But the Casseekey would have us to have gone with
our Boat up the Sound: We supposed the Sound was a great River; and therefore
were not willing to take his advice, having no knowledge; but his Counsel was
good, as We found afterward; for the convenience of passage.

The Casseekey and some other Indians went with our People toward our Wrack,
we rowing along shore, and our Boat very l^aky, that one person had Employ
enough to heave out the Water.

just before we left the Indian-Town, several Indians were for taking the
little, Clothes and Rags We had not; (...) Casseekey, he would cause then to
(...)

S^lomon Crelson was mightily in one Ind^^n's favor, who would hardly stir
from his Wig-wa^^ but Solo^on must be with him, and go Arm in Arm; Which Indian
amongst his Plunder, had a Morning-Gown, which he putt on Solomon, and Solomon
had worn it most of the time we were there; but when the time of our departure
came an Indian unrob^d him, and left only a pair of Breeches, and seemed very
angry.

It was high Noon when We left our Wrack (she being burnt down to her
Floor-T^mbers which ^ay in the Sand) We setting forward, some in the Boat? the
rest traveled a long shore; and a little before Su^^setting, our People came up
with abundance of small Fish ^^at had been forced on shore, as me may suppose,
by the Storm that drove us a shore, (they lying far from the Water, being much
tainted) covered the shore for nigh a mile in length: Of which our People
gathered as many as they could carry. About Sunn-setting we putt on shore to
refresh our selves, and take a small Respi^e, also to take my Kinsman Benjamin
Allin i^ to our Boat: For this Afternoon in his Travel he was taken with a
Fever and Ague, and We had much trouble to get him along, he having been Sick
nigh unto death (being first taken the day before We left Blewfields Road)
until about a Week before we were cast away.

One of my Negroes had saved a Tinder-Box and Flint, and We had reserved two
Knives, by which means We got a Fire, though with much difficulty, for our
Tinder was bad, and all the Wood Salt Water soaken: which being accomplished,
we broiled all our fish, feeding haertily of some of them and the rest we kept
not knowing when we should be thus furnished again; for which some of us were
truli tankfull to the ^od of all our Mercies.

Having a large fire many of us got under the leigh, of it, and others buried
themselves in the sand, in hopes to get a lic^e sleep, that we might be some
what refreshed, and there by be the better enabled some to travel and some to
row the remaining part of the night: but the sand flies and Muskettoes were to
exheam thick that it was impossible the Moon shining we lanched our Boat I and
my wife and child, the Master Robert Barrow my Kinsman Allin, Solomon Cresson.
Joseph Buckley and the Masters Negro went in our Boat; the rest traveled along
soar about midnight, or a little after our people came by an Indian Town; the
Indians came out in a great number, but offered no violence more than
endeavoring to take from them what little they had: But making some small
resistance, the Indians were putt by their purpose They were very desirous to
have us come on shore, and would hale us; but our People would have us keep of.
We were got among a parcel Breakers, and so had much a do to get out to Sea.

Indians with them: When they came a Breast with us, the Indians wafled us a
shore; but we refused, perceiving they werewickedly bent; they would be ever
and anon snatching one thingh or other: At which time our People would point to
us in the Boat; but perceiving they could not ^^tt us a shore in some few hours
left them.

This Day Noon Joseph Kirle having his Quadrart and Calender, took an
Observation, being in Lat^^ude 27 de. 45 min. About one a Clock we saw two
Ind^ans with Bows and Arrows running to meet our People; who when they saw
them, at first they made a (...) and afterward Retreated: At which the Indians
let fly an Arrow; which narrowly escaped one of them: Whereupon they stopped;
the Indians looked strengely on them; but our people set forwards, and the
Indians with them until they came to the Indian-Town. We saw our People go
into the Wiggwams, but stayed a very short time; for the Indians were for
taking those pieces of Canvas they had from them. They got some Water and set
forward again the two Indians still followed them. About this time We saw a
Sail to the Eastward, and We supposeing it at first to be a Briganteene, agreed
to follow her; but in a small time We made it to be a Cannooc or Boat with two
Masts and Sails: She stood in for the shore; but as soon as they espied us She
bore away: And when She saw we made not after her, She stood a shore again for
the Indian-Town; hereupon a Jealousy got amongst us that She might go on
shore and get strong with Men, and then come after us; whereupon We rowed very
hard and kept an offing for some hours; but finding they came not out, we stood
toward the shore again. This day was extreme hott and We had no Water since We
left the Indian-Town to the Sowth-ward of our wrack, called by the name of
Hoc-Bay; therefore We were desirous to get on shore, but when We endeavored
it, We could not; for the Seas swelling very much and came to (...) and broak
almost a mile from the shore; our Master said, It was inpossible to ge(...) on
shoer a live: But I being (...) some Exerci^e was disirous to be on shore, and
thereupon did express my self to the rest of our People* they star^^^d the
danger; all which I was as (...) of as they, yet I could nor rest but insisted
(...) going a shore: The Master and Men said, We should not have our lives; but
I gained so far, that they atempted and were got within half a mile of the
shore; but the Seas came on us so large and hollow that one Sea had like to
have over-welmed us: We just got a topp of it before it broke; There was then
no persuading them to go further, but We stood off, and disigned to keep off
all Night, our People being very weary, and the Sunn setting; We divided one
half to get some sleep, the other to watch and keep the boat's head to the
Sea. The Wether looked as though it would be bad, and the Sea increased;
Whereupon I began a fresh to persuade them to go on shore. All were disirous,
but thougt it impossible. At length We resolved to venture; And so committing
our selves to the Protection of the Almighty GOD; We stood in for the shore,
and made signs to our People that We disigned it. And it pleased GOD to order
i^ so that We went on shore, as though there had been a Lane made through the
Breakers, and were carried to the topp of the Bank, were We got aged Robert
Barrow, my Wife and Child out of the Boat, before ever a Sea came to fill Us;
which did, as soon as they were got out: (...) We got our Boat up from the
wash of the Sea.

The two Indians were for taking off our Clothes, (which would not cover our
Bodies) but We not being willing to yield they would snatch a piece from one
and a bitt from an other, and run away with that, and then come again and do
the like. These two Indians took away what was given to my Wife and Child which
we knew not how to help, but exercised Patience.

We enquired how far it was from St. a Lucea (one of them speaking a little
Spanish) and by signs we understood it was not far. They made fignes that
when we came there, we should be putt to most cruel Death but we hoped
otherwise.

At this place within the Land, and over the Sound our People said, before it
was dark, they saw two or three Houses, which looked white, tho they were
plastered with Lime: which putt us in hopes that there were Spaniards there; so
we set forward as the Iadians directed for St. a Lucea. They made Signs that
we should come to an Inlett of the Sea, and on the other side was St. a Lucea.
We traveled about four Miles and came to the Inlett, but saw no Settlement on
the other side; so we concluded to lie there all Night.

We saw the tract of a large Bare and oth^re wildBeasts; whereupon we set to
work to get Wood and then a fire: Abundance of Muskettoes and Sand-flyes
hindered our rest; to remedy which we dug holes in the Sand, got some Grass
and laid it therein to lie upon, in order to cover our selves from the Flies;
which most of us did; but it being extreme cold, and (...)ing scarce, we had
little comfort.

About Midnight we sent our People to see if they could get off our Boat, and
bring it into the Inlett, that We might get over to the other fide: They went
and launched her, but the Sea was so rough that there was no possibility of
getting Her off, for She was soon filled, and putt to Swimm, and they, Boat and
all were driven on shore again.

Whilst our People were gone for the Boat, We espied some Indians in a Cannooe
with their Torch a Fishing: We sent for Solomon ( Who was gone to launch the
Boat) expecting they would come, seeing fires, and We should not tell what to
say to, them; but they did not. Here We lay watching, for no rest could be
taken.

the 7. Month the 30. the 2. day of the Week.
This Morning by break of Day We saw a small Cannooe from the other side (...)
often shore with two Indians, inner going up the River (or Sound) a Fishing. We
haired them in Spanish and as soon as they heard and saw us, they made to the
shore with all speed, and away to their Town they runn: We perceiving they were
shey of us, begann to ^oubt of their Amity which We had so much depended on;
whereupon We counceled our People now to deport themselves, especially our
Negroes. About (...) We saw the Indians comeing, running (...) great number
with their Bows and Arrows to the Inlett; where having sive or six (...) into
them, as many as those Cannoo's could (...) Others took the water, (...) they
came in the greatest rage the (...) people could. Solomon began (...) they
answered not till they (...) from us; and then comeing (...) they cried out,
Nickaleer, Nickaleer. We satt all still Expecting death, and that in a most
Barbarous manner. They that did speak unto them could not be heard: but they
rushed violently, on us rending and tearing those few Clothes we had: they that
had Breeches had so many about them, that they hardly touched the Ground till
they were shaken out of them thy fore all from my Wife, and espying her
Hair-Lace, some were going to cut it hair and away to get it, but, like
greedy Dogs, another snatched and tore it off. As for our poor young Child,
they snacht from it what little it had, as though they would have shak^n and
torn it, Limb from Limb. After they had taken all from us but our lives, they
began to talk one to another, vehemently foaming at Mouth, like wild Boars, and
taking their Bows anb Arrows with other Weapons, cried out Nickaleer,
Nickaleer. Solomon Spoke in Spanish to Them, and said We were Spanjards; but
They would not hear Him, and continued crying out Nickaleer, Nickaleer, with
all drawing their Arrows to the Head. But suddenly We perceived them to look
about and listen, and then desisted to prosecure their Bloody Disign. One of
them took a pare of Breeches and gave to my Wife. We brought our great Bible
and a large Book of Robert Barclays to this Place. And being all Stripped as
Naked as We were Born, and endeavoring to hide our Nakedne^s; these Cannaballs
took the Books, and tearing out the Leaves would give each of us a Leave to
cover us; which We took from them: At which time they would deride and smite
us; and instantly another of them would snatch away what the other gave us,
smiting and diriding us withal.

Robert Barrow with my Self, Wife and Child were ordered to go in to a Cannooe
to be carried to the other side of the Inlett, being a Furlong over, Four
Indians being in the Cannooe to paddle: when We came to the other side within a
Cannooe's lenght or two of the shore. A number of Indians with their Bows and
Arrows came running into the water, some to their knees, some deeper, having
their Bows and Arrows drawn up, Crying out Nickaleer, Nickaleer; which they
continued without ceasing. The Indians that brought us over leapt out of the
Cannooe, and swam a shore, fearing they should be Shot; But in this Juncture
it pleased GOD to tender the hearts of some of Them toward us; especially the
Cassekey his Wife, and some of the chiefest amongst them, who were made
Instruments to interceede for Us, and stopp the rage of the multitude, who
seemed not to be satisfied without our blood. The Cassekey ordered some to
swim, and fetch the Cannooe a shore; which being done, his Wife came in a
Compassionate manner and took my wife out of the Cannooe, ordering her to
follow her, which we did some distance from the Inletside, and stood till all
our people were brought over, which in a little time was done. But the rage of
some was still great, thirsting to shedd our blood, and a mighty strife there
was amongst them: some would kill us, others would prevent it. and thus one
Indian was striving with another. all being got over, were to walk a long the
sea shore to their Town: in this passage we most of us felt the rage of some of
them, either by striking or stoneing; and diverse Arrows were shot: but those
that were for preserving us would watch those that were for destroying us: and
when some of them would go to shoot, others of them would catch hold of their
Bows or Arm. It was so ordered that not one of us was touched with their Arrows;
several of us were knocked down, and some tumbled into the Sea We dared not
help one another; but help we had by some of them being ^^de isntrumental to
help us. My Wife received several blows, and an Indian came and took hold of
her Hair, and was going either to cut her Throat or something like it, having
his Knife nigh Her throat; but I looked at him, making a sign that he should
not, so he desisted: At which time another Indian came with a handful of
Sea-sand and silled our poor Child's Mouth. By this time the Cassekey's Wife
came to my Wife seeing her oppressed, and they pulled the Sand out of our Child
s mouth, and kept by my Wife until we got into the Casseekey s house, whith
was about forty foot long and twenty-five foot wide, covered with
Palmixtoe-Leaves both topp and sides.

There was a Range of Cabbins, or a Barbecue on one side and two ends. At the
entering on one side of the house a passage was made off Benches on each side
^^ding to the Cabins. On these Benches satt the Chief Indians, and the upperend
of the Cabin was the Casseekey seated. A kind of Debate was held amongst them
for an hour s time. After which Solomon and some others were called to the
Casseekey; and were sea^ed on the Cabin; where the Casseekey talked to Solomon
in the Spanish Language: But could not hold a Discourse. In a little time some
raw Deare-Skins were brought in and given to my Wife and Negroe-Women, and to
us Men such as the Indian-Men wear, being a piece of Platt work of Straws
wrought of diverse colors and of a Triangular Figure, with a Belt of Four
Fingers broad of the same wrought together, which goes about the wast and the
angle of the other having a thing to it, com^ig between the Legs, and Strings
to the ends of the Belt; All three meeting together are fastened behind with a
Horsetail or a Bunch of Silk-grass exactly resembling it, of a ^axen color:
This being all the Apparel or Covering that the Men wear; And thus they
clothed Us. A place was appointed for us, Matts being laid on the Floor of the
House, where We were ordered to lie down: But the place was extreme Nasty; for
all the Stones of the Berries which they eat and all the nastiness that is made
amongst them lay on their Floor, that the place warmed with abundance of many
sorts of creeping things; as a large black hairy Spider, which has two Claws
like a Crabb; Scorpions; and a numberles number of small Buggs. On these Matts
We lay, these Vermin crawling over our naked Bodies. To brush them off was like
driving of Muskettoes from one where they are extreme thick. The Indians wear
Seated as aforesaid, the Casseekey at the upperend of them, and the range of
Cabins was filled with Men, Women and Children, beholding us. At length we
heard a Woman or two cry* according to their manner, and that very Sorrowfully
One of which I took to be the Casseekey^s Wife which occasioned some of us to
think that something extraordinary was to be done to us We heard a strange sort
of a noise which was not like unto a noise made by a Man; but We could not
understand what nor where it was; for sometime it Sounded to be in one part of
the House, sometimes in another, to which We had an ear. And in deed our ears
and eyes could perceive or hear nothing but what was strange and dismal; and
Death seemed sorrounded us. But time discovered this Noise unto us.

The occasion of it was thus. In one part of this House were the Fire was kept,
was an Indian Man, having a Pott on the Fire wherein he was making a Drink of
the Leaves of a Shrubb (which We understood Afterward by the Spaniard, is
called Casseena), boiling the said Leaves, after they had Parched them in a
Pott; then with a Goard having a long Neck and at the Topp of it a small hole
which the topp of ones^ Finger could cover, and at the side of it a round hole
of two Inches diameter, they take the Liquor out of the Pott and putt it into a
deep round Bowl, which being al most filled contains nigh three Gallons:
with this Goard they brew the Liquor and make it froth very much It looks of
a deep brown color. In the ^rewing of this Liquor was his Noise made which we
thought strange; for the pressing of this goard gently down into the liquor,
and the air which it contained being forced out of the little hole at topp
occasioned a sound; and according to the time and motion given would be
various, This Drinck when made, and cool to supp, was in a Conch-shell first
carried to the Casseekey, who threw part of it on the Ground, and the rest he
drank op, and then would make a loud He^m; and afterward the Cupp Passed to
the rest of the Casseekey's Associates, as aforesaid, but no other Man, Woman
nor Child must touch or taste of this sort of Drinck; of which they sat sipping,
Chatring and Smoking Tobacco, on some other Herb instead thereof, for the most
part of the day.

About Noon was some Fish brought us on small Palmetoe Leaves, being boiled
with scales, head, and Gills, and nothing taken from them but the Gut^s; but
our troubles and Exercice were such that We cared not for food.

In the Evening, we being laid on the place aforesaid the Indians made a Drumm
of a skin, covering there with the deep Bowl in which they Brew^d their Drink,
beating thereon with a Stick, and having a couple of Rattles made of a small
Goard put on a Stick with small stones in it, shaking it, they began to set up
a most hideous howling, very irksome to us, and some time after came some of
their Young Women, some singing some dancing. This was continued till
Midnight, after which they went to sleep.

the 8 Mth. 1. the 5 of the Week.
This day the Casseekey looking on us pleasantly, m^de Presents to some of us,
especially to my Wi^^; he gave her a Parcel of Shelfish, which are known by
the name of Clamms; One or two he roasted and gave her, showing that she must
serve the rest so, and eat them. The Indian Women would take our Child and
Suckle It, for It Is Mother's Milk was almost gone that it could not get a
Meal: And our Child, which had been at Death's-Door from the time of It Is
Birth un^^l We were cast away began now to be cheerful, and have an appetite
to food; It had no covering but a small piece of raw Dear Skin; not a shred of
Linne^ or Woollen to putt on it.

About the tenth hour, we observed the Indians to b^e on a sudden motion, most
of the principal of the^ betook themselves to their houses: The Casseekey went
to dressing his head and painting himself, and so also did the rest: When they
had done, they came into the Casseekey's house, and seated themselves in Order.
In a small time after came an Indian with some small Attendance in to the
house, making a Ceremoneous Motion, and seated himself by the C^sseekey, the
persons that came with him seated themselves amongst the others, After some
small pause the Casseekey began a Discourse, which held nigh an hour. After
which the Strange Indian and His companions went forth to the waterside, unto
their Cannooe lying in the Sound, and returned Presently with such Presents as
they had brought, delivering them unto the Ca^seekey, and those sitting by
giving an Applause. The presents were some few Bunches of the Herb they make
their Drink of, and another Herb which they use instead of Tobacco, and some
platted Balls stuffed with Moss to lay their Heads on instead of Pillows. The
Ceremony being ended, they all seated themselves again, and went to drinking
Casseena, Smoking and talking during the Strangers stay,

About Noon some Fish was brought us: Hunger was grown strong upon, and the
Quantity given was not much more than each a Mouthfull; which We eat: The
Casseekey ordered the Master Joseph Kirle Solomon Cr^sson, My Wife and Me, to
sit upon their Cabin to eat our Fish; and they gave us some of their Berries
to eat. We ^asted them, but not one amongst us could suffer them to stay in our
Mouths; for We could compare the Taste of them to nothing else, but rotten
Cheese steeped in Tobacco. Sometime after We had eaten, some of the Indians
asked us, if We were Spaniards? Solomon ansvvered them, Yes. Then some off the
Indians would point to those whose Hair was black, or of a deep Brown, and
say such a one was a Spanjard of the Havana, and such of Augusteen: but those
whose Hair was of a light color they were doubtful of; some would say they
were no Spaniards.

About the third hour in the afternoon the Strangers went away, and some small
time after they having satis^y'd themselves that most of us were Spaniards,
told us that We should be sent for to the next Town; And They told us that
there was a Nickaleer off, and We understood them [ Englishmen off Bristoll],
also the Number Six Men and a Woman: And that they were to be put to Death
before We should get thither. We were silent, although much concerned to hear
that Report. They also told us that a Messenger would come For us to direct us
to the next Town, thence to Augusteen.

Night coming on they betook themselves to their accustomed S^^ging and Dancing.

About the Tenth or Twelfth hour in the Night before the Singing and Dancing
was ended, came in a Stranger armed with Bow and Arrows: the Ca^seekey and
his Companions entertained him with hal^ an hour's Discourse, which ended, We
were on a sudden ordered to get up and hurryed away with this Stranger,
they not giving us time to see if we were all together; and a Troop of Young
Indian-Men and Boy's Followed us for about Four miles, all which Way they
pelted us with Stones: At length they all left us except Two and our Guide;
but We missed Solomon Cre^son, and Joseph Kirle's Boy, and Negroe Ben.; Which
was no small trouble to us.

We had not traveled above Five Miles before our Guide caused us to stop; and
at some small distance was an Indian-Town, which I suppose our Guide belonged
to; For Indians came thence with Fire and Water for Him, and with
Palmetoe-Leaves they made a blast of Fire: Here We stayed nigh two hours: The
Fly^s were very thick, and the Night very Cold, so that our naked bodies were
not able to endure it but with grief. At length we left this place; the whole
night following were troubled with these two young Indians, who at times would
be abuseing one or other of us, singleing them out and asking If they were not
Nickaleer, or English? If they said, nay, then they would hitt them a Blow or
more with a Truncheon, which they had; and said, They were. We traveled all
Night without stopping from the aforesaid place.

8 Month 2. the 6 of the Week.
After Sunrising We came up with the Wrack of the Ve^sell that We heard that
was cast away. She was Staved all to pieces, for her Keeleson was driven a
shore. We saw Sugar-Hogs heads, Ginger and Logwood; which gave us to suppose
tha it was one of our Fleet, and we thought it to be either Buroughs or Smith,
belonging to Bristoll. A Mile or more from hence We came to an Inlett; our
Guide told us, We must Swimm over, except my Wife and Robert Barrow; but We
signified that We could not: He carried Robert Barrow, Joseph Kirle, Me, my
Wife and Child over first; and at length the hole Company, for it was a great
way over: By that time We were all got over, the days was hott, and my Wife
quite tired faint as also Robert Barrow and Io^eph Kirle, whose Leg was grown
so painful that it overcame him. We go^ under a Grape-Bush for shelter from
the Sun, I sent one of my Negroes to seek for Water for them; but ther^ was
none to be had; but he got some Seaside-Grapes, which with resting refresht
the Weak and Lame.

Our Guide was for ^orceing us forward; so We traveled about four or five
Miles further, and met with the Casseekey of this Town and Commander of the
Northern part of this Coast. He was an Ancient Man; his Beard and Hair Gray: He
inquired for the Captain, so our People pointed to Io^eph Kirle whom He went to
and embraced him; then he asked for our Mate or Pilot. This Man could speak
Spanish better than any we had met with yet; but not so well as to discourse,
only to ask some Questions, and We had three or four amongst us could make a
shift to answer Him, for Solomon was kept behind. This old Casseekey seemed to
have Compassion on us, and said, That those People ho had served us thus in
Stripping of us were Rogues. But we were His Comerradoes, or Friends, withal
He said, In Few days, He would carry us to Augusteen; and thereupon He told us
of Six Englishmen, and One Women, being at His Town: We inquired if He
intended them for Augusteen? But He would shake his head and point to the
Southward, saying, Nickaleer, no Comerradoe (Englishmen were not his Friends)
Which words were unpleasant to us. This People kept us Company till We came
within a Mile or two of their Town, and then they left Us, they going faster
got in before us. Their Town stood about half a mile from the Sea-shoar whitin
the Land on the Sound, being surrounded with a Swamp, in which grew White
Mangrove-Trees, which ^id the Town from the Sea. We were directed to the
Casseekey's house, which were large, and filled with (...), and then ordered to
sit down. The Old Casseekey fetched some Water, and washed Rober^ Barrow^s
Feet, and my Wife's; After which He got^ some Canvass and Crocus, Ginger-baggs,
which they had got out of the Vessel that was cast on Shore; which was
distrubuted amongs us. Joseph Kirle had a Coat given him, which they had taken
from the People of the other Vessel; but it was rent down the Back. My Wife had
two pieces of Sail-Canvass given her; and I with others had each a Crocus
Ginger, Bagg. They gave a piece of a Barber's old Linuen st^^r in biggness of a
small hand-kerchif to cover our Child. This was all our Clothing: Robert Bnrrow
and my Wife were quite spent with traveling barefoot on the hott Sand, having
bruised their feet, and with stumps Stones and prickles, their Feet, especially
Robert-Barrow's had holes in them, that one might have putt the topp of ones
Thumb in. We were directed to lie down on a Cabin. The other Vessel'^ Company
were one John Smith Master of the Nantwitch, a Barque belonging to Bristoll,
which came out of ^um^ica with us, with five Men and one Woman, viz. Andrew
Murray Merchant, Andrew Barnes Mate, Hugh Allen, John Osler, John Shears and
Cornelius Toker; Two ^oys with a Woman Passenger named Pene^ope. We took an
opportunity to discourse them. They were cast away the same Night We were, and
their Vessel being forced by the Storm (they not being able for two days
before to carry any Sail) on shore, they got into their Boat and so on shore:
And in a small time was a great part of their Wrack driven on shore; amongst
which, was a Barrel or more of Water, some Barrels of Beef or Pork, with their
Chests? and many other things which they got. On the Morrow they designed to
travel to the Northward; But Andrew Barnes their Mate having been a long time
afflicted with a Flux which had wasted his Body to Skin and Bone, so that he
was not able to help himself, they left Him and traveled a Mile or more and
came to the In^e^t which they could not pass: Whereupon they returned back
again to take their Boat; but at their return, before they could get away with
their Boat, they espied the Indians comeing on them, who soon got to them;
asked in Spanish what Nation they were? If Spanjards, English, or French. But
the Indians made Signs to give them their Clothing; which they readily did. But
still they inquired Of what Nation? At first they answered, Spanjards; but the
Natives looked to furiously that they soon Answered them, Englishmen.
Thereupon every one had it, Nickaleer, Nickaleer. And then they very eagerly
Stripped them of all that they had on them: After which they drove them away to
the Northward unto their Town; but Andriew Barnes being not able to stand nor
go, was left behind, after they had stripped him, on the Land naked when they
were driven away. Before they got to the Town, the Indian Casseekey gave them
some Clothing, and no violence was offered to their persons. They had plenty
of Fish and Berrles to the time of our comeing. John Smith and Andrew Morray
had their being in the C^sseekey's House, and the Woman named Penelope: The
rest of Smith^s people lodged in other Indian-Houses. But on our comeing, the
Old Casseekey told them, they must turn out, and make room for the Spanjards:
But Smith and Morrey would not g^^; and the Indian did not force them out. In
some^ime aft^r We had been in the house, came in Indian-Women laden with
Basketts of Berries, mostly of the Palm, some Seaside Co^^o-Plumbs and
Seaside Grapes: Of the two latter We could eat; but of the Palm-Berries We
could not bear the Taste in our Mouths. We laid our selves on the. Cabin, on
that part which was appointed us; on the other part the young Casseeley or
King lay being Parted by a Chest that stood thereon: before Night was a
parcel of large Fish calleb Drumms brought in: The Old Casseekey told Joseph
Kirle, that those were for the Spanjards, and bidd him let some body to dress
them. He also ordered us a Pott. They were soon dressed, and We eat them. Night
being come the Old Casseekey enquired after our losses; which We, as well as We
could, gave him to understand, that in our Vessel was a grear deal of Clothing
and Money, which the Indians at Hoebay had taken from us. He understood so much
of the matter that he grew covetous, and said, He would go and get some of it
from them.

About Midnight came Solomon Cresson in a Cannooe with two Indians. The Old
Casseekey began to examine him concerning our Vessel, Goods and Money, or
plate; which Solomon rendered a further Account unto him of then We could: Which
caused him to resolve, on the Morrow to provide Men and Boats, and to go
down the Sound to Hoebay, to have part from them; He would have had Solomon
to have gone with him, but Solomon refused.

We inquired of Solomon concerning his stay, and of the Negroe Ben. and Joseph
Kirle's Boy: He said that he was stayed by force; but the Negroe and the Boy
were asleep in another house when We were driven away. They had a design in
staying of Solomon which he could not rightly understand; but supposed that
they doubted that We were not all Spaniards; for the Indians of St. a Lucea
would say to Solomon that he was a Spaniard, and some others; but the most of
us were not Spaniards; and that they had stolen Sclomon: But Solomon denied it.

The 8 Month 3. the 7 of the Week.
This Morning the Old Casseekey with two Cannooes and Tenn Indians with him
went hence for Hoebay. He promised us that as soon as he returned, He would
carry us for Augusteen: which he supposed would be in six days, if he had good
weather. But this Day the Wind was got to the North-East, and it looked as
though the weather would be stormy. The Wind increased, and toward Evening the
Water in the Sound did rise that it began to cover the Land, and came into the
Houses; but We had little or no Rain till Night: Then the Wind increased and
Rain also.

8 Mt. 4. the 1. o^ the Week.
This Morning the Wind was violent with Rain; the Kings House was Knee-deep
with Water, and like to continue riseing. I removed with my Wife, Child, Robert
Barrow and Benjamin Allen to an Indian House that stood on a hill of
Oyster-shells: In this House We remained this day; the Wind continuing at
North-East very violent, and by reason of much Rain, the Water rising every
hour, the Indians began to putt their dry Berries into their Cannooes, and to
seek which way to secure them. Several Indians betook themselves to their
Boats and carried what they had to some high Land a considerable distance,
where a place was made for their Casseekey or King. But before Day the house we
were in was a float, and the Indians were for turning us out, bidding us take
an old Cannooe that had a hole in the side of her almost at the bottom bigg
enough for a man to put his hand through; so that she was full of water: in
this Cannooe they would have had us shifted for out selves; but We were not
willing to go: the Indians made signs for us to be gone diverse times: At length
they grew angry, and took my Kinsman Allen into the Cannooe, and carried him
away: In a little time after returned with the Cannooe (...) bid me and Robert
Barrow be gone. By this time day appeared, the wind and Rain still violent. I
then saw a house on another Oyster-hill that the water was not got over yet;
to which I got and asked by signs if I might be there? The Indians seemed
willing: so thither I got my wife child and Robert Barrow, and remained there.
All this day the wind was violent, it rained and the Flood continued. We
imagined that the Sea was broke in upon the Land, and that We should be
drowned. The houses was almost blown to pieces, and the Indians often a tying
and mending it. The Chief man of this house caused his Wife to Suckle our
Child; for it was almost famished, its Mother having no Milk in her Breast; for
We had received no susstainance since the storm began: Fresh Water was not to
be had, the Land being covered with the Sea. The Indians offered us some of
their Berries, which We endeavored to eat; but could not; the taste was so
irksome and ready to take our breath from us, when we treyed to eat them; but
we expected that if the Flood continued longer, We should not need for Water.
Yet nevertheless we enjoying health and strength, and hunger growing violent,
we would be tasting the Berries, though we would reap no satisfaction.

the 8 Mth. 6. the 7 of the Week.
This Morning the Flood began to come into this house also; the Indians seemed
much concerned: the Storm of wind and rain held till about Midday; at which
time the wind shifted South-west, with the rain; but in some few hours the
Flood began to aba^e.

the 8 mht. 7. the 4 of the Week.
By this day Noon the Water fell many feet, and I went out to see our people
whom I left in the Kings-House: I found them where I left them. All the Indians
had left the house; and our People remained on the Cabin, which was about four
foot from the Floot. The Flood had ris^^ within two or three Inches of the Topp
of the Cabin, and they said, they expected to Dye there. We began to express
our hunger and thirst each to other: but there was no help as yet for either;
We w^nt to the Springs, but they were all salt as the Sea, and we would be
striving with the Berries; but they were so Offensive unto us that we could
reap no satisfaction from them. We went a begging at times to the Indian-women
to Suckle out Child; which they would seldom deny.

the 8 mth. 8. th 5 of the week.
This Day we got some water to drink; but it was very brackish, and at best not
very good.

the 8 ^th. 9. th 6 of the week.
This Day the Young Casseekey returned to his house with his Chest and other
things.

the 8 mth. 10. the 7 of the week.
This day We got a Meal of Fish the greatest plenty we had received since we
were here. We longed for the Old Casseekey's return, and reared that (...) bad
weather would lengthen the time.

the 8 mth. 11. the 1 of the week.
This Morning early came a Messenger giving an Account that the Old Casseekey
was within some few leagues of the Town; and that we might expect him this
Fore-noon; within the time he came in sight a We all drew down to the
Waterside to receive him; We perceived He came in State, having his two
C^nnooes lashed together with Poles a thwart from the one tot he other, making
a Platt form, which being covered with a Matt, on it stood a Chest, which was
belonging to us, and my Negroe-Eoy Caesar, which the Casseekey of Hoe-Bay took
from me, whom he had got from the Indians at Hoe-bay: Upon this Chest he ^^t
cross-legged, being newly painted redd, His men with Poles setting the Cannooes
along unto the shore Seeing us, He cried [ Wough] and looked very ster^ly at
us. He was received by his People with great homage, holding out his hands (as
their custom is) to be kissed, having his Chest carried before Him unto his
house, whither he went, the house being filled with Indians. The Old Casseekey
began and held a Discourse for some hours, giving an account as We suppose,
what he heard and saw; in which discourse he would often mention Nickaleer;
which caused us to fear that all things were not well. After he had told his
story, and some of the Elder Indians had expressed their sentiments thereof. they
drank Ca^seena and Smoaked until Evening. The House being clean, the Old
Casseekey looking very unpleasantly, showed unto us several things which he
had got; as a Hatchet, a Knife, the Chest and many other things, asking us, if
they were not ours? Which we owned; whereupon he would say, they were Nickaleer
(of English): We signified that We had them of the English, but our Money was
Spanish. toward the Evening Joseph Kirle, My self and Solomon got an
Opportunity to discourse him; We began to urge his promise of carrying us for
Augusteen. At First he stated his hardships and labor to Hoe-Bay and back, and
that he must have time to rest, before he could go out again; then He told us,
the way was long and would be tedious, and that at several places we must draw
the Cannooes over Land for a great distance; He also mentioned how many Towns
there were between this and Augusteen, in number Tenn; But nigh the conclusion,
he setting an angry countenance upon us, told us that at Hoe-Bay he was
informed that We should say, We were all Englishmen; after he said this, in an
angry manner he turned from us and went away.

This laid al our hopes in the Dust, and We soon perceived the Indians grew
jealous of us; for they would now daily be asking us, if We were not Nickaleer?
or English? And would not seem satisfied with a denial. Many days were spent,
and the time drew nigh that we understood the Old Casseekey was intended for
Augusteen; hereupon we applied our selves to him, requesting that if all might
not go, he would carry some of us; but he told us, he would carry but one. This
putt us on Q^erying which of us should be that One. The generality was for Me:
But I and Joseph Kirle were for Solomon, because he could speak the
Spanish-Language well, and no other of us could; And should any other of us
have gone and come amongst those Indians to the Northward, who we supposed
could speak the Spanish-Language well, We should be discovered to be what
these People did suppose we were; therefore it might overtrow all our
Expectations; but Solomon might pass all those Objections. These reasons did
not satisfy our People so that some of them grew Colerick: of which the Old
Casseekey took notice, and told Solomon, that if they made such a stirt, He
would not carry one. If He did, it should be either Solomon, Joseph Kirle, or
Me: whereupon we prevailed with Him that Solomon might go, and accordingly made
preparations, the Casseekey appointing the number of Indians to go with Him;
also a Cannooe was sent for, which when it came, We found it to have belonged
to the English, by the maker of her. This Cannooe had a great hole in the head
nigh the bottom with many very great rents and holes in her: Joseph Kirle and I
were required to mend her which with much a do was accomplished, the Cannooe
being much decayed and rotten where the rents were.

the 8 mth. 18. the 1 of the week.
This day Morning the Old Casseekey with Solomon and Six Indians in a Cannooe
set out for Augusteen.

The Casseekey carried a small Chest, in which was nigh One hundred
Pieces-of-Eight, as some of our People did suppose, with some other matters
that were gotten from our Vessel. The Weather was likely for Rain, which caused
us to fear, should the Weather prove bad, that Solomon would hardly live to
get to Augusteen; for he had nothing to cover him, exept a pare of
Indian-Breeches and a small piece of Skin that covered his breast.

We understood by the Old Casseekey that it would be a Month or next New Mood
before We could expect their Return: All which time We spent in much trouble
and hardship. The Weather began to grow cold, and Provision very short, that is
Palm-Berries, Coker-Plunishs and Sea-Grapes, (which are the three sorts before
Expressed) the time of these Fruits-bearing being over, they having no sort of
Fruit till next Spring.

These People neither Sow nor plant any manner of thing watsoever, nor care for
any thing but what the barren Sand produce, Fish they have as plenty as they
please but sometimes they would make it scarce to us, so that a Meal in a Week
was most commenly our portion, and three Meals a rarity. After the Old
Casseeley's departure our hardships increased, especially my Wife's and
Child's: For want of Food of any sort, my Wife's Milk was gone, and our poor
Child was in great want; the Indians now and then would give it suck, but
rearly to satisfy it; for there was a Woman or two of their own which had Young
Children and no Breast to Suckle them. Our Extrenity was such that any manner
of thing would go down with us; the Gills and Gutts of Fish picked of a
Dunghill, was acceptable; the Scraps the Indians threw away, and the Water the
boiled their Fish in, We were thankful for, though never so undecently handled
by them. And though my Wise had hardly and Milk for our Child, yet an
Indian-Women who was lately delivered of a Child, and had no Milk in her
Breast, would have her to Suckle her Child: Which my Wife consented. unto: And
this was a means of her and our Child's reaping a benefitt; for the Indians
would give her Fish, which means helped to increase Milk for our Child. Many
were our exercises both in body and Mind amongst this People Sometimes they
would look upon us as though they had some ill Intent toward the whole of us:
At other times they would tell us (who were nominally Spaniards) how and in
what manner those of Smith's Company should be putt to Death. And thus were We
daily exercised in sorrow and grievous troubles. Sometimes doubts would arise
amongst us concerning what would be the end of us, and what manner of deaths
We should pass through. And whom soever these doubts did appear in, it would
be hard for another to help with Counfell; but some there were Whose hope
never failed, they trusting in the Lord, to Work for our Deliveranc^. One thing
did seem more grievous to Me, and my Wife than any other thing. Which was. That
if it should so happen that We should be putt to Death. We feared that our
Child would be kept alive, and bred up as one of those People; When this
thoughts did arise it wounded us deep.

This day being the time of the Moon's entering the First Quarter, the Indians
have a Ceremonious Dance, which they beginn about Eight a Clock in the morning.
In the First place comes an old Man and takes a Staff about Eight foot long,
having a broad Arrow on the head thereof, and thence half way painted Redd and
White like unto an Barbers-Pole; in the middle of this Staff is Fixed a piece of
wood shaped like unto Thigh. Legh and Foot of a man, and the lower part thereof
is Painted Black, and this Staff being carried out of the Casseekey's house, is
set fast in the Ground standing upreight: This done, he also brings out a
Baskett containing Six Rattles, Which are taken out of the Baskett and placed
at the foot of his Staff; Then another Old Man comes and setts up a Howling
like unto a mighty Dogh, but beyoind him for length of Breath; withal making a
Proclamation: This being done, the most of them having painted themselves, some
red, some black, some with black and red; with their Belly girt up as tight as
well they can girt themselves with Ropes, having their sheits of Arrows at
their backs and their Bows in their hands, being gathered together about this
Staff; Six of the chiefest Men in esteem amongst them, especially one who is
their Doctor, and much Esteemed, taking up the Rattles begins a hidious noise,
standing round this Staff, taking their Rattles, and bowing, without cea^ing;
unto the Staff for about half an hour; whilst these Six are thus employed, all
the rest are stareing and scratching, pointing upwards and downwards on this
and the other side every way; looking like men frighted, or more like Furies:
on thus behaving themselves until the Six have done shaking their Rat^^es.
Then they all beginn a dance, violently stamping on the Ground for the space of
an hour or more without ceasing. In which time they will sweat in a most
excessive manner, that by the time the Dance is over, what by their Sweat and
the violent stamping of their feet, the Ground is trodden into Furrows; and by
the Morning, the place where they danced was covered with Maggots: Thus often
reapeating the manner they continue till about Three or Four a Clock in the
Afternoon; by which time many were Sick and ^ainty. And then being gathered
into the Casseekey^ House, they sit down, having some hort Casseena ready,
Which they drink plentifully; and give greater quantities thereof to the Sick
and Fainty than to others: Then they eat Berries. On these days they eat not
any Food till Night.

The next Day about the same time, they begin their Dance as the day before.
Also the third Day they beginn their Dance a^t the usual time: At Which time
came many Indians from other Towns, and Fell to Danceing without taking any
notice one of the other.

This Day they were stricter than the other two days, for no Woman must look
upon them; but if any of their Women go out of their houses, they go veiled
with a Ma^t.

the 8 month 28. the 1 of the week.
This Day was a day of plenty unto us, for We had as much Fish and Berries as
would serve us two days.

This Week. We observed that great Basketts of dried Berries were brought in
from diverse Towns and delivered to the King or Young Casseekey, which We
supposed to be a Tribute to the King of this Town, Who is Chief of all the
Towns from St. a Lucea to the Northward of this Town of Jece.

the 27. the 3 of the week.
This Day was a Bagg of Berries (the Bagg made of Grass) given us, which We eat
in two or three days; and then We fasted as many days before the Young
Casseekey would give us more.

About this time John Smith and Andrew Morray were sharply Seized with a Fever
and Ague: When the Fit of the Ague was on them, the Indians would mock and
deride them. This We well observed, that these People had no Compassion on
their own Aged declining people when they were past their labor, nor on others
of their own which lay under any declining condition: For the younger is served
before the Elder, and the Elder people both Men and Women are Slaves to the
Younger.

In this Place We saw many Tokens of some of our Nations, having fallen into
the hands of these People* As Two English Canno^es* one of Cedar* the other of
Cotten-Tree, like those of ^amaica* several Blocks and Sheives of
Lignum-(...); se^^^^ Tools and Knives, and more Particularly* a (...) on the
haf^ of which was writ the man's nam^ ^^us* THOMAS FOSTER. Some of these
things looked as though they had been several years amongst them, some but a
few. But We never dared to enquire; for We thought they brought some things in
our view to try us.

Here was a Man in this Town who, some years past, had been taken off by some
of our English-Sloopes, for a Diver on the Wrack to the Eastward of Cuba,
where he was sometime: But the Vessel putting in to Cuba, for Water, this
Indian swam on shore and go^^ to the Havana, thence to St. Augusteen, and so to
his native Town. The greatest Charge this Man had against the English, was, for
taking him and their People away; not but that he was well used amongst them.
This Indian would often call Joseph Kirle, Solomon Cresson and some of us into
his house, seeming very cheerful, Asking if they would eat, withal asking
the name of the B^rries, Expecting We would call them after the English manner
[ Plumbs]: but perceiving his drift, and having learned the name of them, as
the Spaniard calls them [ V^aes; then he would tell us that the English called
them Plumbs]: such sort of discourse we had at times, For he would be striving
to trapp us, viz. Joseph, Solomon and Me, ^n words; but he never had an
advantage, for when Solomon was gone, We shunned all his Invitations and
Arguments.

the 8 month 31. the 7 of the week.
this day came in a Cannooe laden with Fish, and it was free, for those that
would, to take as much as they pleased. The Indians put us to go and take; for
it was a kind of a scramble amongst us and the young Indian men and Boys: All
of us got Fish enough to Serve us two or three days.

the 9 month 2. the 2 of the week.
This Morning about Sunrising came two Strange Indians, who had run so hard
that they Swea^ed extremely, of whom We understood that the Spaniards* were
comeing with their Old Casse^key; Which News surprised us, doubting the truth
of it, for Solomon had been gone but Sixteen days, and We understood that they
must have an extraordinary passage to be here in a Month: We had not long to
Consider of the Matter, for in an hour's time We heard four Musketts
discharged, and immediately We looked out, and the Spaniards in their
Perre-Ango were in sight. the Indians were like a people amazed and overcome
with fear: We perceived the Noise of a Gun was terrible unto them. the
Spaniards Landed being in number twelve, One Sebastian Lop^z Commanding^Tenn
Soldiers, with one Indian an Interpreter. The Spaniards embraced us very
cheerfully, and expressed their being glad to find us alive. But We were not
able to discourse each other, though We had so much Spanish as to ask
Questions, and answer some part of what they asked us. One of the Sp^niards
said, they could not speak English, nor could We speak Spanish enough to
understand each other sufficiently: This the Indians perceived and imediately
cried out, Nickaleer Nickaleer, and looked enviously. on us, so that, could
they have had their wills, We believed they would not have suffered us to have
liv^d many hours; but the Spaniards Awed them.

We received a Letter from Solomon which he wrist when he met with Captain
Sebastian Lopez, signifying the Gouvernment of Augusteen^s great care for our
Preservation, of what Nation soever We were. But how these persons, or the
Gouvernour of Augusteen had knowledge of us, We could not understand; For they
had been Fourteen days from Augusteen, which was ^igh the time Solomon went
hence, and they met Solomon about half way, and sent him for Augusteen with
other Guides, bringing the Old Casseekey and his People with them. We observed
that the Old Casseekey seem^d much dejected. We supposed The Spaniards had
taken from him the Money and what other things he had carried with him; Or that
he was vexed he should be so deceived in taki^g us for Spaniards.

The Spaniards were extraordinary kind unto us, so that We had Occasion to
rejoice, and thank the LORD for this part of our Deliverance by this means.
They were also a Terror unto the Indians; for they Searched their houses and
took all from them that ever they could Find, even to the stubb of a Nail:
which aggravated them, and increased their Dis-affection to U^^ward; So that we
dared not to stir from a Spaniard. The Spanish Captain made inquiry where We
were cast away, and what was (...) that we had in our Vessel? We gave an
account so well as we could to make him onderstand us: which Account made him
very desirous to go down thither; but looking over a paper often, which we
supposed, was the Gouvernor's Order and Instructions to him, we understood they
would not permit him to prosecute that Design: beside we made him sensible of
the danger we should be in, if he and his men should go and leaeve us amongst
these people who were so bitterly in censed against us.

They inquired what became of the Boat that belonged to Smith's-Vessel and
ours, We told them that these Indians had taken Smith's Boat and sunk her some
where in the Sound; but ours was at St. a Lucea. The Spaniards made the Indians
go and show where they had Sunk Smith^s Boat and help our people to get her up:
Which being done, she was brought to the Town: the Spaniards were mightily
pleased with her, and proposed that they in their Cannooe, and our People in
that Boat should go to Hoe-Bay, whereby they might get all from the Indians
which they had gotten from us: But We would not countenance the matter; We were
for a speedy departing from amongst these people as we could, since it had
pleased GOD to open a way for our deliverance.

This Morning the Spanish Captain made the Indians Provide two Cannooes, which
he caused to be lashed together at some distance with Sticks a Cross, and
matted on the Topp: Which being done, with four Indians, Joseph Kirle, John
Smith, Robert Barrow, Andrew Morray, Benjamin Allen, Nathaniell Randall, John
Shears, Corn^lius Toker, Joseph Kirle's Boy John Hilliar; Four Negroes. viz.
Jack; Caesar, Sarah, and Q^enza were sent away for Augusteen: But not ou^
Morsel of Vi^nalls, except a very few Berries, had they with them; and not one
Spaniard to guard them, but were put under the Government of those four Indians.
About an hour after Joseph Kirle was gone, the Spanish Captain ordered Smith's
boat to be made ready with two Spaniards, and Four of our Men to Row to the
place where the drift of Smith^s Vessel was to look for Log-wood or Old Iron:
When they returned, there was not any thing of value.

But our People said that as they were searching about, they found the Bones of
Andrew Barnes: His^ S^ull and Jaw Bone were broken; which occasioned us, to
suspect that he was Knocked on the head by the Indians, after they had driven
away Smith and his people.

We told the Spanish Captain that Joseph Kirles Negroe B^n. had been absent
ever since the day after Solomon Gresson went hence, being gone with the Old
Casseekey's Wife, but we knew not whither. The Captain made inquiry of the
Indians whither he was gone. They said, For Hoe-Bay; then he ordered them to
send for him, for he would not leave him behind. The Indians said, he would be
here within a day or two. The Spaniards were continually Searching for what
they could find of such things as the Indians had gotten from us or others: and
when they could find no more, they would offer to buy with Tobacco what they
could Persuade the Indians to bring to Light. A Leaf or half a leaf of Tobacco
would purchase a Yard of Linen or woollen, or Silk from the Indians. Such
Admirers of Tobacco are they, that they esteem it beyond any other thing. An
Indian of the Town some time before the Spaniards came, having a considerable
quantity of Ambergris, boasted that when he went for Augusteen with that, he
could purchase of the Spaniards a Looking-Glass, an Ax, a Knife or two, and
three or four Mannocoes (which is about five or six pounds) of Tobaccoe. The
Quantity of Amber greece might be about Five pound Weight.

the 9 month the 4. the 4 of the week.
This Day We made Oars for Smith's Boat of Sticks and the Cantle-pieces of
Sugar-Hogsheads which were gotten on the beach where the Drift of Smith's
Vessel came on Shore. And this Evening came the Old Casseekey's Wife with
Joseph Kirle^s Negroe Ben. and Joseph Kirls's Boat; which was of great
advantage to help to carry us. We worked all this night to fit the Boat and
Oars unto her, being intended to go away as soon as We could complete that Jobb.

The Spaniards had brought little Provision with them so that there was not
much to spare for us; having not above a Rove of Corn, and a little
Nova-Spain-Bread, which was so bad that it was more Dust and dead Weavels than
Bread: An handful of it was an acceptable Present to us. We would mix it with
a little Water* making it to a Paes^t, which would eat pleasantly; But Hunger
was no Sranger unto us; and We knew not that We should have any Victuals on
our Journey: But our Deliverance seemed to over balance all. The Indians would
not give us any Berries: But our people watched an Opportunity and took one of
the Casseekey's Baggs of Berries, which might contain about a Bushel; Which
was all that One-and-thirty of us had to depend on.

the 9 month 5. the 5 of the week.
This Morning about three hours before Day We departed from this Town of Jece;
the Weather was grown cold; We had nothing where with to cover our bodies,
besides what the Indians gave us at first, except my Wife, for Whom the
Spaniards got an old Jacke^t (which had been one of Smith's men's), and gave
her to wear; also a small Piece of cloth to cover our poor Child: but it
pleased GOD to strengthen us in this our Condition, so that we rowed all this
day without ceasing until three hours after it was dark, by which time We got
to an Indian-Town: Here We met with Joseph Kirle, Robert Barrow and the
others, who got thither not above an hour or two before us. They had not
received any manner of Sustenance from the time they left us, until they got
some Berries of us, having lain one Night of the two in a Swamp: but they were
as Cheerful as men could be in this Straight.

Since they left us, amongst their other hardshi^s, Joseph Kirle had like to
have lost his Life several tim^. The First was thus. Whilst the two Cannooes
were lasht together, having a few Berries that were designed to have been
shared amongst them; The Irish boy Cornelius Toker would ever and anon be
taking some of them, who being often reproved by Joseph Kirle and others; would
not desist; Whereupon Joseph Kirle with the Paddle he paddled the Cannooe along
with struck him; thereupon an Indian took his how and Arrow and was going to
shoot Joseph, who seemed little concerned whether he liv^d or dy^d, withal
saying, the Spaniards would Justify him.

Another time when he was spent with paddling the Cannooe, and desired John
Smith, Anrew M^rray, and others of them as well able as himself to give him a
Spell, which they refused, and he being not able to paddle further, laid down
his Paddle; Whereupon the Indians commanding him to paddle, he refused, saying,
they might kill him it they would, opening his breast for them to execute their
wills; Which they seemed as though they would have done: But after great
threatening they desisted.

Another time the Wind being high and the Seas rough that they were forced to
unlash their Cannooes, by Joseph Kirle's persuasion, and to go single; Joseph
Kirle taking one Cannooe to his own management, having Robbert Barrow, his Boy,
my Kinsman, Nathaniell Randall, and the Negroes in her; which being thus single
from the other Company was more satisfactory to him than before, though none to
help but Nathaniell Randall. My Negroe-Woman named Sarah, having beaten and
abused a Girl named Quenza, being reproved often by him and Robert Barrow, She
therefore abused them in an extraordinary manner; whereupon. Jose^h struck her
with his Paddle; at which One of the Indians in the other Cannooe took his
Striking Staff and darted at him, narrowly missing him.

This Morning Joseph Kirle with those that were with him were by the Spanish
Captain ordered away at break of day; he not taking any care to give them a
little Sustenance; and about an hour or two after We followed, rowing all this
Day without ceasing until an hour or two in the Night: By which time We got
to an Indian-Town, where not any thing was to be had but Water. About two hours
after us came Joseph Kirle.

The Spanish Captain would not let them come on shore; but ordered them to ^eep
on, that We might get next Night to the place where we must hale our boats
over Land, from one Sound into another.

the 9 month 7. the 7 of the week.
This Morning We set Forward very early and rowed hand: About Noon We got to
a parcel of Marsh^y Islands, amongst which we were to go up Creeks. The
Pa^sage was very difficult to find. At lenght when We were got nigh an
Indian-Town, the Spaniards hollowed and an Indian came out into the Marsh, but
was very loath to come near us at length he came wedding to us to be our
Pilott: We set forward, and in an hour's time or more were got to the place
where Joseph Kirle and those with him were; the Indians that were with Joseph
would not let them proceed further until we came up with them: In half an
hours time we got to the place where we were to hale our Boats over Land being
about a quarter of a Mile from Sound to Sound: at this place the sea was half a
furlong from as The Spanish Captain gave the Indian w^ last took in a piece of
a Leaf of Tobacco commanding him to go with all speed and bid his Casseekey
with all his able Men come to help to hale our Boats over land. But we set to
work, and had them over by that time the Indians came. The Spanish Captain gave
the Casseekey a Leaf or two of Tobacco for him and discharged them, only
ordered the Casseekey to send some men a Fishing for him; which they did and
within Night brought a stately parcel of (...); but none of our people had any
part of it except my Wife, and Penelope: What they did not eat they kept to
carry with them.

A ^^le before Night sprang up a Storm of Wind at North-East: It seemed likely
to be a dismal Night of wind and Rain, and we were got to a place where there
was not a Tree, or Bush, or any manner of shelter, and the Wind so very cold
that we thought we should not live till the next day: We had no Wood to make a
fire with, and what to do we could not tell, but we were resolved to try to
get some, and in order thereto, some of the ablest of us w^nt along the Bay to
search for drift wood, and found a little, but Rain came with the night and no
Shelter to be had but our Boats; and the Spaniard would not let us meddle with
them to turn the bottom opwards for Shelter: which seemed very liard, but they
had ma (...) themselves some Sh^^^r with Matts We were forced to exercise
patience, and with what salt water wood we had, made as good a fire as we
could, and laid ourselves down on the sand by it: and it pleased GOD we had a
comfortable night beyond our Expectation: only the Cold was very sharp.

the 9 month 8. the 1 of the Week.
This Moring we set forward; but the Water was so low that we were forced to
wade and thrust the boat ^^ng for some Miles: at lenght we got into a deep
Channel, where was nothing to beseen but Marsh and Water, and no fast land,
nor Trees.

About Ten a Clok we heard three or four Musketts fired a little a head of us
in the Channel we were in. Our Spaniards presently answered them with the
like, and in a little time we met. This was a Perre-Augoe to Jovn wi^^ that
came for us, having Order to go to the place where we were Cast away, and to
get what was to be had from the Indians: but this other Boat turned back, for
there was no place to go on shore; and in an hour or two's time we got in to
the other Sound where the Land was not to be seen from side to side in some
places. The li^ was in the other we came through. About an hour before Sun-sett
we got to an Indian Plantation (this was the first place we saw any thing
planted) being full of Pumpion Vines and some small Pumpions on them but the
Spaniards were too quick for us and got all before us: some of us got a few a
bigg as one's Fist: We had a fire there, yet had not patience to dress them as
they should be, but putt them into the fire, roasted them and eat them. The
Spaniards used a great deal of Cookery with their Pumpions, and the Perre-Augoe
that came last from Augusteen had brought Bread, Corn and strung Beef; but it
was kept from us, Except a piece of strung beef: the Captain of the Spaniards
gave my Wife as bigg as a Stick of Sealing-Wax; which we treasured up,
expecting it must be harder with us when we left these people. Here Captain
Sebastian Lopaz drew up a Writing, and would have had me and Joseph Kirle to
Sing it; which we refused: For we perceived he had a design especially against
me, to oblige me to give him some of my Negroes: We answered him short; That I
reckoned my self and Negroes at the Governor of Augusteen's disposal; And we
would Sing no Writing We Borrowed a Pott and boiled Pumpion Leaves, having
nothing to putt to them but Water, which was satisfactory; But this night was
more terrible than the last* the Wind being at North-West; it did not blow
hard, yet it was very cold, we lyeing in an open field without any shelter; One
side of us would scorch while the other was freezing. Our Negroe Woman Hagar's
little boy named Cajoe was seized with Convulsion Fitts about Two in the
Morning which was chiefly occasioned by the Cold and want of food: but help
there was not from us. The S^anish Ca^^ came to see the Child, and supposing
that it would dye, asked If the Child was a Christian? He was answered, As good
a one ash could make it; but he called for some Water, putting some of it on
he Crown of the Child's head, and Crossing it, Called, him Francisco. This
Action pa^isyed its Father and Mother.

the 9 month 9. the 2 of the week.
This Morning we were to go forward and the Spaniards were to return to the
place where we were cast away: but our two Boats would not carry us all;
therefore we had the Spaniards great Perre-Augoe to carry us one day's Journey
further to an Indian Town, and ^our Spaiards with us, three of which were to
bring the Perre-Augoe back, the other was to be our Guide for Augusteen. We
departed and met with in tricare passage; for sometimes we should be a ground
on Oyster banks, or Shoals, and al most out of sight of Land, About two or
three in the Afternoon we had not water to go any further: The Wind being
North-Westerly drove the Water out of the Sound: but being nigh the Shore where
had been an Indian Town: We went on Shore and found some ripe Berries on the
Palm-shrubbs, which we were very earnest after till such time as a storm of
wind with rain began to come upon us and Night nigh at hand; whereupon we all
got together, considering what we should do, since there was no possibility of
getting Shelter here. Our Indian Guide said, we might get to a Town about two
leagues off; which we were glad to hear, for it rained hard so we with our
Guide set forward and walked over a parcel of scraggy shrubby hills to the
Sea-shoar, along which we traveled till we got to the Indian Town, where we
got plenty of Berries for our Supper. It rained much till toward Morning.

The 9 month. 10.
This Morning the Indians were not willing to stay any longer; and we were by
our Guide required to depart; which we did, and a great many young Indian Men
followed us some Miles along the Bay, and Offered violence to Robert Barrow and
several others; but were easily stopped by showing them a rusty Muskett
presented toward them, and so they left us. We had an untomard passage from
the sea shore athwart the Land to the Indian Town, the ground being swampey*
and scraggey hills, which (...) our bare fect was very troublesome. This was a
large Town, and there was another large Town about a Mile distant in sight,
thither part of our Company was sent to be Quartered: at which Town about a
Twelve month since a parcel of Dutch Men were killed who having been cast away
on the Bohemia s^^als in a flatt which they built escaped hither, and were here
devoured by these Cannaballs, as we under stood by the Spaniards: The ^att or
our boat people saw: but they seemed kind to them, giving them Fish and Berries
to eat: We rema^ed at these two Towns till next Morning The Indians of the Town
I was at, were no so kind as those at the other Town had been: some of our
people were for selling their ^ags to the Indians for Fish; but We thought
it was most necessary, of the two Extremes, to defend against the Cold: For
every day grew colder than other; and We feared that if We were much longer
exp^led to it, We should not live it out.

the 9 month 11. the 4 of the week.
This Morning leaving this Town, We Embarked in our two Boats, And those of
our People that were at the other Town were to have a large Cannooe to carry
them thence, and were to meet us in the Sound: We rowed several leagues and
did not meet them; it being then about Tenn a Clock; the Spaniard would go on
Shore and travel back by Land-to see after them. We being by an Inlett of the
Sea which was a Mile over, the Spaniard ordered us to go on the other side, and
there stay for him; Which We did many hours. At this Place We all went upon the
search to see if any thing was to be had for the Belly, some on the land, some
in the Water: The Land yielded nothing; but in the Water We got a sort of
Shellfish called Water-Soldiers, Which We eat: at length the Cannooe with our
People came, but our Spaniard was not come; but in about half an hour's time he
came with a small Cannooe. This was the place where Solomon (...) the
Spaniards. The Cannoo's had each two Indians to (...) them along: And We had
one Indian for our Guide named Wan-Antonia who the Spaniard said was a
Christian, but an Inhabitant of that Town wheretthe D^ch-Men were killed. We
set forward in our two Boats, and the two Cannooes, and rowed till night,
being nigh a place of thickety Wood, which We made choice of to lodge at for
this night: Here was Wood enough: We madle large Fires, Were pleased with the
place, and lay down to rest. About Midnight I had a great loss; having about a
Quart of Berries whole, and as much pounded to mix with water to feed our Child
with, the Fire being disturbed, the Cloth which We had our food in was burnt:
All was lost and nothing to be had until we could get to the Spaniards, Which
was two days March at least. About an hour after this the Wind rose at
North-West. and it began to rain; But having small Palmeto which grew nigh,
Joseph Kirle and I set to work and made a shelter which would keep Tenn or
more of us from the Weather: We had no sooner completed our work, but it
rained hard. In this shower of rain the Four Indians got from amongst us, took
their Cannooes, and away they went back again: When day appeared, We missed
them, upon which We went to the waterside, where We found the two Cannooes
gone. And now We were in a great strait. But the Spaniard said, those that
could travel best must go by Land. The Persons pitched upon were Richard
Limpeney, Andrew Murray, Cornelius Toker, Joseph Kirles Boy, John Hilliard, and
Penelope with, Seven Negroes named Peter, Jack, Caesar, Sarah, Bell, Susanna and
Quenza. The Spaniards and the Indian-Wan-Antonia went with them to direct them,
the Way carrying them over land to the Sea shore, and then directing to keep
the Seashoar along to the Northward.

They returned to us, and We with our two Boats rowed all day without ceasing
till Sunsetting: And when we putt on sho^ar, the place we an old Indian-Field
on a high bleak hill, where had been a large Indian house, but it was tumbled
down. Of the runis of this house We made a shelter against the North-West Wind,
which began to blow very bleak. The Spaniard went to the Sea, which was not two
miles off, to see if our People had passed, and at his return he said, They
were gone by. We asked if they could reach to any house or Indian-Town for
shelter? For We supposed, should they be without Fire this night, they could
not live. He said, They must travel all Night. Night came on: We had Fire and
Wood enough, and had gathered a great heap of ^rass to lie in, hoping to have
got some rest: But the North-West increased, and the Cold was so violent, that
we were in a lamentable condition, not able to rest, for as We lay or stood so
close to the Fire that it would scorch us, that side from it was ready to
Freeze: We had no other way, but to stand and keep turning for the most part of
the night. We all thought that we never felt the like. The Spaniard that was
clothed was as bad to bear it as we that were naked. at length day appeared
and we must go.

the 9 month 13. the 6 of the week.
This Morning we were loath to part with our fires, but to stay here it could
not be: So we went to our Boats; wading in the water was ready to benumm us.
But we putt forward, and rowing about 2 Leagues came to an old house, where the
Spaniard told us we must leave the Boats and travel by Land; We had a Boggy
Marsh to wade through for a mile to get to the Sea-Shoar, and had about five
or six leagues along the Bay or Strand to the Spanish Sentinall's house: The
North-West-wind was violent, and the cold such that the strongest of us thought
We should not outlive that day: having got through the boggy Marsh and on the
Sea-Shoar, our People, Black and White, made all speed, one not staying for
another that could not travel so fast; None but I with my Wife and Child,
Robert Barrow, my kinsman Benjamin Allen and my Negroe London, whom I kept to
help carry my Child, keeping together; The rest of our Company had left us,
expectting not to see some of us again; especially Robert Barrow, my Wife and
Child. We traveled after as well as we could having gone about two Mil^s
the Cold so seized on my Kinsman Benjamin Allen that he began to be stiff in
his Limbs, and staggered and fell, grievously complaining that the cold would
kill him: Our Negroe having our young Child I and my Wife took our Kinsman
under each Arm and helped him along; but art length his Limbs were quite
stiff, his speech almost gone, and he began to Foom at Mouth. In this strait
We knevv not what to do; to stay with him we must perish also, and We
were vvilling to strive as long as We could. We carried our Kinsman and laid
him under the Bank, not being dead. I resolved to ruim after our People, some
of them not being out of sight; which I did and let my VVi^e and Child with
the Negroe to follovv as fast as they could. I runn about two miles, making
signs to them, thinking if they should look behind them and see me running,
they would stopp till I got up with them. I was in hopes that if I could
have accomplished this my design, to have got help to have carried my Kinsman
along; But they stop not, and I runn until the Wind pierced me so that my
Limbs failed and I fell; yet still I strove, and getting up vvalked backvvards
to meet my Wife. As I was goying I met with the Spaniard comeing out of the
Sand-hills and Joseph Kirle^ Negroe Ben. I made my Complaint to the Spaniard,
but he not being able to understand me well, went forward. I than applied my
self to the Negroe, making large promises if he would fetch my Kinsman; he
offered to go back and use his endeavor, Which he did. At lenght my Wife and
Child came up with me; She was almost overcome With grief expressing in What
manner We Were forced to part With our Kinsman, and expecting that she and
the Child should go next. Poor Robert Barrow was a great way behind us: I
feared We sold never see him again I used my endeavor to comfort and cheer
my Wife, entreating her, not to let grief overcome her; I had hopes that the
Lord would help us in this strait, as He has done in many since We were in
this Land: And if it pleased God that We might lay down our lives in this
Wilderniss, that We might beseech Him to enable us to do it willingly. Thus
striving in a deep Exercise of Body and Mind We traveled on, admiring Gods
goodness in preserving us thus far through so many eminent Dangers. In the
sense of which a secret hope would arise, (though invol^ed with human doubts
and fear) thar the Lord would yet preserve ^s. I took my Child from the Negroe
and carried him. I had an Indian-Matt with a splitt in it, through which I putt
my head, hanging over my Breast unto my Wast: Under this I carried my Child,
which helpe't to break the wind off it; but the poor Babe was black with cold
from head to foot, and its flesh as cold as a stone; yet it was not forward.
It Is Mother would take it now and then and give it the Breast, but little could
it get at it; besides We dared not stopp in the least, for if we did, We
should perceive our Limbs to fail. About two a Clock in the Afternoon we came
up with our Negroe-Woman Hagar with her Child at her back almost dead: and a
little further we came up with out Negroe-Girle Quenza, being Dead, as we
thought, for she was as stiff as a dead body could be, and her Eyes set; butt
at lenght we perceived her breath: but she had no sense, nor motion. We carried
her from the Waterside under the Bank. This increased my Wife, ssorrow; and she
began to doubt she should not be able to travel much further: But I
endeavored to encourage her not to leave striving as long as any ability was
left. All our People were out of sight exept Four, and those We had gained
upon. I sent my Negroe to overtake them, and to disire them to slacken their
pace till we got up with them; being in hopes that gaining their Company would
to cheer up my Wife: But they would not; so the Negroe stopped for us. We had
lost sight of Robert Barrow by this time: Soon after we overtook John Smith who
was one of the Four: he began to ^ail, and his Companions left him; whereupon
he made grievous Complaints which I reproved him for, left he should discourage
my wife. The Sun was nigh Setting; and we began to look out for the sentinalls
Post; and my Negroe at times got upon several of the highest Sand-hills to
look out, but could not see any house, nor the smoke of Fire: This was terrible
to us all, for the day being so cold, the night much more, and we not able to
travel without rest, being a starved People both within our bodies and
without, and if we ceased from traveling, we should instantly be nummed and
move no further. In the midst of these Reasonings and doubtings We were got
into. I espied a man as I thought, standing on the Bank but at great distance;
I was afraid to speak lest it should prove otherwise, but he was soon seen by
the whole Company, and at lenght We espyd him walking toward the Land; this
confirmed us, and so we took to the hills again to look out, yet could not see
the house from thence, but on the next hill We saw it: this was joy unto us,
though we began to have a sense of our tiredness, for our Resolution abated
after we had got sight of the house.

When we got to the house, we found Four Sentinalls and the Spaniards our
Guide with the three of our Men; viz Joseph Bucklay, Nathaniell Randall, and
John Shires. The Spaniard bid us Welcome, and made room for us to sit down by
the fire. The chiefest man of the Sentinall took a Kersey-Coat and gave my Wife
to cover her, and gave each of us a piece of bread made of Indian-Corn, which
was pleasant unto us: after it we had plenty of hott Casseena drink: It was
dark and we endeavored to prevail with the Spaniards to go seek for Robert
Barrow and my Kinsman, Offering them considerable, but they seemed not fully to
understand me, yet I could make them sensible that my Kinsman was almost dead,
if not quite; and that the Old Man was in a bad condition. They made me to
understand that the weather was not fit to go out, but they would watch if
Robert should pass by. About an hour or two after one of the Spaniards being
walking out of the Bay met with Robert and brought him into the house. We
rejoiced to see him, and inquired concerning our Kinsman and Negroe Ben. He
said our Kinsman was striving to get upp and could not: he came to him and
spoke unto him; he could not answer but Cried, and he could not help him; but
comeing along at some considerable distance met Negroe Ben.; who said he was
going for Benjamin Allen, so he past him; and some miles further he saw Negroe
Jack drawing himself down from the Bank, his lower parts being dead, and crying
out for some fire that he might save his life; but he did not see the Negroe
Girl whom we halled out of the way. We were under a great concern for our
Kinsman; the Spaniards we could not prevail upon to go and ^etch him, or go
and carry where with to make a fire: Which had they done and found them living,
it might have preserved them But we hoped Negroe Ben. would bring our Kinsman.
The Spaniards would have had most of us to have gone to the next Sen^inall's
house; Which was a League further; but we all begged hard of them to let us lie
in their house in any place on the ground, for We were not able to travel
further: besides the cold would kill us; for We were in such a trembling
shaking condition, and so full of pain from head to foot, that it^s not to be
expressed. At length the Spaniards consented that Robert Barrow, I, my Wife and
Child^ and John Smith should lie in the house; but to Joseph Buckley*
Nathaniell Randall, John Sheirs, and my N^groe London. They would not grant
that favor: So one of the Spaniards taking a firebrand bid those Four go
with him. He directed them to a small Thickett of Trees and showed them to
gather Wood and make large Fires and Sleep there. These poor creatures lay out,
and it proved a hard Frosty Night. The Spaniard returned and said they were
got into a Wood, and had Fire enough. We were silent, but feared they would
hardly live till Morning.

After they were gone, the Spaniards took a pint of Indian-Corn and parched it
and gave part to us, which we accepted cheerfully; also they gave us some
Casseena-drink. We were in extraordinary pain, so that we could not rest; and
our Feet were extremely bruis^^ the Skin was off and the Sand caked with the
blood that We could hardly set our feet to the ground after we had been
sometime in the house. The night was extreem cold though We were in the house;
and by the Fire we could not be warm, for one side did scorch whilst the other
was ready to freeze: and thus We passed the night.

the 9 month 14. the 7 of the week.
This Morning We looked out, and there was a very hard Frost on the Ground, so
it was terible to go out of Doors. Our People returned from the Wood, but
complained heavely of their hardship in the Night. They had not been an hour in
the house before the Spaniards gave us all a Charge to be g^ne to the next
Sentinall^s house: This was grievous to us all, but more especially to my Wife,
who could not raise her self when down; but go We must, for though we
entreated hard for my Wife and Robert Barrow, We could not prevail that they
might stay still We could get A Cannooe. As We were all goeing one Spaniard
made a Sign for me and my Wife to stay, which* We did; and it was to have a
handful of parcht Corn: As soon as We had received it they bid us be gone to
the next Sentinall's, where was Victuals enough for us. The Sunn was a great
height, but We could not feel any Warmth it gave, the North-Wester beginning to
blow as hard as it did the Day before. And having deep Sand to travel through,
which made our Traveling this one League very hard, especially to my Wife and
Robert. The Spaniards sent my Wife a Blankett to be Left at the next
Sentinall^s house.

At lenght We came to an Inlett of the Sea; on the other side was the Look-out
and Sentinall^s house; here were all our People ^^^ing waiting to be carri^d
over and in a little time came one of the Sentinalls, with a Cannooe and
carried us over.

This Sentinall would not suffer us to come into his house, but caused us to
kindle a fire under the Leigh of his house and there fit down: About half an
hour after he bid us be gone to the next Sentinall's, which was a League
further, giving us a Cup of Casseena and two Quarts of Indian-Corn for us all,
bidding us go to our Company at next house and our Corn dressed there.

I understood that our Negroe-Woman Hagar got hither late last Night having
her Child dead at her back, which the Spaniards buried.

One of the Spaniards went with us to the next Inlett carrying a Stick of Fire
to set Fire of some Trash to make a signal for them on the otheiside to fetch
us over the Inlett being very wide. When the Cannooe came over for us, our
Guide took the Blankett from my Wife; but the Negroe which brought over the
Cannooe lent my Wife one of his Coats, so we got over, but before We got to
the house we had a shower of hail. At this house We were kindly received, having
such a Mess of Victuals as we had not had in a long time before, which was
very pleasant to our hunger-starved Stomachs. Our People went hence; this
Morning for Augusteen, having a Guide with them: but John Hos^er and Penelope
were left here, not being able to travel. We remained here till the Morrow,
but the Night was so extreem cold that we could not rest.

the 9 month 15. the 1 of the week.
This Morning the Spaniards bid us prepare to travel for they were not able to
mantain us. We understood that it was five or six Leagues to Augusteen, and We
could not travel so Far, being all of us lamed and stiff: We entreated them
to let us go in a Cannooe, but they deneyed us: We entreated for the two Women
and Robert barrow; At lenght we prevailed that they should go up in a Cannooe,
for the Cannooe was to go whether we went or not.

While all this discourse was, came in a couple of Spaniards, one being the
Sentinall that went with our people the day before, the other was a Person the
Governor had sent with a Cannooe and four Spaniards to fetch us, This was
cheerful News; for had we gone to have traveled without a Guide, we should
have Perished. The man that came for us brought two Blanketts, one for my Wife,
the oher for Penelope: He desired us to be goeing. About a League distance from
the place he left the Cannooe, which we parted with very unwillingly; for some
of our people, had they had a Mile further to have gone, could not have gone
it: The Wind still continued at North-West and blowed very Fiercely; and
extreem cold it was: We had such a continual shivering and pain in our Bones
that we were in violent anguish.

Our poor Child was quiet, but so black with cold and shaking that it was
admirable how it lived. We got to Augusteen about two hours before Night*
Being putt on shore, we were directed to the Governor's house: being got
thither we were had up a pare of Stairs, at the head whereof stood the
Governor, who ordered my Wife to be conducted to his Wife's Appartment. I and
John Smith went into a Room where the Governor asked us a few Questions; but
seeing how extreem cold we were, He gave us a Cup of Spanish-Wine and sent us
into his Kitchen to warm our selves at the Fire. About half an hour afterward
the Governor sent for John Smith and M^ and gave us a Shirt and Sliders, a
Hatt and a pare of Silk Stockins, telling us, he had no VVollen Clothes as yet,
but would have some made: We put on the Linen and made all have into the
Kitchen to the Fire. Robert Barrow was quartered at another house: The Persons
came to the Governors house and took such as they were minded to quarter in
their houses; So that Joseph Kirle, John Smith, I, my Wife and Child lodged at
the Governor's house. All our People that came up with Joseph Kirle came to
see us. We perceived the People s great kindness; Fot they were all well
clothed from head too foot with the best the People had. ^oseph Kirle began to
tell us of his Travel after he left us on the Bay, and how that they all
concluded That they should never see my Wife and Child and Robert Barrow any
more, if they did my Kinsman and Me. Richard Limpeney and those that went with
him had a hard Travel for thirthy six hours without ceasing, in which Travel
three of our Negroes that went with them were lost, (viz Jack, C^sar and
Quensa, by sitting down to rest themselves they were in a little time so numed
that they could not go, and there Perished. So that we lost five in that day's
Travel, and began to* doubt that Negroe Ben. Perished also. ^oseph Keirle said
that he thought he should have lost some of our People in their Travel from the
last Centinall's hither, For they were much tired, and the Cold Violent and the
La^ter part of that day's Jorney they VVading for many miles through much
Water, and deep Sand-hills, and when they came in sight of Augusteen they
stayed for Boats to Fetch them, in which time some were nummed with the Cold.
Joseph Keirle applied himself to the Governor on our behalfs to send us help,
for he doubted wether We were all living; the Governor readely Assented and
fortwith sent for a Person fit for his purpose; Chargeing him to get a
Perre-A^goe and Men, and go forthwith and fetch us, but the Tide fell out, so
that We could not go till Midnight: The Governor was so concerned that he
would not go to Bed* till they were gone; when the Tide served he went to the
Waterside and saw the Men putt off, giving them a Strict Charge.

Solomon Cresson began to tell us of his Travells from Jece, having most part
of the way much Rain: The Indians were very kind unto him until thy came to
the Indian Town where the Dutch men were killed, at which place some of those
Indians made a discovery of him to be no Spaniard. They said nothing to him
thereof, but were very dogged to him, giving him no Food, and causing him to
lie on the Ground Amongst Vermin. On the Morrow he was to go with his former
Company; Who were grown so extremely bitter and envious to him that when they
did but look upon him, they were ready to smite him; having gone until about
midday, passing an Inlett, the wether being extreme bad with Wind, Rain and
much Cold, they putt on shore; (this was the place where We putt on shore and
got Water-soldiers and stayed for the Spaniard when he went back to look for
our People that were to follow us in a Cannooe) but the Rage of these bloody
people was such that he expected to dye; being on shore they readely kindled a
Fire, about which time he heard a noise of a Boat and Oars, and presently the
Spanish P^rre-Augo putt on Shore upon them: the Indian were extraordinarily
Surprised and stood Amazed but Solomon was glad to see them, and they him: the
Spaniards took the old Casseekey's Chest and whatever he had from him,
Comanding them to return to the Indian Towns from whence they came. staying all
Night the next morning the Spaniards send Solomon under the Conduct of two
Indians belongingh to these Towns who were commanded by the Spaniards to Carry
Solomon unto the Sentinall's house, but these two Indians carried him a little
beyond the place where We putt on shore to travel, and they seemed as though
they had mischief in their hearts against him: He asked if they would go
forward? But they looking untowardly on him, answered him not: so he went
himself and was glad when he saw they did not follow him.

But We were desirous to know how the Spaniards had knowledge of us, Which it
seems was thus.

When We got to Jece where Smith and his Company were, and We going under the
Denomination of Spaniards and the other English, the report of us runn from
Indian-Town to Indian-Town to the Northward unto the Northernmost Town, at
which Town* were two or more Indians that were converted to the Romish Faith.
These or one of these went to the next Spanish Sentinalls and gave an account
that he heard that there were two Vessels cast away to the Southward of Jece,
one being a Spaniard, the other an English Vessel, the Spaniards having two
Vessels gone for the H^vana to seek for supplies, feared it was those Vessels:
And the same day as this News came to the Governor of Augusteen came also News
of one of their Friars, being murdered by some of the Cape Indians. After this
manner we understood it; viz. Three Friars being under a vow to go amongst the
Indians on the Cape to Convert them, they went to a certain Town to the
Northward of where we were cast away, but it lay within the Sound. The
Casseekey of this Town they gained on to Embrace the Roman-Faith, but all his
people were much incenced against the Friars, and therefore would have their
Casseekey renounce his faith, and put the Friars to death; but he would Assent
to neither: therefore they killed him and one Friar; the other two eshaped.
Hereupon was a Perre-Augoe forthwith sent for us of what Nation soever we might
be, also a party of Spaniards and Indians were sent against that Town where the
Friar was killed. We had a plentiful Supper, and We fedd like people that had
been half starved, for We eat not knowing when We had enough: and We found our
Palats so changed by eating of Berries that We could not relish the Taste of
Salt any more than if it had no saltness in it: We had lodging provided, but
few Beds.

the 9 mt. 16. the 2 of the week.
This Morning We had I^e half an Inch thick, and it had been so for some
Mornings past, but as the Sun riset it is gone.

The Governor came this Morning to our Apartement, inquiring how We did? We
having had Chocolatta for breakfast he asked if We would have any thing else
that his house could afford: If We would but ask it should be brought us. but
we modestly answered That this was sufficient althoug our Appetites were not to
be satisfiied. The Governor stated the poverty of the Country unto us. The
place is a Gar^son maintained one half by the King of Spain the other half by
the Church of Rome. The Male Inhabitants are all Soldiers, every one receiving
Pay according to their Post. A Sentinall^s Pay is 150 pices of Eight a year.
And all their supply of Bread, Clothing and Money comes from the H^vana and
Porto Vella. And it is a going on of three Years since they have had a Vessel
from any place whatsoever, which makes their Wants very great: All things being
expended except Ammanition and Salt, of which they said they had enough. The
Governor offered us the freedom of what his house afforded, withal gave us a
Charge to be careful in going abroad, especially of some persons that did not
effect our Nation: We promised to be ruled and submitt to the Governors
pleasure for our Liberty. Our people came in and We told them the caution; but
they said They had been all over the Tow^ and in many hou^es where they were
kindly received, and such as the people had they would give them. They told us
of some English that lived here, and they had been at their houses; the
chiefest in esteem was one William Carr of the Isle of Man, who about thirty
years ago was in a Vessel bound for South Carolina, but missing their Port were
cast away nigh this Port, many were drowned, but he and some others were brought
hither by the Indians, some of them got away in Spanish Vessels, others died
here: This man turned Roman Catholic and Married a Spanish Woman, of whom he
had Seven Children, and is an Officer in the Garrison: He was chief Interpreter.

This Day came Joseph Kirl's Negroe Ben.: He gave us this Account that after he
had sent him back, he having looked and not finding my Kinsman went to se^k for
a place to shelter himself from the Cold, and some place he found to creep in
where he lay down and continued there all Night, but by Morning was so stiff
with Cold that he could not use his Legs, but halled himself toward the Bay.
The Spaniard our Guide from the first Sentry house the Morning after we went
thence returned along the Bay to see if any of our people were living, but he
found all dead except Negroe Ben.: and he getting a fire made Negroe Ben. was
recovered and got the use of his Limbs.

William Carr the Interpreter acquainted us that the Governor and two Royal
Officers would examine us concerning our being cast away and what goods and
Moneys was lost in our Vessel, and concerning our hardships amongst the
Florida-Indians etc. Which was done, and every one did Sign it. This took up 2
or 3 days time to Complete it. After this was done the Governor told us, That
he expected Capt. Sebastian Lopas in some few days, and after his Arrival he
would provide for our going to Carolina with Cannooes and Men to Guard us.

This Week my Wife was taken with a Fever and Ague which held her three days
and then left her. The Governor ordered his own Docter to administer such
things as were helpful. The Governor kindness to us all was extraordinary,
for he would daily enquire of us if We wanted any thing which he had, of which
he gave us an Account, and We eat no worse than he did daily.

The Town We saw from one end to the other: It is about three quarters of a
mile in length, not regularly built, the houses not very thick; they having
large Orchards, in which are plenty of Oranges, ^emmons, Pome-Citrons, Lymes,
Figgs and Peaches: the house most of them old building and not half of them
inhabited. The number of Men being about three hundred that belong to the
Government and many of them are kept as Sentinalls at their Look-outs. At the
North end of the Town stands a large Fortification, being a Quadrangel with
Bastions, Each Bastion will contain thirtheen Guns; but there is not passing
two thirds of Fifty two mounted. In the Curtin they can not mount any Gunns
being only for small Arms. The Wall of the Fortification is about thirthy foot
high built of sawed Stone, such as they get out of the sand between the Sea
and the Sound. This Stone is only Sand and small shells connexed together being
not very hard till exposed to the Sun. The Fort is moated round, The would not
admit us to come near the Fort; but Joseph Kirle took an Opportunity and
walked round about it.

the 9 mt. 23. the 2 of the week.
This day Joseph Kirle and I considering that the latter end of this week was
talked of for our setting Forward toward Carolina (Which the Spaniards call
St. Georges,) We concluded to endeavor to provide our selves, if We could,
with Clothing; cosidering We should be exposed* to all the weather that might
happen, and have no shelter but what we carried with us. therefore We were
incleined to sell, He his and I one or two of my Negroes to provide us
Chlothing and Provisions. We addressed our selves to the Governor and withal
offered him if he pleased to accept the choice of my Negroes; but he denied our
Offer. We stated our matter to Him and asked if we might dispose of our
Negroes? He said, No, we should not, neither could we ^ell them to any person
but himself for the King's Account without a special License. Therefore he
would Consult the two Royall-Officers and give us his answer.

the 9 mt. 24. the 3 of the week.
This day the Governor sent for us, and told us* That he would give us Credit
for what We and the rest of the Company would. I told him that my Wife and
Child would want some warmer Clothing, also Joseph Kirle and my Self should
want some, if to be had. He ordered us to give in an Account of what We should
Want, and if to be had, he would get it: And Joseph Kirle and I should give
our Obligation to pay the Governor of Carolina what the Sum amounted unto;
which We were willing to do: But We disired that our People should give us
their Obligation for what We were engaged for on their Account; Which the
Governor thought reasonable. I gave in an account of particulars for Joseph
Kirle; Robert Barrow, Myself and Family: Also the quantity of Indian-Corn,
Peace, Stringed Beef, Salt and Earthen Potts for the whole Company: But
Clothing was not to be had except as much Stuff as made a Suit fot my Wife* and
Child, and a few Skins Joseph Kirle and I got: I got also seven Blanketts tho
the price was great. These served Joseph Kirle, Robert Barrow, Myself and
Family. We had Five Roves of Ammonition Bread, so full of Weavel that Corn was
far better. Twenty Roves of strung Beef: Sixty Roves of Indian-Corn. Ten Roves
of Peace. (...) Rove of Salt, Jarrs For Water, and Earthen Potts to boil our
Victuals in.

the 9 mt. 25. the 4 of the week.
The Governor sen^ for Joseph Kirle and Me to certify that all that was to be
got he had got for us. And he further signified unto us that he did expect
Sebastian Lopas before this time, and he would not have us to go till he came,
for whatever he could get of our Money and Goods We should receive it every
Doit. But We said We desired not to be detained on that account, for we had
given that already over for gone from us. And as it had pleased God to make
them the Instruments of our preservation, so we did freely give any thing of
that which was or may be deemed ours to the Governor and those persons that
were sent for us. The Governor said He would not have any thing to do with
it, for what ever he did was for Charity^s sake. Then We desired the Soldiers
should have it if anything shoul be got, Which we doubted. And hereupon we
considered That should those poor men get nothing We ought to allow them
something in general; Therefore Joseph Kirle and I offered the Governor That
We would allow Capt. Sebastian Lopas and his Men an hundred Pieces of Eight
for bringind us up from amongst the Indians. The Governor was well pleased
with our Offer and said the should have it.

About this time Robert Barrow was taken with a grievous Belly-Ach, after which
he f^ll into a violent Flux. Several of our People also were taken with the
Belly-Ach and great Scouring, all which was chieflly Occasioned by our
unreasonable Eating and not governing our selves therein. Our chief Dyett was
Hommoney, Herbs and Pumpions, having not much Meat; Which mean dyett was our
preservation: For had it been all Flesh, We should have distroyed our selves*
But We had the best the Place afforded.

the 9 mt. 26. the 5 of the week.
This day VV^ Signed out Obligation for four hundred Pieces of Eight, and We
were to be gone the 28 or 29 I^stant, after which our People signed their
Obligation to us to pay their proportion of what was Provided for them in
Provisions and their part of what should be paid for their Passage from the
Indians to Carolina: Whereupon We made the best Provision we could: I had got
some Wine and Brandy for my self and Famely and some small Necessaries for our
Child, with a great Resolution to go through.

the 9 mot. 29. the 1 of the week.
This day after we had Dined, Cannooes being got ready, One Capt. Francisco De
Roma with six Soldiers was to go our Conduct; the Governor walked down to see
us Embarque, and taking our Farewell He Embraced some of us and wished us well,
saying, WE SHOULD FORGETT HIM WHEN WE GO^T AMONGST OUR OWN NATION, And also
added THAT IF WE FORGOTT, GOD WOULD NOT FORGETT HIM. Thus in a courteous manner
We parted; which was about two or three a Clock in the Afternoon. Taking our
departure from Augusteen, we had about two or three Leagues to an Indian-Town
called St. a Cruce, where being landed we were directed to the Indian
Warehouse: It is built round having Sixteen Sqares; on each Sqare is a Cabin
built and painted which will hold two People; the house being about Fifty foot
diameter. In the Middle of the Topp is a Square opening about fifteen foot.
This house was very clean, and fires being ready made nigh our Cabins. The
Spanish Captain made choice of Cabins for him and his Soldiers and appointed us
our Cabbins. In this Town they have a Friar and a large house to worship in
with three Bell's, and the Indians go as constantly to their devotion at all
times and seasons a^ any of the Spaniards. Night being come and the time of
their Devotion over, the Friar came in and many of the Indians both men and
women having a Dance according to their way and custom. We had plenty of
Casseena drink and such Victuals as the Indians had provided for us, some
bringing Corn boiled, another Pease, some one thing, some another, of all which
We made a good Supper and Slept till Morning.

the 9 mot. 30. the 2 of the week.
This Morning early We left this Town having about two Leagues to go with the
Cannooes, Then We were to travel by Land: But a Cart was provided to carry our
provisions and Necessaries; in which Cart those that could not travel were
carried. We had about five Leagues to a Sentinall's house, where we lay all
Night, and next Morning traveled along the Seashoar about Four Leagues to an
Inlett: Here We waited for Cannooes to come for us to carry us about two miles
to a Town called St. Wans, an Indian Town, being on an Island. We went through
a kirt of Wood into the Indian Plantations for a Mile. In the middle of this
Island is the Town of St. Wans, a large Town and many People. They have a
Friar, and a Worshipping-House: The People are very Industrious, having plenty
of Hoggs and Fowls and large Cropps of Corn, as We could tell by their
Corn-houses. The Indians brought us Victuals as at the last Town, and We lay
in their Warr-house, Which was larger than that at the other Town.

the 10 mot. 2. the 4 of the week.
This Morning the Indians brought us Victuals for ^reakfast, and the Friar
gave my Wife some Loaves of Bread made of Indian-Corn, Which was somewhat
extraordinary: also a parcel of Fowls.

About Tenn a Clock in the Forenoon we left St. Wans, walking about a Mile to
the Sound Where were Cannooes and Indians ready to transport us to the next
Town. We did believe that We might have come all the way along the Sound, but
the Spaniards were not willing to discover the place unto us.

An hour before Sun set We got to the Town called St. Marys. This is a
Fronteer and a Garrison Town: the Inhabitants are Indians with some Spanish
Soldiers. We were conducted to the War house, as the custom is, for every
Town has a War house. Or as We understood these houses were for their times
of Mirth and Danceing, and to lodge and entertain Strangers. This house is
about 81 foot Diameter built Round, with 32 Sqares, in each Sqare a Cabin about
8 foot long of a good height being Painted and well matted. The Center of this
building is a Quadrangle of 20 foot being open at topp of the house, against
which the house is built thus In this Quadrangle is the place they dance having
a great fire in the Middle: One of the Sqares of this building is the Gate, Way
or Passage in. The Women natives of these Towns cloth their themselves with the
Moss of Trees, making Gowns and Petticoats thereof which at a distance or in
the Night look very neat. The Indian Boys we saw were kept to School in the
Church, the Friar being their School master. This is the Largest Town of all.
About a Mile from this is another Town called St. Philips. At this Town of St.
Mary's were we to stay till the 5th or 6th Instant; Where also We were to
receive our Sixty Roves of Corn, and Tenn Roves of Pease; While we stayed we
had one half of our Corn beaten into Meal by the Indians, the other we kept
whole, not knowing what waether we should have: For the Friar of this Town some
Years past was at Charles Town i^ South Carolina, and he had a Months Passage
in goeing about this time of the Year. This News was very unpleasant to think
of lying out a Month at this season, having been so weather beaten before; But
we endeavored to shun looking back, considering how great our Preservations
had been hitherto.

While We stayed here we were willing to make all the Provision we could for
Back and Belley: We got of the Indians plenty of Garlic and long Pepper to
season our Corn and Pease, both which were griping and windy: And we made us
Wooden Trays and Spoons to eat with; We got Rushes and made a sort of
platted Rope thereof; the use we chiefly intended it for was to be serviceable
to help us in building Hutts or Tents with at such time as we should mee^ with
hard VVeather.

The time drawing on that we were to leave this Town, We had Seven Large
Cannooes Provided to carry us being in all about Sixty Persons; Eighteen of us
and 6 of Smiths Company, Seven Spaniards and thirty add Indians, Which were to
row the Cannooes and be our Pilots. We had some Indians from all the Towns and
two Casseekey's.

We understood that the Carolina Indians called the Yammasees, which are
Related to these Indians were here about a Month since Trading for Deer Skins.

I have Omitted a considerable Passage that happened in Augusteen; The Woman
named Penelope being bigg with Child, by the Spaniard's persuasion stayed with
them: Also Joseph Kirle's Boy named John Hilliar, was detained by the
Spaniards. Joseph Kirle strove hard with the Governor that he might have his
Boy; but the Lad was conveyed out of Town and not to be found. The Governor
promised that he would send him after him if possible; but the Boy came not to
us, and We were to depart hence on the Morrow.

the 10 mot. 6. the 1 of the week.
This Morning we Embarked and departed this place and put in to the Town St.
Philips where the Spanish Captain inveited us on shore to drinck Casseena,
which We did: The Spaniards having left somethingh behind, We stayed here about
an hour and then set forward. About two or three Leagues hence We ^ame in
sight of an Indian town called Sappataw; But We went about a League to the
Northward of it to a Sentinall s house, where We putt our Boats on shore and
had Casseena brought us, making no stay We went hence rowing till next
Morning: In the Night We had lost our way, but got to rights in a little time.

the 7. the 2 of the week.
This Morning we putt on shore having past an Inlett of the Sea, and here we
dressed some Victuals and got a little Sleep until the Tide Served. Some of
our Indians went out a Hunting for Dear and Hoggs of Both which the Spaniards
said there was Plenty, and when the Tide served We were to go to the
Northernmost end of this Island and stay for the Hunters. One of the Indians
brought a Deer which he throwed down amongst the other Indians, and he went out
again to Hunt to the North end of the Island, where We were to rand^vouse for
this Night. We set Forward about Tenn a Clock and got to the place appointed
an hour or two before Sun-sett, It being a fine lofty VVood* We employed our
selves in getting Firewood for the Night and Moss to lie on, of both which we
got plenty, having a large Oak to lie under.

The Indians brought in several Hoggs and Dear, of which we had Part, so that
we Fared richly; having a pleasant Nights repose; We got up to be gone about
an hour before Day.

the 10 mot. 8. the 3 of the week.
This day having rowed from the last place until two hours before Sun-sett We
putt on Shore at a place where had been an Indian Settlement, it being on a
high bank, from whence We had a Prospect of the Sound. Here We employed our
selves to go and fetch Bushes to make shelter against the Wind and Dews of the
Night, and in Cutting of dry Grass to lie on, and getting of Wood which was at
considerable distance; But we resolved to have it if labor would purchase it.
Those that were not employed in these services were providing of Water and
Victuals, For we had alwais enough to do. We had a pleasant Night and rested
well.

the 10 mot. 9. the 4 of the week.
This Morning about Sunrising we saw a Cannooe of Carolina-Indians a going to
the Southward a hunting: They kept the Western side of the Sound, being
fearful of us; We had a Cannooe manned with Indians and Spaniards to go after
them to speak with them, being desirous to get them to carry Letters to inform
of our Comeing' not knowing but we might Alarm the Out-Settlement of Carolina.

This Cannooe of ours pursued the other, but the Carolina Indians putt on
shore, runn into a Mash and Fired at our People. The Spanish Indians who could
Speak the Yammaw's Language, called onto them, and told them their business,
withal entreating them to come unto them; But they Answered That they were
going a hunting for the Season, therefore desired them to be gone, for they
would not come near them: Thus our People returned unto us. The Carolina
Indians went their way, and We Prepared to go forward. We having the Casseekey
of St. Wans with us Sent him away last Night, to see if he could meet any of
the Yammawsee Indians of Carolina, he being acquainted with and related to
them: But this Cannooe passed him, We set forward and rowed all the day till
about an hour before Sun-sett, and then we putt on shore at an Indian-Field
which was overgrown with Sedge. It being low wett Land. Here we made our
Accustomed Provision for Lodging, lying this Night in a Wood, having dressed
Victuals for this time and to morrow; And having rested well this Night, about
Daybreak or sooner We left this place.

the 10 mot. 10. the 5 of the week.
This Day about Tenn a Clock we crossed an Iulets, butt the Tide being against
us we putt on shore at an Old Indian Field. At this Place under the shelter
of some Trees was the Casseekey of St. Wanns. Here we stayed and dranck some
Casseena. There was Abundance of Rabbetts* but we made no stay. Not passing
two hours, the Casseekey was sent before to make discovery, and we followed
rowing until an hour before Sun-Sett, by which time we got to the place
called St. Catalena, where has been a great Settlement of Indians, for the
Land has been cleared for planting, for some Miles distant Here also We met
the Casseekey, also a Cannooe of Carolina Indians being a Man his Wife and
Children having his Dogs and other hunting Implements for to lie out this
Winter Season. The Spanish Captain by this Interpreter discoursed him about
Carrying our Letters, which he readily assented unto; Whereupon the Spanish
Captain set himself to writing to the Governor of Carolina.

We had a Large Field to lie in and no manner of shelter but what was a Mile
distant or more; But We spared not pains, but some fell to Cutting of Boughs
and Brush at that great distance, some to Carrying it to the place, some to
get fire wood; so that by Night we had a brave shelter.

The Spanish Captain sent for me to write to the Governor of Carolina; which I
did: I Write a^^o to a Person of my Acquaintance there: The Letters being
finished and Night come on I delivered my Letters to the Captain and returned
to my Company. By this time they had completed our Booth which we thought was
sufficient, if no Rain fell. We provided our Victuals for our Supper and for
the next Day's Travel, as also some dry Grass to lie on in hopes of resting
well this Night. About Tenn at night the Carolina Indians went with our Letters
for Carolina.

the 10 mot. 11. the 6 of the week.
This Morning about two hours before Day we had a Gust of Wind at the
North-West and the Sky was overcast and looked as though we should (...)*
abundance of Rain: In a little time the rain (...) against which we had no
shelter, but our Blanketts: The Rain held until break of day, at which time
began^ the North-West wind to Blow violent hard and Cold: Our shelter was
fronting the North-West; and we ^ell to work to shift our Booth and to getting
more boughs, Brush and Grass: the Grass was to fill and keep up a bank of Earth
which we raised about three or four Foot high to break the wind from us: All
this Day were we employed in enlarging our Booth and getting of VVood for
fireing; The North-West blew extreme hard and this night was hard, getting but
little rest. the Cold pinching us.

the 10 mo 12. the 7 of the week.
This Day the wind that continued without ceasing. We begann to mend^what the
wind had put out of order by Night, and haved up more Earth on our Booth, and
made some Enlargement, for we were not negligent by Day to provide for the
Night, which pincl^ed us with Cold especially aged Robert Barrow, who having a
violent Flux that had held him from Augusteen hither, and by the violent Cold
being Grown on him so that he could not Govern his weakness, nor get natural
Rest; he was extremely racked with the Cold, that in this Juncture of
hardship we could get no warmth in him; but he was contented with our mean
help although he received little benefit by it. This Day at times we went out
to get vvood, having a long way to go in an Open Field and the Cold almost
numming us by that time we could get to our ^oo^.

This Eveaing the Wind was somewhat abated and we were in great hopes it was
over, but it blowed fiercely the latter part of the Night.

the 10 mo. 13. the 1 of the week.
This Morning the Wind was something abated and the Sun gave forth a little
Warmth: Joseph Kirl^ bo^roborrowed a Gunn, Powder and Shot of the Spaniards,
and went to kill some in wild ^^^se or what other Game he might come up with,
but he had no success, comeing home without any Game: And We were well content
with a Dinner of Indian-Corn and Strung Bee^. The Spanish Indian hunted all
these three days and killed several Dear, but they eat them as fast as they
killed them; having little or no other Provision, their Corn being spent.

The latter part of this Day the wind was very moderate and we hoped to be
going the next Morning. Whereupon we Provided for the next Days Travel.

the 10 mo. 14. the 2 of the week.
This Morning we Embarked and set Forward having fair Weather, the Wind down:
We rowed all Day until three a Clock, being come to a great Inlett of the Sea;
but the Weather looked as though we should have Wind and Rain, and to cross the
Inlett would be dangerous, it being about Two Leagues over, and a little Wind
makes a rough Sea: So We putt on Shore, it being high Land and lofty Woods,
mostly Pine and Live Oaks: her^ we made all the Expedition we could to get a
shelter against the Weather. The Indians set to work to build themselves
little Hutts or Wigg-w^ms, which they had not done till now. They got small
Palmetto-Le^ves and covered their Buildings; but ours were covered mostly with
Boughs, which would not keep out much Rain. By Night we had a great deal of
Rain and VVind. And it being the Evening of the Spaniards Christmas they used
some of their Ceremonies with tink^ing on a piece of Iron, and Singing, (...)
for somewhat for the day following: They (...) of the Indians, and the Indians
in like manner begged of the Spaniards, and what the Indians gave the
Spaniards, that was returned to the Indians.

the 10 mo. 16. the 4 of the week.
This Morning was very ^oggy and proved a rainy day, but we kept rowing until
two in the Afternoon, the Rain being hard and the Wind increased at NE. We putt
on shore, but the Capt. told us we should not stay here long, he intended
further, and if the Weather permitted* would go all Night; but the Weather was
likelier* to be worse than better, and we sat in the Rain until Night was
come, Then we entreated the Captain that we might stay all Night, and that we
might provide against the Weather; but he pretented the weather would break up
and he would be gone: But there was no likelihood of it: The Rain was increased
and we all wett and shram'd with Cold; At length he assented to stay; then were
we hard putt to it, (being Night) to provide shelter: But in the dark did we
work until we had made us a shelter that would keep the Rain from us; having
fires we putt off our wett clothes and dried them as well as we could. Toward
Morning the Rain broke up.

the 10 mo. 17. the 5 of the week.
This Morning at Sunrising we set Forward and Rowed until Noon; at which
time we came to an Inlett and putt a shore: There we stayed all this Afternoon
and dried our Blanketts and what was not dried (...) Night. We also dressed
Victuals, and as soon as it was dark went hence designing to Row all N^ght,
but having an intrieate Passage amongst Marshes, Where were diverse Creeks and
ways, that we rowed sometimes in a wrong one* then Back again, and Rowed in
another; and about Midnight our Pilotts were at a loss not knowing which way
to go, nor where to find any dry Land that We might go on shore: But three
of our Boats rowed until We found a dry Napp to get on shore, where we lay
until Day, having good fires. As soon as it was light we got our Boats and
went to look for the rest of our Company whom we found having made their
Cannooes fast to the Sedge and sitting therein until we came to them.

the 10 mo^. 18. the 6 of the week.
The Night was extreem Foggy, and so was this Morning; but we searched about
and found our Passage, being a little Channel just broad enough for our Boats
to pass, and a Mile in l^ng. After we past this, we came into a great Sound
which went down into a large Inlett that the Land could not be seen from the
one Side to the other. Into the Sound comes down a great River called the
Sabbina-River, which when we got into the Course of it, the water was fresh
though in this great Sound. The Spaniards called it the Cross-Barr, or St. a
Cruce: About Noon we got over this Sound, and here we rowed out to Sea for two
Leagues to get into another Sound; and about three a Clock the Wind began to
blow at North-East, and it looked very black, so that We feared a Storm. We
desired to get on shore to Provide against it, but the Captain said, About a
few leagues further We* should get near Port-Royall, but in the Interim We saw
a Cannooe on the shore: we made to her and there we found some Indian Wig-wams.
Here We went on shore. This was a Cannooe laden with Skins that belonged to
Merchants at Carolina, having four Indians belonging to her; but three of them
runn away fearing the Spaniards, and One stayed.

The Indians Wig-wams were in a bad condition not fit to keep out the Weather;
So We set to work to mend them: Here was plenty of Palmeto-Leaves with which
We covered them and made Addition to them, but the Storm of Wind and Rain came
Violently before We could complete our work and held all Night, yet We lay
indifferent dry though the Storm was very great.

the 10 mo. 19. the 7 of the week.
This Morning the Storm of Wind continued at N E. with Rain We being likely to
stay some time here enlarged our Wig-vvam fearing a North-wester, which about
tenn a Clock this day began to blow fiercely with Snow for some hours. The Wind
was so Violent that We feared lest the tall Pines should be blown on us. We
sent the Carolina^Indian out to being his three Mates in; but they would not.
The Spanish Indians made great Complaint for Food. We gave amongst them Four
Rove of Corn, not being willing to spare any more, not knowing how long We
should be detained by the Weather. Some of our people had almost eaten up their
shares, and We expected, should we be detained long, we must supply them with
what We had to spare.

the 10 mo. 20. the 1 of the week.
This Day the wind continued at N W. and extreme cold it was, but we in our
Wig-wam were well enough Beared from cold. About Noon our Mariners Wig-wam got*
Fire and was burnt their was the lewardmost of all (for we had Eight Wig-wams)
otherwise the whole had been in danger* We understood that we were not passing
two or three days Journey from the English Settlements; but the Spanish Indians
told us that it was more till We were better informed by this Indian who
belonged to that place.

the 10 mo. 21.
This Day early we set forward and passed Port R^yall Sound, being some
Leagues over; and about two a Clock in the Afternoon we p^tt on shore, the Tide
being against us: Here was a close Wood where we lay indifferent well all
Night, and early in the Morning we set forward and rowed all day until One a
Clock in the Afternoon. of the 22. day.

At which time we got to the first settlement in Carolina, belonging to one
Richard Bennet, who received us kindly, and provided plentifully for us of good
food and good drink, showing the Spaniards all kindness possible he could for
our s^kes, which the Spaniards did acknowledge: We stayed here all Night.

the 10 mo. 23.
This Morning having eaten plentifully, and drank also* we went hence in
Company of some of the Inhabitants about ten a Clock, and rowed until two
hours within Night, having passed by several Plantations, we putt on shore on
a point of land to wait a Tide, having a Wood to shelter in and making good
fires we stayed until Midnight, at which time we went thence and rowed until
an hour or two before Day, by which time we got to Governor Blake's House.

24. This morning when the Governor arose he sent for Jo. Kirle, John Smith,
Andrew Marrey and Me making Inquiry of us concerning our Passage and on what
account. the Spaniards came with us. We rendered him an account of the Governor
of Augusteen's Generosity toward us, and that he sent us freely without any
demands except what we had freely Contracted. The Governor sent for the Spanish
Captain. in, and received the letters that were sent from the Governor. of
Aug^steen, also our Obligation, which the Governor accepted. The Governor
showed a great deal of kindness toward us, made Inquiry into all our
Conditions* Robert Barrow he sent to his Neighbor Margarett Bammers, who, he
said, would be careful and nurse him: She was an Ancient Friend, about 2 miles
distant; so he went on horseback. The Governor clothed Jos. Kirle, John Smith
Andrew Murrey; Me, my Wife and Child. To the rest of our People he gave each of
them a Du^fel Blankett which would keep them warm: And plenty of Victuals and
Drink was provided. We Obtained Leave of the Governor to permit the Spaniards
to go to Charlestown with us being willing to* gratify them according to our
Abilities.

the. 10 month 25. the 6 of the week.
This Day in the Afternoon, Joseph Kirle, John Smith, I* my Wife and Child went
to Margarett Bammers where Robert Barrow was; staying all Night till next
Morning, when the Spaniards called for us as they came by Water.

26. This Morning we went hence with the Spaniards for Charlestown, where we
arrived about an hour within Night.

The Gentlemen of the Town appointed a public house of good Credit to
entertain the Spaniards with meat and drink and lodging; which was done to the
Spaniards admiration, they stayed here 8 days. We got our People together and
agreed Jo^ntly to give the Spaniards a 100 pc. of 8, which. Jo: Kirle and I
divided amongst them according to their degrees, we two adding to the sum.

the 11 mo. 4. the 2 of the week.
Joseph Kirle and I provided a small Present to send to the Governor of
Augusteen, and this day we went with the Spaniard to Governor Bla^es, staying
there One day, the Governor treated the Spaniards, and having Completed his
Letters gave the Spanish Captain a considerable Present and sent him homewards,
Ordering them to call on the Yam-massee Indians, where they might have as much
Indian Cor^, ^s they pleased, to carry home with them, the Towns of these*
Indians being about two or three days rowing from Charles Town.

the 11 mo the 9. the 7 of the week.
This Day I returned with my Wife and Child to Charles Town, leaving Robert
Barrow in a weak and low condition with Margarett Bammer. I, my Wife and Family
with Joseph Kirle were entertained by Captain James Ribee the time of our stay
in Carolina. Our Seamen were mostly employed, some in one Vessel, and some in
another that belonged to the Port.

the 12 mo. 6 the 2 of the week.
Joseph Kirle went hence to the Island of Providence (...) hopes of gaining
speedy passage for Pensilvania the place of his abode.

Toward the beginning of this Month Robert Barrow was brought to Charles Town
being extrem Weak and was Lodged at the house of Mary Cross who nursed him.

the 1 mo. 18. the 5 of the week.
This Day I with my Family and Robert Barrow Em^a^ke^ and Set Sail from this
place for Pensilvania, and had Fourteen days Passage to Philadelphia.

the 2 month 4. the 1 of the week.
This Day in the Evening Robert Barrow departed this life and was buried the 6
Instant having passed through great Exercises in much Patience; And in all the
times of out greattest Troubles was ready to Counsel us to Patience and to
wait what the Lord our GOD would bring to pass. And he would often express That
it was his belief, that onr Lives should be spared not be lost in that
Wilderness and amongst those People who would have made a Prey of us. And so
this good Man having finished his Course with Joy Laid down his Body, and is
with Him who rewards the Just.

Thus having Completed our hard Passage hither, wherein Gods great Mercy and
wonderful Loving kindness has been largely Extended unto us in delivering and
preserving us to this Day and time, I hope that I with all those of us that
have been spared hitherto, shall never be Forgetull ^or unmindfull of the Low
estate we were brought into* But that we may double our Diligens^ in serving
there Lord GOD, Is the breathing and Earnest desire of my Soul* Amen.

Jonathan Dickinson


