A DIALOGUE BETWIXT Whig and Tory, Alias Williamite and Iacobite. Wherein the
PRINCIPLES and PRACTICES of each Party are fairly and impartially stated; that
thereby Mistakes and Prejudices may be removed from amongst us, and all those
who prefer English Liberty, and Protestant Religion, to French Slavery and
Popery, may be informed how to choose fit and proper Instruments for our
Preservation in these Times of Danger.

Printed in the Year 1693.

To the KING.
SIR,
THO the Sacred Majesty of Kings (I am sensible) ought not in common Cases to
be approached by every little Busy-body, or frivolous Remonstrance-maker; yet
when our Prince's Palace is on Fire, and his Sacred Person in the midst of
Flames, the meanest of his Subjects has the Privilege then to give him warning
of his Danger, and to assist to quench the Fire: And this I am afraid, Sir, is
at present too near our Case, or I would not have assumed the Boldness to
disturb your Repose, or have placed my self so disadvantagiously before your
Majesty, as I must expect to appear, under the Character of a Public Censor of
the Manners of your Ministers, and a petty State-Reformer. But it is not I
alone that am thus concerned and busy for the Public; the whole World are at
this time mournfully reflecting upon the miserable Estate we are fallen into
from that happy and glorious Prospect of things which we had in 1688 and 1689:
This has put all Men upon Enquiry into the Causes of the unhappy Change of our
Affairs; and I find it agreed on all Hands, That the principal occasion of our
Misfortunes (or rather Mismanagements) is from the intrusting those with the
Government of all, who were the Creatures and Tools of the two last Reigns, and
are irreconcilable Enemies to your Majesty's Government; those who opposed
your coming to the Crown; those who declared to your Face King James the only
Rightful King; Those who sold their Country and betrayed it to the two last
Kings, and will be always ready to sell it even to the French King, if he prove
the fairest Chapman.

I have heard that Thurloe, who was Secretary of State to Cromwell, being asked
by King Charles II. how they did support their Government so long, when all the
Nobility, Gentry and Clergy were against it? he replied, By intrusting those
only in the Management of all Affairs, who were as heartily against that
Nobility, Gentry and Clergy. I do not apply this literally; for, God be
praised, your Majesty has a great part of all these several degrees of Men,
who are most heartily and zealously in your Interests: But I mean by this, that
you are to oppose your Enemies with their Enemies, not with their Friends. And
that the Design of keeping out King James with Jacobites, seems to be as
impracticable, as his Project proved of setting up Popery with a Protestant
Army.

Yet there are some about your Majesty (who for base and private Ends)
endeavor to possess you with the destructive Politics of courting and buying
your Enemies into your Service, and would persuade you, that King James's
Tories are the only Party truly principled for Monarchy, and are fittest for
Employment, as being long practiced in Business: And that (on the contrary)
your Majesty's best Friends, whom they call Whigs, are not only ignorant, and
unacquainted with Public Business, but are Haters of Monarchy, of Common
wealth-Principles; and at best, for making their Kings no more than Dukes of
Venice, and Kings of Clouts. Now this is a Notion so false, so fatal to the
Prosperity of your Affairs, and so dangerous to the very Being of your
Government, that I cannot but think it highly necessary, that this Matter
should be fairly stated and laid before your Majesty: I am sensible how unfit I
am for the Task, and how open I lie to a Charge of Presumption in attempting
it. But as the Son of Cyrus, who was from his Birth dumb, broke Silence when he
saw his Father in the Hands of his Murderers; so (since I saw no other Champion
appear in this Cause) I resolved to break through all Impediments, even those
of Nature, and to endeavor the Rescue of my King out of the Hands of those who
have already been the Ruin of two Kings, your Majesty's Predecessors, and who
will undoubtedly bring you and your Affairs into great Difficulties, if you be
not delivered from their Counsels.

In order to this, I have impartially made a Collection (in the following
Dialogue) of all the Arguments which Whigs employ against the Tories, or Tories
against the Whigs, and submit it to your Majesty's discerning Judgment, and
most piercing and distinguishing Wisdom, (upon the whole) which of them are
most proper for your Majesty to employ; those who were in the Interests of
Popery and of France, or those who opposed both to the Death. I appeal to you,
Sir, whether a Tory's being for the Divine Right of Succession, and
consequently for King James's Monarchy, makes him the fitter in Principle to be
employed by King William? Or, whether his boasted Skill in Business will be of
any use to your Majesty, if he be in Principle and Inclination for K. James,
and believes K. William a King de facto only, without a Rightful Title, and in
plain English, an Usurper? If these Gentlemen (as their Principles will
naturally lead them to do) use all their Skill in their several Stations, to
obstruct and make difficult your Affairs, to betray your Designs to your
Enemies, to countenance and protect K. James's Friends in all their Plots and
Contrivances, furnish them with Intelligence, help them to Passes, Escapes,
etc. all which things (it cannot be denied) have been and are daily done by
some Persons employed in this Government: Of what Use, Sir, or Service then is
this boasted Skill in Business to your Majesty's Interests? Certainly Men less
conversant in Public Affairs, who have a Zeal for your Government, would be of
more Use and Service to you; Men who were persecuted by K. C. and K. I. either
in their own Persons, or in the Persons of their Friends, who were fined,
imprisoned, and some of their Relations hanged in those Reigns, are more likely
to act in earnest against K. I. and in the supporting your Majesty and your
Government, than those who had their Fortunes and their Families raised by K.
I. and his Brother K. C. and who hope to be raised yet more by his Return, or
at least, to secure in his Government what they have got in this, by obliging
him and his Friends, at the Price of sacrificing you and yours.

For Example: Is it reasonable to believe the E. of N. whose Father and Family
was raised by K. C. and K. I. for prostituting the Law (and his nauseous
Rhetoric) to the Designs of those two Brothers, who himself was a
Privy-Counsellor with Father Peter's, and chosen by K. I. at the time of the
Revolution to treat with your Majesty at Hungerford, in order to delay your
Progress to London; and lastly, who so violently opposed your Majesty's being
crowned King, as to lay an eternal Obligation on K. I. by it: I say, Sir, is it
reasonable to believe this Gentleman so proper a Secretary of State to your
Majesty, as the E. of S. who has so mortally disobliged K. I. by being so
early, and so zealous in your Interests, who went at the Head of that Message
to K. I. wherein he was required to retire from Whitehall; who has since that
been so instrumental to place and preserve the Crown upon your Head; and has,
in a word, broken all Measures so with K. I. as to leave no Possibility of a
Reconciliation to him, and consequently has no Retreat from this Government,
but is obliged in common Sense, to serve Your Majesty faithfully and zealously?

Or can your Majesty think Mr. K. who (it is generally said) believes himself
the Son of K. I. and it is known by all the World, owes his Fortune to him; who
(if we may believe Report) at the time of the Revolution, agreed with Captain
Tosyer, to carry the Ships he then commanded in the Straits to K. James in
France, (had not the common Sailers very rudely opposed the Project;) who after
this acquitted himself so ill at Cadiz, in letting the Thoulon Squadron pass by
him in his sight, without fighting them; and to conclude, has made so
unaccountable a Campaign of it this Summer; can your Majesty (give me leave to
say, Sir) think this Gentleman (after all this) fitter to command the Fleet of
England, than Mr. R. whose Provocations to K. I. are never to be forgiven by
him; who was one of the most instrumental Men in England in placing You upon
the Throne; who last Year gave you the greatest and most glorious Victory that
ever was obtained by us at Sea; and whose Courage, Conduct and Fidelity the
Parliament of England has unanimously attested?

And now, Sir, (If I may presume so far) will Your Majesty be pleased to
examine what Honor, what Profit has accrued to You, or the Nation, by your
employing these Gentlemen who have of late been at the Head of the Ministry.
For God's sake, Sir, cast up the Account of the last four Years Management, and
see what You have gained by changing VVhigs for Tories; Have not Your Affairs
gone backward both at Home and Abroad? Have not Mismanagements been multiplied?
Have You not cooled Your Friends, and yet not gained your Enemies? Do not
almost all the Tories You employ drink K. James's Health in Your Wine, and
serve Him in Your Offices? Do They not obstruct all Business which ought to be
dispatched, and dispatch all Business which ought to be obstructed? browbeat
Your Friends, and delay them in their most just Pretenses, but comply with your
Enemies in their most unreasonable Demands; nay, connive at their Cabals and
Conspiracies, and snatch them out of the Hands of Justice, when the Law has
passed Sentence of Death upon them for their Treasons? Would not such Ministers
and Friends as these be less dangerous to You, when professed Enemies, nay in
Arms against You in the Field, than in your Council, Cabinet and Offices?
Undoubtedly they would.

But I know the common Answer to all these kind of Complaints is, That it is
more easy to find Faults than Remedies. If You please therefore, Sir, we will
consider of Remedies, and I think there may be some found out both easy and
certain, and they are these: First, Sir, be pleased to remove from your Person,
Council and Offices of Trust, Men bred up and confirmed in Principles
destructive to our English Government, and hateful to Your People; and to
discountenance all State-Projectors, and Mountebank-Ministers, who make Wounds
in the State to recommend their Balsam: Throw out, Sir, these Achans to be
stoned by the People, who will otherwise (I fear) prevent God's Favor to You;
who blast Your Success Abroad, and rob You of the Affections of Your Subjects
at Home, with their Accursed Thing, I mean that Tinsel Power with which these
Miscreants dazzle the Eyes of Princes, and lead them out of the right way; God
is displeased with it: For uncontrollable and unaccountable Power is the Right
and Attribute of God alone; and (as the Scripture tells us) He will not give
his Glory unto another; nor suffer those to act as Gods, who are to die like
Men. Your People also will be displeased with a Despotick Power; for the Kings
of England are bound by Laws, by Mutual Compacts, etc. (as You your Self, Sir,
have set forth most unanswerably in your Declaration when You came over;) and
if these are broken, Englishmen, who believe themselves Subjects to the Crown
of England, (as by Law established) and not Slaves to any particular Person
Otherwise K. I. would have a fairer Pretense, than I hope we shall ever allow
him.
; they become impatient, angry, and at length perhaps unreasonable. And
whenever they see their King beset with Ministers of Lawless Principles, (those
wholesale Merchants of Arbitrary Power) they grow mistrustful and uneasy, and
are apt in such Cases to shut their Purses, and open their Mouths. And give me
leave to say, Sir, had not the People been made apprehensive and jealous, by
seeing these Men in the Ministry, whose mischievous Methods they were so well
acquainted with, and did so much abhor; no general Excise, no Loans, no Powers
would have been thought by the People of England, too much to have entrusted
You with; so highly they esteemed your Generous Relief of them, your unequal
Courage, and the many other admirable Virtues they saw shine in You. An English
King is the greatest Monarch upon Earth, when he reigns in the Hearts of his
Subjects; and all other Methods to Power and Greatness have been found
ineffectual in England. I remember I once saw written over a Mercer's Shop,
Keep thy Shop, and thy Shop will keep Thee: and tho it be a homely Allusion, it
is very applicable to the present Point; Keep your Laws, Sir, and your Laws
will keep You; support your People in their Rights and Liberties, and Queen
Elizab^th shall pass her Royal Word for them, they will support Your just
Prerogative at Home, and Your Honor Abroad. And, Sir, by the way, do not let
Your Flatterers give You a cheap Opinion of a Power derived from the People;
for it is undoubtedly from their Consent, that all Power must come: Nor let
them make You uneasy that Your Title to the Crown is from the universal free
Choice of the Commons of England: Believe me, Your Ministers, nor the two
Learned Bishops who have scribled upon this Subject, will never be able to find
You a better.

In the next place, Discharge all Iacobites and Trimmers from Offices of Trust:
For such as either desire K. James, or from their Fear, or Wisdom, endeavor to
deserve from him (so much as their Pardon) I humbly conceive are unfit for Your
Service at this Juncture; tho when the Government is more settled, I am for
entertaining all who give Proofs of their Penitence for their past Actions and
Opinions.

But, Sir, Purgatives will not alone perfect the Cure of your Government, and
restore it to perfect Health; You must make use of Alteratives too, there must
be a Change of Measures, as well as a Discharge of Men: And the Method I would
humbly offer is this.

First; To make the Interest of England your chief Design and Aim; and since
You are an English King, to become entirely an English Man. England is a Nation
jealous of Rivals in her Prince's Favor, and thinks her self deserving of all
his Care, and all his Caresses: If the People of England think You have a
favorable Opinion of them, they will endeavor to deserve it; if not, they may
perhaps deserve your worst Opinion too. This Humor of the Nation Queen
Elizabeth found early, and applied her self so happily to it, as by this single
Point to master all her Difficulties, (the greatest it may be that ever Prince
had to struggle with); whereas her Successors, by contrary Measures, brought
themselves into very unfortunate Circumstances.

In the next place, Sir, let me desire You to avoid concerning your Self in
Elections of Members in Parliament, or influencing them when chosen: the
Parliament is a sacred part of the English Constitution, and, like the
Israelites Ark of old, is not to be touched profanely, but with great Danger to
those who touch it so. And therefore, Sir, it will be your true Interest to
leave the People free to their Choice and to leave the Members free to their
Opinions when they are chosen. It is still-fresh in our Memories, how much the
Practices of the late Reigns in corrupting Elections, and Closeting the Members
of Parliament, enraged the Nation, and they had reason to resent it; for if
(for the sake of a Vote) a Member of Parliament shall be placed in an Office of
Trust he is not fit for, this is destroying the Government two ways at once:
For, to speak in the Phrase of the Ministry, it is making a Parliament of
Clouts, and an Officer of Clouts at the same stroke. Rejecting Bills offered by
Parliament of public Benefit, and for the securing of our Ancient Government,
and the Fundamental Rights of the Subject, was highly displeasing to the Nation
also in the late Reigns, and will be so in all Reigns: As was likewise the
denying the People their undoubted Right of frequent Parliaments. They had also
in the late Governments an Invention to make a Pump of the Parliament, and by
pouring in a Pint of Water, to fetch out a Tun: This was justly most provoking
to the Nation, and treasured up Wrath against the Day of Wrath.

The refusing of Bills, and the Contempt of Addresses from the Parliament
against Ministers, or in any other cases, has likewise given great Offense in
former Reigns. For tho the House of Commons, seconded by the House of Lords,
cannot reach the Life of Estate of any Person, but by a full Proof in form of
Law; yet because it is so difficult a matter to come at such a Proof, a Vote of
the House of Commons against any Minister, has always been esteemed by all
Kings (who were well with the People) a sufficient Reason for the removing them
from Court; and I have heard that our King Henry the Fourth (a Warlike and a
Wise Prince) upon an Address from the Parliament against some of his Ministers,
replied. I know no Evil by these Men, but if they are thought unfit by my
Parliament for my Service, I shall not think fit to continue them in it.

All these things, Sir, therefore are most carefully to be avoided by your
Majesty: They will appear with a worse Grace in You, who have declared and made
War against these Practices, than in your Predecessors: For as St. Paul says,
Thou who have said, Ye shall not commit Adultery, do thou commit Adultery?
Thou who have said, Ye shall not steal, do thou steal? You must by no means,
Sir, give this occasion of Clamor and Recrimination to your Enemies. But be
pleased to follow this General Rule, always to beware of the Ministers, and to
avoid the Schemes and Counsels of K. Charles and K. James's Government, and
then You can scarce err: For whatever is opposite to their Principles and
Practices, is the direct Road to your Security and Success.

In the next place, Sir, let Rewards and Punishments be duly and impartially
distributed; this is a Rule to which all Ages and Governments have paid the
greatest Respect and Observance; and to which the present Monarch of France
does chiefly owe the Prosperity of his Affairs: and without this Principle no
Government can subsist. Your Ministers who serve You well and faithfully, must
be distinguished from those who betray You, or serve You carelessly and idely;
and not smiled or frowned upon as they are supported or persecuted by this or
that Party or Faction. (And by the way, Sir, a Prince in England that rules
according to the Laws and Interests of his People, will never have occasion to
make his Court to any Party or Faction; nor can any Minister or any Party serve
You against the Interest of the Nation.) Let your Soldiers be encouraged, and
preferred according to their Bravery and Abilities, without Favor or
Affection: The Bravest otherwise will follow the Example of Cowards, if they
find they have no Advantage over them by their Courage: For all Men would be
Cowards if they durst. To an English Soldier a Smile or a kind Word, is as
acceptable at some times as a Month's Pay; and if you will condescend to a
Commendation of what they do well, they will endeavor in the next occasion to
exceed what they did before: For if You are once Master of their Love, Your are
sure to have the Disposal of their Lives. Nor need You fear to punish them
severely, provided You reward them bountifully. Let the Insolence of your
Enemies be rebuked, and Rebels and Traitors to your Government be severely
punished, and not courted and caressed; for in the present State of Affairs all
Mercy to your Enemies is Cruelty to your Self and Friends: and it encourages
your Enemies, and disheartens your Loyal Subjects, to see these Insolents brave
the Government unpunished, and to see your treacherous Ministers soliciting
the Pardon of every condemned Traitor; and making their Court to K. I. at the
Price of your Safety, is most provoking to every good Man. Besides, it looks
like your having a Doubt of your own Right and Title to the Government, to be
thus backward in asserting it; and is so interpreted by the Iacobites.

Intelligence is another Point of mighty Consequence, and can scarce be
purchased too dear: For it is the Soul of Government, and directs all its
Actions properly, and without it You consult in the dark, and execute
blindfold; You know not what to act, what to fear, where to attack, or where to
defend: I do not mean by this that we are to penetrate into the French King's
Counsels, or rifle his Cabinet, that I am afraid is out of the reach of our
Power, and of our Purse; But I cannot but think we may be able to know the
Marches of their Armies, and the Motions of their Fleets, without selling our
Souls to the Devil for Intelligence, or breaking our Exchequer.

Thus, Sir, I have set before Your Majesty, what, in my poor Judgment, is for
your Interest to pursue, and what is for your Service to avoid; what will make
your Majesty and this Nation happy, what will make both unhappy: and I heartily
pray the Great, Good and Wise God, to direct, bless and prosper your Majesty in
all your Glorious Designs for the Defense of these Kingdoms, and of Christendom
against the common Enemy. If I have used too great a Freedom, or have offended
in what I designed for your Service, I am sorry for it: I call God to witness,
my Plainness proceeded from my Zeal and Affection to your Interests, and the
Prosperity of your Affairs, and not from any factious, saucy, or unmannerly
Principle. I wish some abler Pen had taken upon them this Part. But I must own,
it provoked me to see my Country and my King so forsaken; the one of Advocates,
the other of honest Counsel; and this urged me to take upon me those two
Characters, of Advocate and Adviser, both which I confess my self very unfit
for: Not, but that as I said in the beginning, I take it to be the Privilege,
nay and the Duty too of every English Subject, (provided it be performed with a
decent and due Respect) to lay before the King such Matters as may be dangerous
to his Person or Government, to be concealed from his Knowledge: (for we are not
tied up in England to Spanish Forms, where the King must be wet to the Skin, if
he whose proper Office it is be not in the way to put on his Cloak.) And I beg
your Majesty to believe what I have said is from a Faithfulness and Sincerity,
which will in all Accidents and Difficulties preserve me unalterably,

Your Majesty's most Loyal, most Dutiful, and most Obedient Subject.

To the Honest English Protestant READER.
Honest Reader;
AT the beginning of the late Revolution, I dare say, it was not expected by
thee or me, That it would have been necessary in this Reign, to have entered
into Argument, whether the Principles of Whig or Tory are most agreeable to the
Constitution of the English Monarchy; or which Party were to be chosen for the
Support of our present King and Queen. But such is our Fate, that I am afraid
it requires an abler Pen than mine to convince some, who it is highly necessary
should be convinced, that any of the Measures of the late Reigns were mistaken:
they are taught to believe those Monarchs in the Right; nay, even those evil
Counselors too, which were so m^ul'd in the Declaration of 88; and none are
Rogues and Villains, and deserve to be hanged, but those who were most active
in the bringing the present King and Queen over, and in setting the Crown upon
their Heads. I thought it therefore high time that this Matter should be set
right; and in order to it, that the Principles and Practices of Whig and Tory
should be truly and impartially examined; which I have endeavored to do to the
best of my Knowledge, and shall be well pleased to see any other do it better
from my poor Hint. I acknowledge the Looseness of the Style, the want of Method
in the following Paper, and the many Repetitions this Dialogue way of writing
is liable to, will lay it open to the Lash of every Pedant, and Schoolmaster:
But know, I write not for Fame, or out of any Vanity of being an Author: And
therefore I come not to you, as the Apostle says, in the enticing words of
Man's Wisdom, but in Plainness and in Truth, etc. I have stated the Matter so
fairly, that some of the Tories may be Fools enough perhaps to think I have
given them a Victory, (and triumph as their Admirals did in their being
gazetted, because the Council was so favorable, as to suffer them to pass for
mistaken Block-heads, instead of wilful knavish Liars.) But indeed I thought
the Tories had so weak a Plea, that I might well allow them to make the most of
it, and have left nothing unsaid which I have ever heard them say in their
Defense. What they have done the honest People, and the Interest of England
most Mischief by, is that Sham of a Commonwealth, which I have in the following
Discourse (I hope) convinced all honest Men is a false Notion, impracticable
and impossible in England; however this is the Breast-work which they have
always covered themselves with, when they designed to fire upon the Rights and
Privileges, the Laws, Liberties and Properties of their Country: And whenever
they do raise this Breast-work, we must endeavor to beat it about their Ears;
I am sure it is too weak to resist any Attack, and I hope (as Bays say) They
fly, They fly, They fly, who first did make that Lie. What I have here written,
is with an honest Design of doing Service to my Country; and if it either
happens to inform or convince any, to embrace the Public Interest, and the
common Good of themselves and Fellow Creatures, I have my end. And for the Tory
Critics, they may bite till their Teeth meet through my Book, yet I shall be
as insensible of their Malice, as they have been of the King's Mercy, Favor
and Friendship to them. I will comfort my self, honest Reader, that I have thee
on my side; and so long as thou do continue firm in the supporting the
English Laws and Liberties, thou do build upon a Rock, against which, I hope,
the Gates of Hell shall not prevail; and so long I will build upon thee, and
hope for all Good from thee, and pray for all Blessings upon thee.

Adieu.
A DIALOGUE between Whig and Tory, etc.
Tory. WEll met old Acquaintance; Who would have thought seven Years ago, to
have seen you and I at White Hall together in the same Interest?


Whig. In the same Interest! Why, who thinks that now?


Tory. What, in one of your old peevish Fits? I thought now all things go to
your Mind, you would have been in better Humor.


Whig. You were begotten, born and bred in Mistakes, and I doubt not but you
will continue so to your end: yet you cannot be so gros^y mistaken sure as to
think, all things go to any honest Englishman's Mind; when you, who were the
Tools of the two last Reigns, the Instruments of all our past and present
Misfortunes, and the declared Cause of the War which brought on the late
Revolution, are notwithstanding the only Men courted by this Government.


Tory. I am afraid you will never be pleased with any Monarchical Government.


Whig. That is a Point I know you have been long endeavoring to put upon the
World, but more industriously upon the Court; yet I wonder at your Impudence of
urging it now, since it is so fresh in every Man's Memory, how zealously the
Whigs struggled in the late Convention to settle the Monarchy, whilst you
contested as zealously to make it an Anarchy.


Tory. We will talk more of this by and by: But if you were so instrumental as
you say in setting up this Government, why are you so out of Humor with what
you have made your selves?


Whig. Disappointment you must allow a just Cause of Resentment: We hoped from
new Lords new Laws, new Ministers, and new Methods: But if still we are to have
the same Ministers, and consequently the same Methods, the very Tools of the
two last Reigns, and consequently the same Work; this I take (in my Lord H -- s
Phrase) to be a Change, without an Alteration; and* in my Opinion, gives too
just occasion of Dislike: and I cannot but think this way of managing Affairs,
must end unhappily, both to Prince and People.


Tory. But how come you and I to be so concerned either for the Prosperity of
Princes, who never think of us, but as we can serve some present Turn of
theirs; or for the Interest of Mob, who will sing Ballads upon us under the
Gallows, when we are hanging there for their sakes? Prithee Whig, grow wise,
and do not torment thy self thus with State-Affair^* let Princes take Care of
themselves, and the People of themselves, and let us take Care of our selves.
My Method is, to get what I can, and let Courts do what they will.


Whig. Why then, Sir, with your good leave, your Method is as foolish, as it is
knavish: For whoever sells his Country to a ^awless Power, leaves himself nor
his Family no Certainty, no Property in what he has gotten by his Treachery;
nay, his Estate is as often the Snare, as the Comfort of his Life. It proves
sometimes a Naboth's Vineyard, and makes him the Eyesore of some hungry
Court-Favourite. And I would ask, Whether a small Estate fenced about with
Laws, and the Possession thereof secured to you and your Family, is not of more
Value, than a much greater Revenue, of which you cannot assure your self the
Possession one Minute? Your Forefathers thought the Laws and Liberties of
England worth their Care and Contest, and waded through Rivers of Blood to
leave them in force to their Posterity. And the Church once made it an Article
of their Religion, Nolumus Leges Angliae mutari: But thou do renounce all the
Principles of Humanity, of common Sense, and of Religion; and ought to be
driven out of a Country which thou make open Profession to sell, and betray.
And as for what you say of the Ingratitude of Princes, and People, the one to
his faithful and affectionate Subjects, the other to their zealous Patriots;
this does not discharge you from your Duty to either. But (in Answer to the
first) if you will serve Princes no farther than you serve your Country in
serving them; that Service will always reward it self: and for the Mob, as you
are ever pleased most mannerly to call your Countrymen, and Fellow-Citizens;
if any prove so sordid as you alledg, I shall answer you in the Words of our
Savior, Forgive them, for they know not what they do: And let his Example
teach you better Principles, who, notwithstanding all the Scoffs and
Indignities he met with, laid down his Life upon the Cross for the Benefit of
Mankind. But your Principles make you the Triumph of Heathens, and bring you
upon the same foot with Brute Beasts.


Tory. Come, don't tell us Stories of our great Grandsires, who troubled
themselves about Trifles: There is a Fashion in Government (as well as in
Clothes) which must be complied with, according to the Humor of the present
Age; and you may as well pretend to shape all Gowns by Queen Elizabeth's
Fardingale, as to shape our Courts, or Counsels according to the Sentiments of
that, or other Times, which were as different too from one another, as we are
different from them.


Whig. As for your Fashion of Government, Mr. Tory, I hope it is either gone to
the Grave with K. C. or to France with K. I. and could heartily wish you would
follow it to either places: But pray before you go, let me ask you in what Age
and Time it was, That Men of Sense, or Men of Honor, did prefer Will and
Pleasure to Laws, or Slavery to Freedom? As I take it, the Principles of
Liberty and Property, have always been in Fashion amongst Men of Sense, and
Estates in England, and ever will be. But your Principles can never find
Professors, but amongst Fools and Beggars.


Tory. Whatever our Principles are, you find both them and us preferred to you
and yours, even by a Government of your own choosing: And let that satisfy you
as an Answer to that Point.


Whig. Not at all; that only proves a Mistake some where: And where the Mistake
is, if you please, we will enquire; and I think it will best appear by
examining the original Rise, Principles and Practices of both Parties.


Tory. Come on then, a clear Stage, and no Favor.


Whig. As for your original Rise, it is certain, you owe your being known in the
World, to the horrid and execrable Designs of the two late Kings to set up
Arbitrary Power and Popery amongst us: then were all the Jails, Brothels, and
Kennels raked for Villains of ^ear'd Consciences and desperate Fortunes; your
Arl -- ns, Clif -- ds, Of -- s, were then thought upon for Ministers of State;
and under them were bred such a pack of Wretches, as the Court of Tiberius
would have been ashamed of. In the Law they were of the same sort with the
Ministry; What Age can parallel your N -- ms, your N -- ths, your Ieff -- is,
Sc -- gs, Rain -- ds, Wri -- s, etc. and their under Managers Gra -- m and Burt
-- n? etc. Then as to the Pillars of what they then called the Church of
England, tho so disguised at that time, that it was scarce known by its most
dutiful, most affectionate, and most pious Children; I need say no more of
them, than that they were composed of Bishops, and a Clergy preferred by two
Kings, who were about to set up Popery and Tyranny: And therefore were to
choose such Men into the Government of the Church, who they thought would be
most complying with those Purposes, and whose Looseness of Morals might bring
most Discredit upon the Protestant Religion: and whoever remembers Park -- r,
Cart -- t, or knows Cr -- w, and Wat -- n, will (I think) be of the Opinion
they were not ill chosen for the abovesaid Purposes.


Tory. But you see whatever Purposes they were chosen for, several of the
Bishops opposed Popery with the greatest Bravery imaginable.


Whig. True, they did oppose a Popish Clergy being brought into their
Bishoprics, Churches and Colleges; and who but a mad Man would have expected
any other from them? But did they ever stick at any thing that might advance
Arbitrary Power over the Laity? Did they not conjure the People to Passive
Obedience, Non-resistance? etc. Did they not tie us Hand and Foot, and throw us
like Daniel into the Lions Den? Nay, did they ever stick at building his Popish
Church for him, whilst he contented himself to make use of their Hands? But
when they saw that after they had gone so far in the Service, others were taken
in to finish the Work, and to reap the Fruit of what they had sowed and
planted: This was indeed intolerable, and then it was, and not before, that
they begun to make a Noise about the Protestant Religion, and English
Liberties, and to preach backward all their former Sermons.


Tory. But you cannot deny but that they were very instrumental to the
Revolution.


Whig. I own they were for some time, like Fishes who have got a Worm in their
Heads, they did frisk and leap out of their own Element; but like them too,
they soon plunged into it again: for K. I. was scarce got to Feversham, before
they repented what they had done, and from that day to this have given all the
Proofs and Marks of an invincible Hatred and Enmity to the present Government:
They opposed the King's coming to the Crown, fell into Cabals for the weakening
his Government when he was King, and raised Rebellion without, and Plots within
the Kingdom for the restoring of K. I. etc. Nay, at this time it is undeniable,
that when ever the Clergy are most numerous, the Jacobites are most numerous
too; there are more Jacobites ten for one in every Cathedral Town, than in any
other Towns, accounting number for number: And how the Universities are
generally disaffected to this Government, is notorious; they reproach and rail
against the very Bishops and Clergymen preferred in this Reign. The Archbishop
of Canterbury himself, whose Learning, Piety, and Excellencies of all kinds,
are so eminent, that it seems impolitick in them, as well as unjust to reproach
him, yet him too do they rail, scoff at, and treat with the foulest Invectives.
In short, those who every day piously attend the Service and Religious Worship
of the Church, who most frequently are Communicants in the holy Sacrament,
these they will notwithstanding call Presbyterians, canting, whining
Hypocrites, etc. and esteem none sound Members of their Body but those who
drink with them, and come up to all their highest Points of Dominion, Tyranny,
and Uncharitableness to all those who are not of their Faction: I will not call
it their Church, because I think it a Dishonor to the best Reformed Church in
the World, to be served by such a Clergy as are not only a Scandal to the Name
of Protestant, but to the Name of Religion; and who, under the Title of
Protestant Priests, are laboring with all their Power the Return of K. James,
with his Popery and Slavery, and preach and pray openly for his Restoration;
whilst no Exhortation for Obedience to our present King, our great Deliverer
from Popery and Slavery, is heard from any Pulpit, no Passive Obedience nor
Non-resistance is named in this Reign: And if for the sake of their Livings
they are forced to pray for the King and Queen, it is in so faint and low a
Voice, as if they had no mind to be heard either by God or the People.


Tory. Some few discontented Persons there may be perhaps, who may deserve this
Character, but I hope you do not lay this Charge upon the whole Clergy of
England.


Whig. No, I know there are many religious, learned and good Men amongst them;
and there will I hope be more if this Government continues: But that the Number
is not small who have refused the Oath, to this present Government, you cannot
deny; and that most of the high Church, as they call themselves, those who (as
a Learned Doctor said) have the Spirit of the Church in which they were bred,
tho they will not say with St. Paul, they have the Spirit of God The first
Instance I have met of their Modesty.
. Most of this Order, I say, profess to take the Oath of Allegiance to this
King, as he is King de facto, not de jure. And by the Example of these Reverend
Clergymen, the Lay Knaves and Fools are directed to take Oaths with Mental
Reservations, and private Interpretations and Distinctions. And having no
Principle, but that of Self-Interest, in which case you ever renounce all
Justice, all Humanity to your Fellow Creatures; you profess Slavery to some,
that you may Lord it over others; yea renounce and trample upon all Laws to
serve a Turn, make a Jest of Liberty and Property: And to gratify your Pride or
Avarice, you have betrayed your Country, persecuted and murdered your innocent
Countrymen and Fellow-Citizens, sold your Neighbors to the French King, and
your Laws and Religion to the late Kings; and even from the same Principles
have been endeavoring to bring about the same Practices in this Reign too; and
in order to it, have been tempting your Lord and Master, in the Language of the
Devil to our Savior, All this will I give thee, if thou will fall down and
worship me; and I hope he will answer you in his Words upon that occasion, Thou
shall not tempt the Lord thy King. Thus have I given you in few Lines an
account of the Rise, Principles and Practices of your Party, with which I could
fill up a Volume: But I consider the Nation needs only a general Hint to
refresh their Memory to Particulars. For the Smart of the Wounds received in
the late Reigns from you, is yet most sensible to many honest Englishmen.


Tory. If this Devil of a Tory be so black as you paint him, I wonder how he
comes by so fair a Character, and so numerous a Party in the Nation, and so
great a Countenance from all Courts of contrary Interests.


Whig. Fair Appearances, and great Numbers prove nothing; the lewdest Strumpets
are often fair, and Fools and Knaves have in all Ages out-numbred the Wise and
Honest. How ye Tories came to have so great a Countenance from the last Court,
I have already showed, and will (since you command me) show you how ye became
the Favorites of this Court too, even by the same Means, and the same Men*
that made you Favorites in King Charles's Time. For the M. of C. after all his
mischievous Management of Affairs in that Reign, having by an ill Fate to this
poor Nation, got into some small pretense of Merit, by little Assistances he
gave to the late Revolution; upon this he sets up again for Ministry. But being
apprehensive that those honest Gentlemen, who had so bravely exposed their
Lives and Fortunes for the Redemption of their Country, and were so well
acquainted with his Methods in the late Reigns, would be jealous of his having
too great a Credit with the King, he thought it his best play to begin with
them; and from his first Coming to Court, labored to insinuate Jealousies into
the King of those Gentlemen as Commonwealths-men, Haters of Monarchy, etc. and
having likewise an implacable Pique to Parliaments, for their Impeachment and
Imprisonment of him, he at the same time represents that part of the Government
envious of the King's Power, and always endeavoring to make him a King of
Clouts, a Duke of Venice, etc. Thus by misrepresenting the King's best Friends,
he made way to bring in his old Practices, and his old working Fools (whom he
represented to be Men of Business, and Friends to Monarchy) into this Court
too; and being assisted afterward by the E. of N. and some others, ye have
indeed carried all before you; and how much to the Interest of the Nation, and
the Honor of the King, let all the World judge, who have seen this poor Kingdom
every Year for this last four Years brought to a reasonable Apprehension of
being invaded from Abroad, betrayed at Home; and in a word, to subsist only by
a Miracle.


Tory. All this rambling Story you have told is a wild Supposition, and
straining the Intention of this noble Lord to your own malicious Purpose, who
designed nothing more in bringing in these Gentlemen you call the King's
Enemies, than by reconciling them to the King and his Government, to make the
Foundation of it broader and deeper: And I know not how this comes to be such a
Crime, and so ill Policy with us. I have heard, that Henry the Fourth of
France, who was esteemed a wise and Politic Prince, thought it very good
King-Craft, to caress his Enemies of the League, and to make his Court to the
Jesuits.


Whig. And pray, what did he get by it? Did he ever gain either of them
heartily into his Interest? Were not those of the League ever ready to plot
with the Spaniard, etc. against him? And for his dear Friends of the Church,
not all his Renunciation of his old Religion, and his old Friends; not all his
Gifts, his Caresses, and his Courtship could reconcile them to him, or so much
as save his Life, when they had it in their Power to destroy it. For those
jealous Gentlemen, the Jesuits, never would believe they had his Heart, till it
was sent them in a Box to Le A College of Jesuits in that place.
Fleche, to be buried there.


Tory. But notwithstanding your Jesuits Tale of a Tub, I will undertake that
all the Tories (as you call them) in England, both Clergy and Laymen, shall
take the Oaths to the King, and serve him heartily, provided he will do one
thing.


Whig. What Is that?


Tory. Utterly discard you Whigs, and give us the Penal Laws again upon the
Fanatics.


Whig. And would that make the Foundation of the Government broader and deeper,
as you talked just now? Besides, have you not heard a Story of one Sampson,
Sir, who after he had resigned his Lock of Hair in which his Strength lay, was
delivered up to his Enemies by those he had trusted? But supposing what you
propose (if granted) might win you to be Williamites, were King James dead, yet
I am mistaken, if whilst he lives, and the King of France continues as powerful
as at present, you will ever be drawn by any Courtship, to engage so far in the
Interests of this Government, as to swear otherwise to the King than as King de
facto, nor will you make your Reconciliation to King James desperate. Answer to
this Point plainly and truly.


Tory. Wise Men will always secure a Retreat; and Self-preservation is a first
Principle with all Men. And as a Gentleman said wittily upon this occasion, As
long as the Government can maintain it self, and will maintain me, it is sure
of me: But I have lived too long at Court to die a Martyr for any Monarch, and
will always behave my self so in one Court, as to be well with the next. And
tho perhaps this is not all that this Government might reasonably wish from us,
yet I can tell you they do not believe that they shall mend themselves, by
changing us for you, for diverse and sundry Reasons.


Whig. Pray let us have some of them.


Tory. First, because you are for a Commonweath-Government, and Haters of
Monarchy.


Whig. That is, that we are mad Men, and void of all common Sense and Reason:
for whoever has either of these, will know a Commonwealth, a Chymera
impracticable, and impossible to be brought about in England. If Machiavel be
of any Authority, he says in his 55 th Chapter upon Government, That where
there is not an Equality in the Conditions and Estates of a People, it is
impossible for that People or Nation to erect and settle a Commonweath. He
gives you Examples to confirm this, but I think there are some more to our
purpose, as being more recent and nearer home. Upon the Revolt of the
Low Countries from the Spanish Yoke, it was necessary for them to put
themselves under some Form of Government; and the Form being in their own free
Choice, seven of the seventeen Provinces, who were a Trading sort of People,
much upon an Equality in their Condition and Fortune, and had few Families of
Nobility or Gentry among them, fell naturally into a Commonwealth-Government:
But the other ten Provinces, having great numbers of Nobility and Gentry, tho
they were more immediately under the Tyranny of the Spaniard, and had been more
particularly sensible of D'alva's Cruelty and Oppression, notwithstanding chose
rather to continue under the hated Government of Spain, than to accept of the
Invitation the other seven Provinces had made them of coming into the more
hated Project of a Commonwealth: so impossible it is to reconcile Men
distinguished by Titles and Fortunes, to mix themselves in a common Level with
the People upon any Consideration or Disgust whatsoever. And whoever will look
over what passed here in England from the Year 1648, to the Year 1660, will be
yet more convinced of the Truth of this Assertion, and of the Nonsense of any
Commonwealth-Design in this Nation: Perhaps there was never at any time so many
Men of strong Inclinations for a Commonwealth-Government as then, nor of
greater Abilities to effect such a Design: And yet they found the Nobility,
Gentry and Dignified Clergy such a Rub in their way, as no Art, no Force could
remove: and at last they were brought into that Confusion and Disorder by
attempting it, that the very People and Army who were in this Project of a
Commonwealth, and had overthrown the Monarchy in order to it, and could support
Cromwell in a single Person, yet after his Death saw a necessity of restoring
the Monarchy again, and assisted toward it. But this was the Dust which the
two last Courts threw into the Peoples Eyes when they would make them blind to
Arbitrary Power and Popery: And is now one great Artifice the Iacobites depend
upon, whereby to separate the Friends of this Government from its Support; tho
it will always be a Jest to understanding Men. I have heard a Story of a Lady,
who passing through a Crowd to her Coach, and having a rich Jewel on her
Breast, covered the Jewel with one of her Hands; which a Pick-pocket in the
Crowd observing, steps up to her, and claps his Hand upon a Place below, which
he thought would oblige her to remove her Hand from her Breast, to defend it:
But the Lady apprehending the Thief's Design, very prudently neglected the
false Attack, and applied both her Hands to the s^curing her Jewel, and by that
means came off safe. And so Gentlemen, whenever you make your false Attack upon
our Commonwealth, we shall for the future, take it for the Signal to us, that
your real Aim is at our Liberties and Properties, and shall apply both our
Hands and Hearts to the securing those Jewels of inestimable Price. But to be
serious, in our case the Whigs (as I said in the beginning of our Discourse)
have given sufficient Proof how little they designed a Commonwealth, and how
hearty they were to the Monarchy, in their struggling so zealously to set the
Crown on the King's Head.


Tory. We own you were for giving him the Name of a King: But after all, speak
sincerely, Did you design to make him any more than a King of Clouts, a Duke of
Venice, or a Statholder?


Whig. We designed to make him as great a King as the Laws of England and our
Ancient Constitution make any King: And if you pretend to make him more, take
the Honor of it. But, Sir, upon this occasion your Party were for making his
present Majesty less than either a Duke of Venice, or Statholder of Holland:
For in proposing to make him a Regent, you make him only a Journy-man-King, a
Subject to King James, and accountable to him: But what the Whigs did to
deserve being suspected of a Commonwealth-Design, or of any Intention to lessen
the King's just Power, I am yet ignorant.


Tory. You are wilfully so then; for what could the meaning of the Convention
be to settle the Revenue of the Crown from three Years to three Years, and to
take away the Revenue of the Chymney-Money, one of the fairest Flowers of the
Crown, but lessening the King's Power, and making his Government precarious?


Whig. The Chimney-Tax being grown a Grievance more sensible and more odious to
the common People than any other; and the danger of being enslaved by giving
such great Revenues (for Life) to the two last Kings (by which they were
enabled to maintain standing Armies, and to subsist without Parliaments) was so
fresh in the Memories of all thinking Englishmen, and so apprehended by them,
that the King's Friends thought it greatly for his Service to take away the
Burden of the one, and the Apprehension of the other from the People, and by
using different Methods to those which had been followed in the former Reigns.
To make his present Majesty's Government more acceptable to all good Men, and
that He might hereby reign in the Hearts of his Subjects, and be distinguished
by them: which Method, if pursued, would have given us a fairer Prospect of our
Affairs, than at present I am afraid we have. But this is not the Interest of
wicked Ministers, who when Kings take these Courses, lose their Dominion over
them: their business is therefore to make Princes jealous of Encroachments of
Parliaments, of Commonwealth-Designs amongst the People, to represent the
King's Interest separate from the Interest of his Subjects; and then to
ingratiate themselves with him, and raise themselves in his Opinion for their
Parts and Abilities, they offer him Schemes of Politics, to prevent Designs
against him which were never thought on. Thus these honest Iago's first work a
Prince up to Jealousies and Hatred of his People, by false Suggestions; and
then, as a Remedy against the Mischiefs they have supposed, put him upon
Designs ruinous to his Country and himself. But in the mean time, by appearing
thus zealous for what they call the King's particular Interest and Glory, they
insinuate themselves into some sort of Princes Favor, they become Confidents
of all Court-Intrigues, and grow great and rich; they dispose all Offices* and
crush all who are not their Creatures; and at last come to awe and govern Kings
themselves. As Waiting-Women, who when they have debauched their Mistresses by
their Mercenary Solicitations, and are become the Trustees of their Frailty,
they no longer taste the Busk, nor bitter Reproofs for misplacing of a Pin or
Patch; but from Servants become Mistresses, no Faults are then found with them,
no Liberty denied them; even the Purse, and the rich Petticoat is absolutely at
the Waiting-woman's Service, till at last they bring their Mistresses to Infamy
and Beggary. And so to return to the Ministry again; By this kind of Management
they make their Masters Kings of Clouts, necessitous, miserable, and despised
Princes. For Example; What made the late King James a King of Clouts, but those
Evil Counselors, who put him upon Despotick and Dispensing Power, and
propagating a Religion against Law? Who put him upon preferring Papists and
Irish, to Protestants and English? Who advised his seizing Colleges and
Charters, setting up High-Commission-Courts, and making Parliaments and Laws a
Nose of Wax? Deny this if you can, Mr. Tory. Nay, as to your Idol-King, Charles
the Second, (who notwithstanding I believe much the worse of the two Brothers,
as sinning against a better Understanding, and greater Obligations) was it not
by these Counsels, and some of these Counselors, that this Gentleman was made
a King of Clouts too, from having all the Advantages at the time of his
Restoration that ever King was blessed with? He was beloved, delighted in, and
courted by his Subjects; was respected Abroad, in Plenty and Power at Home; and
could direct the Votes of a Parliament with a Nod (more than he could at last
with his Exchequer): yet after all this in a few Years, by the Management of
some of our present Evil Counselors, who gave him ill Impressions of his
Subjects, made him out of Love with Parliaments, and poisoned him with Lawless
Power, and Love of Tricks, (the worst of Poisons to an English King) who, for
their own filthy Interest, persuaded him to sell Dunkirk, break the Triple
League, and enter into Measures with France, destructive to the Interest of
this Nation, and of all Europe. By these Measures he at last became distasteful
to his Subjects, and was forsaken by a Parliament the most attached to him, and
in love with his Person to a Fault; so that at last* his Necessities drove him
to become a Pensioner to France A fine Character for an English King.
. And if you will believe Mr. Dreyden, his Poet-Laureat, concluded his Reign in
these miserable Circumstances of being [despis'd Abroad, and living on Tricks
at Home.] And how these Gentlemen's Father and Grandfather were made Kings of
Clouts by the like Measures and the like Ministers, by endeavoring at Lawless
Power, and laying aside Parliaments, etc. even the Histories of those Times
published by their own Authority, make it out plainly. And now, Mr. Tory, if
you please we will examine a little into the few Examples we have of Princes
who have practiced a contrary Method to the beforementioned one; we will
enquire what Effects that sort of Government has produced; and we need go no
farther, I think, than Queen Elizabeth's Reign, the immediate Predecessor to
the Scottish Race, to fetch a Comparison that will answer all Objections: And to
give the Beauty of her Government its due Luster, let us set it off with the
Difficulties that attended it and surrounded it in the beginning. Let us
consider her in the first place -- of the weaker Sex, -- a Woman -- having no A
new Distinction our Statesmen have lately found out.
rightful, tho a lawful Title; -- The greatest part of her Subjects of a
contrary Religion to her -- The Queen of Scotland, her next Neighbor, a
Pretender to the Crown -- Ireland in open Rebellion: The King of Spain, the
greatest Monarch of Europe at that time, her mortal Enemy, and Invader -- Plots
and Conspiracies by the Papists against her at Home -- And no Ally Abroad but
the Dutch, then an Infant State, and supported by her. -- And yet we see this
poor, weak Woman in the midst of all these Disadvantages, Absolute and
Uncontrolled at Home, Aweful and Glorious Abroad. This indeed seems very
extraordinary; Let us enquire therefore what Methods were then practiced in
order to the producing such wonderful Success: Was it by corrupting Elections,
or making Pensioners of Parliament Men? -- No, for her Courtiers pleaded (as
well in Bar of being Parliament Men as of being Sheriffs) that they were the
Queen's Servants: So that by this we may reasonably conclude there was nothing
to be got by it in those days. -- Was it by employing her Sister Queen Mary's
Ministers, or courting her Enemies the Papists? -- No, -- For she made England
too hot for the one, and adorned almost every Gibbet in the Nation with her
Justice upon the other. -- Was it by a standing Army then? -- Not that neither;
for she had no Army, nor no Guards, but her Gentlemen-Pensioners, and Yeomen of
the Guard. I know you will say, How the Devil could she bring Matters about as
she did, without using any of the admired Methods of our late Times? -- In good
sooth, even by so homely and plain a Receipt, that you will laugh at me when I
tell it you -- Only -- by loving, and courting the Love of her People, and not
preferring Scottish, French, not Irish Favorites to them (as in the late
Reigns) -- By being just to their Rights and Liberties, and devoted to their
Interests -- By rewarding bountifully, and punishing severely; -- By
encouraging honest Men, and -- browbeating State-Projectors and Tricksters;
Knaves who persuade Princes, that their Interest is separate from the Interest
of their People; -- who counsel them to stretch Prerogative, or be over-fond of
it; -- who endeavor to breed unkind Thoughts in them to their best Friends and
honestest Subjects. This sort of Gentlemen were out at Heels in her time. She,
like a truly wise Woman, never seemed fond of Despotick Dominion, nor of those
who flattered her with it, and put her upon it; for she knew, that Nolo
Dominare is the readiest way to Power in England, and that it is soonest found
of those who seek it not. -- She -- wisely thought, that to be the Deliverer of
Europe, a greater Character than to be Conqueror of it; and that it would be
more truly glorious to redeem one single Town from Slavery, than to enslave the
whole World. Not like some of her Successors, who (unworthy to be Sovereigns of
the Noble Order the Kings of England wear) have chosen rather to be the Dragon
than St. George, rather to destroy than to defend their Kingdoms. -- She never
took Money from her Subjects, but she gave them a Pennyworth for their Penny;
and was seldom nice in according them such Laws as they thought necessary to
their Safety. For being well assured of her own just Intentions, she never
suspected theirs. And thus at last she got an absolute Power even over the
Laws, -- as a good Wife gets a Power over her Husband, by loving and obeying
him. And now I think I have sufficiently exemplified what sort of Ministers and
Methods they are which make Princes Great and Glorious Monarchs, and which make
them Kings of Clouts. And whether this latter Character belongs to the Whig or
Tory, I submit to the Judgment of every impartial and reasonable Man. But go on
with your Charge.


Tory. It is objected against you Whigs also, that you do not love the King's
Person.


Whig. What an Accusation have thou blundered upon, thou very Irish Tory, thou
eternal Trifler! Not love the King's Person? -- It Is a Thought fit only for a
Chambermaid, when the Chaplain or Valet offer their Service to her. Kings are
to be loved by Millions of their Subjects who never see their Persons, (as
Heaven is by Mankind) for their Providence and Care of their People; for the
Influences they dispense of their Justice and Mercy, and for the universal Good
and Benefits which they scatter amongst their Subjects. And in this Point their
Thoughts and Designs should be God-like; and by any other sort of Lovers than
these, any King will be as slenderly accompanied in his Misfortunes, as King
James was to Feversham. But besides, this Accusation is as false as it is
foolish: pray, Sir, Who showed the most early Inclination to the Prince of
Orange's Person, the Whigs or the Tories? Who went into Holland first and begun
the Project of the Prince of Orange's coming over hither, Whigs or Tories? Who
put the Crown upon his Head when he did come, Whigs or Tories? But to come
nearer to the Point; Did not the Whigs show a most apparent Partiality to the
Prince of Orange's Person in all the Points of the Settlement of the Crown, and
particularly in giving it Him for Life, overlooking at the same time the P. of
D's Title, and the Lineal Succession? Did they not to a Man stand by the King's
Authority in the Debate concerning the P. of D's Revenue, and leave the
Disposal of that Affair entirely to the King's Pleasure? And now after four
Years being used like the worst of Enemies for all these Services; after being
shut out from speaking to the King, and almost from seeing him; after being
discountenanced and frowned upon, they have notwithstanding (like the humerous
Lieutenant) ever showed a grutching to his Grace upon the least Encouragement,
or Invitation; and have at the opening of every Sessions, for three Winters
successively, still been ready to swallow the same Sweetnings, and to be
coaks'd by a Clap on the Cheek, like an old City-Cuckold and Cully, and have
been wrought into a Credulity, which nothing but their Fondness and Dotage on
the King's Person, could have effected.


Tory. But you will not deny that* you have sometimes expressed your selves
peevishly concerning the King.


Whig. And what Lover that hangs or drowns himself for his Mistress, does not
do the same? Railing in a Lover is an infallible Symptom that he is far gone in
the Distemper: And no Woman ever yet resented it when it came from that Cause*
But our Court has not learned to distinguish between those who are angry with
them, in concern for their Prosperity, and those who seem pleased with them in
hopes that they are in the way to Destruction. And to speak plainly, Sir, the
Partiality and Courtship which the King has showed to you Tories, in spite of
all your apparent Hatred of his Person, as well as your professed Dislike of
his Title and Government, and the Aversion he has showed to the Whigs, and
Contempt of all their Advances and Addresses, has begotten ugly Reasonings in
jealous and prying Men, as if there were a Biass toward the Principles of
former Governments, rather than to those this Government declared for, and set
up upon: And even the wise and well meaning Tories begin once again to smell a
T -- d when you hold it so near their Noses. But* come, proceed.


Tory. You are likewise accused of being wedded to a Party, and by that means
will reduce his Majesty to be King of a Faction only of his Subjects.


Whig. This will appear much otherwise, if you will please to remember who
brought in the E. of N. to be Secretary of State, and many others of that
Party, and how few of your Faction were displaced by the Whigs when they had
Interest with the King. But this Charge will appear most foully true upon you,
who by the basest Ingratitude and Villainy fell upon undermining those who
brought you into the Government the minute you were possessed of the King's
Ear. And yet you see, notwithstanding all your barbarous Treatment of us, We
have always come in cheerfully to all Votes for Money, all Loans, and all other
Measures to support your Credit and the Common Interest, till both are fallen
so low, that the Peoples Clamours were never so loud, nor their
Dissatisfactions never so great. You, like Solomon's Harlot, are for tearing
the Government asunder, if you may not have the Possession of it. We have
showed on the other hand true Motherly-Tenderness, and consented rather that it
should remain in your Possession entirely, than be torn in pieces betwixt us,
till it appeared to all the World what a vile Stepmother you have been, and
how you have starved and abused a Government worthy your most indulgent
Tenderness and Care. And yet I am not for refusing any Tory that gives Proof of
his sincere Repentance, and of a Love to his Country, but with all my Heart
would give my share of the fatted Calf to make the returning Prodigal welcome;
tho I cannot but think it reasonable, that you should submissively seek the
Government, and not the Government submissively seek you; that you should own
your Sin against Heaven, and against your Country, and give Security of another
course of Life for the future, and not justify your Faults, and persevere in
them. If I could see amongst any of you the least Consideration for the common
Good and Benefit of Mankind, and the universal Welfare of your
Fellow Creatures, to which you are bound by the Law of God, and the Law of
Nature, and to which all the Heathens who were not barbarous, paid a most
profound Reverence and Obedience, and preferred to all private Interest, to
Wives, Children, Estate, nay to Life it self. If I can find any amongst you a
Lover of his Country, a sincere Supporter of the Laws, Liberties and Interest
of the English Nation, I am as much his Servant, tho he be a N --, a C --, or a
R --, as if he were a S --, a R --, a S --, or a T --. But instead of showing
any Regard to the Interest of the Nation, any Bowels for your Country, any
Self-denial in point of private Interest: Have you not sold your Country, and
their Birthrights upon all occasions (like Esau) for a Mess of Pottage? Have
not some of you put off Human Nature, Human Reason, and all common Honesty, so
far, as to conspire to bring in a French Power, to gratify your private and
personal Piques? To bring in Popery and Slavery to rule over you, because you
cannot Tyrannically rule over your Fellow Subjects? Remember what the
Presbyterians got by being so active in restoring the two late Popish Kings,
hoping to be revenged thereby upon the Independents, and other Dissenters: Were
they not mingled in the same Persecution with the others, nay, more oppressed
and marked out for Wrath, as being more numerous and more considerable than any
other Sect? Just so must the Church and their Proselytes expect to fare from
the Hands of their Popish Friends (whose Cause they are so zealously
propagating;) they may admit them to the Honor of being the Cat's-foot, but
not a bit of the Chestnut: No Whig, no Fanatic, but will then have as fair
Quarter (at least) from King Lewis, as you, (for King James I take to be only a
Cipher, and Property to your French Lord and Master, who when he has finished
his Work, will finish his Life too.) And do you Iure Divino, you truly Loyal
Gentlemen, think that you will find more Favor then for being more attached to
King James's Interest? No, be assured the most inveterate Enemies of King James
will meet with as favorable a Treatment at least as you, who have professed
your selves so violently enamored of King James's Person, and of the right
Line. Reflect a little upon the King of France's Conduct at the time of the
late Revolution: He knew long before the Prince of Orange's design of making a
Descent into England, and could have prevented it a thousand ways; but instead
of that, he writes to Barillon, then his Ambassador in England, to know in what
Condition King James was to oppose the Prince's Forces: He being a Foreigner,
and judging only by outward Appearances, represents the Army of King James
sufficiently powerful to resist what Force the Prince of Orange could bring:
whereupon the French King believing that the English and Dutch would by this
means weaken and destroy one another, and leave a fair Game for him the next
Year against the Emperor and Flanders; and to take away all Apprehension from
the Dutch of their needing an Army for their own Defense, and to give all
Encouragement to their Design upon England, he draws all his Troops from the
side of Flanders, and falls upon Philipsburg; which Army if he had marched
toward the Spanish Frontiers in Flanders, the Dutch durst not have transported
a Man; and the whole Design of the Descent had been at an end. From hence it is
plain what Friendship the French King had for his dear Brother King James, and
what you may expect from this Man of Honor and good Nature, when you have
served his Turn. Come, grow wise and honest, and let us not divide under this
or that Ministry, under this or that Faction or Party, but let us all unite
against the common Enemy; let us make the Public Interest, and the Support of
the Government as it is established by Law, our chief and only Aim; and for all
Projectors and Conspirators, whether for a Commonwealth, a French Tyranny, or
any other Tyranny, I wish they were all hanged on the same Tree, the first for
Fools, the others for Miscreants and Villains: And thus much, and no more am I
for being wedded to a Party.


Tory. I own you have told us a fair Tale; but nothing is proved, nothing
appears undeniable, but your Venom and Enmity against the Church, and her
Friends.


Whig. If your mean the French Story needs proving, the Disgrace of Barillon
when he returned to Versaille upon the account of mistaking and misrepresenting
the English Affairs, is notorious: But besides, the Story proves it self more
than a thousand Witnesses; and for the rest, I have related nothing but what
every Englishman is knowing of. And as for what you charge me with in relation
to the Church, I see little Reason for it, unless, as St. Paul says, you
account me your Enemy because I tell you the Truth. For my part I reverence the
Church of England as much as any Man: But I am not for sacrificing the Laws and
Liberties of the Public, nay, the very Nation it self, to a Foreign Conquest,
for the sound of a Word. I have a due Respect for the Priesthood too, and am
their Servant, but never can submit to be their Slave: I honor their Coat, but
cannot be content to strip my self of mine, in respect to it. A moderate
Respect is decent, and our Duty; more I take to be Superstition at least, if
not Idolatry; and to worship a Wooden Priest, appears to me as bad as
worshipping a Wooden God.


Tory. Now you are running into your usual Violence and Heat; and let me tell
you as a Friend, it does you no good neither with the Church, nor Court, which
latter has a very low Opinion of those Men who express too much Warmth in what
they say or do.


Whig. And therefore their Affairs have succeeded accordingly. Let the Nation
be Judges, Whether, if Men of Warmth had been put in Office by our Ministers,
the Taxes would not have been more justly and carefully collected, than they
have been by those Lukewarm Managers they have employed; who, like the unjust
Steward, when the King's Due was an hundred, bid their Neighbors write down
fifty? Or, do you think the Deputy Lieutenants of Surry would have absconded
last Year, when they were ordered to raise the Militia upon King James's coming
down to Normandy, if they had been Men of Warmth to the Government? Or, that
King James's Friends would dare to profess their Opinions, and carry on their
Designs so publicly? That they would presume to insult the Government in every
Coffee-house; nay, in the Mall and Whitehall it self? That they would dare to
threaten you to your Teeth as they do, with Invasions, Descents and Rebellions,
or would venture to correspond with France, and go forward and backward every
Day to King James; nay, raise Regiments of Horse and Foot under your Noses for
a Rebellion, if Men of Warmth and Zeal were in the Government? But it is from
hence that all these Insolences take their Rise, that the Enemies of the
Government are come from hating it, to despite it; that its Friends are
discouraged to appear for it; and that those Officers and Soldiers who in King
Charles's time would have broken the Heads of those whom they heard reflect
upon the King's Person or Government, will in this Reign hear both treated very
odly; not that they want an Affection to either, but out of a fear to offend by
showing themselves Men of Warmth, and Party-men, those Characters being so
abominable to our Court.


Tory. You Whigs have been the occasion of all this too: for you were so
irreconcilable to some Ministers of State at the Beginning of the Revolution,
because they had made a few Slips in the last Reigns; or perhaps because they
had hanged some of your Friends, a Father, or Brother, or so; that you forced
them to take in some Persons which they themselves thought not very proper for
this Government: But if you will run a Man down, he will support himself at any
rate; for Men are but Men: And withal I believe they hoped that a Place would
buy any Party out of their Principles, and that all who they bought into the
Government, would be obliged by that Means to be for the Government.


Whig. This is very far fetched, Mr. Tory, tho it is not the first time I have
heard it. But as to the first part of this Paragraph, the Matter of Fact is
false: The Whigs were willing to forget all past Miscarriages, and be
reconciled to any Minister that could be honest, as I showed you before. But
these Gentlemen quickly convinced all the World, that they were grown so old
and stiff in their former Mischiefs, that they were capable of no other ^end or
Impression, but what they had taken in the last Reigns. And it was plain to
every Man that had Eyes, that they were no sooner in the Ministry, but they
fell into their old Schemes which no honest Man could come into; and which I am
afraid the Court has not found the good Effects from, which these Evil
Counselors promised. It Is true, by giving Places to all that were supple, and
complying, you have brought in the Knaves of all Parties: But since that which
brings them into the Service of the Government, is their own Interest, and not
that of the Government; it will be reasonable for our Rulers to expect, that
the whole Design of such Men, will be rather how to serve themselves of the
Government, than how to serve it. To conclude, Sir, notwithstanding all you
have said in Excuse of your Ministers and their Methods, I cannot but remain in
my first Opinion, That the Men of easy Phlegm, born on the Confines of
Indifference, as Sir, Samuel Tuke in F -- ch-like Fustian describes our
lukewarm Neutrals, are not fit Men to be employed in our Government, as the
Case stands at present, but will prove as destructive to it as downright
Iacobites.


Tory. All this is taking things for granted which we deny; and accusing Men of
what you do not prove; and if it were so, you confess there are Knaves of your
Party too.


Whig. The Truth of what I say in relation to your Party, is so notorious to
all the World, that it would be as impertinent to go about proving it, as to
prove there is a Sun; even you your selves have confessed, and pretended to
repent of your Principles and Practices in King James's time, tho you are now
returned to your Vomit. And as to what you say of our having Knaves amongst us,
I must confess it too true; and am as much afflicted as you can be, that any
Whig should invade your undoubted and sole Right of being Knaves, and selling
and betraying their Fellow Subjects: But yet we hope we may claim a Distinction
to be made, betwixt our Party, who not only profess, but have maintained to the
Death, the Religion, Rights and Liberties of their Country; and yours, who in
King Charles's and beginning of King James's Reign gave up all these things;
and who, though you are employed in, and sworn to the present Government, make
public Rejoicings at the Slaughter of our Armies, and Destruction of our
Fleets. If the Whigs have the Misfortune of some Knaves professing themselves
of their Party: Our Savior himself had a Judas amongst his Twelve, and yet
that did not at all discredit the Doctrine and Principles of the Apostles; not
does our having some Knaves among us, make it as reasonable and equal to adhere
to your Party, that are the professed Enemies of their King and Country, as to
depend on those who have generally in all Times, and on all Occasions declared
their Affection to their Country, Love of its Laws and Religion, and have since
the Revolution showed their Zeal for the present Establishment.


Tory. Just now you seemed to agree to a Comprehension, and were for welcoming
the Prodigals as you called them; now you are for excluding them again.


Whig. No, I am for receiving any Tory, as I told you, that seeks the
Government, and becomes a true Penitent: But I would not have the Government
seek them; nor would I have them entrusted in this critical time without some
Marks of their Repentance and Regeneracy; and by our Easiness give them the
opportunity of selling us to the French King, or King James, as I fear some of
them do at this time.


Tory. All that is Malice and Stuff, and not reasonably to be apprehended: And I
tell you once more, it is the Opinion of some wise Men, that the King cannot
follow a more fatal Counsel than to confine himself to any one Party of his
Subjects.


Whig. Then your Patrons have been advising him fatally these four Years; for
they have been persuading the King to throw himself entirely into your Hands.


Tory. They never refused to receive any Whig, that would comply, and come
under their Protection; but if the King will choose any one Party, I think we
of the Church are the most numerous and considerable, and are fittest as such
to be employed by him.


Whig. Now you are retired into your Sanctuary, the Church, you think you are
safe, and it is indeed dangerous pursuing you: But however I Will venture it; and
since you force me, I must repeat again some of those Arguments I have given
you already, why you are not fit to be trusted by this Government. First, you
Tories do not believe your selves King William's Subjects, and therefore are
very unfit to be employed by him as his Servants. Secondly, It cools the
Affections of the People, to see those employed in Places of highest Trust, who
they have a Demonstration are not for the Government even when they are in it.
And by this Method it is plain the King (according to the Fable) loses his
Shoulder of Mutton, by catching at the Shadow; and by aiming at both Parties,
he has neither.


Tory. I confess I am for the King's relying on one Party as much as you are
(tho not yours;) but however, there are great and wise Men, as I told you, of
another Opinion; and I have heard it asked, Why this Method of uniting all
Parties should not have as good an Effect here as in Holland, for there the
Prince of Orange reconciled all to the common Interest?


Whig. I Will tell you why; First, it appears all Parties there sincerely
intended the Good of the Government; which, it is too plain, is not your Case.
Secondly, Neither Party had any other Head to repair to, as you Tories have;
the Prince of Orange had no pretending Rival to the Right of Statholder: But
the King has here a Rival, a Father-in-Law, who pretends a Right to the Crown,
who is supported by the greatest Power that ever was known in Europe, so as to
make the Event appear doubtful, even to those who are most zealous for this
Government: And by this means the Friends of King James are encouraged to be
firm to his Interests, and Neutrals; nay, and even his fearful Enemies are
frighted from acting with a Zeal against him. Is this a time then to be trying
Experiments, to put our selves and Affairs into the Hands of Men bred up, and
principled against the Design of this Government? Is this a time to reconcile
our selves to our Enemies, and to take Men out of Plots, and place them in our
Cabinet? No sure, with my Lord N -- 's leave, this is not the time. In this
time of Danger, those who have been the ancient and declared Enemies of King
James, and who have most reason to expect being hanged if he return, are most
fit for the King to rely on. But when these Difficulties are mastered, as much
Comprehension as you please. In the mean time your Education in Toryism, your
Obligations to King James, and, which is more than both, your present Hopes
from him, will make you so averse to this Government, that no Favor, no
Courtship can engage your heartily in its Interests; and it is Nonsense to
expect you should fight for a Title you have always declared to disapprove of.


Tory. You are always harping upon that String: But supposing we do not approve
of the making him King, yet we know how to obey Kings when they are made: But
you, after you have made a King, are using him like your Creature; clipping his
Power, and ^ finding Fault with his Conduct. For my part, if I were a King*
would sooner forgive a Man that disliked my Title, than one who disliked my
Conduct.


Whig. Why, then Mr. Tory, you would be none of the wisest Princes* For he who
finds fault with your Conduct, may be your Friend; but he who finds fault with
your Title, must be your Enemy, or else a Knave, and acts against his
Conscience. But how does this Article appear of the Whigs being dissatisfied
with the King's Conduct in any Point, but in his employing you, and the
Consequences of it? Is it from giving cheerfully whatever Sums were demanded in
Parliament; Is it being ready to advance Money upon the most remote Funds, in
offering their Persons to the Public Service in all times of Danger,
notwithstanding all Brow-beatings, and Discouragements; by breaking all
Measures with King James and his Party, that they discover their Dislikes, and
Dissatisfactions to the King, or his Government? But if they disapprove that
the Friends of King James should be King William's Ministers, that those should
be placed in all Offices who hate him and betray him, Will he have Reason to
take their Dislike of this part of his Conduct so very unkindly from them, as
to forgive it less than your renouncing his Right and Title to the Crown? But
your Tories have got a Trick of bringing Kings into your Quarrels, (as the
Priests do God Almighty into theirs) and by placing them before you, hope to
make your selves safe, not caring how much you expose them; and you impudently
place your own Crimes unfairly upon others: and whilst you your selves are
daily Libelling and Lampooning the King's Person and Conduct most maliciously,
and triumphing in all his Misfortunes ingratefully, (witness the public
Insolences at the Bath, and Windsor, upon the late Defeat in Flanders) you,
according to your wonted Modesty, charge the Whigs with your own Faults; and
avoid being Criminals, by turning Accusers.


Tory. I know not what some hotheaded drunken Men may have said and done at
the Bath, or elsewhere; but this I know, that a whole Party ought not to share
the Miscarriages of some few particular Men.


Whig. You are in the right if that were the case; but it is undeniable, that
this Insolence is universal, and even amongst those of you employed and paid by
the Government.


Tory. This is a sore Place I find you are ever complaining of. But why are you
angry with us for being in Places? Did we seek them? Were we not sought,
courted, entreated to accept of Employments? And since you provoke me, I Will
tell you the Reason; the King found none of you Whigs capable of, or fit for
Business; he saw you too of a sour, morose Temper, jealous of Prerogative,
affecting Popularity, childishly fond of Trifles, and tenacious of Lawless
Liberty; whilst we are frank, and easy in all these Matters, and know the
Respect that is due to Crowned Heads.


Whig. That is, when they are rightful!


Tory. Come, you will make no Prince have the worse Opinion of us for that; The
Right Line, Passive Obedience, and Non-Resistance, Prerogative, etc. will
always sound well in every King's Ear. And when he considers us Enemies to his
Title only out of a Principle of Loyalty, he will have reason rather to accuse
his own Misfortune, than our Virtue; we plainly and honestly told him our
Principles, that we believed him a King de facto only; and our Honor in this
Point made him rely upon our Honor in others.


Whig. Let us examine then how honorably, how gratefully you have behaved your
selves to a King who has relied on you, and obliged you so extremely. We will
pass by those who refuse to swear Allegiance to him upon the abovementioned
honorable Pretenses, and only mention those who have accepted Employments of
Profit and Trust. Have not even those in the Government both in England and
Scotland, been plotting the Dethroning this King, who has trusted them so
generously, and courted them so kindly? Particularly, did not one of your Party
at the beginning of this Government, give notice to the King's Enemies of
Warrants against them, in order to their making their Escape, and was
discharged his Employment upon it? Did not a Brother of a certain Secretary,
give out Blank Passes under the Hand and Seal of that Secretary, by which a
Correspondence was carried on betwixt this Place and France securely? And was
not this Gentleman upon this Account laid aside gently and privately, and this
Matter huddled up for fear of any Reflection upon our Monarchical Favorites,
and put upon the Public as Passes forged, (as indeed they were by our own
Officers) and a Lame Proclamation put out with Rewards to the Discoverer, but
without a Pardon for Life, when they knew the whole Matter beforehand? H^ve
not some Women lately been taken going to France (with Letters to King James)
with a Scottish Secretrary's Pass, under his Hand and Seal? Was not an Officer
of the Post Office lately found corresponding with France, and without any
other Punishment for his Capital Crime, laid aside gently and privately? The
Story of Capt. John Layton, late Commander of the St. Albans, and which has
been told in the House of Commons, will show you how faithfully you Tories
serve the Government, and how fit you are to be trusted. Captain Layton being
ordered to Cruise twenty Leagues off Vshant, by a Storm of Wind was driven to
Cape Clear, where he met a French Privateer, and took her: the Captain of the
Privateer asked Layton the Name of his Ship, which he told him; upon this the
Privateer looking into his Pocketbook, asked Layton how he came there; for by
his Intelligence the Station of the St. Albans was to be twenty Leagues from
Vshant, and no further. And the like Story is told of a Transport-Ship going to
France with Prisoners, some few Months ago, who meeting with diverse Privateers,
asked them how they durst be so bold as Cruise there, when four English Men of
War were within six Leagues of them? they replied, they knew the Station of
those English, and that they could not come where they were a cruising but by
breaking their Orders. But the Relation of the Sailer who was taken, and for
some time served aboard an Irish Privateer, is yet more remarkable, for he
deposes, That they told him (thee Months before the Streights Fleet sailed
from Spithead) both the time when they were to sail, the number of their
Convoy, and likewise that the Main Fleet was to go no further than beyond
Vshant. Now how they could come by this Intelligence, but from Officers
employed by and sworn to the Government, I know not; and if so, how faithfully
and honorably you Tories serve Those who trust you, and how fit you are to be
employed in this critical Time, I appeal to all the World.


Tory. These are malicious Stories; and if strictly enquired into, will prove
false I dare say.


Whig. Whenever there is a Committee of indifferent Men ordered to take the
Examination, I am informed all this will be proved, and much more; and how
reasonable it is to expect this and any other Treachery from you, will appear
probable to those who see you in all Offices daily and publicly drinking King
James's Health: who see one Clerk going to a non-swearing Doctor, to take
Advice, whether he may serve the Government as a writing Clerk without
Damnation to his Soul? Yes, replies the Doctor, for thereby you keep out an ill
Man, and may serve your rightful King upon occasion. To see another Clerk
valuing himself to his Companions, that his Place, thank God, does not oblige
him to take the Oaths to the Government. To see Officers of the greatest Trust
in the Admiralty in Clubs twice a Week with Mr. P -- ps, Mr. Ew -- rs, and
other known Iacobites, and from Saturday to Monday constantly living with them
Night and Day.


Tory. I know who you mean, one of them is a Nephew to one of the Gentlemen,
and expects 40000 l. from him; and would you have him renounce such an
Expectance in Consideration of your Place?


Whig. No, but I would have the Government renounce such an Officer, that had
such an Expectation from such an Uncle.


Tory. But where could you get such able Officers if these were discharged?


Whig. As the case stands, one honest Man will be of more Service than ten such
able Men; the Forms of Business will be quickly learned; and want of Experience
will be less fatal to us, than want of Fidelity. Most of the under-Places
require a very indifferent Understanding, and little Experience to carry the
Business on: And if you ascend to the Ministry, I cannot help thinking my Lords
Sh -- y, or Sir I. Tr -- d as able Secretaries as the E. of N. and Mr. R -- ll
as able an Admiral as Mr. K.etc. What is it your able Men have done for us,
pray, this four Years? Was ever any Government in so promising a Condition, as
ours was at the time of the Revolution? Were we not the Hopes of all our
Allies, and the Terror of our Enemies? And is not the case altered with us? I
fear it is: To be plain, a Ministry from Wapping could not have made worse work
on it than yours have done. Ministers who know not so much as what Money their
Affairs will require, but ask the Parliament too little, and manage it so as to
make it less. That want Intelligence so much, that Matters of the greatest
Consequence have been public in every Coffee-house three days before it comes
to the Secretary's Office; particularly the loss of our Merchants Fleet, and
beating our Army in Flanders: As if (as one said) Secretaries, like Cuckolds,
were to know their Dishonor and Misfortunes last. Then the Return of our
Fleets for want of Provisions, laying out Money in false Expeditions, and
wanting it thereby in true Necessities; imperfect Orders, from whence proceeds
imperfect Execution; and besides they prove an Excuse to Officers even in the
most fatal Miscarriages: with a thousand more Mismanagements and Treacheries
from the top to the bottom of the Ministry, too tedious to relate here.


Tory. And do you think the Government would be better served at this time by
Novices, and Strangers to Business?


Whig. I have answered you that before; I think it would be much better served
by ignorant Friends, than understanding Enemies: Tho I am far (at the same
time) from granting you that Point, for I am sure there are more Men of Sense
and Capacity found amongst the Whigs, than amongst the Tories: and that
Experience is not of such mighty Consequence as you would infer, will appear,
if you will please to call to mind the Men employed in Public Affairs by
Cromwell: Was ever Government better served than his? and yet he chose Men of
the most private Condition, and one would have thought most unqualified for
Public Business, Tailors, Draymen, broken Shopkeepers, raw Scholars, and some
few of the midling Gentry. But being careful to choose Men principled against
the Government of King Charles, and zealous for the Interest of the Government
then on foot; they did Wonders, supported their Friends, and were aweful to
their Enemies; and this with all the Nobility, Gentry and Clergy, both Church
of England and Presbyterian, in perpetual Combinations and Conspiracies against
them at home, and a War in Ireland, Scotland, Holland, and Spain too, upon
their Hands. And you have an Instance of it in this Government, in the Person
of one of the Secretaries of Scotland, who (tho bred in a very private way)
has showed himself a most successful Statesman, and of great Consequence to
the Welfare of the King's Affairs in that Country, and this merely from his
incorruptible Honesty, Zeal and Integrity to the present Government, without
Experience, or great Insight into Business.


Tory. I must grant there is something in what you say, Union and Integrity
will do great Matters: But you Whigs cannot pretend to this, for you are not
two of you in the same Mind; you have no Government, no Discipline in your
Party, no Firmness to one another, or to any Point: Your great P. F -- turns
Cadet, and carries Arms under the General of the West Saxons; the two H -- s
are Engineers under the late Lieutenant of the Ordnance, and bomb any Bill,
which he has once resolved to reduce to Ashes, though it were for Recognition,
or any thing else that is most necessary to our Security: Your Jack S. and Jack
G. whenever they touch Penny, will touch Pot too, and drink all in the Bowl, be
it never so deep. And besides this, you are always laughing, despising, or
railing at one another; some of you are too wise, some of you too witty, and
some of you too honest for the rest; jealous and envious of one another Favor
and Preferment; every Man thinking himself fittest to be at the Head of
Affairs, and hating, and reflecting upon those who are so, and despising to be
governed or directed by them. And at the same time those who are at the Top,
disdaining to look down upon those below them, tho they were the Steps by which
they did ascend; they grow stately to their Friends, and unmindful of their
Fortunes, impatient of Addresses, hard of Access, huddling into little Cabals,
where they are wise and witty among themselves: whilst we Tories on the
contrary, have but one Heart, one Voice, one Purse and one Interest; excuse and
justify one another Faults, prefer the meanest Fool or Knave of our Party; and
in return the Underlings are every Man in a perfect Obedience to this Superior,
to vote, rail, write or talk according to Direction, and not otherwise.


Whig. I owe there is too much Truth in what you say, and you speak Truth so
seldom, that we ought to allow it you when you do: But I hope we have seen the
Error of our Disunion, and shall amend it for the future: And however we may
have had Personal Differences, and likewise may have been too much divided, and
too obstinate in some Opinions, yet still in all Times, and under all
Discouragements, we have all agreed to the same end, ( viz.) The Public Good
of our Country, and the Support of its Laws and Liberties; and in this present
Reign have been and are unanimous against King James and his Interest, and have
at all times with one Consent owned his present Majesty, Rightful and Lawful,
which I take to be the Shibboleth, to distinguish those who are alone fit to
serve this Government. And till there be an Act of Recognition in Force, I will
be bold to say all the other Steps of our ablest and honestest Statesmen, will
be upon Boggy Ground: nor can any Man be reasonably employed in any Office who
has not taken this Test; for whoever thinks King William not Rightful, must
think King James is so; and the same Conscience which leads them to believe him
Rightful, will incline them to assist that Right when they have opportunity:
(but to return to the Point of your Charge) we must confess likewise that we
have not been so much under the Government of our Superiors as you are, nor so
industrious in supporting each others private and particular Interests. But to
the first I might answer, That Fools and Beggars are more easily led by the
Nose than Men of Sense and Estates: And as to the latter, I must put you in
mind, that the Societies of Ignatius and of Newgate, are both of them as much
united as you, in universal Mischief; for Roguery makes a stronger Glue and
Cement, than Virtue, because there are more Men capable of the former than of
the latter. And tho it were to be wished, that the Whigs were more friendly,
and had more Concern for the Support of one another in all their honest
Pretenses; yet God forbid there should ever be such a Friendship and Partiality
amongst them, as to condemn and disgrace those who gain Victories, because they
are not of their Party, and to support and defend those who have lost the
Ships, Trade and Honor of the Nation, because they are their Creatures. But on
the other side, where it is without offense to Justice, and the Public
Interest, all Unanimity and Friendship is to be admired, praised, and prayed
for; and I hope you will find it amongst us for the future, till it becomes the
Subject of your Envy, instead of being an Occasion of Reproach. To put an end
to this Argument; It Is plain with all your Friendships, and Union, and other
Politics, you have brought the Nation, and all its Allies, to the lowest
Condition both in Power and Reputation. You have almost put it out of the Skill
of any Conduct to recover us; and whoever now takes the Administration of
Affairs upon them, will be applied to the Government, like Pigeons to the Feet
of dying Men. But however, to those who are true Lovers of their Country, no
Time seems too late to attempt its Relief, no Difficulty so great as to
discourage them from endeavoring it; and tho as the Case stands, it is more
than probable, we may miscarry under the best Conduct, yet it is undeniable we
must miscarry under yours. And so I take my Leave.


FINIS.

