THE CLOSET Of the Eminently Learned Sir Kenelme Digbie Knight. OPENED: Whereby is
DISCOVERED Several ways for making of Metheglin, Sider, Cherry-wine, etc.

TOGETHER WITH Excellent Directions FOR COOKERY: As also for Preserving,
Conserving, Candying, etc.

Published by his Son's Consent.

London, Printed by E. C. for H. Brom, at the Star in Little Britain. 1669.

The truly Learned and Honoble. Sr. Kenelme Digby Knight. Chancellor to the Q:
Mother Aged 62.


Gross Sculpsit
To the Reader.
THis Collection full of pleasing variety, and of such usefulness in the
Generality of it, to the Public, coming to my hands, I should, had I forborne
the Publication thereof, have trespassed in a very considerable concern upon my
Contrymen, The like having not in every particular appeared in Print in the
English tongue. There needs no Rhetoricating Floscules to set it off. The
Author, as is well known, having been a Person of Eminency for his Learning,
and of Exquisite Curiosity in his Researches, Even that Incomparable Sir
Kenelme Digbie Knight, Fellow of the Royal Society and Chancellor to the Queen
Mother, (Et omen in Nomine) His name does sufficiently Auspicate the Work. I
shall only therefore add, That there is herein (as by the Table hereunto
affixed will evidently to thee appear) a sufficiency of Solids as well as
Liquids for the sating the Curiosities of each or the nicest Palate; and
according to that old Saw in the Regiment of Health, Incipe cum Liquido, etc.
The Liquids premitted to the Solids. These being so Excellent in their kind,
so beneficial and so well ordered, I think it unhandsome, if not injurious, by
the trouble of any further Discourse, to detain thee any longer from falling
to; Fall to therefore, and much good may it do thee,

Farewell.
A Receipt to make Metheglin as it is made at Liege, Communicated by Mr.
Masillon.
TAke one Measure of Honey, and three Measures of Water, and let it boil till
one measure be boiled away, so that there be left three measures in all; as for
Example, take to one Pot of Honey, three Pots of Water, and let it boil so
long, till it come to three Pots. During which time you must Skim it very well
as soon as any scum rises; which you are to continue till there rise no scum
more. You may, if you please, put to it some spice, to wit, Cloves and Ginger;
the quantity of which is to be proportioned according as you will have your
Mead, strong, or weak. But this you do before it begin to boil. There are some
that put either Yeast of Beer, or Leaven of bread into it, to make it work. But
this is not necessary at all; and much less to set it into the Sun* Mr.
Masillon does neither the one nor the other. Afterward for to Tun it, you must
let it grow Lukewarm, for to advance it. And if you do intend to keep your
Meathe a long time, you may put into it some ^opps on this fashion. Take to
every Barrel of Meathe a Pound of Hops without leaves, that is, of Ordinary
Hops used for Beer, but well cleansed, taking only the Flowers, without the
Green-leaves and stalks. Boil this pound of Hops in a Pot and half of fair
water, till (...) come to one Pot, and this quantity is sufficient for a Barrel
of Meathe. A Barrel at Liege holds ninety Pots, and a Pot is as much as a
Wine quart in England. (I have since been informed from Liege, that a Pot of
that Country holds 48 O^nces of Apothecary's measure: which I judge to be a
Pottle according to London measure, or two Wine-quarts.) When you Tun your
Mead, you must not fill your Barrel by half a foot, that so it may have room
to work. Then let it stand six weeks slightly stopped; which being expired, if
the Mead do not work, stop it up very close. Yet must you not fill up the
Barrel to the very brim. After six Months you draw off the clear into another
Barrel, or strong Bottles, leaving the dregs, and filling up your new Barrel,
or Bottels, and stopping it or them very close.

The Mead that is made this way, ( Viz. In the Spring, in the Month of April
or May, which is the proper time for making of it,) will keep many a year.

White Metheglin of my Lady Hungerford: which is exceedingly praised.
Take your Honey, and mix it with fair water, until the Honey be quite
dissolved. If it will bear an Egg to be above the liquor, the breadth of a
groat, it is strong enough* if not, put more Honey to it, till it be so strong;
Then boil it, till it be clearly and well skimed; Then put in one good hand^ul
of Strawberry-leaves, and half a handful of violet leaves; and half as much
Sorrel: a Douzen tops of Rosemary; four or five tops of Baulme-leaves: a
handful of Hart's-tongue, and a handful of Liver-worth; a little Thyme, and a
little Red-sage; Let it boil about an hour; then put it into a Wooden Vessel,
where let it stand, till it be quite cold; Then put it into the Barrel; Then
take half an Ounce of Cloves, as much Nutmeg; four or five Races of Ginger;
bruise it, and put it into a fine bag, with a stone to make it sink, that it
may hang below the middle: Then stop it very close.

The Herbs and Spices are in proportion for six Gallons.

Since my Lady Hungerford sent me this Receipt, she sent me word, that she now
uses (and likes better) to make the Decoction of Herbs before you put the
Honey to it. This Proportion of Herbs is to make six Gallons of Decoction, so
that you may take eight or nine Gallons of water. When you have drawn out in^o
your water, all the virtue of the He^bs, throw them away, and take the clear
Decoction (leaving the sett^ings) and when it is Lukewarm, Dissolve your
proportion of Honey in it. After it is well dissolved and laved with strong
Arms or wooden Instruments, like Battle-doors or Scoops, boil it gently, till
you have taken away all the scum; then make an end of well boiling it, about an
hour in all. Then pour it into a wooden vessel, and let it stand till it be
cold. Then pour the clear through a Sieve of hair, ceasing pouring when you
come to the ^oul thick settling. Tun the clear into your vessel, (without Barm)
and stop it up close, with the Spices in it, till you perceive by the hissing
that it begins to work. Then give it some little vent, else the Barrel would
break. When it is at the end of the working, stop it up close. She uses to
make it at the end of Summer, when she takes up her Honey, and begins to drink
it in Lent. But it will be better if you defer piercing it till next Winter.
When part of the Barrel is drunk, she botteleth the rest, which makes it
quicker and better. You clear the Decoction from the Herbs by a Hair-sieve.

Some Notes about Honey.
The Honey of dry open Countries, where there is much Wild-thyme, Rosemary, and
Flowers, is best. It is of three sorts, Virgin-honey, Life-honey, and
Stock-honey. The first is the best. The Life-honey next. The Virgin^honey is of
Bees, that swarmed the Spring before, and are taken up in Autumn; and is made
best by choosing the Whi^est combs of the Hive, and then letting the Honey run
out of them lying upon a Sieve without pressing it, or breaking of the Combs.
The Life-honey is of the same Combs broken after the Virgin-honey is run from
it; The Merchants of Honey do use to mingle all the ^orts together. The first
of a Swarm is called Virgin-honey. That of the next year, after the Swarm was
hatched, is Life-honey. And ever after, it is Honey of Old-stocks. Honey that
is forced out of the Combs, will always taste of Wax. Hampshire Honey is most
esteemed at London. About Bisleter there is excellent good. Some account
Norfolk honey the best.

Mr. Corsellises Antwerp Mead.
To make good Mead, good White and thick Marsilian or Provence-honey is best;
and of that, to four Holland Pints (the Holland Pint is very little bigger then
the English Winepint:) of Water, you must put two pound of Honey; The Honey
must be stirred in Water, till it be all melted; If it be stirred about in warm
water, it will melt so much the sooner.

When all is dissolved, it must be so strong that an Egg may swim in it with
the end upwards. And if it be too sweet or too strong, because there is too
much Honey; then you must put more water to it; yet so, that, as above, an Hens
Egg may swim with the point upwards: And then that newly added water must be
likewise well stirred about, so that it may be mingled all alike. If the Eggs
sink (which is a token that there is not honey enough) then you must put more
Honey to it, and stir about, till it be all dissolved, and the Eggs swim, as
abovesaid. This being done, it must be hanged over the fire, and as it
begins to sees, the scum, that does arise upon it, both before and after,
must be clean skimed off. When it is first set upon the fire, you must measure
it first with a stick, how deep the Kettel is, or how much Liquor there be in
it; and then it must boil so long, till one third part of it be boiled away.
When it is thus boiled, it must be poured out into a Cooler, or open vessel,
before it be tunned in the Barrel; but the Bung-hole must be left open, that it
may have vent. A vessel, which has served for Sack is best.

To make excellent Meathe.
To every quart of Honey, take four quarts of water. Put your water in a clean
Kettle over the fire, and with a stick take the just measure, how high the
water comes, making a notch, where the superficies touches the stick. As soon
as the water is warm, put in your Honey, and let it boil, skiming it always,
till it be very clean; Then put to every Gallon of water, one pound of the best
Blew-raisins of the Sun, first clean picked from the stalks, and clean washed.
Let them remain in the boiling Liquor, till they be thoroughly swollen and soft;
Then take them out, and put them into a Hair-bag, and strain all the juice and
pulp and substance from them in an Apothecaries Press; which put back into your
liquor, and let it boil, till it be consumed just to the notch you took at
first, for the measure of your water alone. Then let your Liquor run through a
Hair-strainer into an empty Woodden-fat, which must stand endwise, with the
head of the upper-end out; and there let it remain till the next day, that the
liquor be quite cold. Then Tun it up into a good Barrel, not filled quite full,
but within three or four fingers breadth; (where Sack has been, is the best)
and let the bung remain open for six weeks with a double bolter-cloth lying
upon it, to keep out any foulness from falling in. Then stop it up close, and
drink not of it till after nine months.

This Meathe is singularly good for a Consumption, Stone, Gravel, Weak-sight,
and many more things. A Chief Burgomaster of Antwerpe, used for many years to
drink no other drink but this; at Meals and all times, even for pledging of
healths. And though He were an old man, he was of an extraordinary vigor every
way, and had every year a Child, had always a great appetite, and good
digestion; and yet was not fa^.

A weaker, but very pleasant, Meathe.
To every quart of Honey take six of water; boil it till be consumed, skiming
it well all the while. Then pour it into an open Fat, and let it cool. When the
heat is well slakened, break into a Bowl-full of this warm Liquor, a
Newlaid-egge, beating the yolk and white well with it; then put it into the Fat
to all the rest of the Liquor, and stir it well together, and it will become
very clear. Then pour it into a fit very clean Barrel, and put to it some
Mother of Wine, that is in it is best fermentation or working, and this will
make the Liquor work also. This will be ready to drink in three or four Months,
or sooner.

An Excellent white Meathe.
Take one Gallon of Honey, and four of water; Boil and scum them till there
rise no more scum; then put in your Spice a little bruised, which is most of
Cinnamon, a little Ginger, a little Mace, and a very little Cloves. Boil it
with the Spice in it, till it bear an Egg. Then take it from the fire, and let
it Cool in a Wooden vessel, till it be but lukewarm; which this quantity will
be in four or five or six hours. Then put into it a hot ^ost of Whitebread,
spread over on both sides, pretty thick with fresh barm; that will make it
presently work. Let it work twelve hours, close covered with Cloves. Then Tun
it into a Runlet wherein Sack has been, that is somewhat too big for that
quantity of Liquor; for example, that it fill it not by a Gallon; You may then
put a little Limon-pill in with it. After it has remained in the vessel a week
or ten days, draw it into Bottles. You may begin to drink it after two or three
Months: But it will be better after a year. It will be very Spritely and quick
and pleasant and pure white.

A Receipt to make a Tun of Metheglin.
Take two handfuls of Dock ( alias wild Car^ot) a reasonable burden of
Saxifrage, Wild-sage, Blew-button, Scabious, Bettony, Agrimony, Wild-marjoram,
of each a reasonable burden; Wild^thyme a Peck, Roots and all. All these are
to be gathered in the fields, between the two Lady days in Harvest. The
Garden-herbs are these; Bay Leaves, and Rosemary, of each two handfuls; A
Sieveful of Avens, and as much Violet-leaves: A handful of Sage; three handfuls
of Sweet-Marjoram. Three Roots of young Borrage, leaves and all, that has not
born seed; Two handfuls of Parsley-roots, and all that has not born Seed. Two
Roots of Elecampane that have not seeded: Two handfuls of Fennel that has not
seeded: A peck of Thyme; wash and pick all your herbs from filth and grass:
Then put your field herbs first into the bottom of a clean Furnace, and lay all
your Garden-herbs thereon; then fill your Furnace with clean water, letting
your herbs sees, till they be so tender, that you may easily slip off the skin
of your Field-herbs, and that you may break the roots of your Garden-herbs
between your Fingers. Then lade forth your Liquor, and set it a cooling. Then
fill your Furnace again with clean water to these Herbs, and let them boil a
quarter of an hour. Then put it to your first Liquor, filling the Furnace,
until you have sufficient to fill your Tun. Then as your Liquor begins to cool,
and is almost cold, set your servants to temper Honey and wax in it, Combs and
all, and let them temper it well together, breaking the Combs very small; let
their hands and nails be very clean; and when you have tempered it very well
together, cleanse it through a cleansing sieve into another clean vessel; The
more Honey you have in your Liquor, the stronger it will be. Therefore to know,
when it is strong enough, take two New-laid-eggs, when you begin to cleanse,
and put them in whole into the bottom of your cleansed Liquor; And if it be
strong enough, it will cause the Egg to ascend upward, and to be on the top as
broad as sixpence; if they do not swim on the top; put more.

The Countess of Bulling brook's white Metheglin.
Take eight Gallons of Conduit-water, and boil it very well; then put as much
Honey in it, as will bear an Egg, and stir it well together. Then set it upon
the fire, and put in the whites of four Eggs to clarify it; And as the scum
rises, take it off clean: Then put in a pretty quantity of Rosemary, and let
it boil, till it tastes a little of it: Then with a Scummer take out the
Rosemary, as fast as you can, and let it boil half a quarter of an hour; put it
into earthen pans to cool; next morning put it into a barrel, and put into it a
little barm, and an Ounce of Ginger scraped and sl^ced; And let it stand a
Month or six Weeks. Then bottle it up close; you must be sure not to let it
stand at all in Brass.

Mr. Webbes Mead.
Master Web, who makes the Kings Meathe, orders it thus. Take as much of
Hyde-park water as will make a Hogshead of Meathe-Boil in it about two Ounces
of the best Hopp's for about half an hour. By that time, the water will have
drawn out the Strength of the Hopp's. Then skim them clean off, and all the
froth, or whatever rises of the water. Then dissolve in it warm, about one
part of Honey to six of water: Lave and beat it, till all the Honey be
perfectly dissolved; Then boil it, beginn^ng gently, till all the scum be
risen, and scummed away. It must boil in all about two hours. Half an hour,
before you end your boiling, put into it some Rosemary-tops, Thyme,
Sweet-mar-jorame, one Sprig of Minth, in all about half a handful, and as much
Sweet-bryar-leaves as all these; in all, about a handful of herbs, and two
Ounces of sliced Ginger, and one Ounce of bruised Cinnamon. He did use to put in
a few Cloves and Mace; But the King did not care for them. Let all these boil
about half an hour, then scum them cl^an away; and presently let the Liquor run
through a strainer-cloth into a Kiver of wood, to cool and settle. When you see
it is very clear and settled, lade out the Liquor into another Kiver,
carefully, not to raise the settlings from the bottom. As soon as you see any
dregs begin to rise, stay your hand, and let it remain unstirred, till all be
settled down. Then lade out the Liquor again, as before; and if need be, change
it again into another Kiver: all which is done to the end no dregs may go along
with the Liquor in tunning it into the vessel. When it is cold and perfect
clear, tun it into a Cask, that has been used for Sack, and stop it up close,
having an eye to give it a little vent, if it should work. If it cast out any
foul Liquor in working, fill it up always presently with some of the same
liquor, that you have kept in bottles for that end. When it has wrought, and
is well settled (which may be in about two months or ten weeks) draw it into
Glass-bottles, as long as it comes clear; and it will be ready to drink in a
Month or two: but will keep much longer, if you have occasion: and no dregs
will be in the bottom of the bottle.

He since told me, that to this Proportion of Honey and water, to make a
Hogshead of Meathe, you should boil half a pound of Hopps in the water, and two
good handfuls of Herbs; and six Ounces of Spice of all sorts: All which will be
mellowed and rotted away quite, (as well as the lushiousness of the Honey) in
the space of a year or two. For this is to be kept so long before it be drunk.

If you would have it sooner ready to drink, you may work it with a little
yeast, when it is almost cold in the Kiver: and Tun it up as soon as it begins
to work, doing afterward as is said before; but leaving a little vent to purge
by, till it have done working. Or in stead of yeast, you may take the yolks of
four New-laid-eggs, and almost half a pint of fine Wheat Flour, and some of
the Liquor you have made: beat them well together, then put them to the Liquor
in the Cask, and stop it up close, till you see it needful, to give it a little
vent.

Note, that yeast of good Beer, is better then that of Ale.

The first of September. 1663. Mr. Webb came to my House to make some for Me. He
took forty three Gallons of water, and forty two pounds of Norfolk honey. As
soon as the water boiled, He put into it a slight handful of Hops; which after
it had boiled a little above a quarter of an hour, he skimed off; then put in
the honey to the boiling water, and presently a while scum rose, which he
skimed off still as it rose; which skiming was ended in little above a quarter
of an hour more. Then He put in his herbs and spices, which were these:
Rose-mary, Thyme, Winter-savory, Sweet-marjoram, Sweet-bryar-leaves, seven or
eight little Parsley^roots: There was most of the Savoury, and least of the
Eglantine, three Ounces of Ginger, one Ounce and a half of Cinnamon, five
Nutmegs (half an Ounce of Cloves he would have added, but did not,) And these
boiled an hour and a quarter longer; in all from the first beginning to boil,
somewhat less then two hours: Then he presently laded it out of the Copper into
Coolers, letting it run through a Hair-sieve: And set the Coolers shelving
(tilted up) that the Liquor might afterward run the more quietly out of them.
After the Liquor had stood so about two hours, he poured or laded out of some
of the Coolers very gently, that the dregs might not rise, into other Coolers.
And about a pint of very thick dregs remained last in the bottom of every
Cooler. That which ran out, was very clear: After two hours more settling, (in
a shelving situation,) He poured it out again into other Coolers; and then very
little dregs (or scarce any in some of the Coolers) did remain. When the Liquor
was even almost cold, He took the yolks of three New-laid-eggs, a spoonful of
fine white flower, and about half a pint of new fresh barm of good strong Beer
(you must have care that your barm be very white and clean, not sullied and
foul, as is usual among slovenly Brewers in London) Beat this very well
together, with a little of the Liquor in a skiming dish, till you see it well
incorporated, and that it begins to work. Then put it to a pailful (of about
two Gallons and a half) of the Liquor, and mingle it well therewith. Then leave
the skiming dish reversed floating in the middle of the Liquor, and so the yest
will work up into and under the hollow of the dish, and grow out round about
the sides without. He left this well and thick covered all night, from about
eleven a clock at night; And the next morning, finding it had wrought very
well, He mingled what was in the Pail with the whole proportion of the Liquor,
and so Tunned it up into a Sack-cask. I am not satisfied, whether he did not
put a spoonful of fine white good Mustard into his Barm, before he brought it
hither, (for he took a pretext to look out some pure clean white barm) but he
protested, there was nothing mingled with the barm, yet I am in doubt. He
confessed to me that in making of Sider, He put's in half as much Mustard as
Barm; but never in Meathe. The fourth of September in the morning, he Bottled
up into Q^art-bottles the two lesser Rundlets of this Meathe (for he did Tun
the whole quantity into one large Rundlet, and two little ones) whereof the one
contained thirty Bottles; and the other, twenty two. There remained but little
settling or dregs in the Bottom's of the Barrels, but some there was. The
Bottles were set into a Cool Cellar, and He said they would be ready to drink
in three weeks* The Proportion of Herbs and Spices is this; That there be so
much as to drown the luscious sweetness of the Honey; but not so much as to
taste of herbs or spice, when you drink the Meathe. But that the sweetness of
the honey may kill their taste: And so the Meathe have a pleasant taste, but
not of herbs, nor spice, nor honey. And therefore you put more or less
according to the time you will drink it in. For a great deal will be mellowed
away in a year, that would be ungratefully strong in three months. And the
honey that will make it keep a year or two, will require triple proportion of
spice and herbs. He commends Parsley-roots to be in greatest quantity, boiled
whole, if young; but quartered and pithed, if great and old.

My own Considerations for making of Meathe.
Boil what quantity of Spring Water you please, three or four walms, and then
let it settle twenty four hours, and pour the clear from the settling. Take
sixteen Gallons of the clear, and boil in it ten handfuls of Eglantine-leaves,
five of Liverwort, five of Sca^io^s, four of Baulm, four of Rosemary; two of
Bayleaves; one of Thyme, and one of Sweet-marjoram, and five Eringo-roots
splirted. When the water has drawn out the virtue of the herbs (which it will
do in half an hours boiling,) let it run through a strainer or sieve, and let
it settle so, that you may pour the clear from the Dregs. To every three
Gallons of the Clear, take one of Honey, and with clean Arms stripped up, lade
it for two or three hours, to dissolve the honey in the water; lade it twice or
thrice that day. The next day boil it very gently to make the scum rise, and
scum it all the while, and now and then pour to it a ladle full of cold water,
which will make the scum rise more: when it is very clear from scum, you may
boil it the more strongly, till it bear an Egg very high, that the breadth of
a groat be out of the water, and that it boil high with great walms in the
middle of the Kettle: which boiling with great Bubbles in the middle is a sign
it is boiled to it is height. Then let it cool till it be Lukewarm, at which
time put some Ale-yest into it, to make it work, as you would do Ale. And then
put it up into a fit Barrel first seasoned with some good sweet White Wind (as
Canary-sack) and keep the bung open, till it have done working, filling it up
with some such honey-drink warmed, as you find it sink down by working over.
When it has almost done working, put into it a bag of thin stuff (such as
Bakers use to bolt in) fa^tned by a Cord at the bung, containing two parts of
Ginger-sliced, and one apiece of Cinnamon, Cloves and Nutmegs, with a
Pebble-stone in it to make it sink; And stop it up close for six Months or a
year, and then you may draw it into Bottles. If you like Cardamom-seeds, you
may add some of them to the spices. Some do like Mint exceedingly to be added
to the other herbs. Where no yeast is to be had, The Liquor will work if you
set it some days in the hot Sun (with a cover, like the roof of a house over
it, to keep wet out, if it chance to rain) but then you must have great care,
to fill it up, as it consumes, and to stop it close a little before it has
done working, and to set it then presently in a Cool Cellar. I am told that the
Leaven of bread will make it work as well as yest, but I have not tried it. If
you will not have it so strong, it will be much sooner ready to drink; As if
you take six parts of water to one of Honey. Some do like the drink better
without either herbs or spices, and it will be much the whiter. If you will
have it stronger, put but Gallons and a half of water to one of honey.

You may use what Herbs or Roots you please, either for their taste or virtue,
after the manner here set down.

If you make it work with yeast, you must have great care, to draw it into
bottles soon after it has done working, as after a fort^ight or three weeks.
For that will make it soon grow stale, and it will thence grow sower and dead
before you are aware. But if (...) work ^ingly of it self, and by help of the
Sun without admixtion of either Leaven or Yeast, it may be kept long in the
Barrel, so it be filled up to the top, and kept very close stopped.

I conceive it will be exceeding good thus: when you have a strong Honey-liquor
of three parts of water to one of Honey, well-boiled and scummed, put into it
Lukewarm, or better (as soon as you take it from the fire) some
Clove-gilly-flowers, first wiped, and all the whites clipped off, one good
handful or two to every Gallon of Liquor. Let these infuse 30 or 40 hours. Then
strain it from the flowers, and either work it with yeast, or set it in the Sun
to work; when it has almost done working, put into it a bag of like
G^lly-flowers (and if they are ^^ly dried, I think they are the better) hanging
it in at the bung. And if you will put into it some spirit of wine, that has
drawn a high T^ncture from Clove-gilly flowers (dried, I conceive is best) and
some other that h^th done the like from flowers and tops o^ Rosemary, and some
that has done the like from Cinnamon and Ginger, I believe it will be much the
nobler, and last the longer.

I conceive, that bitter and strong herbs, as Rosemary, Bays, Sweet-majoram,
Thyme, and the like, do conserve Meathe the better and longer, being as it were
in stead of hops. But neither must they, no more then Clove-gilly-flowers be
too much boiled: For the Volatile pure Spirit flies away very quickly. Therefore
rather in^use them. Beware of in^using Gilly-flower in any vessel of Metal,
(excepting silver:) For all Metals will spoil and dead their color. Glased
earth is best.

Sack with Clove-gilly flowers.
If you will make a Cordial Liquor of Sack with Clove-gillyflowers, you must do
thus. Prepare your Gillyflowers, as is said before, and put them into great
double glass-bottles, that hold two gallons a piece, or more; and put to every
gallon of Sack, a good half pound of the wiped and cut flowers, pu^ting in the
flowers first, and then the Sack upon them. Stop the glasses exceeding close,
and set them in a temperate Cellar. Let them stand so, till you see that the
Sack has drawn out all the principal tincture from them, and that the flowers
begin to look palish; (with an eye of pale, or faint in Color) Then pour the
Sack from them, and throw away the exhausted flowers, or distill a spirit from
them; For if you let them remain longer in the Sack, they will give an earthy
taste to them. You may then put the tincted Sack into fit bottles for your use,
stopping them very close. But if the season of the flowers be not yet past,
your Sack will be better, if you put it upon new flowers, which I conceive will
not be the worse, but peradventure the better, if they be a little dried in the
shade. If you drink a Glass or two of this sack at a meal, you will find it a
great Cordial.

Upon better consideration; I conceive the best way of making Hydrom^l with
Clove-gilly-flowers, is thus: Boil your simple Liquor to it is full height (with
three parts of water to one of Honey,) take a small parcel out, to make a
strong infusion of flowers, pouring it boyl^ng hot upon the flowers in earthen
vessels. If you have great quantity, as six to one, of Liquor, you will easily
draw out the tincture in fourteen or sixteen hours infusion; otherwise you may
quicken your liquor with a parcel of Sack. In the mean time make the great
quantity of Liquor work with yest. When it has almost done fermenting, but not
quite, put the infusion to it warm, and let it ferment more if it will. When
that is almost done, put to it a bag with flowers to hang in the bung.

I conceive that Hydromel made with Juniperberries (first broken and bruised)
boiled in it, is very good. Add also to it Rosemary and Bayleaves.

Upon trial of several ways, I conclude (as things yet appear to me) that to
keep Mead long, it must not be fermented with yest (unless you put Hops to it)
but put it in the barrel, and let it ferment of it self, keeping a thick plate
of lead upon the bung, to lie close upon it, yet so that the working of the
Liquor may raise it, to purge out the foulness, and have always some new made
plain Liquor, to fill it up as it sinks, warm whiles it works: but cold during
three or four month's after. Then stop the bung exceeding close. And when you
will make your Mead with Cherries or Morello-Cherries, or Raspes, or
Bilberries, or Black-cherries, put their juice to the Liquor when you tun it,
without ever boiling it therein; about one quart of juice to every three or
four gallons of Liquor. You may squeese out the clear juice, and mingle it with
the Liquor, and hang the Magma in a bag in the bung. I think it is best to
break the stones of the Cherries, before you put their Magma into the bag.

Since I conceive, that Clove-gilly-flowers must never be boiled in the Liquor:
that evaporateth their Spirits, which are very volatile: But make a strong
infusion of them, and besides hang a Bag of them in the bung. I conceive that
it is good to make the Liquor pretty strong (not too much, but so as the taste
may be grateful) of some strong herbs, as Rosemary, Bayleaves, Sweet-marjoram,
Thyme, Broad-thyme, and the like. For they preserve the drink, and make it
better for the stomach and head. Sanding in the Sun is the best way of
Fermentation, when the drink is strong. The Root of Angelica or Elecampane, or
Eringo, or Orris, may be good and pleasant, to be boiled in the Liquor. Raspes
and Cherries and Bilberies are never to be boiled, but their juice put into the
Liquor, when it is tunning. U^e only Morello-Cherries (I think) for pleasure,
and black ones for health. I conceive it best to use very little spice of any
kind in Meathes.

Metheglin composed by My self out of sundry Receipts.
In sixty Gallons of water, boil ten handfuls of Sweet-bryar-leaves; Eyebright,
Liverwort, Agrimony, Scabious, Balm, Wood-bettony, Straw-berry-leaves, Burnet,
of each four handfuls; of Rosemary three handfuls; of Minth, Angelica, Bays
and Wild-thyme, Sweet-Marjoram, of each two handfuls: Six Eringo-roots. When
the water has taken out the virtue of the herbs and roots, let it settle, and
the next day pour off the clear, and in every three Gallons of it boil one of
honey, scumming it well, and putting in a little cold water now and then to
make the scum rise, as also some whites of Eggs. When it is clear scummed, take
it off, and let it cool; then work it with Ale-yest; tun it up, and hang in it
a bag, with Ginger, Cinamom, Cloves and Cardamom. And as it works over, put
in some strong honey-drink warmed. When it works no more, stop it up close.

In twenty Gallons of water boil Sweet-bryar-leaves, Eyebright, Rosemary,
Bays, Clove-gilly-flowers of each five handfuls, and four Eringo-roots. To
every two gallons and a half of this decoction, put one gallon of honey; boil
it, etc. When it is tunned up, hang in it a bag containing five handfuls of
Clove-gilly-flowers, and sufficient quantity of the spices above.

In both these Receipts, the quantity of the herbs is too great. The strong
herbs preserve the drink, and make it nobler. Use Marjoram and Thyme in little
quantity in all.

My Lady Gowers white Meathe used at Salisbury.
Take to four Gallons of water, one Gallon of Virgin-honey; let the water be
warn before you put in the honey; and then put in the whites of 3 or 4 Eggs
well beaten, to make the scum rise. When the honey is thoroughly melted and
ready to boil, put in an Egg with the shell softly; and when the Egg rises
above the water, to the bigness of a groat in sight, it is strong enough of the
honey. The Egg will quickly be hard, and so will not rise; Therefore you must
put in another, if the first do not rise to your sight; you must put in more
water and honey proportionable to the first, because of wasting away in the
boiling. It must boil near an hour. You may, if you please, boil in it, a
little bundle of Rosemary, Sweet-marjoram, and Thyme; and when it ta^teth to
your liking, take it forth again. Many do put Sweet-bryar berries in it, which
is held very good. When your Mead is boiled enough take it off the fire, and
put it into a Kive; when it is blood-warm, put in some Ale-barm, to make it
work, and cover it close with a blancket in the working. The next morning tun
it up, and if you please put in a bag with a little Ginger and a little Nutmeg
bruised; and when it has done working, stop it up close for a Month, and then
Bottle it.

Sir Thomas Gower's Metheglin for health.
First boil the water and scum it; Then to 12 Gallons put 6 handfuls of
Sweet-bryar-leaves, of Sweet-marjoram, Rosemary, Thyme, of each one a handful:
Flowers of Marigold, Borrage, Bugloss, Sage, each two handfuls. Boil all
together very gently, till a third waste. To eight Gallons of this put two
Gallons of pure honey, and boil them till the Liquor bear an Egg, the breadth
of threepence or a Groat, together with such spices as you like (bruised, but
not beaten) an ounce of all is sufficient.

You must observe carefully. 1. Before you set the Liquor to boil, to cause a
lusty Servant (his Arms well washed) to mix the honey and water together,
laboring it with his hands at least an hour without intermission. 2. That when
it begins to boil fast, you take away part of the fire, so as it may boil
slowly, and the scum and dross go all to one side, the other remaining clear.
When you take it off, let none of the Liquor go away with the dross. 3. When
you take it from the fire, let it settle well, before it be tunned into the
vessel, wherein you mean to keep it: and when it comes near the bottom, let it
be taken carefully from the sediment, with a thin Dish, so as nothing be put
into the vessel, but what is clear. 4. Stop it very close (when it is set in
the place, where it must remain) cover it with a cloth, upon which some
handfuls of Bay Salt and Salpeter is laid, and over that lay clay, and a Turf.
5. Put into it, when you stop it, some New-laid-eggs in number proportionable
to the bigness of the vessel, Shell's unbroken. Six Eggs to about sixteen
Gallons. The whole Egg-shell and all will be entirely consumed.

Metheglin for taste and Color,
Must be boiled as the other, if you intend to keep it above half a year; but
less according to the time, wherein you mean to use it. You must put in no
Herbs, to avoid bitterness and discoloring; and the proportion of water and
honey more or less, as you would drink it sooner or later; (as a Gallon of
honey to 4, 5, or 6 of water.) If to be weak, and to be soon drunk, you must
when it is tunned, put in a Tossed of bread (hard tosted) upon which half a score
drops of Spirit of yest or barm is dropped; for want of it, spread it with
purest barm beaten with a few drops of Oil of Cinnamon. If you intend to give
it the taste of Raspes, then add more barm, to make it work well, and during
that time of working, put in your Raspes (or their Syrup) but the fruit gives a
delicate Color, and Syrup a duller Tincture. Drink not that made after the
first manner, till six months, and it will endure drawing better then wine;
but Bottleled, it is more spirited then any drink.

The Spirit of Barm is made by putting store of water to the barm; then distill
the Spirit, as you do other Spirits; At last an oil will come, which is not for
this use.

Sir Thomas Gower makes his ordinary drink thus: Make ^ery small well Brewed
Ale. To eight Gallons of this put one Gallon of honey; when it is well
dissolved and clarified, tun up the Liquor, making it work in due manner with
barm. When it has done working, stop it up close, and in three months it will
be fit to drink.

He makes Metheglin thus. Make a good Decoct of Eglantine-leaves, Cowslip
flowers, a little Sweet-marjoram, and some Rosemary and Bayleaves, Betony, and
Scabious, and a little Thyme. After the sediment has settled, put or or 1/5 or
1/6 part of honey, (according as you would have it strong, and soon ready) to
the clear severed from the settlement, and stir it exceeding well with stripped
arms 4 or 5 hours, till it be perfectly incorporated. Then boil and scum it;
let it then cool and tun it up, etc. After it has cooled, lade the clean from
the settlement, so that it may not trouble it, and tun up the clear thus
severed from the settlings. Much of the perfection consists in stirring it
long with stripped arms before you boil it. Then to boil it very leisurely till
all the scum be off. And order your fire so, that the scum may rise and drive
all to one side. This will be exceeding pale clear and pleasant Metheglin. He
uses to every G^llon of water, a good handful of Eglantine-leaves, and as much
Cowslip flowers; but only a Pugil of Thyme or Marjoram.

An Excellent way of making white Metheglin.
Take of Sweet-bryar berries, of Rosemary, broad Thyme, of each a handful. Boil
them in a quantity of fair water for half an hour; then cleanse the water from
the herbs, and let it stand 24 hours, until it be thorough cold. Then put your
honey into it (honey which flows from the Combs of it self in a warm place is
best) make it so strong of the honey that it bear an egg (if you will have it
strong) the breadth of a groat above the Liquor. This being done, lave and
bounce it very well and often, that the honey and water may incorporate and
work well together. After this boil it softly over a gentle fire, and scum it.
Then beat the whites of eggs with their shells, and put into it to clarify it.
After this, put some of it into a vessel, and take the whites of two eggs, and
a little barm, and a small quantity of fine flower; beat them well together,
and put it into the vessel close covered, that it may work. Then pour the rest
unto it by degrees, as you do Beer. At last take a quantity of Cinnamon, 2 or 3
races of Ginger, and two Nutmegs (for more will alter the color of it.) Hang
these in a little bag in the vessel. Thus made, it will be as white as any
White Wind.

Another way of making white Metheglin.
To three Gallons of Spring Water take three quarts of honey, and set it over
the fire, till the scum rise pretty thick. Then take off the scum, and put in
Thyme, Rosemary, Hyssop and Maidenhair, of each one handful; and two handfuls
of Eglantine leaves, and half a handful of Organ. The spices, Ginger, Nutmegs,
Cinnamon and a little mace, and boil all these together near half an hour. Then
take it from the fire, and let it stand till it be cold, and then strain it,
and so Tun it up, and stop it close. The longer you keep it, the better it will
be.

Another way.
Take two Gallons of water; one Gallon of Honey: Parietary one handful; Sage,
Thyme, one Pugil; Of Hyssop half a Pugil. Six Parsley-roots; one Fennel-root,
the pith taken out: Red-nettles one Pugil. Six leaves of Hearts-tongue. Boil
this together one ^our* Then put in the Honey, and N^tmegs, Cloves, Mace,
Cinnamon of each one ounce; of Ginger three ounces. Boil all these together,
till the scum be boi^ed in, not scumming it. Then take it off, and set it to
cool. When it is cold, put in it six spoonfuls of barm, and when it is ripe, it
will hiss in the pail. You must take out the herbs, when you put in the honey.
If you put in these herbs following, it will be far better; Sanicle, Bugloss,
Avens, and Ladies-mantle, of each one handful.

To make white Metheglin.
Take of Sweet-bryar a great handful: of Violet-flowers, Sweet-marjoram,
Strawberry-leaves, Violet-leaves, Ana, one handful, Agrimony, Bugloss, Borrage,
Ana, half a handful. Rosemary four branches, Gilly^flowers, N^. 4. (the
Yellow-wall-flowers, with great tops) Anniseeds, Fennel, and Caraway, of each a
spoonful, Two large Mace. Boil all these in twelve Gallons of water for the
Space of an hour; then strain it, and let it stand until it be Milkwarm: Then
put in as much honey, as will carry an Egg to the breadth of six pence, at
least. Then boil it again, and scum it clean; then let it stand, until it be
cold; then put a pint of Ale-barm into it, and ripen it as you do Beer, and tun
it. Then hang in the m^dst of the vessel a little bag with a Nutmeg quartered,
a Race of Ginger sliced, a little Cinnamon, and mace whole, and three grains of
Musk in a cloth put into the bag amongst the rest of the Spices. Put a stone in
the bag, to keep it in the midst of the Liquor. This quantity took up three
Gallons of honey; therefore be sure to have four in readiness.

Strong Mead.
Take one Measure of honey, and dissolve it in four of water, beating it long
up and down with clean Wooden ladels. The next day boil it gently, scumming it
all the while till no more scum rises; and if you will clarify the Liquor
with a few beaten whites of Eggs, it will be the clearer. The rule of it is
being boiled enough is, when it yields no more scum, and bears an Egg, so
that the b^eadth of a groat is out of the water. Then pour it out of the Kettle
into wooden vessels, and let it remain there till it be almost cold. Then Tun
it into a vessel, where Sack has been.

A Receipt for making of Mead.
Take a quart of honey, and mix it with a Gallon of Fountain Water, and work it
well four days together, four times a day; The fifth day put it over the fire,
and let it boil an hour, and scum it well. Then take the whites of two Eggs,
and beat them to a froth, and put it into the Liquor; stirring it well, till
the whites of Eggs have raised a froth or Scum; then take it of^, scumming the
liquor clean. Then take a handful of Strawberry-leaves and Violet-leaves
together, with a little Sprig of Rosemary, and two or three little Sprigs of
Spike; and so boil it again (with these herbs in it) a quarter of an hour. Then
take it of^ the fire, and when it is cold, put it into a little barrel, and put
into it half a spoonful of Ale-yest, and let it work; which done, take one
Nutmeg sliced, and twice as much Ginger sliced, six Cloves bruised, and a
little stick of Cinnamon, and sow these Spices in a little bag, and stop it
well; and it will be fit for use within a fortnight, and will last half a year.
If you will have your Metheglin stronger, put into it, a greater quantity of
honey.

My Lord Hollis Hydromel.
In four parts of Springwater dissolve one part of honey, or so much as the
Liquor will bear an Egg to the breadth of a Groat. Then boil it very well, and
that all the scum be taken away. He adds nothing to it but a small proportion
of Ginger sliced: of which He puts half to boil in the Liquor, after all the
scum is gone; and the other half He puts into a bag, and hangs in the
bung, when it is tunned. The Ginger must be very little, not so much as to make
the Liquor taste strongly of it, but to quicken it. I should like to add a
little proportion of Rosemary, and a greater of Sweet-bryar leaves, in the
boiling. As also, to put into the barrel a tossed of white bread with mustard, to
make it work. He puts nothing to it; but his own strength in time makes it work
of it self. It is good to drink after a year.

A Receipt for white Metheglin.
Take to every quart of honey, 4, 5, or 6, quarts of water; boil it on a good
quick fire as long as any scum rises; as it boils, put about half a pint of
water at a time very often, and scum it very well as it rises; and be sure to
keep it up to the same height and quantity as at the first: Put into it a
little Rosemary, according to the quantity that you make, and boil it half a
quarter of an hour; scum it very well. You may put a little Ginger into it,
only to give it a taste thereof, and let it have a little walm of heat after
it. Then take and put it into a Wooden vessel, (which must be well scalded,
least it taste of any thing) let it stand all night, and the next morning
strain it through a sieve of hair.

Then if you please, you may boil up your grounds that are in the bottom of
the vessel with three or four quarts of water; and when it is cold, strain it,
to the rest, and put to it a little good light barm. That which you make in the
winter, you must let it stand three days and three nights covered up, before
you bottle it up; and two nights in summer, and then bottle it up. But be sure,
you scum off the barm before the bottling up.

Your vessel, which you intend to boil your Mead in, must stand in scalding
water, whilst you boil your Mead; it will drink up the less of your Mead.
Four spoonfuls of good new Ale-barm will serve for five quarts of honey. As you
desire your Metheglin in strength, so take at the first either of the
quantities of water. Five quarts is reasonable.

Hydromel as I made it weak for the Queen Mother.
Take 18 quarts of spring water, and one quart of honey; when the water is
warm, put the honey into it. When it boileth up, skim it very well, and
continue skimming it, as long as any scum will rise. Then put in one Race of
Ginger (sliced in thin slices,) four Cloves, and a little sprig of green
Rosemary. Let these boil in the Liquor so long, till in all it have boiled one
hour. Then set it to cool, till it be blood-warm; and then put to it a spoonful
of Ale-yest. When it is worked up, put it into (...) vessel of a fit size; and
after two or three days, bottle it up. You may drink it after six weeks, or two
months.

Thus was the Hydromel made that I gave the Queen, which was exceedingly liked
by every body.

Several ways of making Metheglin.
Take such quantity as you judge convenient of Spring, or pure rain water, and
make it boil well half an hour. Then pour it out into a Wooden fat, and let it
settle 24 hours. Then power off the clear, leaving the sediment* in the
bottom. Let such water be the Liquor for all the several Honey-drinks, you
will make.

1. Warm sixteen Gallons of this water (lukewarm) and put two Gallons of Honey
to it, in a half tub or other fit Wooden vessel. Lave it very well with a
clean arm, or wooden battledoor for two or three hours, dissolving the honey
very well in the water. Let it stand thus two or three days in wood, laving it
thrice a day, a pretty while each time. Then put it back into your Copper and
boil it gently, till you have scummed away all the foulness that will rise; and
clarify it with whites of Eggs: Then put into it a little handful of cleansed
and sliced white Ginger, and a little mace; when they have boiled enough, put
in a few Cloves bruised, and a stick of Cinnamon, and a little Limmon-peel, and
after a walm or two, pour the Liquor into a wooden half tub, with the spices
in it. Cover it close with a Cloth and blanquet, and let it stand so two days.
Then let the liquor run through a bolter, to sever the spice, stopping before
any settlings come. Then pour this clear liquor into pottle-bottles of glass,
not filling them by a fingers breadth or more. Stop them close with Cork tied
in, and set them in a cool place for 6, 7 or 8 weeks.

2. In forty Gallons of the first boiled and settled water, boil five handfuls
of sweet-bryar tops, as much of Cowslip-flowers, as much of Prim^ose-flowers,
as much of Rosemary flowers, as much of Sage-flowers, as many of
Borage-^lowers, as many of Bugloss ^ flo^ers; two handfuls of the tops of
Betony, four handfuls of Agrimony, and as many of Scabious, one handful of
Thyme, as much of Sweet-marjoram, and two ounces of Mustard Seed bruised. When
this has boiled so long, that you judge the water has drawn out all the
virtue of the Herbs (which may be in half an hour) pour out all into a varte to
cool and settle. Scum away the herbs, and pour the clear from the sediment, and
to every four gallons of liquor (lukewarm) put one gallon of honey, and lave it
to dissolve the honey, letting it stand two or three days, laving it well
thrice every day. Then boil it till it will bear an Egg high, then clarify it
with whites and shells of Eggs, and pour it into a vatte to cool, which it will
do in a days space or better. Whilst it is yet lukewarm, put Ale-yest to it,
(no more then is necessary) to make it work, and then run it into a Rundlet of
a fit Size, that has been seasoned with Sack; and hang in it a boulter bag
containing half a pound of white Ginger cleansed and sliced, three ounces of
Cloves and as much of Cinnamon bruised, as much Coriander seed prepared, and as
much Elder-flowers. As it purges and consumes by running over the bung, put
in fresh honey-liquor warmed, that you keep or make on purpose for that end.
When the working is even almost at an end, stop it up close with clay and sand,
and have great care to keep it always close stopped. After a year draw it into
pottle Glass-bottles stopped with ground stoppels of glass, and keep them in a
cool place, till they are ready to drink, if they as yet be not so.

Have a care, that never any Liquor stay in Copper longer then whilst it is to
boil.

3. In 20 Gallons of the first boiled and settled water, boil six handfuls of
Sweet-bryar ^ leaves, as many of Cowslip flowers, as many of Primrose-flowers,
and as many of Rosemaryflowers; and half a handful of Wild thyme, during the
space of a quarter or half an hour. Then take the clear, and dissolve in it a
sixth part of honey, doing as above for the boiling and clarifying it. But boil
it not to bear an Egg, but only till it be well scummed and clarified. Then
pour it into a wooden Tub, and Tun it with Ale-yest, when it is in due temper
of coolness, as you would do Alewort; and let it work (close covered)
sufficiently. Then Tun it up into a seasoned firkin, and put into it a tossed of
white-bread spread with quick Mustard, and hang it in a boulter bag containing
loosly some Ginger, Cloves and Cinnamon bruised, and a little Limon-peel and
Elder-flowers, with a Pebble-stone at the bottom, to make it ^ink toward the
bottom, and fastened by a string coming out of the bung to hinder it from
falling quite to the bottom. Stop the bung very close, and after six weeks or
two months draw it into bottles.

4. In 20 Gallons of boiled and settled water, boil a quarter of an hour ten
handfuls of sweet bryar-leaves, and as many of Cow^lips. Then let it cool and
settle in wood, and take the clear; and to every four Gallons of liquor, put
one of honey, dissolving it as the others formerly set down. Boil it, till no
more scum rise, and that a fourth part be consumed. Then clarify it with
whites of Eggs and their shells, and make it work with yest. After sufficient
working Tun it up, hanging in it a bag with Ginger, Cloves, Cinnamon and Limon
peel. Stop it very close, and after two or three months, draw it into bottles.

My Lady Morices Mead.
Boil first your water with your herbs. Those she likes best, are, Angelica,
Balm, Borage, and a little Rosemary (not half so much as of any of the rest) a
handful of all together, to two or 3 Gallons of water. After about half an
hours boiling, let the water run through a strainer (to sever the herbs from
it) into Wooden or earthen vessels, and let it cool and settle. To three parts
of the clear, put one or more of honey, and boil it till it bear an Egg,
leaving as broad as a shilling out of the water, skiming it very well. Then
power it out into vessels, as before; and next day, when it is almost quite
cold, power it into a Sack-cask, wherein you have first put a little fresh
Ale-yest, about two spoonfuls to ten Gallons. Hang in it a bag with a little
sliced Ginger, but almost a Porenger full of Cloves. Cover the bung lightly,
till it have done working; then stop it up close. You may tap and draw it a
year or two after. It is excellent good.

My Lady Morice her Sister makes here is thus:
Dissolve your honey in the water till it bear an Egg higher or lower,
according to the strength you will have it of. Then put into it some Sea-warm
wood and a little Rosemary, and a little Sage; about two good handfuls of all
together, to ten Gallons. When it has boi^ed enough to take the virtue of the
herbs, sk^m them out, and strew a hand^ul or two of fine Wheat Flour upon the
boyl^ng Liquor.

This will draw all the dregs to it, and swim at the top, so that you may skim
all off together. And this she holds the best way of clari^ying the Liquor,
and making it look pale. Then pour it into vessels as above to cool. Let it
stand three days; then Tun it up into a Sack ca^k without yest or Spice, and
keep it stopped till it work. Then let it be open, till it have done working,
filling it up still with other honey-drink. Then stop it up close for a year or
two. You may at first stop it so, that the strong working may throw out the
stopple, and yet keep it close, till it work strongly. She says, that such a
small proportion of wormwood gives it a fine quick taste, and a pale color
with an eye of green. The wormwood must not be so much, as to discern any the
least bitterness in the taste; but that the composition of it with the honey
may give a quickness. The Rosemary and Sage must be a great deal less then the
Wormwood. Sometimes she stops it up close as soon as she has Tunned it, and
lets it remain so for three months. Then pierce it and draw it into bottles,
which stop well, and tie down the stoppels. This will keep so a long time. She
uses this way most. It makes the Mead drink exceeding quick and pleasant. When
you pierce the Cask, it will fly out with exceeding force, and be ready to
throw out the stopper and spigot.

To make white Mead.
Take Rosemary, Thyme, Sweet-bryar, Penyroyal, Bays, of each one handful;
steep them 24 hours in a bowl of fair cold water covered close; next day boil
them very well in another water, till the color be very high; then take
another water, and boil the same herbs in it, till it look green; and so boil
them in several waters, till they do but just change the color of the water.
The first waters are thrown away. The last water must stand 24 hours with the
herbs in it. The Liquor being strained from them, you must put in as much fine
honey till it will bear an Egg; you must work and labor the honey with the
Liquor a whole day, till the honey be consumed; then let it stand a night a
clear^ng. In the morning put your L^quor a boiling for a quarter of an hour,
with the whites and shells of six Eggs. So strain it through a bag, and let it
stand a day a cooling; so Tun it up, and put into the vessel in a Linen bag,
Cloves, Mace, Cinnamon and Nutmegs bruised altogether. If you will have it to
drink presently, take the whites of two or three Eggs, of barm a spoonful, and
as much of Wheaten-flower. Then let it work before you stop it, afterward stop
it well with Clay and salt. A quart of Honey to a Gallon of liquor, and so
proportionably for these Herbs.

Sir William Paston's Meathe.
Take ten Gallons of Spring Water, and put therein ten Pints of the best honey.
Let this boil half an hour, and scum it very well; then put in one handful of
Rosemary, and as much of Bayleaves; with a little L^mon-peel. Boil this half an
hour longer, then take it off the fire, and put it into a clean Tub; and when
it is cool, work it up with yest, as you do Beer. When it is wrought, put it
into your vessel, and stop it very close. Within three days you may Bottle it,
and in ten days after it will be fit to drink.

Another pleasant Meathe of Sir William Paston's.
To a Gallon of water put a quart of honey, about ten sprigs of Sweet-Marjoram;
half so many tops of Bays. Boil these very well together, and when it is cold,
bottle it up. It will be ten days before it be ready to drink.

Another way of making Mead.
Boil Sweet Bryar, Sweet Marjoram, Cloves and Mace in Spring Water, till the
water taste of them. To four Gallons of water put one Gallon of honey, and boil
it a little to skim and clarify it. When you are ready to take it from the
fire, put in a little Limon-peel, and pour it into a Wooden vessel, and let it
stand till it is almost cold. Then put in some Ale-yest, and stir it
altogether. So let it stand till next day. Then put a few ^toned Raisins of the
Sun into every bottle, and pour the Mead upon them. Stop the bottles close,
and in a week the Mead will be ready to drink.

Sir Baynam Throckmorton's Meathe.
Take four quarts of Honey, good measure; put to it four Gallons of water, let
it stand all night, but stir it well, when you put it together. The next day
boil it, and put to it Nutmegs, Cloves, Mace and Ginger, of each half an ounce.
Let these boil with the honey and water till it will bear an Egg at the top
without sinking; and then it is enough, if you see the Egg the breadth of a
six pence. The next day put it in your vessel, and put thereto two or three
spoonfuls of barm; and when it has done working, you may (if you like it) put
in a little Ambergris in a clout with a stone to it to make it sink. This
should be kept a whole year before it be drunk; it will drink much the better,
free from any taste of the honey, and then it will look as clear as Sack. Make
it not till Michaelmas, and set it in a cool place. You may drink it a quarter
old, but it will not taste so pleasant then, as when it is old.

To make white M^theglin.
Take a Gallon of Honey; put to it four Gallons of water; stir them well
together, and boil them in a Kettle, till a Gallon be wasted with boiling and
scumming. Then put it into a vessel to cool. When it is almost as cold as
Ale-wort, then clear it out into another vessel: Then put Barm upon it, as you
do to your Ale, and so let it work. And then Tun it up into a vessel, and put
into it a bag with Ginger, Cloves, and Cinnamon bruised a little, and to hang
the bag in the vessel, and stop it up very close; and when it has stood a
month or six weeks, bottle it up and so drink it. You may put in a little
Limmon-peel into some of your Metheglin, for those that like that taste; which
most persons do very much.

A Receipt for making of Mead.
Mistress H^bden tells me, that the way of making Honey-drink in Russia, is
thus; Take for example, 100 Gallons of Spring water, boil it a little; then let
it stand 24 hours to cool, and much sediment will fall to the bottom; from
which pour the clear, and warm it, and put 20 or 25 Gallons of pure honey to
it, and lade it a long time with a great wooden battle-dore, till it be well
d^ssolved. The next day boil it gently, till you have skimed off all the scum
that will rise, and that it bears an Egg boyant. And in this Liquor you must
put, in the due time, a little quantity of Hops, about two handfuls, which must
boil sufficiently in the L^quor. Put this into the cooling fat to cool two or
three days. When it is about milkwarm* take white-bread and cut it into tosts,
upon which, (when they are hot) spread moderately thick some fresh sweet
Ale-yest; and cover the superficies of the Liquor with such tosts; Then cover
the Tub or Far with a double course sheet, and a blancket or two, which tie
fast about it. This will make your Liquor work up highly. When you find it is
near it is height of working, and that the Liquor is risen to the top of the Tub
(of which it wanted 8 or 10 Inches at first,) Skim off the tosts and yest, and
Tun it up in a hogshead: which stop close; but after 24 hours draw it into
another barrel: for it will leave a great deal of sediment. It will work again
in this second barrel. After other 24 hours draw it into another barrel* and
then it will be clear and pale l^ke white wind. Stop it up close, hanging a bag
of bruised spice in the bung; and after five or six months, it will be fit to
drink. If you would have your Mead taste of Raspes, or Cherries ( Morello,
sharp Cherries, are the best) prepare the water first with them; by putting
five or six Gallons of either of these fruits, or more, into this proportion of
water; in which bruise them to have all their juice: but strain the Liquor from
the Grains or Seeds, or Stones. And then proceed with this ti^cted water, as is
said above. Yea may make your Liquor as strong, as you like, of the fruit.
Cardamom-seeds mingled with the suspended spices, add much to the pleasantness
of the drink. Limon-peel, as also Elderflowers.

My Lady Bellassises Mead.
The way of making is thus. She boileth the honey with Spring Water, as I do,
till it be clear scumed; then to every Gallon of Honey, put in a pound or two
of good Raisins of the Sun; boil them well, and till the Liquor bear an Egg.
Then pour it into a Cowl or Tub to cool. In about 24 hours it will be cool
enough to put the yest to it, being only Lukewarm: which do thus: spread yest
upon a large hot tossed, and lay it upon the top of the Liquor, and cover the Tub
well, first with a sheet, then with coverlets, that it may work well. When it
is wrought up to it is height, before it begin to sink, put it unto your barrel,
letting it run through a loose open stra^ner, to sever the Raisins and dregs
from it. Stop it up close, and after it bath been ^hus eight or ten days, draw
it into bottles, and unto every bottle put a cod of Cardamoms, ha^ing first a
little bruised them as they lie in the ^^od; and opening the cod a little, that
the Liquor may search into it. Stop your bottles ^lose, and after three or four
months you may ^^ink, and it will be very pleasant and quick, and look like
white wine.

Another Metheglin.
In every three Gallons of water, boil Rose^ary, Liverwort, Balm, ana, half a
handful, and Cowslips two handfuls. When the water has ^ufficiently d^awn out
the virtue of the herbs, ^our all into a Tub, and let it stand all night. Then
strain it. And to every three Gallons of ^he clear Liquor (or 2, If you will
have ^ our drink stronger) put one Gallon of honey, and boil it, till it bear
an Egg, scum^ng it till no ^ore scum w^ll rise: which to make rise the ^etter,
put in now and then a Porrenger full of ^old water. Then pour it into a Tub,
and let it ^tand to cool, till it be blood^ warm, and then ^ut by degrees a
Pint of Ale-yest to it, to make ^t work. So let it stand three days very close
co^ered. Then skim off the yest, and put it into a seasoned barrel; but stop it
not up close, till it have done his^ing. Then either stop it very close, if you
will keep it in the barrel, or draw it into bottles. Put into this proportion,
Ginger sliced, Nutmegs broken, ana, one ounce, Cinnamon bruised half an ounce in
a bag, which hang in the bung with a stone in it to make it sink. You may add,
if you please, to this proportion of water, or one Gallon more, two handfuls of
Sweet-bryar-leaves, and one of Betony.

Mr. Pierce's Excellent white Metheglin.
In a Copper, that holds conveniently three hogsheads, or near so much, boil
the best water, (as full as is fitting) As soon as it boileth well and high,
put to it four handfuls of Sweet-bryar-leaves, as much of Eyebright: two
handfuls of Rosemary, as much of Sweet-Marjoram, and one of Broad-thyme. Let
them boil a quarter of an hour (He lets them boil no longer, to preserve the
color of the Metheglin pale) then scum away the herbs, scuming also the water
clear. Then lade out the water, (letting it run through a Ranch-Sieve) into a
wide open vessel, or large Vate to coo^^ leaving the settlement and dregs. (He
often leaves out the Eyebright and Thyme, when he provideth chiefly for the
pure taste; though the Eyebright hurts it but little.) When it is blood-warm,
put the honey to it, about one part, to four of water; but because this does
not determine the proportions exactly (for some honey will make it stronger
then other) you must do that by bearing up an Egg. But first, lave and scoop
your mixture exceedingly, (at least an hour) that the honey be not only
perfectly dissolved, but uniformly mixed throughout the water. Then take out
some of it in a great Wooden bowl or pail, and put a good number, (ten or
twelve) New-laid-egges into it, and as round ones as may be; For long ones will
deceive you in the swiming; and stale ones, being lighter then new, will emerge
out of the Liquor, the breadth of a six pence, when new ones will not a
groats-breadth. Therefore you take many, that you make a medium of their
several emergings; unless you be certain, that they which you use, are
immediately then laid and very round. The rule is, that a Groats ^ breadth (or
rather but a threepence) of the Egg-shel must Swim above the Liquor; which
then put again into your Copper to boil. It will be some while, before it
boil,(peradventure a good quarter of an hour) but all that while scum will
rise, which skim away still as it rises; and it should be clear scummed by
then it boileth: which as soon as it does, turn up an hour Glass, and let it
boil well a good hour. A good quarter before the hour is out, put to it a pound
of White-Ginger beaten exceedingly small and searsed (which w^ll sever all the
skins and course parts from the fine) which having boiled a quarter of an hour,
so to make up the whole hour of boiling, pour out the Liquor into wide open
Vats to cool. When it is quite cold, put a pottle of New-ale-barm into a Pipe
or Butt, standing endwise with his head out, and pour upon it a Pail-full of
your cool Liquor out of one of the Vats; which falling from high upon it with
sorce, will b^eak and dissipate the barm into atom^, and mix it with the
Liquor. Pour immediately another pail-ful to that, continuing to do so, till
all the Liquor be in. Which by this time and this course will be uniformly
mixed with the barm, and begin to work. Yet scoop and lade it well a while, to
make the mixtion more per^ect, and set the working well on foot. Then cover
your But-head with a sh^et only in Summer, but blankets in Winter; and let
your Liquor work about 24 hours or more. The measure of that is, till the barm
(which is raised to a great head) beginn^th a little to fall. Then presently
scum of the thick head of the barm, but take not all away so sc^upulously, but
that there may remain a little white froth upon the face of the Liquor. Which
scoop and lade strongly, mingling all to the bot^om, that this little remaining
barm may by this agitation be mixed a new with the whole. Then immediately Tun
this Liquor into two hogsheads that have served for Sp^nish-wine (be ^ure to
fill them q^ite full) and there let it work two or three days; that is to say,
till you see that all the seculent substance is wrought out, and that what
runs out, begins to be clear, though a little whitish or frothy on the
upperside of the stream that runs down along the outside of the hogshead. (If
there should be a little more then to fill t^o hogshead, put it in a Rundlet by
it self.) Then take some very strong firm Paper, and wet it on one side with
some of the barm ^h^t works out, and lay that side over the bung to cover it
close. The barm will make it stick fast to the hogshead. This covering will
serve for a month or two. Then stop it close with strong Cork fi^ed to the
hole, with a linen about it, to pres^ it ^ast in: But let a little vent with a
peg in it be made in hogshead, in some fit place above. This may be fit to
broach in five or six months; but three weeks or a month before you do so,
put into each h^gshead half an ounce of Cinnamon; and two ounces of Cloves
beaten into most subt^ile powder, (Sometimes he leaves out the Cloves) which
will give it a most pleasant flavor; and they (as the Ginger did) sink down to
the bottoms and never tro^ble the Liquor. If they b^ put in long before (much
more if they be boiled) they loose all their taste and Spirits entirely. This
will last very well half a year drawing. But if you stay broaching it a year,
and then draw it into bottles, it will keep admirable good three or four years,
growing to be much better, then when broached at six months end. It will be
purer, if you first boil the water by it self, then let it settle, 24 hours;
and pour the clear from the earthy sediment, which will be great, and dissolve
your honey in that. You may Atomatise it with Ambergreece or Musk, or both (if
you like them) by dissolving a very few Pastils in a Runlet of this Liquor,
when you draw it into little vessels, (as He uses to do after five or six
months) or with a few drops of the Extract of them. This Metheglin is a great
Balsom and strengthener of the Viscera; is excellent in colds and coughs and
consumptions. For which last they use to burn it (like wine) or rather only
heat it. Then dissolve the yolk of an Egg or two in a Pint of it, and some
fresh Butter, and drink it warm in the morning fasting. As it comes from the
Barrel or Bottle, it is used to be drunk a large draught (without any
alteration or admixtion, with a toste early in the morning (eating the toste)
when they intend to dine late. Consider of making Metheglin thus with purified
rain water (of the Aequinoxe) or Dew.

The handfuls of Herbs, are natural large handfuls (as much as you can take up
in your hand) not Apothecaries handfuls, which are much less. If a pottle of
Barm do not make it work enough to your mind, you may put in a little more.
Discretion and Experience must regulate that.

You may make small Meathe the same way, putting but half the proportion of
honey or less. But then after three weeks or a months bar-relling, you must
bottle it.

An Excellent way to make Metheg^in, called the Liquor of Life, with these
following Ingredients.
Take Bugloss, Borage, Hyssop, Organ, Sweet-majoram, Rosemary, French-cowslip,
Coltsfoot, Thyme, Burner, Self-heal, Sanicle a little, Betony, Blew-buttons,
Hart's-tongue, Meads-sweet, Liverwort, Coriander two ounces, Bistort, Saint
John's wort, Liquorish, Two ounces of Carraways, Two ounces of Yellow-saunders,
Balm, Bugle, Half a pound of Ginger, and one ounce of Cloves, Agrimony,
Tormentil-roots, Cumsrey, Fennel-root's, Clowns-all-heal, Maidenhair,
Wall-rew, Spleen-wort, Sweet-oak, Pauls-betony, Mouse^ear.

For two Hogsheads of Metheglin, you take two handfuls a piece of each herb,
Excepting Sanicle; of which you take but half a handful. You make it in all
things as the white Meathe of Mr. Pierce's is made, excepting as follows. For
in that you boil the herbs but a quarter of an hour, that the color may be
pale: But in this, where the deepness of the color is not regarded, you boil
them a good hour, that you may get all the virtue out of them. Next for the
strength of it; whereas in that, an Egg is to Emerge out of the Liquor but the
breadth of a three pence; in This it is to Emerge a l^rge Groats-breadth. Then
in this you take but h^lf a pound of Ginger, and one ounce of Cloves. Whereas
the white has one pound of Ginger, and two ounce^ of Cloves. To this you use
three quarts, or rather more of Ale-yest (fresh and new) and when all your
Liquor is in a high slender tall pipe with the narrowest circumf^rence that may
be (which makes it work better then a broad one, where the Spirits loose
themselves) you have the yest in a large Noggin with a handle or pail, and put
some of the Liquor to it, and make that work; then pour it from pretty high
unto the whole quantity in the pipe, and lade it strongly with that Noggin five
or six, or eight times, pouring it every time from high, and working it well
together, that so every Atome of the yest may be mingled with every Atome of
the Liquor. And this course (in this particular) you may also use in the white.
It is best not to broach this, till a year be over after the making it.

To make good M^theglin.
Take to every Gallon of Honey, three Gallons of water, and put them both
together, and set them over so soft a fire, that you may endure to melt and
break the honey with your hands. When the honey is all melted, put in an Egg,
and let it fall gently to the bottom, and if the Egg rise up to the top again
of the Liquor, then is it strong enough of the honey; but if it lie at the
bottom, you must put in more honey, stirring of it till it do rise. If your
honey be very good, it will bear half a Gallon of water more to a Gallon of
Honey. Then take Sweet-bryar, Rose-mary, Bays, Thyme, Marjoram, Savory, of
each a good handful, which must be tied up all together in a bundle This
Proportion of herbs will be sufficient for 12 Gallons of Metheglin; and
according to the quantity you make of Methegl^n, you must add of your herbs or
take away. When you have put these things together set it upon a quick fire,
and let it boil as fast as you can for half an hour, or better, skiming of it
very clean, which you must Clarify with two or three whites of Eggs. Then take
it off from the fire, and put it presently into some clean covers, and let it
stand till the next morning; then pour the clear from the bottom and tun it up;
putting in a little bag of such spice as you like, whereof Ginger must be the
most. After it has stood some three or four days, you may put in some two or
three spoonfuls of good-ale-yest; it will make it ready the sooner to drink, if
you let it work together, before you stop it up.

The older the honey is, the whiter colored the Metheglin will be.

To make white Metheglin of Sir John Fortescue.
Take twelve Gallons of water, one handful of each of these herbs, Eglantine,
Rosemary, Parsley, Strawberry-leaves, Wild-thyme, Balm, Liver-wort, Betony,
Scabious; when your water begins to boil, cast in your herbs, and let them boil
a quarter of an hour. Then strain it from the herbs. When it is almost cold,
then put in as much of the best honey, as will make it bear an Egg, to the
breadth of two pence; and stir it till all the honey be melted. Then boil it
well half an hour at the least, and put into it the whites of six Eggs beaten
to a froth to clarify it; and when it has drawn all the scum to the top,
strain it into wooden vessels. When it is almost cold, put barm to it, and
when it works well, Tun it into a well-seasoned vessel, where neither Ale nor
Beer has been, for marring the color; and when it has done working, take a
good quantity of Nutmegs, Mace, Cinnamon, Cloves and Ginger-bruised, and put it
into a boulter bag, and hang it in the barrel.

If you will have it taste much of the spice, let it boil 3 or 4 walms in it,
after you have put in the honey. But that will make it have a deep color.

A Receipt for Meathe.
To seven quarts of water, take two quarts of honey, and mix it well together;
then set it on the fire to boil, and take three or four Parsley-roots, and as
many Fennel-roots, and shave them clean, and slice them, and put them into the
Liquor, and boil altogether, and skim it very well all the while it is a
boiling; and when there will no more scum rise, then is it boiled enough: but
be careful that none of the scum do boil into it. Then take it off, and let it
cool till the next day. Then put it up in a close vessel, and put thereto half
a pint of new good barm, and a very few Cloves pounded and put in a
Linen Cloth, and tie it in the vessel, and stop it up close; and within a
fortnight, it will be ready to drink: but if it stay longer, it will be the
better.

My Lord Gorge his Meathe.
Take a sufficient quantity of Rainwater, and boil in it the tops of
Rose-mary, Eglantine, Betony, Strawberry-leaves, Wall-flowers, Borage and
Bugloss, of each one handful; one sprig of Bays; and two or three of Sage. Then
take it off the fire, and put a whole raw Egg into it, and pour so much honey
to it, till the Egg rise up to the top; then boil it again, skiming it very
well, and so let it cool. Then Tun it up, and put Barm to it, that it may
ferment well. Then stop it up, and hang in it such spices, as you like best. It
will not be right to drink under three or four months.

The Lady Vernon's White Metheglin.
Take three Gallons of water (rain water is best) boil in it broad Thyme,
Rose-mary, Peny-royal, of each three handfuls. Then put it into a stone Pan to
cool, and strain away the herbs; and when it is cold, put in one quart of
honey, and mix it very well; then put to it one Nutmeg, a little Cinnamon;
Cloves and Ginger; some Orange and Limon-peels. Then boil and scum it very
well, while any scum will rise. Then put in your spices, and try with a
New-laid-egg; and the stronger it is, the longer you may keep it; and if you
will drink it presently, put it up in bottles, and rub the Corks with yest,
that it may touch it, and it will be ready in three or four days to drink. And
if you make it in the spring put no spices, but Cloves and Cinnamon, and add
Violets, Cowslips, Marigolds, and Gillyflowers; and be sure to stop your vessel
close with Cork; and to this put no yest, for the Clove-gillyflowers will set
it to work.

Several sorts of Mead, Small and Strong.
1. Small. Take ten Gallons of water, and five quarts of honey, with a little
Rosemary, more Sweet-bryar, some Balm, Burnet, Cloves, less Ginger, Limon
Peel. Tun it with a little barm; let it remain a week in the barrel with a bag
of Elder-flowers; then bottle it.

2. Small. Take ten quarts of water, and one of honey, Balm a little; Minth,
Cloves, Limon-peel, Elder-flowers, a little Ginger; wrought with a little yest,
bottle it after a night working.

3. Strong. Take ten Gallons of water* thirteen quarts of honey, with Angelica,
Borrage and Bugloss, Rosemary, Balm and Sweetbryar; pour it into a barrel, upon
three spoonfuls of yest; hang in a bag Cloves, Elderflowers, and a little
Ginger.

4. Very Strong. Take ten Gallons of Water, and four of honey, with
sea-worm-wood, a little Sage, Rosemary; put it in a barrel, after three days
cooling. Put no yest to it. Stop it close, and bottle it after three or four
months.

5. Very Strong. To ten Gallons of water take four of honey. Clarify it with
flower; and put into it Angelica, Rosemary, Bayleaves, Balm. Barrel it without
yest. Hang in a bag Cloves, Elder-flowers, a lttle Ginger.

6. Very strong. Take ten Gallons of water, and four of Honey. Boil nothing in
it. Barrel it when cold, without yest. Hang in it a bag with Cloves,
Elder-flowers, a llittle Ginger and Limon peel; which throw away, when it has
done working, and stop it close. You may make also strong and small by putting
into it Orris-roots; or with Rose-mary, Betony, Eyebright and Wood Sorrel: or
adding to it the tops of Hypericon with the flowers of it; Sweet-bryar; Lilly
of the valley.

To make Mead.
Take three Gallons of water, a quart of Honey; if it be not strong enough, you
may add more. Boil it apace an hour, and scum it very clean. Then take it off,
and set it a working at such heat as you set Beer, with good yest. Then put it
in a Runlet, and at three days end, draw it out in stone bottles; into every
one put a piece of Limon-peel and two Cloves. It is only put into the Runlet,
whilst it works, to avoid the breaking of the Bottles.

Sir John Arundel's White Mead.
Take three Gallons of Honey, and twelve Gallons of water: mix the honey and
water very well together, till the honey is dissolved; so let it stand twelve
hours. Then put in a New-laid-egg; if the Liquor bears the Egg, that you see
the breadth of a groat upon the Egg dry, you may set it over the fire: if it
does not bear the Egg, then you must add a quart or three pints more to the
rest; and then set it over the fire, and let it boil gently, till you have
skimed it very clean, and clarified it, as you would do Suggar, with the whites
of three New-laid-eggs. When it is thus made clear from all scum, let it boil a
full hour or more, till the fourth part of it is wasted; then take it off the
fire; and let it stand till the next day. Then put in into a vessel. When it
has been in the barrel five or six days, make a white tossed, and dip it into
new yeast, ans put the tossed into the barrel, and let it work. When it has done
working, stop it up very close. This keep three quarters of a year. You may
drind in within half a year, if you please. You may add in the boiling, of
what herbs you like the taste, or what is Physical.

To make Metheglin.
Take eight Gallons of water, and set it over a clear fire in a Kettle; and
when it is warm, put into it sixteen pound of very good honey; stir it well
together, till it be all mixed; and when it boileth, take off the scum, and put
in two large Nutmegs cut into quarters, and so let it boil at least an hour.
Then take it off, and put into it own good handfuls of grinded Malt, and with a
white staff keep beating it together, till it be almost cold; then strain it
through a hair sieve into a tub, and put to it a wine pint of Ale-yest, and
stir it very well together; and when it is cold, you may, if you please, Tun it
up picsently in a vessel fit for it, or else let it stand, and work a day: And
when it has done working in your vessel, stop it up very close. It will be
three weeks or a month, before it will be ready to drink.

To make white Mead.
Take six Gallons of water, and put in six quarts of honey, stirring it till
the honey be thoroughly melted; then set it over the fire, and when it is ready
to boil, skim it very clean. Then put in a quarter of ounce of Mace, so much
Ginger, half an ounce of Nutmegs, Sweet-marjoram, Broad-thyme, and Sweet-bryar,
of altogether a handful; and boil them well therein; Then set it by, till it be
through cold, and then Barrel it up, and keep it till it be ripe.

To make a Mead good for the Liver and Lungs.
Take of the Roots of Coltsfoot, Fennel and Fearn each four Ounces. Of
Succory-roots, Sorrel-roots, Strawbery-roots, Bittersweet-roots, each two
Ounces, of Scabious-roots and Elecampane-roots, each an Ounce and a half.
Ground Ivy, Hore-hound, Oak of Jerusalem, Lung-wort, Liver-wort, Maiden hair,
Hart's-tongue of each two good-fulls. Licorish four Ounces. Jujubes, Raisins of
the Sun and Currents of each two Ounces; let the roots be sliced, and the herbs
be broken a little with your hands; and boil all these in twenty quarts of fair
running water, or, if you have it, in Rain water, with five Pints of good white
honey, until one third part be boiled away; then pour the Liquor though a jelly
bag often upon a little Coriander-seeds, and Cinnamon; and when it runs very
clear, put it into Bottles well stopped, and set it cool for your use, and
drink every morning a good draught of it, and at five in the afternoon.

To make white Metheglin.
Put to three Gallons of Spring Water, one of honey. First let it gently melt;
then boil for an hour, continually, skiming it; then put it into an earthen or
a wooden vessel, and when it is a little more then Blood-warm, set it with
Ale-yest, and so let it stand twelve hours. Then take off the yest, and bottle
it up. Put into it Limonpeel and Cloves, or what best pleases your raste of
Spice or Herbs. Eringo-roots put into it, when it is boiling, makes it much
better.

Note, That if you make Hydromel by fermentation in the hot Sun (which will
last about forty days, and requires the greater heat) you must take it
thence, before it be quite ended working; and stop it up very close, and set it
in a cold Cellar, and not pierce it in two months, at the soonest. It will be
very good this way, if you make it so strong, as to bear an Egg very boyant.
It is best made by taking all the Canicular days into your fermentation.

A very good Mead.
Put three parts of water to one of honey. When the Honey is dissolved, it is
to bear an Egg boyant. Boil it and skim it perfectly clear. You may boil in it
Pellitory of the wall, Agrimony, or what herds you please. To every ten Gallons
of water, take Ginger, Cinnamon, ana, one Ounce, Nutmegs half an Ounce. Divide
this quantity (sliced and bruised) into two parts. Boil the one in the Mead,
severing it from the Liquor, when it is boiled, by running through a strainer;
and hang the other parcel in the barrel by the bung in a bag with a bullet in
it. When it is cold, Tun it. And then you may work it with barm if you please;
but it is most commended, without.

To make white Metheglin.
Take the Honeycomb, that the Honey is run out from them, and lay them, in
water over night; next day strain them, and put the Liquor a boiling; Then take
the whites of two or three Eggs, and clarify the Liquor. When you have so
done, skim it clean. Then take a handful of Peny-royal; four handfuls of
Angelica; a handful of Rosemary; a handful of Borrage; a handful of Maidenhair,
a handful of Hartstongue; of Liverwort, of Watercresses, of Scurvy Grass, ana,
a handful; of the Roots of Marshmallows, Parsley, Fennel, ana, one Ounce. Let
all these boil together in the Liquor, the space of a quarter of an hour. Then
strain the Liquor from them, and let it cool, till it be Blood-warm. Put in so
much honey, until an Egg swim on it; and when your honey is melted, then put
in into the Barrel. When it is almost cold, put a little Ale^barm to it; And
when it has done working, put into your barrel a bag of Spice of Nutmegs,
Ginger, Cloves and Mace, and grains good store; and if you will put into a
Lawn-bag two grains of Ambergris, and two grains of Musk, and fasten it in
the mouth of your barrel, and so let it hang in the Liquor.

A most Excellent Metheglin.
Take one part of honey, to eight parts of Rain or River-water; let it boil
gently together, in a fit vessel, till a third part be wasted, skiming it very
well. The sign of being boiled enough is, when a New-laid-egg swims upon it.
Cleanse it afterward by letting it run through a clean Linen Cloth, and put
it into a wooden Runlet, where there has been wine in, and hang in it a bag
with Mustard-seeds by the bung, that so you may take it out, when you please.
This being done, put your Runlet into the hot Sun, especially during the
Dog Days, (which is the only time to prepare it) and your Metheglin will boil
like Must; after which boiling take out your Mustard-seeds, and put your vessel
well stopped into a Cellar. If you will have it the taste of wine, put to
thirty measures of Hydromel^ one measure of the juice of hops, and it will
begin to boil without any heat. Then fill up your vessel, and presently after
this ebullition you will have a very strong Metheglin.

To make white Metheglin of the Countoss of Dorset.
Take Rosemary, Thyme, Sweet-bryar, Penyroyal, Bays, Watercresses, Agrimony,
Marshmallow-leaves, Liver-wort, Maidenhair, Betony, Eyebright, Scabious, the
bark of the Ash-tree, Eringo-roots, Green-wild-Angelica, Ribwort, Sanicle,
Roman-worm-wood, Tamarisk, Mother-thyme, Sassafras, Philipendula, of each of
these herbs a like proportion; or of as many of them as you please to put in.
But you must put in all but four handfuls of herbs, which you must steep one
night, and one day, in a little bowl of water, being close covered; the next
day take another quantity of fresh water, and boil the same herbs in it, till
the color be very high; then take another quantity of water, and boil the same
herbs in it, until they look green; and so let it boil three or four times in
several waters, as long as the Liquor looks any thing green. Then let it
stand with these herbs in it a day and night. Remember the last water you boil
it in to this proportion of herbs, must be ^ twelve gallons of water ^ and when
it has stood a day and a night, with these herbs in it, after the last
boiling, then strain the Liquor from the herbs, and put as much of the finest
and best honey into the Liquor, as will make it bear an Egg. You must work and
labor the honey and liquor together one whole day, until the honey be
consumed. Then let it stand a whole night and then let it be well labored
again, and let it stand again a clearing, and so boil it again a quarter of an
hour, with the whites of six New laid-eggs with the shells, the yolks being
taken out; so scum it very clean, and let it stand a day a cooling. Then put it
into a barrel, and take Cloves, Mace, Cinnamon, and Nutmegs, as much as will
please your taste, and beat them altogether; put them into a linen bag, and
hang it with a thread in the barrel. Take heed you put not too much spice in; a
little will serve. Take the whites of two or three New-laid-eggs, a spoonful of
barm, and a spoonful of Wheat Flour, and beat them altogether, and put it into
your Liquer into the barrel, and let it work, before you stop it. Then
afterward stop it well, and close it well with clay and Salt tempered
together, and let it be set in a close place; and when it has been settled
some six weeks, draw it into bottles, and stop it very close, and drink it not
a month after: but it will keep well half a year, and more.

Another to make white Metheglin.
Take ten Gallons of water; than take six handfuls of Sweet-bryar; as much of
Sweet-marjoram; and as much of Muscovy. Three handfuls of the best Broad-thyme.
Boil these together half an hour; then strain them. Then take two Gallons of
English-honey, and dissolve it in this hot Liquor, and brew it well together;
then set it over the fire to boil again, and skim it very clean; then take the
whites of thirty Eggs well beaten, and put them into the Liquor, and let it boil
an hour; then strain it through a jelly bag, and let it stand 24 hours cooling:
then put it up in a vessel. Then take six Nutmegs, six fair Races of Ginger, a
quarter of an Ounce of Cloves, half an Ounce of Cinnamon; bruise all these
together, and put them into a linnen-bag, with a little Pebble-stone to make it
sink. Then hang it in the vessel. Yoy may add to it, if you please, two grains
of Ambergris, and one grain of Musk. Stop the vessel with a Cork, but not
too close, for six days; then taste it: and if it taste enough of the Spice,
then take out the bag; if not, let the bag hang in it, and stop it very close,
and meddle with it no more. It will be ready to drink in nine or ten weeks.

A Receipt to make good Mead.
Take as many Gallons of water, as you intend to make of Mead; and to every
Gallon put a quart of honey, and let it boil till it bear an Egg. To every
Gallon you allow the white of an Egg, which white you must remove and break
with your hands, and put into the Kettle, before you put it over the fire.
Before it boileth, there will arise a skum, which must be taken off very clean,
as it rises. Put to every Gallon two Nutmegs sliced, and when it has boiled
enough, take it off, and set it a cooling in clean wort-vessels: And when it is
as cold as wort, put in a little barm, and work it like Beer, and when it has
done working, stop it up, and let it stand two months.

Another to make Mead.
To every quart of honey allow six Winequarts of water; half an Ounce of
Nutmegs, and the Peel of a Limon, and the meat of two or three, as you make the
quantity. Boil these together, till the scum rise no more; It must stand till
it be quite cold, and when you Tun it, you squeese into it the juice of some
Limons, and this will make it ripen quickly. It will be ready in less then a
month.

Another Receipt.
Take twelve Gallons of water, a handful of Muscovy (which is an herb, that
smells like Musk) a handful of Sweet-Marjoram, and as much of Sweet-bryar.
Boil all these in the water, till all the streng^h be out. Then take it off,
and strain it out, and being almost cold, sweeten it with honey very strong,
more then to bear an Egg, (the meaning of this is, that when there is honey
enough to bear an Egg, which will be done by one part of honey to three or four
quarts of water: then you add to it a pretty deal of honey more, at least or of
what you did put in at first to make it bear an Egg: then it is to be boiled
and scummed: when it is thus strong, you may keep it four years before you
drink it. But at the end of two years you may draw it out into bottles) just
above it, else it will not keep very long: for the more honey the better. Then
set it over the fire till it bo^ls, and scum it very clean. Then take it from
the fire, and let it stand, till it be cold: then put it into your vessel. Take
Mace, Cloves, Nutmegs, Ginger, of each a quarter of an Ounce: beat them small,
and hang them in your vessel (being stopped close) in a little bag.

Note, when any Mead or Metheglin grows hard or sower with keeping too long,
dissolve in it a good quantity of fresh honey, to make it pleasantly Sweet;
(but boil it no more, after it has once fermented, as it did at the first
Tunning) and which that it will ferment again, and become very good and
pleasant and quick.

To made Metheglin.
Take of Rosemary three handfuls, of Wintersavory a Peck by measure, Organ and
Thyme, as much, White-wort two handfuls, Blood-wort half a peck, Hyssop two
handfuls, Mary-golds, Borage, Fennil, of each two handfuls; Straw-berries and
Violet-leaves, of each one handful; Of Hart's-tongue, Liverwort a peck; Ribwort
half a peck, of Eglantine with the Roots, a good quantity; Wormwood as much as
you can gripe in two hands; and of Sorrel, Mead-sutt, Bettony with the Roots,
Blew-bottles with the Roots, the like quantity; of Eyebright two handfuls,
Wood-bind one handful. Take all these herbs, and order them so, as that the hot
herbs may be mastered with the cool. Then take the small herbs, and put them
into the Furnace, and lay the long herbs upon them. Then take a weight or stone
of Lead, having a Ring, whereunto fasten a stick to keep down the Herbs into
the furnace; then boil your water and herbs three or four hours, and as the
water does boil away, add more. Then take the water out of the Furnace
seething hot, and strain it through a Range-sieve; then put in the honey, and
Mash it well together: then take your Sweet-wort, and strain it through a
Range. Then try it with a New-laid-egg. It must be so strong as to bear an Egg
the breadth of a groat above the Liquor: and if it does not, then put in more
honey, till it will bear the Egg. Then take the Liquor, and boil it again; and
as soon as it does boil, skim the froth very clean from it: Then set it a
cooling, and when it is cold, then put it into a Kive, and pur barm thereto,
and let it work the Space of a Week; Then Tun it up: But be careful when it is
Tunned, that the vessels be not stopped up, till it has done hissing.

Another sort of Metheglin.
Take to one part of honey, three parts of water: and put them into clean
vessels, mixing them very well together, and breaking the honey with stripped
arms, till it be well dissolved. Then pour our your Liquor into a large Kettle,
and let it boil for two hours and a half, over a good fire, skiming it all the
while very carefully as long as any scum rises. When it is boiled enough, pour
out your Liquor into clean vessels, and set it to cool for 24 hours. Afterward
put it into some Runle^s, and cover the bung with a piece of Lead: have a care
to fill it up always with the same boiled Liquor for three or four months and
during the time of working. This Mead the older it is, the better it is. But
if your will have your Mead red, then take twenty pound of black Currants, and
put them into a vessel, and pour your Liquor on them. Of this honey-Liquor you
cannot drink till after nine months, or a year.

My Lord Herbert's Mead.
Take ten Gallons of water; and to every Gallon of water a quart of honey, a
handful and a half of Rose-mary, one ounce of Mace, one ounce and a half of
Nutmegs, as much Cinnamon, half an Ounce of Cloves, a Quarter of a pound of
Ginger scraped and cut in pieces. Put all these into the water, and let it boil
half an hour, then take if off the fire, and let it stand, till you may see
your shadow in it. Then put in the honey, and set it upon the fire again. Then
take the shells and whites of a dozen of Eggs, and beat them both very well
together: and when it is ready to boil up, put in your Eggs, and stir it; then
skim it clean, and take it off the fi^e, and put it into vessels to cool, as
you do wort. When it is cold, set it together with some barm, as you do Beer.
When it is put together leave the settlings behind in the bottom; as soon as it
is white over, tun it up in a vessel, and when it has done working, stop it up
as you do Beer. When it is three weeks old, it will be fit to bottle or drink.

Another white Mead.
Take three Pound of White-honey, or the best Hampshire-honey, and dissolve it
in a Gallon of water, and then boil it; and when it begins first to boil,
put into it half a quarter of an Ounce of Ginger a little bruised; and a very
little Cloves and Mace bruised, and a small quantity of Agrimony. Let all this
boil together a full hour, and keep it constantly skimmed, as long as any Scum
will rise upon it. Then Strain it forth into some clean Kiver or other vessel,
and let stand a cooling; and when it is cold, let it stand, till it be all
creamed over with a blackish cream, and that it make a kind of hissing noise;
then put it up into your vessel, and in two or three months time it will be fit
to drink.

Look how much you intend to make, the same quantities must be allowed to every
Gallon of water.

To make Metheglin.
Tike fair water, and the best honey; beat them well together, but not in a
wooden vessel, for wood drinks up the honey, put it together in a Kettle,
and try it with a New-laid-egg, which will swim at top, if it be very strong;
but if it bob up, and sink again, it will be too weak. Boil it an hour, and put
into it a bundle of herbs, what sort you like best; and a little bag of Spice,
Nutmegs, Ginger, Cloves, Mace and Cinnamon; and skim it well all the while it
boileth: when it has boiled an hour, take it off, and put it into earthen
Pans, and so let it stand till next day. Then pour off all the clear into a
good vessel, that has had Sack in it, or White Wind. Hang the bag of Spice in
it, and so let it stand very close stopped and well filled for a month, or
longer. Then if you desire to drink it quickly, you may bottle it up. If it be
strong of the honey, you may keep it a year or two. If weak, drink it in two or
three months. One quart of honey, will make one Gallon of water very strong. A
sprig or two of Rose-mary, Thyme and Sweet-marjoram, are the Herbs that should
go into it.

To make small Metheglin.
Take to every quart of White-honey, six quarts of fair-water. Let it boil,
until a third part be boiled away; skiming it, as it rises: then put into it a
small quantity of Ginger largely sliced; then put it out into earthen Pans,
till it be Lukewarm, and so put it up into an earthen stand, with a tap in it.
Then put to it about half a Porenger-ful of the best Ale-yest, so beat it well
together; Then cover it with a cloth, and it will be twelve hours before it
work; and afterward let it stand two days, and then draw it out into stone
bottles, and it will be ready to drink in five or six days after. This
proportion of yest (which is about six good spoonfuls) is enough for three or
four Gallons of Liquor. The yest must be of good Ale, and very now. You may
mingle the yest first with a little of the Luke^warm-Liquor; then beat it, till
it be well incorporated, and begins to work; Then add a little more Liquor to
it, and beat that. Continue so adding the Liquor by little and little, till a
good deal of it be Incorporated with the yest; then put that to all the rest of
the quantity, and beat it altogether very well; then cover it close, and keep
it warm for two or three days. Before you bottle it, scum away all the barm and
Ginger (whereof a spoonful) or two is enough for three or four Gallons) then
bottle up the clear, leaving the dregs. If you will, you may Tun it into a
barrel, (if you make a greater quantity) when the barm is well Incorporated
with the Liquor, in the same manner as you do Beer or Ale, and so let it work
in the Barrel as long as it will; then stop it up close for a few days more,
that so it may clear it self well, and separate and precipitate the dregs. Then
draw the clear into bottles. This will make it less windy, but also a little
less quick, though more wholesome. You may also boil a little handful of tops
of Rosemary in the Liquor, which gives it a fine taste: but all other^herbs,
and particularly Sweet-marjoram and Thyme, give it a Physical taste. A little
Limon-peel gives it a very fine taste. If you Tun it in a barrel, to work
there, you may hang the Ginger and Limon^peel in it in a bag, till you bottle
it, or till it have done working. Then you may put two or three stoned and
sliced Raisins, and a lump of fine Sugar into every bottle to make it quick.

To make Metheglin.
Take five Gallons of water, and one Gallon of good White-honey; set it on the
fire together, and boil it very well, and skim it very clean; Then take it off
the fire, and set it by. Take six ounces of good Ginger, and two ounces of
Cinnamon, one Ounce of Nutmegs; bruise all these grossly, and put them into your
hot Liquor, and cover it close, and so let it stand, till it be cold. Then put
as much Ale-barm to it, as will make it work; then keep it in a warm place, as
you do Ale; and when it has wrought well, Tun it up, as yo^ do Ale or B^er:
and when it is a week old, drink of it at your pleasure.

An Excellent Metheglin.
Take Spring Water, and boil it with Rose-mary, Sage, Sweet-Marjoram, Balm and
Saffafras, until it has boiled three or four hours: The quantity of the Herbs
is a handful of them all, of each a like proportion, to a Gallon of water. And
when it is boiled, set it to cool and to settle until the next day: Then strain
your water, and mix it with honey, until it will bear an Egg the breadth of a
Groat. Then set it over the fire to boil. Take the whites of twenty or thirty
Eggs, and beat them mightily, and when it boileth, pour them in at twice; stir
it well together, and then let it stand, until it boileth a pace before you
scum it, and then scum it well. Then take it off the fire, and pour it in
earthen things to cool: and when it is cold, put to it five or six spoonfuls of
the best yest of Ale you can get: stir it together, and then every day scum it
with a bundle of Feathers till it has done working: Then Tun it up in a
Sack-cask and to every six gallons of Metheglin put one pint of Aqua-vitae, or
a quart of Sack; and a quarter of a pound of Ginger sliced, with the Pills of
two or three Limons and Orenges in a bag to hang in it.

The Whites of Eggs above named, is a fit proportion for 10 or 12 Gallons of
the Liquor.

To make white M^athe.
Take six Gallons of water, and put in six quarts of Honey, stirring it till
the honey be thoroughly melted; then set it over the fire, and when it is ready
to boil, skim it clean; then put in a quarter of an Ounce of Mace; so much
Ginger; half an Ounce of Nutmegs; Sweet-marjoram, Broad-thyme* and Sweet-Bryar,
of all together a handful, and boil them well therein. Then set it by, till it
be thoroughly cold, and barrel it up, and keep it till it be ripe.

Another to make Meathe.
To every Gallon of water, take a quart of Honey, to every five Gallons, a
handful of of Sweet-marjoram, half a handful of Sliced-ginger; boil all these
moderately three quarters of an hour; then let it stand and cool: and being
Lukewarm, put to every five Gallons, about three quarts of Yest, and let it
work a night and a day. Then take off the Yest, and strain it into a Runlet;
and when it has done working: then stop it up, and so let it remain a month:
then drawing out into bottles, put into every bottle two or three stoned
Raisins, and a lump of Loaf-sugar. It may be drunk in two months.

Another very good white Mead.
Take to every Gallon of water a quart of Honey: boil in it a little Rose-mary*
and Sweet-marjoram: but a large quantity of Sweet-bryar-leaves, and a
reasonable proportion of Ginger: boil these in the Liquor, when it is skimmed:
and work it in due time with a little barm. Then tun it in a vessel; and draw
it into bottles, after it is sufficiently settled. Whites of Eggs with the
shells beaten together, do clarify Mead best. If you will have your Mead
cooling, use Violet and Straw-berry-leaves, Agrimony, Eglantine and the like:
adding Borage and Bugloss, and a little Rose-mary and Sweet-Marjoram to give it
Vigor.

Tartar makes it work well.

To make white Metheglin.
Take to three Gallons of Spring Water, one of Honey; first let it gently melt,
then boil for an hour, continually skiming it; then put it into an earthen or
wooden vessel, and when it is little more then Blood-warm, set it with
Ale-yest, and so let it stand twelve hours; then take off the Yest, and Bot^le
it. Put in it Limon-peel and Cloves, or what best pleases your taste of Herbs
or Spices. Eringo-roots put into it, when it is a boiling, makes it much
better. So do Clove-gilly, flowers* a quantity of which make the Mead look
like Claret Wine. I observe that Mead requires some strong Herbs to make it
quick and smart upon the Palate; as Rose-mary, Bay Leaves, Sage, Thyme,
Marjoram, Winter-savory, and such like, which would be too strong and bitter in
Ale or Beer.

To make white Mead.
Take Rose-mary, Thyme, Sweet-bryar, Peny-royal, and Bays, Watercresses,
Agrimony, Marshmallows, leaves and flowers: Liver-wort, Wood-betony,
Eyebright, Scabious, of each a like quantity; of the bark of Ash-tree, of
Eringo-roots^green, of each a proportion to the herbs; of wild Angelica,
Ribwort, Sanicle, Roman-worm-wood, of each a proportion, which is, to every
handful of the Herbs abovenamed, a sixteenth part of a handful of these
latter; steep them a night and a day, in a wooden boul of water covered; the
next day boil them very well in another water, till the color be very high;
Then take another quantity of water, and boil the herbs in it, till it look
green, and so let it boil three or four times, or as long as the liquor looks
any thing green; then let it stand with these herbs in it a day and a night.

To every Gallon of this water, put a quart of pure clear honey, the Liquor
being first strained from the herbs. Your Liquor if it be strong enough will
bear an Egg, the breadth of a three pence above water. When you have put the
honey into the Liquor, you must work and Labor it together a whole day, until
the honey be consumed. Then let it stand a whole night again a clearing. Then
put it into a kettle, and let it boil a quarter of an hour, with the whites and
shells of six Eggs; Then strain it clean, and so let it stand a cooling. Then
put it into a barrel, and take Cloves, Mace, Cinnamon, Nutmegs, and beat them
together: put them into a linen bag, hand it with a thread into the barrel. If
you would have it work, that you may drink of it presently, take the whites of
two or three Eggs, a spoonful of barm, a spoonful of wheat flour; beat all
these together: Let it work, before you stop it up. Then afterward stop it
well with clay and salt tempered together, to keep it moist.

To make Metheglin.
If your honey be tried, take six Gallons of Milk-warm-water, to one of honey,
and stir it well together ever and anon, and so let it stand for a day and
night, or half a day may serve; then boil it with a gentle fire, for the space
of half an hour or thereabouts, and skim it, still as the skum arises. After
it is scummed once or twice, you may put in your herbs, and spice grossly
beaten, one half loose; the other in a bag, which afterward may be fastened
with a string to the tap-hole, as Pepper, Cloves, Mace, Ginger and the like;
when it is thus boiled, let it stand in the vessel until it be cooled; then Tun
it up into your barrel, and let it work two or three days, or more before you
stop the bung-hole; but in putting up the boiled liquor into the barrel,
reserve the thick grounds back, which will be settled in the pan or kettle.

If you would have it to drink within two or three months, let it be no
stronger then to bear an Egg to the top of the water. If you would have it keep
six months, or longer, before you drink it, let it bear up the Egg the breadth
of two pence above the water. This is a surer way to proportion your honey then
by measure. And the time of the trial of the strength is, when you incorporate
the honey and water together, before the boiling of it.

Another sort of Mead.
Take thirty six Gallons of fountain water (first boiled, etc.) and dissolve
twelve Gallons of Honey in it. Keep them boiling an hour and a half after they
begin to boil, skimming well all the while. It will be an hour upon the fire
before it boil: When it is clear and enough boiled, pour it out into wooden
vessels to cool. When you are ready to Tun it, have four Gallons of
Black-currants, bruise them in a stone mortar, that they may the more easily
part with their juice to the Liquor. Put them and their juice into the barrel,
and pour the cool Liquor upon them, so as the vessel be quite full. Cover the
bung with a plate of lead lying loose on, that the working of the Liquor may
lift it up, as it needs to cast out the filth. And still as it works over,
fill it up with fresh Liquor, made in the same proportion of honey and water. A
month after it works no longer, stop up the bung very close.

To make very good Metheglin.
Take of all sorts of herbs, that you think are good and wholesome, as Balm,
Minth, Fennel, Rose-mary, Angelica, Wild-thyme, Hyssop, Agrimony, Burnet, and
such other as you may like; as also some field herbs; But you must not put in
too many, especially Rose-mary or any strong herb. Less then half a handful
will serve of every sort. Boil your herbs, and strain them out, and let the
Liquor stand till the morrow, and settle; Then take of the clearest of the
Liquor two Gallons and a half to one Gallon of Honey; and in that proportion
take as much of them as you will make, and let it boil an hour, and in the
boiling scum it very clean. Then set it a cooling as you do Beer; and when it
is cold, take some very good Ale-barm, and put it into the bottom of the Tub,
you mean the Metheglin shall work in, which pour into the Tub by little and
little, as they do Beer, keeping back the thick settling, which lies in the
bottom of the vessels, wherein it is cooled. And when all is put together,
cover it with a cloth, and let it work very near three days. And when you mean
to put it up, scum off all the barm clean, and put it up into your Barrel or
Firkin, which you must not stop very close in four or five days, but let it
have a little vent, for it will work; and when it is close stopped, you must
look to it very often, and have a peg in the top, to give it vent, when you
hear it make a noise (as it will do) or else it will break the barrel. You may
also, if you please, make a bag, and put in good store of sliced Ginger, and
some Cloves and Cinnamon, and boil it in, or put it into the barrel and never
boil it. Both ways are good.

If you will make small Metheglin, you may put fivse or six Gallons of water to
one of honey. Put in a little Cinnamon and Cloves and boil it well. And when it
is cold, put it up in bottles very close stopped, and the stopples well tied
on. This will not keep above five or six weeks, but it is very fine drink.

Make your Metheglin as soon as ever you take your Bees; for if you wash your
combs in the water you boil your herbs in, when it is cold, it will sweeten
much. But you must afterward strain it through a cloth, or else there will be
much wax.

To make Mead.
If you will have it to keep a year or two, take six parts of water, and one of
honey; But if you will have it to keep longer, take but four parts of water to
one of honey. Dissolve the honey very well in the water, then boil it gently,
skimming it all the while as the scum rises, till no more scum rises. Then
pour it out of the Copper into a fit vessel or vessels to cool. Then Tun it up
in a strong and sweet cask, and let it stand in some place, where there is some
little warmth; (It will do as well without warmth, but be longer growing ripe)
This will make it work. At first a course foul matter will work over; to which
purpose it must be kept always full with fresh Liquor of the same, as it
works over. When it begins to work more gently, and that which rises at the
top, is no more foul, but is a white froth; then fill and stop it up close, and
set it in a cool cellar, where it is to stand continually.

After half a year or a year, you may draw it off from the Lees into a clean
vessel, or let it remain untouched. It is not fit to be drunk for it is
perfection till the sweetness be quite worn off, yet not to be sower, but
vinous. You may drink it at meals instead of wine, and is wholsomer and better
then wine.

To small Mead, that is to be drunk presently, you may put a little Ginger to
give it life, and work it with a little barm. If the Me^th work not at all, it
will nevertheless be good, and peradventure better then that which works; but
it will be longer first, and the dregs will fall down to the bottom, though it
work not.

Small Mead of eighth or nine parts of water to one of ho^ey, will be very
good, though it never work, but be barrell'd up as soon as it is cold, and
stopped close: and after two or three months drunk from the barrel without
botteling. This is good for Meals.

To make white Mead.
Take to every three Gallons of water, one Gallon of honey and set the water
over the fire, and let the honey melt, before the water be too hot; then put in
a New-laid-eggs, and feel with your hand; if it comes half way the water, it is
strong enough; Then put into it these Herbs; Thyme, Sweet-marjoram,
Winter-favoury, Sweet-bryar, and Bay Leaves, in all a good great handful; which
a proportion for ten Gallons; Then with a quick-fire boil it very fast half an
hour, and no longer; and then take it from the fire, and let it cool in two or
three wooden vessels; and let it stand without stirring twenty four hours.
Then softly drain it out, leaving all the dregs behind. Put the clear into your
vessel; and if you l^ke any spice, take Ginger, Nutmeg, Cinnamon, Mace and
Cloves, and bruise them a little, and put them in a bag, and let them hang in
your vessel. Before you put your Mead into the vessel, try if it will bear an
Egg as broad as a penny; if it do, then it is very well; and if it be made with
the best White-honey, it usually is just so. But if it should prove too strong,
that it bears the Egg broader; then boil a little more honey and water very
small, and put to it, when it is cold: and then put it into the vessel. It is
best to be made at Michaelmas, and not drunk of till Lent.

To make small white Mead.
Take of the best white-honey six quarts; of Spring Water sixteen Gallons; set
it on a gentle fire at first, tell it is melted, and clean skimmed; then make
it boil a pace, until the third part be consumed. Then take it from the fire,
and put it in a cooler, and when it is cold, Tun it up, and let it stand eight
months, before you drink it. When you take it from the fire, slice in three
Orris-roots, and let it remain in the Liquor, when you Tun it up.

A Receipt to make Metheglin.
Take four Gallons of water, two quarts of Honey, two ounces of Ginger, one
ounce of Nutmegs, a good handful of Rose-mary tops, and as much of Bay Leaves,
two ounces of dried Orange-peel. Boil all these till it be so strong as will
bear an Egg, and not sink; when it is milk-warm, work it up with barm, during
twenty four hours, and then barrel it up. And after three months you may bottle
it up at your pleasure.

As you desire a greater quantity of the drink, you must augment the
ingredients, according to the proportions above recited.

To make Metheglin.
Take four Gallons of water and one of Honey; boil and skim it: then put into
it, Liver-wort, Hart's-tongue, Wild-carro^, and Yarrow, a little Rose-mary and
Bays, one Parsly-root, and a Fennel-root; let them boil an hour altogether. You
may, if you please, hang a little bag of spice in it. When it is cold, put a
little barm to it, and let it work like Beer. The roots must be scraped, and
the Pith taken out.

Mead from the Muscovian Ambassadour's Steward.
Take three times as much water as honey; then let the tubs, that the honey
must be wrought in, be cleansed very clean with scalding water, so that it may
not prove sour; also when you mix them together, take half-warm-water, and
half cold, and squeese them well together; Afterward when you think the honey
is well melted, then let it run through a sieve; and see your kettle of Copper
or Iron (but Copper is better then Iron) be very clean; then put in your spice,
as, Nutmegs, Ginger, Cloves, Cardamome, Aniseeds, Orange peel; put these in
according to the quantity you make, and let them all be bruised, except the
Orange ^peel, which leave whole. The Mead must boil an hour by the Clock;
after put it into Tubs to cool, and when it is cold, take three or four slices
of White-bread, tossed them very hard, and spread very good yest on both sides of
the tosts; then put them into the Tubs. If it be warm weather, let the Tubs be
uncovered; but if it be cold, cover them. This being done, you will find it
worked enough by the black that comes up by the sides of the Tubs; then take a
sieve and take off the yest and bread. Afterward draw it off at a tap in the
Tub into the cask you intend to keep it in; then take a quantity of spice as
before, well-bruised, and put it into a bag, and make it fast at the bung, with
a string, and if it begins to work, after it is in the cask, be sure to give it
vent, or else you w^ll loose all.

To make Mead.
To every quart of honey put four quarts of Spring Water; temper the honey in
the water, being a little warmed; then put it on the fire again, with Fennel,
Rose-mary, Thyme, Agrimony, Parsley or the like. Let them boil half an hour,
and upwards; and as it boileth, scum the froth; Then take it off, and strain
it, and let it cool as you do your wort. Then put a little barm into it, then
take off the froath again, and stir it well together. Then take two quarts of
Ale, boiled with Cloves, Mace, Cinnamon, Ginger and Liquorice; and put it to
the Mead and Tun it up.

A Receipt to make white Mead.
Take Rose-mary, Thyme, Sweet-bryar, Peny-royal, Bays, Watercresses, Agrimony,
Marsh-mallow-leaves and flowers, Liver-wort, Maiden-^air, Betony, Eye^bright,
Scabious, the bark of an Ash-tree, young Eringo-roots, Wild-Angelica, Ribwort,
Sinacle, Roman-worm-wood, Tamarisk, Mother-thyme, Saxafrage, Philipe^dula, of
each of these herbs a like proportion; or of as many as you please, to put in.
You must put in all but four handfuls of herbs, which you must steep a night
and a day, in a little bowl of water, being close covered. The next day take
another fresh quantity of water, and boil the same herbs in it till the color
be very high; then take another quantity of water, and boil the same herbs in
it, until it look green; and so let them boil three or four times in several
waters, as long as the Liquor looks any thing green. Then let it stand with
these herbs in it a day and a night. Remember the last water, you boil it in,
to this proportion of herbs, must be eighteen Gallons. And when it has stood a
day and a night with these herbs in it after the last boiling, then strain the
Liquor from the herbs; and put as much of the finest and best honey into the
Liquor, as will bear an Egg; you must work the honey and liquor together a
whole day, until the honey be consumed; then let it stand one whole night; then
let it be well labored again, and set it a clearing; and so boil it again with
the whites of six New-laid-eggs with the shells; skim it very clean; and let it
stand a day a cooling; then put it into a barrel, and take Cloves, Mace,
Cinnamon and Nutmegs as much as will please your taste, and beat them all
together, and put them in a Linen bag, and hang it with a thread into the
barrel. Then take the whites of two or three New-laid-eggs, a spoonful of barm,
a spoonful of Wheat Flour, and beat them all together, and put it into your
Liquor in the barrel, and let it work before you stop it; then afterward stop
it well, and set it in a cold place, and when it has been settled some six
weeks: draw it into bottles, and stop it very close, and drink not of it in a
month after.

To make Metheglin.
Take eight Gallons of water, set it over a clear fire in a Kettle; and when it
is warm, put to it sixteen pounds of very good honey, and stir it well
together; take off the scum, and put two large Nu^megs cut in quarters, and so
let it boil at least an hour; Then take it off the fire, and put to it two good
handfulls of grinded Malt, and with a white staff keep bea^ing it together till
it be almost cold; then strain it through a hair-sieve into a Tub, and put to
it a wine-pint of Ale-yest, and stir it very well together; and when it is
cold, you may if you please, Tun it up presently into a vessel fit for it, or
else let it stand, and work a day, and when it has done working in your
vessel, stop it up very close. It will be three weeks or a month before it be
ready to drink.

To make Honey drink.
To two quarts of water take one pound of Honey. When it boileth, skim it clean
as long as any scum arises; boil it a pretty while; then take it off the fire,
and put it in an earthen pot, and let it stand till the next day; then put it
into clean bottles, that are th^oughly dry, rinsing first every bottle with a
little of the liquor; Fill them not too full, and put into every bottle four or
five Cloves, and four or five slices of Ginger: and stop it very close, and set
it in Sand; and within ten or twelve days it will be ready to drink.

Some, when they take their Bees, put the honey-combs into fair-water, and make
it so strong of the honey that it will bear an Egg* and then boil it with some
Spice, and put it into a barrel: but I think it not so good, as that which is
made of pure honey.

The Earl of Denbigh's Metheglin.
Take twenty Gallons of Spring Water; boil it a quarter of an hour, and let it
stand, until it b^ (...) most cold; then beat in so much honey, as will make it
so strong as to bear an Egg, so that on the Top, you may see the breadth of a
hasel-nut swimming above; The next day boil it up with six small handfuls of
Rosemary; a pound and half of Ginger, being scraped and bruised; then take the
whites of twenty Eggs shells and all; bear them very well, and put them in to
clarify it; skim it very clean, then take it off the fire and strain it: But
put the Rose-mary and Ginger in again: then let it remain till it be all most
cold: then Tun it up, and take some New-ale-yest; the whites of two Eggs, a
spoonful of flower, and beat them well together, and put them into the barrel;
when it has wrought very well, stop it very close for three weeks or a months:
then bottle it, and a week after you may drink it.

To make Mead.
Take to every Gallon of water, a quart of honey, and set it over a clear fire,
and when it is ready to boil, skim it very clear. Then take two handfulls of
Sweet-marjoram, as much Rose-mary, and as much Baulm: and two handful of
Fennel-roots, as much of Parsley-roots, and as many Esparages-roots: slice them
in the middle, and take out the pith, wash and scrape them very ^lean, and put
them with your herbs into your Liquor. Then take two Ounces of Ginger, one
Ounce of Nutmegs, half an Ounce of Mace: bruise them and put them in: and let
it boil till it be so strong that it will bear an Egg: then let it cool: and
being cold, put in 3 or 4 spoon fulls of New-ale-yest: and so skim it well, and
put it into a Runlet, and it will work like Ale: and having done working, stop
it up close, as you do New-^eer: and lay salt upon it.

To make Metheglin.
Take four Gallons of running water, and boil it a quarter of an hour, and put
it in an earthen vessel, and let it stand all night. The next day take only the
water, and leave the settling at the bottom: so put the honey in a thin bag,
and work it in the water, till all the honey is dissolved. Take to four Gallons
of water, one Gallon of Honey: Then put in an Egg, if it be strong enough of
the honey, the Egg will part of it appear on the top of the liquor: if it do
not, put more honey to it, till it do. Then take out the Egg, and let the
Liquor stand till next morning. Then take two Ounces of Ginger, and slice it
and pare it: Some Rose-mary washed and stripped from the stalk: dry it very
well. The next day put the Rose-mary and Ginger into the drink, and so set it
on the fire: when it is all most ready to boil, take the whites of three Eggs
well beaten with the shells, and put all into the Liquor: and stir it about,
and skim it well till it be clear. Be sure you skim not off the Rose-mary and
Ginger: then take it off the fire, and let it run through a hair sieve: and
when you have strained it, pick out the Rose-mary and Ginger out of the
strainer, and put it into the drink, and throw away the Eggshells, and so let
it stand all night. The next day Tun it up in a barrel: Be sure the barrel be
not too big: then take a little flower and a little bran, and the white of an
Egg, and bear them well together, and put them into the barrel on the top of
the Metheglin, after it is runned up, and so let it stand till it has done
working; then stop it up as close as is possible: and so let it stand six or
seven weeks: then draw it out and bottle it. You must tie down the Corks, and
set the bottles in sand five or six weeks, and then drink it.

Another Mead.
Take twenty Gallons of fair Spring Water. Boil it a quarter of an hour, then
let it stand till the next day. Then beat into it so much honey, as will make
it so strong as to bear an Egg the breadth of a two pence above the water. The
next day boil it up with six small handfulls of Rosemary, a pound and a half of
Ginger, (being scraped and bruised) and the whites of twenty Eggs together with
their shells beaten together, and well mingled with the Liquor. Clarify it and
skim it very clean, still as the scum rises, leaving the Ginger and Rosemary
in it. Let it stand till the next day, then Tun it up, and take some
New-ale-yest, the whites of two Eggs, a spoonful of flower, beat all these
together, and put it on the top of the barrel, when the barrel is full. Let it
work, and when it has done working, stop it up close for three w^eks or a
month. Then you may bottle it, and a few days after, you may drink it.

Another.
Take three Gallons of water, and boil in it a handful of Rose-mary (or rather
the flowers) Cowslips, Sage-flowers, Agrimony, Betony and Thyme, ana, one
handful. When it has taken the strength of the herbs, strain it through a
hair-sieve, and let it cool twenty hours. Then to three Gallons of the clear
part of this decoction, put one Gallon of honey, and mingle it very well with
your hand, till it bear an Egg the breadth of a groat. Then boil it and skim ^t
as long as any scum will rise. Afterward let it cool twenty four hours. Then
put to it a small quantity of Ale-barm, and skim the thin-barm that does rise
on it, morning and evening, with a feather, during four days. And so put it up
into your vessel, and hang in it a thin linen bag with two Ounces of good
White-ginger bruised therein: And stop it up close for a quarter of a year.
Then you may drink it.

Another.
Take a quart of honey to a Gallon of water: set the Kettle over the fire, and
stir it now and then, that the honey may melt; let it boil an hour; you must
boil in it, a Sprig or two of Winter-savory, as much of Sweet-marjoram; put it
into rubs ready scalded, till the next day toward evening. Then tun it up into
your vessel, let it work for three days; after which hang a bag in the barrel
with what quantity of Mace and sliced Nutmeg you please. To make it stronger
then this, it is but adding more honey, to make it bear an Egg the breadth of a
six pence, or something more. You may bottle it out after a month, when you
please. This is the way, which is used in Sussex by those who are accounted to
make it best.

Another Receipt.
Take to every Gallon of Fountain Water a good quart of honey. Set the water on
the fire, till it be pretty warm; then take it off, and put in your honey, and
stir it till it be dissolved. Then put into every three Gallons, two handfuls
of Thyme: two good handfuls of Strawberry-leaves, one handful of Organ; one
handful of Fennel-roots, the heart being taken out, and one handful of
Parsley-roots the heart taken out: But as for the herbs, it must be according
to the constitution of them, for whom the Mead is intended. Then set the Herbs
in it on the fire, to boil for half an hour, still skimming it, as the scum
rises; it must boil but half an hour; then take it off the fire, and presently
strain it from the herbs, and let it stand till it be fully cold; then pour it
softly off the bottom, and put it in a vessel fit for it, and put a small
quantity of barm in it, and mingle it with it, and when it has wrought up,
which will be in three or four days, skim off that barm, and set on fresh: but
the second b^rm must not be mingled with the Mead, but only poured on the top
of it. Take an Ounce of Nutmeg sliced: one Ounce of Ginger sliced: one Ounce of
Cinnamon cut in pieces, and boil them a pretty while in a quart of White Wind
or Sack: when this is very cold, strain it, and put the Spices in a Canvass-bag
to hang in your Mead, and pour in the Wine it was boiled in.

This Mead will be drinkable, when it is a fortnight or three weeks old.

To make Metheglin that looks like White Wind.
Take to twelve gallons of water, a handful of each of these Herbs: Parsley,
Eglantine, Rosemary, Strawberry-leaves, Wild-^hyme, Baulme, Liver-wort, Betony,
Scabious: when the water begins to boil, cast in the herbs: let them boil a
quarter of an hour: then strain out the herbs; and when it is almost cold, then
put in as much of the best honey, you can get, as w^ll bear an Egg to the
breadth of two pence; that is, till you can see no more of the Egg^ above the
water, then a two pence will cover: Lave it and stir it till you see all the
honey be melted; then boil it well half an hour, at the least: skim it well,
and put in the whites of six Eggs beaten, to clarify it: Then strain it into
some wooden vessels; and when it is almost co^d, put some Ale-barm into it.
And when it works well, Tun it into some well seasoned vessel, where neither
Ale nor Beer has been, for marring the color of it. When it has done
working, if you like it, Take a quantity of Cloves, Nutmegs, Mace, Cinnamon,
Ginger, or any of these that you like best, and bruise them, and put them in a
boulter bag, and hang it in the vessel. Put not too much of the Spice, because
many do not like the taste of much Spice. If you make it at Michaelmas, you may
tap it at Christmas: but if you keep it longer, it will be the better. It will
look pure, and drink with as much spirit as can be, and very pleasant.

To make white Metheglin.
Take Sweet-marjoram, Sweet-bryar-buds, Violet-leaves, Strawberry-leaves, of
each one handful, and a good handful of Violet flowers (the dubble ones are the
best) broad Thyme, Borrage, Agrimony, of each half a handful, and two or three
branches of Rosemary, The feeds of Carvi, Coriander and Fennel, of each two
spoonfuls, and three or four blades of largemace. Boil all these in eight
Gallons of running-water, three quarters of an hour. Then strain it, and when
it is but blood-warm, put in as much of the best ^oney, as will make the Liquor
bear an Egg the breadth of six pence above the water. Then bo^l it again as
long as any scum will rise. Then set it abroad a cooling; and when it is almost
cold, put in half a pint of good Ale-barm; and when it has wrought, till you
perceive the barm to fall, then Tun it, and let it work in the barrel, till the
barm leaves rising, filling it up every day with some of the same Liquor. When
you stop it up, put in a bag with one Nutmeg sliced, a little whole Cloves and
Mace, a stick of Cinnamon broken in pieces, and a grain of good Musk. You may
make this a little before M^chaelmas, and it will be fit to drink at Lent.

This is Sir Edward Bainton's Receipt, Which my Lord of Portland (who gave it
me) says, was the best he ever drunk.

To make a small Metheglin.
Take four Gallons of water, and set it over the fire. Put into it, when it is
warm, eight pounds of honey; as the scum rises, take it clean off. When it is
clear, put into it three Nutmegs quartered; three or four Races of Ginger
sliced; Then let all boil a whole hour, Then take it off the fire, and put to
it two handfuls of ground Malt; stir it about with a round stick, till it be as
cold as wort, when you put yest to it. Then strain it out into a pot or Tub,
that has a spiggot and ^aucet, and put to it a pint of very good Ale-yest; so
let it work for two days; Then cover it close for about four or five days, and
so draw it our into bottles. It will be ready to drink within three weeks.

To make Mead.
Take to six quarts of water, a quart of the best honey, and put it on the
fire, and stir it, till the honey is melted: and boil it well as long as any
scum rises: and now and then put in a little cold water, for this will make
the scum rise: keep your kettle up as full as you did put it on; when it is
boiled enough, about half an hour before you take it off, then take a quantity
of Ginger sliced and well scraped first, and a good quantity of Rosemary, and
boil both together. Of the Rosemary and Ginger you may put in more or less, for
to please your taste: And when you take it off the fire, strain it into your
vessel, either a well seasoned-tub, or a great cream pot, and the next morning
when it is cold, pour off softly the top from the settlings into another
vessel; and then put some little quantity of the best Ale-barm to it, and cover
it with a thin cloth over it, if it be in summer; but in the winter it will be
longer a ripening, and therefore must be the warmer covered in a close place,
and when you go to bottle it, take with a feather all the barm off, and put it
into your bottles, and stop it up close. In ten days you may drink it.

If you think six quarts of water be too much, and would have it stronger, then
put in a greater quantity of honey.

Metheglin or Sweet^drink of My Lady Stuart.
Take as much water as will fill your Firkin: of Rosemary, Bays, Sweet-bryar,
Broad-thyme, Sweet-majoram, of each a handful; set it over the fire, until the
herbs have a little colored the water; then take it off, and when it is cold,
put in as much honey, till it will bear an Egg; Then lave it three days morning
and evening. After that boil it again, and skim it very clean, and in the
boiling clarify it with the whites of six Eggs, shells and all, well beaten
together. Then take it off, and put it to cool; and when it is cold, put it
into your vessel, and put to it three spoonfuls of yest; stop it close, and
keep it, till it be old at least three months.

A Metheglin for the Colic and Stone of the same Lady.
Take one Gallon of Honey to seven Gallons of water; boil it together, and skim
it well; then take Pelitory of the Wall, Saxi^rage, Betony, Parsley, Groundsel,
of each a handful, of the seeds of Parsley, of Nettles, Fennel and
Carraway-seeds, Anisseeds and Grumelseeds, of each two Ounces. The roots of
Parsley, of Alexander, of Fennel and Mallows of each two Ounces, being small
cut; let all boil, till near three Gallons of the Liquor is wasted: Then take
it off the fire, and let it stand till it be cold; then cleanse it from the
drugs, and let it be put into a clean vessel well stopped, taking four Nutmegs,
one Ounce and half of Ginger, half an Ounce of Cinnamon, twelve Cloves; cut all
these small, and hang them in a bag into the vessel, when you stop it up. When
it is a fortnight old, you may begin to drink of it; every morning a good
draught.

A Receipt for Metheglin of My Lady Windebanke.
Take four Gallons of water; add to it, these Herbs and Spices following.
Pellitory of the Wall, Sage, Thyme, of each a quarter of a handful, as much
Clove gilly-flowers, with half as much Borage and Bugloss flowers, a little
Hyssop, Five or six Eringo-roots, three or four Parsley-roots: one Fennel-root,
the pith taken out, a ^ew Red-nettle-roots, and a little Hart's-tongue. Boil
these Roots and Herbs half an hour; Then take out the Roots and Herbs, and put
in the Spices grossly beaten in a Canvass-bag, viz. Cloves, Mace, of each half
an Ounce, and as much Cinnamon, of Nutmeg an Ounce, with two Ounces of Ginger,
and a Gallon of Honey: boil all these together half an hour longer, but do not
skim it at all: let it boil in, and set ^t a cooling after you have taken it
off the fire. When it is cold, put six spoonfuls of barm to it, and let it work
twelve hours at least; then Tun it, and put a little Limon-peel into it: and
then you may bottle it, if you please.

Another of the same Lady.
To four Gallons of water put one Gallon of honey; warm the water Lukewarm
before you put in your honey; when it is dissolved, set it over the fire, and
let it boil half an hour with these Spices grossly beaten and put in a
Canvass-bag: namely, half an Ounce of Ginger, two Nutmegs, a few Cloves and a
little Mace; and in the boiling put in a quart of cold water to raise the scum,
which you must take clean off in the boiling. If you love herbs, put in a
little bundle of Rosemary, Bays, Sweet-marjoram and Eglantine. Let it stand
till it is cold, then put into it half a pint of Ale-barm, and let it work
twelve hours; then Tun it, but take out the bundle of herbs first.

To make Metheglin.
Take to every Gallon of Honey, three Gallons of water, and put them together,
and set them over so gen^le a fire, as you might endure to break it in the
water with your hand. When the Honey is all melted, put in an Egg, and let it
fall gently to the bottom; and if your Egg rise up again to the top of the
Liquor, then it is strong enough of the Honey. But if it lie at the bottom, you
must put in more honey, and stir it, till it does rise. If your honey be very
good, it will bear half a Gallon of water more to a Gallon of Honey. Then take
Sweet-bryar, Bays, Rosemary, Thyme, Marjoram, Savoury, of each a good handful,
which you must ^ye up all together in a bundle. This Proportion of Herbs will
be sufficient for twelve Gallons of Metheglin; and according to the quantity of
Metheglin, you make, you must add or diminish your Herbs. When you have put
these things together, set it over a quick fire, and let it boil as fast as you
can for half an hour or better, skimming of it very clean, and clarifying it
with the whites of two or three Eggs. Then take it from the fire, and put it
into some clean vessel or other, and let it stand till the next morning; Then
pour the Clear from the dregs, and Tun it up, putting in a little bag of such
Spice as you like, whereof Ginger must be the most. After it has stood three
or four days, you may put in two or three spoon-fulls of good Ale-yest, it will
make it the sooner ready to drink. It must work before you stop it up. The
older your Honey is, the whiter your Metheglin will be.

Mead with Raisins.
Put forty Gallons of water into your Caldron, and with a stick take the height
of the water, making a notch, when the superficies of the water comes. Then
put to the water ten Gallons of Honey, which dissolve with much Laving it; then
presently boil it gently, skimming it all the while, till it be free from scum.
Then put into it a thin bag of boulter-cloth containing forty pound weight of
the best blew Raisins of the Sun, well picked and washed and wiped dry; and let
the bag be so large, that the Raisins may lie at ease and loosly in it. When
you perceive that the Raisins are boiled enough to be very soft, that you may
strain out all their substance, take out the bag, and strain out all the Liquor
by a strong Press. Put it back to the Honey-liquor, and boil all together
(having thrown away the husks of the Raisins with the bag) till your L^q^or be
sunk down to the notch of your stick, which is the sign of due strength: Then
let it cool in a wooden vessel, and let it run through a strainer to sever it
from the settlings, and put it into a strong vessel, that has had Sack or
Muscadine in it, not filling it to within three fingers breadth of the top (for
otherwise it will break the vessel with working) and leave the bung open whiles
it works, which will be six weeks very strongly, though it be put into a cold
cellar. And after nine months, you may begin to drink it.

Morello Wine.
To half an Aume of white wine, take twenty pounds of Morello Cherries, the
stalks being first plucked off. Bruise the Cherries and break the stones. Pour
into the Wine the juice that comes out from the Cherries; but put all the solid
substance of them into a long bag of boulter-cloth, and hang it in the Wine at
the bung, so that it lie not in the bottom, but only reach to touch it, and
therefore nail it down at the mouth of the bung. Then stop it close. For
variety, you may put some clear juice of Cherries alone (but drawn from a
larger proportion of Cherries) into another parcel of Wine. To either of them,
if you will Aromatise the drink, t^ke to this quantity two Ounces of Cinnamon
grossly broken and bru^sed, and put it in a little bag at the spiggot, that all
the wine you draw may run through the Cinnamon.

You must be careful in bruising the Cherries, and breaking the stones. For if
you do all at once, the Liquor will sparkle about. But you must first bruise
the Cherries gently in a mortar, and rub through a sieve all that will pass,
and strain the Residue hard through your hands. Then beat the remaining hard so
strongly, as may break all the stones. Then put all together, and strain the
clean through a subtle strainer, and put the solider substance into the bag to
hang in the Wine.

Currants-Wine.
Take a pound of the best Currants clean picked, and pour upon them in a deep
straight mouthed earthen vessel six pounds or pints of hot water, in which you
have dissolved three spoonfuls of the purest and newest Ale-yest. Stop it very
close till it ferment, then give such vent as is necessary, and keep it warm
for about three days, it will work and ferment. Taste it after two days, to see
if it be grown to your liking. As soon as you find it so, let it run through a
strainer, to leave behind all the exhausted currants and the yest, and so
bottle it up. It will be exceeding quick and pleasant, and is admirable good to
cool the Liver, and cleanse the blood. It will be ready to drink in five or six
days after it is bottled; And you may drink safely large draughts of it.

Scotch Ale from My Lady Holmbey.
The Excellent Scotch Ale is made thus. Heat Spring Water; it must not boil,
but be ready to boil, which you will know by leaping up in bubbles. Then pour
it to the Malt; but by little and little, stirring them strongly together all
the while they are mingling. When all the water is in, it must be so
proportioned that it be very thick. Then cover the vessel well with a thick Mat
made o^ purpose with a hole for the stick, and that with Coverlets and Blankets
to keep in all the heat. After three or four hours, let it run out by the stick
(putting new heated water upon the Malt, if you please, for small Ale or Beer)
into a Hogshead with the head out. There let it stand till it begin to blink,
and grow long like thin Syrup. If you let it stay too long, and grow too thick,
it will be sour. Then put it again into the Caldron, and boil it an hour or an
hour and a half Then put it into a Woodden-vessel to cool which will require
near forty hours for a hog^^head. Then pour it off gently from the settling^
This quantity (of a hogshead) will requir^ bet^^r then a quart of the best
Ale-barm, which you must put to it thus. Put it to about three quarts of wort,
and stir it, to make it work well. When the barm is risen quick scum it off to
put to the rest of the wort by degrees. The remaining Liquor (that is the three
quarts) will have drawn into it all the heavy dregs of the barm, and you may
put it to the Ale of the second running, but not to this. Put the barm, you
have scummed off (which will be at least a quart) to about two gallons of the
wort, and stir it to make that rise and work. Then put two Gallons more to it.
Doing thus at several times, till all be mingled, which will require a whole
day to do. Cover it close, and let it work, till it be at it is height, and
begin to fall, which may require ten or twelve hours, or more. Watch this well,
least it sink too much, for then it will be dead. Then scum off the thickest
part of the barm, and ^un your Ale into the hogshaed, leaving all the bung open
a day or two. Then lay a strong Paper upon it, to keep the clay from falling
in, that you must then lay upon it, in which you must make a little hole to let
it work out. You must have some of the same Liquor to fill it up, as it works
over. When it has done working, stop it up very close, and keep it in a very
cold Cellar. It will be fit to broach after a year; and be very clear and sweet
and pleasant, and will continue a year longer drawing; and the last glass full
be as pure and as quick as the first. You begin to broach it high. Let your
Cask have served for Sweet-wine.

To make Ale drink quick.
When small Ale has wrought sufficiently, draw into bottles; but first put
into every bottle twelve good raisins of the Sun split and stoned; Then stop up
the bottle close, and set it in sand gravel) or a cold dry Cellar. After a
while this will drink exceeding quick and pleasant. Likewise take six
Wheat-corns, and bruise them, and put into a bottle of Ale; it will make it
exceeding quick and stronger.

To make Cider.
Take a Peck of Apples, and slice them, and boil them in a barrel of water,
till the third part be wasted* Then cool your water as you do for wort, and
when it is cold, you must pour the water upon three measures of grown Apples.
Then draw forth the water at a tap three or four times a day, for three days
together. Then press out the Liquor, and Tun it up; when it has done working,
then stop it up close.

A very Pleasant Drink of Apples.
Take about fifty Pipp^ns; quarter and core them, without paring them: for the
paring is the Cordialest part of them. Therefore only wipe or wash them well,
and pick away the black excrescence at the top; and be sure to leave out all
the seeds, which are hot. You may cut them (after all the superfluities are
taken away) in^o thinner slices, if you please. Put three Gallons of Fountain
water to them in a great Pipkin, and let them boil, till the Apples become
clear and transparent; which is a sign, they are perfectly tender, and w^ll be
in a good half hour, or a little more. Then with your Ladle break them into
Mash and Pulpe, incorporated with the water; letting all boil half an hour
longer, that the water may draw into it self all the virtue of the Apples. Then
put to them a pound and a half of pure dubble refined Sugar in powder, which
will soon dissolve in that hot Liquor. Then pour it into an Hippocras bag, and
let it run through it two or three times, to be very clear. Then put it up into
bottles; and after a little time, it will be a most pleasant, quick, cooling,
smoothing drink. Excellent in sharp Gonorrhaeas.

Sir Paul Neale's way of making Cider.
The best Apples make the best Cider, as Pearmains, Pippins, Golden-pippins,
and the like. Codlings make the finest Cider of ^ll. They must be ripe, when
you make Cider of them; and is in prime in the Summer season, when no other
Cider is good. But lasts not long, not beyond Autumn. The foundation of
making perfect Cider consists in not having it work much, scarce ever at all;
but, at least, no second time; which Ordinary Cider does often, upon change of
weather, and upon motion: and upon every working it grows harder. Do then thus:

Choose good Apples. Red streaks are the best for Cider to keep; Ginet-moils
the next, then Pippins. Let them lie about thre^ weeks, after they are
gathered; Then stamp and strain them in the Ordinary way, into a wooden fat
that has a^^igot three or four fingers breadth above the^^ottom. Cover the fat
with some hair or sack ^oth, to secure it from any thing to fall in, and to
keep in some of the Spirits, so to preserve it from dying; but not so much as
to make it ^erment. When the juice has been there twelve hours, draw it by the
spigot (the fat inclining that way, as if it were a little tilted) into a
barrel; which must not be full by about two fingers. Leave the bung open for
the Air to come in, upon a superficies, all along the barrel, to hinder it from
fermenting; but not so large a superficies as to endanger dying, by the airs
depredating too many spirits from it.

The drift in both these settlings is, that the grosser parts consisting of the
substance of the Apple, may settle to the bottom, and be severed from the
Liquor; for it is that, which makes it work again (upon motion or change of
weather) and spoils it. After twenty four hours draw of it, to see if it be
clear, by the settling of all dregs, above which your spigot must be. If it be
not clear enough, draw it from the thick dregs into another vessel, and let it
settle there twenty four hours. This vessel must be less then the first,
because you draw not all out of the first. If then it should not be clear
enough, draw it into a third, yet lesser then the second; but usually it is at
the first. When it is clear enough draw it into bottles, filling them within
two fingers, which stop close. After two or three days visit them; that if
there be a danger of their working (which would break the bottles) you may take
out the stopples, and let them stand open for half a quarter of an hour. Then
stop them close, and they are secure for ever after. In cold freesing weather,
set them upon Hay, and cover them over with Hay or Straw. In open weather in
Winter transpose them to another part of the Cellar to stand upon the bare
ground or pavement. In hot weather se^ them in sand. The Cider of the Apples of
the last season, as Pippins, not Peermains, nor codlings, will last till the
Summer grow hot. Though this never work, it is not of the Nature of Stummed
Wine; because the naughty dregs are not le^t in it.

Doctor Harvey's pleasant Water-cider, whereof He used to drink much, making it
His Ordinary Drink.
Take one Bushel of Pippins, cut them into slices with the Parings and Cores;
boil them in tw^lve Gallons of water, till the goodness of them be in the
water; and that consumed about three Gallons. Then put it into an Hypocrasbag,
made of Cotton; and when it is clear run out, and almost cold, sweeten it with
five pound of Brown-sugar, and put a pint of Aleyest to it, and set it a
working two nights and days: Then skim off the yest clean, and put it into
bottles, and let it stand two or three days, till the yest fall dead at the
top: Then take it off clean with a knife, and fill it up a little within the
neck (that is to say, that a little abo^t a fingers breadth of the neck be
empty, between the superficies of the Liquor, and the bottom of the stopple)
and then stop them up and ^ye them, or else it will drive out the Corks. Within
a fortnight you may drink of it. It will keep five or six weeks.

Ale with Honey.
Sir Thomas Gower makes his pleasant and wholesome drink of Ale and Honey thus.
Take forty Gallons of small Ale, and five Gallons of Honey. When the Ale is
ready to Tun, and is still warm, take out ten Gallons of it; which, whiles it
is hot, mingle with it the five Gallons of Honey, stirring it exceeding well
with a clean arm till they be perfectly incorporated. Then cover it, and let it
cool and stand still. At the same time you begin to dissolve the honey in th^s
parcel, you take the other of thirty Gallons also warm, and Tun it up with
barm, and put it into a vessel capable to hold all the whole quantity of Ale
and Honey, and let it work there; and because the vessel will be so far from
being full, that the gross foulness of the Ale cannot work over, make holes in
the sides of the Barrel even with the superficies of the Liquor in it, out of
which the gross feculence may pu^ge* and these holes must be fast shut, when
you put in the rest of the Ale with the Honey: which you must do, when you see
the strong work^ng of the other is over; and that it works but gently, which
may be after two or three or four days* according to the warmth of the season.
You must warm your solution of honey, when you put it in, to be as warm as Ale,
when you Tun it; and then it will set the whole a working a fresh, and casting
out more foulness; which it would do too violently, if you put it in at the
first of the Tunn^ng it. It is not amiss that some feculence lie thick upon the
Ale, and work not all out; for that will keep in the spirits. After you have
dissolved the honey in the Ale, you must boil it a little to skim it; but skim
it not, till it have stood a while from the fire to cool; else you w^ll skim
away much of the Honey, which will still rise as long as it boileth. If you
will not make so great a quantity at a time, do it in less in the same
proportions. He makes it about Michaelmas for Lent.

When strong Beer grows too hard, and flat for want of Spirits* take four or
five Gallons of it out of a Hogshead, and boil five pound of honey in it, and
skim it, and put it warm into the Beer; and after it has done working, stop it
up close. This will make it quick, p^easant and stronger.

Small Ale for the Stone.
The Ale, that I used to drink constantly of, was made in these proportions.
Take fourteen Gallons of Water, and half an Ounce of Hops: boil them near an
hour together. Then pour it upon a peck of Malt. Have a care the Malt be not
too small ground; for then it will never make clear Ale. Let it soak so near
two hours. Then let it run from the Malt, and boil it only one walm or two. Let
it stand cooling till it be cool enough to work with barm, which let be of Beer
rather than Ale, about half a pint.

After it has wrought some hours, when you see it come to it is height, and is
near beginning to fall in working, Tun it into a barrel of eight Gallons; and
in four or five days it will be fit to broach to drink. Since I have caused the
wort to be boiled a good half hour; since again I boil it a good hour; and it
is much the better; beca^se the former Ale tasted a little Raw. Now because it
consumes in boiling, and would be too strong, if this Malt made a less
proportion of Ale; I have added a Gallon of water at the first, taking fifteen
Gallons in stead of fourteen. Since I have added half a peck of Malt to the
former proportions, to make it a little stronger in Winter.

Apple Drink with Sugar, Honey, etc.
A very pleasant drink is made of Apples, thus; Boil sliced Apples in water, to
make the water strong of Apples, as when you make to drink it for coolness and
p^easure. Sweeten i^ with Sugar to your taste, such a quantity of sliced Apples,
as would make so much water strong enough of Apples; and then bottle it up
close for three or four months. There will come a thick mother at the top,
which being taken off, all the rest will be very clear, and quick and pleasant
to the taste, beyond any Cider. It will be the better to most tastes, if you put
a very little Rosemary into the liquor, when you boil it, and a little
Limon-peel into each bottle, when you bottle it up.

To make Stepponi.
Take a Gallon of Conduit-water, one pound of blew Raisins of the Sun stoned,
and half a pound of Sugar. Squeese the juice of two Limons upon the Raisins and
Sugar, and slice the rindes upon them. Boil the water, and pour it so hot upon
the ingredients in an earthen pot, and stir them well together. So let it stand
twenty four hours. Then put it into bottles (having first let it run through a
strainer) and set them in a Cellar or other cool place.

Weak Honey-drink.
Take nine pints of warm fountain water, and dissolve in it one pint of pure
White-honey, by laving it therein, till it be dissolved. Then boil it gently,
skimming it all the while, till all the scum be perfectly scummed off; and
after that boil it a little longer, peradventure a quarter of an hour. In all
it will require two or three hours boiling, so that at last one third part may
be consumed. About a quarter of an hour before you cease bo^ling, and take it
from the fire, put to it a little spoonful of cleansed and sliced Ginger; and
almost half as much of the thin yellow rind of Orange, when you are even ready
to take it from the fire, so as the Orange boil only one walm in it. Then pour
it into a well-glased strong deep great Gally-pot, and let it stand so, till it
be almost cold, that it be scarce Lukewarm. Then put to it a little
silver-spoonful of pure Ale-yest, and work it together with a Ladle to make it
ferment: as soon as it begins to do so, cover it close with a fit cover, and
put a thick dubbled woollen cloth about it. Cast all things so that th^s may be
done when you are going to bed. Next morning when you rise, you will find the
barm gathered all together in the middle; scum it clean off with a silver-spoon
and a feather, and bottle up the Liquor, stopping it very close. It will be
ready to drink in two or three days; but it will keep well a mon^h or two. It
will be from the first very quick and pleasant.

Mr. Webb's Ale and Bragot.
Five Bushels of Malt will make two Hogsheads. The first running makes one very
good Hogshead, but not very strong; the second is very weak. To this proportion
boil a quarter of a Pound of Hops in all the water that is to make the two
Hogsheads; that is, two Ounces to each Hogshead, You put your water to the Malt
in the Ordinary way. Boil it well, when you come to work it with yest, take
very good Beer-yest, not Ale-yest.

To make Bragot, He takes the first running of such Ale, and boils a less
proportion of Honey in it, then when He makes His ordinary Mead; but dubble or
triple as much spice and herbs. As for Example to twenty Gallons of the
Strong-wort, he puts eight or ten pound, (according as your taste likes more
or less honey) of honey; But at least triple as much herbs, and triple as much
spice as would serve such a quantity of small Mead as He made Me. (For to a
stronger M^ad you put a greater proportion of Herbs and Spice, then to a small;
by reason that you must keep it a longer time before you drink it: and the
length of time mellows and tames the taste of the herbs and spice) And when it
is tunned in the vessel (after working with the barm) you hang in it a bag with
bruised spices (rather more then you boiled in it) which is to hang in the
barrel all the while you draw it.

He makes also Mead with the second weak running of the Ale; and to this He
uses the same proportions of honey, herbs and spice, as for his small Mead of
pure water; and uses the same manner of boiling, working with yest, and other
Circumstances, as in making of that.

The Countess of Newport's Cherry Wine.
Pick the best Cherries free from rotten, and pick the stalk from them; put
them into an earthen Pa^. Bruise them, by griping and straining them in your
hands, and let them stand all night; on the next day strain them out (through a
Napkin; which if it be a course and thin one, let the juice run through a
Hippocras or gelly-bag, upon a pound of fine pure Sugar in powder, to every
Gallon of juice) and to every gallon put a pound of Sugar, and put it into a
vessel. Be sure your vessel be full, or your wine will be spoiled; you must let
it stand a month before you bottle it: and in every bottle you must put a lump
(a piece as big as a Nutmeg) of Sugar. The vessel must not be stopped until it
has done working.

Strawberry Wine.
Bruise the Strawberries, and put them into a Linnen-bag which h^th been a
little used, that ^o the L^quor may run through more easily. You hang in the
bag at the bung into the vessel, before you do put in your Strawberries. The
quantity of the fruit is left to your discretion; for you will judge to be
there enough of them, when the color of the wine is high enough. During the
working, you leave the bung open. The working being over, you stop your vessel.
Cherry-wine is made after the same fashion. But it is a little more troublesome
to break the Cherry-stones. But it is necessary, that if your Cherries be of
the black sour Cherries. You put to it a little Cinnamon, and a few Cloves.

To make Wine of Ch^rries alone.
Take one hundred pounds weight, or what quantity you please, of ripe, but
^ound, pure, dry and well gathered Cherries. Bruise and mash them with your
hands to press out all their juice, which strain through a boulter cloth, into
a deep narrow Wooden tub, and cover it close with clothes. It will begin to
work and ferment within three or four hours, and a thick foul scum will rise to
the top. Skim it off as it rises to any good head, and presently cover it
again. Do thus till no more great quantity of scum arise, which will be four or
five time, or more. And by this means the Liquor will become clear, all the
gross muddy parts rising up in scum to the top. When you find that the he^ght
of the working is past, and that it begins to go less, tun it into a barrel,
let^ing it run again through a boulter, to keep out all the gross ^eculent
substance. If you should let it stay before you tun it up, till the wo^king
were to^ much deaded, the wine would prove dead. Let it remain in the barre^
close stopped, a month or five weeks. Then draw it into bottles, into each of
which put a lump of fine Sugar, before you draw the wine into it, and stop them
very close, and set them in a cold Celler. You may drink them after three or
four months. This wine is exceeding pleasant, strong, spiritful and comfortable.

OF COOKERY.
To make a Sack posset.
BOil two wine-quarts of Sweet-cream in a Possnet; when it has boiled a
little, take it from the fire, and beat the yolks of nine or ten fresh Eggs,
and the whites of four with it, beginning with two or three spoonfuls, and
adding more till all be incorporated* then set it over the fire, to recover a
good degree of hear, but not so much as to boil; and always stir it one way,
least you break the consistence. In the me^n time, let half a pint of Sack or
While muscadin boil a very little in a basin, upon a Cha^ing-dish of Coals,
with three quarters of a pound of Sugar, and three or four quartered Nutmeg^,
and as many pretty big pieces of sticks of Cinnamon. When this is well scummed,
and still very hot, take it from the fire, and immediately pour into it the
cream, beginning to pour near it, but raising by degrees your hand so that it
may fall down from a good height; and without any more to be done, it will be
then fit to ear. It is very good kept cold well as eaten hot. It does very well
with it, to put into the Sack (immediately before you put in the cream) some
Ambergreece, or Ambered-sugar, or Pastils. When it is made, you may put powder
of Cinnamon and Sugar upon it, if you like it.

Another.
To two quarts of Cream, if it be in the Summer, when the C^eam is thick and
best, take but two or three yolks of Eggs. But in the Winter when it is thin
and hungry, take six or seven; but never no whites. And of Sack or Muscadin,
take a good third (Scarce half) of a pint; and three quarters of a pound of
fine Sugar. Let the Sugar and Sack boil well together, that it be almost like a
Syrup; and just as you take it from the fire, put in your ground Amber or
Pastils, and constantly pour in the Cream, with which the Eggs are
incorporated: and do all the rest as is said in the foregoing Process.

Ambered-sugar is made by grinding very well, four grains of Ambergreece, and
one of Musk, with a little fine Sugar; or grinding two or three Spanish Pastils
very small.

A plain Ordinary Posset.
Put a pint of good Milk to boil; as soon as it does so, take it from the fire,
to let the great heat of it cool a little; for doing so, the curd will be the
renderer, and the whole of a more uniform consistence. When it is prettily
cooled, pour it into your pot, wherein is about two spoonfuls of Sack, and
about four of Ale, with sufficient Sugar dissolved in them. So let it st^nd a
while near the fire, till you eat it.

A Sack Posset.
Take three pints of Cream; boil in it a little Cinnamon, a Nutmeg quartered,
and two spoonfuls of grated bread; then beat the yolks of twelve Eggs very well
with a little cold Cream, and a spoonful of Sack. When your Cream has boiled
about a quarter of an hour, thicken it up with the Eggs, and sweeten it with
Sugar; and take half a pint of Sack and six spoonfuls of Ale, and put into the
basin or dish, you intend to make it in, with a little Ambergreece, if you
please. Then pour your Cream and Eggs into it, holding your hand ^s high as
conveniently you can, gently stirring in the basin with the spoon as you pour
it; so serve it up. If you please you may strew Sugar upon it.

You may strew Ambredsugar upon it, as you eat it; or Sugar-beaten with
Cinnamon, if you l^ke it.

A Barley Sack Posset.
Take half a pound or more of French-barley, (not Perle-barley) and pour
scalding water upon it, and wash it well therein, and strain it from the water,
and put it into the Corner of a Linen Cloth and tie it up fast there, and
strike it a dozen or twenty blows against a firm table or block, to make it
tender by such bruising it, as in the Country is used with wheat to make
frumenty. Then put it into a la^ge skillet with three pints of good milk. Boil
this till at least half be consumed, and that it become as thick as hasty
pudding, which will require at least two hours; and it must be carefully
stirred all the wh^le, least it burn too: which if by some little inadverrence
it should do, and that some black burned substance sti^keth to the bottom of
the skillet, pour all the good matter from it into a fresh skillet (or into a
b^sin whiles you scour this) and renew boiling till it be very thick; All
which is to make the barley very tender and pulpy, and will at least require
two or near three hours. Then pour to it three pints of good Cream, and boil
them together a little while, stirring them always. It will be sometime before
the cold Cream boil, which when it does, a little will suffice. Then take it
from the fire, and season it well with Sugar. Then take a quarter of a pint of
Sack, and as much Rhenish-wine (or more of each) and a little Verjuyce, or
sharp Cider, or juice of Orange, and se^son it well with Sugar (at least half a
pound to both) and set it over Coals to boil. Which when it does, and the Sugar
is well melted, pour the Cream into it; in which Cream the barley will be
settled to the bottom by standing still unmoved, after the Sugar is well
stirred and melted in it, or pour it through a ha^r-sieve; and you may boil it
again, that it be very hot, when you mingle them togethe^; else it may chance
not curdle. Some of the barley (but little) will go over with it, and will do
no hurt. After you have thus made your Posset, let it stand warm a while that
the curd may thicken: but take heed it boil not, for that would dissolve it
again into the consistence of Cream. When you serve it up, strew it over with
Powder of Cinnamon and sugar. It will be much the bett^r, if you strew upon it
some Ambergreece ground with Sugar. You may boil bruised sticks of Cinnamon in
the Cream, and in the Sack, before you mingle them. You must use clear
Char-coal-fire under your vesse^s. The remaining barley will make good barley
Cream, being boiled with fresh Cream and a little Cinnamon and Mace; to which
you may add a little Rosemary and Sugar, when it is taken from the fire: or
butter it as you do wheat. Or make a pudding of it, putting to it a Pint of
Cream, which boil; then add four or five yolks, and two whites of Eggs, and the
Marrow of two bones cut small, and of one in lumps: sufficient Sugar, and one
Nutmeg grated. Put this either to bake raw, or with puff-past beneath and above
it in the dish. A pretty smart heat, as for white Manchet, and three quarters
of an hour in the Oven. You may make the like with great Oat-meal scalded (not
boiled) in Cream, and soaked a night; then made up as the other.

My Lord of Carlile's Sack-posset.
Take a Pottle of Cream, and boil in it a little whole Cinnamon, and three or
four flakes of Mace. To this proportion of Cream put in eighteen yolks of Eggs,
and eight of the whites; a pint of Sack; beat your Eggs very well, and then
mingle them with your Sack. Put in three quarters of a pound of Sugar into the
Wine and Eggs with a Nutmeg grated, and a little beaten Cinnamon; set the basin
on the fire with the wine and Eggs, and let it be hot. Then put in the Cream
boiling from the fire, pour it on high, but stir it not; cover it with a dish,
and when it is settled, strew on the top a little fine Sugar mingled with three
grains of Ambergreece, and one grain of Musk, and serve it up.

A Syllabub.
My Lady Middlesex makes Syllabubs for little Glasles with spouts, this. Take 3
pints of sweet Cream, one of quick white wine (or Rhehish) and a good wine
glassful (better the of a p^nt) of Sack: mingle with them about three quarters
of a pound of fine Sugar in Powder. Beat all these together with a whisk, till
all appears converted into froth. Then pour it into your little
Syllabub-glasses, and let them stand all night. The next day the Curd will be
thick and firm above, and the drink clear under it. I conceive it may do well,
to put into each glass (when you pour the liquor into it) a ^prig of Rosemary a
little bruised, or a little L^mo^-peel, or some such thing to quicken the
taste; or use Amber-sugar, or spirit of Cinnamon, or of Lignum-Cassiae; or
Nutmegs, or Mace or Cloves, a very little.

A good Dish of Cream.
Boil a quart of good Cream with sticks of Cinnamon and quartered Nutmeg and
Sugar to your taste. When it is boiled enough to have acquired the taste of the
Spice, take the whites of six New laid eggs, and beat them very well with a
little Fresh-cream, then pour them to your boiling Cream, and let them boil a
walm or two. Then let it run through a boulter, and put a little Orange
flower-water to it, and slicedbread; and so serve it up cold.

An Excellent Spanish Cream.
Take two quarts (you must not exceed this proportion in one vessel) of
perfectly Sweet-cream, that has not been jogged with carriage: and in a
Possnet set it upon a clear lighted Char-coal-fire, not too hot. When it
begins to boil, cast into it a piece of double refined hard Sugar about as
much as two Walnuts, and with a spoon stir the Cream all one way. After two or
three rounds, you will perceive a thick Cream rise at the top. Scum it off with
your spoon, and lay it in another dish. And always stir it the same way, and
more Cream will rise; which as it does rise, you put it into your dish, one
lare upon an other. And thus almost all the Cream will turn into this thick
Cream, to within two or three spoonfuls. If you would have it sweeter, ^ou may
strew some Sugar upon the top of it. You must be careful not to have the heat
too much; for then it will turn to oil; as also if the Cream have been carried.
If you would have it warm, set the dish you lay it in, upon a Chafing Dish of
Coals.

Another Clouted Cream.
Milk your Cows in the evening about the ordinary hour, and fill with it a
little Ket^le about three quarters full, so that there may be happily two or
three Gallons of Milk. Let this stand thus five or six hours. About twelve a
Clock at night kindle a good fire of Charcoal, and set a large Trivet over it.
When the fire is very clear and quick, and free from all smoke, set your Ket^le
of Milk over it upon the Trivet, and have in a pot by a quart of good Cream
ready to put in at the due time; which must be, when you see the Milk begin to
boil simpringly. Then pour in the Cream in a little stream and low, upon a
place, where you see the milk simper: This will presently deaden the boiling,
and then you must pour in no more Cream there, but in a fresh place, where it
simpreth and bubbeleth a little. Continue this pouring in, in new places where
the milk boileth, ^^ll all your Cream i^ in, watching it carefully to that end.
Then let it continue upon the fire to boil, till you see all the Mi^k r^se up
together to the top, and not in little parcels here and there, so that it would
run over, if it should stay longer upon the fire. Then let two persons take it
steadily off, and set it by in a Cool-room to stand unmoved, uncovered; but so
as no Motes may fall in, for the rest of that night, and all the next day and
night, and more, if you would have it thicker. Then an hour or two before
Dinner cut the thick Cream at the top with a Knife into squares as broad as
you^ hand, which will be the thicker, the longer in has stood. Then ^have a
thin slice or skimmer of Latton, and with that raise up the thick Cream,
putting your slice under it so nicely, that you take up no milk with it; and
have a Ladle or Spoon in the other hand to help the cream upon the slice, which
thereby will become mingled: and lay these parcels of Cream in a dish, into
which you have first put a little raw Cream, or of that (between Cream and
Milk) that is immediately under the Clouts. To take the Clouts the more
conveniently, you hold a back of a Ladle or skimming-dish against the further
side of the Clout, that it may not slide away when the Latton slice shuffeth it
on the other side to get under it, and so the Clout will mingle together or
dubble up, which makes it the thicker, and the more graceful. When you have
laid a good Laire of Clouts in the dish, put upon it a little more fresh, raw
or boiled-cream, and then fill it up with the rest of the Clouts. And when it
is ready to serve in, you may strew a little Sugar upon it, if you will you may
sprinkle in a little Sugar between every flake or clout of Cream. If you keep
the dish thus laid a day longer before you eat it, the Cream will grow the
thicker and firmer. But if you keep it, I think it is best to be without sugar
or raw Cream in it, and put them in, when you are to serve it up. There w^ll be
a thin Cream swimming upon the milk of the Kettle after the Clouts are taken
away, which is very sweet and pleasant to drink. If you should let your clouts
lie longer upon the milk, then I have said, before you skim it off, the Milk
underneath would grow sour, and spoil the cream above. If you put these clouts
into a Churm with other cream, it w^ll make very good butter, so as no sugar
have been put with it.

My Lord of S. Alban's Cresme Fouettee.
Put as much as you please to make, of sweet thick cream in^o a dish, and whip
it with a bundle of white hard rushes, (of such as they make whisks to brush
cloaks) tied together, till it come to be very th^ck, and near a buttery
substance. If you whip it too long, it will become butter. About a good hour
will serve in winter. In summer it will require an hour and a half. Do not put
in the dish, you will serve it up in, till it be almost time to set it upon the
table. Then strew some poudered fine s^gar in the bottom of the dish it is to
go in, and with a broad sp^^ule lay your cream upon it: when half is laid in,
strew some more fine sugar upon it, and then lay in the rest of the Cream
(leaving behind some whey that will be in the bottom) and strew more sugar
upon that. You should have the sugar-box by you, to strew on sugar from time to
tim^, as you eat off the superficies, that is strewed over with sugar. If you
would have your whipped cream light and frothy, that has but l^ttle substance
in the eating, make it of only plain milk; and if you would have it of a
consistence between both, mingle cream and milk.

To make the Cream-Curds.
Strain your Whey, and set it on the ^ire; make a clear and gentle fire under
your kettle; as they rise, put in Whey, so contin^ing ti^l they are ready to
skim. Then take your skimmer, and put them on the bottom of a hair sieve; so
let them drain till they are cold; then take them off, and put them into a
basin, and beat them with two or three spoonfuls of Cream and Sugar.

To make Clouted Cream.
Take two Gallons more or less of new milk, set it upon a clear fire; when it
is ready to boil, put in a quart of sweet cream, and take it off the fire, and
strain it through a hair sieve into earthen pans; let it stand two days and two
nights; then take it off with a skimmer; strew sugar on the cream, and serve it
to the Table.

To make a whip Syllabub.
T^ke the whites of two Eggs, and a pint of Cream, six spoonfuls of Sack, as
much Sugar as will sweeten it; then take a Bir^hen rod and whip it; as it
rises with froth, skim it, and put it into the Syllabub-pot; so continue it
with whipping and skimming, till your Syllabub pot be ^ull.

To make a plain Syllabub.
Take a pint of Verjuyce in a bowl; milk the Cow ^o the Verjuyce; take off the
Curd; and take sweetcream and beat them together with a little Sack and Sugar;
put it into your Syllabub pot; then strew Sugar on it, and so send it to the
Table.

Concerning Potages.
The ground or body of Potages must always be very good broth of Mu^ton, Veal a
Volaille. Now to give good taste, you vary every month of the year, according
to the herbs and roots that are in season. In Spring and Summer you use
Cerfevil, Oseille, Borage, Bugloss, Pourpier, Lettice, Chicoree and Cowcombers
quartered, etc. The manner of using them is to boil store of them about half an
hour or a quarter, in a pot by it self, with some bouillon taken out off the
great pot; half an hour before dinner, take light bread well dried from all
moisture before the fire; then cut in slices, laid in a dish over coals, pour
upon it a ladleful of broth, no more then the bread can presently drink up;
which when it has done, put on another ladleful, and stew that, till it be
drunk up; repeat this three or four times, a good quarter of an hour in all,
till the bread is swelled like a gelly (if it be too long, it will grow glewy
and stick to the dish) and strong of broth; then fill it up near full with the
same strong broth, which having stewed a while, put on the broth and herbs, and
your Capon or other meat upon that, and so let it stew a quarter of an hour
longer, then turn it up.

In winter, boil half an hour a pretty bundle of Parsley, and half as much of
Sives, and a very little Thyme, and Sweet-marjoram; when they have given their
^aste to the herbs, throw the bundle away* and do as abovesaid with the bread.
Deeper in the Winter, Parsley-roots, and White-chicoree, or Navets, or Cabbage,
which last must be put in at first, as soon as the pot is skimmed; and to
color the bouillon it is good to put into it (sooner or later, according to
the coursness or finess of what you put in) Partridges or Wild-duck, or a
fleshy piece of Beef half roasted. Green-pease may some of them be boiled a
pretty while in the great not; but others in a pot by themselves, with some
Bouillon no longer then as if they were to eat buttered, and put upon the dish,
containing the whole stock a quarter of an hour after the other has stewed a
quarter of an hour upon the bread. Sometimes Old-pease boiled in the broth from
the first, to thicken it, but no Pease to be served in with it. Sometimes a
piece of the bottom of a Venison Pasty, put in from the first. Also Venison
bones.

Plain savoury English Potage.
Make it of Beef, Mutton and Veal; at last adding a Capon, or Pigeons. Put in
at first a quartered Onion or two, Some Oat-meal, or French barley, some
bottom of a Ven^son-pasty-crust, twenty whole grains of Pepper: four or five
Cloves at last, and a little bundle of Sweet-herbs, store of Marigold-flowers.
You may put in Parsley or other herbs.

Or make it with Beef, Mutton and Veal, Putting in some Oat-meal, and good
pot herbs, as Parsley, Sorrel, Violet-leaves, etc. And a very little Thyme and
Sweet-marjoram, scarce to be tasted: and some Marigold leaves, at last. You may
begin to boil it overnight, and let it stand warm all night; then make an end
of boiling it next morning. It is well to put into the pot, at first, twenty or
thirty corns of whole Pepper.

Potage de blanc de Chapon.
Make first a very good bouillon, seasoned as you like. Put Some of it upon the
white flesh of a Capon or Hen a little more then half-rosted. Beat them well in
a Mortar, and strain out all the juice that will come. You may put more b^oth
upon what remains in the Strainer, and beat again, and strain it to the former.
Whiles this is doing, put some of your first plain broth upon some dried bre^d
to mittonner-well. Let there be no more broth, then just to do that. None to
swim thin over. When you will serve the Potage in, pour the white liquor upon
the swelled and gellied-bread and let them stew together a little upon the
Coals. When it is through hot, take it off, and squeese some Limon or Orange
into it, and so send it in presently. It mendeth a Bouillon much, to boil in it
some half roasted Vol^ille, or other good meat.

To make Spinage-broth.
Take strong broth, and boil a neck of Mutton, and a Marrow-bone in it, and
skim it very well; then put in half a pound of French barley, and a bundle of
Sweet herbs, and two or three blades of Large-mace. Let these boil very well.
Then mince half a peck of Spinach, and two great Onions very small, and let it
boil one hour or more; season it with salt as you please, and send the Mutton
and the Marrow-bone in a dish with French bread or Manchet to the Table.

Ordinary Potage.
Take the fleshy and sinewy part of a leg of B^ef, crag-ends of necks of Ve^l
and Mutton. Put them in a ten qua^t pot, and fill it ^p with water. Begin to
boil about six a clock in the Morning, to have your potage ready by Noon. When
it is well skimmed, put in two or three large Onions in quarters, and half a
loaf (in one lump) of light French bread, or so much of the bottom crust of a
Venison Pasty; all which will be at length clean dissolved in the broth. In due
time season it with Salt, a little Pepper, and a very few Cloves. Likewise at a
fit distance, before it be ended boiling, put in store of good herbs, as in
Summer, Borrage, Bugloss, Pursl^in, Sorel, Lettice, Endive, and what else you
like; in Winter, Beetes, Endive, Parsley-roots, Cabbage, Carots, whole Onions,
Leeks, and what you can get or like, with a little ^weet-marjoram and exceeding
little Thyme. Order it so that the broth be very strong and good. To which end
you may after hours (or three) boil a Hen or Capon in it; light French- bread
sliced, must be taken about noon, and tosted a little before the fire, or
crusts of crisp new French-bread; lay it in a dish, and pour some of the broth
upon it, and let it stew a while upon a Chafing Dish. Then pour in more Broth,
and if you have a Fowl, lay it upon the bread in the broth, and fill it up with
broth, and lay the herbs and roots all over and about it, and let it stew a
little longer, and so serve it up covered, after you have squeesed some juice
of Orange or Limon, or put some Verjuyce into it. Or you may beat two or three
Eggs, with part of the broth, and some Verjuyce, or juice of Orange, and then
mingle it with the rest of the broth.

Barely Potage.
Take half a pound of French-barley, and wash it in three or four hot-waters;
then tie it up in a course linen cloth and strike it five or six blows against
the table; for this will make it very tender. Put it into such a pot full of
meat and water, as is said in the ordinary potage, after it is skimmed; and
season this With Salt, Spice, Marjoram and Thyme, as you did the other. An hour
before you take it from the fire, put into it a pound of the best Raisins of
the Sun well washed; at such a distance of time, that they may be well plumped
and tender, but not boiled to mash. When the broth is enough boiled and
consumed, and very strong, pour some of it upon sliced dry bread in a deep
potage-dish, or upon crusts, and let it stew a while. Then pour on all the rest
of the broth, with the barely and Raisins, upon a Capon or Hen, or piece of
Mutton or Veal; and let it mittonner a while upon the Chafing Dish, then serve
it in.

Stewed Broth.
Take a like quantity of water and flesh, as in the others, adding two
Marrow-bones: which tie at the ends with piec^s of Linen, that the Marrow may
not melt out, and make the broth too fat. A while after it is skimmed, put into
it a loaf of French bread very thin sliced, (which is better then grated) and
this will be all dissolved in the broth. Season it in due time with salt, four
or five flakes of Mace, and five or six Cloves; as also with sweet herbs: And
an hour, or better, before you take it of, put in Raisins of the Sun, Prunes,
and Currants, of each one Pound, well picked and washed. When it is boiled
enough, pour the broth into a basin, that if it be too fat, you may take it
off. There season it with a little Sugar, and four or five spoonfuls of
White Wind or Sack. Then pour it upon sliced-bread, and stew it a while. Then
squeese an Orange or Limon (or both) upon it, and serve it up with the
Marrow-bones in it.

An English Potage.
Make a good strong broth of Veal and Mutton; then take out the meat, and put
in a good Capon or Pullet: but first, if it be very fa^, pa^boil it a little to
take away the Oyleness of it, and then put it into the broth; and when it has
boiled a little therein, put in some grated bread, a bundle of sweet^herbs, two
or three blades of Mace, and a peeled Onion. When it is ready to be dished up,
take the yolks of six Eggs, beat them very well with two or three spoonfuls of
White Wind. Then take the Capon out of the broth, and thicken it up with the
Eggs, and so dish it up with the Capon, and tostes of White-bread or slices,
which you please; and have ready boiled the Marrow of two or three bones with
some ^ender boiled white Endive, and strew it over the Capon.

Another Potage.
A good Potage for dinner is thus made: Boil Beef, Mutton, Veal, Volaille, and
a little piece of the Lean of a Gammon of the best Bacon, with some quartered
Onions, (and a little Garlic, if you like it) you need no salt, if you have
Bacon; but put in a little Pepper and Cloves. If it be in the Winter, put in a
Bouquet of Sweet-herbs, or whole Onions, or Roots, on Cabbage. If season of
Herbs, boil in a little of the broth apart, some Lettice, Sorrel, Borage and
Bugloss, etc. till they be only well mortified. If you put in any gravy, let it
boil or stew a while with the broth; put it in due time upon the tosted-bread
to Mittoner, etc. If you boil some half roasted meat with your broth, it will be
the better.

Portugal Broth, as it was made for the Queen.
Make very good broth with some lean of Veal, Beef and Mutton, and with a
brawny Hen or young Cock. After it is scummed, put in an Onion quartered, (and,
if you like it, a Clove of Ga^lick,) a little Parsley, a sprig of Thyme, as
much Minth, a little balm; some Coriander-seeds bruised, and a very little
Saffron: a little Salt, Pepper and a Clove. When all the substance is bo^led
out of the meat, and the broth very good, you may drink it so, or, pour a
little of it upon tosted sliced-bread, and stew it, till the bread have drunk
up all that broth, then add a little more, and stew; so adding by little and
little, that the bread may imbibe it and swell: whereas if you drown it at
once, the bread will not swell, and grow like gelly; and thus you will have a
good potage. You may add Parsley-roots or Leeks, Cabbage or Endive in the due
time before the broth is ended boiling, and time enough for them to become
tender. In the Summer you may put in Lettice, Sorrel, Purslane, Borage and
Bugloss, or what other pot herbs you like. But green herbs do rob the strength
and Vigor and Cream of the Potage.

The Queens ordinary Bouillon de sante in a morning, was thus. A Hen, a handful
of Parsley, a sprig of Thyme, three of Spear-minth, a little balm, half a great
Onion, a little Pepper and Salt, and a Clove, as much water as would cover the
Hen; and this boiled to less then a pint, for one good Porrenger full.

Nourissant Potage de sante.
Fill a large earthen pot with water, and make it boil; then take out half the
water, and put in Beef and Mutton (fit pieces) and boil and skim: and as soon
as it boils, season it with Salt and Pepper. After an hour and half, or two
hours, put in a Capon, and four or five Cloves; when it is within a good half
hour of being boiled enough, put in such herbs, as you intend, as Sorrel,
Lettice, Purslane, Borage and Bugloss, or Green-pease; and in the Winter,
Parsley-roots and White-endive, or Navets, etc. so pour the broth upon tosted
light bread, and let it stew a while in the dish covered* You should never put
in fresh water. And if you should through the consuming of the water by long
boiling, it must be boiling hot. The less broth remains, the better is the
Potage, were it but a Porrenger full, so that it would be stiff gelly when it
is cold. It is good to put into the water, at the first, a whole Onion or two;
and if you will, a spoonful of well-beaten org^ monde, or bottom crust of
bread, or some of the bottom of a Venison Pasty.

Potage de sante.
Make strong broth with a piece of Beef, Mutton and Veal, adding a piece of the
sinews of the leg of Beef, seasoning it with two great Onions quartered, some
Cloves, and White-pepper. In due time put in a Capon, or take some broth out to
boil it in. But before you put in the Capon, take out some of the Broth, in
which boil and stew Turnips first prepared thus. Fry them in scalding butter,
till they be tender; then take them out with a holed skimmer, and lay them in a
holed dish warmed, set in another whole dish* When all the butter is quite
drained out, stew them in a Pipkin in the broth, as is said above. When you
will make up your potage, pu^ some Ladlefuls of the broth of the great pot
(driving away the fat with the ladle) upon slices of scorched-bread in a deep
dish. Let this mittonner a while. Then lay the Capon upon it, and pour the
Turnips and broth of them over all. A Duck in lieu of a Capon will make very
good potage. But then it is best, to fry that first, as the Turnips, then boil
it.

Potage de sante.
Make a good and well seasoned bouillon with (...) Beef, Mutton and Veal, in
which boil a Capon. Boil with it either Cabbage, or Turnips, or whole Onions.
The first two you put into the broth all over the dish; but the Onions you lay
all round about the brim, when you Serve it in. Whiles the meat is boiling to
make the bouillon, you roast a fleshy piece of Beef (without fat) of two or
three pound; and when it is half roasted, squeese out all the juice, and put the
flesh into the pot with the rest of the meat to boil, which will both color
and strengthen it. When you find your Bouillon good, pour it into the dish,
where your bread lies sliced (which must be very light and spungy, and dried
first, after it is sliced) and let it mittonner a little. Then pour your gravy
of Beef upon it, (or of Mutton) and lay your Capon upon it, and lay in your
roots round about it. It is best to boil by themselves in some of the bouillon
in a pot a part, the roots or Onions.

Potage de sante.
Mounsieur de S. Eurem^nt makes thus his potage de sante and boiled meat for
dinner, being very Valetudinary. Put a knuckle of Veal and a Hen into an
earthen P^pkin with a Gallon of water (about nine of the Clock forenoon) and
boil it gently till you have skimmed it well. When no more scum rises (which
will be in about a quarter of an hour,) take out the Hen (which else would be
too much boiled,) and continue boiling gently till about half an hour past ten.
Then put in the Hen again, and a handful of white Endive uncut at length, which
requires more boiling then tenderer herbs* Near half hour after eleven, put in
two good handfuls of tender Sorrel, Borage, Bugloss, Lettice, Purslane (these
two come later then the others, therefore are not to be had all the winter) a
handful a piece, a little Cerfevil, and a little Beet-leaves. When he is in
pretty good health, that he may venture upon more savoury hotter things, he
puts in a large Onion stuck round with Cloves, and sometimes a little bundle of
Thyme and other hot savoury herbs; which let boil a good half hour or better,
and take them out, and throw them away, when you put in the tender herbs. About
three quarters after eleven, have your sliced dried bread ready in a dish, and
pour a ladleful of the broth upon it. Let it stew covered upon a Cha^ing-dish.
When that is soaked in, put on more. So continue till it be well mittonee, and
the bread grown spungy, and like a gelly. Then fill up the dish with broth, and
put the Hen and Veal upon it, and cover them over with herbs, and so serve it
in. He keeps of this broth to drink at night, or make a Pan-cotto, as also for
next morning. I like to add to this, a rand of tender brisket Beef, and the
Cragg-end of a neck of Mutton. But the Beef mu^t have six hours boiling. So put
it on with all the rest at six a Clock. When it is well scummed, take out all
the rest. At nine, put in the Veal and Mutton, and thenceforwards, as is said
above. But to so much meat, and for so long boiling, you must have at least
three Gallons of water* Either way you must boil always but leisurely, and the
pot covered as much as is convenient, and season it in due time with a little
salt, as also with Pepper, if you like it; and if you be in vigorous health,
you may put a greater store of Onions quartered. The beets have no very good
taste, peradventure it were best leave them out. In health you may season the
potage with a little juice of Orange. In season green Pease ^re good, also
Cucumbers. In Winter, Roots, Cabbage, Poix-chiches, Vermicelli at any time. You
may use yolks of Eggs beaten with some of the broth and juice of Oranges or
Verjuyce, then poured upon the whole quantity.

Tea with Eggs.
The Jesuit that came from China, Ann. 1664, told Mr. Waller, That there they
use sometimes in this manner. To near a pint of the infusion, take two yolks of
new laid-eggs, and beat them very well with as much fine Sugar as is sufficient
for this quantity of Liquor; when they are very well incorporated, pour your
Tea upon the Eggs and Sugar, and stir them well together. So drink it hot. This
is when you come home from attending business abroad, and are very hungry, and
yet have not convenience to eat presently a competent meal. This presently
discusseth and satisfies all rawness and indigence of the stomach, flies
suddenly over the whole body and into the ve^ns, and strengthens exceedingly,
and preserves one a good while from necessity of eating. Mr. Waller finds all
those effects of it thus with Eggs.

In these parts, He says, we let the hot water remain too long soaking upon
the Tea, which makes it extract into it self the earthy parts of the herb. The
water is to remain upon it, no longer then whiles you can say the Miserere
Psalm very leisurely. Then pour it upon the sugar, or sugar and Eggs. Thus you
have only the spiritual parts of the Tea, which is much more active,
penetrative and friendly to nature. You may for this regard take a little more
of the herb; about one dragm of Tea, will serve for a pint of water; which
makes three ordinary draughts.

Nourishing Broth.
Make a very good gelly-broth of Mutton, Veal, joynt-bones of each, a Hen, and
some bones (with a little meat upon them) of roasted Veal or Mutton, breaking
the bones that the marrow may boil out. Put to boil with these some barley
(first boiled in water, that you throw away) some Hartshorn rasped, and some
stoned raisins of the Sun. When the broth is thoroughly well boiled, pour it
from the Ingredients, and let it cool and harden into a gelly: then take from
it the fat on the top, and the dregs in the bottom. To a porrenger full of this
melted, put the yolk of a new-laid egg beaten with the juice of an Orange (or
less, if you like it not to sharp) and a little Sugar; and let this stew gently
a little while altogether, and so drink it. Some flesh of roasted Veal or
Mutton, or Capon, besides the rosted-bones, that have marrow in them, does much
amend the broth.

The Joints I have mentioned above, are those, which the Butchers cut off, and
throw to their dogs, from the ends of shoulders, legs, and other bare long
parts, and have the sinews sticking to them.

Good no^rishing Potage.
Take any bones of roasted or boiled Beef, from which the meat is never so clean
eaten and picked; as the Ribs, the Chine-bones, the buckler plate-bone,
marrow-bones, or any other, that you would think never so dry and insipid.
Break them into such convenient pieces, as may lie in your pipkin or pot; also
you may bruise them. Put with them a good piece of the bloody piece of the
throat of the Beef, where he is sticked, and store of water to these. Boil and
scum them, till the first foul scum is risen and taken away; afterward scum no
more, but let the blood boil into the broth. You may put a quartered Onion or*
two to them, if you like them. After four or five hours boiling, put in a good
Knuckle with some of the leg of Veal; and, if you please, a crag-end or two of
necks of Mutton. Let these boil very well with the rest. You may put in what
herbs you please, in due time, as Lettice, Sorrel, Borage and Bugloss, Spinach
and Endive, Purslane, etc. and a bundle of sweet herbs: In winter, Cabbage, or
Turnips, or Parsley-roots, or Endive, etc. It will be done in two or three
hours after the Veal and Mutton are in. Pour out the broth, and boil it a
little by it self over a Cha^ing-dish, in some deep vessel, to scum off the
superfluous fat. Then pour it upon tosted bread (by degrees, if you will,
stewing it, to gelly it) to serve it in (after it has stewed a little,) you
must remember to season it with salt, Pepper and Cloves, in the due time. You
will do well to quicken it with some Verjuyce, or juice of Orange; or with some
yolks of Eggs and the juyces, if the broth be not over-strong. Greenpease in
the season do well with the Potage. You may put in, near the beginning, some
bottom of a Peppered Pasty, or of a loaf of bread.

Wheaten Flommery.
In the West-country, they make a kind of Flomery of wheat flower, which they
judge to be more hearty and pleasant then that of Oatmeal, Thus; Take half, or a
quarter of a bushel of good Bran of the best wheat (which contains the purest
flower of it, though little, and is used to make starch,) and in a great
wooden bowl or pail, let it soak with cold water upon it three or four days.
Then strain out the milky water from it, and boil it up to a gelly or like
starch. Which you may season with Sugar and Rose or Orange-flower-water, and
let it stand till it be cold, and gellied. Then eat it with white or
Rhenish-wine, or Cream, or Milk, or Ale.

Pap of Oat-meal.
Beat Oat-meal small; put a little of it to milk, and let it boil stewingly,
till you see that the milk begins to thicken with it. Then strain the milk from
the Oat-meal (this is as when you soak or boil out the substance of Oatmeal
with water, to make Flomery,) then boil up that milk to the height of Pap,
which sweeten with a little Sugar, and put to it some yolks of Eggs dissolved
in Rose or Orange-Flower-water, and let it mittonner a while upon the
Cha^ing-dish, and a little Butter, if you like it. You may boil a little Mace
in the Milk.

Panado.
Beat a couple of New-laid-eggs in good clear broth; heat this a little,
stirring it all the while. Then pour this upon a Panado made thick of same
broth; and keep them a little upon a Chasing-dish to incorporate, stirring them
all the while.

Barley Pap.
Boil Barley in water usque ad Putri^aginem, with a ^lake or two of Mace or a
quartered Nutmeg; and when it is in a manner dissolved in water with long
boiling, strain out all the Cream or Pap, leaving the ^usks behind. At the same
time beat (for one mess) two Ounces of blanched Almonds with Rose Water; and
when they are thoroughly beaten, strain out their milk, (or you may put this to
the Barley before it is strained, and strain them together) and put it to the
Barley Pap, and let them stew a while together; then sweeten it with Sugar to
your taste. Or when you have boiled the Barley in water very tender as above,
you may put Milk to it, and boil again to fittin^ thickness; Then strain it,
adding Almon^s as above. Or if you will, and your stomach will bear it, you may
eat it without straining the barley (but the Almonds must be strained) and you
may put Butter to it if you please.

You may do the like with Oat-meal or Rice; or put Pine-Ke^nels (first well
watered) with the Almonds.

Oat-meal Pap. Sir John Colladon.
Put beaten Oat-meal to soak an hour or two in milk, as you do in water, when
you make Flomery. Then strain it out into a Possnet through a sitting strainer;
and if you judge it too thick of the Oat-meal for sufficient boiling, add more
milk to it. Set this to boil, putting then into it a lump of Sugar, (about as
big as a little Wall nut) and stir it well all the while, that it burn not too.
About an hours boiling is sufficient, by which time it should be grown pretty
thick. Put then a good lump of fresh-butter to it, which being well melted and
stirred into the Pap and incorporated with it, take it from the fire, and put
it into a dish, and strew some fine sugar upon it, or mingle some sugar with it
to sweeten the whole quantity. You may season it also with Rose Water or Orange
flower-water, or Ambergreece, or some Yolks of New-laid-eggs. You may put in a
very little Salt at the first.

Rice and Orge monde.
Boil a quart of Milk in a large Pipkin; as soon as it boileth, take it from
the fire, and instantly put into it five or six good spoonfuls of picked Rice,
and cover it close, and so let it stand soaking in the Chimney-corner two
hours. Then set in on the fire again, to make it stew or boil simpringly for an
hour, or an hour and half more, till it be enough. Then put sugar to it, and so
serve it in.

Orge monde is done in the same manner; only* you let that stand covered and
warm all the while, during three, four or five hours, and then you boil it
simpringly three or four hours more. The quantity must be more or less, as you
desire it thicker or thinner, which after once trial, you will easily know how
to proportion out. The chief care must be, that the Rice or Barley be well
homogeneated with the Milk.

Smallage Gruel.
In a Marble mortar beat great Oat-meal to meal (which requires long beating)
then boil it three or four hours in Spring Water. To a possnet full of two or
three quarts of water put about half a Porrenger full of Oat-meal, before it is
beaten; for after beating it appears more. To this quantity put as much
Smallage as you buy for a penny, which makes it strong of the Herb, and very
green. Chop the smallage exceeding small, and put it in a good half hour before
you are to take your possnet from the fire. You are to season your Gruel with a
little salt, at the due time; and you may put in a little Nutmeg and Mace to
it. When you have taken it from the fire, put into it a good proportion of
butter, which stir well, to incorporate with the Gruel, when it is melted.

About water Gruel.
When you set to the fire a big pot of Oatmeal, (which must be but once cut,
that is, every corn cut once a two) and water, to make water gruel; Let it boil
long, till it be almost boiled enough, then make it rise in a great ebullition,
in great galloping waves, and skim off all the top, that rises; which may be a
third part of the whole, and is the Cream, and has no gross-visible Oat-meal
in it. Boil that a while longer by it self, with a little Mace and Nutmeg, and
season it with Salt. When it is enough, take it off, and put Sugar, Butter, and
a little Red-rose-water to it, and an Egg with a little White Wind, if you like
it, and would have it more nourishing. This is by much better, then the part
which remains below with the body of the Oat-meal. Yet that will make good
Water Gruel for the Servants.

If you boil it more leisurely, you must skim off the Cream, as it rises in
boiling; else it will quickly sink down again to the rest of the gross
Oat-meal. And thus you may have a finer Cream then with hasty boiling.

An Excellent and wholesome Water Gruel With Wood Sorrel and Currants.
Into a Possnet of two quarts of water, besides the due proportion of beaten
Oat-meal, put two handfuls of Wood sorrel a little-chopped and bruised, and a
good quantity of picked and washed Currants, tied loosly in a thin stuff bag
(as a bolter cloth) Boil these very well together, seasoning the Composition in
due time, with Salt, Nutmeg, Mace, or what else you please, as Rosemary, etc.
when it is sufficiently boiled, strain the Oat-meal, and press out all the
juice and humidity of the Currants and Herbs, throwing away the insipid husks;
and season it with Sugar and Butter; and to each Porrenger-ful two spoonfuls of
Rhenish-wine and the yolk of an Egg.

The Queens Barley-Cream.
You must make a good barley-water, throwing away the three first waters as
soon as they boil; which will take up about three quarters of an hour. Then you
boil a large quantity of water with the Barley (which thus prepared makes the
water no more Red or Russet) during an hours space or more; (that it may be
strong of the Barley; perle-Barley is best,) toward the latter end put in the
Pullet slead, and the legs cut off; If it should boil too long, the emulsion
would taste too fleshy. When it is enough, let the broth run clear from the
Barley and pullet, and beat the Almonds with the broth, and strain them from
it. Then sweeten it with Sugar. This is to make at least two English quarts of
Emulsion. I should like to put some pulp of Barley, boiled by it self, to
strain with the Almond-Milk* and, if you will, some Melon seeds. You may put
some juice of Limon or Orange to it. Also season it with Cinnamon, and make the
broth stronger of the flesh.

The Queens white Potage is made only of the white flesh of Capon beaten with
good broth and strained, and a little juice of Limon or Orange; but no Almonds.

Pressis Nourissant.
The Queen Mothers Pressis was thus made. Take un Gigot of Mutton, a piece of
Veal, and a Capon (or half the quantity of each of these) and put them to roast
with convenient fire, till they are above half roasted, or rather, till they be
two thirds roasted. Then take them off, and squeese out all their juice in a
press with screws, and scum all the fat from it, and put it between two dishes
upon a Chafing dish of Coals to boil a very little, or rather but to heat well;
for by then it is through hot, the juice will be ripened enough to drink,
whereas before it was raw and bloody; then if you perceive any fat to remain
and swim upon it, cleanse it away with a Feather. Squeese the juice of an
Orange (through a holed spoon) into half a Porrenger full of this, and add a
little Salt, and drink it. The Queen used this at nights in stead of a Supper;
for when she took this, she did eat nothing else. It is of great, yet temperate
nourishment. If you take a couple of Partridges in stead of a Capon, it will be
of more nourishment, but hotter. Great weaknesses and Consumptions have been
recovered with long use of this, and strength and long life continued notably.
It is good to take two or three spoonfuls of it in a good ordinary bouillon. I
should like better the boiling the same things in a close flagon in bulliente
Balneo, as my Lady Kent, and My Mother used.

Broth and Potage.
Mounsieur de Bourdeaux used to take a mornings a broth, thus made. Make a very
good broth (so as to gelly, when it is cold) a lean piece of a leg of Veal, the
Cr^g-end of a neck of Mutton, and a Pullet, seasoning it with a little Salt,
Cloves and Pepper to your mind. Beat some of it with a handful of blanched
Amonds, and twenty husked-seeds of Citron, and strain it to the whole; put
Sugar to it, and so drink it as an Emulsion.

Otherwhiles He would make a Potage of the broth, (made without fruit) boiling
and stewing it with some light-bread.

Pan Cotto.
To make a Pan Cotto, as the Cardinals use in Rome, Take much thinner broth,
made of the fleshes as above (or of Mutton alone) and boil it three hours,
gently and close covered in una pignata, with lumps of fine light-bread tosted
or dried. Un Pan grattato is made the same way with fine light-bread grated.
Season the broth of either lightly with Salt, and put in the Spice at the last,
when the bread is almost boiled or stewed enough. You may use juice of Orange
to any of these. A wholesome course of diet is, to eat one of these, or Panada,
or Cream of Oat-meal, or Barley, or two Newlaid-egg* for breakfast; and dine
at four or five a Clock, with Capon or Pullet or Partridg, etc. beginning your
meal with a little good nourishing Potage. Two Poched Eggs with a few fine
dry-fryed collops of pure Bacon, are not bad for breakfast, or to begin a meal.

My Lord Lumley's Pease-Porage.
Take two quarts of Pease, and put them into an Ordinary quantity of Water, and
when they are almost boiled, take out a pint of the Pease whole, and strain all
the rest. A little before you take out the pint of Pease, when they are all
boiling together, put in almost an Ounce of Coriander-seed beaten very small,
one Onion, some Mint, Parsley, Winter-savoury, Sweet-Marjoram, all minced very
small; when you have strained the Pease, put in the whole Pease and the
strained again into the pot, and let them boil again, and a little before you
take them up, put in half a pound of Sweet-butter. You must season them in due
time, and in the ordinary proportion with Pepper and Salt.

This is a proportion to make about a Gallon of Pease porage. The quantities
are set down by guess. The Coriander-seeds are as much as you can conveniently
take in the hollow of your hand. You may put in a great good Onion or two. A
pretty deal of Parsley, and if you will, and the season afford them, you may
add what you like of other Porage herbs, such as they use for their Porages in
France. But if you take the savoury herbs dry, you must crumble or beat them to
small Powder (as you do the Coriander-seed) and if any part of them be too big
to pass through the strainer, after they have given heir taste to the quantity,
in boiling a sufficient while therein, you put them away with the husks of the
Pease. The Pint of Pease that you reserve whole, is only to show that it is
Peaseporage. They must be of the thickness of ordinary Pease-porage. For which
these proportions will make about a Gallon.

Broth for sick and convalescent Persons.
Put a Crag-end of a Neck of Mutton, a Knuckle of Veal, and a Pullet into a
Pipk^n of water, with a spoonful or two of French-barley first scalded in a
water or two. The Pullet is put in after the other meat is well skimmed, and
has bo^led an hour. A good hour after that, put in a large quantity of Sorrel,
Lettice, Purslane, Borage and Bugloss, and boil an hour more at least three
hours in all. Before you put in the herbs, season the broth with Salt, a little
Pepper and Cloves, strain out the broth and drink it.

But for Potage, put at first a good piece of fleshy young Beef with the rest
of the meat. And put not in your herbs till half an hour before you take off
the Pot. When you use not herbs, but Carrots and Turnips, put in a little
Peny-royal and a sprig of Thyme. Vary in the season with Green-pease, or
Cucumber quartered longwise, or Green sower Verjuyce Grapes; always well
seasoned with Pepper and Salt and Cloves. You pour some of the broth upon the
sliced-bread by little and little, stewing it, before you put the Herbs upon
the Potage.

The best way of ordering your bread in potages, is thus. Take light spungy
fine white French-bread, cut only the crusts into tosts. Tossed them exceeding
dry before the fire, so that they be yellow. Then put them hot into a hot dish,
and pour upon them some very good strong broth, boiling hot. Cover this, and
let them stew together gently, not boil; and seed it with fresh-broth, still as
it needs; This will make the bread swell much, and become like gelly.

An Excellent Posset.
Take half a pint of Sack, and as much Rhenish wine, sweeten them to your taste
with Sugar. Beat ten yolks of Eggs, and eight of whites exceeding well, first
taking out the Cockstread, and if you will the skins of the yolks; sweeten
these also, and pour them to the wine, add a stick or two of Cinnamon bruised,
set this upon a Chafing Dish to heat strongly, but not to boil; but it must
begin to thicken. In the mean time boil for a quarter of an hour three pints of
Cream seasoned duly with Sugar and some Cinnamon in it. Then take it off from
boiling, but let it stand near the fire, that it may continue scalding-hot
whiles the wine is heating. When both are as scalding-hot as they can be
without boiling, pour the Cream into the wine from as high as you can. When all
is in, set it upon the fire to stew for 1/8 of an hour. Then sprinkle all about
the top of it the juice of a part of a Limon; and if you will, you may strew
Powder of Cinnamon and Sugar, or Ambergreece upon it.

Pease of the seedy buds of Tulips.
In the Spring (about the beginning of May) the flowry-leaves of Tulips do fall
away, and there remains within them the end of the stalk, which in time will
turn to seed. Take that seedy end (then very tender) and pick from it the
little excrescencies about it, and cut it into short pieces, and boil them and
dress them as you would do Pease; and they will taste like Pease, and be very
savoury.

Boiled Rice dry.
The manner of boiling Rice to eat with Butter, is this. In a Pipkin pour upon
it as much water, as will swim a good singers breadth over it. Boil it gently,
till it be tender, and all the water drunk into the Rice; which may be in a
quarter of an hour or less. Stir it often with a wooden spatule or spoon, that
it burn not to the bottom: But break it not. When it is enough, pour it into a
dish, and stew it with some Butter, and season it with sugar and Cinnamon. This
Rice is to appear dry, excepting for the Butter, that is melted in it.

Marrow Sops With Wine.
Make thin tosts or slices of light French bread, which dry well, or toste a
little by the fire, then Soak them in Canary or old Malagawine, or fine Muscat,
and lay a row of them in a deep dish or basin; then a row of lumps of Marrow
upon that; then strew a little fine sugar mingled with some Powder of Cinnamon
and Ambergreece (and Nutmeg, if you like it) upon that. Then another row of
sops, etc. repeating this, till the dish be full: and more Sugar, Cinnamon and
Amber at the top, then on the other rows. If you will, you may put a row of
stoned Raisins of the Sun upon every row of Marrow. Then cover the dish, and
put it in an Oven to bake for half an hour, or till the Marrow be sufficiently
baked.

Capon in White-broth.
My Lady of Monmouth boileth a Capon with white broth thus. Make reasonable
good broth, with the crag-ends of Necks of Mutton and Veal (of which you must
have so much as to be at least three quarts of White-broth in the dish with the
Capon, when all is done; else it will not come high enough upon the Capon) Beat
a quarter of a pound of blanched Almonds with three or four spoonfuls of Cream,
and, if you will, a little Rose water; then add some of your broth to it, so to
draw out all their substance, mingling it with the rest of the broth. Boil your
Capon in Fair-water by it self; and a Marrow-bone or two by themselves in other
water. Likewise some Chess-nuts (in stead of which you may use Pistaccios, or
macerated Pine kernels) and in other water some Skirrits or Endive, or
Parsley-roots, according to the season. Also plumpsome Raisins of the Sun, and
stew some sliced Dates with Sugar and water. When all is ready to join, beat
two or three New-laid-eggs (whites and all) with some of the White-broth, that
must then be boiling, and mingle it with the rest, and let it boil on: and
mingle the other prepared things with it, as also a little sliced Oringiado
(from which the harp Candy-sugar has been soaked off with warm-water) or a
little peel of Orange (or some Limon Pickled with Sugar and Vinegar, such as
serves for Salets) which you throw away, after it has been a while boiled in
it: and put a little Sack to your broth, and some Ambergreece, if your will,
and a small portion of Sugar; and last of all, put in the Marrow in lumps that
you have knocked out of the boiled bones. Then lay your Capon taken hot from
the Liquor, he boiled in, upon sippets and slices of tosted light bread, and
pour your broth and mixture upon it, and cover it with another dish, and let
all stew together a while; then serve it up. You must remember to season your
broth in due time with salt and such spices as you like.

To butter Eggs with Cream.
Take to a dozen of Eggs a pint of Cream; beat them well together, and put
three quarters of a pound of Butter to them, and so set them on the fire to
harden, and stir them, till they are as hard, as you would have them.

To make Cock-Ale.
Take eight Gallons of Ale; take a Cock and boil him well; then take four
pounds of Raisins of the Sun well stoned, two or three Nutmegs, three or four
flakes of Mace, half a pound of Dates; beat these all in a Mortar, and put to
them two quarts of the best Sack: and when the Ale has done working, put these
in, and stop it close six or seven days, and then bottle it, and a month after
you may drink it.

To make Plague-water.
Take a pound of Rue, of Rosemary, Sage, Sorrel, Celandine, Mugwort, of the
tops of red brambles, of Pimpernel, Wild-drago^s, Agrimony, Balm, Angelica of
each a pound. Put these Compounds in a Pot, fill it with White Wind above the
herbs, so let it stand four days. Then still it for your use in a Limbeck.

Another Plague-water.
Take Rue, Agrimony, Wormwood, Celandine, Sage, Balm, Mugwort, Dragons,
Pimpernel, Mary-gold, Fetherfew, Burnet, Sorrel, and Elicampane-roots scraped
and sliced small. Scabious, Wood-betony, Brown-may weed, Mints, Avence,
Tormentil, Card^us benedictus, and Rosemary as much as of any thing else, and
Angelica if you will. You must have like weight of all them, except Rosemary
aforesaid, which you must have twice as much of as of any of the rest; then
mingle them altogether and shred them very small; then steep them in the best
VVhite-wine you can get, three days and three nights, stirring them once or
twice a day, putting no more wine then will cover the Herbs well; then still it
in a Common-still; and take not too much of the first-water, and but a little
of the second, according as you feel the strength, else it will be sower. There
must be but half so much Elicampane as of the rest.

To make Rasbery-wine.
Take four Gallons of Deal wine, put it into an earthen jugg; put to it four
Gallons of Rasberries; let them stand so infusing seven days; then press it out
gently; Then infuse as many more Rasberries seven days longer, and so three
times if you please; put to it as much fine Sugar as will make it pleasant; Put
it into a Runlet close stopped, let it stand till it is fine; and then draw it
into bottles, and keep it till it be fine.

To keep Quinces all the year good.
Take all your least and worst Quinces, that are sound, and cut them in pieces,
with all the Corings and Parings you make; boil them more then an hour; then
put the Quinces into this boiling liquor, and take them forth presently, not
letting them boil, and lay them to cool one by one a part; then take the liquor
and strain it; and put for every Gallon of liquor half a pint of honey; then
boil it and scum it clean; let it be cold; and then put your Quinces into a pot
or tub, that they be covered with the liquor, and stop it very close with your
Paste.

To make a White-pot.
Take three quarts of Cream, and put into it the yolks of twelve Eggs; the
whites of four, being first very well beaten between three quarters of a pound
of Sugar, two Nutmegs grated, a little Salt; half a pound of Raisins first
plump'd. These being sliced together, cut some thin slices of a stale Manchet;
dry them in a dish against the fire, and lay them on the top of the Cream, and
some Marrow again upon the bread, and so bake it.

To make an Hotchpot.
Take a piece of Brisket-beef; a piece of Mutton; a Knuckle of Veal; a good
Colander of pot herbs; half minced Carrots, Onions and Cabbage a little broken.
Boil all these together until they be very thick.

Another Hotchpot.
Take a Pot of two Gallons or more; and take a brisket rand of Beef; any piece
of Mutton, and a piece of Veal; put th^s with sufficient water into the pot,
and after it has boiled, and been skimmed, put in a great Colander full of
ordinary pot herbs; a piece of Cabbage, all half cut; a good quantity of Onions
whole, six Carrots cut and sliced, and two or three Pippins quartered. Let this
boil three hours until it be almost a gelly, and stir it often, least it burn.

To stew Beef.
Take good fat Beef, slice it very thin into small pieces, and beat it well
with the back of a chopping Knife. Then put it into a Pipkin, and cover it with
wine and water, and put unto it a handful of good Herbs, and an Onion, with an
Anchoves. Let it boil two hours; A little before you take it up, put in a few
Marygold-flowers; and so season it with what Spice you please, and serve them
up both with sippets.

Another to stew Beef.
Take very good Beef, and slice it very thin; and beat it with the back of a
Knife; Put to it the gravy of some meat, and some wine or strong broth,
sweet-herbs a quantity; let it stew till it be very tender; season it to your
liking; and varnish your dish with Marygold-^lowe^s of Barberries.

To stew a Breast of Veal.
Take a Breast of Veal half roasted, and put it a stewing with some wine and
gravy; three or four yolks of Eggs minced small; a pretty quantity of
Sweet-herbs with an Onion, Anchoves or Limon; stick it either with Thyme or
Limon-peels, and season it to your liking.

Sauce of Horseradish.
Take Roots of Horseradish scraped clean, and lay them to soak in f^ir-water
for an hour, Then rasp them upon a Grater, and you shall have them all in a
tender sp^^gy Pap. Put Vinegar to it, and a very little Sugar, not so much as
to be tasted, but to quicken (by contariety) the taste of the other.

The Queens Hochpot.
From Her Escuyer de Cuisine, Mr. la Montagne.
The Queen Mothers Hochpot of Mutton, is thus made. It is exceeding good of
fresh Beef also, for those whose Stomachs can digest it. Cut a neck of Mutton,
Crag end and all into steaks (which you may beat, if you will; but they will be
very tender without beating) and in the mean time prepare your water to boil in
a Possnet, (which must be of a convenient bigness to have water enough, to
cover the meat, and serve all the stewing it, without needing to add any more
to it; and yet n^ sup^^fl^ous water at last.) Pu^ your meat into the boil^^g
water, and when you have scummed it cle^n, put into it a good handful of
pa^sley, and as much of Sibboulets (yo^ng Onions, or Sives) chopped small, if
you like to eat them in substance: otherwise tied up in a bouquet, to throw
them away, when they have communicated to the wa^er all their taste; some
Pepper; three or four Cloves, and a little Sal^, and half a Limon first pared.
These must stew or boil simpringly, (covered) at least three or hours (a good
de^l more, if Beef) stirring it often, that it burn not too. A good hour before
you in^end to take it off, put some quartered Turnips to it, or, if you like
them, some Carrots. A while after, take a good lump of Houshold-bread, bigger
th^n your fist, crust and crum, broil it upon a Gridiron, that it be thoroughly
tosted; sc^ape off the black burning on the ou^side; then soak it thoroughly in
Vinegar, and put this lump of tossed into your possnet to stew with it; which you
take out and throw away after a while. About a quarter of an hour before you
serve it up melt a good lump of Butter (as much as a great Egg) till it grow
red; then take it from the fire, and put to it a little fine flower to thicken
it (about a couple of spoonfuls) like thick Pap. Stir them very well together;
then set them on the fire again, till it grow-red, stirring it all the while;
then put to it a ladleful of the liquor of the pot, and let them stew a while
together to incorporate, stirring it always. Then pour this to the whole
substance in the Possnet, to Incorporate with all the liquor, and so let them
stew a while together. Then pour it out of the possnet into your dish, meat and
all: for it will be so tender, it will not endure taking up piece by piece with
your hand. If you find the taste not quick enough, put into it the juice of the
half Limon, you reserved. For I should have said, that when you put in the
Herbs, you squeese in also the juice of half a Limon (pared from the yellow
rind, which else would make it bitter) and throw the pared and squeesed half
(the substance) into it afterward. The last things (of Butter, bread, flower)
cause the liaison and thickening of the liquor. If this should not be enough,
you may also put a little gravy of Mutton into it; stirring it well when it is
in, least it curdle in stewing, or you may put the yolk of an Egg or two to
your liaison of Butter, Flower, and ladleful of broth.

For gravy of Mutton. Roast a juycy leg of Mutton three quarters. Then gash it
in several places, and press out the juice by a screwpress.

A savoury and nourishing boiled Capon Del Conte di Trino, a Milano.
Take a fat and fleshy Capon, or a like Hen; Dress it in the ordinary manner,
and cleanse it within from the guts, etc. Then put in the fat again into the
belly, and split the bones of the legs and wings (as far as you may, not to
deface the fowl) so as the Marrow may distill out of them. Add a little fresh
Butter and Marrow to it; season it with Salt, Pepper, and, what other Spice you
like, as also savoury herbs. Put the Capon with all these condiments into a
large strong sound bladder of an Ox (first well washed and scoured with
Red-wine) and tie it very close and fast to the top, that nothing may ouse out,
nor any water get in (and there must be void space in the bladder, that the
flesh may have room to swell and ferment in; therefore it must be a large one)
Put this to bo^l for a couple of hours in a Kettle of wa^er, or till you find
by touching the Bladder, that the Capon is tender and boiled enough. T^en serve
it up in a dish, in the Bl^dder (dry w^ped) which when you cut, you will find a
pre^ious and nou^ishing liquor to eat with bread* and the Capon will be short,
tender, most savoury and full of juice, and very nourishing.

I conceive, that if you put enough Ox-marrow, you need no butter; and that it
may do well to add Ambergreece, Dates-sliced and pithed, Raisins, Currants, and
a little Sugar.

Peradventure this might be done well in a Silver-flagon close luted, set in
Balneo bulliente, as I make the nourishing broth or gelly of Mutton or
Chickens, etc.

An Excellent Baked Pudding.
Slice thin two peny-roles, or one, of French-bread, the tender part. Lay it in
a dish or pan. Pour upon it a quart of Cream, that has been well boiled. Let
it stand almost half an hour, till it be almost cold. Then stir the bread and
Cream very well together, till the bread be well broken and Incorporated. (If
you have no French bread, take stale Kingston bread, grated) add to this two
spoonfuls of fine Wheat Flour, the yolks of four Eggs, and the whites of two;
a Nutmeg^grated small; Sugar to your taste; a little Salt, and the Marrow of two
bon^s a little shreded. Stir all these together; then pour it into a dish
greased over with Butter, and set it uncovered in the Oven to bake. About half
an hour will serve, and give the top a yellow crispiness. Before you put in the
Marrow, put in a quarter of a pound and a half of Raisins of the Sun, and as
much of Currants; Ordering them so, th^^ they may not fall to the bottom, but
be all about the pudding.

My Lady of Portland's Minced Pyes.
Take four pounds of Beef, Veal or Neats-Tongues, and eight pounds of Suet; and
mince both the meat and Suet very small, before you put them together. Then
mingle them well together, and mince it very small, and put to it six poun^s of
Currants washed and picked very clean. Then take the Peel of two Limons, and
half a score of Pippins, and mince them very small. Then take above an Ounce of
Nutmegs, and a quarter of an Ounce of Mace, some Cloves and Cinnamon, and put
them together, and sweeten them with Rose Water and Sugar. And when you are
ready to put them into your Paste, take Citron and Orangiadoe, and slice them
very thin, and lay them upon the meat. If you please, put dates upon the top of
them. And put amongst the meat an Ounce of Caraway-seeds. Be sure you have very
fine Paste.

My Lady of Portland told me since, that she finds Neats-tongues to be the best
flesh for P^es. Parboil them first. For the proportion of the Ingredients she
likes best to take equal parts of flesh, of suet, of currants and of Raisins of
the Sun. The other things in proportion as is said above. You may either put
the Raisins in whole, or stone the greatest part, and Mince them with the Meat.
Keep some whole ones, to lay a bed of them at the top of the Pie, when all is
in. You will do well to stick the Candid Orange-peel, and green Citron-peel
into the meat. You may put a little Sack or Greek Muscadine into each Pie. A
little Amber-sugar does well here. A pound of flesh, and proportionably of all
things else, is enough for once in a large family.

Another way of making excellent Minced Pyes of My Lady Portlands.
Parboil Neats-tongues. Then Peel and hash them with as much as they weigh of
Beef Suet, and stoned Raisins, and picked Currants. Chop all exceeding small,
that it be like Pap. Employ therein at least an hour more, then ordinarily is
used. Then mingle a very little Sugar with them, and a little wine, and thrust
in up and down some thin slices of green Candyed Citron-peel. And put this into
coffins of fine light well reared crust. Half an hour baking will be enough. If
you strew a few Carvi comfits on the top, it will not be amiss.

Minced Pyes.
My Lady L^sson makes her finest minced Pyes of Neats-tongues; But she holds
the most savoury ones to be of Veal and Mutton equal parts very small minced.
Her finest crust is made by sprinkling the flower (as much as it needs) with
cold water, and then working the past with little pieces of raw Butter in good
quantity. So that she uses neither hot water, nor melted butter in them; And
this makes the crust short and light. After all the meat and seasoning, and
Plums and Citron Peel, etc. is in the Coffin, she puts a little Ambered-sugar
upon it, thus; Grind much two grains of Ambergreece and half a one of Musk,
with a little piece of hard loaf-Sugar. This will serve six or eight pyes,
strewed all over the top. Then cover it with the Liddle, and set it in the Oven.

To Roast fine Meat.
When the Capon, Chickens, or Fowl, have been long enough before the fire, to
be through hot, and that it is time to begin to baste them: baste them once all
over very well with fresh Butter; then presently powder it all over very thin
with Flower. This by continuing turning before the fire, will make a thin
crust, which will keep in all the juice of the meat. Therefore baste no more,
nor do any thing to it, till the meat be enough roasted. Then baste it well with
Butter as before, which will make the crust relent and fall away; which being
done, and that the meat is growing brown on the Outside, besprinkle it over
with a little ordinary white Salt in gross-grains; and continue turning, till
the outside be brown enough.

The Queen uses to baste such meat with yolks of fresh-Eggs beaten thin, which
continue to do all the while it is rosting.

Savoury Collops of Veal.
Cut a Leg of Veal into thin Collops, and beat them well with the back of a
Knife. Then lay them in soak a good half hour in the yolks of four Eggs, and
the whites of two very well beaten, and a little small shreded Thyme mingled
with it; then lay them in the Drying Pan, wherein is boiling Butter, and pour
upon them the rest of the Eggs, that the Collops have not Imbibed* and carry
with them, and fry them very well, turning them in due time. Then pour away all
the Butter, and make them a Sauce of Gravy seasoned with Salt and Spice, and
juice of Orange at last squeesed upon them.

A Fricacee of Lamb-stones, or Sweet-breads, or Chicken, or Veal, or Mutton.
Boil the meat in little pieces (if Chicken, flead and beaten) in the Pan with
a pint of fair-water, with due seasoning. When it is very tender, put some
Butter to it, and pour upon it a Liquor made of four yolks of Eggs beaten with
a little white wine and some Verjuyce; and keep this in motion over the fire,
till it be sufficiently thickened. Then pour it into a warm dish, and squeese
some juice of Orange upon it, and so serve it up. If you would have the meat
first made brown and Rissole, fry it first with Butter, till it be brown on the
outside; then pour out all the Butter, and put water to it, in which boil it,
and do all as before. If you like Onions or Garlike, you may put some to the
water. Flesh broth may be used (both ways) in stead of water, and makes it
more Savoury.

A Nourishing Hachy.
Take good Gravy of Mutton or Veal, or of both, with the fat clean skimmed off.
Break into it a couple of new-laid Eggs, and stir them in it over a
Chafing Dish of Coals; in the mean time, mingle some small cut juycy hashy of
Rabet, Capon or Mutton with another parcel of like Gravy as above, till it be
pretty thin. Then put this to the other upon the fire, and stir them well with
a spoon, whiles they heat. When all is heated through, it will quicken of a
sudden. You may put in at first a little chipping of crusty bread, if you will.
Season this with white Pepper, Salt, juice of Orange or Verjuyce, of Berberies,
or Onion, or what you like best.

A pint of Gravy (or less) four or five spoonfulls of hashy, and two Eggs, is a
convenient proportion for a light Supper.

Such Gravy, with an Onion split in two, lying in it, whiles it is heating, and
a little Pepper and Salt, and juice of Limon or Orange, and a few Chippings of
light-bread, is very good Sauce for Partridges or Cocks.

Excellent Marrow-Spinage-Pasties.
Take Spinach, and chop it a little; then boil it, till it be tender. In the
mean time make the best rich light Crust you can, and roll it out, and put a
little of your Spinach into it, and Currants and Sugar, and store of lumps of
Marrow; Clap the Past over this to make little Pasties deep within, and fry
them with clarified Butter.

To Pickle Capons My Lady Portland's way.
Take two large fleshy Capons, not two fat; when you have draw'd and trussed
them, lay them upon a Chafing Dish of Charcoal to singe them, turning them on
all sides, till the hair and down be clean singed off. Then take three pounds
of good Lard, and cut it into larding pieces, about the thickness of a two-peny
cord, and Lard it well, but first season your bits of Lard, with half an Ounce
of Pepper, and a handful of Salt, then bind each of them well over with
Pack-thread, and have ready over the fire about two Gallons of Beef-broth, and
put them in a little before it boileth; when they boil, and are clean skimmed,
then put in some six Bay Leaves; a little bunch of Thyme; two ordinary Onions
stuck full of Cloves, and Salt, if it be not Salt enough already for pickle;
when it has boiled about half an hour, put in another half Ounce of beaten
White-Pepper, and a little after, put in a quart of White Wind; So let it boil,
until it has boiled in all an hour; and so let it lie in the pickle till you
use it; which you may do the next day, or any time within a fortnight; in stead
of broth you may use water, which is better; in case you do four or six, which
of themselves will make the pickle strong enough. If you will keep them above
four days, you must make the pickle sharp with Vinegar.

Very good sauce for Partridges or Chicken.
To ordinary Sauce of sliced or grated-bread soaked in good Bouillon, with
Butter melted in it, put Gravy of Mutton, and a Cloven-Onion or two, to stew
with it whiles you put it upon the fire to heat anew. Then take out the Onion,
and put in some Limon-sliced, or juice of Limon, and some white Pepper. You put
in his proportion of Salt before.

To make Minced Pyes.
Take two Neats-tongues, and boil them* Shred them with Beef Suet, and put in
Cloves and Mace, beaten very small, with Raisins, Currants and Sugar; you must
mingle them before you put in your Suet. Fat double tripes boiled tender, then
minced, make very good Pyes.

To make a French-Barley Posset.
Take two quarts of Milk to half a pound of French-barley; boil it, until it is
enough; when the Milk is almost boiled away, put to it three Pintes of good
Cream. Let it boil together a quarter of an hour; then sweeten it; and put in
Mace, Cinnamon in the beginning, when you first put in your Cream. When you
have done so, take White Wind a Pint, or Sack and White Wind together, of each
half a Pint; sweeten it, as you love it, with Sugar; pour in all the Cream, but
leave your Barley behind in the Skillet. This will make an Excellent Posset;
nothing else but a tender Curd to the bottom: let it stand on the Coals half a
quarter of an hour.

To make Puff-past.
Take a Gi^l of cold-water; two whites of Eggs, and one yolk; to a quart of
Flower one pound of Butter; so roll it up, but keep out of the Flower so much
as will roll it up.

To make a Pudding with Puff-past.
Take a new French peny-loaf, and slice it very thin, and lay it in a dish; and
take three pints of Cream, and boil it with a little Mace and Nutmeg grated;
sweeten it with a little Sugar, and add to it a little Salt. Then let it stand
till it be cold. Then take ten yolks of Eggs; and beat them very well with two
or three spoonfuls of the Cream; then put it into the Cream, and stir them well
together: Take the Marrow of three bones; lay half the Marrow upon the bread in
good big lumps, and some Citron, and Candid Limon, and what other sweet meats
you like. Then pour it all upon the bread; then put the rest of your Marrow on
the top with Citron and Candid Limon. I forgot to tell you, that you must lay a
Puff-paste at the bottom of the dish, before you put in the bread, and cover it
with the same.

To make Pear-Puddings.
Take a cold Turkey, Capon or co^d Veal. Shred it very small; and put almost as
much Beef Suet as your meat, and mince it very small. Then put Salt and Nutmeg
grated, half a pound of Currants; a little grated-bread, and a little Flower.
Then put in three yolks of Eggs, and one of the whites, beaten very well. Then
take so much Cream, as will wet them, and make them up as big as a
Bon-christian pear; and as you make them up, take a little flower in your hand,
that they may not cling. Then put in little sticks at the bottom like the stems
of Pears; or make them up in Ba^ls. Butter the dish very well, and send them up
in the same dish you bake them in. They will be baked in about half an hour: I
think the dish needs not to be covered, whiles it baketh. You may make minced
Pyes thus: and bake them with Puff-past in a dish like a Florenden, and use
Marrow in stead of Suet.

Marrow-Puddings.
Take the pith of Beeves; a good spoonful of Almonds very small beaten with
Rose Water: beat the pith, when the skin is taken off very well with a spoon;
then mingle it with the Almonds, and put in it fix yolks of Eggs well beaten,
and four spoonfuls of Cream boiled and cold, it must be very thick; put in a
little Ambergris, and as much Sugar, as will sweeten them; a little Salt,
and the Marrow of two good bones, cut in little pieces. When your Beefs-guts
are seasoned, fit them up and boil them.

To make Red Dear.
Take a piece of the Buttock of Beef, the leanest of it, and beat it with a
rowling-pin the space of an hour, till you think you have broken the grain of
it, and have made it very open both to receive the sowsing-drink, and also to
make it tender. Then take a pint of Vinegar, and a pint of Claret Wine and let
it lie therein two nights, and two days. Then beat a couple of Nutmegs, and put
them into the sowsing-drink; then Lard it. Your Lard must be as big as your
greatest finger for consuming. Then take Pepper, Cloves, Mace and Nutmegs, and
season it very well in every place, and so bake it in Eye-paste, and let it
stand in the oven six or seven hours. And when it has stood three hours in
your oven, then put it in your sowsing-drink as is aforesaid; and you may keep
it a quarter of a year, if it be kept close.

To make a shoulder of Mutton like Venison.
Save the blood of your sheep, and strain it. Take grat^d bread almost the
quantity of a Penny loaf, Pepper, Thyme, chopp'd small; mingle these Ingredients
with a little of the blood, and ^tuf^ the mutton. Then wrap up your shoulder of
Mutton, and lay it in the blood twenty four hours; prick the shoulder with your
Knife, to let the blood into the flesh, and to serve it with Venison Sauce.

To stew a Rump of Beef.
Take a Rump of Beef, and season it with Nutmegs grated, and some Pepper and
Salt mingled together, and season the Beef on the Bony-side; lay it in a pipkin
with the fat-side downward. Take three pints of Elder-wine^vinegar, and as much
water, and three great Onions, and a bunch of Rosemary tied up together. Put
them all into a Pipkin, and ste^ them three or four hours together with a so^^
fire being covered close. Then dish it up upon sippets, blowing off the fat
from the Gravy; an^ some of the Gravy put into the Beef, and serv^ it up.

To boil smoaked Flesh.
Mounsieur Overbec does tell me, that when He boileth a Gambon of Bacon, or any
salted flesh and hanged in the smoke (as Neats-tongues, Hung-beef, and
Hogs-cheeks, etc.) He puts into the Kettle of water to boil with them three
or four handfuls of fle^r de foin, (more or less according to the quantity of
flesh and water,) tied loosly in a bag of course-cloth. This makes it much
tenderer, shorter, mellower, and of a finer color.

A Plain but good Spanish Oglia.
Take a Rump of Beef, or some of Brisket or Buttock cut into pieces, a lo^n of
Mutton, wi^h the superfluous fat taken off, and a fleshy piece of the Leg of
Veal or a Knuckle, a piece of enterlarded Bacon, three or 4 Onions (or some
Garlike) and if you will, a Capon or two, or three great ^ame Pigeons. First,
put into the water the Beef and the Bacon; After a while, the Mutton and Veal
and Onions. But not the Capon or Pigeons till only so much time remain, as will
serve barely to boil them enough. If you have Garavanzas, put them in at the
first, after they have been soaked with Ashes all night in heat, and well
washed with warm water, after they are taken out; or if you will have Cabbage,
or Roots, or Leeks, or whole Onions, put them in time enough to be sufficiently
boiled. You may at first put in some Crusts of bread, or Venison Pie crust. It
must boil in all five or six hours gently, like stewing after it is well
boiled. A quarter or half an hour before you intend to take it off, take out a
porrenger ^ull of broth, and put to it some Pepper and five or six Cloves and a
Nutmeg, and some Saffran, and mingle them well in it. Then put that into the
pot, and let it boil or stew with the rest a while. You may put in a bundle of
Sweet-herbs. Salt must be put in as soon as the water is skimmed.

Vuova Lattate.
Take a quart of good, but fine broth; beat with it very well eight
New-laid-eggs (whites and all) and put in a little Sugar, and if you will a
little Amber, or some Mace, or Nutmeg. Put all this into a fit Pipkin, and set
this in a great one, or a kettle of boiling water, till it be stiffened like a
Custard.

Vuova Spersa.
When some broth is boiling in a Pipkin, pour into it some Eggs well beaten,
and they will curdle in a lump, when they are enough; ^ake them out with a
holed ladle, and lay them upon the bread in the Minestra.

To make Excellent Black-puddings.
Take a quart of Sheeps-blood, and a quart of Cream; ten Eggs, the yolks and
the whites beaten well together; stir all this Liquor very well, then thicken
it with grated Bread, and Oat-meal finely beaten, of each a like quantity;
Beef Suet finely shred and Marrow in little lumps: season it with a little
Nutmeg and Cloves and Mace mingled with Salt, a little Sweet-marjoram, Thyme
and Peny-royal shr^d very well together, and mingle them with the other things:
Some put in a few Currants; then fill them in cleansed guts, and boil them
carefully.

A Receipt to make white Puddings.
Take a fillet of Veal, and a good fleshy Capon; then half roast them both, and
take off their skins: which being done, take only the wings and brawns with an
equal proportion of Veal, which must be shred very small as is done for
Sassages. To this shred half a pound of the belly part of interlarded Bacon,
and half a pound of the finest leaf (la p^nne) of Hog cleared from the skin;
then take the yolks of eighteen or twenty Eggs, and the whites of six well
beaten with as much Milk and Cream, as will make it of convenient thickness;
and then season it with Salt, Cloves, Nutmeg, Mace, Pepper and Ginger, if you
please. The Puddings must be boiled in half Milk and half water. You are to use
small-guts, such as for white-M^rrow-puddings, and they are to be cleansed in
the O^dinary manner; and filled very lankley; for they will swell much in the
boiling, and break if they be too full.

To make an Excellent Pudding.
Take of the Tripes of Veal the whitest and finest you can find; wash them
well, and let them l^e in fair Fountain or River-water, till they do not smell
like Tripes. This done, cut them so small as is necessary to pass through a
Tunnel. Take also one or two pounds of Pork, that has not been salted, and cut
it as small as the Tripes, and mingle them altogether; which season with Salt,
White-pepper, Anis-seeds beaten, and Coriander-seeds; Then make a Liaison with
a little Milk and yolks of Eggs; and after all is well mingled and thickened, as
it ought to be, you must fill with it the greatest guts of a Hog, that may be
had, with a Funnel of Wh^^e iron, having first tied the end of the gut below.
Do not fill it too full, for fear they should break in the boiling, but leave
room enough for the flesh to swell. When you are going to boil them, put them
into a Kettle with as much Milk as will cover and boil them, being boiled, let
them lie in the liquor till they are almost cold, then take them out and lay
them in a basket upon a clean linen cloth to cool.

If they are well seasoned, they will keep twelve or fifteen days; provided you
keep them in a good place, not moist, nor of any bad smell. You must still turn
them and remove them from one place to another.

Scotch Collops.
My Lord of Bristol's Scotch Collops are thus made: Take a leg of fine
Sweet-Mut^on, that, to make it tender, is kept as long as possible may be
without stinking. In Winter seven or eig^t days. Cut it into slices with a
sharp Knife as thin as possibly you can. Then beat it with the back of a heavy
Knife, as long as you can, not breaking it in pieces. Then sprinkle them with
Salt, and lay them upon the Gridiron over a small Charcoal-fire, to broil, till
you perceive that side is enough, and before any moisture run out of them upon
the fire. Then lay the Collops into a warm dish close covered, till the Gravy
be run out of them. Then lay their other side upon the Gridiron, and make an
end of broiling them, and put them again into the dish, where the former Gravy
run out. Add to this more Gravy of Mutton, heightened with Garlike or Onions,
or Eschalots; and let them stew a while together, then serve them in very hot.

They are also very good of a Rump of tender Beef.

To roast Wild-Boar.
At Franckfort, when they roast Wild-boar (or Ro-buck or other Venison) they lay
it to soak, six or eight or ten days (according to the thickness and firmness
of the piece and Pene^rability of it) in good Vinegar, wherein is Salt and
Juniper Berries bruised (if you will, you may add bruised Garlic or what other
Haut-goust you like) the Vinegar coming up half way the flesh, and turn it
twice a day. Then if you will, you may Lard it.

When it is roasted, it will be very mellow and tender. They do the like with a
leg or other part of Fresh-pork.

Pyes.
I made good Pyes there with two Hares, a good Goose and (as much as the Goose
is) the lean of fresh good Pork, all well hashed and seasoned; then larded with
great Lardons well seasoned, (first sprinkled with Vinegar and Wine) and
covered with Bay Leaves, and sheets of Lard; then laid in past, and baked.

I made also good Pyes of Red-Deer, larding well the lean, then laying under it
a thick Plastron (or Cake of a Finger thick) of Beef Suet, first chapped small,
and seasoned well with Pepper and Salt, then beaten into a Cake fit for the
meat. And another such Cake upon the Deers-flesh, and so well baked in strong
crust, and soaked two or three hours in the oven after it was baked enough,
which required six good hours. If you use no Suet, put in Butter enough; as
also, put in enough to fill the pa^^e, after it is baked and half cold, by a
hole made in the top, when it is near half baked.

Baked Venison.
My Lady of Newport bakes her Venison in a dish thus; A side or a h^nch serves
for two dishes. Season it as for a Pasty. Line the dish with a thin crust, of
good pure Past, but make it pretty thick upwards toward the brim, that it may
be there Pudding-crust. Lay then the Venison in a round piece upon the Paste in
the dish, that must not fill it up to touch the Pudding, but lie at ease; put
over it a cover, and let it overreach upon the brim with some carved Pasty
work to grace it, which must go up with a border like a lace growing a little
way upwards upon the Cover, which is a little arched up, and has a little hole
in the top to pour in unto the meat the strong well seasoned broth, that is
made of the broken bones, and remaining lean flesh of the Venison. Put a little
pure Butter or Beef Suet to the Venison, before you put the cover on, unless it
be exceeding fat. This must bake five or six hours or more as an ordinary
Pasty. An hour, or an hour and half before you bake it out to serve it up, open
the Oven, and draw out the dish far enough to pour in at the little hole of the
cover the strong decoction (in stead of decoction in water, you may boil it by
self in Balneo in duplici vase; or bake it in a pot with broth and Gravy of
Mutton) of the broken bones and flesh. Then set it in again, to make an end of
his baking and soaking. The meat within (even the lean) will be exceeding
tender and like a gelly; so that you may cut all of it with a spoon. If you
bake a side at once in two dishes, the one will be very good to keep cold; and
when it is so, you may, if you please, bake it again to have it hot; not so
long as at first, but enough to have it all perfectly he^ted through. She bakes
thus in Pewter-dishes of a large ^ise.

Mutton or Veal may be thus baked with their due seasoning; as with Onions, or
Onions and Apples, or Larding, or a Cawdle, etc. Sweet-breads, Beatilles, Champ
g^ons, Treu^fles, etc.

An Excellent way of making Mutton Steaks.
Cut a Rack of Mutton into tender Steaks, Rib by Rib, and beat the flesh well
with the back of a Knife. Then have a composition ready, made of Crumbs of
stale Manchet grated small, and a little Salt (a fit proportion to Salt the
meat) and a less quantity of White-pepper. Cover over on both sides all the
flesh with this, pretty thick, pressing it on with your fingers and flat Knife,
to make it lie on. Then lay the Steaks upon a Gridiron over a very quick fire
(for herein consists the well doing) and when the fire has pierced in a
little on the one side, turn the other, before any juice drop down through the
Powder. This turning the steaks will make the juice run back the other way; and
before it run through, and drop through this side, you must turn again the
other side: doing so, till the Steaks be broiled enough. Thus you keep all the
juice in them, so that when you go to eat them (which must be presently, as
they are taken from the fire) abundance of juice runs out as soon as your
Knife enters in to the flesh. The same Person, that does this, rosteth a
Capon so as to keep all its juice in it. The mystery of it is in tu^ning it so
quick, that nothing can drop down. This makes it the longer in rosting. But
when you cut it up, the juice runs out, as out of a juycie leg of Mutton;
and it is excellent meat.

Excellent good Collops.
Take two legs of fleshy juycie tender young Mutton, cut them into as thin
slices as may be. Beat them with the back of a thick Knife, with smart, but
gentle blows, for a long time, on both sides: And the strokes crossing one
another every way, so that the Collops be so sho^t, that they scarce hang
together. This quantity is near two hours beating. Then lay them in a clean
drying pan, and hold them over a smart fire: And it is best to have a sit cover
for the Pan, with a handle at the top of it, to take it off when you will. Let
them fry so covered, till the side next the Pan be enough; then turn the other
side, and let that fry, till it be enough. Then Pour them with all the Gravy
(which will be much) into a hot dish, which cover with another hot one, and so
serve it into eat presently. You must season the Collops with Salt sprinkled
upon them, either at the latter end of beating them, or whiles they fry. And if
you love the taste of Onions, you may rub the Pan well over with one, before
you lay in the Steak^ or Collops; or when they are in the dish, you may beat
some Onion-water amongst the Gravy. You may also put a little fresh-butter into
the pan to melt, and line it all over before you put in the Collops, that you
may be sure, they bu^n not to the pan. You must put no more Collops into one
pan, at once, then merely to cover it with one L^re; that the Collops may not
lie one upon another.

Bluck Puddings.
Take three pints of Cream, and boil it with a Nutmeg quartered, three or four
leaves of large Mace, and a stick of Cinnamon. Then take half a pound of
Almonds, beat them and strain them with the Cream. Then take a few fine Herbs,
beat them and strain them to the Cream, which came from the Almonds. Then take
two or three spoonfuls (or more) of Chickens blood; and two or three spoonfuls
of grated-bread, and the Marrow of six or seven bones, with Sugar and Salt, and
a little Rose Water. Mix all together, and fill your P^ddings. You may put in
eight or ten Eggs, with the whites of two well-beaten. Put in some Musk or
Ambe^greece.

To make Pith Puddings.
Take a good quantity of the pith of Oxen, and let it lie all night in water to
soak out the blood. The next morning, strip it out of the skin, and so bea^ it
with the back of a spoon, till it be as fine as P^p: You must beat a little
Rose Water with it. Then take three pints of good thick Cream, and boil it with
a Nutmeg quartered, three or four leaves of large Mace; and a stick of
Cinnamon. Then take half a pound of the best Jordan Almond^. Blanch them in
cold water all night; then beat them in a Mortar with some of your Cream; and
as they grow dry, still put in more Cream; and when they be well beaten, strain
the Cream from the Almonds into the Pith. Then beat them still, until the Cream
be done, and strain it still to the pith. Then take the yolks of ten Eggs, with
the Whites of two; beat them well, and put them to your former Ingredients.
Then take a spoonful of grated-bread. Mingle all these together, with half a
pound of fine-sugar, the Marrow of six or seven bones, and some Salt, and so
fill your Puddings.

They will be much the better, if you put in some Ambergreece.

Red-Herrings Broyled.
My Lord d' Aubigny eats Red-herrings thus broiled. After they are opened and
prepared for the Gridiron, soak them (both sides) in Oil and Vinegar beaten
together in pretty quantity in a little Dish. Then broil them, till they are
hot through, but not dry. Then soak them again in the same Liquor as before,
and broil them a second time. You may soak and broil them again a third time;
but twice may serve. They will be then very short and crisp and savoury. Lay
them upon your Sallet, and you may also put upon it, the Oil and Vinegar, you
soaked the Herrings in.

An Oat-meal-Pudding.
Take a Pint of M^lk; and put to it a Pint of large or midling Oat-meal; let it
stand upon the fire, until it be scalding hot: Then let it stand by and soak
about half an hour: Then pick a few sweet Herbs and shred them, and put in half
a pound of Currants, and half a pound of Suet, and about two spoonfuls of
Sugar, and three or four Eggs. These put into a bag, and boiled, do make a very
good Pudding.

To make Pear-Puddings.
Take a cold Capon, or half-rosted, which is much better; then take Suet, shred
very small the meat and Suet together; then half as much grated bread, two
spoonfuls of Flower, Nutmegs, Clove and Mace; Sugar as much as you please; half
a Pound of Currants; the yolks of two Eggs, and the white of one; and as much
Cream, as will make it up in a stiff Paste. Then make it up in fashion of a
pear, a stick of Cinnamon for the stalk, and the head a Clove.

To make Call-Puddings.
Take three Marrow-bones, slice them; water the Marrow over night, to take away
the blood. Then take the smallest of the Marrow, and put it into the Puddings,
with a Peny-loaf grated, a spoonful of Flower, and Spice as before; a quarter
of a pound of Currants; Sugar as much as you please, four Eggs, two of the
whites taken away. Cream as much as will make it as stiff as other Puddings.
Stuff the Call of Veal cut into the bigness of little Hogs-puddings; you must
sow them all to one end; and so fill them; then sow up the other end, and when
they are boiled, take hold of the thread, and they will all come out. You must
boil them in half white^Wine and half Water; with one large Mace, a few
Currants, a spoonful of the Pudding stuff, the Marrow in whole lumps; all this
first boiled up, then put in your P^ddings, and when half boiled, put in your
Marrow. One hour will boil them. Serve them up with Sippets, and no more
Liquor, then will serve them up; you must put Salt in all the Puddings.

A Barley Pudding.
Take two Ounces of Barley picked and washed; boil it in Milk, till it is
tender; then let your Milk run from it; Then take half a Pint of Cream, and six
spoonfuls of the boiled Barley; eight-spoonfuls of grated bread, four Eggs, two
whi^es taken away. Spice as you please, and Sugar and Salt as you think fit,
one Marrow-bone, put in the lumps as whole as you can; Then make Puff-paste,
and roll a thin sheet of it, and lay it in a dish. Then take a piece of
Green-citron sliced thin, lay it all over the dish. Then take Cream, grated
bread, your Spice, Sugar, Eggs and Salt; beat all these very well together half
a quarter of an hour, pour it on your dish where Citron is, then cover it over
with puff-paste, and let it bake in a quick oven three quarters of an hour.
Scrape Sugar on it, and serve it up.

A Pippin-Pudding.
Take Pippins and pare, and cut off the tops of them pretty deep. Then take out
as much of your Apple as you can take without breaking your Apple, then fill
your Apple with puddingstuff, made with Cream, a little Sack, Marrow, Grated
bread, Eggs, Sugar, Spice and Salt. Make it pretty stiff. Put it into the
Pippins; lay the tops of the Pippins upon the Pippins again, stick it through
with a stick of Cinnamon. Set as many upright in your dish as you can: and so
fill it up with Cream, and sweeten it with Sugar and Mace; and stew them
between two dishes.

To make a baked Oatmeal-Pudding.
Take middle Oat-meal, pick it very clean, steep it all night in Cream, half a
Pint of Oat-meal, to a quart of Cream, make your Cream scalding hot, before you
put in your Oat-meal, so cover it close. Take a good handful of Pennyroyal,
shred it very small, with a pound of Beef Suet. Put it to your Cream with half
a pound of Raisins of the Sun, Sugar, Spice, four or five Eggs, two whites
away. So bake it three quarters of an hour; and then serve it up.

A plain Quaking-Pudding.
Take about three Pints of new morning Milk, and six or seven new laid Eggs,
Putting away half the whites, and two spoonfuls of fine-flower, about a quarter
of a Nutmeg grated, and about a quarter of a pound of Sugar (more or less,
according to your taste,) After all these are perfectly mingled and
incorporated together, put the matter into a fit bag, and so put it into
boiling water, and boil it up with a quick fire. If you boil it too long, the
Milk will turn to whay in the body or substance of the Pudding, and there will
be a slimy gelly all about the outside. But in about half an hour, it will be
tenderly firm, and of an uniform consistence all over. You need not put in any
Butter or Marrow or Suet, or other Spice, but the small proportion of Nutmeg
set down, nor grated bre^d. For the Sauce, you poor upon it thickened melted
Butter, beaten with a little Sack, or Orange-flower water, and Sugar; or
compounded in what manner you please, as in other such like Puddings.

A good Quaking Bag-Pudding.
Set a quart of good morning Milk upon the fire, having seasoned it with Salt,
and sliced or grated Nutmeg. When it begins to boil, take it from the fire,
and put into it four penny Manchets of light French-bread sliced very thin (If
it were Kingstone-bread, which is firmer, it must be grated) and a lump of
Sweet-butter as big as a Wall-nut, and enough Sugar to seas^^ it; and cover the
possnet with a plate to keep the heat in, that the bread may soak perfectly.
Whiles this stands thus, take ten yolks of New-laid-eggs, with one White, and
beat them very well with a spoonful or two of Milk; and when the Milk is cooled
enough, pour it (with the bread in it,) into the basin, where the beaten Eggs
are, (which likewise should first be sweetened with Sugar to their proportion,)
and put about three spoonfuls of fine flower into the composition, and knead
them well together. If you will, you may put in a spoonful of Sack or
Muscadine, and Ambared Sugar, working all well together; as also, some lumps of
Marrow or Suet shred very small: but it will be very good without either of
these. Then put this mixtion into a deep Wooden dish (like a great Butter-box)
which must first be on the inside a little greased with Butter, and a little
Flower sprinkled thereon, to save the Pudding from sticking to the sides of the
dish. Then put a linen cloth or handkercher over the mouth of the dish, and
reverse the mouth downwards, so that you may tie the Napkin close with two
knots by the corners cross, or with a strong thread, upon the bottom of the
dish, then turned upwards; all which is, that the matter may not get out, and
yet the boiling water get through the linen upon it on one side enough to bake
the pudding s^fficiently. Put the Woodden-dish thus filled and tied up into a
great Possnet or little Kettle of boiling water. The faster it boils, the
better it will be. The dish will turn and roll up and down in the water, as it
gallopeth in boiling. An hours boiling is sufficient. Then u^^y your linen,
and take it off, and reverse the mo^th of the dish downwards into the
Silver-dish you will serve it up in; wherein is sufficient melted B^^^er
thickened with beating, and sweetened to your taste with Sug^^, to serve for
Sauce. You may beat a little Sack or Muscadine, or Rose, or Orange-flower-water
with the Sauce; a little of any of which may also go in^o the Composition of
the Pudding. If you put in more Flower, or more then one white of Egg to this
proportion, it will bind the Pudding too close and stiff.

In plain Bag-puddings it makes them much more savoury, to put into them a
little Pennyroyal shreded very small, as also other sweet-Herbs. You must put
in so little, as not to taste strong of them, but only to quicken the other
flat Ingredients.

Another baked Pudding.
Take a Pint and half of good Sweet-cream; set it on the fire, and let it just
boil up, take a peny-Man^het, not too new, cut off the crust, and sli^e it very
thin, put it into a clean earthen pan, and pour the Cream upon it, and cover it
very clo^e an hour or thereabouts, to steep ^he bread; when it is steeped
enough, take four New laid-eggs, yolks and whites, beat them with a spoonful of
Rose Water, and two of Sack; grate into it half a Nutmeg, and put into it a
quarter of a pound of good white-Sugar finely beaten, stir all this together
with the Cream and Bread; then shred very small half a pound of good
Beef-kidney-suet, and put this to the rest, and mingle them very well together
with a slice or spoon; then size your dish, that you intend to bake it in, and
rub the bottom of it with a little sweet-Bu^^er; then put your pudding into it,
and take the Marrow of two good bones, and stick it in lumps here and there all
over your Pudding; so put it into the oven three quarters of an hour, in which
time it will be well baked. Strew on it some fine Sugar, and serve it.

To make Black-Puddings.
Take a pottle of half-cut Groats; pick them clean, that there may be no husks
nor foulness in them; then put them into a Mortar, bruise them a little with a
Pestle; then have ready either Milk, or fresh meat-broth boiled up, and the
Oat-meal immediately put into it; It must be just so much as will cover it;
then cover the thing close that it is in, and let it steep twenty four hours;
To this two quarts of Oat-meal, put a pint and half of blood, season it well
with Salt, and a little Pepper, and a little beaten Cloves and Mace, eight
Eggs, yolks and whites, five pound of Kidney-beef-suet shred, but not too
small; then put in of these herbs; Peny-royal, Fennel, Leek-blades, Parsley,
Sage, Straw-berr^-leaves and Violet-leaves, equal parts, in all to the quantity
of a good handful; let them be picked and washed very clean, and chop'^ very
small, and mingled well with the former things; Then fill your Puddings.

Make ready your guts in this manner. Cleanse them very well, when they are
fresh taken out of the Hog; and after they are well washed and scowred, lay
them to soak in fair water three days and three nights, shifting the water
twice every day: and every time you shift the water, scour them first with
Sater and Salt. An hour and a quarter is enough to boil them.

To preserve Pippins in Ielly, either in quarters, or in slices.
Take good sound clear Pippins, pare, quarter and coar them; then put them into
a skillet of Conduit-water, such a proportion as you intend to make; boil it
very well: then let the liquor run from the pulp through a sieve, without
forcing, and let it stand till the next morning. Take Orange or Limon peel, and
boil in a skillet of water, till they are tender; then roll them up in a linen
cloth to dry the water well out of them; let them lie so all night. Then take
of double refined and finely beaten and searced Sugar a pound to every pint of
Pippin Liquor that ran through the sieve, and to every pound of Sugar, and pint
of liquor, put ten Ounces of Pippins in quarters or in slices, but cut them not
too thin; boil them a little while very fast in the Pippin-liquor, before you
put in the Sugar, then strew in the Sugar all over them as it boileth, till it
is all in, keeping it still fast boiling, until they look very clear; by that
you may know they are enough. While they boil, you must still be scumming them;
then put in your juice of Limon to your last, and Amber, if you please; and
after let it boil half a dozen walms, but no more. Then take it from the fire,
and have ready some very thin Brown-paper, and clap a single sheet close upon
it, and if any scum remain, it will stick to the Paper. Then put your quarters
or slices into your Glasses, and strew upon them very small slices of Limon or
Orange (which you please) which you had before boiled; then fill up your
Galsses with your jelly.

For making your Pippin-liquor, you may take about some forty Pippins to two
quarts of water, or so much as to make your Pippin-liquor strong of the
Pippins, and the juice of about four Limons.

My Lady Diana Porte^'s Scotch Collops.
Cut a leg or two of Mutton into thin slices, which beat very well. Put them to
fry over a very quick fire in a pan first glased over, with no more Butter
melted in it, then just to besmear a little all the bottom of the Pan. Turn
them in due time. There must never be but one row in the pan, not any slice
lying upon another; but every one immediate to the pan. When they are fried
enough, lay them in a hot dish covered, over a Chafing dish, and pour upon them
the Gravy that run out of them into the Pan. Then lay another row of slices in
the Pan to fry as before; and when they are enough, put them into the dish to
the other. When you have enough, by such repetitions, or by doing them in two
or three pans, all at a time; take a Porrenger full of Gravy of Mutton, and put
into it a piece of Butter as much a Wall-nu^, and a quartered Onion if you will
(or rub the dish afterward with Garlike) and Pepper and Salt, and let this
boil to be very hot; then throw away the Onion, and pour this into the dish
upon the slices, and let them stew a little together; then squeese an Orange
upon it, and serve it up.

A Fricacee of Veal.
Cut a leg of Veal into thin slices, and beat them; or the like with Ch^cken,
which must be flead off their skin. Put about half a pint of water or
flesh-broth to them in a drying pan, and some Thyme, and Sweet-marjoram, and an
Onion or ^wo quartered, and boil them till they be tender, having seasoned them
with Sal^, and about twenty Corns of whole white Pepper, and four or five
Cloves. When they are enough, take half a pi^t of White wine, four yolks of
Eggs, a quarrter of a pound of butter (or more) a good spoonful of Thyme,
Sweet-Marjoram and Parsley (more Parsley then of the others) all minced small;
a Porrenger full of gravy. When all these are well incorporated together over
the fire, and well beaten, pour it into the pan to the rest, and turn it
continually up and down over the fire, till all be well incorporated. Then
throw away the Onion and first sprigs of Herbs, squeese Orange to it, and so
serve it up hot.

If instead of a Fricacee, you will make un estuvee de veau, stew or boil
simpringly your slices of Veal in White Wind and water, an^, with a good lump
of Butter, seasoning it with Pepper and Salt and Onions. When it is enough, put
to it store of yolks of Eggs beaten with Verjuyce, or White Wind and Vinegar,
and some Nutmeg (and gravy if you will) and some Herbs as in the Fricacee; and
stir all very well over the fire till the sauce be well lie together.

A Tansy.
Take three pints of Cream, fourteen New-laid-eggs (seven whites put away) one
pint of juice of Spinach, six or seven spoonfuls of juice of Tansy, a Nutmeg
(or two) sliced small, half a pound of Sugar, and a little Salt. Beat all these
well together, then fry it in a pan with no more Butter then is necessary. When
it is enough, serve it up with juice of Orange or slices of Limon upon it.

To Stew Oysters.
Take what quantity you will of the best Oysters to eat raw. Open them, putting
all their water with the fish into a basin. Take out the Oysters one by one
(that you may have them washed clean in their own water) and lay them in the
dish you intend to stew them in. Then let their water run upon them through a
fine linen, that all their foulness may remain behind. Then put a good great
lump of Butter to them, which may be (when melted) half as much, as their
water. Season them with Salt, Nutmeg, and a very few Cloves. Let this boil
smartly, covered. When it is half boiled, put in some crusts of light
French-bread, and boil on, till all be enough, and then se^ve them up.

You may put in three or four grains of Ambergreece, when you put in the
Nutmeg, that in the boiling it may melt. You may also put in a little
White Wind or Verjuyce at the last, or some juy^e of Orange.

To dress Lamprey's
At Gl^cester they use Lamprey's thus. Heat water in a Pot or Kettle with a
narrow mouth, till it be near ready to boil; so that you may endure to dip your
hand into it, but not to let it stay in. Put your Lamprey's, as they come out
of the River, into this scalding-water, and cover the pot, that little while
they remain in, which must be but a moment, about an Ave Maria while. Then with
a Wooden ladle take them out, and la^ them upon a table, and hold their head
in a Napkin (else it will sl^p away, if held in the bare hand) and with the
back of a knife scrape off the mud, which will have risen out all along the
fish. A great deal and very thick will come off: and then the skin will look
clean and shining and blew, which must never be flead off. Then open their
bellies all along, and with a Penknife loosen the string which begins under
the gall (having first cast away the gall and entrails) then pull it out, and
in the pulling away, it will stretch much in length; then pick out a black
substance, that is all along under the string, cutting toward the back as much
as is needful for this end. Then roll them up and down in a soft and dry
napkin, changing this as soon as it is wet for another, using so many Napkins;
as may make the fishes perfectly dry; for in that consists a chief part of
their preparation. Then powder them well with Pepper and Salt, rubbing them in
well, and lay them round in a Pot or strong crust upon a good Lare of Butter,
and store of Onions every where about them, and chiefly a good company in the
middle. Then put mo^e Butter upon them, covering the pot with a fit cover, and
so set them into a quick oven, that is strongly heated; where they will require
three or four hours (at least) baking. When they are taken out of the oven and
begin to cool, pour store of melted Butter upon them, to fill up the pot at
least three fingers bread^h above the fish, and then let it cool and harden;
And thus it will keep a year, if need be, so the Butter be not opened, nor
craked, that the air get in to the fish.

To eat them presently, They dress them thus: When they are prepared, as
abovesaid, (ready for baking) bo^l them with store of Salt and gross Pepper,
and many Onions, in no more water, then is necessary to cover them, as when you
boil a Carp or Pike an Court bovillon. In half or three quarters of an hour,
they will be boiled tender. Then take them and drain them from the water, and
serve them with thickened Butter, and some of the Onions m^nced into it, and a
little Pepper, laying the fish upon some sippe^s of spungy bread, that may soak
up the water, if any come from the fish; and pour butter upon the fish; so
serve it up hot.

To dress Stock fish, ^omewhat differingly from the way of Holland.
Beat the fish very well with a large Woodden-M^llet, so as not to break it,
but to loosen all the flakes within. It is the best way to have them beaten
with hard heavy Ropes. And though thus beaten, they will keep a long time, if
you put them into Pease-straw, so thrust in as to keep them from all air, and
that they touch not one another, but have straw enough between every fish. When
you will make the best dish of them, take only the tails, and tie up half a
dozen or eight of them with White-thred. First, they must be laid to soak over
night in cold water. About an hour and half, (or a little more) before they are
to be eaten, put them to boil in a pot or Pipkin, that you may cover with a
cover of Tin or Letton so close, that no steam can get out; and lay a stone or
other weight upon it, to keep the cover from being driven off by the steam of
the water. Put in no more water, then well to cover them. They must never boil
strongly, but very leasurely and but simpringly. It will be near half an hour
before the water begin to boil so: And from their beginning to do so, they must
boil a good hour. You must never put in any new water, though hot, for that
will make the fish hard. After the hour, take out the fishes, and untie them,
and lay them loose in a colander with holes to drain out the water, and toss
them in it up and down very well, as you use to do Butter and Pease; and that
will loosen and break asunder all the flakes, which will make them the more
susceptible of the Butter, when you stew them in it, and make it pierce the
better into the flakes, and make them tender. Then lay them by thin rows in the
dish, they are to be served up in: casting upon every row a little salt, and
some green Parsley minced very small. They who love young-green Onions or
sives, or other savory Herbs, or Pepper, may use them also in the same manner,
when they are in season. When all is i^, fill up with sweet Butter well melted
and thickened; and so let it stew there a while, to soak well into the fish;
which will lie in fine loose tender flakes, well buttered and seasoned. You may
eat it with Mustard besides.

Buttered whitings with Eggs.
Boil Whitings as if you would eat them in the Ordinary way with thick
Butter-sauce. Pick them clean from skin and bones, and mingle them well with
butter, and break them very small, and season them pretty high with Salt. In
the mean time Butter some Eggs in the best manner, and mingle them with the
buttered Whitings, and mash them well together. The Eggs must not be so many by
a good deal as the Fish. It is a most savoury dish.

To dress Poor-john and Buckorn.
The way of dressing Poor-john, to make it very tender and good meat, is this.
Put it into the Kettle in cold water, and so hang it over the fire; and so let
it soak and stew without boiling for 3 hours: but the water must be very hot.
Then make it boil two or three walms. By this time it will be very tender and
swelled up. Then take out the backbone, and put it to fry with Onions. If you
put it first into hot water (as ling and such salt fish,) or being boiled, if
you let it cool, and heat it again it will be tough and hard.

Buckorne is to be watered a good hour before you put it to the fire. Then boil
it till it be tender, which it will be quickly. Then Butter it as you do Ling;
and if you will, put Eggs to it.

The way of dressing Stock Fish in Holland.
First beat it exceedingly well, a long time, but with moderate blows, that you
do not break it in pieces, but that you shake and loosen all the inward Fibers.
Then put it into water (which may be a little warmed) to soak, and infuse so
during twelve or fourteen hours (or more, if it be not yet pierced into the
heart by the water, and grown tender.) Then put it to boil very gently, (and
with no more water, then well to cover it, which you must supply with new hot
water as it consumes) for six or seven hours at least, that it may be very
tender and loose and swelled up. Then press and drain out all the water from
it; and heat it again in a dish, with store of melted Butter thickened; and if
you like it, you may season it also with Pepper and Mustard. But it will be yet
better, if after it is well and tender boiled in water, and that you have
pressed all the water you can out of it, you boil it again an hour longer in
Milk; out of which when you take it, to put it into the dish with butter, you
do not industriously press out all the M^lk, as you did the water, but only
drain it out gently, pressing it moderately. In the stewing it with butter,
season it to your taste, with what you think fitting.

Another way to dress Stock Fish.
Beat it exceeding well with a large wooden Mallet, till you may easily pluck
it all in pieces, severing every flake from other, and every one of them in it
so being loose, spungy and limber, as the whole fish must be, and plyant like a
glove, which will be in less then an hour. Pull then the bones out, and throw
them away, and pluck off the skin (as whole as you can; but it will have many
breaches and holes in it, by the beating) then gather all the fish together,
and lap it in the skin as well as you can, into a round lump, like a
bag-pudding, and tie it about with cords or strings (like a little Collar of
Brawn, or souced fish) and so put it into luke warm water (overnight) to soak,
covering the vessel close; but you need not keep it near any heat whiles it
lies soaking. Next morning take it out that water and vessel, and put it into
another, with a moderate quantity of other water, to boil; which it must do
very leisurely, and but simpringly. The main care must be, that the vessel it
boileth in, be covered so exceeding close, that not the least breath of steam
get out, else it will not be tender, but tough and hard. It will be boiled
enough, and become very tender in about a good half hour. Then take it out,
unty it, and throw away the skin, and lay the flaky fish in a Cullender, to
drain away the water from it. You must presently throw a little Salt upon it,
and all about in it, to season it. For then it will imbibe it into it self
presently; whereas if you Salt it not, till it grow cold in the air, it will
not take it in. Mean while prepare your sauce of melted well thickened butter
(which you may heighten with shreded Onions or Syves, or what well tasted herbs
you please) and if you will you may first strew upon the fish some very small
shreded young Onions, or Sibbouls, or Syves, or Parsley. Then upon that pour
the melted butter to cover the fish all over, and soak into it. Serve it in
warm and covered.

To dress Parsneps.
Scrape well three or four good large roots, cleansing well their outside, and
cutting off as much of the little end as is Fibrous, and of the great end as is
hard. Put them into a possnet or pot, with about a quart of Milk upon them, or
as much as will cover them in boiling, which do moderately, till you find they
are very tender. This may be in an hour and half, sooner or later, as the roots
are of a good kind. Then take them out, and scrape all the outside into a
pulpe, like the pulpe of roasted apples, which put in a dish upon a chafing
dish of Coals, with a little of the Milk, you boiled them in, put to them; not
so much as to drown them, but only to imbibe them: and then with stewing, the
pulpe will imbibe all that Milk. When you see it is drunk in, put to the pulpe
a little more of the same Milk, and stew that, till it be drunk in. Continue
doing thus till it has drunk in a good quantity of the Milk, and is well
swelled with it, and will take in no more, which may be in a good half hour.
Eat them so, without Sugar or Butter; for they will have a natural sweetness,
that is beyond sugar, and will be Unctuous, so as not to need Butter.

Parsneps (raw) cut into little pieces, is the best food for tame Rabets, and
makes them swee^. As Rice (raw) is for tame Pigeons, and they like it best,
varying it sometimes with right tares, and other seeds.

Cream with Rice.
A very good Cream to eat hot, is thus made. Into a quart of sweet Cream, put a
spoonful of very fine powder of Rice, and boil them together suffi^iently,
adding Cin^amon, or M^ce and Nutmeg to your liking. When it is boiled enough
take it from the fire, and beat a couple of yolks of new-laid Eggs, to color
it yellow. Sweeten it to your taste. Put bread to it, in it is due time.

Gr^wel of Oat-meal and Rice.
Doctor Pridion ordered my Lord Cornwallis for his chief diet in his looseness,
the following grewel, which he found very tastefull.

Take about two parts of Oat-meal well beaten in a Mortar, and one part of Rice
in subtle powder. Boil these well in water, as you make water-grewel, adding a
good proportion of Cinnamon to boil also in d^e time, then strain it through a
cloth, and sweeten it to your taste.

The yolk of an Egg beaten with a little Sherry-sack, and put to it, is not bad
in a looseness. At other times you may add Butter. It is very tasteful and
nourishing.

Sauce for a Carp or Pike.
To butter Pease.
Take two or three spoonfuls of the Liquor the Carp was boiled in, and put it
into a pipkin; There must be no more, then even to cover the b^ttom of the
pipkin. Make this boil by it self; as soon as it does so, put to this half a
pound of sweet butter, let it melt gently, or suddenly, it imports not, so as
the liquor boiled, when you did put the butter in; when the butter is melted,
then take it from the fire, and holding the handle in your hand, shake it round
a good while and strongly, and it will come to be thick, that you may almost
cut it with a Knife. Then squeese juice of Limon into it, or of sharp Orange,
or Verjuyce or Vi^egar; and heat it aga^n as much as you please upon the fire.
It will ever after continue thick, and never again, upon any heating, grow
oily, though it be cold and heated again twenty times. Butter done with fair
water, as is said above, with the other Liquor, will be thick in the same
manner, (for the liquors make no difference in that:)

Put of this butter to boiled Pease in their dish, which cover with another; so
shake them very strongly, and a good while together. This is by much the best
way to butter pease, and not to let the butter melt in the middle of them, and
then stir them long with a spoon. This will grow Oily (though it be good at the
first doing) if you heat them again: The other, never; and therefore, is the
best way upon all occasions to make such thickened melted Butter. You may make
sauce for a Pike in the same manner you did for a Carpe; putting Horseradish
to it if you please.

A Herring-Pye.
Put great store of sliced Onions, with Currants and Raisins of the Sun both
above and under the Herrings, and store of Butter, and so bake them.

A Syllab^b.
Take a reasonable quantity (as about half a Porrenger full) of the Syrup, that
has served in the making of dried plums; and into a large Syllabub-pot-milk or
squirt, or let fall from high a sufficient quantity of Milk or Cream. This
Syrup is very quick of the fruit, and very weak of Sugar; and therefore makes
the Syllabub exceeding well tasted. You may also use the Syrup used in the like
manner in the drying of Cherries.

Butter and Oil to fry Fish.
The best Liquor to fry Fish in, is to take Butter and Salet Oil, first well
clarified together. This has not the unsavory taste of Oil alon^, nor the
blackness of Butter alone. It fryeth Fish crisp, yellow, and well tasted.

To prepare Shrimps for dressing.
When you will Butter Shrimps, first wash them well in warm Milk and Water
equally mingled together, and let them soak a little in it; then wash them
again in fresh Milk and Water warmed, letting them also soak therein a while.
Do this twice or thrice with fresh Milk and Water. This will take away all the
rankness and slimyness of them. Then Butter them, or prepare them for the
table, as you think fit.

Tosts of Veal.
My Lady Lusson makes thus her plain tosts of kidney of Veal: Cut the kidney
with all the fat about it, and a good piece of the lean flesh besides. Hash all
this as small as you can. Put to it a quarter of a pound of picked and washed
Currants, and as much Sugar, one Nutmeg grated, four yolks and two whites of
new-laid Eggs raw; work all these very well together, seasoning it with Salt.
Spread it thick upon slices of light white-bread cut like tosts. Then fry them
in Butter, such quantity as may bo^l over the tops of the tosts.

To make Mustard.
The best way of making Mustard is this: Take of the best Mustard Seed (which
is black) for example a quar^. Dry it gently in an oven, and beat it to subtle
powder, and ^earse it. Then mingle well strong Wine-vinegar with it, so much
that it be pretty liquid, for it will dry with keeping. Put to this a little
Pepper beaten small (white is the best) at discretion, as about a good pugil,
and put a good spoonful of Sugar to it (which is not to make it taste sweet,
but rather quick, and to help the fermentation) lay a good Onion in the bottom,
quartered if you will, and a Race of Ginger scraped and bruised; and stir it
often with a Horseradish root cleansed, which let always lie in the pot, till
it have lost it is virtue, then take a new one. This will keep long, and grow
better for a while. It is not good till after a month, that it have fermented a
while.

Some think it will be the quicker, if the seed be ground with fair water, in
stead of vinegar, putting store of Onions in it.

My Lady Holmeby makes her quick fine Mustard thus: Choose true Mustard Seed;
dry it in an oven, after the bread is our. Beat and searse it to a most subtle
powder. Mingle Sherry-sack with it (stirring it a long time very well, so much
as to have it of a fit consistence for Mustard. Then put a good quantity of
fine Sugar to it, as five or six spoonfuls, or more, to a pint of Mustard. Stir
and incorporate all well together. This will keep good a long time. Some do
like to put to it a little (but a little) of very sharp Wine-vinegar.

To make a White-pot.
Boil three pints of sweet Cream, with a very little Salt and some sliced
Nutmeg. As soon as it begins to boil, take it from the fire. In the mean time
beat the yolks of twelve or fifteen new-laid Egg^ very well with some Rose or
Orange^flower-water, and sweeten the Cream to your taste with Sugar. Then beat
three or four spoonfuls of Cream with them, and quickly as many more; so
proceeding, till you have incorporated all the Cream and all the Eggs. Then
pour the Eggs and Cream into a deep dish laid over with sippets of fine light
bread, which will rise up to the top for the most part. When it is cooled and
thickened enough to bear Raisins of the Sun, strew all over the top with them
(well-washed.) Then press a little way into it with great lumps of raw Marrow.
Two bones will suffice. Cover your dish with another, and set it upon a great
pot of boiling water, with a good space between the water and the dish, that
there be room for the hot steam to rise and strike upon the dish. Keep good
fire always under your pot. In less then an hour (usually) it is ba^ed enough.
You will perceive that, if the Marrow look brown, and be enough baked. If it
should continue longer on the heat, it would melt. You may bake it in an oven
if you will; but it is hard to regulate it so, that it be not too much or too
little: whereas the boiling water is certain. You may strew Ambred Sugar upon
it, either before you set it to bake, or after it is done.

For rosting of Meat.
To roast fine meat (as Partridge, Pheasant, Chicken, Pigeon) that it be full of
juice; baste it as soon as it is through hot, and time to baste, with Butter.
When it is very moist all over, sprinkle flower upon it every where, that by
turning about the fire, it may become a thin crust. Then baste it no more till
the latter end. This crust will keep in all the juice. A little before you take
it up, baste it again with Butter, and this will melt away all the crust. Then
give it three or four turns of the spit, that it may make the outside yellow
and crisp.

You may also baste such meat with yolks of new* laid Eggs, beaten into a thin
oil. But with this you continue basting all the while the meat rosteth.

To stew a Rump of Beef.
Take a rump of Beef, break all the bones; season it with Pepper and Salt to
your liking; Take three or four Nutmegs, and a quantity of Mace, beat them
grossly; Then take a bunch of very good sweet herbs, and one good Onion cut in
quarters, or Garlike, as you like it. Put in half a pint of White Wind Vinegar,
and one pint of good Claret, one handful of Sugar; and a piece or two of beef
Suet or Butter: shred some Cabbage under and over, and scrape in a pound of
good old Cheese. Put all these into an earthen pot, and let it stand in an oven
with brown-bread four or five hours; but let the pot be covered close with
paste.

To stew a Rump of Beef.
Take a fat rump of young Beef, as it comes from the Butcher, and take out all
the bones, excepting the tip of it toward the tail that is all fat, which you
cannot take out, without spoiling or defacing or breaking it. But take out all
the thick bones toward the Chine, and the thick Sinews, that are on the outer
sides of the flesh; (which will never become tender with boiling) so that you
have nothing but the pure flesh and fat, without any bony or tough substance.
Then beat well the lean part with a wooden roling pin, and when you have
beaten well one side, turn the other. Then rub it well with Pepper grossly
beaten, and salt; just as you would do, to season a Venison pasty, making the
seasoning higher or gentler according to your taste. Then lay it in a fit
vessel, with a flat bottom (pipkin or kettle as you have convenience) that will
but just contain it, but so that it may lie at ease. Or you may tie it up in a
loose thin linen cloth, or boulter, as they do Capons a la mode, or Brawn, or
the like. Then put water upon it, but just to cover it, and boil it close
covered a matter of two hours pretty smartly, so that it be well half boiled.
Then take it out of that, and put it into another fit vessel, or the same
cleansed, and put upon it about two quarts of good strong deep well bodied
Claret Wine, and a good bundle of sweet-herb^,(Pennyroyal, Sweet- Marjoram,
Winter-savory, Limon Thyme, etc.) and a good large Onion peeled, and stuck as
close with Cloves, as you can stick it, if you like the taste of On^ons. They
must be the strong b^ting Onions, that are round and red: a little Nutmeg, and
some Mace. Put to the wine abo^t a pint of the Liquor that you have al^eady
boiled the Beef in; and if you would have it strong of the seasoning of Pepper,
and Salt; take the bottom of this Liquor. Thus let it boil very gently,
simpringly, or rather stew with Char-coal over a little furnace, or a fit
Chafing Dish, a matter of three hours, close covered. If the L^quor waste too
much, you may recruit it with what you have kept of that, which your beef was
boiled in. When it is near time to take it up, stew some Oysters in their own
L^quor (to which you may add at the latter end, some of the winy Liquor, that
the Beef is now stewing in, or some of the first Beef-broth, or use some good
pickled Oysters) and at the same time make some thin tostes of Kingstone
manchet, which toste very leisurely, or rather dry them thoroughly, and very
hard, and Crisp, but not burned, by lying long before the fire. And if you have
fresh Champignons, dress a good dish full of them, to be ready at the same
time, when all the rest is ready; If not, use pickled ones, without further
dressing. When you find your Beef is as tender as can be, and will scacely hold
together, to be taken up together, and that all the other things are ready, lay
the tostes in the dish, where the Beef is to lie; pour some of the Liquor upon
it. Then lay the Beef upon the tosts; throw away the bundle of Herbs and
Onions; and pour the rest of the Liquor upon the Beef, as also the Oysters, and
the Mushrooms, to which add a pretty deal, about half a pint of Broombuds: and
so let it stand a while well covered over coals to Mittoner; and to have all
the several substances communicate their tastes to one another, and to have the
tostes swell up like a gelly. Then serve it up. If you want Liquor, you may
still recruit your self out of the first Beef-broth, which you keep all to
supply any want afterward. Have a care, whiles it is stewing, in the
Winy-liquor, to lift the flesh sometimes up from the bottom of the vessel,
least if it should lie always still, it may stick to the bottom, and burn; but
you cannot take it out, for it would fall in pieces. It will be yet better
meat, if you add to it, at the last (when you add all the other heightnings)
some Marrow, and some Chessnuts, and some Pistachios, if you will. Put to your
Broombuds (before you put them in to the rest) some elder Vinegar, enough to
soak them, and even to cover them. If you find this make your composition of
the whole too sharp, you may next time take less. When you put the Beef to stew
with the wine (or a while after) you may put to it a pretty quantity (as much
as you can take in both hands at once) of shreded Cabbage, if it be the season;
or of Turnips, if you like either of these. Carrots make it somewhat flat. If
the wine be not quick enough, you may put a little elder Vinegar to it. If you
like Garlike, you may put in a little, or rub the dish with it.

Pickled Champignons.
Champignons are best, that grow upon gravelly dry rising Grounds. Gather them
of the last nights growth; and to pre^erve them white, it is well to cast them
into a pitcher of fair-water, as you gather them: But that is not absolutely
necessary, if you will go about dressing them as soon as you come home. Cut the
great ones into halves or quarters, seeing carefully there be no worms in them;
and peel off their upper skin on the tops: the little ones, peel whole. As you
peel them, throw them into a basin of fair-water, which preserves them white.
Then put them into a pipkin or possnet of Copper (no Iron) and put a very
little water to them, and a large proportion of Salt. If you have a pottle of
Mushrooms, you may put to them ten or twelve spoonfuls of water, and two or
three of Salt. Boil them with pretty quick-fire, and scum them well all the
while, taking away a great deal of foulness, that will rise. They will shrink
into a very little room. When they are sufficiently parboiled to be tender, and
well cleansed of their scum, (which will be in about a quarter of an hour,)
take them out, and put them into a Colander, that all the moisture may drain
from them. In the mean time make your pickle thus: Take a quart of pure sharp
white Wine Vinegar (elder-Vinegar is best) put two or three spoonfuls of whole
Pepper to it, twenty or thirty Cloves, one Nutmeg quartered, two or three
flakes of Mace, three Bay Leaves; (some like Limon-Thyme and Rose-mary; but
then it must be a very little of each) boil all these together, till the
Vinegar be well impraegnated with the Ingredients, which will be in about half
an hour. Then take it from the fire, and let it cool. When the pickle is quite
cold, and the Mushrooms also quite cold, and drained from all moisture: put
them into the Liquor (with all the Ingredients in it) which you must be sure,
be enough to cover them. In ten or twelve days, they will have taken into them
the full taste of the pickle, and will keep very good half a year. If you have
much supernatant Liquor, you may parboil more Mushroms next day, and put them
to the first. If you have not gathered at once enough for a dressing, you may
keep them all night in water to preserve them white, and gather more the next
day, to join to them.

To stew Wardens or Pears.
Pare them, put them into a Pipkin, with so much Red or Claret Wine and water,
ana, as will^near reach to the top of the Pears. Stew or boil gently, till they
grow tender, which may be in two hours. After a while, put in some sticks of
Cinnamon bruised and a few Cloves. When they are almost done, put in Sugar
enough to season them well and their Syrup, which you pour out upon them in a
dee^ Plate.

To stew Apples.
Pare them and cut them into slices. stew them with Wine and Water as the
Pears, and season them in like manner with Spice. Toward the end sweeten them
with Sugar, breaking the Apples into Pap by stirring them. When you are ready
to take them off, put in good store of fresh-butter, and incorporate it well
with them, by stirring them together. You stew these between two dishes. The
quickest Apples are the best.

Portuguez Eggs.
The way that the Countess de Penalva makes the Portuguez Eggs for the Queen,
is this. Take the yolks (clean picked from the whites and germ) of twelve
new-laid Eggs. Beat them exceedingly with a little (scarce a spoonful) of
Orange-flower-water. When they are exceeding liquid, clear, and uniformly a
thin Liquor, put to them one pound of pure double refined Sugar (if it be not
so pure, it must be clarified before) and stew them in your dish or basin over
a very gentle fire, stirring them continually, whiles they are over it so that
the whole may become one uniform substance, of the consistence of an Electuary
(beware they grow not too hard; for without much caution and attention, that
will happen on a sudden) which then you may ^at presently, or put into pots to
keep. You may dissolve Ambergreece (if you will, ground first very much with
Sugar) in Orange-flower or Rose Water, before hand, and put it (warm and
dissolved) to the Eggs, when you set them to stew. If you clarify your Sugar,
do it with one of these waters, and whites of Eggs. The flavor of t^ese
sweet-waters goes almost all away with boiling. Therefore half a spoonful put
into the composition, when you take it from the fire, seasoneth it more then
ten times as much, put in at the first.

To boil Eggs.
A certain and infallible method to boil new-laid Eygs to sup up, and yet that
they have the white turned to milk, is thus: Break a very little hole, at the
bigger end of the shell, and put it into the water, whil^s it boileth. Let it
remain boiling, whiles your Pulse beats two hundred strokes. Then take it out
immediately, and you will find it of an exact temper: others put Eggs into
boiling water just as you take it from the fire, and let them remain there,
till the water be so cooled, that you may just put in your hand, and take out
the Eggs.

Others put the Eggs into cold water, which they set upon the fire, and as soon
as the water begins to boil, the Eggs are enough.

To make clear Gelly of Bran.
Take two pound of the broadest open Bran of the best Wheat, and put it to
infuse in a G^llon of Water, during two or three days, that the water may soak
into the pure flower, that sticks to the bran. Then boil it three or four
walms, and presently take it from the fire, and strain it through some fine
strainer. A milky substance will come out, which let stand to settle about half
a day. Pour off the clear water, that swimmeth over the starch or flomery, that
is in the bottom (which is very good for Pap, etc.) and boil it up to a gelly,
as* you do Hartshorn gelly or the like, and season it to your taste.

To bake Venison.
Boil the bones (well broken) and remaining flesh of the Venison, from whence
the meat of the Pasty is cut, in the Liquor, wherein Capons and Veal, or Mutton
have been boiled, so to make very strong broth of them. The bones must be
broken, that you may have the Marrow of them in the Liquor; and they must stew
a long time (covering the pot close:) that you may make the broth as strong as
you can; and if you put some gravy of Mutton or Veal to it, it will be the
better. When the Pasty is half baked, pour some of this broth into it, by the
hole at the top; and the rest of it, when it is quite baked, and wants but
standing in the oven to soak. Or put it all in at once, when the Pasty is
sufficiently baked, and afterward let it remain in the oven a good while
soaking.

You may bake the bones (broken) with the broth and gravy, or for want thereof,
with only water in an earthen pot close stopped, till you have all the
substance in the Liquor; which you may pour into the Pasty an hour before it is
baked enough.

If you are in a Park, you may soak the Venison a night in the blood of the
Deer; and cover the flesh with it, clotted together when you put it in paste.
Mutton blood also upon Venison, is very good. You may season your blood a
little with Pepper and Salt.

To bake Venison to keep.
After you have boned it, cut away all the si^ews, then season it with Pepper
and Salt pretty high, and divide a Stag into four pots; then put about a pound
of Butter upon the top of each pot, and cover it with Rye-past pretty thick.
Your oven must be so hot, that after a whole night it may be baked very tender,
which is a great help to the keeping of it. And when you draw it, drain all the
Liquor from it, and turn your pot upon a pie-plate, with the bottom upwards,
and so let it stand, until it is cold; Then wipe your pot, that no g^avy remain
therein, and then put your Venison into the same pot again; them have your
Butter very well clarified, that there be no dross remaining; Then fill up your
pot about two Inches above the meat with Butter, or else it will mould. And so
the next day bind it up very close, with a piece of sheeps Leather so that no
air can get in. After which you may keep it as long as you please.

Master Adrian May put's up His Venison in pots, to keep long, thus: Immediately
as soon as He has killed it, he seasoneth and baketh it as soon as He can, so
that the flesh may never be cold. And this makes that the fat runn^th in among
the lean, and is like calvered Salmon, and eats much more mellow and tender.
But before the Deer be killed, he ought to be hunted and chafed as much as may
be. Then seasoned and put in the oven before it be cold. Be sure to pour out
all the gravy, that settleth to the bottom, under the flesh after the baking,
before you put the Butter to it, that is to lie very thick upon the meat, to
keep it all the year.

About making of Braw^^.
It must be a very large oven, that so it may contract the stronger heat, and
keep it the longer. It must be at least eight hours heating with wood, that it
be as hot as is possible. If the Brawn be young, it will suffice eight hours or
a little more in the oven. But if old, it must be ten or eleven. Put but two
Collars into each pot, for bigger are unwieldy. Into every pot, put twelve
corns of whole Pepper, four Cloves, a great Onion peeled and quartered, and two
bay leaves, before you put them into the oven. Before they are set in, you do
not fill them with water to the top, least any should spill in sliding them in;
but fill them up by a bowl fastened to a long Pole. No water must be put in,
after the oven is closed (nor the oven ever be opened, till after all is
thoroughly baked) and therefore you must put in enough at first to s^rve to the
last; you must roll your Collars as close as may be, that no air may be left in
the folds of them: and sow them up in exceeding strong cloth, which a strong
man must pull as hard as He can in the sowing. Their cloths must not be pulled
off, till the Collars have been three or four days out of the oven, least you
pull off part of the Brawn with them. You may put the same proportion of
Pepper, Clove^, etc. Into the Souce-drink as you did in the baking them; which
at either time (especially at first) give them a fine taste. The Souce-drink is
made of six shillings Beer, and Thames or River-water, of each an equal
quantity, well boiled with Salt. When boiled and cold, put in to it two or
three quarts of skimmed Milk, only to color it; and so change it once in three
Weeks. Tender Brawn sliced thin, and laid Sallet-wise in a dish as the sliced
Capon, and seasoned with Pepper, Salt and Vinegar and Oil, with a little Limon,
is a very good Sallet.

Sallet of cold Capon roasted.
It is a good Sallet, to slice a cold Capon thin; mingle with it some Sibbolds,
Lettice, Rocket and Tarragon sliced small. Season all with Pepper, Salt,
Vinegar and Oil, and sliced Limon. A little Origanum does well with it.

Mutton baked like Venison, soaking either in their blood.
Take a large fat loin of Mutton (or two) boned after the manner of Venison.
Season it well to your taste with Pepper and Salt. Then lay it to steep all
night in enough of the sheep's blood, to cover it over, and soak well into it.
Then lay it into the past, with all the clo^ted thick blood, under it, upon it,
and hanging about it. you may season the blood with Pepper and Salt, before you
lay the meat in it. But though you do not, it will not be amiss, so as the meat
be seasoned high enough. Then bake it as you do an ordinary Pasty; and you may
put gravy of Mutton or strong broth into it. You may do it in a dish with past;
as My Lady of Newport does Her Venison. This way of steeping in blood before
you bake it, is very good also for Venison.

To make an excellent Hare-pye.
Hash the flesh of as many Hares, as you please, very ^mall. Then beat them
strongly in a Mortar into a Paste, which season duly with Pepper and Salt. Lard
it thoroughly all over with great Lardons of Lard well rolled in Pepper and
Salt. Put this into a straight earthen pot, to lie close in it. If you like
Onions, you may put one or two quartered into the bottom of the Pot. Put store
of Sweet-butter upon the meat, and upon that, some strong red Claret Wine.
Cover the pot with a double strong brown paper, tied close about the mouth of
it. Set it to bake with houshold-bread, (or in an oven, as a Venison pasty) for
eight or ten hours. Then take out the pot, and thence the meat, and pour away
all the Liquor, which let settle. Then take all the congealed Butter, and
clarify it well. Put your meat again into the pot, and put upon it your
clarified Butter, and as much more as is necessary. And I believe the putting
of Claret Wine to it now is better, and to omit it before. Bake it again, but a
less while. Pour out all the Liquor, when it is baked, and clarify the Butter
again, and pour it upon the meat, and so let it cool; The Butter must be at
least two or three fingers breadth over the meat.

To bake Beef.
Bone it, and beat it exceeding well on all sides, with a roling pin, upon a
table. Then season it with Pepper and Salt, (rubbing them in very well) and
some Pars^ey, and a few Sweet herbs (Pennyroyal, Winter-savoury,
Sweet-marjoram, Limon Thyme, Red-sage, which yet to some seems to have a
Ph^sical taste) an Onion if you will. Squeese it into the pot as close as you
can. Put Butter upon it, and Claret Wine, and covered all as above. Bake it in
a strong oven eight or ten hours. Take it out of the oven, and the meat out of
the pot, which make clean, from all settlings; and squeese all the juice from
it (even by a gentle press.) Then put it in again hard pressed into the por.
Clarify the Butter, that you poured with the Liquor from the meat out of the
pot; and pour it again with more fresh, to have enough to cover it two or three
fingers thick.

To bake Pigeons, (which are thus excellent, and will keep a quarter of a
year) or Teals, or Wild-ducks.
Season them duly with Pepper and Salt; then lay them in the pot, and put store
of Butter, and some Claret Wine to them. Cover and bake as above: but a less
while according to the tenderness of the meat. In due time take out your pot,
and your birds out of it, which press not, but only wipe off the Liquor. Pour
it out all. Clarify the Butter; put in the birds again, and the clarified
butter, and as much more as needs (all melted) upon them, and let it cool. You
may put a few Bay Leaves upon any of these baked meats, between the meat and
the Butter.

Gre^n Geese-Pye.
An excellent cold Pie is thus made. Take two fat Green-geese; bone them, and
lay them in paste one upon the other, seasoning them well with Pepper and Salt,
and some little Nutmeg, both above and below and between the two Geese. When it
is well-baked and out of the oven, pour in melted Butter at a hole made in the
top. The crust is much better than of a Stubble-goose.

To boil Beef or Venison tender and savoury.
The way to have Beef tenderest, short and best boiled, as my Lord of Saint
Alban's uses it, is thus. Take a rump or brisket of beef; keep it without salt
as long you may, without danger to have it smell ill. For so it grows mellow
and tender, which it would not do, if it were presently salted. When it is
sufficiently mortified, rub it well with Salt; let it lie so but a day and a
night, or at most two nights and a day. Then boil it in no more water then is
necessary. Boil it pretty smartly at first, but afterward but a simpring or
stewing boiling, which must continue seven or eight hours. Sometimes he boileth
it half over night, and the rest next morning. If you should not have time to
Salt it, you may supply that want thus; When the Beef is through boiled, you
may put so much Salt into the pot as to make the broth like brine, and then
boil it gently an hour longer; or take out the Beef, and put it into a deep
dish, and put to it some of his broth made brine, and cover it with another
dish, and stew it so an hour. A hanch of Venison may be done the same way.

To bake Wilde-Ducks or Teals.
Season your Duck and Teal with Pepper and Salt, both within and without, so
much as you think may season them; then crack their bones with a roling pin;
then put them into an earthen pot close, and cover them with Butter, and bake
them in an oven as hot as for bread, and let them stand three or four hours;
when you take them out of the oven, pour out all the Liquor from them, then
melt so much Butter as will cover them; when you have melted your Butter, let
it stand a while, until all the dross be settled to the bottom, and put in the
clear Butter, which must cover the Fowl.

To season Humble-Pyes: and to Roast Wilde-Ducks.
Bake Humble-Pyes without chapping them small in a Pie, seasoned with Pepper
and Salt, adding a pretty deal of Parsley, a little sweet-marjoram and Savoury,
and a very little Thyme.

Roast wild Ducks putting into their Bellies some Sage and a little Onion (both
well shreded) wrought into a lump with butter, adding a little Pepper and Salt.
And let their sauce be a little gravy of Mutton, to enlarge the seasoned gravy,
that comes from the Ducks when they are cut up.

To souce Turkeys.
Take a good fat Turkey or two; dress them clean, and bone them; then tie them
up in the manner of Sturgeon with some thing clean washed. Take your kettle,
and put into it a pottle of good White Wind, a quart of Water, and a quart of
Vinegar; make it boil, and season it with Salt pretty well. Then put in your
Turkeys, and let them boil till they be very tender. When they are enough
boiled, take them out, and taste the Liquor; if it be not sharp enough* put
more Vinegar, and let it boil a little; then put it into an earthen pot, that
will hold both Turkeys. When it is cold enough, and the Turkeys through-cold,
put them into the Liquor in the Pot, and be sure they be quite covered with the
Liquor; Let them lie in it three weeks or a month; Then serve it to the table,
with Fennel on it, and eat it with elder Vinegar.

You may do a Capon or two put together in the same manner: but first larding
it with great Lardons rolled in Pepper and Salt. A shorter time lying in the
pickle will serve.

An Excellent Meat of Goose or Turkey.
Take a fat Goose, and Powder it with Salt eight or ten days; Then boil it
tender, and p^t it into pickle, like Sturgeon-pickle. You may do the like with
a very fat Turkey; but the best pickle of that is, the Italian Marinating*
boiling Mace, Nu^meg, etc. in it. You may boil Garlic in the belly of the
fouls, if you like it, or in the pickle.

To pickle an old fat Goose.
Cut it down the back, and take out all the bones; Lord it very well with green
Bacon, and season it well with three quarters of an Ounce of Pepper; half an
Ounce of Ginger; a quarter of an Ounce of Cloves, and Salt as you judge
proportionable; a pint of white wine and some Butter. Put three or four
Bay Leaves under the meat, and bake it with Brown-bread, in an earthen pot
close covered, and the edges of the cover closed with Paste. Let it stand three
or four days in the pickle; then eat it cold with Vinegar.

About ordering Bacon for Gambons, and to keep.
At Franckfort they use the following cautions about the Bacon, they salt for
Gambons or sides to keep. The best is of male Hogs of two year old, that have
been gelt, when they were young. They kill them in the wan of Moon, from a day
or two after the full, till the last quarter. They fetch off their hair with
warm-water, not by burning (which melts the fat, and makes it apt to grow
resty) and after it has lain in the open air a full day, they salt it with dry
Salt, rubbing it in well: Then lay what quantity you will in a tub for seven or
eight days (in which time the Salt dissolveth to water) then take it out, and
wipe it dry, and hang it in a room, where they keep fire, either on a hearth,
or that smoke comes out of a stove into the room (as most of those rooms do
smoke) but hang them not in the Chimney, that the hot smoke strikes upon them;
but if you have a very large Chimney, hang them pretty high and aside, that the
smoke may not come full upon them. After a while, (when they are dry) take them
thence, and hang them from the smoke in a dry warm room. When the weather
grows warm as in May, there will drop from them a kind of melted oily
grease, and they will heat, and grow resty, if not remedied. Take them down
then, and lay them in a cold dry place, with hay all about them, that one may
not touch another. Change the Hay every thirty, or twenty, or fifteen days,
till September, that the weather grows cool; then hang them up again in the
free air, in a dry Chamber. If you make the shoulders into Gambons, you must
have a care to cut away a little piece of flesh within, called in Dutch the
Mause; for if that remain in it, the Bacon will grow resty.

To make a Tansey.
Take Spinach, Sorrel, Tansey, Wheat, a quart of Cream; bread (the quantity of
a two penny loaf) twenty Eggs, and half the whites, one Nutmeg, half a pound of
Sugar, and the juice of a couple of Limons. Spinach is the chief herb to have
the juice; Wheat also is very good, when it is young and tender. You must not
take much Sorrel, for fear of turning the Cream; but less Tansey, so little
that it may not taste distinctly in the composition. The juice of Limons is put
in at the end of all. You may lay thin slices of Limon upon the Tansey made,
and Sugar upon them.

Another way.
Beat twelve Eggs (six whites put away) by themselves exceeding well (two or
three hours) sometimes putting in a spoonful of Cream to keep them from oyling;
Then mingle them well with a quart of Cream; to which put about half a pint of
juice of Spinach (as much as will make the Cream green) or of green wheat, and
four spoonfuls of juice of Tansey, one Nutmeg scraped into thin slices, and
half a pound of Sugar; All things exceeding w^ll Incorporated together; Fry
this with fresh butter, no more then to glase the Pan over, and keep the Tansey
from sticking to the Pan.

To make Cheese-cakes.
Take twelve quarts of Milk warm from the Cow, turn it with a good spoonful of
Runnet. Break it well, and put it into a large strainer, in which roll it up
and down, that all the Whey may run out into a little tub; when all that will
is run out, wring out more. Then break the curds well; then wring it again, and
more whey will come. Thus break and wring till no more come. Then work the
Curds exceedingly with your hand in a tray, till they become a short uniform
Paste. Then put to it the yolks of eight new laid Eggs, and two wh^tes, and a
pound of butter. Work all this long together. In the long working (at the
several times) consists the making them good. Then season them to your taste
with Sugar finely beaten; and put in some Cloves and Mace in subtle powder.
Then lay them thick in Coffins of fine Paste, and bake them.

Short and Crisp crust for Tarts and Pyes.
To half a peck of fine flower, take a pound and half of Butter, in this
manner. Put your Butter with at least three quarts of cold water (it imports
not how much or how little the water is) into a little kettle to melt, and boil
gently: as soon as it is melted, scum off the Butter with a ladle, pouring it
by ladlefuls (one a little after another, as you knead it with the flower) to
some of the flower (which you ^ake not all at once, that you may the better
discern, how much Liquor is needful) and work it very well into Paste. When all
your butter is kneaded, with as much of the flower, as serves to make paste of
a fitting consistence, take of the water that the Butter was melted in, so much
as to make the rest of the flower into Paste of due consistence; then join it
to the Paste made with Butter, and work them both very well together, of this
make your covers and coffins thin. If you are to make more paste for more Tarts
or Pyes, the water that has already served, will serve again better then fresh.

To make Goose-pyes, and such of thick crust, you must p^t at least two pound
of Butter to half a peck of flower. Put no more Salt to your Past, then what is
in the Butter, which must be the best new Butter that is sold in the Market.

To make a Cake.
Take eight wine quarts of flower; one pound of loaf Sugar beaten and searsed;
one ounce of Mace, beat it very fine: then take thirty Eggs, fifteen whites,
beat them well; then put to them a quart of new Ale-yest; beat them very well
together, and strain them into your flower; then take a pint of Rosewater,
wherein six grains of Ambergreece and Musk have been over night. Then take a
pint and half of Cream or something more, and set it on the fire, and put into
it four pounds and three quarters of Butter; And when it is all melted; take it
off the fire, and stir it about, until it be pretty cool; And pour all into
your flower, and stir it up quick with your hands, like a lith pudding; Then
dust a little flower over it, and let it stand covered with a Flannel, or other
woollen cloth, a quarter of an hour before the fire, that it may rise; Then
have ready twelve pounds of Currants very well washed and picked, that there
may be neither stalks, nor broken Currants in them. Then let your Currants be
very well dried before the fire, and put warm into your Cake; then mingle them
well together with your hands; then ge^ a tin hoop that will contain that
quantity, and butter it well, and put it upon two sheets of paper well
buttered; so pour in your Cake, and so set it into the oven, being quick that
it may be well soaked, but not to burn. It must bake above an hour and a
quarter; near an hour and half. Take then a pound and half of double refined
Sugar purely beaten and searsed; put into the whites of five Eggs; two or 3
spoonfuls of rose water; keep it a beating all the time, that the Cake is a
baking which will be two hours; Then draw your Cake out of the oven, and pick
the dry Currants from the top of it, and so spread all that you have beaten
over it, very smooth, and set it a little into the oven, that it may dry.

Another Cake.
Take three pounds and an half of flower; one penny worth of Cloves and Mace;
and a quarter of a pound of Sugar and Salt, and strew it on the flower. Then
take the yolks of eight Eggs well beaten, with a spoonful and half of rose
water; Then take a pint of thick Cream, and a pound of Butter; Melt them
together, and when it is so, take three quarters of a pint of Ale-yest, and
mingle the yest and Eggs together. Then take the warm liquor, and mingle all
together; when you have done, take all, and pour it in the bowl, and so cover
the flower over the liquor; then cover the pan with a Napkin, and when it is
risen, take four pounds of Currants, well washed and dried, and half a pound of
Raisins of the Sun sliced, and let them be well dried and hot, and so stir them
in. When it is risen, have your oven hot against the Cake is made; let it stand
three quarters of an hour. When it is half baked, Ice it over with fine Sugar
and Rose Water, and the whites of Eggs, and Musk and Ambergreece.

When you m^ngle your yest and Eggs together for the Cake, put Musk and Amber
to that.

To make a Plumb-Cake.
Take a peck of flower, and part it in half. Then take two quarts of good
Ale-yest, and strain it into half the flower, and some new milk boiled, and
almost cold again; make it into a very light paste, and set it before the fire
to rise; Then take five pound of Butter, and melt it in a skillet, with a
quarter of a pint of Rose Water; when your paste is risen, and your oven almost
hot, which will be by this time, take your paste from the fire, and break it
into small pieces, and take your other part of flower, and strew it round your
paste; Then take the melted Butter, and put it to the past, and by degrees work
the paste and flower together, till you have mingled all very well. Take six
Nutmegs, some Cinnamon and Mace well beaten, and two pound of Sugar, and strew
it into the Paste, as they are a working it. Take three pounds of Raisins
stoned, and twelve pounds of Currants very well washed and dried again; one
pound of Dates sliced; half a pound of green Citron dried and sliced very thin;
strew all these into the paste, till it have received them all; Then let your
oven be ready, and make up your Cake, and set it into the oven; but you must
have a great care, it does not take cold. Then to Ice it, take a pound and half
of double refined Sugar beaten and searsed; The whites of three Eggs new-laid,
and a little Orange flower-water, with a little musk and Ambergreece, beaten
and searsed, and put to your sugar; Then strew your Sugar into the Eggs, and
beat it in a stone Mortar with a Wooden Pastel, till it be as white as snow,
which will be by that time the Cake is baked; Then draw it to the ovens mo^th,
and drop it on, in what form you will; let it stand a little again in the oven
to harden.

To make an Excellent Cake.
To a Peck of fine flower, take six pounds of fresh butter, which must be
tenderly melted, ten pounds of Currants, of Cloves and Mace, half an ounce of
each, an ounce of Cinnamon, half an ounce of Nutmegs, four ounces of Sugar, one
pint of Sack mixed with a quart at least of thick barm of Ale (as soon as it is
settled, to have the thick fall to the bottom, which will be, when it is about
two days old) half a pint of Rose Water; half a quarter of an ounce of Saffron.
Then make your paste, strewing the spices, finely beaten, upon the flower: Then
put the melted butter (but even just melted) to it; then the barm, and other
liquors: and put it into the oven well heated presently. For the better baking
of it, put it in a hoop, and let it stand in the oven one hour and half. You
Ice the Cake with the whites of two Eggs, a small quantity of Rose Water, and
some Sugar.

To make Biscuit.
To half a peck of flower, take three spoonf^ls of barm, two ounces of seeds;
Aniseeds or Fennel-seeds. Make the paste very stiff, with nothing but water,
and dry it (they must not have so much heat, as to make them rise, but only dry
by degrees; as in an oven after Manchet is taken out, or a gentle stove) in
flat Cakes very well in an oven or stove.

To make a Caraway-Cake.
Take three pound and a half of the finest flower and dry it in an oven; one
pound and a half of sweet butter, and mix it with the flower, until it be
crumbled very small, that none of it be seen; Then take three quarters of a
pint of new Ale-yeast, and half a pint of Sack, and half a pint of new milk;
six spoonfuls of Rose Water, four yolks, and two whites of Eggs; Then let it
lie before the fire half an hour or more. And when you go to make it up, put in
three quarters of a pound of Caraway-Confits, and a pound and half of biskets.
Put it into the oven, and let it stand an hour and half.

Another very good Cake.
Take four quarts of fine flower, two pound and half of butter, three quarters
of a pound of Sugar, four Nutmegs; a little Mace; a pound of Almonds finely
beaten, half a pint of Sack, a pint of good Ale-yest, a pint of boiled Cream,
twelve yolks, and four whites of Eggs; four pound of Currants. When you have
wrought all these into a very fine past, let it be kept warm before the fire
half an hour, before you set it into the oven. If you please, you may put into
it, two pound of Raisins of the Sun stoned and quartered. Let your oven be of a
temperate heat, and let your Cake stand therein two hours and a half, before
you Ice it; and afterward only to harden the Ice. The Ice for this Cake is
made thus: Take the whites of three new laid Eggs, and three quarters of a
pound of fine Sugar finely beaten; beat it well together with the whites of the
Eggs, and Ice the Cake. If you please you may add a little Musk or Ambergreece.

Excellent small Cakes.
Take three pound of very fine flower well dried by the fire, and put to it a
pound and half of loaf Sugar sifted in a very fine sieve and dried; Three
pounds of Currants well washed and dried in a cloth and set by the fire; When
your flower is well mixed with the Sugar and Currants, you must put in it a
pound and half of unmelted butter, ten spoonfuls of Cream, with the yolks of
three new-laid Eggs beat with it, one Nutmeg; and if you please, three
spoonfuls of Sack. When you have wrought your paste well, you must put it in a
cloth, and set it in a dish before the fire, till it be through warm. Then make
them up in little Cakes, and prick them full of holes; you must bake them in a
quick oven unclosed. Afterward Ice them over with Sugar. The Cakes should be
about the bigness of a hand-breadth and thin: of the cise of the Sugar Cakes
sold at Barnet.

My Lord of Denbigh's Almond March-pane.
Blanch either Nut-Kernels, from the Husk* in the best manner you can. Then pun
them with a due proportion of Sugar, and a little Orange-flower, or Rose Water.
When it is in a fitting uniform paste, make it into round Cakes, about the
bigness of your hand, or a little larger, and about a finger thick; and lay
every one upon a fine paper cut fit to it; which lay upon a table. You must
have a pan like a tourtiere, made to contain coals on the top, that is flat,
with edges round about to hold in the coals, which set over the Cakes, with
fire upon it. Let this remain upon the Cakes, till you conceive, it has dried
them sufficiently for once; which may be within a quarter of an hour; but you
take it off two or three times in that time, to see you scorch not the outside,
but only dry it a little. Then remove it to others, that lie by them; and pull
the Papers from the first, and turn them upon new Papers. When the others are
dried enough, remove the pan back to the first, to dry their other side: which
being enough, remove it back to the second, that by this time are turned, and
laid upon new Papers. Repeat this turning the Cakes, and changing the Pan, till
they are sufficiently dry: which you must not do all at once, least you scorch
them: and though the outside be dry, the inside must be very moist and tender.
Then you must Ice them thus: Make a thick pap with Orange flower or Rose Water,
and purest white Sugar: a little of the whites of Eggs, not above half a
spoonful of that Oil of Eggs, to a Porrenger full of thick Pap, beaten
exceeding well with it, and a little juice of Limons. Lay this smooth upon the
Cakes with a Knife, and smoothen it with a feather. Then set the pan over them
to dry them. Which being if there be any unevenness, or cracks or discoloring,
lay on a little more of that Mortar, and dry it as before. Repeat this, till it
be as clear, and smooth, and white, as you would have it. Then turn the other
sides, and do the like to them. You must take care, not to scorch them: for
then they would look yellow or red, and they must be pure, white and smooth
like Silver between polished and matte, or like a looking Glass. This Coat
preserves the substance of the Cakes within, the longer moist. You may beat
dissolved Amber, or Essence of Cinnamon, with them.

To make Slipp coat Cheese.
According to the bigness of your moulds proportion your stroakings for your
Cheese-curds. To six quarts of stroakings, take a pint of Spring Water: if the
weather be hot, then let the water be cold, and before you put it into the
stroakings, let them stand a while to cool after they are milked, and then put
in the water with a little Salt first stirred in it: and having stirred it well
together, let it stand a little while, and then put in about two good spoonfuls
of Runner, stir it well together, and cover it with a fair linen cloth, and
when it is become hard like a think jelly, with a skimming-dish lay it gently
into the moulds, and as it sinks down into the moulds, fill it still up again,
till all be in, which will require some three or four hours time. Then lay a
clean fine cloth into another mould of the same cise, and turn it into it, and
then turn the skirts of the cloth over it, and lay upon that a thin board, and
upon that as much weigh^, as with the board may make two pound or thereabouts.
And about an hour after, lay another clean cloth into the other mould, and turn
the Cheese into that; then lay upon the board so much, as will make it six or
seven pound weight; and thus continue turning of it till night: then take away
the weight, and lay it no more on it; then take a very small quantity of Salt
finely beaten, and sprinkle the Cheese all over with it as slightly as can be
imagined. Next morning turn it into another dry cloth, and let it lie out of
the mould upon a plain board, and change it as often as it wets the cloth,
which must be three or four times a day: when it is so dry, that it wets the
cloth no more, lay it upon a bed of green-rushes, and lay a row upon it; but be
sure to pick the bents clean off, and lay them even all one way: if you cannot
get good rushes, take nettles or grass. If the weather is cold, cover them with
a linen and woollen cloth: in case you cannot get stroakings, take five quarts
of new Milk, and one of Cream. If the weather be cold, heat the water that you
put to the stroakings. Trun the Cheese every day, and put to it fresh of
whatsoever you keep it in. They are usually ripe in ten days.

To make Slipp-coat Cheese.
Master Philipps his Method and proportions in making slippe-coat Cheese, are
these. Take six wine quarts of stroakings, and two quarts of Cream; mingle
these well together, and let them stand in a bowl, till they a^e cold. Then
power upon them three pints of boiling fair water, and mingle them well
together; then let them stand, till they are almost cold, colder then
milk-warm. Then put to it a moderate quantity of Runnet, made with fair water
(not whey, or any other thing then water; this is an important point) and let
it stand till it come. Have a care not to break the Curds, nor ever to touch
them with your hands, but only with your skimming dish. In due time lade the
Curds with the dish, into a thin fine Napkin, held up by two persons, that the
whey may run from them through the bunt of the Napkin, which you roll gently
about, that the Curds may dry without breaking. When the whey is well drained
out, put the Curds as whole as you can into the Cheese-fat, upon a napkin, in
the fat. Change the Napkin, and turn the Cheese every quarter of an hour, and
less, for ten, twelve or fourteen times; that is, still as soon as you perceive
the Napkin wet with the whay running from the Curds. Then press it with a half
pound weight for two or three hours, Then add half a pound more for as long
time* then another half pound for as long, and lastly another half pound, which
is two pounds in all; which weight must never be exceeded. The next day, (when
about twenty four hours are past in all) s^lt your Cheese moderately with white
Salt, and then turn it but three or four times a day, and keep it in a cotton
cloth, which will make it mellow and sweet, not rank, and will preserve the
coat smooth. It may be ready to eat in about twelve days. Some lay it to ripen
in dock-leaves, and it is not amiss; but that in rain they will be w^t, which
moulds the Cheese. Others in slat ^it boxes of wood, turning them, as is said,
three or four times a day. But a cotton cloth is best. This quantity is for a
round large Cheese, of about the bigness of a sale ten penny Cheese, a good
fingers breadth thick. Long broad grass ripeneth them well, and sucketh out the
moisture. Rushes are good also. They are hot, but dry not the moisture so well.

My Lady of Middlesex makes excell^nt slipp-coat Cheese of good morning milk
putting Cream to it. A quart of Cream is the proportion she uses to as much
milk, as both together make a large round Cheese of the bigness of an ordinary
Tart-plate, or Cheese-plate; as big as an ordinary soft cheese, that the
Market-women sell for ten pence. Thus for want of stroakings at London, you may
take one part of Cream to five or six of morning milk, and for the rest proceed
as with stro^kings; and these will prove as good.

Slipp-cort Cheese
Take three quarts of the last of the stroakings of as many Cows as you have;
keep it covered, that it may continue warm; put to it a skimming dishful of
Spring Water; then put in two spoonfuls of Runnet, so let it stand until it be
hard come: when it is hard come, set your fat on the bottom of a hair-sieve,
take it up by degrees, but break it not; when you have laid it all in the fat,
take a fine cloth, and lay it over the Cheese, and work it in about the sides,
with the back of a knife; then lay a board on it, for half an hour: after half
an hour, set on the board an half pound stone, so let it stand two hours; then
turn it on that board, and let the cloth be both under and over it, then put it
into the fat again; Then lay a pound and half weight on it; Two hours after
turn it again on a dry cloth, and salt it, then set on it two pound weight, and
let it stand until the next morning. Then turn it out of the Cheese-fat, on a
dry board, and so keep it with turn^ng on dry boards three days. In case it
turn abroad, you must set it up with wedges; when it begins to stiffen, lay
green grass or rushes upon it: when it is stiff enough, let rushes be laid both
under and over it. If this Cheese be rightly made, and the weather good to dry
it, it will be ready in eight days: but in case it does not dry well, you must
lay on it a linen cloth, and woollen upon it, to hasten the ripening of it.

To make a Scalded Cheese.
Take six gallons of new milk: put to it two quarts of the evening Cream; then
put to it good ru^^^t* for winter Cheese; let it stand, till it be even well,
then sink it as long as you can get any whey out: then put it into your fat,
and set it in the press, and let it stand half an hour: in this time turn it
once. When you take it out of the Press, set on the fire two gallons of the
same whey: then put your Cheese in a big bowl, break the Curd as small with
your hands as you do your Cheese-cakes: when your whey is scalding hot, take
off the scum: lay your strainer over the Curd, and put in your whey: take a
slice, and stir up your Curd, that it may scald all alike: put in as much whey
as will cover it well: if you find that cold, put it out, and put in more to it
that is hot. Stir it as before: then cover it with a linen and woollen cloth:
then set some new whey on the fire, put in your Cheese-fat and suter and cloth.
After three quarters of an hour, take up the Curd, and put it into the Cheese
fat, as fast, as two can work it in: then put it into the hot cloth, and set it
into the Press. Have a care to look to it, and after a while turn it, and so
keep it in the press with turning, till the next day: then take it forth and
Salt it.

The Cream-Courds.
Strain your Whey, and set it on the fire: make a clear and gentle fire under
the kettle: as they rise, put in whey, so continuing, till they are ready to
skim. Then take your skimmer, and put them on the bottom of a hair-sieve: so
let them drain till they are cold. Then take them off, and put them into a
basin, and beat them with three or four spoonfuls of Cream and Sugar.

Savoury tosted or melted Cheese.
Cut pieces of quick, fat; rich, well tasted cheese, (as the best of Brye,
Cheshire, etc. or sharp thick Cream-Cheese) into a dish of thick beaten melted
Butter, that has served for Sparages or the like, or pease, or other boiled
Sallet, or ragout of meat, or gravy of Mutton: and, if you will, Chop some of
the Asparages among it, or slices of Gambon of Bacon, or fresh-collops, or
Onions, or Sibboulets, or Anchovis, and set all this to melt upon a Cha^ingdish
of Coals, and stir all well together, to Incorporate them; and when all is of
an equal consistence, strew some gross White-Pepper on it, and eat it with
tosts or crusts of White-bread. You may scorch it at the top with a hot
Fire-Shovel.

To feed Chicken.
First give them for two days, paste made of Barley Meal and Milk with Clyster
(...) to scowre them. Then feed them with nothing but hashed Raisins of the
Sun. The less drink they have, the better it is: for it washes away their fat;
but that little they have, let it be broken Beer; Milk were as good or better;
but then you must be careful to have it always sweet in their trough, and no
sowerness there to turn the Milk. They will be prodigiously fat in about twelve
days: And you must kill them, when they are at their he^ght: Else they will
soon fall back, and grow fat no more.

Others make their Paste of Barley meal with Milk and a little course Sugar,
and mingle with it a little (about an eight part) of powder of green Glass
beaten exceeding small. Give this only for two days to cleanse their stomachs.
Then feed them with paste of Barley-meal, made sometimes with Milk and Sugar,
and sometimes with the fat skimmed off from the pot, giving them drink as above.

Others make a pretty stiff paste for them with Barley-meal (a little of the
coursest bran sifted from it) and the fat scummed off from the boiling pot, be
it of Beef (even salted) or Mutton, etc. Lay this before them for their food
for four days. Then give them still the same, but mingled with a little powder
of Glass for 4 or five days more. In which time they will be extremely fat and
good. For their drink, give them the droppings of good Ale or good Beer. When
you eat them, you will find some of the powder of glass in their stomachs, i.
e. gizzards.

To feed Poultry.
My Lady Fanshaws way of feeding Capons, Pullets, Hens, Chicken or Turkies, is
thus. Have Coops, wherein every fowl is a part, and not room to turn in, and
means to cleanse daily the ordure behind them, and two troughs; for before
that, one may be scalding and drying the day, the other is used, and before
every fowl one partition for meat, another for drink. All their Meat is this:
Boil Barley in water, till it be tender, keep some so, and another parcel of it
boil with Milk, and another with strong Ale. Let them be boiled as wheat that
is cried. Use them different days for variety, to get the fowl appetite. Lay it
in their trough, with some Brown-Sugar mingled with it. In the partition for
Liquor, let them have water or strong Ale to drink. They will be very drunk and
sleep; then eat again. Let a Candle stand all night over the Coop, and then
they will eat much of the night. With this course they will be prodigiously fat
in a fortnight. Be sure to keep them very sweet. This makes the taste pure.

Another way of feeding Chicken.
Take Barley meal, and with droppings of small Ale, (or Ale it self) make it
into a consistence of batter for Pan-cakes. Let this be all their food. Which
put into the troughs before them, renewing it thrice a day, morning, noon and
evening; making their troughs very clean every time, and keeping their Coops*
always very clean and sweet. This is to serve them for drink as well as meat,
and no other drink be given them. Feed them thus six days; the seventh give
them nothing in their troughs but powder of brick searced, which scowreth and
cleanses them much, and makes their flesh exceeding white. The next day fall
to their former food for six days more, and the seventh again to powder of
Brick. Then again to barley Meal and Ale. Thus they will be exceeding fat in
fifteen days, and purely white and sweet.

To fatten young Chicken in a wonderful degree.
B^il Rice in Milk till it be very tender and P^lpy, as when you make Milk
Potage. It must be thick, almost so thick, that a spoon may stand an-end in it.
Sweeten this very well with ordinary Sugar. Put th^s i^to their troughs where
they seed, that they may be always eating of it. It must be made fresh every
day. Their drink must be only Milk, in another little trough by their
meat-trough. Let a candle (fitly disposed) stand by them all night; for seeing
their meat, they will eat all night long. You put the Chicken up, as soon as
they can feed of themselves; which will be within a day or two after they are
(...), and in twelve days, or a fortnight, they will be prodigiously fat; but
after they are come to their height, they will presently fall back. Therefore
they must be eaten as soon as they are come to their height. Their Pen or Coop
must be contrived so, that the Hen (who must be with them, to sit over them)
may not go at liberty to eat away their meat, but be kept to her own diet, in a
part of the Coop that she cannot get out of. But the Chicken must have liberty
to go from her to other parts of the Coop, where they may eat their own meat,
and come in again to the Hen, to be warmed by her, at their pleasure. You must
be careful to keep their Coop very clean.

To feed Chicken.
Fatten your Chicken the first week with Oarmeal scalded in Milk; the second
with Rice and Sugar in Milk. In a fortnight they will be prodigiously fat. It
is good to give them sometimes a little Gravel, or pow^er of Glass, to cleanse
their maws, and give them appetite.

If you put a little bran with their meat, it will keep their maws clean, and
give them appetite.

Another Excellent way to fatten Chicken.
Boil white bread in Milk, as though you were to eat it; but make it thick of
the bread, which is sliced into it in thin slices, not so thick as if it were
to make a pudding; but so, that when the bread is eaten out, there may some
liquid m^lk remain for the Chicken to drink; or that at first you may take up
some liquid Milk in a spoon, if you industriously avoid the bread: sweeten very
well this potage with good Kitchin^Sugar of six pence a pound; so put it into
the trough before them. Put there but a little at a time, (two or three
spoonfuls) that you may not clog them, and feed them five times a day, between
their wakening in the morning, and their roosting at night. Give them no other
drink; the Milk that remains after they have eaten the bread, is sufficient;
neither give them Gravel, or ought else. Keep their Coops very clean, as also
their troughs, cleansing them very well every morning. To half a dozen very
little Chicken, little bigger then black-birds, an ordinary porenger full every
day may serve. And in eight days they will be prodigiously fat, one penny loaf,
and less then two quarts of Milk and about half a pound of Sugar will serve
little ones the whole time. Bigger Chicken will require more, and two or three
days longer time. When any of them are at their height of fat, you must eat
them; for if they live longer, they will fall back, and grow lean. Be sure to
make their potage very sweet.

An Excellent way to Cram Chicken.
Stone a pound of Raisins of the Sun, and beat them in a Mortar to Pulp; pour a
quart of Milk upon them, and let them soak so all night. Next morning still
them well together, and put to them so much Crumbs of Grated stale white bread
as to bring it to a soft paste, work all well together, and lay it in the
trough before the Chicken (which must not be above six in a pen, and keep it
very clean) and let a candle be by them all night. The delight of this meat
will make them eat continually; and they will be so fat (when they are but of
the bigness of a Blackbird) that they will not be able to stand, but lie down
upon their bellies to eat.

To feed Partridges, that you have taken wild.
You must often change their food, giving them but of one kind at a time, that
so their appetites may be fresh to the others, when they are weary of the
present. Sometimes dry wheat; Sometimes wheat soaked two or three days in
water, to make it soft and tender; Sometimes barley so used; Sometimes oats in
like manner. Give them continually to lie by them; Some of the great green
leaves of Cabbages, that grow at the bottom of the stalk, and that are thrown
away, when you gather the Cabbage; which you may give them either whole or a
little chopped. Give them often Ants and their Eggs, laying near them the
inward mould of an Ant hill, taken up with the Ants in it.

To make Puffs.
Take new milk Curds, strained well from the whey* then rub them very well;
season them with Nutmeg, M^ce, Rose water and Sugar; then take an Egg or two, a
good piece of Butter, and a hand^^l of flower; work all together, and make them
into Balls; bake them in an oven, upon sheets of Paper; when they are baked,
serve them up with butter melted and beaten with Rose^ water and Sugar. In
stead of flower, you may take fine grated-bread, dried very well, but not Crisp.

Apples in Gelly.
My Lady P^get makes her fine preserved Pippins, thus: They are done best, when
Pippins are in their prime for quickness, which is in November. Make your
Pippin-water as strong as you can of the Apples, and that it may be the less
boiled, and consequently the paler, put in at first the greatest quant^ty of
pared and quartered Apples, the water will bear. To every Pint of Pippin-water
add (when you put the Sugar to it) a qu^rter of a pint of fair spring water,
that will bear soap (of which sort only you must use) and use half a pound of
Sugar, the purest double refined. If you will have much gelly, two Pippins
finely pared and whole, will be enough; you may put in more, if you will have a
greater proportion of substance to the gelly. Put at first but half the Sugar
to the Liquor: for so it will be the paler. Boil the Apples by themselves in
fair water, with a very little Sugar, to make them tender; then put them into
the liquor, and the rest, the other half of the Sugar with them. Boil them with
a quick fire, till they be enough, and the liquor do gelly, and that you see
the Apples look very clear, and as though they were transparent. You must put
the juice of two Limons and half an Orange to this in the due time. Every
Pippin should be lapped over in a broad-pill of Orange; which you must prepare
thus. Pare your Orange broad and very thin, and all hanging together, ^ub it
with Salt, prick it, and boil it in several waters, to take away the
bitterness, and make it tender. Then preserve it by it self with sufficient
quantity of Sugar. When it is thoroughly done, and very tender (which you must
cast to do before hand, to be ready when the Apples are ready to be put up)
take them out of the^r Syrup, and lap every Pippin in an Orange-peel, and put
them into a pot or glass, and pour the liquor upon them: which will be gelly
over and about the Apples, when all is cold. This proportion of liquor, Apples,
and Orange-peels, will take up about three quarters of a pound of Sugar in all.
If you would keep them any time, you must put in weight for weight of Sugar.

I conceive Apple-John's in stead of P^ppins will do better, both for the gelly
and Syrup; especially at the latter end of the year; and I like them thin
sliced, rather than whole; and the Orange-peels scattered among them in little
pieces o^ chipps.

Syrup of Pippins.
Quarter and Core your Pippins; then stamp them in a Mortar, and strain out the
Juice. Let it settle, that the thick dregs may go to the bottom; then pour off
the clear; and to have it more clear and pure, flilter it through sucking Paper
in a glass funnel. To one pound of this take one pound and an half of pure
double refined Sugar, and boil it very gently (scarce simpringly, and but a
very little while) till you have scummed away all the froth and foulness (which
will be but little) and that it be of the con^i^tence of Syrup. If you put two
pound of Sugar to one pound of juice, you must boil it more and stronglier.
This will keep longer, but the color is not so fine. It is of a deeper yellow.
If you put but equal parts of juice and Sugar, you must not boil it, but set it
in a Cucurbite in bulliente Balneo, till all the scum be taken away, and the
Sugar well dissolved. This will be very pale and pleasant, but will not keep
long.

You may make your Syrup with a strong decoction of Apples in water (as when
you make gelly of Pippins) when they are green; b^t when they are old and
^ellow, the substance of the Apple will dissolve into pap, by boiling in water.

Take three or four spoonfuls of this Syrup in a large draught of fountain
water, or small posset-Ale, pro ardore urinae, to cool and smoothen, two or
three times a day.

Gelly of Pippins or Iohn-Apples.
Cut your Apples into quarters (either pared or unpared) Boil them in a
sufficient quantity of water, till it be very strong of the Apples. Take the
clear liquor, and put to it sufficient Sugar to make gelly, and the slices of
Apple; so boil them all together, till the slices be enough, and the liquor
gelly; or you may boil the slices, in Apple-liquor without Sugar, and make
gelly of other liquor, and put the slices into it, when it is gelly, and they
be sufficiently boiled. Either way, you must put at the last some juice of
Limon to it; and Amber and Musk if you will. You may do it with halves or
quartered Apples, in deep glasses, with store of gelly about them. To have
these clear, take the pieces out of the gelly they are boiled in, with a slice,
so as you may have all the rag^ run from them, and then put neat clean pieces
into clear gelly.

Preserved Wardens.
Pare and Core the Wardens, and put a little of the thin rind of a Limon into
the hole that the Core leaves. To every pound of Wardens, take half a pound of
Sugar, and half a p^nt of water. Make a Syrup of your Sugar and Water; when it
is well scummed, put it into a Pewter dish, and your Wardens into the Syrup,
and cover it with another P^wter dish; and so let this boil very gently, or
rather stew, keeping it very well covered, that the steam get out as little as
may be. Contin^e this, till the Wardens are very tender, and very red, which
may be in five, or six, or seven hours. Th^n boil them up to the height the
Syrup ought to be to keep: which yet will not be well above three or four
months. The whole secret of making them red, con^isteth in doing them in
Pewter, which spoileth other preserves; and in any other metal these will not
be red. If you will have any Amber in them, you may to ten or twelve pound of
Wardens, put in about twenty grains of Amber, and one, or at most, two gra^ns
of Musk, ground with a little Sugar, and so put in at the last. Though the
Wardens be not covered over with the Syrup in the ^tewing by a good deal, yet
the steam, that rises and cannot get out, but circulateth, will serve both to
stew them, and to make them red and tender.

Sweet meat of Apples.
My Lady Barclay makes her fine App^e-ge^ly with slices of John-apples*
Sometimes she mingles a few Pippins with the John's to make the Gelly. But she
likes best the John's single, and the color is paler. You first fill the
glass with slices round-wise cut, and then the Gelly is poured in to fill up
the vacuities. The Gelly must be boiled to a good stiffness. Then when it is
ready to take from the fi^e, you put in some juice of Limon* and of Orange too,
if you like it: but these must not boil; yet it must stand a while upon the
fire stewing in good heat, to have the juyces Incorporate and Penetrate well.
You must also put in some Ambergreece, which does exceeding well in this
sweet-meat.

A Flomery-Caudle.
When Flomery is made and cold, you may make a pleasant and wholesome caudle of
it, by taking some lumps and spoonfuls of it, and boil it with Ale and White^
wine, then sweeten it to your ta^te with Sugar. There will remain in the Caudle
some lumps of the congealed flomery, which are ^^t ungrateful.

Pleasan^ Cordial Tablets, which are very comfort^^^* and strengthen nature
much.
Take four ounces of blanched Almonds; of Pine kernels, and of Pistachios, ana,
four Ounces. Eringo-roots, Candid-Limon peels, ana, three Ounces, Candid Orange
peels two Ounces, Candid Citron-peels four Ounces, of powder of white Amber, as
much as will lie upon a shilling; and as much of the powder of pearl, 20 grains
of Ambergris, three grains of Musk, a book of leaf gold, Cloves and Mace, of
each as much as will lie upon a three pence; cut all these as small as possible
you can. Then take a pound of S^gar, and half a pint of water, boil it to a
candy-height, then put in all the Ambergris and Musk, with three or four
spoonfulls of Orange flower water. Then put in all the other things, and stir
them well together, and cast them upon plates, and set them to dry: when both
sides are dry, take Orange-flower-water and Sugar, and Ice them.

To make Hartshorn Gelly.
Take four Ounces of Hartshorn rasped, boil it in four pound of water, till it
will be a gelly, which you may ^ry upon a plate (it will be so, in four or five
or six hours gentle boiling) and then pass the clear liquor from the ho^n
(which will be a good quart) then set it on the fire again with fine Sugar in
it to your taste; when that is d^ssolved, (or at the same time you put that in)
put half a pound of white wind or Sack into it; and a bag of Spice, containing
a little Ginger, a stick of Cinnamon bruised, a Nutmeg quartered, two or three
Cloves, and what other Spice you like, but Pepper. As soon as it begins to
boil, put into it the whites of three or four Eggs beaten, and let it boil up
gently, till the Eggs harden into a curd. Then open it with a spoon, and pour
into (...) the juice of three or four good Limons; then take it presently off
the fire, letting it not boil more above a walm: Then run it through a
Hippocras bag, putting spirit of Cinnamon, or of Ambergreece, or what you
please to it.

For gelly of flesh you proceed in the same manner, with a brawny Capon or
Cock, and a rouelle of Veal (first skinned, and soaked from the blood) in stead
of Hartshorn: and when the broth will gelly, do as above, using a double or
treble proportion of wine. Boil no Salt in it at first, for that will make the
gelly black.

Hartshorn Ielly.
Take a pound of Hartshorn, and boil it in five quarts of water, until it come
to three pints, then strain it through a sieve or strainer, and so let it
stand, until it be cold; and according to the ^trength you may take more or
less of the following Ingredients. First, take your stock of gelly, and put it
into a skillet or pipkin with a pound of fine loaf Sugar, and set it over a
fire of Charcoal; and when it begins to boil, put in a pi^t or more of
Rhenish-wine. Then take the whites of Eggs six or eight, beaten very well, with
three or four spoonfuls of Rose Water, and put into the gelly. Then take two
grains of Amber, and one grain of Musk, and put thereto, so let it boil a
quarter of an hour, but not too violent; Then put in three or four spoonfuls of
Cinnamon Water, with the juice of seven or eight Limons; boil it one walm more,
and run it very hot through your gelly-bag; this done, run it again as cool and
softly as you can into your Glasses and Pots.

To make Hartshorn Gelly.
Take a pound of Hartshorn, and a pretty big lean Chicken, and put it into a
skillet with about nine quarts of water, and boil your stock pretty stiff, so
that you may cut it with a knife; you may try it in a spoon, as it is a
boiling. Then drain your liquor clear away from the Hartshorn through a fine
searse, and let it stand until the next morning; then if there be any fat upon
it, pare it away, and likewise the settlings at the bottom. Then put your Gelly
into a good big skillet, and put to it a quart of the palest white wind that
you can procure, or a qua^^ of Rhenish-wine, and one pound of double refined
Sugar, and half an Ounce of Cinnamon broken into small pieces, with three or
four flakes of Mace. Then set it upon the fire, and boil it a good p^ce. Then
h^ve the whites of sixteen Eggs beaten to a high froth; so put in the froth of
your Eggs, and boil it five or six Walms; then put in the juice of six Limons,
and boil it a little while after, and then run ^t into a silver basin through
your gelly-bag: and keep it warm by the fire, until it have run through the
second time. You must observe to put but a very little into your bag at a time
for the second running, that it may but little more then drop; and it will be
so much the clearer: and you must not remove the whites of Eggs nor Spice out
of the bag, all the while it is running. And if the weather be hot, you need
not put in so much wine; for it will not then be so apt to gelly as in cold
weather.

Another way to make Harts-horn-Gelly.
Take a small Cock^chick, when it is scalded, slit it in two pieces, lay it to
soak in warm water, until the blood be well out of it. Then take a calves foot
half boiled, slit it in the middle and pick out the fat and black of it. Put
these into a Gallon of fair-water; skim it very well; Then put into it one
Ounce of Hartshorn, and one Ounce of Ivory. When it is half consumed, take
some of it up in a spoon; and if it gelly, take it all up, and put it into a
silver balon, or such a Pewter one as will endure Char-coal. Then beat four
whites of Eggs, with three or four spoonfuls of Damask-Rose-water very well
together. Then put these into the gelly, with a quarter of an Ounce of Cinnamon
broken into very small pieces; one flake of Mace; three or four thin ^lices of
Ginger; sweeten it with loaf Sugar to your liking; set it then over a cha^ing
dish of coals; stir it well, and cover it close; blow under it, until there
arise a scum or curd; let it boil a little, then put into it one top of
Rose-mary; two or three of sweet Marjoram; wring into it the juice of half a
Limon; let not your curd fall again, for it will spoil the clearness of the
gelly. If you will have it more Cordial, you may grind in a Sawcer, with a
little hard Sugar, half a grain of Musk, a grain of Ambergreece. It must be
boiled in an earthen pipkin, or a very sweet Iron^pot, after the Hartshorn and
Ivory is in it. It must constantly boil, until it gellieth. If there arise any
scum, it must be taken off.

Marmulate of Pippins.
Take the quickest Pippins, when they are newly gathered, and are sharp; Pare
and Core and cut them into half quarters. Put to them their weight of the
fine^t Sugar in Powder, or broken into little pieces. Put upon these in your
preserving pan, as much fountain water, as will even cover them. Boil them with
a quick-fire, till by frying a little upon a Plate, you find it gellieth. when
it is cold (which may be in less then half an hour) then take it from the fire,
and put into it a little of the yellow rind of Limons rasped very small, and a
little of the Yellow rind of Oranges boiled tender (casting away the first
waters to correct their bitterness) and cut into narrow slices (as in the gelly
of Pippins) and some Ambergreece, with a fourth part of Musk, and break the
Apples with the back of your preserving spoon, whiles it cools. If you like
them sharper, you may put in a little juice of Limon, a little before you take
the pan from the fire. When it is cold; put it into pots. This will keep a year
or two.

Try if the juice of Apples (strained out of rasped Apples) in such sort, as
you make Marmulate of Quinces, with the juice of Quinces, would not be better,
then fair-water, to boil your Apples and Sugar in.

Gelly of Quinces.
MY last Gelly of Quinces I made thus. The Quinces being very ripe, and having
been long gathered, I took the flesh of twelve Quinces in quarters, and the
juice of fifteen or sixteen others, which made me two pound of juice; And I
made a strong decoction of about twenty four others, adding to these twenty
four (to make the decoction the stronger, and more slimy) the Cores and the
Parings of the twelve in quarters; and I used the Cores sliced and Parings of
all these. All this boiled about an hour and half in eight or ten pound of
water; Then I ^trained and pressed out the decoction (which was a little
viscous, as I desired) and had between 4 and five pound of strong decoction. To
the decoction and Syrup, I put three pound of pure Sugar, which being dissolved
and scummed, I put in the flesh, and in near an hour of temperate boiling
(covered) and often turning the quarters, it was enough. When it was cold, it
was store of firm clear red gelly, environing in great quantity the quarters,
that were also very tender and well penetrated with the Sugar. I found by this
making, that the juice of Quinces is not so good to make gelly. It makes it
somewhat running like Syrup, and tastes sweetish, mellowy, syrupy.

The Decoction of the flesh is only good for Syrup. I conceive, it would be a
grateful sweetmeat to mingle a good quantity of good gelly with the Marmulate,
when it is ready to put into pots. To that end they must both be making at the
same time: or if one be a little sooner done then the other, they may be kept a
while warm (fit to mingle) without prejudice. Though the Gelly be cold and
settled, it will melt again with the warmth of the Marmulate, and so mingle
with it, and make a Marmulate, that will appear very gelly^sh; or peradventure
it may be well to fill up a pot or gl^ss with gelly, when it is first half
filled with Marmulate a little cooled.

Preserved Quince with Gelly.
When I made Quinces with Gelly, I used the first time these proportions; of
the decoction of Quinces three pound; of Sugar one pound three quarters; Flesh
of Quince two pound and an half; The second time these, of decoction two pound
and an half, Sugar two pound and a quarter, Of flesh two pound three quarters.
I made the decoction by boiling gently each time a dozen or fourteen Quinces in
a Pottle of water, an hour and a half, or two hours, so that the decoction was
very strong of the Quinces. I boiled the parings (which for that end were pared
very thick, after the Quinces were well wiped) with all the substance of the
Quince in thick slices, and part of the Core (excepting all the Kernels) and
then let it run through a loose Napkin, pressing gently with two plates, that
all the decoction might come out; but be clear without any flesh or mash* The
first making I intended should be red; and therefore both the decoction, and
the whole were boiled covered, and it poved a fine clear red. This boiled above
an hour, when all was in. The other boiled not above half an hour, always
uncovered (as also in making his decoction) and the Gelly was of a fine pale
yellow. I first did put the Sugar upon the fire with the decoction, and as soon
as it was dissolved, I put in the flesh in quarters and halves; and turned the
pieces often in the pan; else the bottom of such as lay long unturned, would be
of a deeper color then the upper part. The flesh was very tender and good. I
put some of the pieces into Jarglasses (carefully, not to break them,) and then
poured gelly upon them. Then more pieces, then more gelly, etc. all having
stood a while to cool a little.

To make fine white Gelly of Quinces.
Take Quinces newly from the tree, fair and sound, wipe them clean, and boil
them whole in a large quantity of water, the more the* better, and with a
quick-fire, till the Quinces crack and are soft, which will be in a good half
hour, or an hour. Then take out the Quinces, and press out their juice, with
your hands hard, or gently in a press through a strainer, that only the clear
liquor or juice run out, but none of the pap, or solid and fleshy substance of
the Quince. (The water, they were boiled in, you may throw away.) This liquor
will be slimy and mucilaginous, which proceeds much from the seeds that
remaining within the Quinces, do contribute to making this Liquor. Take three
pound of it, and one pound of fine Sugar, and boil them up to a gelly, with a
moderate fire, so that they boil every where, but not violently. They may
require near an hours boiling to come to a gelly. The trial of that is, to take
a tin of silver plate, and wet it with fair-water, and drop a little of the
boiling juice upon the wet plate; if it stick to the plate, it is not enough;
but if it fall off (when you sl^pe the Plate) without sticking at all to it,
then is it enough: and then you put it into flat shallow Tin forms, first
wetted with cold water, and let it stand in them four or five hours in a cold
place, till it be quite cold. Then reverse the plates, that it may shale and
fall out, and so put the parcels up in boxes.

Note, you take fountain water, and put the Quinces into it, both of them being
cold. Then set your kettle to boil with a very quick-fire, that gives a clear
smart flame to the bottom of the kettle, which must be uncovered all the while,
that the gelly may prove the whiter; And so likewise it must be whiles the
juice or expression is boiling with the Sugar, which must be the finest, that
it may not need clarifying with an Egg; but that little scum that rises at the
sides at the beginning of moderate boiling must be scummed away. You let your
juice or expression settle a while, that if any of the thick substance be come
out with it, it may settle to the bottom; for you are to use for this only the
clear juice: which to have it the clearer, you may let it run through a^large,
thin, open, strainer, without pressing it. When you boil the whole Quinces, you
take them out, to strain them as soon as their skins crack, and that they are
quite soft; which will not happen to them all at the same time, but according
to their bigness and ripeness. Therefore first take out and press those, that
are ready first: and the rest still as they grow to a fit state to press. You
shall have more juice by pressing the Quinces in a torcular, but it will be
clearer, doing it with your hands; both ways, you lap them in a strainer.

White Marmulate, The Queens way.
Take a pound and an half of flesh of Quinces sliced, one pound of Sugar, and
one pound of Liquor (which is a decoction made very strong of Quinces boiled in
fair water) Boil these with a pretty quick fire, till they be enough, and that
you find it gellieth. Then proceed as in my way.

My Lady of Bath's way.
Take six pounds of flesh of Quince, and two pound of Sugar mo^stened well with
juice of Quinces. Boil these together in a fit kettle; first gently, till the
Liquor be sweated out from the quince, and have dissolved all the Sugar; Then
very quick and fast, proceeding as in my way, (br^ising the Quinces with a
spoon, etc.) till it be enough. This will be very fine and quick in ta^^e; but
will not keep well beyond Easter. In this course you may make Marmulate without
any juice or water (by the mere sweeting of the flesh) if you be careful,
proceeding slowly till juice enough be sweated out, least else it burn to; and
then quick, that the flesh may be boiled enough, before the Moisture be
evaporated away.

Paste of Quinces.
Take a quart of the juice of Quince, and when it is on the fire, put into it,
pared, quartered and Cored as much Quince, as the juice will cover; when it is
boiled tender, pass the Liquor through a sieve, and put the pulp into a stone
Mortar, and beat it very fine with a Wooden Pestel; then weigh it, and to
every pound of pulp, take a quarter of a pound of loaf Sugar, and boil it up to
a candy-height in some of the juice, which you passed through the sieve; then
put therein your pulp, stirring it well together, till it has had one boil and
no more; Then drop it on glasses, or spread it on plates, and set it to dry.

Into the juice that remains, you may put more flesh of Quinces, and boil it
tender, doing all as at the first. Then adding it (beaten to pulp* in a Mortar)
unto the former pulp; repeating this, till you have taken up all your juice.
Then put your proportion of Sugar to the whole quantity of pulp, and so make it
up into paste, and dry it, and sometimes before a gentle fire, sometimes in a
very moderate stove.

Paste of Quinces with very little Sugar.
To one pound of flesh or solid substance of Quinces (when they are pared,
cored, and quartered,) take but a quarter of double refined Sugar. Do thus,
scald your flesh of Quinces in a little of the juice of other Quinces, that
they may become tender, as if they were coddled. Then bea^ them in a mo^^^r to
a subtle uniform smooth pulp (which you may pass through a searce.) In the mean
time let your Sugar be dissolved, and boiling upon the fire. When it is of a
candy-height, put the pulp of Quince to it, and let it remain a little while
upon the fire, till it boil up one little puff or bubbling, and that it is
uniformly mixed with the Sugar; you must stir it well all the while. Then take
it off, and drop it into little Cakes, or put it thin into shallow glasses
which you may afterward cut in^o slices. Dry the cakes and slices gently and
by degrees in a stove, turning them often. These will keep all the year, and
are very quick of taste.

Another paste of Quinces.
Put the Quinces whole into scalding water, and let them boil there, till they
be tender. Then take them out and peel them, and scrape off the pulp, which
pass through a strainer; and when it is cold enough, to every pound put three
quarters of a pound of double refined Sugar in Subtle powder; work them will
together into an uniform paste; then make little cakes of it, and dry them in a
stove. If you would have the Cakes red, put a little (very little; the color
will tell you, when it is enough) of juice of barberies to the paste or pulp.
You have the juice of Barberries thus: Put them ripe into a pot over the fire,
till you see the juice sweat out. Then strain them, and take the clear juice.
If you would have the paste tarter, you may put a little juice of Limons to it.

A pleasant Gelly in the beginning of the winter is made, of Pearmains, Pippins
and juice of Qninces. Also a Marmulate made of those Apples, and juice of
Quinces, is very good.

A smoothening Quiddany or Gelly of the Cores of Quinces.
Take only the Cores, and slice them thin, with the seeds in them. If you have
a pound of them, you may put a pottle of water to them. Boil them, ti^l they be
all Mash, and that the water has drawn the Mucilage out of them, and that the
decoction will be a gelly, when it is cold. Then let it run through a wide
strainer or fit colender (that the gross part may remain behind, but all the
slyminess go through) and to every pint of Liquor take about half a pound of
double refined Sugar, and boil it up to a gelly. If you put in a little juice
of Quince, when you boil it up, it will be the quicker.

You may also take a pound of the flesh of Quinces (when you have not cores
^now, to make as much as you desire) and one ounce of seeds of other Quinces,
and boil them each a part, till the one be a strong decoction; the other a
substantial Mucilage* Then strain each from their course faeces: and mingle the
decoctions, and put Sugar to them, and boil them up to a Gelly.

Or with the flesh and some juice of Quinces, make Marmulate in the Ordinary
way; which whiles it is boiling, put to it the Mucilage of the seeds to
Incorporate it with the Marmulate. You may take to this a less proportion of
Sugar than to my Marmulate.

Marmulate of Cherries.
Take four pound of the best Kentish Cherries, before they be stoned, to one
pound of pure loaf Sugar, which beat into small Powder: stone the Cherries, and
put them into your preserving pan over a gen^le fire, that they may not boil,
but resolve much into Liquor. Take away with the spoon much of the thin Liquor,
(for else the Marmulate will be Glewy) leaving the Cherries moist enough, but
not swimming in clear Liquor. Then put to them half your Sugar, and boil it up
quick, and scum away the froth that rises. When that is well Incorporated and
clear, strew in a little more of the Sugar; and continue doing so by little and
little, till you have put in all your Sugar; which course will make the color
the finer. When they are boiled enough, take them off, and bruise them with the
back of a spoon; and when they are cold, put them up in pots.

You may do the same with Morello Cherries; which will have a quicker-tast, and
have a fining, pure, shining, dark color.

Both sorts will keep well all the year.

Marmulate of Cherries with juice of Raspes and Currants.
Mingle juice of Raspes and red Currants with the stoned Cherries, and boil
this mixture into Marmulate, with a quarter, or at most, a third part of Sugar.
The juyces must be so much as to make Gelly of them to mingle handsomely with
the Cherries, to appear among and between them.

Madam Plancy (who makes this sweet-meat for the Queen) uses this proportion.
Take three pounds of Cherries stoned; half a pound of clear juice of raspes,
and one pound of the juice of red currants, and one pound of fine Sugar. Put
them all together into the preserving pan; boil them with a quick fire,
especially at the first, skimming them all the while, as any scum rises. When
you find them of a fit consistence, with a fine clear gelly, mingled with the
Cherries, take the preserving pan from the fire, and bruise the Cherries with
the back of your preserving spoon; and when they are of a fit temper of
coolness, pot them up.

Peradventure, to keep all the year, there may be requisite a little more Sugar.

To make an Excellent Syrup of Apples.
Slice a dozen or twenty Pippins into thin slices, and lay them in a deep dish,
Stratmu super stratum, with pure double refined Sugar in powder. Put two or
three spoonfuls of water to them, and cover them close with another dish,
luting their joining that nothing may expire. Then set them into an oven. And
when you take out the dish, you will have an excellent Syrup, and the remaining
substance of the Apples will be insipid.

You may proceed with Damsens, or other plumms, in the same manner, and you
will have excellent stewed Damsens, (as fair as preserved ones) swimming in a
very fine Syrup.

Sweetmeats of my Lady Windebanks.
She makes the past of Apricocks (which is both very beautiful and clear, and
tastes most quick of the fruit) thus, Take six pound of pared and sliced
Apricocks, put them into a high pot, which stop close, and set it in a kettle
of boiling water, till you perceive the flesh is all become an uniform pulp;
then put it out into your preserving pan or pos^enet, and boil it gently till
it be grown thick, stirring it carefully all the while. Then put two pound of
pure Sugar to it, and mingle it well, and let it boil gently, till you see the
matter come to such a thickness and solidity, that it will not stick to a
plate. Then make it up into what form you will. The like you may do with Raspes
or Currants.

It is a pleasant and beautiful sweet meat to do thus: Boil Raspes in such a
pot, till they be all come to such a Liquor; Then let the clear run through a
strainer; to a pound, or English wine pint whereof, put a pound of red Currants
(first stoned and the black ends cut off) and a pound of Sugar. Boil these,
till the Liquor be gellied. Then put it in Glasses. It will look like Rubies in
clear Gelly. You may do the like with Cherries, either ^^oned, and the stalks
cut off, or three or four capped upon one stalk, and the stone lest in the
first, and boiled in Liquor of Raspe^.

She makes her curious red Marmulate thus: Take six pounds of Quince-flesh; six
pounds of pure Sugar; and eight of pints of juice; boil this up with quick
fire, till you have scummed it, then pull away all the Coals, and let it but
simper, for four or five hours, remaining covered, renewing from time to time
so little fire, as to cause it so to continue simpring. But as soon as it is
scummed, put into it a handful of Quince kernels, two races of Ginger sliced,
and fourteen or fifteen Cloves whole; all these put into a Tyffany-bag tied
fast; when you find that the color is almost to your mind, make a quick
fire, and boil it up a pace, then throw away your bag of kernels, Ginger and
Cloves, and pot up your Marmulate, when it is cool enough.

She makes her red Gelly of Quince thus: Put the Quinces pared and sliced into
a pot, as above; and to every pound of this flesh put about half a demistier of
fair water, and put this into a kettle of boi^ing water, till you perceive all
the juice is boiled out of the Quince. Then strain it out, and boil this Liquor
(which will not yet be clear) till you perceive it gellieth upon a plate. Then
to every pint of Liquor put a pound of Sugar, and boil it up to a gelly,
skimming it well, as the scum rises, and you will have a pure gelly.

Gelly of Red Currants.
Take them clean picked, and fresh gathered in the morning, in a basin, set
them over the fire, that their juice may sweat out, pressing them all the while
with the back of your preserving spoon, to squeese out of them all that is
good. When you see all is out, strain the Liquor from them, and let it stand to
settle four or five hours, that the gross matter may sink to the bottom. Then
take the pure clear, (the thick settling will serve to add in making of
Marmulate of Cherries, or the like) and to every pint or pound of it, p^t three
quarters of a pound of the purest refined Sugar, and boil them up with a quick
fire, till they come to a gelly height (which will be done immediately in less
then a quarter of an hour)* which you may try with a drop upon a plate. Then
take it off, and when it is cold enough, put it into Glasses. You must be
caref^l to skim it well in due time, and with thin brown Paper to take off the
froth, if you will be so curious.

Gelly of Currants, with the fruit whole in it.
Take four pound of good Sugar, clarify it whites of Eggs, then boil it up to
a candid height (that is, till throwing it, it goes into flakes: Then put into
it five pound (or a^ discretion) of pure juice of red Currants first boiled to
clarify it by skimming it. Boil them together a little while, till it be well
scummed, and enough to become gelly. Then p^t a good handful or two of the
berries of Currants whole, and cleansed from the stalks and black end, and boil
them a little till they be enough.

You need not to boil the juice, before you put it to the Sugar, and
consequently do not scum it before the Sugar and it boil together: but then
scum it perfectly: and take care before, that the juice be very clear and well
strained.

Marmul^te of red Currants.
Take some juice of red Currants, and put into it a convenient proportion of
some entire Currants cleansed from the stalks and buttons at the other end. Let
these boil a little together. Have also ready some fine Sugar boiled to a candy
height. Put of this to the Currants at discretion, and boil them together, till
they be enough: and bruise them with the back of your enough: and bruise them
with the back of your spoon, that they may be in the consistence of Marmulate
(like that of Cherries) which put in pots, when it is cool enough. You do not
stone the whole Currants put into the juice, unless you please.

Sucket of Mallow Stalks.
To candy or preserve the tender stalks of Mallows, do thus; Take them in the
spring, when they are very young and tender; and peel off the strings that are
round about the outside, as you do French-beans, and boil them, till they are
very tender. In the mean time prepare a high Syrup of pure Sugar, and put the
boiled stalks into it, whiles it is boiling hot, but taken from the fire. Let
them lie soaking there till the next morning. Then take out the stalks, and
heat the Syrup ag^in, scalding hot, and return the stalks into it, letting them
lie there till next morning; (Note, that the stalks must never boil in the
Syrup,) Repeat this six, or eight, or nine times, that is to say, till they are
sufficiently Imbibed with the Syrup. When they are at this pass, you may either
keep them as a wet sucket in Syrup, or dry them in a stove upon Papers, turning
them continually, in such sort as dried sweetmeats are to be made. I like them
best dry, but soft and moist within (Medull^si) like Candied Eryngos. In Italy
they eat much of them, for sharpness and heat of U^ine, and in Gonorrhaea's to
take away pain in Urin^ng.

A Sucket is made in like manner of the Carneous substance of stalks of
Lettice. It is the knob, out of which the Lettice grows, which being pared,
and all the tough rind being taken off, is very tender and so it is a pretty
way downwards the root. This also is very cooling and smoothing.

In Italy these tender stalks of Mallows are called Mazzocchi, and they eat
them (boiled tender) in Sallets, either hot or cold, with Vinegar and Oil, or
Butter and Vinegar, or juice of Oranges.

Conserve of Red Roses.
Doctor Glisson makes his conserve of red Roses thus: Boil gently a pound of
red Rose leaves (well picked, and the Nails cut off) in about a pint and a half
(or a little more, as by discretion you shall judge fit, after having done it
once; The Doctors Apothecary takes two pints) of Spring water; till the water
have drawn out all the Tincture of the Roses into it self, and that the leaves
be very tender, and look pale like Linen; which may be in a good half hour, or
an hour, keeping the pot covered whiles it boileth, Then pour the tincted
Liquor from the pale Leaves (strain it out, pressing it gently, so that you may
have Liquor enough to dissolve your Sugar) and set it upon the fire by it self
to boil, putting into it a pound of pure double refined Sugar in sm^ll Powder;
which as soon as it is dissolved, put in a second pound; then a third, lastly a
fourth, so that you have four pound of Sugar to every pound of Rose-leaves.
(The Apothecary uses to put all the four pounds into the Liquor altogether at
once,) Boil these four pounds of Sugar with the tincted Liquor, till it be a
high Syrup, very near a candy height, (as high as it can be, not to flake or
candy) Then put the pale Rose-leaves into this high Syrup, as it yet stands
upon the fire, or immediately upon the taking it off the fire, But presently
take it from the fire, and stir them exceeding well together, to mix them
uniformly; then let them stand till they be cold; then pot them up. If you put
up your Conserve into pots, whiles it is yet thoroughly warm, and leave them
uncovered some days, putting them in the hot Sun or stove, there will grow a
fine candy upon the top, which will preserve the conserve without paper upon
it, from moulding, till you break the Candied crust, to take out some of the
conserve.

The color both of the Rose-leaves and the Syrup about them, will be exceeding
beautiful and red, and the taste excellent; and the whole very tender and
smoothing, and easy to digest in the stomach without clogging it, as does the
ordinary rough conserve made of raw Roses beaten with Sugar, which is very
rough in the throat. The worst of it is, that if you put not a Paper to lie
always close upon the top of the conserve, it will be apt to grow moldy there
on the top; especially apres que le pot est entame.

The Conserve of Roses, besides being good for Colds and Coughs, and for the
Lunges, is exceeding good for sharpness and heat of Urine, and soreness of the
bladder, eaten much by it self, or drunk with Milk, or distilled water of
Mallows, and Plantaine, or of Milk.

Another Conserve of Roses.
Doctor Bacon related to me, that Mr. Minito The Roman Apothecary, made him
some conserve of Roses, in th^s manner. He took twelve pounds (of sixteen
Ounces to the pound) of the best lump or kitchen Sugar, and clarified it very
well with whites of Eggs, using Springwater in doing this. He made his
reckoning, that his twelve pound of Sugar, came to be but nine pound, when all
the scum was taken away, and the Sugar perfectly clarified. Boil it then to a
Syrup, and when it is about half boiled, go roundly about your Rose-leaves.
They must be picked and the white nails cut off beforehand; but begin not to
beat them before your Syrup is half boiled. Then put thirty Ounces (which is
two pound and an half of Roses to every pound of such Sugar) of your Red-Roses
into the Mortar, and beat them well, squeesing into them, as you beat them,
some of the subtilest and best part (which comes out first) of about two
Limons, which brings out their color finely. You must have finished beating
your Roses, by then the Sugar is come by boiling to a high Syrup (for if you
should let them lie st^ll in the Air, but a little while, they would grow
black, and of ill color) then with your ladle put the Roses to the Sugar, and
stir them very well in it, to Incorporate all well and uniformly together. So
let them boil on gently (for all thi^ while you take not your preserving pan
from the fire, and a thick scum of the Roses will rise, which you scum off from
time to time continually as it comes up, and reserve this in a pot by it self,
for it will be good hard Sugar of Roses, and may be about an eight or ninth
part of the whole. After it is clear from scum, and has boiled near a quarter
of an hour with the Roses in it, and that you see by a drop upon a plate, that
it is of a due consistence; take your pan from the fire* and stir all very well
together, and p^t it into pots, which leave uncovered during ten or twelve
days, setting them in the hot strong Sun all the day long during that time, to
give the Roses a fine hard crust or candy at the top; but under it, in the
substance of the matter, it will be like a fine clear Syrupy gelly. If the Sun
favor you not, then you may use a stove. After twelve days, tie covers of
Paper, upon the pots.

Doctor Bacon uses to make a pleasant J^lep of this Conserve of Roses, by
putting a good spoonful of it into a large drinking glass or cup; upon which
squeese the juice of a Limon, and clip in unto it a little of the yellow rind
of the Limon; work these well together with the back of a spoon, putting water
to it by little and little, till you have filled up the glass with
Spring Water: so drink it. He sometimes passes it through an Hypocras bag, and
then it is a beautiful and pleasant Liquor.

FINIS.
The Table.
A
SCotch Ale from my Lady Holmbey 114 To make Ale drink quick 116 A very
pleasant drink of Apples Ibid. Ale with Honey 120 Small Ale for the stone 112
Apple drink with Sugar, Honey, etc. 123 Master Webbs Ale and Bragot 125 Trstew
Apples 241 Apples in Gelly 280 Sweet^meat of Apples 285 To make an excellent
syrup of Apples 302
B
St^wed Broth 148 Portugal Broth, as it was made for the Queen 149 Nourishing
Broth 156 Broth and Potage 166 Broth for sick and convalescent Persons 169 A
savoury and nourishing boiled Capon 181 To stew Beef 177, 178 To stew a Rump of
Beef 194, 235 To roast Wild Boar 200 About making of Brawn 246 To bake Beef 249
To boil Beef or Venison 251 Ordering Bacon for Gambo^s, and to keep 254 To make
B^ket. 263
C
To make Cider 116 Sir P^ul Neal's way of making Cider 117 Dr. Harvey's
pleasant Water Cider, whereof he used to drink much, making it his ordinary
drink 120 A good D^sh of Cream 135 An excellent Spanish Cream 136 Another
Clouted Cream 137 My Lord of St. Alban's Cresme Fouettee 139 To make Cream
Curds 140 The Queens Barley Cream 164 Capon in White-broth 172 To make Cock-Ale
174 Savoury Collops of Veal 186 To pickle Capons my Lady Portland's way 188
Scotch Collops 199 Excellent good Collops 203 My Lady Diana Porter's Scotch
Collops 216 Cream with Rice 228 Pickled Champignons 239 Sallet of cold Capon
Roasted 247 To make Cheese cakes 257 Sharp and crisp Crust for Tarts and Pyes
Ibid. To make a Cake 258, 260, 261, 262, 264 To make a Caraway-Cake 263
Excellent small Cakes 264 To make scalded Cheese 272 The Cream-Curds 273
Savoury* tosted or melted Cheese Ibid. To feed Chicken 274, 276, 277 To fatten
young Chicken in a wonderful degree 276, 278 An excellent way to Cram Chicken
279 Gelly of Red Currants 305 Gelly of Currants with the fruit whole in it Ibid
D.
To bake Wild Ducks or Teals 252 To Roast wild Ducks Ibid.
E.
To butter Eggs with Cream 174 Portuguez Eggs 241 To boil Eggs 242
F.
Wheaten Flomery 158 A Fricacee of Lamb-stones, andC. 187 To boil smoaked Flesh
194 A Fricacee of Veal 217 Butter and Oil to fry Fish 231 A Flomery-Caudle 285
G
Smallage Gruel 162 About water Gruel 163 An excellent and wholesome water
Gruel with Wood sorr^l and Currants 164 Gruel of Oatmeal and Rice 228 To make
clear Gelly of Bran 243 An excellent meat of Goose or Turkey 253 To pickle an
old fat Goose 254
H.
Some Notes upon Honey 5 My Lord Hollis Hydromel 34 Hydromel as I made it weak
for the Q. Mother 36 To make Honey drink 97 Weak Honey drink 124 To make a^
Hotchpot 177 The Queens Hotchpot 179 A nourishing Hachy 187 Red Herrings boiled
206 To season Humble Pyes 252 To make Hearts horn Gelly 286, 288, 289
L.
To dress Lamprey's 219
M.
Master Corsellises Antwerp Meathe 5 To make excellent Meathe 7 A weaker, but
very pleasant Meathe 8 An excellent white Meathe 9 Master Webb's Meathe 12 My
own considerations for making of Meathe 17 My Lady Gower's white Meathe 25
Strong Meathe 33 A Receipt for making of Meathe Ib. 46, 59, 72, 73 My Lord
Morice's Meathe 41 My Lady Morice her Sisters Meathe Ibid. To make white Mead
43, 64, 77, 82, 83, 84, 90, 94 Sir William Paston's Meathe 44 Another way of
making Meathe 45, 86 Sir Baynam Throckmorton's Meathe Ibid. My Lady Bellassises
Meathe 48 My Lord George his Meathe 60 Several sorts of Meathe, small and
strong 61 To make Meathe 62, 89, 94, 98, 100, 101, 102, 106 Sir John Arundel's
White Meathe 63 To make a Meathe good for the Liver and Lungs 65 A very good
Meathe 66 My Lord Herbert's Meathe 76 To make small white Meathe 91 Meathe from
the Muscovian Ambassador's St^ward 93 Meathe with Raisins 111 A Receipt to make
Metheglin as it is made at Liege, communicated by Mr. Masillon 1 White
Metheglin of my Lady Hungerfords which is exceedingly praised 3 A Receipt to
make a Tun of Metheglin 9 The Countess of Bullingbrook's white Metheg. 11
Metheglin composed by my self 24 Sir Thomas Gower's Metheglin for health 27
Metheglin for taste and color 28 An excellent way of making white Metheglin
30, 31, 32, 35 Several way of making Metheglin 37 To make white Metheglin 46,
66 Another Metheglin 49, 67, 71, 83, 104 Mr. Pierce's excellent white Metheglin
50 An excellent way to make Metheglin, called the Liquor of Life 55 To make
good Metheglin 57, 87 To make white Metheglin of Sir J. Fortescue 58 The Lady
Vernon's white Metheglin 60 To make Metheglin 64, 74, 75, 77, 80, 85, 92, 96,
99, 110 A most excellent Metheglin 68, 81 To make white Metheg. of the Count.
of Dorsets 69 To make small Metheglin 78, 105 The Earl of Denbigh's Metheglin
97 To mak^ Metheglin that looks like White Wine 103 Metheglin, or sweet-drink
of my Lady Stuart 107 A Metheg. for the Colic* Stone, of the same Lady 180 A
Receipt for Metheglin of my Lady Windebanke 108, 109 Marrow sops with Wine 172
To make a shoulder of Mutton like Venison 194 An excellent way of making Mutton
steaks 202 To make Mustard 232 For roasting of Meat 234 Mutton baked like
Veniso^ 247 My Lord of Denbigh's Almond March-pane 265 Marmulate of Pippins 291
White Marmulate, the Queens way 296 My Lady of Bath's way 197 Marmulate of
Cherries 301 Marmulate of Red Currants 306
O
A plain but good Spanish Oglia 195 To stew Oysters 218
P
Excellent Marrow-Spinage Pasties 188 To make a French Barley Posset 190 To
make Puff-past 191 To make a Pudding with Puff past Ibid. To make Pear Puddings
192, 207 Marrow Puddings Ibid. To make excellent Black Puddings 196, 205, 214 A
Rec^ipt to make White Puddings 197 To make an excellent Pudding 198 Pyes 200 To
make Pith Puddings 205 An Oat-meal Pudding 207 To make Call Puddings Ibid. A
Barley Pudding 208 A Pippin Pudding 209 To make a bak^d Oat-meal Pudding Ibid.
A plain quaking Pudding 210 A good quaking Bag Pudding 211 To preserve Pippins
in Ielly 215 To dress Poor-John, and Buckorn 223 To dress Parsneps 226 To
butter Pease 229 A Herring Pie 230 To make an excellent Hare Pie 248 To bake
Pigeons, Teals or Wild^ ducks 250 Green-Geese Pie Ibid. To make a plain
ordinary Posset 131 Concerning Pottages 141 Plain savoury English Pottage 143
Pottage de blanc de Chapon 144 Ordinary Potage 145 Barley Potage 146 An English
Potage 148 Another Potage 149 Nourissant Potage de sante 150 Potage de sante
151, 152, 153 Good nourishing Potage 157 Pap of Oat-meal 159 Panado Ibid.
Barley Pap 160 Oat meal Pap. Sir John Colladon 161 Pressis-Nourissant 165
Pan-Cotto 167 My Lord Lumley's Pease-Potage Ibid. An excellent Posset 170 Pease
of the seedy buds of Tulips 171 To make Plague-Water 174, 175 An excellent
baked Pudding 182, 213 My Lady of Portland's Minced Pyes 183, 184 Minced Pyes
185, 190 To feed Poultry 275 To feed Partridges that you have taken wild 279
To make Puffs 280 Gelly of Pippins or John-Apples 283
Q
To keep Quinces all the year good 176 Gelly of Quinces 292 Preserved Quince
with Gelly 293 To make fine white Gelly of Quinces 294 Paste of Quinces 297,
298, 299 A smoothening Quiddany or Gelly of the C^res of Quinces 300
R
Rice and Orge monde 161 Boiled Rice dry 171 To Roast fine Meat 185 To make
Red-Dear 193 Conserve of Red Rose^ 308, 310
S
Sack with Clove gilly-flowers 21 To make Stepponi 124 To make a Sack-posset
129, 130, 131 A Barley Sack-posset 132 My Lord of Carlile's Sack-posset 134 A
Syllabub 135, 141, 230 To make a whip Syllabub 141 To make Spinage-broth 145
Sauce of Horseradish Ibid. Very good Sauce for Partridges and Chicken 190 To
dress Stock Fish 221, 224, 225 To prepare Shrimps for dressing 231 To make
Slip-coat-Cheese 267, 268, 271 Sweetmeats of my Lady Windebanks 303 Sucket of
Mallow-stalks 307
T
Tea with Eggs 155 A Tansy 218, 256 To souce Turkeys 253 Pleasant Cordial
Tablets 286
V
To stew a breast of Veal 17^ Vuova Lattate 196 Vuova Spersa 196 Baked Venison
201, 243, 244 Tosts of Veal 231
W
Morello Wine 112 Currants Wine 113 The Countess of Newports Cherry Wine 127
Strawbury Wine Ibid. To make Wine of Cherries alon^ 128 To make Rasberry- Wine
175 To make a White pot 176, 233 Buttered Whitings with Eggs 223 To stew
Wardens or Pears 240 Preserved Wardens. 285
The End.

