OF THE Sympathetick Powder.

A DISCOURSE IN A Solemn Assembly AT MONTPELLIER.

Made, in French, BY Sir KENELM DIGBY, Knight 1657.

LONDON, Printed for John Williams, 1669.

A DISCOURSE OF The Cure of WOUNDS, BY THE POWDER of SYMPATHY.
My Lords,
I Believe you will remain all in one mind with me, that, to penetrate and know
a Subject, it is necessary, in the first place, to show whether the thing be
such, as it is s^pp^sed or imagined to be: For would not one unprofitably lose
both his time and labor, to busy himself in the re-sea^ch of the causes, of
that which peradventure is but a Chim^ra, with-any foundation of truth?

I remember to have read a place in Plut^rch, where he proposes this Question,
Why those Horses, who, while they are Colts, have been pursued by the Wolf and
saved themselv^ by force of running, are more fleet than other H^r^es? Whereto he
answers, That it may be the scaring and aff^^ghtment, which the Wolf gives the
young beast, makes him try his utmost strength, to del^ver himself from the
danger that follows him at the heels: therefore, the said fright, as it were,
unknits his joy^ts, and stretches his sinews, and makes the ligaments and other
parts of his body the more supple to run; insomuch, that he resents it all his
life afterward, and becomes a good Courser. Or, perhaps, says he, those Colts,
which are naturally swift, save themselves by flying away; whereas others, who
are not so, are overtaken by the Wolf, and so become his prey: and so, it is
not because they have escaped the Wolf, that they are the more fleet, but it is
their natural swiftness that saves them. He affords also other reasons; and at
last concludes, That it may be the thing is not true. I find it not so fit (my
Lords) to reply hereto at a Table D^scourse: where the chief design of
conversation is to pass away the time gently and pleasantly; without meddling
with the severity of high fetched reasons, to wind up the spirits, and make them
more attentive. But, in so renowned an Assembly as this, where there are such
Judicious Persons and so profoundly learned, and who, upon this rancounter,
expect from me, that I pay them in solid reasons; I should be very sorry, that,
having done my uttermost to make it clear, How the Powder, (which they commonly
call the Powder of Sympathy) does, naturally and without any Magic, cure
wounds without touching them, yea, without seeing of the Patient: I say, I
should be very sorry, that it should be doubted, Whether such a cure may
effectually be performed or no.

In matter of fact, the determination of the existence and truth of a thing
depends on the report which our Senses make us. This business is of that
nature; Wherein, they, who have seen the effects and had experience thereof, and
have been careful to examine all necessary circumstances, and satisfied
themselves afterward that there is no imposture in the thing, nothing doubt
but that it is real and true; And, they, who have not seen such experiences,
ought to refer themselves to Narrations and Authority of such as have. I could
produce diverse whereof I was an ocular witness; nay, Quorum p^rs m^gna fui: But
as a certain and eminent example in the affirmative is convincing, to determine
the possibility and truth of a matter in doubt; I shall content my self
(because I would not trespass too much upon your patience at this time) to
instance in one only. But, it shall be one of the clearest, the most
perspicuous, and the most averred that can be; not only for the remarkable
circumstances thereof, but also for the hands (which were above the Vulgar)
through which the whole business passed. For, the cure of a very sore hurt was
perfected by this Powder of Sympathy, upon a Person illustrious, as well for
his many perfection^, as for his several employments. All the circumstances
were examined and sounded to the bottom, by one of the greatest and most
knowing Kings of of his time, viz. King James of England; who had a particular
talent and marvailous sagacity, to discuss natural things, and penetrate them
to the very marrow: As also by his Son, the late King Charles, and the Duke of
Buckingham, their prime Minister. And, in fine, all was registered among the
Observations of the great Chancellor, Bacon, to add, by way of Appendix, to his
Natural History. And I believe, when you shall have understood this History,
you will not accuse me of Vanity, if I attribute to my self the Introducing
this way of Cure, into this Quarter of the World.

Mr. James Howel, (well known in France, for his public Works; and
particularly, for his Dendrologia, translated into French by Monsier Baud^uin)
coming by, by chance, as two of his best friends were fighting in D^el, did his
endeavor to part them; and, putting himself between them, seized with his left
^and upon the Hilt of one of the Comb^^ants, while with his right he laid hold
of the Blade of the other. They, being transported with fury one against the
other, strugled to rid themselves of the hindrance their Friend made, that they
should not kill one another: and one of them, roughly drawing the Blade of his
Sword, cut, to the very bone, the nervs and mus^les of Mr. Howe^'s ^and: and
then the other, di^ingaging his H^lt, gave a cross blow on his Adversaries
head, which glanced toward his Friend; who, heaving up his hand to save the
blow, was wounded on the back of his hand, as he had been before within. It
seems some st^ange Con^^ellation reigned then against him, that he should lo^^
so much blood by parting two such dear Friends, who, had they been themselves,
would have h^z^rded both their lives to have preserved His: B^t, this
unvoluntary effusion of blood by them, prevented that which they should have
drawn one from the other. For they, seeing Mr. Howel's face besmeared with
blood by heaving up his wounded hand, both ran to embrace him: and having
sea^ch'd his hurts, they bound up his Hand with one of his Garters, to close
the Veins which were cut and bled abundantly. They brought him home, and sent
for a Chyrurgeon: But this being heard at Court, the King sent one of his own
Chyrurgeons; for his Majesty much ^ffected the said M^. Howel.

It was my chance to be lodged hard by him; and, four or five days after, as I
was making my self ready, he came to my House, and prayed me to view his
wounds,: for I understand, said he, that you have extraordinary remedies upon
such occasions; and my Chyrurgeons apprehend some fear, that it may grow to a
Gangrene, and so the hand must be cut off. In effect, his countenance
discovered that he was in much pain; which, he said, was insupportable, in
regard of the extreme inflammation. I told him that I would willingly serve
him: but if, happily, he knew the manner how I would cure him, without touching
or seeing him, it may be he would not expose himself to my manner of curing;
because he would think it, peradventure, either ineffectual or superstitious.
He replied, The wonderful things which many have related to me, of your way of
medicament, makes me nothing doubt of its efficacy; and all that I have to say
to you is comprehended in the Spanish Proverb, Hagase el milagro, y hagalo,
Mahoma, Let the miracle be done, though Mahomet do it.

I asked him, then, for any thing that had the blood upon it; so he presently
sent for his Garter, wherewith his hand was first bound: and as I called for a
Basin of water, as if I would wash my hands; I took a handful of Powder of
Vitriol, which I had in my Study, and presently dissolved it. As soon as the
bloody Garter was brought me, I put it in the Basin, observing the while what
Mr. Howel did; who stood talking with a Gentleman in a corner of my Chamber,
not regarding at all what I was doing: But he started suddenly, as if he had
found some strange alteration in himself. I asked him what he ailed? I know not
what ails me, said he, but I find, that I feel no more pain: methinks, a
pleasing kind of freshness, as it were a wet cold napkin spread it self over my
hand; which has taken away the inflammation that tormented me before. I
replied, since then you feel already so good an effect of my medicament, I
advise you to cast away all your plasters; only keep the wound clean, and in a
moderate temper 'twixt heat and cold. After dinner I took the Garter out of the
water, and put it to dry before a great fire. It was scarce dry, but Mr.
Howel's servant came running, to tell me that his Master felt as much burning
as ever he had done, if no^ more; for the heat was such, as if his hand were
betwixt coals of fire. I an^wer'd, that although that had happened at present,
yet he should find ease in a short time; for I knew the reason of this new
accident, and I would provide accordingly, so that his Master should be free
from that inflammation, it may be, before he could possibly return unto him:
but, in case he found no ease, I wished him to come presently back again; if
not, he might forbear coming. Away he went; and at the instant I put again the
Garter into the water; thereupon, he found his Master without any pain at all.
To be brief, there was no sense of pain afterward; but, within five or six days
the wounds were cicatriced, and entirely healed. King James required a punctual
information of what had passed, touching this cure: and after it was done, and
perfected, his Majesty would needs know of me how it was done, having droll'd
with me first (which, he could do with a very good grace) about a Magician and
a Sorcerer. I answered, That I should be always ready to perform what his
Majesty should command; but I most humbly desired him before I should pass
further, that I might tell him what the Au^hour, of whom I had the Secret, said
to the great Duke of Toscany, upon the like occasion. It was a Religious
Carmel^te, that came from the Indies and Persia to Florence, he had also been
at China; who, having done many mavelous cures with this Powder, after his
arrival to Toscany, the Duke said, he would be very glad to learn it of him. It
was the father of the Great Duke, who governs now. The Carmelite answered him,
That it was a Secret which he had learnt in the Oriental parts, and he thought
there was not any, who knew it in Europe but himself; and that it deserved not
to be divulged; which could not be hindered, if his Highness would meddle with
the practice of it, because he was not likely to do it with his own hands; but
must trust a Surgeon, or some other servant; so that, in a short time diverse
other would come to know it, as well as himself. But, a few months after, I had
opportunity to do an important courtesy to the said ^ryar; which induced him
to discover unto me his Secret: and the same year he returned to Persia; that
now there is no other knows this Secret in Europe, but my self. The King
replied, That I needed not apprehend any fear that (...) would discover it; for
he would not trust any body in the World to make experience of this Secret, but
do it with his own hands: therefore he would have some of the Powder^ which I
delivered, instructing him in all the circumstances. Whereupon his Majesty made
sundry proofs; whence he reciv'd singular satisfaction.

In the Int^rim, Dr. Mayerne, his first Physician, watched to discover what was
done by this Secret: and at last he came to know, that the King made use of
Vitriol. Afterward he accosted me, saying, he durst not demand of me my
Secret, because I made some difficulty to discover it to the King himself: But,
having learnt with what matter it was to be done, he hoped I would communicate
to him all the circumstances, how it is to be used. I answered him, That if he
had asked me before, I I would frankly have told him all; for, in his hands,
there was no fear that such a secret should be prostituted: and so I told him
all. A little after the Doctor went into France, to see some fair Territories
he had purchased near Geneva; which was the Barony of Aubonne. In this voyage
he went to see the Duke of Mayerne, who had been a long time his friend and
protector; and he taught him this Secret: whereof the Duke made many
experiments, which if any other but a Prince had done, it may be they had
passed for effects of Magic and enchantments.

After the Dukes death, who was killed at the siege of Montauban, his Surgeon,
who waited on him in doing cures, sold this Secret to diverse persons of
Quality, who gave him considerable sums for it, so that he became very rich
thereby. The thing, being fallen thus into many hands, remained not long in
terms of a Secret but by degrees came to be so divulged, that now there is
scarce any Country Barber but knows it.

Behold, Sirs, the genealogy of the Powder of Smpathy in this part of the World
with a notable History of a cure performed by it. It Is time now to come to the
discussion, how it is done. It must be avowed, that it is a mavelous thing,
that the hurt of a wounded person should be cured by the application of a
remedy put to a rag of cloth or a weapon at a great distance. Yet it is not to
be doubted, but after a long and profound speculation of all the economy and
concatenation of natural causes, which may be adjudged capable to produce such
effects, one may fall at last upon the true ones, which must have subtle
resorts and means to act. Hitherto they have been wrapped up in darkness, and
esteemed so inacc^essible, that they who have undertaken to speak or write of
them, (at least those I have seen) have been contented to speak of some
ingenious slight; without diving into the bottom: endeavoring rather to show
the vivacity of their spirit and force of their eloquence, than to satisfy
their Readers and Auditors, how the thing is really to be done. They would have
us take for ready money some terms, which we understand not, nor know what they
signify. They would pay us with conveniences, with resemblances, with
Sympathies, with Magnetical virtues, and such terms, without explicating what
these terms mean: They think they have done enough, if they feebly persuade any
body that the business may be performed by a natural way; without having any
recourse to the intervention of Demons, and Spirits: but they pretend not in
any sort to have found out the convincing reasons which demonstrate, how the
thing is done.

If I did not hope to gain otherwise upon your spirits; if I did not, I say
believe, that I should be able to persuade you otherwise than by words, I would
not have under^aken this enterprise. I know to well, -- Quid vale^nt humeri,
quid far recusent. Such a design requires a great fire, and vivacity of
conceptitions, volubility of tongue, aptness of expressions, to insinnuate, as
it were by surprisal, that which one cannot carry away by a firm foot, and by
cold reasons, though solid. A Discourse of this nature challenges other than a
Stranger; who finds himself obliged to display his sense in a language, wherein
he can hardly express his ordinary conceptions. Nevertheless these
considerations shall not deterr me from engaging my self in an enterprise,
which may seem to some much more difficult, than that which I am now to
perform, viz. to make good convincing proofs, that this Sympathetical cure may
be done naturally; and to show before your eyes, and make you touch with your
finger, how it may be done. You know that Persuasions are made by ingenious
arguments, which, expressed with a good grace, rather tickle the Imagination,
than satisfy the Understanding: But demonstrations are built upon certain and
approved principles; and though they be but roughly pronounced, yet they
convince and draw after them necessary conclusions. They proceed, as a strong
Engine fastened to a gate to batter it down; or as a plate of metal to imprint
the mark of the money. At every turn, that truth makes, she approaches but
little, and as it were insensibly, and makes not much noise, and there is no
such great force required to turn her; but her strength, though it be slow, is
invincible. That at the end, she breaks down the gate, and makes a deep
impression on the p^ece of Gold or Silver. Whereas the stroke of hammers, and
bars, (whereto witty discourses, and the flourished conceptions of Subtle
spirits may be compared) requires the arm of a Giant, makes a great noise; and,
at the end of the account, produces little effect.

To enter then into the matter I will (according to the method of Geometrical
Demonstrations) lay Six or Seven Principles, as foundation-stones, whereon I
will erect my Structure, But I will lay them so well, and so firmly, that there
shall be no great difficulty to grant them. These Principles shall be like the
wheels of Archimedes: by the advantage whereof a child might be capable to hale
on shore the bigest Carack of King Hieron; which a hundred pair of Oxen, with
all the Ropes and Cables of his Arsenal, were not able to stir. So, by the
strength of these Principles, I hope to wast my Conclusions to a safe Port.

The First Principle shall be, that the whole O^be or Sphere of the Air is
filled with Light. If it were needful to prove in this point, that Light is a
material and corporal Substance, and not an imaginary and incomprehensible
Quality, (as many Schoolmen aver), I could do it evidently enough: but I have
done this in another T^eatise, which has been published not long since. And it
is no new op^nion: for, many of the most esteemed Philosophers among the
Ancients have advanced it; yea, the Great St. Augustine, (in his Third Ep^stle
to Volusian) alleges, that it is his sentiment. But to our present business,
whether L^ght be the one, or the other, it matters not; it is enough to explicate
its course, and the journies it makes, whereto our Senses bear witness. It Is
clear, that, issuing continually out of its source, the Suu, and lancing it
self by a marvailous celerity on all sides by straight lines, where it
encounters any obstacles in its way, by the opposition of some hard or opaque
body, it reflects; and leaping thence to equal angles, takes again its course
by a straight line, till it bandies upon some other solid body; and so it
continues to make new boundings here and there; till, at the end, being chased
on all sides, by the bodies which oppose it in its passage, it is tired, and so
extinguishes. In the like manner as we see a Ball in Tenis Court, being struck
by a strong arm against the walls, leaps to the opposite side; so that
sometimes it makes the circuit of the whole Court, and finishes its motion near
the place where it was first struck. Our very eyes are witnesses of this
progress of the Light; when, by way of reflection, it illuminates some obscure
place, whither it cannot directly arrive: Or when, issuing immediately from the
Sun, and beating upon ^he Moon, or some other of the Planets, the ray's, which
cannot find entrance there, bound upon our Earth, (otherwise we should not see
them); and there it is reflected, broken and bruised by so many bodies, as it
meets in its diversity of reflections.

The Second Principle shall be, that The Light gla^cing so upon some body, the
rays which enter no further but rebound from the superficies of the body,
carry with them some small particles or atoms: just as the Ball, whereof we
have spoken, would carry with it some of the moisture of the wall, against
which'tis banded, if the plaster thereof were also moist, and as, in effect, it
carried away some tincture of the black, wherewith the walls are colored. The
Reason whereof is, that the Light, that subtle and rarefied fire, coming with
such an imperceptible haste, (for its darts are within our eyes, as soon as
soon as its head is above our Horison, making so many millions of miles in an
inimaginable space of time) I say, the Light, beating upon the body which
opposes it, cannot choose but make there some small incisions, proportion^ble to
its rarity and subtility. And these small Atoms being cut and loosned from
their trunk, the heat of the light sticks and incorporates it self wi^h the
most humid, viscuou^, and glewing parts of them; and carries them along with
it. Experience shows us this, as well as Reason. For, when one puts some h^m^d
cloth to dry before the fire, the fiery rays beating thereon, those which find
no entrance, but refl^ct th^nce, carry away with them some small moist bodies,
which make a kind of mist betwixt the cloth and the fire. In like manner the
Sun at his rising enlightening the earth, which is moistened either by rain or
the dew of the night, his beams raise a Mist, which, by little and little,
ascends to the tops of the hills: and this Mist does rarifie, according as the
Sun has more force to draw it upwards; till at last we lose the sight thereof,
and it becomes part of the Air, which, in regard of its tenuity, is invisible
to us. These Atoms then are like Cavaliers, mounted on winged Coursers; who
ride on still till the Sun, setting, ^akes from them their Pegasus and leaves
them unmounted: and then they precipitate themselves in crowds to the Earth,
whence they sprung. The greatest part of them, and the most heavy, fall, upon
the first re^^eating of the Sun; and that we call the Serain: which though it
be so thin that we cannot see it, yet we feel it, as so many small hammers
striking upon our heads and Bodies; principally the elder sort of us. For,
young persons, in regard of the boiling of their blood, and the heat of their
complexion, thrust out of them abundance of Spirits: which, being stronger than
those that fall from the Serain, repulse them, and hinder them to operate on
the Bodies, whence these Spirits came forth; as they do upon those that, being
grown cold by age, are not guarded by so strong an emanation of their Spirits.
The Wind which blows, and is tossed to and fro, is no other than a great River
of the like A^omes; drawn out of some solid Bodies, which are upon the earth,
and so banded here and there, according as they find cause for that effect.

I remember to have once sensibly seen how the Wind ^s engendered. I passed over
Mount Cenis, to go for Italy, toward the beginning of Summer; and I was
advanced to half the Hill, as the Sun rose clear and luminous: b^t before I
could see his body, because the Mountains interposed, I observed his rays,
which gilded the top of the M^untain Viso* which is the Pyramid of a Rock, a
good deal h^gher, than Mount Cenis and all the neighboring Mountains. Man^ are
of opinion, that it is the highest Mountain in the World, after the Pic of
Tenariff, in the Gran-de-Canary: and this Mount Viso is always covered with
Snow. I observed then, that, about that place which was illuminated by the
Solar rays, there was a Fog: which at first was of no greater extent, than an
ordinary Boul: but by degrees it grew so great, that at last, not only the top
of that Mountain, but all the neighboring Hills were canopied all over with a
C^oud. I was now come to the top of Mount Cenis; and, finding my self in the
straight line, which p^sses from the Sun to Mount Viso, I stayed a while to
behold it, while my Servants were coming up the Hill behind: for, having more
men to carry my chair, than they had, I was there sooner. It was not long e're
I might perceive the said Fog descend gently to the place where I was; and I
began to feel a freshness that came over my face, when I turned it that way.
When all my Troop was come about me, we went descending the other side of Mount
Cenis, toward S^z^: and the lower we went, we sensibly found that the Wind
began to blow hard behind our backs; for, our way obliged us to go toward the
side, where the Sun was. We met with Passengers that were going up, as we down;
who told us, that the Wind was very impetuous below, and did much incommodate
them, by blowing in their faces and eyes; but the higher they came, it was
l^sser and lesser. And for our selves, when we were come to the place where
they said the Wind blew so hard, we found a (...) of Storm: and it increased
still, the lower we went; till the Sun, being well advanced, drew no more by
that line, but caused a Wind in some other place. The people of that Country
assured me, that it was there always so; if some extraordinary and violent
accident did not intervene, and divert the ordinary course, viz. at a certain
hour of the day, the Wind raises it self to such a romb, or point, and, when
the Sun is come to another point, another wind rises; and so from hand to hand
it changes the point, till the Sun set: which always brings with it a calm, if
the we^ther be fa^r; and that always comes from the Mount Viso, opposite to the
Sun. They told us also that the daily wind is commonly stronger toward the
bottom of the Mountain, than toward the top; whereof the reason is evident.
For, the natural movement of every body natural increases always in swiftness,
according as it moves forward to its center; and that by the unequal numbers,
(as Galileo has ingeniously demonstrated; I did it also in another Treatise):
that is to say, if at the first moment it advances an ell, in the second it
advances three, in the third five, in the fourth seven, and so it continues to
augment in the same manner; which proceeds from the density and figure of the
descending body, acting upon the cessiblility of the medium. And these small
Bodies, which cause a wind from Mount Viso, are thick and terrestrial: for, the
Snow being composed of watery and earthy parts united by the cold, when the heat
of the Solar beams disunites and separates them, the viscous parts fly with
them; while the terrestrial, being too heavy to fly upward, fall presently
downward. This makes me remember a very remarkable thing, which befell me when
I was with my Fleet in the Port of Scanderon or Alexandretta, toward the
bottom of the Mediterranean Sea: there they use to dis-imbark, when they go to
Aleppo, or Babylon. I had done already what I had intended to do in those Seas,
and happily compassed my design; so it imported me much to return to England as
soon as possibly I could; and the rather because my Ships were battered by a
great Fight, I had had a little before, against a formidable power; wherein
although I had obtained the better, yet, in so furious a dispute, my Fleet was
in some disorder, and my Ships full of wounded Men. To advise therefore of the
most expedient Course to come to some Harbor, where I might repair my Ships
and be in surety: I assembled all my Captains, Pilots, and Mariners, the most
experienced of my Fleet: and, having propounded to them my design, they were
all of an unanimous opinion, that the surest course was toward the South, and
to cast upon Syria, Judea, Egypt, and Africa, and render our selves at the
straight of Gi^raltar; sailing so near the main Land, we should have every
night some small briezes of wind, whereby we should in a short time make our
Voyage. And besides, we should not be in any great danger to meet either with
Spanish or French Fleets. For, England was at that time in open War with both
those Kings, and we had advice, that they had great Fleets abroad, to vindicate
some things we had done in prejudice of them both, those sixteen months that we
remained Ma^ter of those Seas: therefore it concerned us to make toward some
safe Port; where we might both refresh our Men, and repair our battered Vessels.

My opinion was clean contrary to theirs: for, I believed our best Course were,
to steer our Course Westward, and to sail along the Coasts of Cilicia,
Pamphylia, Lydia, Natolia, or Asia the Less; and to traverse the mouth of the
Archipelago, leave the Adriatic on the right hand, and pass by Sicily, Italy,
Sardinia, Corsica, the Gulf of Lion, and so coast all Spain. Telling them,
that it would be a great dishonor to us to forsake our best Road, for fear of
the Enemy; since our chief business thither was to find them out: and the
protection which it pleased God to afford us all along in so many Combats, in
going, ought to make us hope the same providence would vouchsafe to guide us in
returning. That there was no doubt but the road which I proposed to them,
considered simply in it self, was, without comparison, the better, and the more
expedite to sail out of the Mediterranean Sea, and gain the Ocean; because,
said I, although we have the briezes from the Land, as long as we are upon the
Coasts of Syria; and Egypt, we shall not have them at all while we sail upon
the coasts of Lybia, where there are those fearful Sands, the Syrtes, which are
of a great extent, the said coast having no humidity; for there is neither tree
nor herb grows there, nor ought else but moving Sands, which covered and
interred heretofore at one glut the puissant Army of King Cambyses. Now, where
there is no humidity, the Sun cannot attract to make a wind: so that we shall
never find there, specially in Summer time, any other wind but that Regular one
which blows from East to West, according to the course of the Sun, who is the
Father of Winds; unless some extraordinary happen, either from the coast of
Italy, which lies Northward, or from the bottom of Ethiopia, where the
Mountains of the Moon are, and the source of the Cataracts of Nile. Therefore,
if we were near the Syrtes, the winds of Italy would be most dangerous to us,
and expose us to shipwreck. I reasoned so according to natural Causes, while
they of my Council of war kept themselves firm to their Ex^e^^ence; and I would
do nothing against the unanimous sense of all: for, though the disposing and
resolution of all things depended absolutely upon my self, yet I thought I
might be justly accused of rashness or wilfulness, if I should prefer my own
advice before that of all the rest. So we took that course, and went happil^,
as far as the Syrtes of Lybia: but there our land bri^zes failed us; and for
seven and thirty days, we had no other but a few gentle Zephirs, which came
from the West, whither we were steering our course. We were constrained to keep
at anchor all that time, with a great deal of apprehension, that the wind might
come from the North, accompanied with a Tempest: for, if that had happened, we
had been all lost; because our anchors had not been able to hold among those
moving Sands (for, under water they are of the same nature as they are upon dry
land) and so we must have been shipwrackt upon that coast. But God Almighty,
who has been pleased I should have the honor to wait on you this day,
delivered me from that danger. And, at the end of seven and thirty days, we
observed the course of the clouds very high, which came from So^^h-^ast; at
first but slowly, but by degrees faster and faster: insom^ch that, in two days,
the wind, which was forming it self a great way off in Ethiopia, came, in a
tempest, to the place where we rid at anchor, and carried us whither we
intended to go; but the force of it was broken before, coming so far.

Out of this Discourse we may infer, and conclude, that, wherever there is any
wind, there are also some small B^dies or Atoms, which are drawn from the
Bodies, whence they come, by the virtue of the Sun, and Light; and, that in
effect, this Wind is nothing else but the said A^omes agitated, and thrust on
by a kind of impetuosity. And so, the winds partake of the qualities whence
they come: as, if they come from the South, they are hot, if from the No^th,
they are cold, if from the Earth alone, they are dry, if from the M^rine or
Seaside, they are humid and mo^st; if from places which produce aromatical
substances, they are odoriferous, wholesome, and pleasing: As those from Arabia
Faelix, which produces Spices, Perfumes, and Gums of sweet savor; or that from
Fonten^y and Vaugirard at Paris, in the season of Roses, which is all perfumed:
on the contrary, those winds that come from stinking places, viz. from the
sulphurous so^l of Pozzuolo, smell ill: as also those that come from infected
places bring the contagion along with them.

My Third Principle shall be, that The Air is full throughout of small Bodies
or Atoms; or rather that, which we call ou^ air, is no other than a mixture or
confusion of such Atoms, wherein the aereal parts predominate.

It Is well known, that in nature there cannot be actually found any pure
Element, unblended with others: for the exterior Fire and the Light acting one
way, and the internal Fire of every Body pushing on another way, causes this
marvailous mixture of all things in all things. Within that huge extent, where
we place the Air, there is ^^fficien^ space and liberty enough to make such a
mixture; which Experience, as well as Reason confirm^. I have seen little
Vipers, as soon as they came from the eggs where they were engendered, being not
yet an inch long: which, conserved in a large Gourd, (covered with paper tied
round about, that they might not get out, but leaving little pin-holes made in
it, that the Air might enter) increased in substance and bigness so
prodigiously, in six, eight, or ten months, that it is incredible; and more
sensibly, during the season of the Equinoxes, when the air is fuller of those
ethereal and balsamical atoms, which they drew for their nouriture.

Hence it came that the Cosmopolites had reason to say, Est in ^^re occultus
vitae cibus, there is a hidden food of life in the air. These small Vipers had
but the air only for their sustenance; nevertheless, by this thin viand, they
grew, in less than a year, to a foot long, and proportionably big and heavy.
Vitriol, Saltpeter, and some other substances, augment in the same manner,
only by attraction of air.

I remember, that upon some occasion, seventeen or eighteen years ago, I had
use of a pound of Oil of Tartar; it was at Paris, where I had then no
Operatory. Wherefore I desired Monsir Ferrier, a man universally known by all
such as are curious, to make me some: for, he had none then ready made, but did
it expressly for me. And because, for the calcination of Tartar, twenty pound
may be as easily made as two, without increase of charge; he took occasion
hereby to make a quantity for his own use. When he brought it me, the oil smelt
so strong of the Rose, that I complained of his mingling it with that water,
whereas I had desired him to do it purely, by exposing it to the humid air: for,
I verily thought he had dissolved the Salt of Tartar in Rose Water. He swore to
me that he had not mingled it with any liquor; but had left the Tartar calcind
within his Cellar, to dissolve of it self. It was then the season of Roses;
therefore it seems that the Air, being then full of the atoms which come from
the Roses, and being changed into water by the powerful attraction of the Salt
of Tartar, their smell became very sensible in the place where they were
gathered together, as the beams of the Sun do burn, being crowded together in a
burning glass.

There happened also another marvailous thing, touching this Oil of Tartar; which
may serve to prove a proposition we have not yet touched: but, not to interrupt
the course of the story, I will tell it you by way of advance. It was, that, as
the Season of Roses passed, the smell of the Rose vanished away from the said
Oil of Tartar; so that, in three or four months, it was quite gone. But we were
much surprised, when, the next year, the said odor of Roses returned as strong
as ever and so went away again toward winter: which course it still observes.
Which made Monsir Ferrier keep it as a singular rarity; and the last Summer I
found the effect in his house.

We have in London an unlucky and troublesome confi^mation of this doctrine:
for, the air uses to be full of such atoms. The fuel in that great City, is
commonly pit-Coal, brought from Newcastle, or Scotland. This Coal ha^h in it a
great quantity of volatile Salt, very sharp; which being carried on by the
Smoke, uses to dissipate it self and fill the air, Wherewith it so incorporates,
that, although we do not see it, yet we find the effect: for it spoils Beds,
Tapistries, and other household stuffs, that are of any beautiful fair color;
the fuliginous air tarnishing it by degrees. And, though one should lock up his
Chamber very clean, and come not thither in a good while, yet at his return, he
will find a black kind of thin soot cover all his household stuff; as we see in
M^lls there is a white dust, as also in Bakers shops; which uses to whiten the
walls, and sometimes gets into cup-boards and chests. The said coal-soot also
gets abroard, and fouls cloths upon hedges, as they are a drying; as also, in
the Spring time, the very leaves of Trees are besooted therewith. Now, in regard
that it is this air which the lungs draw for respiration among the Inhabitants,
therefore the phlegm and spittle which comes from them is commonly black^sh and
fuliginous. Moreover, the acrimony of this ^oot produces another funest effect;
for, it makes the people subject to inflammations, and by degrees to
ulcerations in the Lungs. It is so corrosive and biting, that, if one put
Gammons of Bacon, or Beef, or any other flesh, within the chimney, it so dries
it up, that it spoils it. Wherefore, they who have weak lungs quickly feel it;
whence it comes to pass, that almost the one hal^* of them who dye in London,
dye of ptisical and pulmonical distempers; spi^ting commonly blood from their
ulcerated lungs. But, at the beginning of this malady, the remedy is very
easy: It is but to send them ^o a place where the air is good. Many, who have
means ^o pay the charge of such a journey, come to Paris, and they (...) use to
recover their healths in perfection. The (...) inconveniences are also, though
the operations be not so strong, in the City of Li^ge, where the Common People
burn no other than pit-coals, which they call h^ville. Paris it self also
though the air about it be excellent, yet is subject to incommodities of that
nature. The excessivly stinking dirt and channels of that vast City mingles a
great deal of ill allay with the purity of the air; stuffing it every where
with corrup^ed atoms: which yet are not so pernicious as those of London. We
find that the most neat and polished Silver Plate, exposed to the air, becomes
in a short time livid and fo^l which proceeds from no other cause, than those
black atoms, (the true colou^ of putrefaction) which stick to it. I know a
Person of Q^ality, (and a singular friend of mine) who is lodged in a place,
where on o^e side, a great many poor people inhabit, few Carts use to pass, and
fewer Coaches. His neighbors behind his house empty their filth and ordures in
the middle of the street; which uses hereby to be full of mounts of filth, to be
carried away by Tombrells, but when they they remove these ordures; you cannot
imagine what a stench what kind of infectious air is smelt thereabour every
where. The Servants of my said Friend, when this happens, use to cover their
Plate, and Andirons and other of their fairest household stuff, with Cotton or
course Bays; otherwise they would be all ^arnished. Yet nothing hereof is seen
within the air; however these experiences manifestly convince, that the air is
stuffed with such atoms. I cannot omit to add hereto another experiment; which
is, that we find by the effects, how the rays of the Moon are cold and moist.
It Is without controversy, that the luminous parts of those rays come from the
Sun; the Moon having no light at all in her: as her ecclipses bear witness;
which happen, when the Earth is just twixt her and the Sun, and by such
interposition hinders her to have light from his rays, The beams then which
come from the Moon are those of the Sun; which glancing upon her, reflect upon
us, and so bring with them the atoms of that cold and hum^d-star, participating
of the ^ou^^e whence they come. Whence, if one expose a hollow basin, or glass,
to assemble them, he shall find, that whereas those of the Sun burn by such a
conjuncture, these, clean contrary, refresh and m^isten in a notable manner,
leaving an aquatick and viscuous glutining kind of sweat upon the glass. One
would think it a folly to talk of washing hands in a well polished Silver
Basin, wherein there is not a drop of water, yet this may be done; by the
reflection of the Moon beams only; which will afford a competent humidity to do
it, But they who have tried this have found their hands, after they are wiped,
to be much moister than usually: and this is an infallible way to take away
Warts from the hands, if it be often used,

Let us then conclude, out of these premises and experiments, that the Air is
full of atoms; drawn from bodies, by means of the light which reflects thereon,
or sallying out by the interior natural heat of those bodies, which drive them
forth. It may happily seem impossible that there can be an emanation of so many
small bodies, that should be spread and carried up and down, so far in the air
by a continual flux, (if I may say so) and yet the body whence they come
receive no diminution that is perceptible; though sometimes it is visible enough;
as, by the evaporations of the Spirits of wine, musk, and other such volatile
substances. But, this objection will be null, and the two precedent Principles,
render themselves more credible, when we shall settle another, viz. That Every
body, be it never so little, is divisible in infinitum: not that it has
infinite parts, (for the contrary thereof may be demonstrated) but it is capable
to be divided and subdivided into new parts, without ever coming to the end of
the division: And it is in this sense that our Masters teach us that Quantity
is infinitely divisible. This is evident to him who shall consider, with a
profound imagination, the essence and formal notion of Quantity; which is
nothing else but divisibility. But, in regard that this speculation is very
subtle and metaphysical, I will serve my self of some geometrical
demonstrations to prove this truth; for, they accommodate best with the
imagination. Euclide teaches us (in the Tenth Proposition of his Sixth Book),
that if one take a short line, and another a long one, and the long one be
divided into diverse equal parts; the short one may be divided also into as many
equal parts, and every one of those parts also into others, and these last into
so many more, and so on, without being able eve^ to come to that which is not
divisible.

B^t let us suppose (although it be impossible) that one might divide and
subdivide a line, so that at last we should come to an indivi^ible; and lets
see what will come of it. I say then, that, since the line resolves it self
into indivisibles, it must be composed of them; lets see whether that may be
verified. To which purpose, I take three indivisibles, (and to distinguish
them) let them be A, B, C. for, if three millions of indivisibles make a long
line, three indivisibles will make a short one. I put them then in a row; First
A, then B, so near, that they touch one another: and I say, that B must
necessarily possess the same place as, A, or not possess it. If it possess the
same place, they both together make no extension: and, by the same reason,
neither 3, nor 3000 will do it; but all the indivisibles will unite together,
and the result of all shall be but only one indivisible. It must be then, that,
being not both in the same place, yet touching one another, one part of B must
touch one part of A, and another part not touch it: Then I add the indivisible
C, where of one part shall touch a part of B. which touches not A; and by this
means B is copulant, lying between A and C, to make the extension. To do this,
you see that we must admit that B has parts; as the other two also which by
your supposition are all indivi^ible: and this being absurd, the supposition is
impossible. But, to render the matter yet more perspicuous, let us suppose that
these three indivisibles make one extension, and compose one line; the
proposition already cited from Euclide demonstrates, that this line may be
divided into thirty equal parts, or into as many as youplease: insomuch that it
must be granted, that every one of these three indivi^ibles may be divided into
three parts; which is point blank against the nature and definition of an
indivisible. But, without dividing into so many parts, Euclide shows (by his
Tenth proposition of his First Element) that every line may be parted into two
equal parts: but this, being composed of indivisibles of unequal number, it
must necessarily follow, that, being parted into two, there must be an
indivisible more on the one side than on the other, or the middle one be parted
into two halfs. So that he, who denies that Quantity may be divided in
infinitum, entangles himself in absurdities, and incomprehensible
impossibilities: And on the contrary, he, who assents to it, will find it no
impossibility or inconvenience, that the atoms of all bodies, which are in the
air, may be divided, stretched and carried to a marvailous distance. Our very
senses make faith hereof in some sort: There is no body in the World, which we
know of, so compact, so solid, and weighty as Gold; yet, to what a strange
extent and division may it be brought! Let Us take an Ounce of this massy
metal; it shall be but a button, as big as my fingers end: A beater of Gold
will make a thousand leaves or more of this Ounce. Half of one of these leaves
shall suffice to gild the whole surface of Silver of three or four Ounces.
Let Us give this gilded lingot of Silver to them, who prepare Gold and Silver
Third to make Lace; and let them draw it to the greatest length and subtilty
they can; let them draw it to the thinness of a hair, and so this third may be
a quarter of a league long in extent, if not more; and in all this length there
will not be the space of an atom which is not covered with Gold. Behold a
strange and marvailous dilatation of this half leaf. Let us do the like to all
the rest of the beaten Gold; it will appear that, by this means, this small
button of Gold may be so extended, as to reach from this City of Montpellier to
Paris, and far beyond it: into how many millions of atoms might not this gilded
line be cut with small Sciffers.

Now, it is easy to comprehend, that this extention and divisibility, made by
such gross instruments, as hammers and Scissers, is not comparable to that
which is made by the light and rays of the Sun. And it is certain, that, if
this gold may be drawn into such a great length by spindles or wheels of iron,
some of its parts may easily be carried away by those winged Coursers we spoke
of before; I mean, by the rays that fly in a moment from the Sun to the Earth.

If I did not fear to prove tedious to you by my prolixity, I would entertain
you with the strange subtility of little bodies; which issue forth from living
bodies; by means whereof our Dogs in England will pursue the scent of a man's
steps, or of a beasts, many miles: and not only so, but they will find, in a
great heap of stones, that which a man has touched with his hand: Therefore, it
must needs be, that upon the Earth, or upon the Stone, some material parts of
the touched body remain: yet the body does not sensibly diminish; no more than
Ambergrise, and Spanish skins, which will send out of them an odor during a
hundred years, without any diminution of skin or smell. In our Country they use
to sow a whole field with one sort of grain; to wit, one year with Barley, the
next with Wheat, the third with Beans: and the fourth year they let it rest,
and dung it, that it may recover its vigor by attraction of the vital spirit it
receivs from the air; and so be plowed up again after the same degrees. Now,
the year that the field is covered with Beans, Passengers use to smell them at
a good distance off, if the wind blow accordingly, and they be in flower. It is
a smell that has a suavity with it, but fading; and afterward is unpleasant,
and heady. But the smell of Rosemary, which comes from the coasts of Spain,
goes much further. I have sailed along those coasts diverse times, and observed
always that the Mariners know when they are within thirty or forty leagues of
the Continent, (I do not exactly remember the distance): and they have this
knowledge from the smell of the Rosemary which so abounds in the fields of
Spain. I have smelt it as sen^ibly, as if I had had a branch of Rosemary in my
hand; and this a day or two before we could discover land; it is true, the wind
was in our faces, and came from the shore. Some Naturalists write that Vultures
have come two or three hundred leagus off, by the smell of carrens, and dead
bodies left in the field, after some bloody Battle; and it was known that these
B^rds came from afar off, because none used breed near. They have a quick
smelling; and it must be that the rotten atoms of those dead Carcaffes were
transported by the air so far: and those Birds, having once caught the scent,
pursue it to the very source, and, the nearer they come to that, the stronger
it is.

We will conclude here that which we had to say, touching the great extent of
those little Bodies, which, by the mediation of the Sunbeams and of the Light,
use to issue out of all Bodies that are composed of Elements; which throng in
the air, and are carried a marvailous distance from the place and bodies where
they have their origin and source: the proof and explication of which things
has been the aim of my discourse hitherto.

Now, my Lords, I must, if you please, make you see how These small bodies,
that so fill and compound the Air, are oftentimes drawn to a road altogether
differing from that which their universal causes should make them hold: and it
shall be our Fifth Principl^.

One may remark, within the course and economy of Nature, diverse sorts of
attractions. As, that of Sucking; whereby I have seen leaden Bullets at the
bottom of a long Barrel exactly wrought, follow the air, which one sucked out
of the mouth of the Gun, with that impetuosity and strength, that it broke his
teeth. The attraction of water or wine by a Scyphon is like to this: for, by
means of that, the liquor is made to pass from one Vessel into another, without
changing any way the color, or rising of the lees. There is another sort of
attraction which is called Magnetical, whereby the Loadstone draws the Iron.
Another Electrick, when the Iet-stone draws to it Straws. There is another of
the Flame; when the smoke of a Candle put out draws the flame of that which
burns hard by, and makes it descend to light that which is out. There is
another of Filtration, when a humid body climbs up a dry. Lastly, when the Fire
or some hot body draws the Air and that which is mixed therewith.

We will treat here of the two last species of Attraction; I have sufficiently
spoken of the rest in another place. Filtration may seem to him who has not
attentively considered it, nor examined by what circumstances so hidden a
Secret of Nature comes to pass, and to a person of a mean and limited
understanding, to be done by some occult virtue or property; and he will
persuade himself that, within the Filtre or strayning instrument, there is some
secret Sympathy, which makes Water to mount up, contrary to its natural motion.

But, he, who will examine the business, as it ought to be, observing all that
is done, without omiting any circumstance, will find there is nothing more
natural, and that it is impossible it should be otherwise. And we must make the
same judgment of all the profound and hidden'st mysteries of Nature; if men
would take the pains to discover them, and search into them with judgment.

Behold, then, how Filtration is done. They use to put a long tongue of cloth,
or cotton, or spongy matter, within an earthen pot of Water or other liquor;
and leave hanging upon the brim of the pot a good part of the cloth; and one
shall see the water presently mount up, and pass above the brink of the Vessel,
and drop, at the lower end of the piece of cloth, upon the ground, or into some
Vessel. And the Gardners make use of this method, to water their plants and
flowers in Summer, by soft degrees. As also Apothecaries, and Chemists, to
separate their liquors from their dregs and residences.

To comprehend the reason why the water ascends in that manner, let us nearly
observe all that is done. That part of the cloth which is within the water
becomes wetted; viz. it receivs and imbibes the water through its spungy and
dry parts at first. This cloth swells in receiving the water; so, two bodies
joined together require more room than one of them would by it self. Let us
consider this swelling and augmented extension, in the last third of them which
touch the water, viz. that on the super^icies; which, to distinguish from the
rest, let us mark at the two ends (as by a line) with A. B. and the third which
immediately follows and is above it, with C. D. the next with E. F. the next
with G. H. and so to the end of the tongue. I say then, that the third A, B.
dilating it self and swelling, by means of the water which enters 'twixt it is
fibers or strings, approaches by little and little to C. D.; which is yet dry,
because it touches not the water: but when A. B. is grown so gross and swol'n,
by reason of the water which enters, that it fills all the vacuity and distance
'twixt it and C. D. as also that it presses against C. D. by reason of it is
extension, which is greater than the space was betwixt them both; then it wets
C. D., because the third A. B. being compressed, the exterior part of the water
which was in it, coming to be pushed on upon C. D., seeks there a place, and
enters within the thrids, and wets them, in the same manner as at first it is
exterior and highest part became wet. C. D. being so wetted, will dilate it
self as A. B. did; and consequently pressing against E. F. it cannot choose but
work the same effect in it, which before it had received by the swelling and
dilatation of A. B. and so, by gentle degrees, every third wets its neighbor,
till the very last third of the cloth tongue. And it is not to be feared, that
the continuity of the Water will break, ascending this scale of chords; or that
it will recoil backwards: for, those little ladders, so easy to be mounted,
render the ascent facile, and the woolly fibers of every third seem to reach
their hands to help them up at every step: and so the facility of geting up,
joined with the fluidness of the water, and the nature of quantity, (which
tends always to the uniting of substances and bodies which it clothes, when
there occurs no other predominant cause to break and divide it) causes that the
water keeps it self in one piece, and passes above the brink of the pot. After
that, its vo^age is made more easy, for it follows its natural tendence,
always downwards. And, if the end of the cloth hangs lower without the pot,
than the surface of the water within, the water drops into the ground, or some
Vessel placed underneath; as we see a chord being hung upon a pully, the
longest and heaviest end falls upon the ground, and carries away the shortest
and lightest, drawing it over the pully. But, if the end of the cloth, without
the pot, were horizontal with the surface of the water, and hung no lower than
it, the water would be immovable: as, the two sides of a Balance, when
there is equal weight in both the scales. And, if one should pour out part of
the water that is in the pot, so that the superficies grow lower than the end
of the cloth without: in that case the ascending water becoming more heavy than
the descendant on the other side, without the pot, it would call back that
which was gone out before and ready to fall; and would make it thrust on and
return to its former pace, and enter again into the pot, to mingle with the
water there.

You see then this mystery, which at first was surprising, displaid, and made
as familiar and natural, as to see a stone fall down from the air. It Is true,
that to make a demonstration thereof, exact and completely rigorous, we must
add other circumstances; which I have done in another Discourse, wherein I
expressly treated of this subject. But that which I now say is sufficient, to
give a taste how this so notable Attraction is performed,

The other Attraction by Fire, which draws to it the ambient air, with the
small bodies therein, is wrought thus;

The Fire, acting according to its own nature, which it, to push on a continual
river or exhalation of its parts, from the center to the circumference, carries
away with it the air adjoined and sticking to it on all sides; as the water of
a river trains along with it the earth of that channel or bed, through which it
glides. For, the air being humid, and the fire dry, they cannot do less, than
embrace and hug one another. But, there must new air come from the places
circumjacent, to fill the room of that which is carried away by the fire;
otherwise there would a vacuity happen, which nature abhors. This new air
remains not long in the place it comes to fill; but the fire, which is in a
continual carreer and emanation of its parts, carries it presently away, and
draws other: and so there is a pe^petual and constant current of the air, as
long as the action of fire continues. We daily see the experience hereof: For,
if one makes a good fire in ones Chamber, it draws the air from the door and
windows; which though one would shut, yet there be crevices and holes for the
air to enter, and, coming near them, one shall hear a kind of whistling noise
which the air makes in pressing to enter. It Is the same cause that produces the
sound of the Organ and Flute. And he, who would stand between the crevices and
the fire, should find such an impetuosity of that artificial wind, that he
would be ready to freeze, while he is ready to burn the other side next the
fire. And a Wax-candle held in this current of wind would melt, by the flame
blown against the wax, and waste away in a very short time: whereas, if that
Candle stood in a calm place, that the flame might burn upward, it would last
much longer. But, if there be no passage whereby the air may enter into the
Chamber, one part, then, of the vapor of the wood, which should have converted
to flame and so mounted up the funnel of the Chimney, descends downward against
its nature, to supply the defect of air within the said Chamber, and fills it
with smoke; but at last the fire choaks, and extinguishes, for want of air.
Whence it comes to pass, that the Chemists have reason to say, that the air is
the life of fire, as well as of animals. But, if one puts a Basin or Vessel of
water before the fire upon the hearth, there will be no smoke in the Chamber;
although it be so close shut, that the air cannot enter: for, the fire attracts
part of the water, which is a liquid substance and easy to move out of its
place; which aquatic parts rarifie themselves into air, and thereby perform the
functions of the air. This is more evidently seen if the Chamber be little; for
then the air, which is there penned in, is sooner raised up and carried away.
And, by reason of this attraction, they use to make great fires, where there is
housholdstuff, of persons that dyed of the Pestilence, to dis-infect it. For,
by this inundation of attracted air, the fire as it were sweeps the walls,
floor, and other places of the Chamber; and takes away those little putrified,
sharp, corrosive, and venomous bodies, which were the infection that adhered to
it: drawing them into the fire, where they are partly burnt, and partly sent up
into the Chimney, accompanied with the atoms of the fire and the smoke. It Is
for this reason that the great Hippocrates, (who groped so far into the secrets
of Nature) dis-infected, and freed from the Plague a whole Province or entire
Region; by causing them to make great fires every where.

Now, this manner of attraction is made, not only by simple fire, but by that
which partakes of it, viz. by hot substances: and that which is the reason and
cause of the one, is also the cause of the other. For, the Spirits or ignited
parts, evaporating from such a substance or hot body, carry away with them the
adjacent air; which must necessarily be supplied by other air or some matter
easily rari^iable into air; as we have spoken of the basin and tub of water,
put before the fire to hnder smoke. It Is upon this foundation that Physicians
ordain the application of Pigeons, or Puppy's, or some other hot Animals, to
the soles of the feet, or the hand-wrists, or the stomachs, or navils of their
Patients; to extract out of their bodies the wind or ill vapors which infect
them. And, in time of contagion or universal infection of the air, Pigeons,
Cats, Dogs, with other hot Animals, which have continually a great
transpiration or evaporation of Spirits, use to be killed: because through
attraction, the Air taking the room of the Spirits, which issue forth by the
evaporation, the pestiferous atoms, which are scattered in the air and
accompany it, use to stick to their feathers, skins, or furs.

And, for the same reason, we see that Bread coming hot out of the Oven, put
upon the Bung, draws to it the Must of the Cask which would spoil the Wine: and
that Onions, and such hot bodies which perpetually exhale fiery parts, (as
appears by the strength of their smell) are quickly poisoned with infectious
airs, if they be exposed to them: and, it is one of the signs, to know whether
the whole mass of the air be universally infected.

And, one might reduce to this head the great attraction of air by calcined
bodies; and particularly by Tartar, all ignited by the violent action of the
fire which is crowded and encorporated among it is Salt. I have observed, that
it attracts to it nine times more air, than it self weighs. For, if one expose
to the air a pound of Salt of Tartar well calcined and b^rnt, it will ^ff^rd
ten pound of good Oil of Tartar; draw^^g to it, and so incorporating the
circumjacent air, and that is mingled with it: as it befell that O^l of Tartar
which Mon^ir F^rrier made me, whereof I spoke before. But, meth^nks, all this is
but little, compared to the attraction of air by the body of a certain N^n at
Rome; whereof Pe^rus Servius, ^r^a^ the E^ght's Physician, makes mention, in a
Book which he has published, touching the marvailous accidents which he
observed in his time. Had I not such a vouchy, I durst not produce this
History; although the Nun her self confirmed it to me, and a good number of
Physicians assured me of the truth thereof. There was a Nun, that, by excess
of fasting, watching, and mental orisons, was so ^ea^ed in her body, that she
seemed to be all on fire, and her bones dried up and calcined. This heat then,
this in^ernal fire, drawing the air powerfully; this air incorporated within
her body, as it uses to do in Salt of Tartar: and, the passages being all open,
it got to those parts where there is most serosity, which is the bladder; and
thence she rendered it in water among her Urine, and that in an incredible
quantity; for, she voided, during some Weeks, more than two hundred pounds of
Water every four and twenty hours. With this notable example I will put an end
to the experiments, I have urged to prove and explicate the attr^ction made of
air, by hot and ig^ited bodies, which are of the nature of fire.

My Sixth Principle shall be, that When fire or some hot body attracts the Air
and that which is within the Air, if it happens that within that air there be
found some dispersed a^oms of the same nature with the body that draws them;
such atoms are more powerfully attracted, than if they were Bodies of a
different nature, and they stay, stick, and mingle more willingly with the body
which draws them. The Reason hereof is, the Resemblance and Sympathy they have
one with the other. If I should not explicate wherein this Resemblance
consisted; I should expose my self to the same censure and blame, as that which
I taxed, at the beginning of my discourse, in those, who spoke but lightly and
vulgarly of the Powder of Sympathy, and such marvels of Nature. But, when I
shall have cleared that which I contend for by such a resemblance and
convenience; I hope then you will rest satisfied. I could make you see that
there are many sorts of Resemblances, which cause an Union between bodies; but
I will content my self to speak here only of three signal ones.

The first Resemblance shall be in Weight; whereby bodies of the same degree of
heaviness assemble together, The reason whereof is eviden^. For, if one body
were lighter, it would occupy a higher situation than the heavier body; as on
the contrary, if a body were more weighty, it would descend lower than that
which is less heavy: but both having the same degree of heav^ness, they keep
company together in equilibrio, As one may see by experience in this gentile
example; which some curious spirits use to Produce, to make us understand how
the Four Elements are situated one above the other, according to their weight.
They put in a vial the spirit of Wine tinctured with red, to represent the
Fire, the spirit of Turpentine tinctured with blew, for the Air, the spirit of
Water tinctured with green, and represent the element of Water; And, to
represent the Earth, the Powder of some solid Metal enameled: you see them one
upon the other without mix^ng; and if you shake them together by a violent^
(...) you shall see a Chaos, such a confusion, that it will seem there is no
particular atoms that belong to any of those bodies, they are so hudled pel mel
altogether. But, cease this agitation, and you shall see presently every one of
these four substances go to its natural place; calling again, and laboring to
unite all their atoms in one distinct mass, that you shall see no mixture at
all.

The second Resemblance of bodies, which draw one another and unite, is among
them which are of the same degree of Rarity and Density. The nature and effect
of Quantity is to reduce to unity all things which it finds; if some other
stronger power, (as, the differing substantial Form, which multiplies it) do
not hinder. And the reason is evident. For the ^ssence of Quantity is
Divisibility or a Capacity to be divided, that is to be made Many; whence may
be inferred that Quantity it self is not-many; it is therefore of it self and in
its own nature one continued extension, Seeing then that the nature of Q^antity
in general tends to Unity, and Continuity; the first differences of Quantity,
which are Rarity and Density, must produce the same effect of Unity, and
Continuity in those bodies which participate in the same degree of them. For
proof whereof, we find, that water unites and incorporates it self strongly and
easily with water, oil with oil, spirit of wine with spirit of wine: but water
and oil will hardly unite, nor mercury with the spirit of wine; and so other
bodies of differing density and tenuity.

The third Resemblance of bodies which unites and keeps them strongly together,
is that of Figure. I will not serve my self here with the ingenious conceit of
a Great Personage; who holds that the continuity of Bodies results from some
small hooks or clasps, which keep them together; and are different in bodies of
a differing nature: But (not to extend my self too diffusively in every
particularity) I will say in gross, as an apparent thing, that every kind of
body affects a particular Figure. We see it plainly in the several sorts of
Salt; peel and stamp them separately, dissolve, coagulate, and change them as
long as you please; they come again always to their own natural figure, after
every dissolution, and coagulation. The ordinary Salt forms it self always in
cubes of ^oursquare faces; Saltpeter in forms of six faces: Armoniac-salt in
Hexagons; as the Snow does, which is sexangular. Whereto Mr. Davison attributes
the pentagonary figure of every one of those Stones, which were found in the
Bladder of Monsir Peletier, to the number of fourscore; for the same immediate
efficient cause the Bladder had imprinted its action both on the stones, and
the salt of the urine. The Distillators observe, that if they power upon the
dead head of some distillation the water which was distilled out of it, it
imbibes it, and re-unites incontinently; whereas if one pour on it any other
water of an heterogeneous body, it swims on the top, and incorporates with much
difficulty. The reason is, that the distilled water, which seems to be an
homogeneous body, is composed of small bodies of discrepant figures; as the
Chemists plainly demonstrate: and these atoms being chaced, by the action of
fire, out of their own Chambers, or beds exactly fitted to them; when they come
back in their ancient habitations, viz, to the pores which are left in the dead
heads, they accommodate themselves, and amiably rejoin and comensurate together.
The same happens when it rains, after a long drougth: for, the earth
immediately drinks up the water, which had been drawn up by the Sun; whereas any
other strange liquor would enter with some difficulty. Now that there are
differing po^es in bodies which seem to be homogeneous, Monsir Gassendus
affirms, and undertakes to prove, by the dissolution of Salts of differing
natures in common water. When, says he, you have dissolved in it common Salt,
as much as it can bear; if you put in only a scruple more, it will leave it
entire in the bottom, as if it were sand or plaster; nevertheless it will
dissolve a good quantity of Saltpeter; and when it is glutted with this, 'twil
dissolve as much of Armoniacal salt, and so others of different figures. So
that as I have observed elsewhere, we see plainly by the economy of Nature,
that bodies of the same figure use to mingle more strongly, and unite
themselves with more facility. Which is the reason why those, tha^ make a
strong glue, to piece together broken pots of Porcelain or Crystal, etc.
always mingle with the glue the powder of that body, which they endeavor to
re-accomodate: and the Goldsmiths themselves, when they go about to soder
together pieces of gold, or silver, mingle always their own dust in the soder.

Having hitherto run through the reasons and causes why bodies of the same
nature, draw one to another with greater facility and force, than others, and
why they unite with more promptitude; lets now see according to our method, how
experience confirms this discourse, for, in natural things we must have
recourse, en dernier ressort, to experience; and all reasoning that is not
supported so, ought to be repudiated, or at least suspected to be illegitimate.

It Is an ordinary thing, when one find she has burnt his hand; to hold it a
good while as near the fire as he can, and by this means the ignited atoms of
the fire and of the hand mingling together, and drawing one another; and the
stronger of the two, which are those of the fire, having the mastery, the hand
finds it self much eased of the inflammation which it suffered. It Is an usual
course, though a nasty one, of those who have ill breaths, to hold their mouths
open over a Privy, as long as they can; and by the re-iteration of this remedy,
they find themselv^s cured at last; the greater stink of the privy drawing to
it, and carrying away, the less, which is that of the mouth. They who have
been pricked or bitten by a Viper or Scorpion, hold, over the bitten or pricked
place, the head of a Viper or Scorpion bruised; and by this means the poison,
which, by a kind of filtration crept on to gain the heart of the party, returns
back to its principles, and so leaves him well recovered. In time of common
contagion, they use to carry about them the powder of a Toad, and sometimes a
living Toad or Spider, sh^t up in a b^x; or Ars^ick, or some other venomous
substance; which draws to it the contagious air, that otherwise would infect
the party: and the same powder of a Toad draws to it the poison of a plague
sore. The Farcy is avenemous and contagious humor within the body of a Horse:
hang a Toad about the neck of the Horse, in a little bag, and he will be cured
infallibly; the Toad, which is the stronger poison, drawing to it the venom
which was within the Horse. Make water to evaporate out of a Stove, or other
room, close shut; if there be nothing that draws this vapor, it will stick to
the walls of the Stove, and, as it cools, recondense there into water; but if
you put a basin or bucket of water into any part of the Stove, it will attract
all the vapor which filled the chamber, and no part of the wall will be wetted.
If you dissolve Mercury, which, resolving into smoke, passes into the
recipient, put into the head of the limbeck a little thereof, and all the
Mercury in the limbeck will gather there, and nothing will pass into the
recipient. If you distill the Spirit of Salt, or of Vitriol, or the Baume of
Sulpher, and leave the passage free betwixt the Spirit and the dead head,
whence it issued; the Spirits will return to the dead head, which, being fixed
and not able to mount up, draws them to it.

In our Country, ^(and I think it is so used here,) they use to make provision
for all the year of Venison, at the season that their flesh is best and most
savory, which is in july, and August; they bake it in earthen pots, or
Ryecrust, after they have well seasond it with salt and spices; and being cold,
they cover it deep with fresh butter, that the air may no^ enter. Nevertheless
it is observed, that after all their diligence when the l^v^ng Beasts, which are
of the same nature and kind, are in Rut, the flesh in the pot smells very rank,
and is very much changed, having a stronger taft; because of the spirits which
come at thi^ season from the living Beasts; which spirits are attracted
na^urally by the dead flesh. And then, one has much to do (...) preserve it
from being quite spoiled: but the said season being passed, there is no danger
or difficulty to keep it gustful all the year long.

The Wine Merchants (in this Country, and every where else, where there is
Wine,) observe that, during the season that the Vines are in flower, the Wine,
in their Cellars, makes a kind of fermentation, and pushes forth a little white
Lee, (which I think they call the Mother) upon the surface of the wine: which
continues in a kind of disorder, till the flowers of the Vines be fallen; and
then, this agitation or fermentation being ceased, all the wine returns to the
same state it was in before.

Nor is it now that this observation has been made, but, besides diverse
others, who speak hereof, St. Ephrem the Syri^n* (in his last Will and
Testament, some 1300 years ago,) reports this very same circumstance of Wine;
sensibly suffering an ag^tation and fermentation within the vessel, a^ the same
time that the Vines seem to exhale their Spirits in the Vineyards. He makes use
of the same example in dry Onions, which bud in the House, when those in the
Garden begin to come out of the earth, and fill the air with their Spirits;
showing by these known examples of Nature, the communication between Living
Persons, and the souls of the Dead. Now those Viny Spirits that issue from the
buds and flowers, filling the air, (as the Spirits of Rosem^ry use to do in
Spain) are drawn into the Vessels, by the connatural and attractive virtue of
the Wine within: and these new volatile Spirits, entering, excite the more fixed
Spirits of the Wine, and so cause a fermentation; as if one should pour therein
new or sweet wine, for in all fermentations, there is a separation made of the
terrestial parts from the oily, and so the lightest mount up to the
Superficies, the heaviest become Tartar lees, which sink to the bottom. But, in
this Season, if one be not very careful to keep the Wine in a proper and
temperate place, and the Cask full and well bung'd; and to use other endeavors
which are ordinary with Wine-Coopers, one runs a h^z^rd to have his Wine
impaird, or quite spoiled; because volatile Spirits, evaporating again, carry
away with them the Spirits of the wine that is barrel'd, by exciting and
mingling with them. As in like manner, the Oil of Tartar, which Monsur ^errier
made, attracting to it self the volatile Spirits of Roses, diffused in the air
in their Season, suffered such a fermentation: and made every year new
attractions of the like Spirits, in regard of the affinity which this oil had
contracted with those Spirits at first; which it lost again still as the Season
passed. And it is for the very same reason, that a Table-cloath, or Napkin,
spoted with Mulberries, or red Wine, is eas^ly whitned again, at the season
that the Plants flower; whereas at any other time, these spots can hardly be
washed out. But, it is not only in France, and other places where Vines are near
Cellars of wine, that this fermentation happens: in England, where we have not
Vines enough to make wine, the same thing is observed; yea, and some
particularities farther. Although they make no wine in our Country, to any
considerable proportion, yet we have wine there in great abundance, brought
over by the Merchants. It uses to come principally from three places, viz. from
the Canaries, from Spain, from Gascony. Now, these Regions being under
different Degrees and Climates, in point of Latitude, and consequently one
Country being hotter or colder, than the other; so that the same Vegetals grow
to maturity sooner: it comes to pass, that the foresaid fermentation of our
differing Wines advances it self more or less, according as the Vines, whence
they proceed, do bud and flower in the Region where they grow; it being
consentaneous to reason, that every sort of wine attracts more willingly the
Spirits of those Vines whence it comes, than of any other.

I cannot forbear making some digression here, to unfold some other effects of
Nature; which we see often, and are not less curious, than the most principal
we treat of, and will seem to be derived from more obscure causes;
notwithstanding, in many circumstances, they depend on the same principles,
and, in many, much differing. First, touching M^les or marks, which happen to
Infants when their mothers, during the time of their pregnancy, have longed for
some particular things. To proceed after my accustomed manner; I will begin
with an example. A Lady of high condition, whom many of this Assembly know, at
least by reputation, has upon her N^ck the figure of a Mu^berry; as exactly as
any Painter or Sculp^or can possibly represent one: for it bears not only the
color, but the just proportion of a Mulberry, and is as it were embossed upon
her flesh. The Mother of this Lady, being w^th-child, had a great mind to eat
some Mul^erries; and her fancy being satisfied, one of them casually fell upon
her neck; the sanguin juice whereof was soon wiped off, and she felt nothing at
that time. But the Child being born, the perfect figure of a Mulberry was seen
upon her Neck; in the same place where it fell upon the Mothers: and every year,
in Mulberpy season, this impression, or rather this excrescence of flesh sweld,
grew big, and itch'd.

Another Lady who had the like mark of a Stra^berry, was more incommodated
therewith; for it, not only grew inflamed and itch'd in Strawberry-season, but
broke, like an Impostume, whence iss^ed forth a sharp corrosive humor. But, a
skilful Surgeon took all away, to the very roots, by cauterizing; so that,
since that time, she never felt any pain or alteration in that place which
incommodated her so much; it being become a simple scar.

Now then, lets endeavor to penetrate, if we can, the causes and reasons of
these marvailous effects. But, to go the more handsomely to work, let us
reflect. that, in the actions of all our senses, there is a material and
corporal participation of the things we are sensible of, viz. some atoms of the
body operate upon our Senses, and enter into their organs; which serve them as
funnels, to conduct and carry them to the brain and the imagination. This
appears evidently in Vapors and Savours. And for Hearing, the exterior air,
being agitated, causes a movement within the membrane or tympane of the Ear,
which gives the like shake to the hammer tied thereto; and that beating upon
its anvil, causes a reciprocal motion in the air, which is shut within the
crannies of the Ear; and this is that which we usually call Sound.

Touching the Sight, it is evident that the Light, reflecting from the body that
is seen, enters into the eyes; and cannot, bu^bring with it some emanations of
the body whereon it reflects; as we have established in our Second Principle.

It remains now to show that the like is done in the grossest of our senses,
the Touch or Feeling. And if it be true, as we have shown, that every body
sends forth a continual emanation of atoms out of it self: it makes much for
the assertion of this truth. But to render it yet more manifest, and take away
all possibility of doubt, I will demonstrate it evidently to the eye: whereof
every one may make an experience in a quarter of an hour, if he be so curious,
yea, in a less compass of time.

I believe you all know the notable affinity betwixt Gold and Quicksilver. If
Gold but touches Mercury, that sticks close to it, and whitens it so, that it
scarce appears Gold, but silver only. If you cast this blanched Gold into the
fire, the heat chases and drives away the Mercury, and the Gold returns to its
former color: but, if you repeat this often, the Gold calcines, and then you
may pound, and reduce it to powder.

Now, there is no dissolvant in the World that can well calcine and burn the
body of Gold, but Quicksilver. I speak of that which is already formed by
Nature; without engaging my self to speak of that which is talked of among the
Secrets of Philosophy. Take then, a spoonful of Mercury in some porcelan or
other dish, and finger it with one hand: if you have a Gold-Ring on the other
hand, it will become white and covered with Mercury; though it does not any way
touch it. Moreover, if you take a leaf or a Crown of gold in your mouth, and
put but one of your toes in a Vessel where Mercury is; the Gold in your mouth,
though you shut your lips never so close, shall turn white and laden with
Mercury: then, if you put the Gold in the fire, to make all the Mercury
evaporate, and re-iterate this thing often, your Gold will be calcined, as if
you had, by amalgation, joined Mercury therewith corporally. And all this will
yet be done more speedily and effectually, if, in lieu of common Mercury, you
make use of Mercury of Antimony, which is much hotter, and more penetrating;
and, though you drive it away by force of fire, it will carry away with it a
good quantity of the substance of the Gold; that, re-iterating often this
operation, there will no more Gold remain for you to continue your experiments.
If then, cold Mercury does so penetrate the whole body; we ought not to think
it strange, that subtle atoms of fruit composed of many fiery parts will pass
with more facility and quickness. I could further make you see how such Spirits
and Emanations suddenly also penetrateev'n steel; though it be a substance so
compacted, cold, and hard, that the said atoms keep there residence their many
months and years. In a living body, such as is Man's: the intern Spirits aid and
contribute much facility to the Spirits that are without, (such as those of
Fruits are,) to make their journey to the Brain. The great Architect of Nature
in the fabric of a Human Body, the master piece of corporal nature, has
placed there some intern Spirits, to serve as Sentinels, to bring their
discoveries to their General, the Imagination, (which is, as it were, the
Mistress of the whole family,) whereby the man might know and understand, what
is done without his Kingdom, in the great World; and might shun what is noxious
and seek after that which is profitable. For, these Sentinels or intern
Spirits, with all the inhabitants of the sensitive organs, are not able to to
judge alone: insomuch, that, if the Imagination or thought, be distracted
strongly to some other object, these intern Spirits do not know whether a man
has drunk the wine which he has swa^low'd; if perchance, seeing a person who
comes to salute him, he fixes his eye upon him all the while, or he listens
attentively to the air of some melodious Song or musical Instrument. The inward
Spirits therefore bring all their acquisitions to the Imagination; and if she
be not more strongly bent upon another object, she falls a forming certain
Id^as and Images: for the atoms from without, being conveyed by these intern
Spirits to our imagination, erect there the like edifice, or else a model in
short resembling the great body whence they come, And if the Imagination has
no more use of those significative atoms for the present, she ranges them in
some proper place within her Magazin, the Memory; where she can recall, and
send them back when she pleases. And if there be any object which causes some
emotions in the Imagination, and touches her nearer, than common objects use to
do; she sends back her Sentinels, the internal Spirits, upon the Confines, to
bring her more particular news. Hence it proceeds that being surprised by some
particular person, or other object, that has already some eminent place in his
Imagination, be it with desire or aversion, man suddenly changes color, and
becomes now red, then pale, then red again at diverse times: according as the
Ministers, which are those intern Spirits, go quick or slow toward their
object, and return with their reports to their Mistress, which is the
Imagination. But, besides these passages we speak of, from the brain to the
external parts of the body, by the ministry of the nerv's; there is also a
great road from the Brain to the Heart; by which the vital spirits ascend from
the Heart to the Brain, to be animated: and hereby the Imagination sends to the
Heart those atoms which she has received from some external object. And there
they make an ebullition among the vital Spirits; which, according to the
intervening atoms, either cause a dilatation of the Heart, and so gladden it;
or contract it, and so sadden it: and these two differing and contrary actions
are the first general effects, whence proceed afterward the particular
Passions; which require not that I pursue them too far in this place, having
done it more particularly else where, and more expressly.

Besides these passages, which are common to all Men and Women, there is
another that is peculiar only to females; which is, from the Brain to the
Matrix: whereby it often falls out that such violent vapors mount up to the
Brain; and those in so great a number, that they often hinder the operation of
the Brain and Imagination, causing convulsions and follies, with other strange
accidents; and by the same channel, the Spirits or atoms pass with a greater
liberty and swiftness to the womb or Matrix, when the case requires.

Now, lets consider how the strong Imagination of one m^n does marvailously act
upon another man, who has it more feeble and passive. We see daily, that, if a
person gape; those who see him gaping are excited to do the same. If one fall
in company with persons that are in a fit of laughter, he can hardly forbear
laughing, though he knows not, why they laugh: or if one enters into an house
where all the World is sad; he becomes melancholy. Women and Children, being
very moist and passive, are most susceptible of this unpleasing contagion of
the Imagination. I have known a very melancholy woman, which was subject to the
disease called the Mother; and while she continued in that mood, she thought
her self possessed, and did strange things, which among those that knew not the
cause, passed for supernatural effects, and of one possessed by the ill spirit,
she was a person of quality; and all this happened through the deep resentment
she had for the death of her Husband. She had attending her four or five young
Gentlewomen; whereof some were her Kinswomen, and others served her as
Chamber-maids: All these came to be possessed as she was, and did prodigious
actions. These young Maids were separated from her sight and communication; and
not having yet contracted such profound roots of the evil, they came to be all
cured by their absence: and this Lady was also cured afterward by a Physician,
who purged the atrabilious humors, and restored her Matrix to its former
estate. There was neither imposture, or dissimulation in this.

I could make a notable recital of such passions, that happened to the Nuns at
Lodun: but, having done it in a particular Discourse at my return from that
Country, where I, as exactly as I could, discussed the point, I will forbear
speaking thereof at this time. And only pray you to remember, that, when two
Lutes or Harps, near one another are both set to the same ^une; if you touch
the strings of the one, the other consonant Instrument will sound at the same
time, though no body touch it; whereof Galileo has ingeniously rendered the
reason.

Now, to make application to our purpose of all that has been produced about
it, I say that, since it is impossible, that any two several persons should be
so near one the other as the Mother and the Infant in her womb; one may thence
conclude, that all the effects of a strong and vehement Imagination, working
upon another more feeble, passive, and tender, ought to be more efficacious in
the Mother acting upon her Infant, than when the Imaginations of other persons
act upon those who are nothing to them. And, as it is impossible for a Master
of Music, let him be never so expert and exact, to tune so perfectly any two
Harps, as the great Master of the Universe does the two bodies of the Mother
and the Infant; so by consequence, the concussion of the principal strings of
the Mother, which is her Imagination, must produce a greater shaking of the
consonant string in the Infant, to wit, his Imagination, than the string of one
Lute being struck, can of the Consonant strings of another. Wherefore, when the
Mother sends Spirits to some parts of her body, the like must be sent to those
parts of the Child's body.

Now, lets call to memory, how the Imagination of the Mother is full of
corporeal atoms, coming from the Mulberry or Strawberry, that fell upon her Neck
and Breast; and her Imagination being then surprised with an emotion, by the
suddenness of the accident, it follows necessarily, that she must send some of
these atoms also to the Brain of the Infant, and so to the same part of the
body, where she took the stain at first; twixt which and the brain, there pass
such frequent and speedy messengers, as we have formerly set forth. The Infant
also having his parts tuned in an harmonious consonance with the Mothers,
cannot fail to observe the same movement of spirits, twixt his Imaginations and
his neck and breast, as the mother did 'twixt hers: and, these Spirits, being
accompanied with atoms of the Mulberry, which the Mother conveyed to his
Imagination, make a deep impression and lasting mark upon his delicate skin,
whereas that of the mothers was more hard. As if one should let fly a Pistol
charged with powder only, against a Marble, the powder would do nothing but
^ully it a little, which may quickly be rubbed off; but if one should discharge
such a Pistol at a Man's face, the grains of the powder would pierce the skin,
and stick and dwell there, all his life time, making themselves known by their
black-blewish color, which they always conserve.

In like manner, the small grains or atoms of the Fruit, which passed from the
Mothers neck to the Imagination of the Infant, and thence to the same place
upon his skin, do lodge and continually dwell there for the future; and serve as
a source to draw the atoms of the like fruit dispersed in the air, in their
season, (as the wine in the Tun draws to it the volatile spirits of the Vines)
and by drawing them, the part of the skin, where they reside, ferments, swells,
corrod's, inflames, and sometimes break^. But to render yet more considerable
these marvailous marks of longing, (since we are upon this subject), I cannot
forbear to touch also another circumstance, which might seem at first to be a
miracle of Nature, beyond the causes which I have alleged: but having well
eventilated it, we shall obsolutely find that it depends upon the same
principles. It Is. that oftentimes it falls out, that the impression of the
thing desired or longed for by the Mother, sticks on the Child; though the
thing it self never touched the mothers body. It Is sufficient, that some other
thing fall or inexpectedly beat upon some part of the woman with-child, while
such a longing predominates in her imagination; and the figure of the thing so
longed for, will be found at last imprinted on the same part of the body of the
Infant, where the Mother received the stroke. The reason hereof is, that the
atoms of the thing longed for, being raised up by the Light, go to the brain of
the Mother, through the channel of her eyes, as well as other more material
atoms, proceeding from the corporeal touch, would go thither, by the guidance
of the nervs: And, of these petty bodies, the mother forms in her imagination a
complete model of that whence they flow by way of emanation. Now, if her mind
only run on it, these atoms, which are in her imagination, make no other
voyage, than to her heart, and thence to the imagination and heart of the
Infant; and so cause a reinforcement of the Passion in them both which may be
moved to such a violent impetuosity, that, if the Mother does not enjoy her
longed-for object, this passion may cause the destruction both of her and her
Infant, at least make so great a change in their bodies as may prejudice them
both in their healths' But, if some unlook'd-for blow surprise the mother in
any part of her body, it often happens that the spirits, which reside in the
brain, are immediately sent to that part by her imagination. And, in all such
sudden surprisals, either in women or men, these spirits are transported with
the more impetuosity, the more the Passion is violent: As, when one loves
another passionately, he runs suddenly to the door when any knocks, or that --
Hylax in limine latrat, hoping always it is the party that entirely occupies his
thoughts, (for qui amant ipsi sili s^mnia fingunt) who comes to give him a
visit. These spirits then moved by this sudden assault, being mingled with the
petty bodies or atoms of the longed-for thing which poss^sses so powerfully the
fantasy, carry them along with themselves to the part of the body which is
struck; as also to the same part of the body of the Infant, as well as to his
Imagination: and after that, all which haprens is but the same in respect of
the Mother and the child; as when the Mu^berry or Strawberry fell upon the neck
or breast of the Ladies, with whom I have entertained you.

Permit me, my Lords, to enlarge my digression a little further by
re-accounting to you a marvailous accident, known all over the Court of
England; in the confirmation of the activity and impression which the
Imagination of the Mother makes upon the body of the Infant in her womb. A Lady
that was my Kinswoman, (she was the Neice of Fortescu, the Daughter of Count
Arundel) came to give me visits sometimes in London; she was handsome and knew
it well; taking great complacency not only to keep her self so, but to add that
which she could further: wherefore being persuaded that black Patches which she
used, gave her a great deal of ornament, she was careful to wear the most
curious sort. But as it is very hard to keep a moderation, in things which
depend more upon Opinion, than Nature; she wore them in excess, and patched
most of her face with them, Though that did not much add to her beauty, and I
took the liberty to tell her so yet I thought it no opportunity then, to do any
thing that should give her the least diftast; since with so much civility and
sweetness she came to visit me. Nevertheless, one day I thought good, in a kind
of drolling way so that she might not take any disgust, (and Ridentem dicere
verum quis vetat?) to tell her of it; so I let my discourse fall upon her
great-belly, advising her to have a care of her health, whereof she was somewhat
negligent; according to the custom of young vigorous women, which know not yet
what it is to be subject to indispositions, She gently thanked me for my care
herein; saying, That she could do no more for the preservation of her health,
than she did, though she was in that case. You should at least, I replied, have
a great care of your Child, O! for that, said she, there is nothing can be
contributed. Yet, I told her, see how many Patches you we^r upon your face: are
you not afraid that the Infant in your womb may happily be born with such marks
on his face? But, said she, What danger is there that my child should bear such
marks, though I put them on artificially? Then, you have not heard, I replied,
the marvailous effects that the imaginations of Mothers work upon the bodies of
their children, while they are yet big with them; therefore I will reaccount to
you some of them. So I related to her sundry stories upon this subject: as,
that of the Queen of Ethiopia, who was delivered of a white Boy; which was
attributed to a Pictu reof the Blessed Virgin, she had near the teaster of her
bed, where bore she great devotion. I urged another, of awoman who was brought
to bed of a child all hairie; because of a pourtrait of St. John Baptist in the
Wilderness, when he wore a coat of Camels hair. I re-accounted to her also the
strange Antipathy which the late King James had to a naked sword; whereof the
cause was ascribed to some Schotch Lords, entering once violently into the
Bedchamber of the Queen his Mother, while she was with child of him, where her
Secretary, an Italian, was dispatching some letters for her: whomthey hacked
and killed with naked S^ords, before her face, and threw him at her feet; and
they grew so barbarous, that they had near hurt the Queen her self who
endeavored to save her Secretary by interp^sing her self, for her skin was
rased in diverse places. Bucanan makes mention of this Tragedy. Hence it came
that her Son, King James, had such an aversion all his life time to a naked
Sword; that he could not see one, without a great emotion of spirits: and,
though otherwise courageous enough, he could not over-master his passions in
this particular. I remember, when he dubbed me Knight; in the ceremony of
putting a naked Sword upon my shoulder, he could not endure to look upon it,
but turned his face another way; insomuch that, in lieu of touching my
shoulder, he had almost thrust the point into my eyes, had not the Duke of
Buckingingham guided his hand aright.

I alleged to her diverse such stories; to make her apprehend, that a strong
Imagination of the Mother might cause some notable impression upon the body of
her Child, to his prejudice. And 'pray consider, said I, how attentive you are
to your Patches, how you have them continually in your imagination; for, I have
observed, that you have looked on them ten times since you came to this room,
in the Lookingglass. Have you, therefore, no apprehension that your child may be
born with half-moons upon his face; or rather, that all the black, which you
spot in several places up and down may assemble in one, and appear in the
middle of his forehead, the most apparent and remarkable part of the visage, as
broad as a Iacobus: and then, what a grace would it be to the Child. O^mee!
said she, rather than that should happen, I will wear no more Patches, and
while I am with-child: thereupon instantly she pulled them all off, and threw
them away. When her friends saw her afterward without Patches; they demanded
how it came to pass, that she, who was esteemed to be one of the most curious
Beauties of the Court, in point of Patches, should so suddenly give over
wearing them? She answered, that her Uncle, in whom she had a great deal of
belief, assured her, that, if she wore them, during the time she was
with-child, the Infant would have a large black patch in the midst of his
forehead. Now, this conceit was so lively engraven in her imagination, that she
could not thrust it out: And so this poor Lady, who was so fearful that her
child should bear some black mark in its face, yet could not prevent, but it
came so into the World, and had a spot as large as a Crown of Gold in the midst
of the forehead; according as she had figured before in her imagination. It was
a Daughter that she brought forth every way very beautiful, this excepted: it is
but few months since, that I saw her bearing the said mole or spot, which
proceeded from the force of the Imagination of her Mother.

I need not tell you of your Neighbor of Carcassona; who lately was brought to
bed of a prodigious Monster, exactly resembling an Ape, which she took pleasure
to look upon, during the time she was with-child: for, I conceive you know the
story better than I. Nor of the woman of St. Maixent, who could not forbear
going to see an unfortunate child of a poor passenger woman, that was born
without arms; and she her self was delivered afterward of such a Monster; who
yet had some small excrescences of flesh upon the shoulders, about the place
whence the arms should have come forth. As also of her who was desirous to see
the execution of a Criminal, that had his head cut off according to the laws of
France: whereof her affrightment made so deep a print upon her Imagination, that
presently falling in labor, before they could carry her, to her lodging, she
was brought to-bed, before her time, of a Child who had his head severed from
his body, both the parts yet shedding fresh blood, besides that which was
abundantly shed in the womb; as if the heads-man had done an execution also
upon the tender young body within the Mothers womb. These three Examples,
manifestly enough prove the strength of the Imagination: and many others, as
true I could produce; which would engage me too far, if I should undertake to
clear the causes and unwrap the difficulties that would be found greater in
them, than in any of those wherewith I have entertained you. Because those
spirits had the power to cause essential changes and fearful effects, upon
bodies that were already brought to their perfect shapes; and it may be well
believed, that in some of them there was a transmutation of one species to
another, and the introduction of a new Form into the Subject Matter, totally
differing from that which had been introduced at first; at least, if that which
most Naturalists tell us, at the animation of the Embryo in the womb, be true.
But this digression has been already too long

To return then, to the great channel and third of our Discourse. The examples
and experiments, which I have already insisted on in confirmation of the
reasons I have aledg'd, clearly demonstrate that Bodies, which draw the atoms
dispersed in the air, attract themselves such as are of their own nature, with a
greater force and energy, than other heterogeneous and strange atoms; as Wine
does the vinal spirits; The oil of Tartar perfumed in the making, with Roses,
drew the volatile spirits of the Rose; The flesh of Deer, or Venison buried in
crust, attracts the spirits of those Beasts; and so all the other whereof I have
spoken.

The History of the Tarantula, in the kingdom of Naples, is very famous: you
know how the venom of this Animal, ascending from the part that was bitten,
toward the head and heart of the Par^ies; excites in their Imagination an
impetuous desire to hear some melodious airs; and most commonly they are
delighted with differing airs. Therefore, when they hear an air that pleases
them, they begin to dance incessantly; and, thereby fall a sweating in such
abundance, that a great part of the venom evaporates. Besides, the sound of
the music raises a movement, and causes an agitation among the aereal and
vaporous Spirits in the brain, and about the heart; and diffused up and down
through the whole body, proportionably to the nature and cadence of such
Music! as, when Timotheus transported Alexander the great with such a
vehemence, to what Passions he pleased: and, as when one Lute struck makes the
consonant strings of the other to tremble, by the motions and tremblings which
it causes in the air; though they be not touched otherwise at all. We find too,
oftentimes, that Sounds (which are no other thing, than Motions of the air,)
cause the like movement in the Water: as, the harsh sound, caused by rubbing
hard with ones finger, the brim of a (...) full of water, excites a noise, a
turning, and boundings, as if it danced according to the cadence of the Sound:
The harmonious Sounds also of Bells, in those Countries where they use to be
rung to particular tunes, makes the like impressions upon the superficies of
the Rivers that are nigh the Steeple, as in the Air especially in the night
time, when there is no other movement, to stop or choke the other supervenient
one. For, the air being contiguous, or rather continuous, with the water; and
the water being susceptible of movement; there is the like motion caused in the
fluid parts of the water, as began in the air. And, the same contract, which is
betwixt the agitated air, and the water by this means moved to; happens also to
be betwixt the agitated air, and the vap'rous Spirits in those bodies that have
been bitten by the Tarantula; which Spirits, by consequence, are moved by the
agitated air, that is to say, by the Sound; and that the more efficaciously,
the more this agitation or Sound is proportioned to the nature and temperature
of the party hurt. And, this intern agitation of the Spirits and vapors helps
them to discharge the vaporous venom of the Tarantula, which is mixed among all
their humors: as standing puddle Waters and corrupted airs, putrified by long
repose, and the mixture of other noisome substance^, are refined and purified
by motion. Now, winter appro^ching, which destroys these Animals, the persons
are freed from this malady; but, at the return of that season when they use to
be bitten, the mischief returns, and they must dance again as they did, the
year before. The reason is, that the heat of Summer revives these Beasts, so
that their venom becomes as malignant and furious as before; and, that being
heated and evaporating it self, and dispersing in the air the leven of the same
poison, which remains in the bodies of them who have been hurt, that draws it
to it self; whereby such a fermentation is wrought, as infects the other
humors, and thence a kind of steam issuing and mounting to the brain, uses to
produce such strange effects.

It is also well known that, where there are great dogs or Mastifs (as in
England) if any be bitten perchance by them, they commonly use to be killed,
though they be not mad; for fear, least the leven of the canine choler which
remains within the body of the party bitten, might draw to it the malignant
spirits of the same dog, (should he afterward chance to be mad) which might
come to distemper the spirits of the person. And, this is not only practiced in
England, where there are such dangerous dogs; but also in France; according to
the report of Father Cheron, Provincial of the ^armelites in this Gountrey; In
his examen de la Theology mystique, newly imprinted, and which I have lately
read.

I will say nothing of artificial Noses, made of the flesh of other men, to
remedy the deformity of those, who by an extreme excess of cold, have lost
their own: which new Noses putrify, as soon as those persons, out of whose
substance they were taken, come to die; as if that small parcel of flesh,
engrafted on the face, lived by the spirits it drew from it is first root and
source. For, though this be constantly avouch'd by considerable Authors, yet I
desire you to think that I offer you nothing which is not verified by solid
tradition; such, that it were a weakness to doubt of it.

But, it is high time that I come now to my Seventh and last Principle: it is
the last turn of the engine, and will, I hope, batter down quite the gate which
hindered us an entrance to the knowledge of this so marvailous a mystery; and
imprint such a lawful mark upon the doctrine proposed, that 'twill pass for
current. This principle is, that The source of those spirits or little bodies,
which attract them to it self, draws likewise after them that which
accompanies, and whatever sticks and is united to them. This conclusion needs
not much proof, being evident enough of it self. If there be nails, pins, or
ribands, tied to the end of a long chord or chain, and withal a lump, either of
wax, gum, or glue; and I take this chord or chain by one end, and draw it to
me, till the other end come to my hand: it cannot be otherwise but, at the same
time, the nails, the pins, the ribands, the lump, and in fine, all that hangs
at it must come to my hand. I go therefore to relate to you, only, some
experiments that have been made, in consequence of this Principle; which will
most strongly confirm the others produced before.

The great fertility and riches of England consists chiefly in pasturage for
Cattle; whereof we have the fairest in the world, principally of Oxen and Kine.
There Is not the meanest Cottager, but has a Cow to furnish his Family with
milk: it is the principal sustenance of the poorer sort of people, as it is also
in Switzerland; which makes them very careful of the good keeping and health of
their Cows. Now, if it happen that the Milk boil over, and so comes to fall
into the fire, the good woman or maid presently gives over whatever she is
adoing and runs to take the Vessel off the fire: and, at the same time, she
takes a handful of Salt, which uses to be commonly in the corner of the Chimney
to keep it dry* and throws it upon the cinders where the milk was shed. Ask
her, wherefore she does so? and she will tell you, it is to prevent a mischief to
the Cows Udder, which gave this milk: for without this remedy, it would grow
hard and ulcerated; and she would come to piss blood, and so be in danger to
die. Not that 'twould rise to this extremity the first time; but she would grow
ill-disposed, and if this should happen often, the Cow would soon miscarry. It
might seem that there were some superstition or folly in this: but the
infallibility of the effect warrants from the last, and, for the first, many
indeed believe that the malady of the Cow is supernatural, or an effect of
Sorcery, and consequently that the remedy which I have alleged is
superstitious; but it is easy to disabuse any man of this persuasion, by
declaring how the business goes, according to the foundations I have laid. The
milk falling upon the burning coals is converted to vapor, which disperses and
filtreth it self through the circumambient air, where it encounters the Light
and Solar rays which tran^port it further; augmenting and extending still
farther the Sphere of its activity. This vapor of the milk is not alone or
simple; but composed of fiery atoms, which accompany the smoke and vapor of
the milk, mingling and uniting themselves therewith. Now, the sphere of the said
vapor extending it self to the place where the Cow is; her Udder, which is the
source whence the milk proceeded, attracts to it the said vapor, and sucks it
in together with the fiery atoms that accompanied it. The Udder is, part,
glandulous and very tender; and consequently very subject to inflammations:
this fire then heats, inflames, and swells it; and in fine, makes it hard and
ulcerated. The inflamed and ulcerated Udder is near the Bladder; which comes
likewise to be inflamed: making the anastomoses and communication 'twixt the
veins and arteries to open and cast forth blood, and to regorge into the
bladder, whence the Urine empty's it self. But, whence comes it, you will ask,
that the Salt remedies all this? It Is because that is of a nature clean
contrary to the fire; the one being hot and volatile, the other cold and fixed:
insomuch that, where they use to encounter, the Salt, as it were, knocks down
the fire, by precipitating and destroying its action; as may be observed in a
very ordinary accident. The chimneys which are full of Soot use to take fire
very easily; and, the usual remedy for this is to discharge a Musket in the
funnel of the Chimney, which loosneth and brings down with it the fired Soot,
and then the disorder ceases: but, if there be no Musket, or Pistol, or other
Instrument to fetch down the Soot, they use to cast a great quantity of Salt on
the fire below; and that chokes, and hinders the atoms of fire, that otherwise
would incessantly mount up and join with them above, which, by this means
wanting nouriture, consume themselves, and come to nothing. The same thing
befalls the atoms which are ready to accompany the vapor of the milk; the salt
precipitates and kills them on the very place: and if any chance to escape and
save themselves, by the great strugglings they make, and go along with the said
vapor, they are nevertheless accompanied with the atoms and spirit of the Salt
sticking to them; which, like good wrestlers, never leave their hold, till they
have got the better of their Adversary. And you may please to observe by the
by, that that there is not a more excellent balm for a burn, than the spirit
of salt, in a moderate quantity. It Is then apparent, that there cannot be
employed any means more efficacious, to hinder the ill effects of the fire upon
the Udder of the Cow; than to cast upon her milk, that has boiled over upon the
Cinders, a sufficient quantity of Salt. This effect, of securing the Cows Udder
upon the burning of her milk, makes me call to mind, what diverse have told me
they have seen both (...) France and England, viz. when the Physicians examine
the milk of a Nurse, for the Child of a Person of Quality, they use to make
proofs several ways, before they come to judge definitively of the goodness
thereof; as, by the taste, by the smell, by the color and consistence of it:
and sometimes they cause it to be boiled, till it come to an evaporation and
they see it is residence, with other accidents and circumstances which may be
learnt and discerned by this means. But, those, of whose milk this last
experiment has been made, have felt themselves so tormented in their Paps,
while their milk was a boiling* that, having once endured this pain, they would
never consent that their milk should be carried away out of their sight and
presence: though they willingly submited to any other proof than that by fire.

Now, to confirm this experiment of the attraction which the Cows Udder makes
of the fire and vapor of the burnt milk, I am going to recount to you another
of the same nature; whereof I my self have seen the truth more than once, and
whereof any one may easily make trial. Take the excrement o^ a Dog, and throw it
into the fire, more than once; at first you shall find him heated and moved,
but, in a short time, you shall see him, as if he were burnt all over, panting
and stretching out his tongue, as if he had run a long course. Now, this
alteration befalls him, because his entrails, drawing to them the vapor of the
burned excrement, and, with that vapor, the atoms of fire which accompanied
it, grow so changed and inflamed, that the Dog, having always a Fever upon him,
and not being able to take any nourishment, his flancks cling together and he
dies. 'Twere dangerous to divulge this experience among such persons, as are
subject to make use of any thing for doing of miscief: for, the same effect,
would be wrought upon Men's Bodies, if one should try the conclusion upon their
excrements.

There happened a remarkable thing to this purpose, to a neighbor of mine in
England, the last time I was there: He had a very pretty Child, whom because he
would have always in his eye, he kept the Nurse in his House. I saw him often,
for he was a stirring man, and of good address; and I had occasion to use such
a man. One day I found him very sad, and his Wife a weeping: whereof demanding
the reason, they told me that that their little Child was very ill; that he had
a burning Fever, which inflamed him all over, as appeared the redness of his
face; that he strove to go to Stool, but could do little, and that little he
did was covered with blood; and that he refused also to suck: And that which
troubled them most was, that they could not conjecture how this indisposition
come; for his Nurse was very well, her milk was as good as could be wished; and
in all other things there was as much care had of him as could be. I told them,
that the last time I was with them, I observed one particularity, whereof I
thought fit to give them notice; but something or other still diverted me; 'twas
this, that the Child, making a sign that he was desirous to be set on his feet,
let fall his excrements on the ground; and his Nurse presently took the
Fire-shovel and covered them with embers, and then threw all into the fire* The
mother began to make her excuses, that they were not more careful to correct
this ill habit of the child; telling me that, as he advanced in years, he
should be corrected for it. I replied, that 'twas not for this consideration
that I spoke of it: but searching after the reason of her child's distemper, and
consequently to find some remedy. And thereupon, I related to them the like
accident which had happened, two or three three years before, to a child of one
of the most illustrious Magistrates of the Parliament of Paris; who was bred up
in the House of a Doctor of Physic of great reputation in the same Town: I
told them also what I have now related to you, touching the excrements of Dogs.
And I made reflections to them upon a thing they had often heard, and which is
often practiced in our Country; viz. that, In the Villages, which are always
dirty in the winter, if there happens to be a Farmer any thing more neat than
others, and that keeps the approaches to his House cleaner than his neighbors
do, the Boys use to come thither, in the night time or when it begins to be
dark, to discharge their bellies there: because, in such Villages there is not
much commodity of easments; besides that in such clean places the knaves are
out of danger to sink into the dirt, which otherwise might rise up higher than
their shoes. The good houswives in the morning, when they open their doors,
and find such an ill-favored smell, use to be transported with choler: But
they, who are acquainted with this trick, go presently and make red hot a Spit,
or Fireshovel, and thrust it so into the excrements, and when it is quenched,
they heat it again and again to the same purpose. Mean while the Boy, that had
played the sloven, feels a kind of pain and colic in his bowels, with an
inflammation in his fundament and a continual desire to go to Stool: and he is
hardly quit of it, till he suffer a kind of Fever all that day; which makes
him return thither no more. And these women, to be freed from such affronts,
pass among the Ignorant for Sorceresses, and to have made a compact with the
Devil; since they torment people in that fashion, without seeing or touching
them. This Gentleman did not disallow those things I have already told you; but
was confirmed farther when I wished him to look farther into the fundament of
his child, for without doubt he should find it red and inflamed, and perhaps
full of pimples, and excoriated. Not long after, this poor chil^ grew ill, and
with much pain and pitiful cries, voided some small matter: which in lieu of
casting into the fire or covering it with embers, I caused to be put into a
basin of cold water and set in a cool place. This was continued to be done,
every time the child gave occasion; and he began to amend the very same hour,
and, within four or five days became perfectly well recovered. But, least I
trespass too much upon your patience, I Will hold you no longer, but with one
experiment more, very familiar in our Country: and then I will sum up all
that has been said; to make you see the force and import of this whole
D^scourse.

We have in England, as I touched before, excellent Pasturage for the feeding
and fatting of Ca^tle; so abundant, th^^, it falls out often, the Oxen come to
acquire such excess of ^at that it extends it self in a great quantity to their
legs and feet and even hoofs; which many times causes impostumes in the of
their feet that comes to swel and get a core full of putrified matter, so that
the Beast is not able to go. The Owners observing that, though the Beef be
never the worse for the Shambles, yet they are damnified thereby; because, not
being able to bring them to London, (where the grand market is for fat Beefs
through all England, as Paris is for Auuergne, Normandy, and other provinces of
France,) they are constrained to kill them up on the place, where their flesh
is not worth half the price they might have got in London: the Owners, I say,
have recourse to this remedy viz. Observing where the Ox, Cow, or Heifer, fix
upon the Ground the sick foot, at first rising up in the morning; that very
turf with the print of the foot on it, they cut up, and hang upon a tree or
hedge lying open to the North wind: And, that wind blowing upon the turf, the
Beast comes to be cured, within three or four days* very perfectly, but if one
should p^t that turf toward the South or South west wind the foot would grow
worse. These circumstances will not seem superstitions to you when you shall
have considered, how, that, by the repose of the night, the corrupt matter or
core uses to gather, in a great quantity under the foot of the Beast; which
being set on the ground in the morning presses forth the impostume: the matter
whereof sticks to the place. Now, this turf of Earth being exposed in some
proper place, to receive the dry cold blasts of the Northern winds; those
blasts intermingle with the said corrupt impostumated matter: which spreading
its Spirits about through all the air, the ulcerated foot of the Animal, (being
their sourse) draws them to it, and with them the cold dry atoms which cure it;
the malady requiring no other help than to be well dried, and refreshed. But, if
one should expose this turf to a moist hottish wind, it weuld produce contrary
effects.

Behold, my Lords, all my wheels formed; I confess they are ill filed and
polished, but let us try whether, being put together and mounted, they will make
the engine go: which, if they do, and fairly draw in the Conclusion, you will, I
presume, have the goodness to pardon the gr^ssness of my language; and, passing
by the words, content your selves with the naked truth of the things. Let us
therefore apply what has been said, to that which is practiced, when a hurt
person is cured. Let us consider Mr^ Ho^el wounded in the hand, and a great
inflammation following upon his hurt; his Garter is taken, covered with the
blood that issued from the wound, and is steeped in a basin of water where
V^triol was dissolved, one keeps the Basin in a closet moderately warmed by the
Sun all day, and at night in the chimney corner; so that the blood upon the
Garter be always in a good natural temperament, neither colder nor hotter than
the degree required in a healthful body: What now must result, (according to
the doctrine that we endeavor to establish,) from all this? In the first
place, the Sun and Light will attract, a great extent and distance off, the
spirits of the blood upon the Garter: and the moderate heat of the chimney,
acting gently upon the composition, (which comes to the same thing, as if one
should carry it dry in his pocket, to make it feel the temperate heat of the
Body,) will push out and thrust forward still the said atoms, and make them
march of themselves a good way in the air round about, to help thereby the
attraction of the Sun and Light.

Secondly, the Spirit of Vitriol, being incorporated with the blood cannot
choose but make the same voyage together with the atoms of the blood. Thirdly,
the wounded hand expires and exhales, in the mean time, continually abundance
of hot fiery Spirits, which stream as a river out of the inflamed hurt: nor can
this be, but the wound must, consequently, draw to it the air which is next it.
Fourthly, this air must draw to it the other air next it, and that the next to
it also; and so there will be a kind of current of air drawn round about the
wound. Fifthly, with this air will come to incorporate at last the atoms and
Spirits of the Blood and Vitriol, which were d^ffused a good way off in the
air, by the attractions of the Light and the Sun: Besides, it may well be,
that, from the beginning, the orb and sphere of these atoms and Spirits
extended it self to so great a distance; without having need of the attractions
of the air, or light to make them come thither. Sixthly, the atoms of blood,
finding the proper source and original root whence they issued, will stay
there, re-entering into their natural beds and prim^tive receptacles: whereas
the other air, being but a passenger, will evaporate away as soon as it comes;
as, when it is carried away through the funnel of the chimney, as soon as it is
drawn into the chamber by the door. Seventhly, the atoms of the blood being
inseparable from the Spirits of the Vitriol, both the one and the other will
jointly be imbibed together within all the corners, fibers, and orifices of the
Veins which lie open about the wound; whence it must of necessity be refresh^,
and in fine imperceptibly cured.

Now to know in virtue of what such an effect and cure is so happily performed,
we must examine the nature of Vitriol: which is composed of two parts; the one
fixed, the other volatile. The fixed, which is the Salt, is sharp and biting,
and cauftique in some degree. The volatile is smooth, soft, balsamical, and
astringent; and it is for that reason that Vitriol is made use of, as a
sovereign remedy for the inflammations of the eyes, when they are corroded and
parched by some sharp and burning humor or defluction; as also in injections,
where excoriations require them, and in the best plasters to stanch the blood
and incarnate hurts. But, they who well know how to draw the sweet oil of
Vitriol, which is the pure volatile part thereof, know also that in the whole
closet of Nature, there is no balm like this oil: For, it heals in a very short
time, all kind of hurts which are not mortal, it cures and consolidates the
broken veins of the breast; even to the Ulcers in the lungs, which is an
incurable malady without this balm. Now, it is the volatile part of the Vitriol,
which is transported by the Sun (the great Distiller of Nature) and which by
that means dilates it self in the air: and that the wound or part which
received the hurt, draws and incorporates with the blood and its humors and
spirits. Which being true, we cannot expect a less effect of the volatile
Vitriol, but that it should shut the veins, stanch the blood, and so, in a
short time heal the wound.

The method and primitive manner how to make use of this Sympathetical remedy
was, To take only some Vitriol, and that of the common sort, as it came from
the Druggists, without any preparation or addition at all; and to make it
dissolve in fountain (or rather in rainwater,) to such a proportion, that,
putting therein a knife or some polished iron, it should come out changed into
the color of copper: and, into this water, they used to put a clowt or rag
embrued with the blood of the party hurt; if the rag were dry: But, if the rag
was yet fresh, and moist with the reaking blood, there was no need but to
sprinkle it with the small powder of the same Vitriol; so that the powder might
incorporate it self with, and imbibe the blood remaining yet humid. In both
cases the rag was to be kept in a temperate heat or place; viz. the powder in
ones pocket, and the water (which admits not of this commodity) within a
chamber where the heat should be temperate, and, every time that one should put
new water of Vitriol or fresh powder to new cloth or other bloodied stuff, the
patient would feel new ease; as if the wound had been then dressed with some
sovereign medicament. And for this reason they used to reiterate this manner of
dressing both Evening and Morning.

But now, the most part of those who serve themselves with the Powder of
Sympathy endeavor to have Vitriol of Rome, or of Cyprus; which they calcine at
the rays of the Sun: And besides, some use to add the Gum of Tragagantha; it
being easy to add to things already invented.

For mine own part, I have seen as great and admirable effects of simple
Vitriol, of eighteen pence the pound; as of that Powder which is used to be
prepared now at a greater price: yet I blame not the present practice; on the
contrary, I commend it, for, it is founded upon reason. For

First, it seems that the purest and best sort of Vitriol operates the best.

Secondly, it seems also, that the moderate calcining thereof at the rays of the
Sun takes away the superfluous humidity of the Vitriol; and operates on no part
thereof, but that which is good: as if one should boil broth so clear that it
would come to be gelly, which certainly would render it more nourishing.

Thirdly, it seems, that the exposing of the Vitriol to the Sun, to receive
calcination, renders its spirits more fitly disposed to be transported through
the air by the Sun, when need requires. For, it cannot be doubted but some pa^^
of the ethereal fire or Solar rays incorporates with the Vitriol; (as is
plainly discovered in calcining Antimony by a Burning-glass; for it much
augments the weight of it, almost half in half:) both are near-a-kin: those
therefore, easily obeying the Motion of their brother-beams, must needs make
the grosser matter, they are united with less refractory.

Fourthly, these Solar rays, being embodied with the Vitriol are in a posture
to communicate to it a more excellent virtue, than it has of it self; as we
find that Antimony, calcined in the Sun becomes (of rank poison that it was
before) a most sovereign and balsamical medicament, and a most excellent
Corroborative of Nature.

Fifthly, the Gum of Tragagantha, having a glutinous faculty, and being, in
other respects very innocent, may contribute something toward the consolidation
of the wound.

My Lords, I could add many most important considerations touching the Form and
essence of Vitriol; whereof the substance is so noble, and the origin is so
admirable, that one may avouch it, with good reason, one of the most excellent
bodies which Nature has produced.

The Chemists assure us that it is no other than, a corporification of the
Universal Spirit* which animates and perfects all that has existence in this
sublunary World: which it draws in that abundance to it, that I my self have,
in a short time, by exposing some only to the open air, made an attraction of a
celestial Vitriol ten times more in weight, of a marvailous pureness and
virtue; a privilege given to none but It, and pure virgin Saltpeter.

But to anatomise, as we ought, the nature of this transcendent Individual,
(which nevertheless in some respect may be said to be Universal, and
fundamental to all bodies,) would require a Discourse, far more ample, than I
have yet made: And I have already entertained you so long, that it would be a
very great indiscretion to entrench further upon your goodness, who have
hitherto listened to me with so much attention and patience; if I should go
about to enter into any new matter, and embark my self for a further voyage.
Wherefore remiting several things to some other time, when you shall please to
command me, and returning to the general consideration of this Sympathetical
cure I will put a Period to this Discourse: after I shall have said two or
three words, which will not be of small importance, for the confirmation of all
that has been alleged by me hitherto.

I have deduced to you the admirable causes of the operations, and strange
effects of the Powder of Sympathy, from their first root. These fundamental
causes are so linked one within the other, that it seems there can be no
default, stop, or interruption, in their proceedings. But we shall be the
better fortified in the belief of their virtue and efficacy, and how they come
to produce the effects of so many rare Cures, if we consider that when any
juggling is practiced in some one of these causes, or in all of them together,
we may perceive immediately an effect altogether differing from the former. If
I had not formerly seen a Watch or Clock, I should be justly surprised and
remain astonished, to see the hand or needle so regularly mark the journal
hours and motion of the Sun, upon the flat of a Quadrant; and that it should
turn and make its round every four and twenty hours; there being nothing seen
that should push on the said needle. But, if I look on the other side, I see
wheels, ressorts, and counterpoises in perpetual movement; which having well
considered, I presently suspect, that those Wheels are the cause of the
movement and turnings of the said Needle; though I cannot presently discern or
know how they effect it, because of the plate that lies interposed betwixt
them. Thereupon, I reason thus with my ^elf, Every effect whatever must of
necessity have some cause; therefore the body moved there, must necessarily
receive its movement from some other body contiguous to it: Now, I see no other
body, to make the needle of the quadrant move and turn, but the said wheels;
Therefore, I must of force be persuaded to attribute the movement to them. But,
afterward, when I (...) have stopped the motion of those wheels and taken away
the Counterpoise, and observed that suddenly the needle ceases to move; and
that, applying again the Counterpoise, and giving liberty for the wheels to
turn, the needle re^urns to her ordinary course, and that I make one wheel go
faster, by putting my finger to it, or by adding more weight to the
counterpoise, the needle hastens and advances its motions proportion^bly: then
I grow to be convinced and entirely satisfied; and so absolutely conclude that
these Wheels and Counterpoises are the true cause of the motion of the Needle.

In the same manner, if, interrupting the action of any of those causes, which
I have established for the true foundation of the Sympathetical Powders virtue,
I alter, retard or hinder the Cure of the Wound: I may boldly conclude, that
they are the legitimate and genuine true causes of the Cure; and that we need
not amuse our selves to search after any other.

Let us then examine the matter by this rule. I have affirmed that, the Light
transporting the atoms of the Vitriol and Blood, and dilating them to a great
extent in the air: the wound or place hurt attracts them, and thereby is
immediately refresht and eased; and consequently comes to be healed; by the
Spirits of the Vitriol, which is of a balsamical virtue. But, if you put the
Basin or Powder with the cloth-imbrued with blood into a Cup-boord or a corner
of some cold room, or into a Cellar, where the Light or fresh Air never comes
(whence the place is corrupted and full of ill smell^,) in that case the wound
can receive no amendment, nor any good effect from the said Powder. And, it
will fall out in the same manner, if, having put the basin or Powder in some
By-corner, you cover them with some thick cloth, stuffing and spongie, which
may imbibe the atoms coming forth, and retain the light and rays that ener
there, so that they are thereby stopped and quite lost. Moreover Morover, if you
suffer the water of Vitriol to congeal into ice; or the cloth dip't in it; the
party hurt shall be sensible, at the beginning, of a very great cold in his
wound: but when it is iced all over, he shall feel neither heat nor cold, in
regard that congealed cold constipates the pores of the water, so that it
ceases to transpire and send forth Spirits. If one wash the bloody Cloth in
Vinegar or Lie, (which, by their penetrating acrimony, transport all the
spirits of the blood), before the Vitriol be applied; it will produce no
effect. Yet, if the Cloth be washed but with pure simple water, it will
nevertheless do something; for, that water carries not away so much; but, the
effect will not be so great, as if the Cloth had not been washed at all; for
then it would remain full of the spirits of the blood. The same cure is
performed, by applying the remedy to the Blade of a Sword which has wounded a
body; so the Sword be not too much heated by the fire: for that will make all
the Spirits of the blood to evaporate; and consequently the Sword will
contribute but little to the cure. Now, the reason why the Sword may be dressed
in order to the cure, is, because the subtle spirits of blood penetrate the
substance of the blade, as far as it went into the body of the wounded party;
and, there keep their residence, unless the fire, as I said before, chase them
away. For experiment whereof, hold the Blade over a chasing dish of moderate
fire, and you shall discern, on the side opposite to the fire, a little
humidity; which resembles the spots that ones breath makes upon
looking-glasses; or upon the burnished blade of a sword. If you look upon it
through a magnifyingglass, you shall find that this soft dew of the Spirits
consists in l^ttle bubles, or blown bladders: and, when once they are entirely
evaporated, you shall discern no more upon the weapon; unless it were thrust a
new into the body of a (...) nor, from the beginning shall you discover any such
thing, but precisely upon the part of the blade, which had entered the wound.

This subtle penetration of the Spirits into hard steel, may confirm the
belief of such Spirits piercing through the skin of a woman big with child: as
I remind, to have proposed to you in my sixth Principle.

To confirm all these particulars, I could add, to those I have already
recounted many notable examples more; but, I fear I have already too much
exercised your patience; I will therefore suspend any mention of them at this
time; but I offer to entertain any of this Honorable Assembly therewith, when
they shall have the curiosity.

I conclude then, my Lords, with representing to you that all this mystery is
carried and guided throughout, by true natural ways and circumstances;
although, by the agency and resorts of very subtle spirits.

I am persuaded my Discourse has convincingly showed you, that, in this
Sympathetical cure, there is no need to admit of an action distant from the
Patient: I have traced to you a real Communication 'twixt the one and the
other; viz. of a Balsamical substance, which corporally mingles with the wound.

Now, it is a poor kind of pusillanimity and faint-heartedness, or rather a
gross weakness of the Understanding, to pretend any effects of charm or magic
herin; or to confine all the actions of Nature to the grossness of our Senses,
when we have not sufficiently considered nor examined the true causes and
principles whereon it is fitting we should ground our judgment: we need not have
recourse to a Demon or Angel in such difficulties, Nec Deus intersit, nisi
dignus vindice nodus
Inciderit. --


(...)

