A DIALOGUE BETWEEN TWO JESUITS, Father ANTONY and Father IGNATIUS, AT
AMSTERDAM, The one coming from ENGLAND, and the other going Thither.
Ig. Who's here Father Antony? I am very glad to see you, but why here at
Amsterdam, and why in this Dress? I think I never saw you since the Jubilee at
Rome before.


An. Father Ignatius, I am glad to see both you and my self here, in this, or
any other Dress that a Jesuit may wear, (and you know those are a good many)
for (to tell you true) it is not long since I thought I should even have
followed the Fate of my lost Brethren in England, and have left the disposition
of Sword and Perriwig to Signior Scaccia-Preti, Squire Finisher, that dextrous
Trusser, and Untrusser of our Order.


Ig. Why then you came from England it seems, and I am just going thither, and
since we are so happily met, if you please, we'll change appearances, I Will put
on your Cavaliers, and you shall put on my Religious Habit, and that will save
us both Money and trouble.


An. With all my heart: Time about is fair Play, My own good Fortune attend
you, but I Will assure you you will meet with difficulties, though here and there
you will find a Friend too.


Ig. Ay now you talk of Friends, Pray recommend me to some body in England, (if
you know any body) that I may trust, and take the pains to give me a brief
account, in what condition the cause is there.


An. That I shall do with all my heart Father, and in short since the Devil put
that trick of the Discovery of the Plot upon us, it has been our main business
there, to amuse the Kingdom with heats and Divisions among themselves, that we
might be taken the less notice of; and indeed we have succeeded to a Miracle
in it, for we have filled every Tap-house and Coffeehouse so full of Wrangling
and Dispute, that the Heretics have their hands full of one another. At one
Club they Cry, an Owen, an Owen! Hark to Alsop, Hark to Alsop! And by and by
Baxter has it, Baxter has it. At another House they Cry nothing but, O brave
Dr. Stillingfleet! God a mercy Dr. Stillingfleet! All the World can never
rejoyn to this. This is unanswerable.

And within a matter of Ten days after, you shall find the poor Doctor so
All-to-be-Printed, bespattered and daubed, and with such unreasonable merciless
Weapons, and applied so rudely, that 'twould even grieve any honest man's heart
alive to see it. Presently he (who you know has always something to say for
himself) recovers himself, gots upon his Feet, sets the best Leg forward, and
reconfutes the Enemy, and then the Church (as they call it) Cries God Bless
thee my Son; Now thou have done their business, there is an end of the Quarrel,
and now sit thee down in Peace on Gods name.

But by their fair leave we have not done with them so, for as long as there is
a Protestant Diffenter (Fairchieve the Term) in England, that can Write his
Name, and Pen and Ink to be had either for Love or Money, we'll find a way to
set him to work, or we'll write for him our selves.

In a word both sides are so very warm and vigorous, that the best Gamester in
the Kingdom knows not which to lay his Money on.


Ig. Why I thought there had been no such equality in the case, because you
know their Church (forsooth) is established by Law, which does on the contrary
severely animadvert against all other Nonconforming Sects whatsoever. And I
always thought there was some disproportion in their knowledge, and learning
besides.


An. All this is very true Father, but you must know that in England at this
day we have found the secret to balance Sense with Noise, and Face, and
Action, and as the case now stands its hard to know who has the better end of
the Staff.

The Protestant Dissenters are daintily grown up on my word, and I hope will
hold the Churchmen tack. Nay, I Will assure you that in the time of the late
Parliament, there was an honest poor Fellow that had like to have been pulled
in pieces only for being overheard to name the word Fanatic.


Ig. But what if they should begin to falter a little, (as you know they have
always the worst of it, except it be at downright knocks) what methods should
we use to take their Parts? What way should we find to insinuate our selves
amongst them? Do you think they would accept of our help though we should offer
it?


An. Never trouble your self about that, for there is a Person in England of a
very singular Character and Employment, that has Sworn to such a Correspondence
between us and the Field Conventiclers in Scotland; and why should we despair
of the same practice in England.


Ig. Methinks I should not much care for their conversation, except it were in
some very unsuspected, and very advantageous address; but for a lift with my
Pen, I should be always at their Service, for I hear them say, the Press is as
open as the Stews, that the Printers (a many of them) have no more integrity or
Modesty, than Bawds and Whores, and in one word that many of the Authors have
no more Wit than Cullies, and no more Conscience or honesty than Mountebanks.


An. Soft and fair good Father Ignatius, this is no just conjuncture for
downright Satyr. Soft Phrase, and Oily words are the mode at present, always
provided they be ambiguous, and will admit of one evil meaning at least, for
such enter easily, and spread insensibly, they have a strange influence upon
the People, and they (you know) have the most hands.


Ig. But not to interrupt you Father Antony, I was going to ask you, whether we
might not now and then put a Miracle upon them, is that trick quite left off or
not? Will they believe nothing that is new and extraordinary?


An. Hang 'em, the men of sense believe nothing but what is reasonable and
manlike, but the Rabble they will believe what you will. And so the influence,
and Prediction of the Comet, the Maid of Hatfield, the death of the Lions in
the Tower, and the like have been made use of by some of our Friends amongst
the common sort of People, with admirable success.


Ig. I am well enough satisfied that such things have a wonderful prevalence
among the Vulgar, and though every man that has but an Egg-shell full of Brain
explode them at first sight, yet for all that, I hear they do their work with
them among the People, who believe them as certainly as they do the Penteteuch.
These are Piae Frauds, honest Cheats, that bring men to Heaven through a
Backdoor, and draw them into the right way by unrighteous means. But I must
not do the Casuists before you.

And now Pray tell me where I might find a right well-meaning Printer, for you
know I am a little inclined to thinking, and it may be I may sometimes take the
humor, (as occasion offers) to say something to more People than I am
acquainted with, and then you know I shall want a meet help.


An. Every body can tell you that, there is one Harris, but especially there is
one Frank Smith I Would recommend to you, the fittest Fellow alive for your
business. On my Conscience, that Fellow has deserved better of the Catholic
cause, then either Coleman, or Stafford. I need not tell you where he lives,
there is scarce a man of Twenty year old in London, but will inform you either
for good, or ill will.

It was but the other day he gave their Mighty Stillingfleet such a Joak, that he
made all the Town snear again, and by the round World, I think 'twas one of the
best Arguments he could have made use of.


Ig. Pray Father what was that? For I hate the very name of that Goliath
Stillingfleet, he has made such an appearance.


An. Why I Will tell you what it was, he told the World in Print, that if they
wanted Arguments against the Church of Rome, they might have them Dog-cheap at
such a place, of Dr. Stillingfleet's Writings, for there was I know not how
many Coppies lay upon the Printers hands.


Ig. There he nicked him indeed, and to speak the truth, that same
Stillingfleet has such a kind of a head, that without Jears and Affronts can
pass for Reason, we shall never convince him. However we have to thank Smith
for his good will. I have seen a many of Stillingfleet's Writings.


An. And so have I too more than ever I had a mind to have seen, and if we had
him I know where, I would not be in his Clothes for more than I Will tell you.
And now we talk of Clothes, Pray let us step into the long Cellar here and make
the change we talk of, for I am sick of the Cavalier, I am weary both of the
burden and danger of wearing a Sword, and so will you be too, if any of the
Kings Evidences should chance to know you.


Ig. Well happy man catch a Mackerel, come what will come, I am resolved, and
when I have once tied my self to that cold Iron, I shall think my self bound
not only in Religion, but in honor, to live and dye an unalterable Median
Persian Roman Catholic.


FINIS.

