A DIALOGUE Between Two Oxford Scholars.

A DIALOGUE Between Two Oxford Scholars.
A. WEll! I see thou art resolved to leave us. I will not say, Go and be
Hanged; but go and turn Countrey-Parson.


B. That Is almost as bad, as the World goes now: But thanks to my Stars, I know
a better Trick then that.


A. It may be thou art fallen out with all Mankind, and intendest to turn
Quack, or as they call it in the Country, Doctor.


B. No such matter, the French can kill Men fast enough; and for the Women,
thou know my kindness --


A. But some of them have Lived too long; and there are others so miserable
that even Compassion will incline thee to help them out of the World. I can
assure thee it is a profitable Calling, for whether thou do Kill or Cure, thy
Fees will be put into thy Hand, and Ladies Bed-Chambers, thou know, are
Comfortable places.


B. Yes, when they are found. But prithee speak no more of it, for I am
resolved against it.


A. What then, art Thou resolved for the Law; methinks Thou should have too
much University Learning, and too much Wit for that Profession.


B. And too much Honesty -- But I Will spare thee the pains of guessing, and tell
thee in short what my Condition is, and what I design. My Portion is all spent
save Fifty pound; and with that I am resolved for London, or some other Wealthy
place, where Conventicles abound; and as a Man of a Tender Conscience, and
infinitely dissatisfied with several things in the Church of England, I will
endeavor by some means or other to force my self into an Acquaintance with
some of their leading Men, and more especially with some of the most Zealous
and Powerful Women among them: And this point once gained, I doubt not, but
before my stock is half spent, I shall receive a Call to be Pastor of, or
Holderforth in some Congregation or other -- why do smile.


A. At my Friend's design. And I cannot but admire how it came into thy Head.
Thy Ability to manage such a Design, I know very well, but how thou will
dispense with the Knavery of it I am yet to learn.


B. That Is a small matter. As the World goes, one must practice a little
Knavery, or resolve to leave the World. Do not know that Religious Cheats are
Licensed by a Law? And shall I live and dye without taking advantage of it?
Believe me Friend, Nature has fitted me pretty well to be one of the Godly
Mountebanks, and a little Art, together with few Months Conversation with that
sort of People, will supply all Natures Defects. Cannot I put on, when I
please, a grave and serious Countenance; and with Head depending on one
Shoulder a little more than on the other, sigh for the Iniquities of the Times,
and the Corruptions of the Church? Cannot I wipe mine Eyes with the fair
Pocket-Cloath, as if I wept for all your Abominations? Cannot I groan in Spirit
as if ready to burst with Grief and Compassion? And cannot I likewise when Time
serves, and Company is disposed to be kindly affected with it, smile and fleer
as takingly? And what hurt is there in this? Sure I may use my own fee as I
please, Et si populus vult decipi decipiatur.


A. But where is your Conscience all this while?


B. Why, It Is to be pretended for all this, and several things more -- And the
pretense of Conscience is a good Legal Warrant against all Opposers. In short,
Sir, I must live, and my Conscience tells me so, and you must help me to live,
it is my own, and neither you nor any other Mortal has any thing to do with my
Conscience.


A. A pure Rogue! but what if my Conscience force me to discover thy Roguery,
when thou art too far engaged in it to make a fair Retreat?


B. Behold the Blinders of Mankind, the folly of Humane Learning. How much
better is one Dram of Grace then all the vain Philosophy of the World? Let me
tell thee my Friend, and I do it from the very bottom of my Bowels, That it is
a very dangerous thing to suffer Conscience to Command thee: Thou had better
Command it -- verily Beloved it is better to Command it: It Is good, it is good I
say to bring it under the Yoke, Believe -- Alas, that you will be so hard of
belief! You break my Heart, indeed you do, by your Impersuadablems --


A. Go, Go thou Canting Rascal to the Conventicle, and there be a Reproach to
thy Mother and to all Old Acquaintance.


B. And go thou to some pitiful Country Vicaridge; or if thy Stars favor thee,
get the biggest Parsonage in thy Country, and I Will wager my Head against thee,
I Will get more Money in one Year in a small Congregation of the Saints, than thou will do in three --


A. But a little gotten in an Honest way and with an upright Heart, will be
sweeter then all thy Gains.


B. I intend not to dispute with thee about Honesty. It was much commended and
but little practiced, when the World was better than it is now. But I Will
undertake to convince thee, that the Conventicling way is the only Thriving
way, and the best way for me to take at this Time.


A. Do so then, I Will hear thee with a great deal of Patience, though I know
there is nothing but Hyprocrisy at the Bottom --


B. First then, if I have a desire to take Orders, in your way, I must to a
Bishop; and before the Good Man with two or three of his Presbyters will lay
Hands upon me, I must under go an Examination in several points of Divinity, as
they please. This must needs go much against me, because I am well aware that I
am but a small Divine.


A. Very Right.


B. Then supposing I am so fortunate as to pass Muster, I cannot be ordained
before I have Subscribed and taken some Oaths. Neither of which will pass very
well, if I am ever so little Popishly inclined, or Socinianiv'd, or have
entertained any odd Crotchets in an any point of Religion, (and it is but seldom
that great Wits are without some) or if I know my self to be of a proud and
pragmatical Temper, not very apt to own any Superiors, and Consequently not
very able to withstand the Temptations I am like to meet withal to Faction,
Sedition, and Rebellion.


A. Right still.


B. But supposing me to swallow all this, and to be Ordained. Before I go to
Exercise my Office, the Bishops Secretary or Register will present me with some
Parchments and Wax, and these I must take for my Credentals; for which I must
present him with some Crowns, which for a poor Man that knows the worth of Money
will go like so many Ounces of his best Blood. Is not this, think you, a very
fine and hopeful Beginning? And can a Man hope to thrive that takes not better
steps at first setting out? But now all this I clearly escape in my designed
way. I have no need of any outward Call, one from within will do my Business;
and a pack of Phrases, without much Divinity, together with a Demure look, and
some other Remarkable signs of Grace, either in my Face, or in the fashion of
my Clothes, will do as much as all the Parchment and Wax in the World. By
Virtue of which I can hold forth the Gospel boldly, and pray out a Nonsensical
Sermon without fear of any Spiritual Court; and Scratch and Tickle the Ears,
the Itching Ears of my Godly Hearers, 'til they cry out, O precious Man! How
sweet and gracious are his Lips! O happy people upon whom the Honey of the
Gospel does drop so sweetly, so abundantly! O that we were sensible of our
Happiness! O that we had but enlarged Mouths to receive it! -- And besides
this, I am at Liberty (O precious Liberty, who would part with it for a
Kingdom!) to find fault with any thing my Superiors do. I can compare your
Bishops to Baal's Priests, and your Civil Governors to those that lick up the
Spittle of the Whore of Babylon: I can bewail their Blindness, with all the
signs of Grief and Compassion; and with all the Spite I am capable of
entertaining, envy against their Malice to the Truth -- And the more I spend my
self this way, the more enlarged toward me will the Hearts of my good people
be, and the more open their Purses, --


A. A subtle Rogue.


B. But then, in the second place, in your way, when I have done what I have
said before, I cannot exercise the Office, which cost me so dear, to any
purpose of Profit, without some Curacy, Vicaridge, or Parsonage; and after
either of these I may Hunt till my Pocket is as Empty as 'twas when it came
from the Tailor. I may possibly meet in a short time with some rich
Impropriator, who receives two or three hundred pounds a year in Tyths, who may
out of his great Christian Charity, or generous Liberality vouchsafe to promise
me Ten pound a year beside a Sunday Pudding, for which I must wear out mine
Eyes and Lungs, and humor the Imperious Gentleman as much as his Groom or
Butler. Or the like Fortune may befall me under a Goodly Pluralist, who will
not favor me much more, though he may Condescend to call me Brother. But to
put the best Case in short, we will suppose a Vicaridge or Personage to become
Vacant, of an hundred pound value in common Estimation; And the poor painful
Priest standing fair in the opinion of the Neighborhood is recommended to it;
It is ten to one but there is an Abigail in the Patron's House, that must be
Married, or there is a Steward that has looked after his Worships business at
very small wages for several years, and He must be gratified: or (as it often
happens) the Gentleman's Hounds and Whores have weakn'd his Estate, and He must
be dealt withal in way of Bargain and Sale; or if he be in a better Condition,
it may be he has a fancy to some of the Churches Revenue, and thinks no Money so
sweet as that which comes from the Clergy. And which of these soever it is,
poor Pil-Garlick is but in sorry Circumstances. If there be nothing but
Matrimony in the case, it is two to one he is undone. If there be not any thing
of that, but all must be done by hard Silver or Gold, or something Equivalent,
as a Lease of Tyths, or the like -- I am certainly Ruined, the Oath of Simony
will be a continual Scourge to me, and I may wear away my unhappy life before I
shall recover the money I have paid or engaged to pay --


A. This is not to be denied.


B. But suppose my good Fortune brings me a Presentation to a Benefice in the
most Honorable way; I must first with my Presentation to the Bishop; and if my
Patrons Title and my own Testimonials be accepted of, I must again subscribe
and swear. And from him I am sent to an Archdeacon or Rural Dean for Induction
with wax and Parchment the value of Five or Six pounds; and this charge with
that of Journeying will render the little Clergyman as poor as Job. And when
he comes to the long-wish'd for place, it is Five to One, he finds an old rotten
House ready to fall upon his Head, and the little ground about it laid wast
(for vacancys are generally beneficial to poor knaves) And a poor Disconsolate
Widow, with several children about her, ready to dye at the sight of Him, and
all her Relations and friends come flocking about Him, to desire him to
compassionate her condition and to allow her One years profit at least. -- This
is the joy that poor Booby must expect to meet with, when he knows very well
that he has need of peoples charity Himself.


A. This may be too true.


B. But then, when I have got over all these Rubs, and begin to show my self in
my Parish, and expect that something of Money should come in unto me to defray
my former charges; The Churchwardens tell me, that they have a Sequestration
upon my Living, and the Profits are at their Disposal till I have taken it off;
and withal, that a Considerable sum of Money has been disburs'd by them, for the
service of the Cure during the vacancy, which must be repaid them. Which sad
news puts me upon another Journey and Costs me a Pound or a Mark at leact. And
when this is done I find my Living is in the Kings Books, and the First Fruits
must be Compounded for, and paid, which will make me much worse then nothing
(as they say) and I must live upon the little Credit I have gotten by my Title
to the Benesice. -- But now, my friend, in my intended way, there is nothing of
all this. If a Church will not call me, I can call a Church, and without a penny
charge receive the profits thereof, being King, Bishop, Archdeacon and every
thing my self. I shall be wholly on the gaining side, and not one person the
better for my preferment.


A. Very good.


B. Let me then suppose my self to be settled in my Vicaridge or Parsnage; I
shall quickly feel my goings out, Besides Tenths to be yearly paid to the King,
and the charges of Visitations by way of Procurations, Synodals and I know not
what more; The charge of attending upon my superiors when they are pleased to
Command me; The charge of entertaining officers, and I know not how many sorts
of Men coming to me upon public Business; I shall find a charge to lie heavy
upon me from my own Parish: Hospitality must be kept, and none of my
parishoners must go from me with dry Lips, or empty Bellies. I must contribute
equally with all of them to the maintenance of the Militia, the Poor and I know
not what besides; And upon some occation or other, some of them will be
spunging on me every day. -- What this may cost me every Year let my friend
compute if he pleases. I proceed to another charge, which poor Country Parsons
do at this Time find more heavy then all. No Act of Parliament passes for Money
for the King but the Clergy are included in it. And tho they have no
Representatives, or votes by Representatives in Parliment, (except you will say
a Knight or two in a County are entrusted to Vote for them) and have not the
least power, either as Commissioners or Assessors in Leving of Taxes, which
puts them in a worse condition then the meanest Freeholder that can expend
Forty shillings a year, and lays them open to the Malice and Spite of every
Atheistical or Factious knave in the Neighborhood; they must pay equally with
their Neighbors, whose Estates have no such Burdens upon them, and are
Estates of Inheritance: Equally did I say? I may say double to what they pay;
for I am sure upon good and certain grounds, that considering the charges they
are at in the ways before mentioned, and that the far greatest part of what
they can claim as due to them by Law, must come from a Multitude of people,
some of whom are poor and cannot pay, and others Knavish and will not pay,
except they be compelled by Law, which as the Case stands with the Clergy is a
Remedy worse then the Disease; that the Country man that has but Forty pounds
a year is in a far better condition than the parson that has Fourscore, tho he
has that Forty pound a year but for his Life, as the Parson has his Fourscore.


A. I can readily believe all this; for it is but three days since I heard an
Honest Country parson say, That his Charge was so great upon the Accounts
mentioned, that he did not know how to maintain himself and his family in any
tolerable sort, tho his Living was commonly reputed worth Sixscore pound a
year. And he told me and others very seriously, That by the late Assesments
which were made and delivered into the Commissioners upon Oath, He had paid and
was to pay for Threescore pound a year, as much as some of his Neighbors did
for Sixscore pound of good Land of Inheritance. And which is more, He told us
that a professed Papist in his Neighborhood, who by the late Act of Three
shillings in the pound was to pay double for his Estate, was not charged with
so much as Himself for the same value in Tiths and a small Glebe. But nothing
troubled him so much as that after all this He and his poor Brethren who would
gladly part with their Benefices, if it could be done lawfully, for less money
then Three hundred pound, should be made Gentlemen and forced to pay Twenty
shillings a piece as such, tho some of them hardly know how to get bread to eat.


B. Very well on my side, A wonderful encouragment indeed it is for a man to
turn Country parson: May I rather be a Hog-heard. But there is this of comfort
in it for those that look that way, that this may occasion a great fall in the
price of Presentations. But let so much suffice for that, and let me proceed to
something further, viz. That as I shall be quickly sensible of the charge I
must be at in my new Parsonage, so when I come to demand my dues for the
defraying of that charge, and the maintenance of my Family, I shall ^ind it a
hard matter to get them. If I be minded to farm out my Tiths, my Parishenours
will bid me half the worth of them. If I will take them in kind, they will
cheat me of little less then the half. And that which will vex me most of all,
I must not dare to tell them of their injustice; for if I do I shall certainly
have their ill will and as many mischeivous Tricks played me as they can
possible. And should I lay aside all care for their Souls to watch their
subtle practices, and do no more for them then any Lay Impropriator does where
he is concerned, they would be to hard for me in many things, so full of
Cunning and Knavery are Clouted shoes --


A. Well, let them pass; for I can easily think of many things relating to them
and their Cheats which need not take up our Time. I desire to have a short
account of the Advantage thou dream'st of in thy intended way.


B. Dream, do you say? you shall hear and Confess that I think and speak
nothing but Demonstration. Suppose me then in my Congregation as their Pastor,
Teacher, Holderforth, call it what you please; you most know, that they will be
a select Number of people, (not like your Churches a Herd made up of few Sheep
and a Multitude of Goats) most of them of the sweet Female Sex (whose kindness
toward the Spiritual Pastors or Teachers is never less then their Zeal for
what they teach them) scattered up and down, here and there in several of your
Parishes. And for the better Edification of these precious Souls, it will be in
my power to choose the place of my Residence or abode: And if I do not choose a
Convenient place it is my own Fault. Instead of an old rotten Parsonage or
Vicaridge House, I promise my self Forty, Fifty or Threescore good Houses,
where I shall be entertained with such fullness of Delight, yea and Empire too
(not like your pitiful Curates or Chaplains that must sneak to the Groom and
Butler) that even the Gentlemen that pretend to make a God of their Landlords
will be apt to envy me. And if I resolve to enter into the Matrimonial state, I
shall be strangly unfortunate, if instead of an Abigail; I meet not with some
Opulent Widow, or some tender hearted Virgin of no ordinary Fortune, who with
yearning Bowels will offer me her best Assistance and endeavors to build me a
House --


A. Excellent! It Is the Common fortune of a Conventicle.


B. Suppose me then a Housekeeper; I dare promise my self at least an hundred
pound a year, which will be paid me Quarterly without the least trouble or
charge. I say I dare promise my self so much, because I am well assured that
several Holdersforth about mine own size, receive two or three hundred pound a
year. And all this, if I please, may be spent on my own dear self; for besides
this, That no Obligation to Hospitality will lie upon me, and I shall be
troubled with few Visiters but such as will bring their Entertainment with
them, if they send it not before them; or will pay me richly for what I gave
them; I shall not be liable to pay one Penny out of my Income to Bishops or
Chancellors, to Church or Poor, no, nor to the King and Queen. And what a
Happiness, think you, will this be, to live under a Government, and to enjoy so
much good under its Protection, and not part with one Farthing toward the
support of it! And pardon us (my Friend) if we think our selves much the
Happier, that your poor Parsons, Vicars and Curates, do with so much charge
preserve and nourish the Tree, under the Branches of which we sit so safely,
and enjoy our selves so pleasantly. --


A. Very pleasant indeed. But methinks, to a generous Soul this should be a
very disagreeable way of Living.


B. That Is thy Ignorance Friend. For what can be more agreeable to thee than
that which comes freely, which is so far from being Extorted, as your Tith Pigs
and Geese are, that it is even forced upon us. And if the good Wife does rob
from the Husband, or the Husband does substract a little from you to oblige and
cherish us, it will not be the less but rather the more sweet unto us. You
never yet heard that the Israelites were offended with their Jewels and other
fine things, because they were the spoils of the Egyptians. --


A. Very true; but prithee do not profane Scripture: And tell me whether thou
must not be a slave to the Humors of thy precious People for all this; and how
thou hopest to bring thy self to it.


B. Alas! That a Man should live so long in the University, and have his Eyes
and his Ears open to get some knowledge of the World, and yet ask such a
Question, and have need of Instruction. I Will resolve and instruct thee in sew
words, because I must hasten from the upon necessary besiness. Know then, that
they are generally people that will be easily managed, and it can hardly be
imagined that they should be otherwise, because they have been Teacher-ridden
for many Years. Their Understandings have been so baffled with Phrases and
Distinctions, that they have but little use of them: And for their Affections,
I shall be at Liberty to turn my self into any shape to Command them; and I do
not doubt in the least but I shall have as Absolute an Empire over them, as
ever the Pope of Rome had over the best natured of our Forefathers. But if any
should prove more intractible or less ductible then others, I shall not be
without some Tricks for 'em, which will not cost me half the pains as your
Parsons are found to be at, to keep a poor Interest among their Parishioners --
But whereas you speak of my being a Slave, let me tell you in short, that I
know no greater Slaves than the Church of England Clergy are; and I have never
thought of them of late, but the Fate of Issachar has come into my mind, a
strong and patient Creature Crouching down between two Burdens. On one side
there are Laws or Acts of Parliament, on the other Canons, and lest these
should not pinch you enough, there comes ever and anon Declarations,
Injunctions, Orders, and I know not what besides, which must be submitted to,
or the poor Creature must suffer for it. There was a Time indeed when you were
accounted one of the three Estates of the Realm, and the first and greatest of
the Three; but now you are swallowed up by the other two, and you stand but for
Ciphers in the Government. Your Privileges are daily lessened; and your Burdens
are daily increased; for besides the Burdens which your Predecessors did bear,
and you as Clergymen do bear still, many of the Burdens of the Laity are laid
upon you, whilst you enjoy the Privileges of neither. You are made mere Tools
for the Great ones to work their Designs by; and when they have Compassed their
ends, they expose you to Contempt and Scorn, and encourage the vilest of the
people to tread you under foot. Your Power and Authority, as the Ministers of
Christ is next to nothing. You may talk in your Pulpits, as Mountebanks upon
the Stage, but few think themselves obliged to mind what you say. And as for
your Censors which formerly were dreaded as Thunderbolts, they are generally
contemned, and there is one bare word which will defend the vilest and most
scandalous men against them all. Some parts of your office (in some cases at
least) you cannot execute according to your Rule, without galling your
Consciences; and yet if you fail to do it, there is a Cruel Whip ready for your
Backs. And though your Principles are infinitely Servicable to Government,
Order. and Peace, yet you are treated rather like Enemies than Friends
thereunto; as men of pernicious Principles and of no Conscience. Whilst others
whose principles are big with Nonsense and Irreligion, and who draw
Consequences from them destructive to all Government, and productive of Anarchy
and Confusion, are favored and respected as Men of Conscience, Sobriety, and
Godliness, because they scruple the wearing of a Surplice, Sir. If you know not
these things, you know nothing. Judge then whether you may not be accounted
Slaves. I would add something of the Freedom of the Conventicle Holders-forth
-- Free as the Light they are, and safe as the Sun in the Firmament: They are
tied to no Rules but their own, and those they may change as they please
themselves -- But I must leave thee at present, for the Dispatch of-Necessary
business.


A. One Word before thou go, viz. That as Happy as the Conventiclers are at
present, the Case may quickly be altered with them and us.


B. Yes when the World becomes Wise. But that is not to be expected in this its
declining State.


A. But there is, thou know, an Union designed between all disagr^^^^g
Parties: And good Men hope it will quickly be effected.


B. But they who have their Eyes in their Heads, know very well, that it will
not be done by the ways of Condescension and Comprehension, except there be a
Miraculous change wrought upon thr Dissenting Parties. Make it once their
Interest to Unite with you, and do something to save their Honor, and then I
shall entertain some Hope: But till this be done I Will prepare my self for what
I said at first was my Design. And do thou turn Country Parson or be --


THE END.
LONDON, Printed for H. H. and T. J. near Temple Bar.


