A RELATION Of the French Kings Late Expedition into the Spanish-Netherlands,
In the years 1667, and 1668.

With an Introduction discoursing his Title thereunto: And an account of the
Peace between the two Crowns, made the second of May 1668.

Englished by G. H. Gent.

LONDON, Printed for John Starkey at the Miter in Fleetstreet near Temple Bar.
1669.

THE INTRODUCTION, Containing a Display of the Grounds, upon which the French
King lays claim to a great part of the Spanish Netherlands.
THat the best Title of the French Queen to the Duchy of Brabant, and its
annexes, the Seignory of Malmes, Antwerp, Upper Gelderland, Namur, Limburg, and
the places united on the other side the Meuse, Hainault, Artois, Cambray, the
County of Burgundy, and the Duchy of Luxembourg, consisted in the Sword of the
King her Husband, scarce seems a doubt to any but the French themselves. And
with what success the Cause has been pleaded by that Weapon, during the
Campaign of 1667. the ensuing Narrative, written by one that was present at
most of the considerable Actions thereof, gives a particular and yet no
immodest Account. So that perhaps it is not much necessary to preface this
Relation with a Display of the Grounds and Reasons of the War, whose progress
it exhibits; accordingly the Author thought fit not to meddle therewith,
conceiving, I suppose, that the Justice of his Sovereigns Arms was
sufficiently evidenced to all the Subjects by the Manifesto, and other writings
which his Majesty had published immediately before his Forces entered Flanders.
Nevertheless, in regard that it is likely many, into whose hands this Piece may
fall, have not so fully understood the Reasons, whereby the French King has
endeavored to justify, to Foreign Princes and States, his late Proceedings in
the Netherlands, nor those contrary ones, whereby the Spaniards endeavor to
maintain their own possessions, and invalidate the French Pretensions, I shall
adventure to present the Reader with an Abstract of either Parties Allegations.

The French Queens Title stands thus: Philip the fourth, King of Spain, married
Elizabeth, Daughter to Henry the fourth, and Sister to Lewis the thirteenth,
Kings of France, in the year 1615. on the same day whereon the last mentioned
Prince espoused Anne of Austria, Infanta of Spain. The Portions of either side
were satisfied by way of Exchange, being the sum of 500000. Crowns of Gold.
Elizabeth some years after dies, leaving behind her a Son named Don Balthazar,
and a Daughter named Donna Maria Theresa: Afterward King Philip marries
another Wife, by whom he has Issue male, Don Carlo, who by the death of his
half-Brother, Don Balthazar, became Heir apparent to the Catholic Crown. In
the year 1659. a Treaty of Peace was concluded between the two Crowns, and
together therewith a Marriage between Lewis the fourteenth, now King of France,
and the abovementioned Lady Maria Theresa, for whose Portion the King, her
Father, obliged himself to pay 500000. Crowns of Gold, and pretended Salick Law
debars Females from succession to the French Crown; as also to the end that the
two Crowns being too great and puissant to be united into one Kingdom, all
occasions of such a Conjunction might be avoided, It was covenanted (amongst
other things) that neither the Infanta, nor her Children and Descendants, in
what degree soever, should ever succeed in the Kingdoms, Signiories, or
Dominions, which do or shall belong to his Catholic Majesty, as well within as
without the Kingdom of Spain, notwithstanding any Law or Custom, which by this
Agreement (which is to continue in the full force and vigor of a Law for ever)
their Majesty's did abolish. This Renunciation the Infanta confirmed in these
very Terms by her Oath in the presence of the Kings themselves, the Princes of
the Blood, and the chief Nobility of both Kingdoms.

This Peace remained inviolated about six years, (in which time the King of
Spain, for the preservation thereof, yielded to the King of France the
Precedence, which had occasioned a fray between the Train of the Ambassadors
of the two Crowns there at London.) But upon the death of Philip of Spain,
which happened toward the latter end of the year 1665. and had been looked for
the year before by his good Neighbor, (who from the latter end of 1664. had
laid up great Magazines of Corn at Amiens, and other places on the way toward
Flanders) discourses began to be spread abroad through France, of a Title which
the Queen and her Son the Dauphin, had to certain Provinces of the Netherlands.
Nevertheless, his French Majesty thought not fit to make discovery of his
Designs, till he saw what would be the Issue of the War, which in great
measure, by his practices, was broken out between the King of Great Britain,
and the States of the United Provinces, whose Quarrel, upon a pretended League
made two years before, he espoused.

In the mean time he set forth a considerable Navy at Sea, (which yet never
engaged in any Action against the English) and likewise made great Levies, and
warlike Preparations at Land, without manifesting how he intended to employ the
same. At length, about the middle of May, when his Neighbors, the English and
United Provinces, being weary of the War, had set on foot a Treaty of Peace at
Breda, wherein himself was also included, he thought it a fit opportunity to
publish a Manifesto of his Claim to part of the Spanish Netherlands, which he
likewise sent to several Princes of Christendom, and shortly after seconded, by
falling into those Countries with a powerful Army; the performances whereof are
recorded in the following Narrative.

In the said Manifesto it is set forth, 1. That by the customary Law of
Brabant, the Children by the first Marriage go away with the whole Inheritance
of their Father, the Children of the same Father, by a second Marriage, being
excluded; which Law is called Jus Devolutionis, or the Right of Devolution; and
consequently, that the Infanta (now Queen of France) being the sole surviving
Issue of Philip the fourth, by his first Marriage, is Heir of all those
Countries wherein the said Law does obtain, and so excludes her Brother of the
half-blood by a second Marriage. 2. That by the Laws of Spain she is likewise
Heir to her Mother of all her Marriage-portion, and the Jewels left behind her
at her death, amounting with interest to the sum of 1100000. Crowns of Gold. 3.
That the Renunciation made by the Infanta at her Marriage is void and null:
First, because that a Renunciation is only of an Estate in expectancy, not of
an Estate already fallen, as these Countries are pretended to have been upon
the death of the Spanish Queen: Secondly, because a Renunciation supposes a
Portion actually paid; but the Infanta never received any; and that if the
500000. Crowns of Gold, promised in the Contract of Marriage, had been actually
paid, it had still been no Portion, in regard 1100000. were due to her. To all
which some other specious reasons are added, which would take up too much room
in this short Introduction.

On the other side, the Spaniards answer, That, even setting aside the
Renunciation, the Daughter can pretend no Title to succeed in the Countries in
question, so long as there is an Heir-male living: 1. Because the Right of
Devolution has nothing to do with the succession of Soveraign^^s (as being
merely a municipal Law for private Estates) which descend in these Countries in
the same manner as they do in all other parts of Christendom, wherein the Male
by the second Marriage succeeds before the Female by the first; and for that
there are some express Laws, made by several Princes of these Countries, which
declare, That Women shall then only be admitted to the succession of them,
Masculis non extantibus, when there are no Heirs-males living. 2. Because no
Example can be produced in any Age of such an irregular succession in Brabant,
etc. that a Woman has been preferred before a Man, in the same degree, in the
public Government: But on the contrary, there are not wanting Examples, where
the Right of Devolution has been neglected, in the succession of the same
Duchy. 3. They allege, that Renunciations are valid, though no Portion be
paid, because the end of them is the preservation of the Grandeur of Families.
And 4. That by the Contract of Marriage the Infanta was in lieu of all
pretenses whatsoever, to rest satisfied with 500000. Crowns of Gold; the
non-payment whereof does not invalidate the Renunciation, because the Equity of
Law corrects such severity, and allows another day; as also because the Law
says, That Filia non per numerationem Dotis, sed per conventionem excluditur.
5. And lastly, That by the Edict of Charles the fifth, confirmed by the Estates
of Brabant, and the other Provinces of the Netherlands, these Countries are
declared inseparable from the Crown of Spain.

To all which, perhaps it will not seem superfluous, to add here a Letter or
two of the French Kings, concerning this affair, and likewise the Queen of
Spains Answer to him; together with one of the Marquis de Castle Rodrigo, then
Governor of the Spanish Provinces.

The French King's Letter to the States General of the United Provinces.
MOst dear Friends, Allies, and Confederates, We dispatch this Currier expressly
to the Count d' Estrades, our Extraordinary Ambassador with you, to order him
to let you know from us, as being our good and true Friends and Allies, the
Resolution, which after a long and manifest denial of all Justice, our Honor,
and our Interest, has forced us to take, for maintenance of the Rights of the
Queen, our dearest Wife, and our dearest Son the Dauphin; to this end we
command our said Ambassador, to communicate to you a Writing, which we caused
to be composed and published, to inform all Christendom of the evidence of our
Reasons, with a Copy of the Letter, which we writ this day to our dearest
Sister the Queen of Spain. In the former Piece you will see the undisputable
grounds of our proceedings, and that without desiring the breach of Peace, or
pretending to, or desiring the Estates of another; all our thoughts only aim at
the delivery of our selves from oppression by the force of our Arms, or by a
reasonable accommodation; to which we shall be always ready to hearken. Thus
leaving the rest to be delivered to you by our said Ambassador, we pray God to
have you in his holy protection and keeping, most dear great Friends, Allies,
and Confederates.

Your good Friend, Ally, and Confederate, LEWIS.


The French Kings Letter to the Queen of Spain, bearing date, May 8, 1667.
MOst High, Illustrious and Mighty Princess, our most dear and loving Sister,
The sincere Inclination we have always had, for the procuring and maintaining
of Peace, which was sufficiently testified to the World, by the Treaties of
Westphalia and the Pyrenaeans, induced us about the close of the year 1665. by
an obliging Prevention (though it was not so taken at Madrid) to find out some
way of providing, that nothing might be able to alter the good Understanding
and Amity between us and your Majesty, and our Crowns, which was so happily
established by our august Marriage. This was the late Queen our Mothers
intention, when she desired the Marquis De Fuentes to write to your Majesty in
her name, That having sufficiently informed her self of the Right of the Queen,
our dearest Wife, to several Estates in the Netherlands, and finding the
Grounds to be solid, just and undeniable, she earnestly conjured your Majesty,
by the tender affection you bear to her, that she would also inform her self of
these Rights, and take particular cognizance thereof, to the end, that viewing
the justice of them, as she her self had done, the equity thereof might induce
you to do us reason, by a good accommodation, which might take away all
occasions of misunderstanding between our Monarchies; that she sufficiently
knew our intentions, so as to be able to answer for us; that we should be very
moderate in the condition of the said accommodation; and that finding her self
drawing toward her end, next to her Salvation she desired nothing more in the
world, nor with so much zeal, as the satisfaction of having a union and amity
firmly settled between our two Houses, which this Difference might soon
disturb. All these Particulars cannot but be remembered by your Majesty, and the
Councels of Spain cannot also forget the Quality of the Answers, which they
obliged your Majesty to make, so little conformable to the Piety and Vtility of
the Queen Mothers Instances, and so contrary, without doubt, to the Inclination
your Majesty has for the conservation of the public Peace.

This Answer was, That your Majesty could not in any manner, nor upon any
consideration whatsoever, enter into the discussion of this Affair, nor agree
or treat upon those Rights, which you knew had no foundation: And presently
after your Majesty sent Order to the Governor of Flanders, to cause the Oath
of Fidelity to be administered to all the Estates and People of the Country,
which till then had been neglected, since the decease of the late King our
Father-in-law. This absolute refusal of doing us Justice, and this last
Resolution of binding those people by Oath to your Majesty, which are truly our
Subjects, in right of the Queen our Wife, having reduced us to the unpleasing
and undispensable necessity, either to be wanting in that which we owe to our
Honor, to our Self, to the Queen, and to the Dauphin our Son; or to endeavor
by the force of our Arms to obtain that Reason which has been denied us: We
have chosen the latter, as that which both Justice and Honor obliges us to:
And by an express Currier, which we dispatch to the Archbishop of Ambrun our
Ambassador, we order him to let your Majesty know our Resolution which we have
taken, to march in person toward the end of this month, at the head of our
Army, to endeavor to put our selves into possession of that which belongs to
us in the Low Countries, in right of the Queen, or of something equivalent; and
at the same time to present to your Majesty a Writing, which we have ordered to
be composed, containing the Grounds of our Right, and plainly destroying the
frivolous Objections of those contrary Writings, which the Governor of
Flanders has published to the world.

In the mean time we promise our selves so much from your Equity, that as soon
as you shall have seen and examined the said Writing, you will much blame the
Counsel which was given you, to deny us that Justice, which you will find so
clear and well-founded, and willingly embrace the ways that we have insinuated
to you, and do still offer them, to decide the differences between us by a
friendly accommodation; assuring your Majesty, in encouragement to it, of two
things; One, that we shall be content with very moderate conditions, regard
being had to the quality and importance of our Rights; the other, that if the
success of our Arms be as prosperous as their cause is just, we have no
intention to thrust them forwards beyond that which belongs to us, or something
equivalent to it, wheresoever we can light on it. And as to all the rest of the
Estates of our dearest and most beloved Brother the King of Spain, the chief
foundation supposed that we receive that Justice which is due to us, we shall
be always ready to defend them against all Aggressors, for the conservation of
them to him and his posterity, which we wish may be numerous, and without end;
as also very religiously to observe the Peace, as we assured the Marquis De la
Fuentes, when he took his leave of us, not thinking that the Peace is broken by
us by our entering into the Low Countries, though with the Sword in our hand,
since we march only to put our selves in possession of that which is usurped
upon us: Thus referring you further to our Ambassador. We pray God to preserve
you, most High, etc.


The surprise of the Spaniards at this Letter, and the Manifesto presented at
the same time with it (being extremely contradictory to the French Kings other
Declarations) was so great, that when the French Ambassador residing in that
Court, had presented the same to the Queen Regent, the people became
immediately enraged against the French, to that height, that her Majesty,
fearing lest some violence might be done by them to the Ambassadors person,
found it necessary to appoint some Guards to attend him for his security. And
to the Letter it self she returned this following Answer, bearing date May 21.
1667.

The Queen of Spains Answer to the foregoing Letter.
THe Archbishop of Ambrun, your Majesty's Ambassador in this Court, has
delivered me your Letter, bearing date the eight instant, accompanied with a
Book and a Memorial together, with a large representation and recital of the
Motives alleged by your Majesty, for the motion of your Forces, upon a
pretended Right to some Provinces in the Low Countries. Whilst we apply our
selves to the answer of yours, in all the particulars required, I thought it
not fit to defer the giving an answer to your Letter, although I am very much
surprised with the unexpected news of such a design. And although your Majesty
is pleased to insinuate, that the most Christian Queen, my good Sister (whom
God has taken to his glory) had communicated these pretensions to the Marquis
De la Fuente, and that I cannot but remember, that he informed me of it by his
Letter; yet in truth I always looked upon that discourse as a thing only of
private familiarity and confidence, since it passed not in the form of an
Ambassador, nor as a Minister from your Majesty, nor yet in your Majesty's
name. And I have been the rather confirmed in the truth of this Opinion, since
having given the said Marquis a very succinct answer, to all that could be said
upon the point, nothing was further said in that matter: So that the silence
which has been kept since the Marquis had his answer, could not leave any
other impression on me, but that your Court being informed of the just Rights
of the King my Son, and sufficiently satisfied of the sincerity of my
proceedings, all further pursuit of those pretensions had been wholly laid
aside. It being further to be considered, that this insinuation which has been
made is quite contrary to those formalities, which the Articles of Peace made
in the Pyrenaeans requires, before it can be lawful to proceed to a Rupture; It
being also certain upon the ninetieth Article, that if the Renunciation it self
had not been made, it ought not to have been pursued by the way of Arms, but
by that of sweetness and Justice. And since your Majesty does now declare your
willingness to enter into an amicable Treaty, I am also willing to conform my
self to it; and am content that the Rights be seasonably examined, that Justice
may take its place by the way and means most proper for that purpose: To which
end some persons ought to be nominated, and a place agreed on convenient for
such a Treaty. And as it is necessary that both parties do in the mean time
abstain from all further proceedings by the way of Arms, I hope your Majesty
will condescend to it: Which if denied, I shall be forced, as I am obliged in
conscience, and as a Guardian Royal to the King my Son, to make use of the same
ways and means to defend the Justice of his Cause.


Although nothing could be more fair and reasonable, then the Proposal
contained in this Letter, of referring the Controversy to be discussed by
amicable means; yet the French King returned his Reply to it, not by the
ordinary way, but by that of Flanders, and the noise of his Canon; in which
rough language he likewise answered that excellent Letter sent to him by the
Marquis De Castle Rodrigo, to desire an Arbitration, which here follows to
conclude this Introduction.

The Marquis De Castle Rodrigo's Letter to the King of France.
THe Information we have received from all parts so confidently assuring us,
That the great preparations your Majesty is now making, are intended against
these Counties, that it is now no longer made a doubt; and there appearing to
the World no just reason, why your Majesty should violate a Peace, in which the
Crown of Spain was content to sit down with so much prejudice, leaving the
advantages to your Majesty; its principal aim being only to restore Peace to
Christendom, and put an end to a War which had involved the poor and innocent
Subjects of each party in so much misery and ruin: and being desirous to
prevent a Relapse into a greater, in which all Europe will have a share, should
the Rupture be founded rather upon Will then Reason: I have thought it an
incumbency both upon my Place and Duty, to represent to your Majesty, the
Scandal that will be given to all the world, when they shall see your Majesty
engaged against a Brother of only six years of age, and against a Regency
subordinated to the Laws of a Testator, without any form of Justice, or
observance of the Rule, of first demanding satisfaction. And if your Majesty
has any pretension of dissatisfaction, Reason and Justice require, your
Majesty should first declare and justify them, not only in particular to the
Parties interessed, but also to the Neighboring Princes, to the Countries in
dispute, and to your Majesty's own Subjects; since by the Law of Nature,
nothing can be exacted or forcibly taken from ones own Subject or Slave, much
less from one that is wholly innocent, where the Government is tied up by a
Regency, to the prejudice of the Subjects of both Parties, and of the Roman
Empire; by virtue of whose Laws, and without whose knowledge, so noble a
Member, as the Circle of Burgundy, cannot be taken away. This proceeding
violates the Treaty of Munster, by which (as also by our Peace which was since
concluded) it was capitulated, that in case of a Rupture, the Parties concerned
should have ten months notice of it; and infringeth the Peace of our
Neighbors, whose concernments will oblige them to interest themselves in a
common danger. Besides this* your Majesty was pleased to tell the Marquis De la
Fuente, at his Audience of Conge, That he was a Witness, with what earnestness
you intended to preserve the good correspondency and peace between both Crowns;
and that he should in your Majesty's name assure the Queen, my Mistress, that
you would continue it in the same manner, and with the same good will, giving
likewise your Ambassador at Madrid the same charge.

I leave it, Sir, to the consideration of your Majesty, how remote it will be
from the Justice, Christianity and Generosity of your Majesty, to attempt an
Invasion without any of those Formalities and Interpositions which all
Christian Princes have always observed; that so your Majesty, as the most
Christian, may not introduce an Example, which as it is contrary to all former
ones, so it may prove prejudicial to your self and your Posterity.

I do not desire your Majesty to prejudice your own Rights (if any such you
have) but only that you would declare them, if you pursue them; nor that you
should suspend the use of Force, if satisfaction be denied you; but that before
you begin your March, or any Hostility, which may render an accommodation
impossible, you would prevent the Mischiefs that may ensue upon it to all
Christendom, by giving place to a Negotiation. I am firmly persuaded, that the
Queen, my Mistress, will give your Majesty all reasonable satisfaction, and
that she will not refuse to reason the Cause wherein both parties are
interessed, to the Cognizance, Mediation, and even the Decision of any of those
that may be concerned in the mischief^ the Rupture will occasion: Obliging my
self (as soon as I know the cause and pretensions of your Majesty) to give
account of it to the Queen, my Mistress, who, I doubt not (to let the World see
her good intention, and the justice of her Proceedings) will not refuse to
refer her self to the judgment, not of one or two only, but of the whole World,
and in particular of all the Princes of the Roman Empire, of the Crown of
England, (supposing that your Majesty is very near a Peace with it) and of the
United Provinces, our Neighbors, to the end that their joint Plenipotentiaries
may see the reasons, and justify those that have reason on their side, before
any advance be made by the force of Arms, considering there is nothing that so
far presses you, nor any danger in suspension, that should be preferred before
the common Interest; by which each Party may justify to the World the events
which may happen.

This Representation, Sir, and Request, which my Zeal alone to your Majesty
has put me upon, seems to me most just, as desiring that Christendom, our
Neighbors, and common Subjects, may avoid all new calamities, and especially
those mischiefs, which may prove far greater then those that are already past,
before an end can be put to these Wars, wherein we are going to engage our
selves. And I hope, Sir, that your Majesty will please to admit it as such, and
that Almighty God will put it into your Majesty's heart, to resolve upon an
Expedient as just as it is fair and advantageous to all, by letting Reason take
place, and having a just regard to the tender age of the King my Master, giving
our Neighbors the satisfaction of being Judge of the Differences between us;
whereby al^ those Mischiefs may be prevented, which a different procedure or
further violence will occasion. God preserve the Sacred Person of your most
Christian Majesty, as I desire.

Brussels, May 14. 1667.

A RELATION Of the French Kings Late Expedition into FLANDERS, Anno Dom. 1667,
and 1668.
THe flame of a new War being begun to be kindled between the two Crowns in the
Year 1667. And finding my self without employment in the new-raised Army, I
thought I could not fit my self with a more honorable, and more profitable way
of bestowing my time during the Campaign of this year, then to set down in
writing the Passages thereof; to the end I might not be reduced, as I have
often been during the space of seventeen or eighteen years spent in his
Majesty's Troops, to ransack my memory in vain for such things as I had a mind
to remember. I take not upon my self to make an exact description of the State
of affairs at that time; my design being to compose a Journal, and not a
History. Neither do I think fit to display the Queens Title to the Netherlands,
since the righteousness thereof has been authentically enough made out by the
Manifesto published by his Majesty concerning the same. It shall be sufficient
for me to relate in a plain manner, and without all affected Ornament of Style,
what I saw my self, and what I received by information from others.

The Peace which was Treating at Breda, between England, France, and Holland,
was at the point of conclusion, when the King who had suffered eighteen or
twenty months to pass since the death of Philip the fourth King of Spain,
thereby to allow time to the Queen Dowager to give him satisfaction in a fair
way in reference to his pretentions to several Provinces of the Low Countries,
as he had given her to understand as well by sundry Letters, as by frequent
instances of his Ambassador in the Spanish Court; astonished all his Neighbors
and surprised most part of his own Subjects, by giving order in the months of
March and April, that almost all the Forces designed by his Majesty to serve in
this Expedition, should advance to the Frontiers of Champaigne and Picardy,
under pretense of making great Musters, as he had accustomed to do for some
years past; wherein all the Regiments and Companies both of Horse and Foot were
used to encampe as exactly and regularly as if they had been in open War, and
in the midst of his enemies.

After the review which his Majesty made of his Guards at S. Germains, toward
the end of the month of April, it began to be divulged that his Majesty would
in good earnest take the Field, if the Counsel of Spain did not speedily yield
to the King a good part of those thing which he had demanded of them. Soon
after General Officers were nominated, and care was taken for disposing great
sums of money for the Artillery and provisions. The Commanders of Regiments had
notice given them to advertise all persons under their command to see to their
Equipages; and in a word, all such Orders were given out as are usual in the
commencing of a War.

Whilst these things were in preparation, the Manifesto, setting forth the
Queens Right and Title to those Countries, was published; and about the
beginning of May Printed Copies thereof were sent throughout all Europe,
e^pecially into Spain, and to Brussels. Which being a sufficient and competent
Declaration of War, the King fitted himself to go and expect an answer to it at
the head of his Army.

Accordingly his Majesty together with the Queen departed from S. Germains on
the sixteenth day of the same month, attended with such a small number of
those of his Court as were in readiness to accompany him; most of the great
Lords and Courtiers staying behind to prepare their Equipages of War. But that
those who intended to follow might have time to overtake him, his Majesty spent
four days on the way before he arrived at Amiens, where he arrived on the
twentieth day of the same month of May. At the same time the General Officers
set forward in order to the drawing of the Troops together in several places;
some at La Fere, others at S. Quintin, Guise, Mezieres, Peronne, Dourlens and
Hesdin: so that the Forces were extended from the River Meuse to the coast of
Calais; though in distinct Bodies, yet so as that they might join together in
five or six days, according as it should seem expedient.

Marshall D' Aumont, Governor of Paris, was designed to command a body of
between seven and eight thousand men, on the coast of Dunkirk; and he had under
him for his Lieutenant Generals, the Count Du Passage, and the Duke of Roanez,
formerly styled Count de la Fu^illade; for the Marshalls of his Camp the Counts
de ^orge and S. Lieu. His Infantry consisted of the Regiments of Navarre,
Normandy, Plessis-Praslin, Harcourt, Sourches, and the Queen's Regiment; His
Cavalry, Commanded by Monsieur la Cardonniere Comissary General, was divided
into three Brigades, at the head of which were the Marquis de Rouvray, the
Marquis de Gelis, and Calvo.

The Marquis de Crequy, newly recalled to Court, from which he had been absent
for six years, was sent with between three and four thousand men to the
Frontrie of Luxembourg, and the parts about Alsatia; and with him Monsieur
Desperce for Marshall of that Camp. He had but two Regiments of Foot with him,
viz. the Regiment of Piedmont, and S. Vallier, besides 1000 Dragoons. His
Cavalry was likewise divided into three Brigades, under the Command of the
Marquisses d'Joyeuse de la Feuillee, and de Montaurel, who were all under the
obedience of Monsieur de Rochepere.

At the same time the Duke of Noailles was sent to Perpignan, whereof he was
Governor, to the end he might take care of Roussillon, whilst the main brunt
of the War should be in Flanders. This Duke had but few Forces, because there
was but little to enterprise; only some Regiments of Cavalry were assigned to
him, and Monsieur Foucaut, for his Lieutennant General.

'Twas easily judged that the King had some great design when it was understood
that before his departure from S. Germain's he appointed a Counsel to remain
with the Queen, consisting of the Chanceller of France, and the Marshall
d'Estree, with two Secretaries of state, Monsieur Vrilliere, and Monsieur
Guenegaud. After which having declared her Majesty Regent of the Kingdom
during his absence, he sent for the Parliament and other Sovereign Courts to
signify to them his pleasure, that they should acknowledge her for such whilst
his Majesty should be absent.

The Prince of Conde remained at his house of Chantilly, partly for that he was
indisposed in his health, and partly for that, as it was seen afterward, the
King reserved him for other employments when the War should be begun; his
Majesty declaring, that during the whole course of of this Campaign he would
not make use of the Counsel of any but that of mounsieur de Turenne, Marshal
General of the Camp, who by this means beheld himself at a higher step of
glory then ever he had ascended to before.

As for the Ministers of State, of whom his Majesty served himself, namely
Monsieur le Tellier, Monsieur de Lionne, Secretaries of State, and Monsieur
Colbert, they departed not from Paris, till six days after his Majesty, and
then they went directly to La Fere, there to remain in expectation of further
orders.

The Marquis de Louvois, Secretary of State, had set forth from Paris two days
before the King, namely on the fourteenth of May, in order to give notice to
all the world of his Majesty's march, and the design he had to let the Queen
see what Troops he had about Peronne, where their Majesty's arrived the 26 of
May. But before we proceed any further, it seems to me not impertinent to give
account what Forces were in being when the King began first to think of this
enterprise.

All the Infantry of France were divided into 1200 Companies, each of them
consisting of fifty men; but several young Gentlemen of Quality having since
taken the Command of Regiments upon them, they are now much more, they having
for greater Ostentation of their Commands many of them enlarged their Troops,
and at their own expense raised several Companies much more Numerous then was
required.

Moreover, the King had two Regiments of his Guards, one of French, the other
of Swiss, besides twenty Companies of new raised Swiss, all which Foot amounted
upon the Muster Role to 70000 men, besides 1000 Dragoones.

The Horse consssted of 200 Troops, each of them of fifty men, which made up
likewise by the Roles 10000 Horse, his Court and Equipage were 3000 Horse, if
we reckon the Guards de Corpse, his Musquitires on Horseback his Gens d' Arms,
and his light Horse belonging to his person, the most ready and best
disciplined that without doubt have been seen at any time.

Having furnished his Garrisons out of these, and divided the rest into several
Bodies, according to the different places he designed to employ them, as I have
related before, the Army Royal was judged to consist of about 24 or 25000 Foot,
and 9 or 10000 Horse, of which you shall have the particulars.

The Foot was divided into four Brigades, the first and strongest was that of
the Guards, Composed of twenty-eight Companies of the French Guards, and
nineteen of the Swiss, and four and twenty Companies of the Kings Regiment
Commanded by the Marquis d' Anjau who altogether made eleven Battalions: viz.
The French Guards four, the Swiss four, and the other Regiment three.

The second Brigade was that of Picardy, of which was the Regiment called by
that name Commanded by the Count de la Mark, the Regiment of Saux Commanded by
the Count de Saux de Lesdiguiers, the Lyonnois Regiment Commanded by the
Marquis de Villeroy, the Regiment de Turenne Commanded by the Marquis de
Sillery; all which Regiments made up two Battalions a piece.

The third was the Brigade of Champagne, composed of the Regiment of Champagne
Commanded by the Marquis d' Ambre, and of the Regiments of Castelnau, Louvigny,
and Orleans, the first Commanded by the Marquis de Castelnau, the second by the
Marquis de Louvigny, the third by the Marquis de Beaufort, and each of these
Regiments made up two Battalions likewise.

In the fourth Baigade was the Regiments of Auvergne Commanded by the Duke de
Chevreuse, the Royal Regiment Commanded by Pierrefit, the Regiment of
Roussillon or Catalonia Commanded by Caramagne, and the Regiment of Alsatia
Commanded by the Count de Nassau, which in all made up but seven Battalions,
Roussillon making but on The Light Horse Commanded by the Duke Coaslin, their
Camp Master General, was divided into twelve Brigades; but because it would be
tedious to reckon up the several Regiments they were composed of, I shall
content my self only to insert the names of the several Brigadies they served
under, which were the Barron of Montelar, of Fourneaux, Beauveze, the Marquis
de Resnel, Bissy, and Montauban, the Chevallier de Fourilles, the Comte de
Choiseul, Artagnan, the Comte de Roye, the Marquis de Rochefort and de
Villequier.

There were expected also some Troops from the Duke of Lorraine, which
consisted of four Regiments of about 1500 Horse, and two of Foot of about 900
or 1000 Men.

Their Canon they brought from la Fere and Amiens, I mean their great pieces,
for at the beginning of the month the King had given order to the Commanders
of the several Brigades, that every Battalion should carry a piece of 4 or 5
pound Ball along with it, and money was given out accordingly to buy Horses and
other things, necessaries for their train.

S. Hillary Lieutenant of the Ordinance, was the person Commanded all the
Equipage designed for this Army, and Colbert Master of the Request was
Comissary. And this is the account of our strength by land.

As to our Forces at Sea, I have been told we had twelve or thirteen Galleys in
the Mediterranean Sea, and that the Duke de Beaufort, our Admiral, was upon the
coast of Britain and Rochell with about 25 or 30 men of War.

The King being arrived at Amiens the 20 of May he depa^^ed from thence the 25,
having taken his eave of the Queen who instead of being present, as was
supposed, at the Rendevouze at Perrone, returned by Montdidier to Compiegne, and
and the same day being the twenty fifth with all the Horse his Majesty encampt
near d' Encre, and the next day at Mont S. Quintin, not far from Peronne, where
he met most of his Army, especially his Foot, who were drawn up thereabouts,
from thence he marched and incampt at Gouy near Catelet, from thence to Briatte,
not far from Chasteau Cambressy, from thence to Villerpol near Quesnoy, after
that to Peronneval near to Binch, a small Town in Hainault unfortified, and
which in the time of the Wars follows always the Master of the Field: here it
was thought expedient to leave some Forces for our convenience whilst the Army
lay at Charleroy, where his Majesty designed to go at his coming from Amiens;
at the length he came and encamp't at Pieton, a Village situate upon a Brook of
the same name, which after some meanders and Circumflexions falls about a
league from the Town into the Sambre.

This River and Brook where they meet do make an Angle on the side of their
descent, which being sufficiently elevated above the waters, there was formerly
a little Villa called Charnoy. This place having appeared of great advantage to
Castle Rodrigoe, Governor of the Low Countries for the King of Spain, in
respect the Sambre was not furnished with any Forts from Landrey (which is not
far from its Fountain) to Namur where it falls into the Meuse, he had resolved
the year before with the Counsel of the Provinces, to raise a strong Fort
there, which might oppose it self to the Excursions of such Garrisons as the
King of France had betwixt the Sambre and the Meuse, that is to say, Avernes,
Phillippville and Marienburg, Towns that were delivered up to us upon the peace
on the Pyreneans; and the design was pursued with that diligence and expense,
that the place was almost defensible, when they had the first news of the
Kings resolution to come in person with a great Army to demand such places as
he pretended belonged ^n justice to the Queen.

This place which was called by Castle Rodrigo, Charleroy, was fortified with
seven Bastions, lined with a sort of stone that was very strong and large, that
they had brought from the Country of Liege. The most part of these Bastions and
the Courtines were raised to the very top, and the outworks also were in so
good a condition, there was scarce a better to be seen in Flanders.

In the men time Castle Rodrigo understanding that the King was coming toward
him in good earnest, and fearing that his works being new and made the most
part in the winter, were not able to make any long defense if they should be
set upon and besides, having not Force enough to make good oath places he
thought of as much importance, he resolved to quit it, and having drawn away
his Canon, and all the Ammunition he had sent thither, before he blew it up,
and demolisht the body of it as well perhaps as ever was any before; but the
outworks they left entire, and they appeared so well to his Majesty when he
came thither, that he resolved to repair all, upon an opinion that this place
not being above six Leagues from Namur, and about ^s many from Monts, and
perhaps some 12 or 13 from Brussels, might be of great consequence for the
design he had upon Brabant, and the remainder of Hainault.

But there were other reasons also made the King take up this resolution, for
he being come of a sudden out of France, and the Spring being very backward by
reason the Winter proved so ^ong, he found but very little ^orrage; besides,
they were so ill provided with Horses for their Train of Artillery, that all
they could rap and rend were scarce sufficient to draw eight or ten pieces of
whole Canon with necessary Ammunition for them and their Foot. Nor was their
accommodation for Victuals in a much better condition, most of their Baggage
being in a very ill posture to follow the Army which was falling into their
Country: it may be also he might have some inclination to attend, and see what
effect his Manifesto, might have upon the spirits of the people, the War not
being yet so far gone, but that if they had given any assurance of satisfaction
he could have hearkened to their conditions, and have saved those Provinces from
all the calamities and devastations has been since brought upon them by his
Army: But whatsoever was the reason, we spent there fifteen days in reparing
the ruins, as well as we could, the whole Army working all the while with all
diligence imaginable.

The War being thus begun, and no enemy appearing in the Field, there was not
much Hostility committed, the King keeping his Army in as strict a discipline
as if they had been in his own Dominions. However they did not forbear the
prosecuting the War from the time it marched from about Chasteau de Cambresy,
and Pilois Camp-Master to the Horse, was Commanded out with 500 Horse to fall
into the Country for intelligence, and to discover if there were any
preparation making against them. The most part of the persons of quality
offered themselves as Volunteers in this Expedition; but the King would permit
but some few, of which the most considerable were the Duke d' Enguien, the
Count de S. Paul, and the Duke de Bouillon; but their design proved to little
purpose, for after they had been abroad four or five days they returned to the
Camp without opportunity of doing any thing.

During the stay of the Army at Charleroy, the Queen, as I have said, returned
to Compiegne; but she came back as far as Avesne to enjoy the presence of the
King who was there, and to take the advantage of that little time he would
spare from the care he would needs take to see the place accommodated himself.

The day she was to arrive the King went out with a good body of Horse, some
two or three Leagues to meet her; and during the four or five days they were
together, Monsieur, who remained in the Camp, gave out all necessary orders.

Some there are that will say, that that which carried the King into this part
of the Country, was not only the design upon Charleroy, which he knew was
demolisht before he set out: But having a long time maintained a correspondence
in Namur and Luxembourg, he had hastened his march to encourage that enterprise:
but I am not so well informed of the intrigues of Government to know the
certainty; this I only know, they were favorers of the house of Austria that
spread the report to make the conduct of the King the more odious to the people.

In short they put Charleroy into such a condition of defense, that they left
all the great Guns they had in the Camp there, and put the Regiment of la Ferte
in Garrison, and other Companies drawn out of several battalions, which they
formed into another called the Dauphins Regiment, and gave the Command of it to
Phisica, sometimes Lieutenant Colonel in the Regiment of Turenne: the Government
of the Fort was bestowed upon Montal, with order to continue the fortifications
without intermission.

They left also 300 Horse about Charleroy for their farther security, after
which marched the King up into the Country, to make his advantage of the
consternation his great Army had brought upon the Provinces.

On the 15th of June he discamp't and marching toward Brussels he took up his
quarters about Nivelle; whither having at the entreaty of the inhabitants sent
two of his Guards to secure them, they were notwithstanding contrary to all
honor and equity carried Prisoners to Brussels, where they lay above two
months. From Nivelle the Army marched a little above Mons toward
Braine-le-Comte, and after some days march they came to Ath, a little Town
situate almost at the head of the River Dendre without any fortification, but
so capable of it that the King resolved to leave a Garrison there, and made des
Lands (who had formerly served the Prince of Condy) the Governor.

Out of diverse Regiments there were some Companies drawn out, in all about 400
Foot and 100 Horse, which were left on purpose to infest and alarm the Towns
thereabouts, and particularly Brussels, which was but eight leagues distant,
there being no considerable Rivulets betwixt them.

All this progress was made without any other impediment then from the badness
of the ways, the Enemy not daring to show themselves any where; only a Party
of their Cravatts, earnest upon plunder, fell upon our bagage. But Rommecour,
Lieutenant of the Company of the Gardes de Corpse, being by accident with a
Party of Horse near Enchoit upon a design, which was the place where this
business began, he charged them so home he constrained them to leave their
prize, though they had slain some of our men, not without loss certainly to
themselves. This I am sureof, the Comte de S. Geran, who served then as Aid de
Camp, and the Marquis de Bellefont, were both very much wounded.

The Army staid not so long there as it had done at Charleroy, they left the
Garrison only some pallisadoes to begin their fortifications withal; and the
King discampt and marched to the siedge of Tournay, a place of great importance,
but very ill provided with Soldiers, and the inhabitants, who were very
numerous, bearing no great animosity to the French, under whose Dominion they
had lived long, for it is scarce an age since they submitted themselves to the
house of Austria.

Besides the King perceived the taking of this Town would be a considerable
acquest in respect of its situation upon the River Sceld, betwixt Conde and
Oudenarde, and might especially perplex that part of Flanders is called the
Wallonne Country (of which that is a Member) as also Hainault and Brabant.

On the 20th of June they began their march; but before that he gave order to
Comte de Lillebonne (a Prince of the house of Lorrain, who Commanded the
Troops the Duke of Lorraine had sent to the King, and who being not as yet
joined to the Army was quartered about Arras) that he should immediately join
himself with Artagnan, who was thereabouts also, and that passing the bridge at
Avendin, he should march away immediately and block up Tournay on that side
next Lille, which was executed accordingly, and the Bridges for communication
being finished, the King past the River next day with most of his Army, and
took his Quarters up at the Town of Foryenne, having left on the other side of
the water the Marquis Humieres, and the Comte de Duras, with such Troops as
were thought necessary for the beleaguering the Town on that side next to
Hainault and Brabant; and without giving further time to the beseiged to
recollect themselves it was resolved they should that very night begin their
approaches.

The place being surveyed; we began our approaches on the side of certain
Windmils, which are placed upon a little eminence not far from the bank of the
River as you go into the Town. The first Battalion of the French Guards that d'
Ortie Commanded, first Captain of that Squadron, began their works toward the
right, and the Regiments of Picardy and Cast^lnau on the left: but these last
having misspent their time at the beginning of the night, their approaches went
on but slow; however they advanced as they pleased themselves; the opposition
and firing of the enemy being very small, there was scarce any need of shelter
at all; there were not many Soldiers killed, nor but few wounded.

This day Monsieur being in the Trenches found the King there, who came
likewise to give them a visit, an action not ordinary amongst princes, and of
which History affords but few examples.

It would be tedious to insert the names of all the Volunteers that were then
in our Trenches. The presence of the King who exposed himself in all places of
danger (insomuch that whilst out of a desire to see all that past, he went
about surveying the works, he had one of his Pages wounded behind him with a
Canon-shot, and some few Horses killed) was a great encouragement to the whole
Court, and put them all forward to do something remarkable on this first
occasion; amongst the Voluntires that more particularly signalis'd themselves,
was the Comte of S. Paul, who in a sally the besieged made, beat them up to the
very Counterscarp, and there for a good while disputed with one of his Enemies
at the push of Pike; and in this sally S. Sandoux, a Captain in the Regiment
of Guards was sore wounded. The next day the first Battalion, of the Swiss
Guards Commanded by Molondin their Colonel, releived the French Guards, their
General the Comte of Soissons being ill, and not able to come as yet to the
Army. About midnight they beat a parley, and a cessatiou being presently granted
they yielded up the Town, Tournay surrendered.
and that before one great Gun was shot against it; nor indeed had we as yet
one piece for Battery, though we were in an hourly Expectation of a great
convoy from Arras of 1500 or 1600 Wagons of all sort of Provision and
Ammunition, and eight pieces of whole Canon that the Army had great need of.

The Town being surrendered the Governor retires into the Castle with his
Garrison, which is strong, and divided from the Town by the Sceld. It is
reported to have been built by the English, whilst it was in their possession,
after they had taken it from the French. The works are ancient indeed, but not
bad; but as they stood then, they were in no very good condition, nor was it
defended any better then the Town, for they had much to do to keep it one day
afterward, and marched out the 26th about 300 ill foot and 100 good Horse, in
three Troops, without Canon or any other good terms, and were conducted to
Brussels by Pruines, an in feriour officer of the Guards, with about 25 or 30
of his Soldiers: amongst all the wounded of quality in this siege there was
only Tracy Captain of the Guardes that was shot with a Musquit in the cheek.

In the mean time the Marshall d' Aumont was not idle, for being entered into
Flanders by the new ditch betwixt S. Omer and Air, he had advanced almost as
far as Bergue, where having understood there were no formed Troops in the
place, he thought it necessary to make any formal siege; but drawing
altogether by 9 in the morning he made all his Foot advance, and fell on in
two several places.

These two storms were Commanded, one by the Comte d' Passage, and the other
by the Duke of Roanez, both Lieutenant Generals; the latter of which, not
troubling himself to throw up any works, fell immediately on, and made himself
Master of the half moon and Counterscarpe: at first they had some resistance,
the Citizens having taken Arms with some of the Country that were come in for
refuge; but before night they parly'd, and at the same time surrendered upon
honorable terms. Bergue taken by Marshall d' Aumont.
There were some brave men slain there, notwithstanding, for S. Lieu, Marshall
d' Camp, in this Army much esteemed for his courage, and long experience in
the War, was killed by two shots of a Musket; and five or six Officers in the
Queens Regiment, and the Regiment of Navarre, were slain or wounded, with about
200 Soldiers in all, but most of the Duke of Roanez side, for of Passage's
here were but few.

Bergue being taken the Army advanced toward Furnes to give the Garrison of
Dunkerque more elbow-roome, where the resistance was much one as at Bergue. The
second day after our Trenches were opened the place was surrendered, Furnes
taken.
and we became Masters of it the third or fourth time.

The Marshall de Aumont, not satisfied with this, was marching with his Army to
Dixmude, when he received express order from the King to come away immediately
to Armentiers, which place is situate upon the Lis, and in the time of Marshall
Gassion, had gained great reputation, it was fortified by him in the Winter
1645, but was so demolisht by the Spaniard since, that in May, whilst the King
was at Peronne, Artagnan was sent thither with some Troops, and entering as he
pleased he took the Governor Prisoner in his own lodgings without any noise or
Alarm. The design the King had in calling the Marshal d' Aumont thither, was
apparently to secure the passage of Victuals to our great Army, whilst it lay
before Tournay, for they were the same Troops that conducted the great convoy I
mentioned before.

Tournay being delivered, the King and his whole Court were lodged in the Town;
he gave Renouart, Captain of the Regiment of Guards, the Government, leaving
him four Companies of that Regiment, and three of the Swiss Guards, with three
Troops of Horse of the Regiment of S. Sierge, but lodged them all in the Castle
to prevent any incommodity the in habitants might receive in the Town, and to
show his new subjects how easy his dominion would be.

The 28th of the same month having given exact orders for the Conservation of
the place, he marched away with his Army toward Gaunt, and as every body
thought, with design to fall upon Oudenarde, or Courtray.

They which desired Oudenarde should be besieged alleged the Town was situate
upon the Sceld, some seven leagues from Tournay, and would extend our conquests
quite down the River as far as Gaunt; and that though the Town being commanded
by a very high mountain on that side toward Alost, could not be very strong,
yet by placing a good Garrison there it might make a good post, and be very
useful in interrupting the Commerce betwixt Brussels and Gaunt, the two
Principal Towns in the Low Countries. Others were for attempting of Courtray, a
Town upon the Lis, and of great importance ever since Gassion raised a Citadel
there, and by it held in subjection as well the Wallonne, part of Flanders, as
the Flemming: and this opinion appeared the most reasonable, seeing all the
Prisoners taken agreed in their report, that there were but 200 Soldiers in
the Town, and that the principal Inhabitants had already resolved to deliver up
the Town, and attended only his Majesty's appearance with his Army to surrender
it into his hands. But both these opinions were disappointed in the event, for
the Army which was then incampt at Helchin, some three leagues from Courtray,
four from Oudenarde, and four or five from Lille, on a sudden on the 30th of
that month marched clear back again; the King having the day before Commanded
out the Count de Duras, with two Brigades of Horse, and the Comte de
Lillebonne, with all the Lorrainers, in order to a design upon Douay, and these
Troops being advanced, to strengthen it, all the Army followed with great
marches, so as on the second of July the Town was besieged on all sides.

The King at first would take up his quarters at Barbieres, a Village upon the
Scarpe near the Road betwixt Douay, and Arras, but this Town being too far off,
and it being believed the Town would require circumvallation, he removed and
lodged himself in la Mottes quarters nearer the Town, and more capable of being
fortified.

Whilst they were ordering the Camp, the King, having dined at a Villedge of
Esquierchin, perceived as he was getting a Horseback some of the Enemy drawing
out of the Town, and advanced to a little Chapel some 7 or 800 paces without
their Counterscarpe, which gave him a great desire of seeing them nearer hand,
he Commanded out presently a small party of the Colonels Regiment that was then
by, to charge them, and take some Prisoners if they could: Mazel Master of the
Horse to the Vicompte de Turenne, with some others, putting themselves in with
this party, and having ordered two Squadrons of the Guards to relieve them,
they advanced, and without so much as stopping at their Vollies they advanced
to their Turnepike, behind which the Enemy being retired, our Forces were open
to all their shot, both Canon and Musket. Notwithstanding which there were not
above two or three wounded, amongst whom Lestang, an Ensign of the Guards of
Turenne was one, and another Named S. Rut. Some persons of quallity stole away
from the King also to be present at this action, and amongst the first of them
was the Comte de Soissons, and the Comte de Avergne.

It is no great matter to guess the Reasons that brought his Majesty before
Douay: For this Town being of very great consequence in those parts, being
situate upon the Scarpe some five leagues below Arras, and capable of receiving
great numbers of men, and the yiedling great supply of Provision for the Army,
we could not take in any thing of more importance, or that could contribute
more to the keeping of Tournay, which without the communication of this Town,
was not easily to be kept. Besides he had advice the Town was but ill manned,
and not like to hold out long and that the Scarpe Fort, which is a Fort
consisting of five Bastions, built in that Marsh, which makes the River and
gives it its name, about a Cannon shot below the Town, was also very ill
provided: and upon these reasons the King resolved to attaque them both at one
time, as well to astonish them within, as to take away all hopes of relieving
them without; which would have been very easy another time, in respect the
place was of that extent it would require a vast line of circumvallation, and
without that it was impossible; to attempt either the Town without the Fort, or
the Fort without the Town, at least to block them up so as to prevent their
reliefs; but in spite of the strength or feebleness of the Enemy, the
Vigilance of the King and his Captains overcame all difficulties; For on the
third at night our Trenches were opened by fourteen Companies of the Regiments
of Guards, where Marshall Grammont their Colonel was present, as sick as he
was, as he had been before at Tournay: The Guards began their works as they had
designed to attaque the Ravelin before the Gate toward the Village of
Esquierchin, and the Regiments of Picardy; and the Kings on the other side
began theirs toward the half Moon that looks toward Quinchy. There happened
nothing singular in these attaques, saving that the Trenches being very large
and deep they raised a battery the same night of ten pieces of Canon betwixt
the works, which was in condition to play by four a clock in the morning. Le
Renche a Captain was wounded here, but very slightly, and scarce one man lost.
The fourth at night the French Guards were relieved by the Swiss Guards, that
is to say, by seven Companies of them, and the Count of Soissons, (General of
all the Swiss in the French service) at the head of them: They entered the
Trenches about seven at night, exposed to all the Canon of the Town, which was
a great number, and perhaps as well planted as ever any were. The King visiting
the Trenches approved very much what they had done; but he had much more reason
to commend them the next day, when he understood, that the 400 paces of Ground
remaining betwixt the head of their Trenches and the Ditch of the Counterscarp
was secured by the works they had thrown up that night, and that all the
Trenches were in a good condition by six a clock in the morning. Nor was this
all, the Marquis d' Humieres, Lieutenant General, that da^ having proposed to
the Comte de Soissons, to attempt the ditch, to sound it, and throw in some
Faggots, in order to their advancing the next night. The Swisses animated by
the example of their General, who was present all the while, would show no
weariness for what was past, but having begun a mine by eight in the morning,
they peirc't their ditch by noon; though they had neither plancks, nor blinds,
nor any thing necessary in such an Enterprise.

There were two Officers that Commanded in the Trenches, one was Aspremont, a
Captain in the Regiment of Guards, who managed all the works, and expressed
himself in that a man of more then ordinary understanding: the other was S.
Fere, a Captain of Horse, who had put himself then amongst the Volunteers that
accompanied the Marquis de Humieres. These two Officers, desiring to signallize
themselves by some action extraordinary, proposed to the Commanders in the
Trench to swim over the ditch, and lodge themselves on the other side, as well
to render the structure of the Bridge the more easy, as to make it the more
formidable when it should be done, and by the boldness of the enterprise to
frighten the Enemy perhaps from the point of their work; their proposal was
applauded, though contrary to the rules of so great a siege: And having chosen
a certain number of souldeirs that could swim, they stripped themselves upon the
Spott, and S. Fere with seven Swisses only, without other Arms then their
Pickaxes and shovells, swam over the ditch, and placing themselves on the other
side, they fell to their work to shelter themselves as well as they could; but
S. Fere having the curiosity to stand right up and peep over their blind,
received a shot from a Musket in his body, and dyed within a quarter of a^
hour.

Aspremont in the mean time was with some of his Volunteers and Swisses in the
ditch laboring to fill it up as much as possible: and of the seven that swam
over, one of them only was killed, the other six made their work defensible;
and the Bridge being by five in the morning so finished that they might pass
over dry, they sent over from the other side a Sergeant with twelve Soldiers
well armed to make good what their six comrades had thrown up.

All this affair, both in the night and day, cost about 40 Soldiers, and two
Officers slain or wounded; but amongst the Volunteers there were several
persons of quality ill handled; the Marquis de Noisy Maupeou was wounded that
night by a Musket shot in his head, of which he recovered, though it was
judged mortal at the first: The Comte du Broutay, sometimes Camp-master to the
Regiment of Navarre, received a shot under the Arm-pit, and died a few days
after. The Marquis de Terms was wounded in the thigh, the Comte de Combourg on
his foot, Monmont in the shoulder, and a little before the Trench was raised
the Comte de Blin, received a shot with a facileon bullet on the top of his
arm which brake the bone so as it was believed he would dye of it, as he did
in the conclusion. There was several others wounded with their Canon, but the
Prince d' Espinoy, who was shot in the Arm, and Brissac a Lieutenant in the
Guards, are all I can remember.

As to the approaches of the Regiments, Picardy was relieved by the Regiment of
Auvergne; but not being there I can give no further relation then that Vauban,
Captain in the Regiment of Picardy, that commanded in that work, received a
Musket shot in his face. For the same reason I shall pass by what was done on
the Comte de Duras his side, having heard no more, then that being encampt with
his Forces on the other side of the Town toward Cambray and Valecienne, and
desirous that his Forces also should have their share in the honor, he begged
of the King that he might make his effort on his side also; whither having
drawn up the Regiment du Saut on the fourth at night, and having found no great
resistance, with no great difficulty he lodged himself the same night on the
Counterscarp: Insomuch as the Enemies seeing themselves overlaid on every side,
and persuaded otherwise by the reasons of the Comte de Gramont, whom the King
had sent to summon them, they demanded a parley, and obtained a cessation of
Arms that very fifth at night, at least on the Guards side; for on the side the
Regiments of Lyonnois and Louvigny were on, who were apparently ignorant of the
Truce, they past the two ditches, and lodged themselves upon the half moon,
which proved to no great purpose, the Hostages being given before.

All the rest of the night was spent in making their terms, which were, that
all the Soldiers consisting of about 300 Foot, pitiful fellows, and ill
provided, with three Troops of Horse of about 120. should march out with their
Arms and Baggage, but no Canon; which was performed the seventh, of the same
month, Daway taken.
and they conducted to Valencienne.

The Scarp Fort was attempted distinctly by the Count de Lillebonne, and some
other Troops Commanded by le Bret, Marshal de Camp, to whom the King had given
the Charge of that affair. They opened their Trenches, on the fourth at night,
by the Regiment of Champagne, which having began its approaches along the
Marsh, carried them on within twenty paces of their Counterscarp, without the
loss almost of one man. The next day this Regiment was relieved by the Regiment
of Castelnau, who observing the small resistance that was made, past over the
ditch before the Counterscarp, and in two several places lodged themselves at
the very foot of the Pallisadoes of their False-Bray, and forced the Enemy to
leave their main Guards and in short all their out Guards; insomuch as they
beat a parley, and their Articles being made, they marcht-out with their Arms
and Colors, but not Canon, and were conducted to Valencienne; So that Doway,
which never durst, The Scarp Fort taken.
for the space of five and twenty years after the gaining several Battles, be
attempted, was taken in three days, and its Fort, which was believed
impregnable by reason of the water and ^l^^es with which they could drowned all
about both the Fort and the Town: The King made Aspremont Governor, who had
been so instrumental in the(...) taking it: and gave him eight Companies of the
French Guards, and six of Swisses, Commanded by Sury, Captain of that body, but
no Horse, in respect that all his Family, and the most part of the Equipage of
the Court were then at a distance, whilst the King who was then departing for
Compiegne began his journey.

But the reason why the King left the Army at that time, is not yet come to my
ears; all that I can say is that there were several marched off with him that
never thought it necessary to come back.

All this while the Marshal d' Aumonts Army was at Armentieres, where to
prevent idleness, they had began to repair the old works. But judging the small
Garrison left there would be in no great security, the Marshall removed from
thence, and brought his Troops nearer Lille, encamping about Hautbourdin, some
two leagues from the Town, to the end he might block up that Garrison that made
its constant excursions either upon our Convoy, or to the very Gates of Tournay.

But for the father incommodity of this great Town they put fire to all the
Windmills that were near it, which amounted to near 50 or 60, which could not
be performed without some ^kirmishes, and without outting off some particular
persons by their Canon. About this time it was ^he Foot Regiment of Normandy*
and the Queens Regiment having met in the night without discovering one
another, they charged, and, as was reported in the Kings Quarters, could not be
got off till 30 or 40 men were slain in the place.

The 9th of this month the Marshal General of the Camp remaining sole Master
as it were, he rose from before Doway, and encampt about two leagues from that
place, near an Abbey of Nuns called Flines, just upon the Road to Lille; and on
the their side the Army advanced to Cautice, about half a league distance from
Orchies, where their design was to attend the return of the King.

During the 15 days the Army ^emained encamped, there was no great matter
past; the Enemy having no great party of Horse in the Field, they con^ented
themselves to sally now and then out of the Town in ^mall bodies, to incommode
us in our forraging and convoys, from which they seldom returned without some
prize: Lamezan, sometimes Ensign of the Gens d' arms belonging to the King,
with three or four Volunteers and their equipage, going from Arras to Dourlens,
fell unluckily into their hands: Lamezan was killed there, and another
Voluntier called Bretoncelles was wounded, and the young Villarceaux taken in a
Wagon in which he lay sick. But this party were near doing a greater exploit;
for the Duke d' Euguien, the comte de Armagnac, the Duke de Bouillon, and other
persons of quallity returning into France with the King, and hearing at Court
the Army was lying down before Courtray, and that their several Regiments were
drawn out upon that design, that is to say, the Duke de Enguin's Regiment, with
the Brigade of Bissy, of which that was a part, and the Duke of Bouillons, with
the Brigade belonging to the Comte de Roy; they resolved upon any terms to
return into Flanders, and accordingly taking the Road to Arras, without any
other convoy then their own Servants, and some officers of the Army that would
need accompany them, they were in great danger within two or three leagues of
Dourlens of being taken by some Troops that seemed to come from Arras. And had
it not been for de Roche, a Captain in the Prince of Condy's Guards, who went
out to discover them, supposing them at first sight a convoy sent for the Duke
of d' Enguien from Arras, but finding them Enemies he suffered himself to be
taken to preserve the rest, which if he had not done, they had doubtless run
the same fortune.

I forget to mention how the King before his departure had resolved the Marshal
de Aumonts Army, that had done nothing these two sieges, should be employed
upon some place or other of importance, to which end he sent him four Regiments
of Foot out of the main Army, viz. the Regiment of Champagne, the Royal
Regiment, and the Regiments of Orleans and Roussillon, and three Brigades of
Horse, all under the Command of the Marquis de Paguilin, Marshal de Camp, who
carried eight great pieces of Canon along with him, the Marshall d' Aumont
having none before.

A while after we understood that on the 12th of that month the Marshal had
raised his Camp, and was gone from Pont-a-Tresin, near Lille, with Peguilin,
recrutes toward Courtray, where they were well informed the Garrison was very
weak.

At this time also the Marshal Turenne drew out five Brigades of Horse under
the Command of the Marquis de Bellefons, Lieutenant General, and sent them for
sureness sake to the reinforcement of the siege; they took their post at
Harlebec, a Town upon the Lis, about a league below Courtray: they left about
Douay also two Brigades of Horse, and the Alsatia Regiment of Foot, to attend
the King in case the Enemy should draw into a body, and constrain our Army to
march to the relief of the besiegers: but they had already put in what force
they were able: the Barron of Limbec, with 300 Horse having conducted some Foot
in the 13th of that month, which was the day before our Troops were set down
before it.

But as he was making his retreat the Marquis of Bellefons having got news of
his march, pursues and overtakes him in a Town, as he was refreshing some four
or five leagues off: it fell out very luckily for the Enemy, for the Town had
Barriers, and could not easily be entered, whereby they having opportunity to
get to Horse, and some of them having got to a Bridge, we must of necessity
pass into the Town; they repelled the foremost of our Troops, and after a short
dispute retired toward Gaunt, without any considerable loss.

Courtray being besieged in this manner the 14th, and the Trenches opened the
15th at night without making any lines, the Regiment of Campaign, had the
honor of the first attaque, as being the antientest Regiment in the Army,
having been six months longer standing then the Regiment of Navarre; but these
Troops, and the other on the other side, meeting no no great resistance from
the Town, Courtray taken.
they took the outworks the first night, and the next day the Townsmen treated
and yielded. The Soldiers retreated into the Citadel, where on the 17th they
were besieged also; on which day we threw up two works, one in the Plain on the
side the Town lies, and the other on the other side. But notwithstanding this
Citadel was in a good condition* and indifferently well provided with men, it
defended it self not much longer then the Town, for the next day it surrendered,
and 400 or 500 men that were in it, were sent down the River to Gaunt,
according to the Articles, in Boats.

About this time the King was returned from Campiegne, and the Queen with him,
whom his Majesty had a desire should have a sight of his Conquests: and to let
her understand, that as he had undertaken her interest, so he was able to do
her reason by by force of Arms, when the untractableness of the Spaniard, could
not be brought to it otherways. Perhaps also he would have his new subjects see
a Princess of the house of Austria, who coming in person to demand her Rights,
become one with his Majesty now by her Marriage, might take away their regret
at the changing the Government, and leave them without just reason of complaint.

She was brought at first to Doway, where she was received with all possible
acclamations; which made him desirous she should see Tournay also, as well to
prevent any exception that Town might take, for having been less considered
then Doway, as also to demonstrate to all the world, that he was absolute
Master of the Field; neither the Queen, nor any of her Train, having received
the least alarm, nor heard one Gun go off in all their march. And although
they past in the sight of Lille, and very near the Isle of S. Amont, which was
certainly the Enemies, they sent away the Court Harbingers on the 25th to take
up lodgings for the King and Queen the next day at Tournay; but the way being
long, from one place to the other, and very incommodious for an Army to pass,
especially with so great a Train, all the Court came that night to the Camp at
Cautice, some two leagues higher then the Road they should have come: What past
that night being no matter of War, is not to be expected in this journall, nor
to be written by a person so little acquainted with the affairs of the Court. I
shall only say this, that all they that had houses in the Kings Quarters, made
tender of them to the Ladies: The King and the Queen making choice of no other
then the lodgings belonging to the Vicomte Turenne.

The next morning by 10 of the clock, they arrived at Tournay, where the people
gave all the expressions of joy imaginable: Two days they past there without
any thoughts, but of their divertisment, after which the Queen returned to
Douay, in her way to Arras, where she was to attend the Kings coming back, who
was then advancing further against his Enemies, with design of enlarging his
Conquests.

He conducted her two Leagues himself, and having taken his leave, and
returning to the Camp with Rochefort's Brigade only, and some Volunteers, he
discerned a great dust, and hearing of Guns go off, he sent out, and understood
it was a great body of the Enemy fallen upon the Guards on that side next to
Lille, with a design to beat them off.

There was a Squadron of the Kings Gens-d'armes upon the Guard that day,
Commanded by the Prince de Soubize, Captain Lieutenant to that Company; he had
one of his out-Guards almost surprised by the Enemy, who counterfeiting
themselves Lorrainers, came on crying out Vive Turenne, and at the first dash
killed three or four of the Guards, but the rest having discovered the cheat,
engaged them very stoutly, though they were much inferior in number. The Enemy
was reinforc't with four other Troops, which advanced a full trot toward the
Squadron of the Guards, and they having taken the alarm were marching toward
the relief of their own, insomuch that there was only a hollow way betwixt the
Enemy and us. When the Volunteers that were about the King came in, and his
Majesty also with his Troops being at hand, and making a great dust, they
perceived it, and ran immediately without order, or resistance, and were pursued
in the very sight of Lille. The Duke d' Enguin was one of the first that
followed them, and made it appear at this, as well as at all other times, that
courage was no less natural to him, then to the Prince of Condy, his Father;
they were so close pursued that of 200 Horse Commanded by Maciet, a man of
great reputation amongst them, he had much ado to bring half off, the rest
being killed or taken.

The next day being the 28th of July, the Army rose from about Tournay; and
passing the Sceld, about half a league above, they encampt at Herines, and the
next day at Luperken, a Village not far from Oudenard.

This town which the Sceld runs through was already blockt up on one side by the
Comte de Lillebonne, and his Lorrainers; and on the other, by the Forces
commanded by Bellefons and Peguilin, who had not as yet rejoyned themselves
with the body of the Army, since they were drawn out from Courtray; they would
that night have opened their Trenches on both sides, but they did it only on
Bellefons side; for the Lorrain Foot, though they were further advanced, were
judged not numerous enough, nor well enough armed to venture upon a place that
set so good a countenance upon the business, and appeared outwardly so well
fortified, for within it was no great matter. They let them alone therefore
till their next day, and for that night employed no other then the Regiments of
Campaign, and Castelnau, who having opened the Trenches by the Fauxbourg that
goes toward Courtray, they carried the Counterscarp at first, and fell a
filling the ditch, leaving a half moon on their left, that the Enemy had
deserted. The day after, about ten a clock, the King planted good store of
Cannon, upon an Eminence about a Musket shot from the Town, that Commanded all
the outworks on that side that is toward Brabant, which Battery, with some of
the Field-peices, they carry at the head of their Battalions, firing
continually; all day long the Enemy durst not show themselves, but apprehending
they should be stormed and carried by force the next night, they beat a parley
about four in the afternoon, and yielded upon conditions, Oudenarde taken.
that all the Soldiers should become Prisoners of War: there was in the Town
about four or five hundred Foot, but no Horse.

This Conquest cost very few men, and we took in less then four and twenty
hours a place that Strada makes a great noise of in his History of the Low
Countries, and magnifies the Duke of Parma exceedingly for having conquered it
in two months.

There was but one Officer wounded in the Regiments that fell on, and but very
few Soldiers; there was also on the Kings side, one Voluntier wounded, and
that with a Faulcon shot in the calf of his leg, and two other shots with a
Musket, as he was advancing too near the suburbs to survey their works, he was
called Royecourt, and had had considerable employments in the War of Piedmont
and Italy, in the time of the Regency of Madam Royal the Duchess of Savoy.

This Town being taken, though attach't by the by, the Army marched the next day
being the 12th of August toward Alost; The Count of Duras was drawn out that
night with five Brigades of Horse, and 1500 Musketeers, to possess himself of
some post betwixt Brussels and Dendremond, so as to be able to give alarm and
jealousy to both: As he past by he summons Alost, and had it surrendered after
some few Volleyes, there being in the Town not above thirty Horse left, Alost
taken*
rather for intelligence of our motion, then defense.

In this party there marched so great a number of Volunteers, they made up some
distinct Troops, and would needs undertake some enterprise by themselves; the
design was to march up betwixt Brussels, and Viluord, and to surprise, if they
could, one of the passage Boats that goes daily up and down that Cut betwixt
the two Towns: but whether it was that the design was ill laid down at first,
or whether amongst such a collected medly of people, there was not that
obedience or discipline that was requisite, and they had not the success was
expected. From other places also there were several parties Commanded out; and
so strangely had the desire of engaging their Enemies seized upon their
spirits, that one of the Troops commanded by Chazeron, Lieutenant of the the
Guards de Corpse, fell foul upon another of our Troops, and by a generous
refractoriness refusing to tell who they were for, fell on, and found not they
were Friends till Royer Dubreuil Captain of the Colonels Regiment was slain.

The 13th the Army encamp't at Hochstrate, a Village betwixt Alost and
Dendremond, from whence Truel, a person of great understanding in those
affairs, was dispatched to discover the situation of Dendremond, and to inform
whether it might not be blockt up by a line, or whether the waters which they
kept with their sluices being let loose would not make a great inundation.

Truel reports they might lodge themselves well enough, and on the Fourteenth
the King gave order the Wherries that went along to the Artillary, should march
to make a Bridge over the Sceld, and made all the other Boats he found in Alost
to be carried down the Dendre, to make another over that. The next day being
the fifteenth the Bridge over the Sceld was finished, at a Villedge called
Apels, some half a League above Dendremond, on that side the way lies from
Gaunt; but having employed all their twenty Wherries about that Bridge, and
finding no more to make another on the other side toward Anwerp, where the
Sceld was much broader and the Tide came up higher, they were constrained to
leave them that way free for supplies. In the mean time the Marquis of
Bellifons advanced with five brigades of Horse, and four Regiments of Foot
marched over the Bridge that was made, to possess the other side of the River,
who finding an enclosed Country, they might easily block it up close, and put
themselves into a condition to prevent any succors going in by Land on that
side.

The King took up his quarters at the Town of Apels aforesaid, which was very
near the Bridge, and lay with the forces he had with him all the space betwixt
the Sceld, and the Bridge he had now made over the Dendre. The Count of Duras
with his Squadron, and the Count of Lillebonne, with his Lorrainers, took up
all the ground betwixt the Dendre and the Sceld, on that side next Brussels and
Viluorde; their Posts being thus taken, every body concluded, they would fall
on, but there were several considerations altered their resolutions.

Those who were for the siege pretended the place was weak, the fortifications
decayed, and in an ill condition, that there was not above eight or nine
hundred men in the Town, and those shattered and insufficient to resist such an
Army as ours, especially as it was then animated by the presence of the King;
that the waters they made such a noise with, might be easily diverted by
cutting the banks of the Sceld, which damned up the waters of the Dendre, and
were made on purpose to carry that River nearer the Town, which otherwise would
naturally have fallen into the Sceld, about a Musket shot above that place.
And indeed, Truel had already made two cuts in this bank, and had begun a
third, with confidence (according to the opinion of the Watermen of Alost, and
Dendremond, that were in our Camp) in four or five days time, to have turned
the River so as they might in two several places have fallen upon the Town, and
have easily carried it, by reason of the weakness of the defense that was to be
made.

Those who were for the r^ising of the siege alleged on the other side that
that draining or diverting the River was impossible, by reason the sluices in
the Town were entire, and the cutting the banks of the Sceld would but increase
the inundation, by letting in the waters of the Sea, which in that place was
twice in four and twenty hours above six foot high; In so much as they should
never be able to make any works but what would be wet, if not overflown twice
every day. Besides the Sceld being open below the Town, and we having besides
the Bridge we had made, neither Staccads, nor Trees, nor Chains, nor any thing
to hinder them, the Enemy might when he pleased break the Bridge; for it was
obvious that with the least favorable wind, and the assistance of the Tide,
they might come from Anwerp in four hours with many Vessels as they thought
fit, and beating down what we had raised to resist, put what supplies they
thought necessary into the Town; and moreover, the Town had been reinforc't
with men and all other necessaries for a long defense, Louvigny, a person of
great esteem in the Low Countries, having had opportunity to put himself in
with what Troops he had pleased: and lastly, that if all things could be
managed as was proposed, they had no more to do then to encamp thesmelves at
Nienove, and in four days they would be able to starve our Army, bread being
already grown scarce in spite of all the care the Commissaries could take that
were employed by order from the Intendant ^olbert. This advise was asserted by
so many, and their arguments appeared so probable, the King resolves to quit
that Leaguer that was like to be difficult, for another, no less honorable,
nor perhaps of less consequence.

During the two days we were before this Town there was scarce any thing
considerable past: the Enemy shot many great Guns amongst us, but with little
execution; I believe there was not above 12 or 15 men slain, of which the most
eminent was one Mr. Villars, a voluntier under the Marquis de la Valliere
Lieutenant of the Dolphins light Horse. There was also a little Rancontre,
betwixt the Horse on the other side of the Sceld, before the Bridge was
finished, for the King having sent 50 of his Guards over in one of the Wherries
designed for the bridge, under the Command of Lansson, one of the Lieutenants
of the four Companies, the Cavaliers putting their Horses (unsadled) through the
water made them swim to the other side, where as soon as they had sadled them
again, they mounted, and marched along a Dike (all covered with Trees) toward
Dendremond: in a straight way they encountered about 150 of the Enemy, whom at
first dash they beat back to their reserves, who advancing put a stop to our
carrier, and sent our forlorn back with the same speed; but Lansson coming on,
charges them again, however the Enemy received it so well there was but few
either killed or taken: we lost also some few Cavalliers, and had some of our
Volunteers wounded, and amongst the rest, the Marquis of Courcelles, Lieutenant
of the Artillery, and the same Mazel I have mentioned before: after which the
night approaching they parted, and the Bridge being finished, the next morning
we heard no more of them.

Two days after the Marquis de Bellefons having past his Troops over the same
Bridge again, brake it down, and the Army discamp't from before the Town.

Some there were that reported that several of our Army, and in particular of
those under the Command of the Marquis de Bellefons, being stragled for plunder
into the Country of the Vaes, came short home; for expecting to pass at the
Bridge, and finding it broke down, they could not get over, and that above 2000
of them fell into the Enemies hands; but this was otherwise, for it was certain
there was not two hundred lost there in all.

The Army being thus risen from Dendremond, the Marquis of Humieres, with four
Brigades of Horse, had orders to go and invest Lille, that they had been a long
time bartering for; the Marshall d' Aumont ever since and before the siege of
Courtray, having never lain above two or three Leagues from it, ready to
attaque them whenever the Enemy should draw away their Troops.

This was a business of no small importance; it was well known there was a very
strong Garrison in it, especially of Horse, all prisoners agreeing there was
above 1200 of them, and 3000 Foot: but whether it was that the Vicomte of
Turrenne advised him to it, or that his Majesty was weary of Conquest with ease,
all could not hinder him but that in four days March the whole Army took up
their quarters before the Town.

At his arrival the King quartered at the Village of Esguermes, but the next
day, by reason the Cannon from the Town incommoded his lodging, he removed to
the Village of Laos upon the River Deulle, with his Troops, taking up all
betwixt Laos as far as Helesme, where the Marquis of Humieres had taken up his.
Next the Lorrainers, took their quarters toward the River of Marque; and next
them the Marquis of Bellefons with his Troops lay from the Lorrainers to the
River Deulle, toward the Abbey of Marquet: And last of all the Count of Duras
took his post on the other side of the River, whose Camp reached to the Village
of Lambersart, and coming ^ack to the River again made a complete Ring of the
Circumval^ation.

Things being thus disposed, the eleventh at night, about nine a clock all the
Army stood to their arms, and every Troop having his Tools ready they advanced
800 paces toward the Town, where to secure their Camp against the Sallyes of
the Enemy out of the Town (which is one of the biggest in the Low Countries,
and without comparison most populous of any in subjection to the King of Spain,
for they were reported to be 20000 men bearing arms in the Town, besides the
Garrison) they began to entrench: but this was not finished the first night, but
within two nights after was so complete they planted thirteen small
Field-peices upon them, to secure the line, and restrain the besieged from
sallying, which they had no mind to at all; for without any interruption to our
work they contented themselves with firing their great Guns into our Camp, and
especially into the Kings quarters, where they saw most people.

The siege then being of great importance, on which side soever it is
considered, the King to put himself into a condition of compassing his
designs, and to furnish himself with all manner of provisions, before he
opened his trenches, Commands in all the country about to assist in his Line.
Several Convoys are sent to Arras, Bethune, Tournay, and Doway, for Canon,
Powder, Bullets and match; in short, all things were ordered to be had that
were necessary in so great a siege.

About this time it was the King understood the Queens discomposure for his
absence, and the indisposition of the Dauphin. However he concealed the trouble
he had for that as well as other misfortunes he had received at the beginning
of this siege; there it was he heard the Prince of Ligne had fallen upon 300
Horse of the Garrisons of Charleroy, and Phillippeville, had routed them and
taken the Marquis of Vaubrun-nogent, who Commanded the party Prisoner, with
most of his Officers, besides what were left upon the place: there it was he
had notice that the Garrison of Cambray, and Valencien to give him some
diversion had been abroad, and had Plundered and burnt Riblemont Marle, and
other considerable Houses about Capelle; and that then Marsin was marching to
Ipre* to give him interruption both in his Camp and toward the Sea in both
which places he was no^ provided over well. Here it wa^ also he was advertised
that the Enemy appeared about Oudenard and it was to be feared they might
recover that place with as much ease as we had taken it* for which reason
Beauveze was Commanded out with a party of Horse to discover, who found it
nothing, and gave the King notice the Enemy had drawn together at Alost, but
were retired to Dendremond with out leaving any Garrison there. Besides all
these, the King was troubled after four or five days with an exceeding pain in
his teeth which could by no means be lessened whilst he continued at his
lodging at Biouvac, where he lay every night exposed to all the mists and fogs,
that were constantly occasioned by the extraordinary heat of that season.
Notwithstanding all which perplexities he must of necessity attend the
conservation of what he had gained, which nothing but so brave a Person as he
could have done: to that end he gave all Orders himself daily, and (without any
other regulation of the controversy betwixt the Marshal General of the Camp,
and the other Marshals of France, touching priority of Command) he sends away
the Marshal d' Aumont with the residue of his Forces to encamp about Tournay:
His Army was then but small, he having drawn out two Regiments of Foot to the
Leaguer at Lille, that is to say, the Regiment of du Plessis, and a Regiment of
Harcourt; in exchange of which he only sent them the Regiment of Alsatia, which
the Campaign had exceedingly weakened, most of the Germans (of which it
consisted) being either sick or run from their colors, as most of the new
Regiments that come from that Nation into the French service do; besides the
Comte de Lorges, Marshal to that Army of de Aumonts, had drawn out a thousand
Horse for the visiting of Lille, and was not returned; the King having
Commanded his Troops for the securing of the River Lis, as also Varneton,
Comene, and Menene, least by that way the enemy should attempt to put relief
into the Town, insomuch as the Marshall had not above four or five hundred
Horse left with him. There were four Companies of the French Guards, and three
Swiss Companies in the Garrison drawn out of Tournay, so as the charge of that
Town lay upon his Foot; besides that he was to have an eye upon Ath, to secure
the passes over the Sceld, and the Scarp, as also Mortaigne, S. Amand, and
Marchienne, whither he was was fain to send several of his Army: In short, it
lay almost wholly upon him to defend all that was at any distance, and to look
to the security of the Campagnia; the Marquis of Crequy not being yet come up
with his Troops out of Luxemburg, where he had been employed all this while.

But to return to the siege of Lille; the King Commanded that all the while
betwixt the tenth and the eighteenth, should be spent in fortifying their
Leaguer, both against the Town, and without, and in furnishing the Camp with
all Provisions, both of Victuals, and Ammunition, they should have need of. The
Marquis of Louvoy, a person of great activity, had the care of all, and in
particular, of the Artillery, in which he took great pains that nothing might
be wanting; for in this siege the King was resolved to use all his Force, as if
his reputation all over Europe had been at stake this bout; all that he had
done hitherto having been an effect rather of the terror of his Arms, then any
real experiment of his strength. Moreover, in all Armies (but especially where
there be many Courtiers, as there was always about his Majesty) there wants
not such as will never approve any Councels, of which they have no part
themselves, and who constantly decry all enterprises that appear doubtful, as
this of Lille did, to the end that if it miscarried, the greatness of their
judgments might appear, or at least they might for a while lessen the
reputation of him that had the charge. And of this sort there are many, who by
the mischief they do that way, redouble the care that is necessary to the
accomplishment.

The King all this while spared no pains, no watchings, no expense, no not so
much as his own person, considering nothing on this occasion but his own
courage, and what might contribute to the augmentation of his glory.

One of these nights which the King past at Biouac, or most commonly at the
quarters of the Light Horse belonging to the Dauphin, where to repose himself
he would go sometimes into the Tent of the Marquis de Valliere, there happened
a fire in his lodging, which burnt it almost quite down, though by thy care of
those that were there, the loss was not considerable.

The Vicompte Turenne on his side was on Horseback night and day, and forgot
nothing he had learned by his long experience, as considering well that
whatever should befall must contribute either to his honor or diminution.

All things disposed to the best advantage according to the shortness of the
time, the eightteenth at night the Trenches were opened, and they fell on o^
that side that was next the Village of Helesme.

In this approach the opinions of Aspremont (who this Campania was chief
Ingineer) and Vauban, a person of great understanding in matters of Leaguer,
overruled: Others there were would have the attaque made at the Port de
Malades, because all the prisoners that were taken, and all the people that
came out daily, reported that the weakest place, and that there was but three
foot water in the ditch: Others were for storming on the Suburbs side, because
there was but one work, and newly made, and not yet in a condition to be
defended, and that being briskly attaqu't they should come immediately to the
Counterscarp of the Town, without any further trouble then at the first;
moreover, they alleged that place was nearest the Kings quarters, and under
the shelter of his Guns, whereby they might draw up their releifs with more
convenience without, reckoning the advantages of Timber, and other materials
for a siege, which they should gain in that part of the Town. But all these
reasons gave place to other, nor without reason, seeing it was but fit they
should in some measure accommodate to the judgment of those that were to have
so great a share in the action: besides, on that side next Helesme, there were
but two Bastions, and they a great distance from one another, and defensible
only by their Cannon, because there were three half moons upon the same line,
to secure the length of their Curtain, in the midst of which there was a gate
in an old Tower, but so weak their Flankers could give but little defense.

This place therefore being chosen for the storm on, Tuesday night they opened
their Trenches in two places, about two or three hundred paces from one
another; the French Guards took the right as was usual, not but that they might
have chose their post as they saw their advantage, but judging their sallyes
less to be feared on that side having a Marsh, and a River on that hand, and
that the Enemy not being able to come at them without great difficulty they
might with more expedition advance; they took the right, as I have said, and
began their approaches along the paved way by the Church of the Priory of Fere.
That night they advanced extraordinarily; but their Trenches were so bad and so
narrow by the mistake of those that set them out, (or because it is almost
impossible it should be otherwise in so great Leaguers, the front whereof is of
so great extent) that there was scarce any part secure.

The Regiments of Picardy, and Orleance, made their approaches on the left
hand, but they advanced not so far as the Guards; yet their works were very
well done, sustaind with redoubts, and other works, and all with the loss of
very few men.

Wednesday, the 19th the Enemy made a sally, but by the consequence it appeared
only for a taste, and to discover how we lay, for the better pointing their
Artillery, rather then for any thing else; for their Horse not being above
sixty, and their Foot not many more, they never durst venture above 100 paces
from their Counterscarp; and scarce had they shown themselves there, but they
were beaten back by the Horse that attended our Trenches, and by the Foot of
the Guards, who advanced immediately against them: in their sally, Castelan,
Major of that Body, was bruised in the upper part of his thigh.

To make good our attaques, five Squadrons every night releived one another, at
the tail of our works, under the Command of a Brigadier, besides which they
placed three more at a little more distance behind the Line of circumvallation,
against any present alarm. Moreover, the greatest part of the Volunteers
embracing the occasion, got themselves together the first day of the siege and
resolved to form themselves into Squadrons, of which one was every night to be
with the other Horse in the Trenches to do the same service with the regulated
Troops; and to that end had chosen themselves Commanders, who were the
Chevalier de Rohan, Folleville, the Marquis of Grignan, and the Comte de Mare:
for there was nothing so much apprehended as their sallies (had they had the
courage to have made them) and that because of the Number of the Horse were in
the Town, which were known certai^^y to be seven or eight hundred, and good
Horse too, besides that they had Foot enough by reason of the inhabitants.

But these apprehensions lasted but a short time, and in process of the siege
we understood that the Count de Bro^ay, the Governor, finding he had men
enough in his Regiments to defend a place of that Latitude and extent as Lille
was, dismounted part of his Horse, leaving the other part scarce able to keep
Guards both without and within: for although he was well beloved in the Town,
and past amongst them and the Sould^ers for a brave person and experienced, yet
he neglected not to have an eye over the Townsmen, who being always used to a
quiet and secure life, and to have no other care then to increase their
estates, were amazed to see their houses come thundering down with our
Grenades, and Fireworks, and the Bullets that came over their works: They were
troubled likewise, as was reported, at the daily contributions, toward the new
Levies, and at their payments toward the works and reparations that were but
necessary for their defense of the place; they began to deliberate also,
whether if their Forces that were incamp't out of the Town were set upon, they
had best venture out to their relief; and this perhaps may be one of the
reasons why the Order established amongst the Voluntieres was but of two days
continuance, unless you would rather think that so many French Gentlemen
differing both in humor and quality, were not likely to remain long in a mind,
or to bring themselves to obey one another.

At first it was not certainly known whether they had any of the Army Troops,
or not; however it was considently believed they had not above six Companies of
Spaniards consisting of about 250 men, and almost as many Italians, one
Regiment of Walloons called the Regiment of Rache; and about 400 English and
Irish; besides which they had almost 2000 Curlius, for so they call the Militia
they had raised in that Castelleny: But that which is truth is, they shot hard
at our first approaching, and so, as in twenty sieges and above that I have
been at I never in my whole life saw such fire; which made us at first believe
the Townsmen also were in Arms, because according to our conjecture the
Soldiers were not enough to defend the Town in that manner.

The 19th at night fourteen Companies of the French Guards Commanded by Dortie,
were relieved by eight Companies of the Swiss Guards with the Count de Soissons
their General: That night they advanced not much, for the Guards had left their
works in so ill a condition, the Vicomte Turenne had given orders they should
by no means go on above 100 or 120 paces, and Commanded the Pioners should be
employed in nothing but repairing the works had been so ill made the night
before; both by enlarging them, and making them deeper, to such a proportion,
that they might advance under covert; which was executed as was desired, they
working hard all night to make new where their old works were irremediable,
insomuch as the next morning those that came to veiw the Trenches knew them not
when they saw them, they were already so exact.

This night very few men were lost, because we advanced not very far. The next
morning the Enemy made a show again of sallying, some thirty or forty of their
Horse coming out some 50 paces from their works, the Volunteers that were then
with our Horse pressed on immediately toward them, there being several persons
of quality amongst them, whose exploits did daily distinguish them, as amongst
others the Comte of S. Paul, the Prince of Marsillac; Lansson, that was then
upon the Guard with his Guards de Corpse, and by accident was next them,
advanced with forty Horse, as a reserve to the Volunteers, who marched up to
their very Pallisadoes, under whose shelter the Enemy retited at first; and
there it was the Chevalier de Fourbin, Major of the Guards de Corpse, was
wounded in the throat with a Musket, two of the Guards were killed also, and
one taken prisoner, having engaged himself too far. We took one of the Enemies
too, but he could tell us no news, but that the Townsmen certainly took up
Arms, and had listed themselves for the Common defense.

The 20th at night the Swisses were relieved by fourteen Companies of the
Guards of France, who were Commanded by Magalloti, and this night also they
made no great progress, being employed in making a line of Communication with
the Trenches of Picardy, which they had not begun before; and in this there was
never an Officer hurt but Remond an Ensign.

At the other attaque, I have said there was the Regiment of Picardy, and
Orleance, who had opened their Trenches too, and were relieved by the Regiments
of Champagne and Plessis Parslin, who with the loss of very few men, made very
good works, and I think there was not on Officer hurt, but the Chevalier du
Plessis (Master de Camp of the Regiment of his own name) and two Captains of
the Regiment of Champagne.

The third day these two Regiments were releived by those of Auvergne and
Roussillon, who proceeded very well also with the loss of scarce a man, and
never an Officer wounded but the Duke of Cheureuse, and he but slightly in the
nose.

The fourth in the morning our Batteries began to play, that is to say,
twenty-four pieces of Cannon, of which some carried thirty three pound balls,
and others twenty-four; but the place they battered being of great extent, and
the Enemy having more great Guns planted against us, then we against them, in
spite of all the noise and thunder we made with ours, they forbore not
incommodating us much, and especially our Trenches and Batteries with six
pieces they had placed upon a Bastion a good distance on the right hand of the
breach, and toward which there was not one of ours. Insomuch as during this
siege, this Battery did us much mischief, and being planted at the foot of a
Windmill on the Bastion, they called every shot that came the Millers shot:
However, the fourth at night it was attempted to raise a new battery of four
Guns, upon the right hand of the approaches of the Guards, to remove those
pieces from the Bastion that disturbed us. But this work being very near the
Counterscarp, and many of the Pioners slain, it is possible they did not exactly
pursue their directions, and therefore in the morning at break of day they
found the work not being well pointed would do but little service against the
Bastion, from whence the Miller played his pranks; besides it was not
altogether near enough, however they finished it so that on the fifteenth at
night they planted four Guns to batter the half moon on the right hand, in case
we had stormed that, as some people advised, but others were for falling on
only on that in the midst, which covered the Gate of Fere, alleging it was too
much to storm three places at one time; in the mean time the works went on, and
the seven Companies of Swiss, that relieved the fourteen French Companies,
advanced very near the Counterscatp, so as it was conceived they were not above
80 paces off it.

This day Monsieur was in the Trenches of the Guards Battery, where the Swisses
were then with the Count de Soissons: he viewed their works to the very utmost
Post, having done the same at the other Battery, that day the Regiments of Saux
and Harcourt were there, where notwithstanding all they could say to the
contrary he exposed himself much more then persons of his greatness ought in
reason to do.

The other Trench was relieved by the Regiments of Castelnau, and Turenne, who
though they met with several halfmoons which the Enemy had made at the angles
of the Counterscarpe, were not discouraged from proceeding considerably that
night. Amongst the Swiss they lost several men; their Major called Demer,
whilst he was giving directions, was shot with a musket in the leg, to no
small inconvenience to the party, he being an old Officer, a brave man, and
exceedingly experienced in all things of War; there was never another Officer
hurt, but of the common Soldiers there were about sixty slain. I know not what
the Regiments in the left hand Trenches lost, and therefore I shall say nothing
of them.

This day the Enemy made a show also of a sally, their Horse appearing along
their Counterscarp betwixt our Battery and the Port de Malades; but the King
being with his Guards near the contrevallation, with a Regiment that bore his
own name, commanded by the Prince d' Marsillac, marches himself directly
against them, and stopped their journey, they contenting themselves with the
firing all the Cannon and Muskets they had, upon all that appeared in the
Plain.

The fifth at night the Trenches were relieved those of the Guards, by the
Regiments of Lions and of Louvigny; and those of Picardy, by the Regiments of
Saux and Harcourt; these Regiments advanced still, having but few Offices hurt,
and not many Soldiers.

The sixth the Kings Regiment relieved the Regiments in the Guards Trenches,
but they could proceed but little, because they came at a way that was paved,
and as it were fortified with the ruins of Houses, which made the work very
difficult, however they found when it was day they were not far from the
Counterscarp, because they had several officers wounded, and many Soldiers
killed.

On the left hand the Kings Regiment and the Lorrainers entered the Trenches,
which they carried on within twelve or fifteen paces of the Counterscarp,
without any considerable loss; amongst people of note there was only the
Chevalier de Signac slain* a young Gentleman, and a Voluntier, who would needs
assist every night in carrying on the works, exposing himself always as much as
was possible in these sorts of employments.

I do not always observe the names of the General Officers that Commanded in
the Trenches; it is sufficient to tell you there were in the Kings Army four
Liuetenant Generals, that is to say the Marquis de Bellefons* the Marquis de
Humieres, the Comte de Duras, and Pradelle; and four Marshalls of the Camp, the
Marquis of Vivonne, the Marquis of Peguilin, Podwits, and le Bret; of which,
two, viz. one Lieutenant General, and one Marshall de Camp, were daily in the
Trenches, and gave orders for the security of the Camp, which when they had
done they gave constantly their account to the King, or the Marshall General,
and then betook themselves to such places as had most need of them. There was
every day also one of the Aides of the Kings Camp that went to the Trenches to
overlook what was done, and continued there as long as the Troops he came with
all; there were six of them (...) all, who relieved one another by turns, that
is to say, the Comte de Lude, the Marquis de Soyecourt, the Comte de Chamilly,
the Marquis de Villars, Biscarras, and the Baron de la Guard; of which number
the Marquis de Soyecourt falling sick at that time, the Marquis d'Arcy-Martel
was by the King deputed in his place.

The Marshall de Aumonts Troops being dispersed in several places during the
siege of of Lille, the Count de Lorges, Marshall of his Camp, was drawn out to
assist against Lille, from whence he was Commanded to the Lis, to secure the
passage there; but the necessity they had of having more Horse in the Line,
made him be Countermanded; and that day the Regiments of Saux and Harcourt were
in the Trenches he was there and received a shot in the lower part of his
reins, and was the only General Officer was wounded; for that touch that le
Bret received (who was a Marshal de Camp likewise) was but inconsiderable.

Whilst things in the Camp were at this pass, there came intelligence from all
parts that the Enemy was drawing together out of all his Garrisons, to form a
body, and put some relief into the place; which occasioned a message to the
Marquis de Crequy to march away with his Horse and Dragoons only, so as to be
in the Camp the 23d of August, in the morning; being ordered for the more
expedition to leave his Foot behind, with his Baggage, Powder and Ammunition,
to come along after him, under the Command of Espence who was Marshal de Camp
to his Army: The King thought good to keep only some of his Regiments of Horse,
and 500 of his Dragoons, and send him away with the rest to Comene, a passage
upon the Lis, where they were most fearful the Enemy would encamp; for that
being but three Leagues from our Camp, they might give great disturbance to the
quarters of Duras, Bellefons, and the Lorraines, whose Troops were weakest, for
otherwise coming from a greater distance they did not apprehend they could come
near our Lines, but we should hear of them.

Besides this we had intelligence of their march every day; from Ath we had
news they were coming that way, and it was probable might attempt that place
(wherein there were very few Forces) though it were but to restore the courage
of the people, who believed themselves utterly abandoned, seeing no effort
made, either for their protection or defense. From Courtray we had advice the
Enemy were passing to Gaunt, and so to take the Road to Burges, toward the
Sea, where our Garrisons were but small, and our Towns in an ill condition,
inasmuch as there was good reason of suspecting some enterprise or other was in
hand; Especially they imbarking Cannon upon the Canal at Gaunt, to be sent to
Burges.

But all these alarms, and the murmurings of several persons about the King,
could not alter the Vicomte de Turenne's pace in the siege, who opposed all
their Counsels that advised to deal a little more roundly with the besieged;
but all that he pressed with vehemence to the Regiments when they went into the
Trenches, was, that they should work well, and securely, not regarding how
little they advanced; so that on the seventh day they had fifteen or twenty
paces to the Counterscarp left, which not agreeing with the impatience of the
Fr^nch, several persons took the liberty to decry him for making so great a
business of this Town, and saying, that if they had handled this, as they had
done Tournay and Doway, it had been ours before then, the Garrison being no
stronger then in those places, seeing all the resistance they could make was
only with the Musket, and that principally by vollies, and those most commonly
without aim: It Is true, the Cannon they had within was well disposed, but it
was only against our batteries, where we had twenty-eight pieces of great
Cannon to silence the Enemies, if those that were to manage them would ply
them hard: that in respect of those five or six pieces upon their Bastion on
the right, where as I have said our Batteries could not play, it was an easy
matter to make them unserviceable by planting five or six of ours upon a little
rising before the Lorraine quarters that was open to the back of that Bastion,
and from whence they might easily dismount their Guns: But all the design these
people had, was but to lessen the Marshal General, whom they asperst with
protracting the War, for no other end, but to continue his own greatness and
Authority.

And through most quarters of the Army, this was the only discourse, which was
intended only to hasten the siege. But the French Guards, and the Regiment of
Picardy, having retaken their turn upon the 7th at night, it was imagined they
might fall upon the Counterscarp that night; and accordingly the Marquis de
Humieres disposing in the evening all his Troops into convenient places, about
a eleven a clock shot off three pieces from our Batteries, which was the signal
to fall on in two several places, the Guards on the right, and the Picards on
the left, which they performed very readily, and with a commanded party ran
immediately to their Pallisadoes: at first they made good resistance, and most
of them that were drawn out having put themselves out of their reach, it was
necessary the Bodies should advance, which they did, with the success they
desired, for the Enemy seeing himself attaqu't in several places, began to
lessen his fire; and their Pallisadoes being broken by our Cannon in many
places, they left their works free for our Troops and Volunteers to get in,
which they did, and immediately beat them from their works, and lodged
themselves as largely and as conveniently as they could desire: There were some
of our Volunteers, with the Marquis Rambures at the head of them, that charged
to the very halfmoon, before the Gate, but not being above seven or eight, and
the rest of the Officers and Soldiers busy in securing the quarters they had
got, they were not relieved; and the Marquis, his Nephew, and three or four of
that small party having been wounded they were forced to retire, and the Enemy
remained Master of the half moon he had almost abandoned: the besieged also
gave fire to a Mine that was under the point of the Counterscarp, at the place
where the Guards stormed, but without any other effect then removing so much
earth and rubbish as was necessary for the accommodation of our lodging. At
this storm Cavois, and the Chevalier d' Assigny, both Lieutenants of the
Guards, were slain, with four or five Sergeants, and about 100 common Soldiers
killed and wounded.

On the Picards side there were two Captains, Previgny-Rambouillet, and
Villedieu slain, of the Soldiers I know not the number. There were some
Volunteers wounded also in these attaques, amongst the rest the Count of S.
Paul, in the Arm, and the Chevalier of Lorrain in the leg, but both slightly.
The next day being Thursday the twenty-fourth, the Swisses relieved the French
Guards at ten in the morning: The Officers and Soldiers that had been in the
storm, not being able to do more by reason of the ill weather it was, the
Swisses carried on their Trenches along the Pallisades about eight paces for
their enlargement, from the left to the Angle of return; where they made a
double about six or seven fathoms, and at the same time began two Mines under
their Parapet, with design to have attempted their half moon, as soon as they
had finished them: one of them being complete about two hours after midnight,
Aspremont, that managed them, was of opinion they should not spring it, because
he was mistaken seven or eight Fathom, and the hollow of the Mine inclined a
little too much to the right hand to be exactly under the corner of the
half moon; insomuch as they spent the rest of the night in perfecting the
other; where many Volunteers had put themselves for occasion of showing their
courage, and most of them to accompany the Count de Soisson, who was always at
the head of the work; yet he lodged twice in the Trenches for their once, being
always on the Guards with the Swisses, who mounted at this work twice in six
hours as well as the French Guards.

When it was day they wrought no further: nevertheless the Marquis being come
the next morning to see what they had done over night, and having conferred with
Pradelle Lieutenant General that day, and with the Comte de Soissons, the two
last resolved to carry on their approaches to the Parapet before they were
relieved, that so they might facilitate the attempting the half moon to the
French Guards, who were to come to their relief; which was immediately
undertaken, and very happily performed: for though it was done in the open day,
and in spite of all their works, there was but one Soldier killed, and but
two wounded, so as by Noon it was capable of receiving five and twenty or
thirty men.

At the same time the French Guards relieved the Trenches, and the Swiss put
them in possession of this post, which seemed to be defensible enough; but the
enemy having considered of what importance it was, they powered down Soldiers
into the ditch of the half moon, which was almost dry, and made it inaccessible
by a double Pallisadoe on each side of the ditch, placed upon a kind of Freez,
with the points upwards on those on the outside to keep us from going down into
the ditch, and the other planted on the top of the Parapet. An invention I had
never seen before, and well enough contrived, to make our descent difficult,
under which the Enemy lay secure, throwing their Grenades into our Trenches,
and making a noise as if they were upon the point of sallying; and being
protected by their shot from the Courlin, and the traversers they had toward
the half moon on the right hand, they terrified those that were at the head of
the Trenches.

Godonit, a Lieutenant, Commanded to that quarter, was slain by a Granado;
Briconnet that came in his place, was killed there also; and Derville, a
Lieutenant that succeeded both in his turn, was shot in three places, and
carried off; after him S. Marcell, and S. Seine, two under-Lieutenants were
both wounded; Magalotti, that Commanded the Battallion of the Guards received a
shot from a Musket in his side; Bonvizi, a Captain had another in his mouth,
which carried away some of his teeth; Biscarras had one in his arm, and
Montgimont, Major of the Regiment of Guards, had a wound he died of a short
time after: There were besides some Sergeants, and a considerable number of
Soldiers slain; and the work being cleared the Enemy with their Halbards
overturned all, and did what they could to stop the mouth of the Mine up till
night.

That which happened in the Trenches being told the King, who from the
difficulties of the siege began to be impatient, to bring it to an issue, and
the rather because the Raines had incommoded them much, and Marcin was arrived
at Ipre with 11 or 12000 men, with a design to fall upon some of our quarters,
as he should have opportunity. He Commanded two Companies of Musketeers into
the Trench again, that night, with resolution to fall upon the half moon on so
many sides as might assuredly render him Master thereof: which succeeded
accordingly; the Musketeers falling on at the same time, on the right and left
hand of the point of the half moon, and the French Guards on the front, the
besieged were not able to sustain them, but after some resistance, retired into
the Town in confusion, leaving all their Arms, and some dead in the place, and
seven or eight Prisoners: after this the Musketeers Commanded the Bastines,
and the Chevalier de Noailles, Marshall de Logis, began to lodge; after them
came others of the Regiment of Guards, who with the Chevalier Cauvesson, and
Captain Camisson, were drawn out thence, and made a good post, which they kept
till the next day about ten or eleven a clock, when the Swisses came to relieve
them. The Enemy seeing the half moon on the left hand was lost also, they beat
a parley, and desired to capitulate.

This last half moon was stormed by the Regiments of Auvergne, and Roussillon,
and by 200 commanded men out of the Kings Regiment, of whom all the Officers
almost were wounded, and some of the other Regiments also; there were some
Sergeants killed, and Soldiers a good number; there was at the other storm
some seven or eight of the Kings Musketeers, killed, and fifteen or twenty
wounded, but of Officers there was only Colbert, Captain of the second Company,
that received a shot, and that but slight too. There were several Volunteers
hurt, and amongst the rest, the Marquis of Bourbonne lost an eye: The Guards
also lost some Soldiers, but they had never an Officer killed, but Arcis
Catinat, a Captain who was shot in the knee with a Musket Bullet, and died in
a few days after.

In short, cessation of Arms concluded, the News was carried with all speed to
the King, about Saturday noon, and certainly it was as acceptable as could have
come; for the Foot began to be weary of the service, and of the ill weather,
which for the five or six last nights had been very bad; however the Trenches
were reinforc't with more exactness then before, because we understood very
well the Enemy was at Ipre, and it was of highest reputation to his Majesty's
honor that they should put in no relief, now it was so near a surrender.

Upon this consideration he left his quarters at Loos, and removed to the
Marquis of Humieres at Helesme, whither* he brought all his Guards de Corpse,
and two Battallions of French Foot and Swisses, that being the convenientest
place to give relief to all quarters, but especially the Lorrainers, where they
had no other Foot, then the two Lorrain Regiments, in whom they had no great
confidence, as well for their number, as that they were ill armed. Besides, the
King was there at the foot as it were of the Trenches, and had intelligence
every moment, and his presence made all things be executed with more care and
expedition.

The Enemy having demanded parley, they sent out the Marquis of Richebourg with
their propositions, who was received by the Marquis de Bellefons that day,
Lieutenant General, and conveyed to the King, of whom he at first desired two
or three days time, in expectation of relief, engaging if they came not, to
surrender upon reasonable conditions; but these proposals not answering the
impatience the King was in of perfecting his conquest, he sent him back
immediately, and commanded the Marquis of Bellefons to renew the Batteries, and
ply their Guns as fast as they could. But some of them that attended Richebourg
back, having told him his Propositions were unreasonable in the Condition the
Town stood then, all their outworks being taken, and the Rampart that remained
being hardly defensible; that it would bring the safety of the Town, and the
prudence of the Governor in question, who had managed his affairs so
honorably hitherto, if by delaying for a few hours, they should incense his
Majesty, and make his own condition worse, and expose the people to the hazard
of being plundered, and all the calamities of a Sack. Moreover, that he had been
overseen not to bring some of the chief Citizens along with him (who were a
considerable body) to have a care of their interest in the Capitulation. Now
whether he was by these arguments effectually persuaded, or whether he had
Order from the Governor, to abate of his former demands, he condescended to
propose that some small time might be allowed him to return and confer with the
several interests. In short, after some going to and fro, which continued till
eight a clock at night, all things were agreed.

The Governor and the Citizens having jointly sent out their Hostages, the
Regiment of Castelnau, which was then in the Trenches on the left side, was
about eleven that night put into possession of one of the Gates of the Town,
and about eight or nine in the morning the Garrison marched out with Arms and
Baggage, their Horse consisted of six Companies of the Regiment of Maciet, of
four of Erbais, of three of Gavelans, two of Richebourg, and some others I know
not whose, the whole number might be about 7 or 800. The Infantry consisted of
300 natural Spaniards, or thereabouts, drawn out of several Terces, and near as
many from Naples, but not so good Soldiers, about as many English, and some
150 Irish, proper men, and who had the appearance of old Soldiers. There was
also besides these a part of the Regiment of Rache, which were reported to be
but six Companies, but they made up above 600 men, which made it be believed
that they being composed of Walloons as they were, the most part of the Curlins
of the Town and their new Levies had put themselves into those Companies,
because there was not found one person of that kind, though we were informed
during the siege that there was 1500 of them within: And this with the
Governors Company consisting of 30 men, was the whole number of their Foot,
and all these by an inferior Officer with twenty of the Guards only conducted
to the Ipre the Count de Brouay not being persuaded to go any-where else,
because it was rumored in the Army they would attempt this place again.

Whilst in this manner the Garrison marched out, and the Champagne Brigade, and
two other of Horse, viz. that of Bissy, and that of Resnel entered the Town,
the King gave order that the Army should march to see if by any means he could
engage the Enemy. It is remarkable, that from the time the King understood they
parlied in the Town, all his trouble was to find out a way to give the Enemy
Battle, whilst they were together. Having, to that end had conference with the
Marshal Turenne, he made the Marquis of Crequy, with his Horse and Dragoons to
march that very night, being Saturday; he gave order also to the Comte de
Lillebonne with his Lorrainers, that he should follow the Marquis as fast as
was possible: Insomuch as these Troops having refresh't a little at Menene,
were the next day encamp't beyond Harlebec; and having from thence past the
Lis, at Deinse, were advanced as far as the Canal betwixt Bruges and Gaunt. The
King having only past through Lille as it werre, and stayed the time of singing
a Te deum, marched himself on Sunday after dinner; but it being late he could
march that night not above three quarters of a League, which was near the Abbey
of Marquette. The next day being Monday, the 29th, he marched very early in the
morning, with a design to encamp also at Harlebec, where the two Brigades of
Horse belonging to Choiseul and Fourilles were drawn out under the Marquis de
Bellefons to march toward Gaunt, and to follow the steps of the Marquis de
Crequy, and the Lorrainers. The next day the Army past the Lis at Deinse, where
the King took up his quarter, his Troops encamping upon the way, whereby they
might upon all occasions relieve the Marquis of Crequy, if there should be any
necessity; and the same night he sent away Podwits, Marshall de Camp, with the
two Horse Brigades of Ar^agnan an Montauban to join with the Marquis de
Bellefons; but they hearing the Marquis had already past the Canal near the
Village called Vinderhout, some three quarters of a League from Gaunt, at a
Bridge the inhabitants had made for the convenience of their commerce, they
followed the same way, and found them encampt in two Villages about a League
and a half on the other side of the Bridge. The Marquis of Crequy being always
about half a League before to interpose and stop them in case the Enemies
design were to return to Gaunt, as the King, and the Marshall General conceived
they would, in which they found afterward, they were not much deceived: for,
Marcin, who was at Ipre, having no news on Sunday noon that Lille did
capitulate, and considering there were no Forces left in Gaunt, Brussels, nor
generally in all Brabant nor Hinault, he saw plainly all diligence was to be
used to retire with his Troops to the relief of those places that might be in
great necessity for want of them, so as he discampt within an hour after he had
received the news, marching directly for Bruges, and from thence for Gaunt, but
with his Horse only, because he judged the Foot would not be able to follow so
fast, which obliged him to send them down the River from Ipre to Dixmude by
water.

Marcin being with the greatest diligence he could marched to Bruges, understood
there by the people of the Country, that the Marquis of Crequy had past the
Canal, and that he was got into a Country very inconvenient for Horse, where he
would have much a do to get off should he advance against him. Upon this he
immediately sounds to horse, and putting himself at the head of about 40.
divisions, he marched along the way to Gaunt, without any delay, to the place
where he heard our Troops were; in which expedition he spent most part of that
night, but coming near them, and having taken some Prisoners, he found the
Marquis was not alone, that Bellefo^s was not far off, (...) at last that the
King had past (...) at Deinse, all his Troops (...) along continually on that
(...) know not well how well (...) this news was to him; but (...)rtain a party
of his of a (...) 100 came up to the Marquis his out Guards about two a clock
after midnight, and only giving them an alarm retired.

The Marquis of Crequy, who had kept those Guards on Horseback all night,
commanded out a Cornet with 25 Horse, which was the Guard aforesaid, to follow
them immediately, and either bring him some Prisoners, or be taken himself;
which was performed happily enough, for within an hour he returned with some
Cavaliers Prisoners, which eased the Marquis of the disquiet he was in, by
informing him who they were had given him the alarm; and accordingly, at the
same instant he gave order to all his Troops to march, keeping before him only
that Regiment that had the Guard, which was that day the Kings Regiment,
Commanded by the Comte de Torigny Matignon, and which was the first of the
Marquis de Rouvrays Brigade. He had scarce past a League or such a matter in
this order, but he overtook three of the Enemies Troops; who made a head, and
took up all the Ground they could possible in that place: our forelorns charged
immediately, but having to do with those that were drawn, and stood firm in a
good place, which is great advantage in an enclosed Country, they could move
them but little; and there could have been nothing but Skirmishing at a
distance, had not the Marquis dismounted 100 of his Dragoons commanded by
Ranqueil, who being drawn upon the right and left hand of the way, and giving
their Volleys at a convenient distance, the Enemy was so startled, that the
Marquis, with the Marquis Peguilin, who was sent to him with some Troops from
the Marshal d' Aumont, the Comte de Torigny, the Marquis du Rouvray, with ten
or twelve Officers besides that were next them, having charged that Troop that
had possessed it self of the way, they break it, so that all they that made head
at first, took to their heels and fled in spite of all their Officers could
do, and were pursued by our Horse above a League, where some of them made a
stand, but 'twas but for a short time, for they were routed again, and pursued
above two Leagues more, and not one person faced about unless some Officers,
who paid dear for their valor. There were many killed, many of the most
considerable wounded and taken Prisoners, amongst the rest, the Chevalier
Vielleneuve Commissary General of their Horse, the Prince of Salme, the young
Rhingrave, Vaudemont, and other Officers, I know not their names; there were
also two pair of Kettledrums, and three or four Colors taken, with many Horse,
and about 3 or 400 men, insomuch as the Enemy was chased into the Territories
of Holland. We lost there some persons of condition, amongst the rest the
Marquis of Crequy's Master of the Horse, Gassay Matignon, and some others were
wounded, and the Marquis of Crequy and Peguilin had both of them their Horses
shot under them.

On the other side, the Marquis of Bellefons, who, as we said, following four
Brigades of Horse, considering with himself that he was in the Rear of all, and
that following their steps that were before, he should never see the Enemy, not
being able to pass either of one hand or other, by reason of the hedges and
enclosures on each side, and conceiving moreover in the confusion they were
then in, the Enemy must needs retire to Bruges, he leaves the Troops of Crequy
and the Lorrainers to pursue that way, and facing about with his own, he
marches about two Leagues to the right hand, without meeting with any thing,
when turning again a little to the left he had not marched long but he fell upon
the heels of Marcin, who was marching away with 3000 Horse; after he had seen
the Van of his Troops disordered, he le^t the way open for such as did run, and
in good order retrea^s toward Bruges, having left his Cravates, and the
Holstein Regiments (which he had great Confidence in, being most old Soldiers,
and the Colonel a Dane, who not finding his conditions so good under the
Emperor, had made a better bargain with the King of Spain) to bring off the
Rear. Bellefons Van coming up to the Rear Guard, they charged them immediately
with the Queens Company, and Mousieurs; the first under Villiers Command, the
other under Valseme, who were at the head of the Brigade of Choiseul, whose
forelorne being well received, they durst not pass a little Bridge the Enemy
had before them; but the gross of our Troop coming up, this Holstein Regiment,
though it received the charge very well, and rallied often, was at last
constrained to give Ground and run, but not with that confusion as they did on
Crequy's side: There was 150 Prisoners, and amongst them some considerable
Officers, as Don Antonio de Cordove Lieutenant General of their Horse, besides
Kettle-drums and Colors. On our side also there were some slain, and
particularly of the two Companies of the Queen and Monsieur, who had been in
the Van all the while: and some Officers wounded, as la Salle, Cornet to
Monsieurs light Horse.

It was not long they were engaged before the news arrived at the Camp, of
which Pradelle advertising his Majesty, though it was not five a clock in the
morning, his Majesty (who was then at Deinse) was on Horseback before most of
his party understood the occasion. And in full Gallop taking his way that lead
to the Canal, his Troops had some trouble to keep pace; when he came near the
Bridge he put himself at the head of Rocehforts Brigade, and having taken up
for a while to give time for his train to come up, he made an Alt, attending
some news from the Vicomte Turenne, who having already past with the Regiments
of Monclar and Desfourneaux, was advanced as far as the Village where the
Lorrainers lay to be always in readiness for the relief of those should have
most need of them. Monsieur, and almost all the persons of quality of the
Court, were in this party, and several Volunteers with them. But because the
passage was strait and dangerous by reason of an old Channel, over which there
was a Bridge of Stone, the Vicomte Turenne would not suffer his Troops to pass
till he had first had certain news of the Marquis de Crequy: so as they
continued there till two in the afternoon, before they learnt by the Prisoners
that were carried by, that the Enemy was routed, and our Troops returning to
their Camp, which occasioned them all to repair to his Majesty, who was then at
the Canal, who after consultation with the Marshall General resolved to stay
where he was, till he had news of the Marquis de Bellefons also, for whom he
was in great trouble, he not coming in till night.

Resolution was then taken to encamp near Gaunt, and the King Commands 3000
Foot from the Guards Brigad from Denise, having with him no Infantry at all,
but some select parties drawn out of the Queens Regiments and de Sourches,
which the Marquis of Crequy had with him to dispose here and there as he saw
occasion.

In the mean time there were some proposed to his Majesty to summon Gaunt,
alleging that the Town being great, and having only a Garrison of 200 men in
the Castle, and seeing the Troops that were coming to their releif broken and
repelled, they might in probability enter into a new Treaty under the
protection of France, which was reported to have been already proposed by some
of the principal inhabitants, adding moreover that we were to make use of our
time, and not neglect such opportunities which happened but seldom, and that
there could be no inconvenience at all in the attempt; but the King gave no ear
to those propositions, but made answer that he was not in a condition to do it
at that time; notwithstanding this expedient was found out, the Comte of
Chamilly, as of himself, should desire to speak with some of his acquaintance
in the Town, it being impossible but he had gained some in the time of his
residence there with the Prince of Condy, and under this pretense give them
notice of his Majesty's intention, and sound them what effect the taking of
Lille, and the routing of Marcin had had upon their spirits: But this trade
lasted not long, for the Governor would not suffer Chamilly to come into the
Town, nor speak with any particular person; so as he went as he came, and they
thought no more of the Conquest of Gaunt.

The next morning, which was the last of August the, King returned with his
Army to Deinse, from whence he went to Lille, the first of September, leaving
the Camp with the Marshall General, with whom he was agreed what course they
should steer. It was reported a resolution was taken to attempt no more that
year, but to put their Troops into their Winter quarters the latter end of
October, and as many as they could in the places newly conquered, that they
might have some refreshments, after the tediousness of the Campania, which
began earlier then ordinary, and was more troublesome, by reason their great
marches had put them into an ill condition, most of them after a seven years
peace having been unaccustomed to the incommodities of War.

The Vicomte Turenne remained at Deinse, and the King went from Lille to Arras,
where the Queen attended him; from Arras both their Majesty's went on to
Peronne, and from thence arrived the sixth of September at S. Germans.

After which the Marshall Geral having news about the ninth or tenth of the
same month that the Enemy was returned to Alost, and fortifying apace, he
marched immediately, and in three days coming before the Town, they within
refusing to open the Gates, he stormed them the same day he arrived, without
any intrenchments at all: the French Guards, and the Regiment of Picardy, with
some select men, fell on on two or three several places, but found more
resistance then they expected: They lost several out of Picardy, which had
thirteen or fourteen Officers wounded, and many Soldiers slain; of the Guards
there was one Ensign killed, and some Soldiers, and Bartillac a Lieutenant was
with a Musket Shot shot into the body.

However the next morning the Enemy surrendered; and marched out with their Arms
according to Articles, and presently after we fell a demolishing the works,
which though at that time could be of no advantage to us, would have very much
incommoded us had the Enemy had time to have maintained them; the Army
continued here some time, and from thence went and encampt at Likerque, where
there was a Castle made some show of holding out, but not long: Here the Army
rested some time, that is, as long as they found any forage; and afterward
they changed their quarters and marched to Gamerage between Ath and Brussels,
that they might at once keep what they had got, and eat up the Enemies Country.

At length the time being come for drawing into Winter quarters, every Officer
General that was designed to any Command went to the quarter appointed him. The
Marquis de Bellefons should have Commanded Lille, Orchies, Doway, Courtray, and
Armentieres; but whether that employment pleased him not, or whether he had
other designs on Foot, he came to the Court himself, and begged of his Majesty
he might be permitted to serve him in some other place: Insomuch as the Marquis
d' Humieres had his Command, and he the Marquis of Humieres's, which was
Charleroy, and all the Country between the Sambre and the Meuse. The Count of
Duras had under him all the Troops in Tournay, Oudenarde, and Ath: The Comte de
Passage was dispatched toward the Sea side with his Troops for securing Bruges,
and Furnes. The Government of Bergue was given to Casaux, and that of Furnes,
to the Baron de le Guard; Courtray was given to Pertuis Captain of the Guards
to Monsieur Turenne: Genlis had Armentieres; Le Brett, Doway, and Rochefort and
Oudenarde, who had been Governor there before in the former Wars. They put men
also into Orchies, S. Amand, and such other places as he believed might
facilitate their Contribution. The Marquis of Crequy, with the most part of the
Forces he had commanded this Campagnia, was sent back into Luxembourg, and he
had with him for Officers Podwits and de Espence: the Count de Vivonne stayed
at Lille, with the Marquis of Hunieres. In short, all the Officers General,
which had served in this Campania, except Pradelle and the Marquis of Peguilin,
had Commands during the Winter.

Many people admire that the King broke the course of his Conquest so suddenly,
seeing he was absolute Master of the Field, and that after defeat of Marcin,
the terror was so great all over the Low Countries, he seemed to have no more
to do then to take his choice which Town was the next he would take in; but it
ought to be considered, that the ^ear being far gone, and the ^oot much
lessened, it was no easy matter to undertake great enterprises, for as much as
those places that remained to be taken were very strong and well provided with
all things necessary for a long siege; or else of so small importance, they
were not worth the pains of thinking of them. Besides, the great Towns we had
taken, as Lille, Tournay, Doway, and Courtray, were very hard to be kept; and
leaving sufficient Garrisons there, we had not men enough to attempt any thing
against Cambray, Valenciennes, or Monts, or any other strong Town in the
Country. Wherefore the safest Council was followed, which was to keep what we
had got, till we should see what party would side with the house of Austria,
and its Allies: And perchance also his Majesty would not take away all hopes of
an accommodation from the people, all his Neighbors having interposed, and
principally the English, Swede, and Hollander, who offered upon a cessation of
Arms to see his Majesty should have reason done. The Pope also had put in, and
sent a Nuntio on purpose to Cologne, where all the Deputies of the Princes of
Europe were to meet, in oder to find out some expedient for a Peace.

Here ends the Narrative of the French Writers. Unto which for the Readers
satisfaction I shall subjoyn the proceedings of the French in Franche Comte the
beginning of the next years Campaign, and those few Occurrences in the
Netherlands, between the French and Spaniards, which happened between the end of
the Campaign, and the conclusion of the Peace.
THe French Army being retired into their Winter Quarters, Prisoners were
exc^ang'd on both sides, and the first action of their new Dominion, was to
oblige the Towns lately conquered to contribute toward their maintenance: The
Tax was so high that 50000 Livres were imposed upon Lille alone; which Place,
and diverse other French Garrisons, became shortly after much infested with
sicknesses, to which great numbers of the Conquerours themselves were forced to
yield without quarter. Now although the terms on which the Towns abovesaid had
resigned themselves into the French hands, were fair and easy enough, yet such
is the humor of that Nation, that they are by all the world observed to govern
their good fortune with little moderation, as accordingly they did at Lille,
insomuch that soon after there happened a great Tumult in* this City by a quarrel
arising between the Citizens and Soldiers; which came to that hight, that one
of the Captains of the Guard, and about twenty Soldiers, were killed. This
accident occasioned an additional supply of three thousand Soldiers more to be
added to that Garrison, besides the Kings Regiment of Guards, formerly designed
to take up their quarter there. And for terror to the City for the future, ten
or a dozen of the Citizens were hanged, as the principal causes of this fray,
and the whole City disarmed.

The French King, though retired to Paris (where, and at Versailles, he made
most magnificent Entertainments for his whole Court, as Triumphs for his
Conquests) yet had his eye still toward the Low Countries, and accordingly
designed an Army of twenty thousand men to be sent into Alsatia as soon as the
next season should open the Campaign, under the Command of the Prince of Condy;
intending also to send another of fifteen thousand into Catalonia, of which his
brother the Duke of Orleance was designed General. But the Diet of Ratisbone
refusing to undertake the Protection of the Low Countries, as part of the Roman
Empire, in a Warlike manner, till milder courses should be tried, agreed to
endeavor to procure a Treaty between the two Crowns; and accordingly several
of the Electors sent Agents to the Courts of both Kings. A suspension of Arms
was proposed by the King of France, but not accepted, by the Governor of the
Spanish-Netherlands, who about the Middle of Winter had a Successor designed
him; and by particular Commission from the Queen of Spain he was constituted
Sole Plenipotentiary for Negotiating a Peace, whereof the Pope was likewise
nominated by her to be Sole Mediator, and the place Aix la Chappelle. Some
months passed before it was believed that these Overtures would come to any
thing; during which the French King employed all possible diligence in making
preparations to invade Franche Comte with an Army under the Prince of Condy,
and leaving Paris, put himself upon the way to go thither in person, where he
arrived about the beginning of February: On the first of which month, the
Prince of Condy with his Army invested the City of Besanzon, sending a summons
for its surrender, from whence he was answered that they were ready to receive
his Majesty as into an Imperial City. But it being replied, that their City
ceased to be so by the Treaty of Munster; and offers being made to them, that
upon the giving up their City, they should not have their Privileges in the
least infringed, they thought fit to surrender without any resistance. In the
mean time the Duke of Luxemburg, with a Regiment of Orleance, and a body of
Horse Commanded by the Monsieur de Bligny, with some few other Musketeers
appeared before Salines, immedialy entering the Suburbs, where some opposition
was made, the defend^nts s^tting fire to some houses, and discharging in
several great and small shot, killing only one French Soldier, and wounding
about eight of the Light-horsemen; but finding little encouragement to make a
long defense, they presently surrendered both Town and Castle. The same fortune
also ran Besterans, with with the Castle of Rochfort, and some other small
Forts. The Government of Bisanzan, was soon after conferred on the Marquis de
Villers, and a Swiss Garrison placed therein; and that of Sali^s on Monesiur de
Maupean.

On the eleventh of the same month the Prince of Condy came with his Army
before Dole, which had been reinforced a little before with an Army of 3 or
4000 Forces of the Militia of the Country; and about two days after the King
in person arrived at the Leaguer from Dijon; upon whose coming, Two of the
half-moons belonging to the Town, fell down of themselves and one of their
Bastions cleft; which somewhat disheartened the defendants, who nevertheless,
refused to return an answer to the summons sent to them; whereupon his Majesty
ordered a Battery of thirty Guns to be raised against the Town.

The Artillery having made a considerable breach in the works on the west side
of the Town, order was given to assault the Counterscarpe, on the 25th of
February at eight in the Evening in three places, viz. by the Guards Commanded
by the Duke de Roquelour; by the Regiments of S. Vallier, and de la Ferte,
Commanded by the Count de Guadagne, and the Lions Regiment Commanded by the
Count de Chamilly, who after a stout resistance made themselves masters that
night of the Outworks, lodging themselves upon the Counterscarpe, and gaining
some half-moons, in one of which the Marquis de Villeroy, particularly showed
eminent proofs of his Valor, himself siezing one of his Enemies Ensigns. In
this attaque were slain the Marquis de Fourilles, Captain of the Guards, with
the Lieutenant Colonel of the Regiment of Villeroy, and some other inferior
Officers; the Count de S. Mesme, the Sieur Bonvise, and some others hurt.

The next day his Majesty sent the Marquis de Grammont, to invite them again to
a surrender, and he so effectually prevailed upon them, by representing to them
the small probability they had of making a long defense, the great dangers they
might run by their further opposition, and the assurance his Majesty gave them
for the preservation of their Privileges upon their surrender, that they
presently agreed upon Terms, and his Majesty entered the Town the next day,
causing Te Deum to be sung for their happy success, and confirming the
Government upon the Count de Guadagne.

The next day, the Army appeared before Gray, and within two days began to
open their Trenches; but by the mediation of the Marquis de Yennes, formerly
Governor of Franche Comte for the Spaniard, the City was soon prevailed upon
to open the Gates. His Majesty conferred the Government of this Place upon the
Sieur de Bissy, Camp-Master and Commander of a Brigade of Horse.

About the same time Joux, a considerable place of strength upon the borders of
Swisserland, surrendered to a part of the French Army at the first summons, and
the Command thereof was given to the Sieur de Chamarante, one of his Majesty's
Bedchamber; so likewise did the Fort of S. Anne.

Thy County being thus almost entirely reduced in the short space of one month,
the King in favor of the Prince of Condy, united the same to the Duchy of
Burgundy) the Princes Government) and Granted two Reversions thereof, one to
the Duke d' Enguyen his son, and the other to the Duke de Bourbon his Grandson.
He likewise made the Marquis d' Yennes Lieutenant General of his Forces there,
allowing him the same Pension which formerly he received from Spain, and giving
the Command of a Regiment of Horse to the Count de S. Amor his Nephew, for his
good service in winning the said Marquis to a compliance, whereby the nimble
Conquest of this County was much facilitated.

This settlement being constituted there, the French Forces drew off toward
Luxembourg, and the King returned to Paris in the latter end of February.

During the Winter, the French and Spanish Forces in Flanders, made several
excursion in Parties with various success; nothing considerable being achieved
by the Former, but the reduction of the Castles of Winnedale and Ligny.

The King of great Britain, and the States of the United Netherlands having
entered into a League for an efficacious Mediation of Peace between the two
Crowns now in War, and obtained from the Most Christian King a promise he would
lay down his Arms on a condition the Spaniards would either quit to him all
those places already taken by him in the last years Expedition; or else
transfer to him the Remainder of their right to the Duchy of Luxembourg (or to
the County of Burgundy) together with Cambray, Cambresis, Doway, Air, S.
Omers, Bergue, S. Wynox, Fuernes and Link, with their dependances; (in which
case the French were to restore to the Spaniards all the places already taken)
In which League it was further agreed between the King of England and those
States, to employ force to bring the two Crowns to accept of these terms, if
either of them should refuse the same; The French King accepted of the same,
and in order to an accommodation accordingly proposed a cessation of all Acts
of Hostility during the months of March, April, and May following; to which
also the Marquis de Castle Rodrigo consented, and nominated the Baron of
Bergeyck to be sent with sufficient Powers and Instructions to Aix la Chappelle
to assist at the Treaty of Peace there.

Notwithstanding the cessation, the French forbore not to make all possible
Preparations for War; and Monsieur de Bellefons and Duras pretending want of
notice of the cessation, (which they would not take from any besides their
General) invested Guena, and in a few days constrained the same to be
surrendered.

But the French King thought not fit to hold a place, which had been taken
during the Truce; and therefore, even before the Treaty, gave order for the
delivering of it back into the hands of the Spaniards: But withal he declared
that he would take the Field in the beginning of April, and unless the Peace
were perfectly concluded by the 25th of May next ensuing, it should be free for
him to pursue his Conquests; yet obliging himself, in case of Peace by that
time to restore back to the Spaniards all such places as he should make himself
master of by his Arms.

Monsieur Colbert was employed by his French Majesty to Aix la Chapel for
negotiating the Peace, and the Here Van Beverning by the United Provinces, as
Sir William Temple, Resident at Brussels for his Majesty of Great Britain was
likewise ordered thither for the same effect: Signieur Aug. Franciotti
Plenipotentiary for the Pope, and three Plenipotentiaries more from the three
Ecclesiastical Electors of Germany.

In the mean time the French King gives command for the demolishing of the
Fortifications of most of the considerable Towns which he had taken in Franche
Comte, and also for the building of a Citadel at Besanzon. The former was
accordingly executed; but in regard the Peace began now to be hopeful, it was
thought fit to forbear the latter.

After many doubts concerning the issue of this Treaty, at last the
Plenipotentiaries signed an agreement on the second of May, which being
ratified by the French King and the Queen Regent of Spain, was proclaimed at
Brussels on the 30th of the same month, and shortly after sworn to by both
Kings.

The substance of this conclusion was, (1.) That the most Christian King should
keep and effectually enjoy all Places, Forts, etc. that he had taken or
fortified by Arms during the last years Campaign, viz. The fortresses of
Charleroy, the Towns of Binch and Atthe, the the Places of Doway, the Fort of
Scarpe being comprised, Tournay, Oudenard, Lille, Armentieres, Courtray,
Bergues, and Fuernes, and all their Baliwicks, Castlewicks, Appurtenances and
dependances, by what name soever called, as far as ever they extend; the
Catholic King for himself and his Successors renouncing and disclaiming the
same for ever. (2.) That immediately after the Publication of the Peace, the
French King should withdraw his Forces from the Garrisons of all Places, Towns,
Castles and Forts of the County of Burgundy, commonly called la Franche Comte,
and restore the same to the Catholic King. (3.) That the Treaty of of the
Pyreneans stand good and valid, without any prejudice by this present Treaty.

FINIS.

