A DIALOGUE BETWEEN THE Pope and the Devil, ABOUT Owen and Baxter.
Pope. SHall WE allow these Scribbling Fellows to write for ever? They feed the
Press as Baxter feeds his Wolf, and it, like their Desires, is as large as
Hell; and, like the Horse-Leach, it sucks, and is never satisfied: They have a
kind of Ambitious Itch to scrible: Here comes a Heap of Octavo's, there a Heap
of Quarto's; and presently another of Folio's: and the People do so Dote on
their Labors, That a MASS BOOK, a Crucifix, or such like things cannot so much
as oblige them to cast one Courteous Eye toward them: They have such Hoops and
such CALLS to the Unconverted to come to the SAINTS Everlasting Rest, that they
extremely lessen our Number: My Holiness nor my Holy water have no Influence
over them: They Ridicule and Laugh at my Pictures, and are so far from falling
down to my Breaden-GOD, that the Villains despise it as they do the Organs in
the Church! Is there no ART to lessen their increasing Number?


Devil. Yes, yes. Take away their Family Books, my Friend, in the first place,
and call-in their CALLS in the next, and that will do the Business. Thou
know my unweariedness to serve thee: I have gone about not only like a
Roaring Lion, seeking whom I may devour: but I have often acted the Part of an
Eves-dropper: I have peeped trough the Glass-Windows and there have I seen such
Swarms of the Ordinary sort of People both in City and Country pooring upon
Baxter's Family Book (as they call it) as would have amazed thee: Then would
thou have crossed thy self to have seen them cross thee by taking such cross
ways to thy Purgatory: I have heard them read on a Sunday night, till their
very Eyestrings were ready to crack again, and then they would take a little
Breath, snuff the Candles, trim their Lamps, and to it again, and ever as one
grew weary, then Tom was called, after him Harry the other Apprentice; thus they
took it by turns, as the Oars do their Fares: A Pox on them, thought I, If this
be their Trade, there is no Footing for me. I could have wished that their
Candles might have burnt blew, or, that Guy Faux had been in some Cellar under
them with a Cardinals Cap full of Gun powder that he might have sent them
hastily and quickly to their Mansion House above: For I see no likelihood of
working them to a Conformity to my pleasure below.


Pope. Nay, If they puzzle the Devil, no wonder if they puzzle the Pope: Well
but this we may do, We may make our Jesuits render, them as odious as Frost in
July: We may stir up the looser sort of Protestants against them; we can make
them New Forms of Prayer, give them new Commendments to obey, and make their
Belief run Retrograde.


Devil. This I have done already by my Agent Ashington: but what avails this?
this is but like throwing Oil upon the Fire to quench it, they know well enough
the Devil had his Paw in this Py^ I know it will please the Papists, but
Protestants will loath it, and the ^^^^s^ant Dissenters abhor it, and brand my
Labors with the Title of Blasphe^^; They think none but such Villains as had a
hand in the late King's Death ever made use of such a Prayer as this is, this
has done ten times more hurt than good to our Design, for now they begin to
look upon the Common player with more kind Eyes than ever, they think the
Divine Service i^ an Angels Work to this; This has so netled them, That they
mix (...) ^ore Zeal with their Prayers than ever, they pray now with so mu^^
(...) and servency, that you would think it impossible that Heaven should deny
their requests; they pray now as though they would take up their Seats in
Heaven with Violence. Oh! Fie upon them: I have heard some of them say; They
would give no rest to their Eyes, nor slumber to their Ey^*lids till the
Kingdom of Satan and Antichrist be destroyed. They have taken pet plaguily,
that we should make them such set Forms of Prayer as these, when they had so
stiffly refused to be subject to better.


Pope. What shall we do with this stubborn, stiff-neck'd and rebellious people,
that will neither be obedient to the Pope nor the Divil? Shall we let them
alone? If we cease to plot against them, they will not cease to be our Enemies;
What agreement can there be between God and Belial? Its in vain to use
Arguments to persuade them they have things they call Shields of Godliness,
Armor of Faith and Helmets of Salvation; the Kings Evidence are not better
armed than they against all our Insinuations, Dugdale, Mowbray, Bolron, etc.
they have gotten their Steel Bodies, to dull the Points of our Sacred Daggers,
but the other have gotten steel Souls, would we could steal them out, for they
are Cannon Proof against all our Designs.


Devil. I know nothing so proper as a secret Massacre, and how to put that
Plaster to their side I know not, they are as watchful as Peter's Cock, and they
are a, numerous as the stars: Pox on 'em, would they VVatch and not Pray, or
Pray and not VVatch, we might Effect or Designs, but they do both, and that
will ruins us both.


Pope. Nay, If thou art faint-hearted, Farewell the glorious hopes of my
Conquest!

Go thou to thy Infernal Home,
And I will go to mine at Rome.

London, Printed for S. J. 1681.


