COMPLAINTS AND QUERIES UPON ENGLANDS Misery: Acted October. 13, 1659.

BY SOME OFFICERS OF THE ARMY, AGAINST The Parliament of the Commonwealth of
ENGLAND.

By a true Lover of the LAWS and LIBERTIES of ENGLAND. E. D.

LONDON, Printed by J. C. 1659.

COMPLAINTS and QUERIES upon Englands Misery, acted October. 13 1659.
Complaint. O How dolefully different is this day from this day sevennight?
when Parliament, and Council os State, Lord Mayor, Aldermen, and Common Council
of the City of London, with the Officers of the Army, met at their sacred
Solemn devotions of singing, praying, praising and preaching the praises of
God, for the late deliverance from the Northwest Insurrection; marching
afterward in great State with sound of Trumpets, atrendance of Armed
Soldiers, and aspect of innumerable people, to a most sumptious Dinner, where
they eat and drank of all choice varieties and rarities, with great welcome,
and rare Music, and all interchangeable signs and significations, of
integrated unity and amity. But now the Army has (they say) dissolved the
Parliament; And is not this days sorrow far greater then that days joy; sad
enough to break more hearts then on that day were made merry?

Query. Say ye the Parliament is dissolved, How can that be, when by an Act of
the people in Parliament, this Parliament was never to be dissolved, without an
Act of their own. Nor did those Representatives of the the people of England
ever consent to their dissolution? So that let come never so many pretended
Parliaments, Conventions, Forms pretending Supreme Power; yet will not the
supremacy of this Parlliament still impend over them? Will not the Authority of
this Parliament be still in force, to call all the said Pretentioners to an
account, and to stick in their sides, when ever the free people of England,
(continually watching their opportunitys) shall bring them back to sit in
Parliament?

Compl. However, if the Army have not dissolved, yet sure enough they have
interrupted, and put off the Parliament; which is sad enough. It being all one
with not having a remedy, as not to have Liberty to use it: So that the cry of
the good people is; The Parliament is gone, and we in probability for ever
undone.

Quaere. Whether we shall do well, so to conclude? For did they not so once
before, in Olivers time; some of them assisting him in that evil, others of the
Army afterward, strengthening him keeping out the Parliament till many of the
Commander, and some of the Soldiers troubled in Conscience left the Army; and
others so manifested their dissatisfaction, that they were lifted out by
Oliver? And is not this last evil in this second interruption greater then the
former? And therefore like to cry louder against their Consciences, to cause
them (if God please) to return? I say, I Query whether this second interruption
be not greater then the former, all things considered? For, did not the
remaining Officets of the Army (pretending to godliness) refuse to take warning
of treasuring up an evil Conscience, by the trouble of Conscience that befell
the others? Did they not assist in the Proclaiming Richard Protector? not
knowing any sufficient ground? And had they not the patience, and connivance at
least* if not giving some assistance to the said Richads callin a Free
Pauliament (as they named it); so free, that besides (through notorious
patching and shuffling) the most of them were English Cavelleers, arch
Royalists; there were called in 60 Scottish and Irish* Representatives; against
all Law, Custom, Ordinance or show of Authority whatsoever; to the dangerous
prejudice of this Nation of England (they being a third part more then the
Quorum of an English Parliament) able to make Laws upon us without our
consents, if at any time 40 of ours should not be in the House?

And moreover did not the complexion of that Parliament (as they call it)
appear as looking toward a Kings At least did not the Army suspect so much,
whereby they feared the reverting of Kings, Queens, Lands, and Fee-FarmRents?
And did not the Officers of the Army upon these and the like considerations,
set forth in Print their repentance for all their aforesaid evils, of May 6,
1659. Saying, The public concernment of this Commonwealth being through a
vicisitude of dangers and backslidings of many brought into that state and
posture wherein they now stand, AND OUR SELVES also contributing thereunto, by
wandering diverse ways, from righteous and equal paths; and also observing to
our great grief that the good SPIRIT which formerly appeared amongst us in the
carrying on of this great work did daily decline, so as the GOOD OLD CAUSE
became a reproach, etc.? And did not they and some of the former Commanders
troubled in Conscience as aforesaid joining with them, earnestly entreat in the
said Printed Declaration, (That this Parliament formerly interrupted by Oliver)
would return to the exercise and discharge of their trust, promising them (in
the said Declaration) that they would be ready in their places, as becomes them
to yield them their utmost assistance to sit*in safety, in settling and securing
the peace and freedom of this Commonwealth.

And when this Parliament with much self-denial, ventured themselves diverse
ways to sit and act, and now the conscentious Officers that before relinquished,
or were ejected out of Command are restored to their respective Commands; did
not the generallity of both sorts of the Officers aforesaid, (all pretending to
godliness) now again stop this Parliament from going to the House, and therein
seem to vomit up their repentance (repenting of that repentance) and to lick up
that Vomit which formerly they had spewed out. And did not the Same men herein
fare worse then before; not only in transgressing against their former
self-conviction, former examples of Conscience, former repentings, former
repentance of their indangering the whole Commonwealth, but against the Sage
Patriots of their Country and pious (for the Generallity) toward God, and
some of them brave Soldiers; and that after they had sat half a year, mainly
doing their Drudgery, getting Laws of Excise and Custom, raising Taxes, and
paying Soldiers by Sea and Land? Yea in the very Act of stopping the Speaker
in Kings-street, when a Lieut. Col. busling in the business, was asked why*he
did these things? Did he give any other answer, but this? That he had received
a Command so to do. And does not such an answer as this make a considered man
astonished what might be the GODLINESS (so much cried up) of a Soldier, that
out of the business of War, and resistance of the Supreme Legislative Power
obey an unrighteous command (his Conscience being witness) without dispute.

Compl. They were necessiated (they say) thus to stop the Parliament, for
self-preservation.

Quaery. Is there any doubt but that self was mainly in it? But is there any
necessity? Can there be any necessity (if we believe that GOD Governs the
World) of sinning? Or was there such a stress to be put upon Nine Men's losing
their Commissions, wherein were embarked only a little future ayry honor, and
durty riches, they having had enough already to make them of Low-men to live
like Lords? Or is not the truth of the story, that they brought themselves
into that damage* if they count it so great a damage, as to tear up all,
rather then to fall into it? For, did not forty Commanders of the North-West
expedition presently after their compassing things about Chester, subscribe a
Petition, or some such paper to have a General, and general Officers? And
when the Parliament (having private notice of it) Voted that the granting that
request was Needless, Chargeable, and Dangerous to the Commonwealth, did not
230 Officers anon after subscribe a Representation and Petition, wherein
(besides many shrewd reflections on the Parliament hinted, as it were of their
ingratitude, their oblique admonitions of the Army, etc:) desiring of the
Parliament nine Proposals; in the sixth and seventh whereof they Petition that
no Officer might be put into the Army but by a Commit of Nomination, nor put
out of the Army without a due proceeding at their Court Martial; and in the
eigth they neatly couch that their Commander in chief might be more fixed in
his Commission, then the condition of the Parliament it self was, according to
a certain Vote that they had formerly passed, touching the length of their
sitting? And were not these Proposals obvious to be interpreted (as some did
interpret them) That the Army cold better trust the said Commit of
Nomination, and Court Martial, then the Parliament; and looked more after their
own Establishment then that of the Parliament? And to graspe at a power to
change the Complexion of the Army (the Parliaments Servants,) as they the
Officers should see cause, without the Cognizance of the Parliament their
Master? Yet because in the said paper of Proposals they did so often mention
themselves to be the Parliaments faithful Servants (which title did they make
good) did not the Parliament strein hard to squeese out so much out of the said
paper as to give them thanks for the good expressions of their affections, and
faithfulness; and to tell them they had already taken into consideration some
of the particulars in the said Representation; and that they would the rest on
Saturday next? And did not the Parliament keep their promise? And within few
days were come to the sixth Proposal aforementioned? But mean while, did not nine
of their Officers, not staying for the Parliaments answer subscribe a Letter,
sending it about to the rest to subscribe it, to be sen to the Army in Scotland
and Ireland, that the Officers in both these places might subscribe to the said
Representation and Proposal, which, with the said Letter (mentioned therein)
they accordingly sent the said Letter? which attempt did it signify less then
that they were resolved here in England to adhere (and to get the rest in
Scotland and Ireland to adhere if they could) to those Proposalls what ever
answer the Parliament should give them? This original Letter with the said
nine hands, being brought by a Commander to whom it was sent to subscribe, unto
the Parliament, was it not a sufficient cause to make the Parliament the same
day it was brought in, after long debate (for they sat late) to vote the
Commissions of those nine Officers void? And thereby to experience whether the
Army, or Parliament were in chief rule? And whether the Parliament were not
better to dye in honor, then to live and loose their Authority? Now does this
story merit such a self preservation, as must be attained with an universal
desolation of the safety of three Nations? Are nine men's pomp and riches, or
rather only the continuance of addition of those two (for there was nothing but
parchment voted away from them) balanceable against the peace and prosperity of
three Nations? If they say anon the Parliament might vote out nine more and
nine, etc, etc: Is this imaginably possible (unless so many would be as
disobedient as the first nine) seeing the Parliament cannot be without an Army?
And could the Officers of the Army, yea and some of the said ejected Officers
brook it to be uncommissionated by Oliver or the other so dealt with from time
to time* for their faithfulness to the Parliament; and are they now afraid to
be voted out of Commission from time to time, whilst they stand faithful to
the Parliament? If they say (as some of them did that October. 13.) that they
were forced so to rout or stop the Parliament, that they might know whether
they were to live or dye: Is not this a strange Ceimaera, phantisied merely in
the brain, unbecomming men of valor, that had so often boldly looked death in
the face? Had the Parliament had that in their hearts, might they not as easily
have voted them to be seized upon? Did this Parliament execute the King without
unkinging of him; and could they not imprison or punish Commanders of an Army,
without first uncommissionating them? Did not therefore these Officers in
opposing the Parliaments sitting, seek a self-preservation rather from their
own jealousies, then real dangers? However, may not any Malefactor as Lawfully,
if not more Lawfully, offer violence to an Officer of the Magistate, sent by
authority to arrest, or imprison that Malefactor, alleging he did it out of
Self-preservation?

Compl. But they did put this cessation upon the Parliament (as they say
themselves) for another reason, viz: because the voting out of nine Officers at
once did put a disreputation upon the Army.

Que. Did not the Earl of Essex and hundreds of men of quality submit to the
Parliament to be laid aside and took it not to heart, as these men have done?
Were they not rather honored for their self-denial.

Que. Did not Oliver do near as much at one time; and much more at several
times to the value of an 100? Yet had they any courage on that juster occasion,
to extricate and deliver themselves? Yea could this one act, and but once acted
since the Parliament sat, in slightly punishing nine for disobedience to them,
put a disrepute on an Army of 5 or 6000? Did not they in their Address to
Richard delivered (the former convention sitting in Parliament as they called
it) importune that all Uuworthy men should be removed, in what place soever
they were, whether among themselves or etc: and then ought it no disrepute to
the Army? If they say, but those they meant were indeed unworthy, but not the
said nine: then the query will be, whether the Parliament are meetest to be the
judge of that, or the Army; yea those nine, and that in their own case? But the
maine query touching this complaint of disreputation is, whether the revenge or
remedy they took, in interrupting the Parliament of England (called together
this second time by their own entreaty) were the right ready way to cure that
their supposed disrepute? Or rather was not a direct course to accumulate more,
and worse reproach upon themselves the longest day they have to live, in the
eyes of all true Englishmen? and to leave it on record when they are dead in
the Chronicles of England? Yea have not this supposed cure, wounded the repute
and hearts of all the sober Godly people of England that adhered to the
Parliament, by the taunts of Enemies at home, crying to them, where is now your
Parliament? and by the rejoycings of the Enemy abroad in all Nations round
about us, animated (in all likelihood) hereby to invade us? yea whether the
Officers by this breaking off of Parliament have not rendered themselves a
scorn to their own Soldiers whiles they now jeer, saying, every month, or
quarter they have a new Master?

Compl. Others say, shall the Parliament Vote all the Godly out of the Army?

Querie. Are those nine all your Godly ones? Yea are those nine all Godly? Cold
we ever hear, or learn so much touching some of them, though it would have
been joy to us to have heard it? Is not he Godly that does Godly, Tit. 1. 11.
12? Or can true Godliness be separated from Righteousness by the same place? Or
is he a Righteous man, that does not that which is Righteous, 1 John 3. 7? Or
are these violences against the grand Government of a Nation, the fruits of
Godliness, Jam. 3. 17? Is this to Learn meekness of Christ as we are commanded,
Math. 11. 29? Do Soldiers herein as becomes Godly ones, obey the Command of
God, Luke 3. 14? And John Baptist said to the Soldiers Do violence to no man;
neither accuse any falsely, and be content with your wages? Is this according to
that rule, Dearly beloved, Avenge not your selves, Romans 12. 19? Can men be
Godly according to the first Table, whilst unrighteous according to the second
Table, Jam. 2. 10. Must these nine Godly ones (if so) be redressed at no
cheaper a rate, then by pulling up the Foundation of the ancient only supreme
Authority of this Nation, to the great grief of thousands of Godly people, to
the stopping of the Trade of thousands of Tradesmen; to the preventing the
timely relief of thousands of poor Prisoners, Orphans, and Widows, for whom
the Parliament were preparing to relieve them? Is this according to 1 John 3.
16. to lay down our lives for the Godly Brethren? Or in it not rather like
Matchiavels Maxim, Let our friends Perish so as our Enemies perish together
with them? If ye from thence call to mind, and object your ventering your lives
for the good people and Parliament of England; the query is, whether most of
you did it not when ye had but little else to venture? And whether the
Parliament and many of the good people of England did not venture their lives
and great Estates, viz: hanging up and Confiscation, if the King had prevailed,
besides ventering their lives (a many of them) in battle receiving many
honorable wounds? And whether all the people of England have not well paid you
ever since; thousands becoming very poor, to make you rich? And whether they
making you their Servants, and thus daintily bringing you up, ye have not most
ingratefully made your selves their Masters?

Compl, We will not, say others of them, serve the Parliament, or any Form,
contrary to the Common main interest, viz: Of Freedom as Men, and Freedom as
Christians.

Querie. Touching Liberty as Christians, that is Liberty of Conscience, what
signs or tokens were there of the Parliaments infringing this? were there not
many for one, in the Parliament for large Liberty of Conscience? Yea did they
not manifest it in a Resolve at a Commit for that purpose (and it is in print)
for a larger allowance of Liberty of Conscience then the Army Petitioned for?
Let us set down both, word for word, and then see whose expressions for that
thing are larger. The humble Petition and Address of the Officers of the Army,
to the Parliament of the Commonwealth of England, May 12. 1659. Proposal the
sixth. That all persons who profess Faith in God the Father, and in Jesus Christ
His Eternal Son, the true God, and in the holy Spirit* God coequall with the
Father and the Son, one God blessed for ever, and do acknowledge the Holy
Scriptures (...) Testament, to be the revealed, or written word or will of God,
shall not be restrained from their profession, but have due encouragement and
equal protection in the profession of their Faith, and exercise of Religion,
whilst they abuse not this liberty to the civil injuries of others, or
disturbance of others in their way of Worship: So that this Liberty be not
extended to Popery or Prelacy, nor to such as shall practice, or hold forth
licentiousness, or prophanness, under the profession of Religion. Thus the
Army, in their Address afore^^d.

The Committee of Parliament for Government, October the 8th 1659. Resolved,
That the Supreme deligated power is not entrusted to restrain the pro^^ssion of
any person, or persons who profess faith in God the Father, and in Jesus christ
God manifested in the Flesh, and in God the Holy Spirit, God blessed for
^vermore, And do acknowledge the holy Scriptures of the Old and New Testa^ent
to be the revealed or written word, or will of God; but ought to give due
en^^uragement, and equal protection to them in the profession of their Faith,
and ^^cercise of Religion, whilst they abuse not this liberty to the civil
injury of others, (...) disturbance of others, in their way of Worship, Thus
the Commttee of Pa(...)meant.

Now the Quaery is, Whether the Committee does not express themselves in ^^ger
and softer terms for Liberty of Conscience, then the said Officers of the
^rmy? And if any Reader cannot perceive it; Whether if he as a Quaker or a
^ocinian (to name no more, though more might be named) according to what has
^een truly recited out of the said printed Copies) Whether we had not rather
^ubscribe to that of the Committee, then to that of the Officers of the Army?
Yea it is quaeried further, whether this were the way to secure Liberty of
Con^cience, to disperse the Parliament, the only Legislative power to restrain
the Adversaries of Liberty of Conscience, by a Law to give way to the said
Liberty? Yea, whether whilst we look on the present, and former breaches made
on Parliaments, and invasion of worse things in their room, ushered in commonly
with (...) cry for Liberty of Conscience, do not render this cry very
suspicious, that it is used only as a Visard to palliat every ugly design?

2. Touching Liberty as men, that is of our persons. that we be not unlawfully
^mprisoned, and of our Purses and Estates, that they be not drained by
illegal, ^awless Taxes, and of our Familes, that they be not molested with
force and Free Quarter upon and in our Houses, and upon which the Quaere is,
whether the way to attain this Liberty securely be, to take off the Parliament,
(the only Legal Assertor of that Liberty) whilst there are 3 great Armies in
England, Scotland and Ireland, that must (or at least will) be maintained? Yea,
are not the Commanders of the Army by this course, in a fair way to make their
Children, yea and themselves too, very slaves, in case they leave the Army, or
the Army leaves them, and leave us in this condition?

3. Touching non-serving the Parliament, or any Form, conttary to the said two
Liberties; This quaery is, Whether the common use of this word Form, (of late
years) in a disdainful sense, be not a Satanical invention, and Engine to keep
men off at large, from any thing that should bound them to a closer
conscientions walking, despisig all ways of Worship as Forms, contemning
Parliaments (...)ny the Power thereof, whether this be to obey the Form of
Doctrine ((...).) the Form of sound words (2 Timothy 1. 13.) continued in the
Scriptures (...) Command (1 Pet. 2. 13.) To submit to every Ordinance of man
(in things Civil) for Conscience sake? Much more to a Parliament that is above
Kings? And threatens us ( Romans 13. 1, 2.) That if we resist the HIGHER Powers,
we resist the Ordinance of GOD; and they that resist, shall receive to
themselves damnation? Now is there any more natural and Genuine HIGHEST Power,
then a Parliament chosen by the People, in whom the Original of Supreme Powers
r^dicated? Quaery further, whether, though in some things there may be a form
without substance, there can be any visible substance or Action without its
Form* As, can there be Fire without Heat, Water without liquidity, kinds of
Beasts and Birds and men without variety of Forms, True godliness without some
Form of profession, a fighting Army without some form of Battallio? A
Government set up by the people over themselves without a Parliament (or call
it what yo will) that does present the people, by the peoples choice, and
consent? And is not the Peoples Agreement how they will be governed, a
Fundamental Form of Government, both Intrinsical to the Constitution and
Extrinsical to the Execution of the Legislative part?

Comp. Others say this Parliament, consisting of these men, are not fit to a
rule, as not refined enough; and therefore a more refined party is fitter for
it. Not to excuse the want of that goodness as was desirable in some 3 or 4 of
them; were not the generality of them learned, pious Godly men, for men of that
rank and quality? If notwithstanding, the Officers of the Army and their
Adherents, knowing them (I suppose) by name, would call them into the House,
does it not probably signify, that they called them to sit, only to do their
drudgerie, viz: To out Mr. Richard, to clear the way (for I know not who;) to
make an Act of Indemnity for the Army; to lay two Taxes to be paid within half
a year* to pay the Soldiery and Seamen; to make two Acts, the one for payment
of excise, the other for payment of Customs, for them whom the Army should
a(...)* ter thrust into Government to gather up; dismissing this Parliament
under th(...) great odium of the people in the three Nations? It is queered
further, if never (...) refined a party as can be had (before Christ come, and
make all the Inhabitants o(...) the Earth perfect Saints) should take upon
them, the supreme Legislative power and rule, can they allow more Liberty of
Conscience, then aforesaid? Can they defray the Commonwealths charges with less
Taxes then will maintain a stron(...) Fleet at Sea, and pay 3 huge Armies in
England Scotland and Ireland? or can they rule justly without punnishing
Offenders? If they cannot; where is the refined difference? yea where will
there be any Bassis or Bottom of that refined Government if the peoples consent
Concur not to their sitting? And if their consent does not Concur, where is
our Civil Liberty as men, and our Liberty of conscience as Christians, liable
to be imposed upon, to submit to we know not what refined Fantasies.

FINIS.

