A DIALOGUE Betwixt SAM. The Ferriman of Dochet, WILL. A Waterman of London,
And TOM. A Bargeman of Oxford.

UPON The KINGS Calling A PARLIAMENT To meet at OXFORD.

LONDON, Printed in the Year, 1681.

A Dialogue, etc.
SAM. How now Will. how comes this kindness betwixt thee and Tom. the
Barge-man? last time I saw you together at Dochet, you were for heaving Stones
at one another heads.


Will. O, that is long since, and utterly forgot; we are now good Friends.


Tom. God-a-mercy Horse, this Rogue Will. was tugging up Stream whilst his Oars
were ready to break at Way-bridge, and seeing us come up with three good Horses
Towing our Punt, his Stomach came down, and he begged most devoutly to give him
a Tow to Windsor; not a word of the Bell-Wether, or any of his usual
Complements. I took mercy on the poor Rogue, and let him fasten his Wherry to
us, and I think in my heart the Whelp has eaten us half a Stone of Beef to day.


Will. Upon the honest word of a Waterman, Tom. I never eat daintier Beef in my
Life, nor better Mustard, but not one mouthful of Mutton was to be seen.


Tom. Sirrah, one word more of Mutton and off you go; you cannot forbear your
Roguery.


Sam. But pray thee, Will. whither art thou making at this Time of the year?


Will. Why, faith Sam, thou know I follow the Court for the most part, and
now I am going before it, and intend to get a good Birth at Oxford:
Acquaintance is a main matter with a Waterman: besides, here is honest Tom.
promises me Lodging at his House; and when he goes for London, his Wife and I
can make as merry as if he were gone an East India Voyage.


Tom. But, I hope, there will be another Voyage found out, they say the King
will make us a way Westward to Bristol for our Barges, and has sent for
Dutchmen that can make Boats go by Land as well as by Water, and then Bristol
will be London. The saucy Rogues the other day at Qucen-Hith were ready to Brain
us, and threatened to fire the Barges, because we belonged to Oxford. If the
King would take my Counsel, he should come no more amongst them for one seven
years, I would make the proud Rogues know themselves better.


Sam. I am not for that, Tom neither, for that would quite spoil our Ferry:
when all is done London is London.


Tom. And will be London, that is, a Nest of unthankful Rogues that hate us
Country Gentlemen, though they get all they have by us: What would London be
worth, if it were not for the Country? And faith, since all the wealth of the
Country is gotten thither by the Kings living so long amongst them, I hope His
Majesty will even now live in the Country till their Money be brought into the
Country again.


Sam. I could agree well enough to all thou say, but only for this Ferry,
and that would quite be ruined if the King should leave London.


Tom. For that, if the Dutchmen come, they will dig so many Cuts to make the
Thames run from our Town to Bristol, I warrant thee, thou may get a New
Ferry, and better than this, upon some of those New Cuts.


Sam. But do think the King will keep his Court at Oxford any long time? I
heard our Parson say, for all this the Parliament would not be held at Oxford,
because there was a Parliament once held there, and it was called the mad
Parliament.


Tom. Thou may tell the Parson from me, that there has been many Parliaments
held at London, that have been worse than mad; and it is well if this last was
not the made that ever was yet.


Sam. I must confess there was a strange Touse whilst they were Sitting: Our
Townsmen of Windsor would have talked so of the brave Acts they were a making,
and what good they would have done to the Commonalty, and how they would have
handled the Courtiers, and abundance more than I can remember. Thou would
have admired, but to say Truth, this Town of Windsor, though they be our
Neighbors, is as Roguish a place as any is in England. If I were worth to
advise the King, I would make a great Wall betwixt the Castle and the Town,
that should reach down to the River on the one side, and down to Old Windsor on
the other side, and never a Gate through it, but for the Kings convenience to
go a Hunting into the great Park, or the Duke into the Forest, and shut at all
other times. Then would I build a New Town to entertain the Kings Court, should
reach to the Ferry.


Will. Still, still this Ferry is the Burden of the Song,


Sam. But prithee Will tell us what this Parliament would have done for the
good of the Commonalty that is talked on so much; thou carriedst Parliament Men
in thy Boat every day, and I know thou have heard all their Speeches; I have
heard them make Speeches as they have passed over here at our Ferry-Boat.


Will. Thou art in the right of that, for there is not one Member (for so we
call them at London) of forty, but they are still making Speeches: I heard one
of them make a Speech to Deaf Hugh, an old Sculler, from Westminster Stairs to
the Temple. Hugh nodded at him now and then, and he went on as Policitly as if
he vad been in the House all the while. When they landed at the Temple, where I
also landed my Fair, he bid Hugh give him three pence, but wanting Change, he
asked me for three pence, but I having never a three pence, says the Member to
Hugh, I see thou art a right English man, a good Protestant, and, I dare say,
hates the Popish Successor with all thy heart, and therefore I will give thee
the whole Six pence.


Sam. 'Twas well he had the Wit to Nod at him, being a could not hear him.


Will. So it was, and that was enough, for I dare say, a Nod now and then,
would have continued the Speech to Gravesend. O, our Watermen have thousands
such Stories as these of their Worships, they were for the most part so full of
it, they could not hold it in.


Sam. But prithee Will. tell us what thou heard'st they did in the House as
well as out.


Will. Well, in the first place they kept a Rehearsal at the Sun Tavern on the
back of the Exchange a long time before they sat.


Sam. A Rehearsal! what is that?


Will. Why, as the Players Rehearse or Act over the Play in the Morning, which
they intend to Play in the Afternoon: So, did they make their Speeches, and set
all their Matters in order in the Tavern, before they met in the House.


Sam. Methinks, if it were needful for a Parliament to have such a Rehearsing,
his Majesty should provide them a place to rehearse in: It is not very handsome
in my mind, that the matters which concern his Majesty and the Kingdom should
be meddled with in a Tavern.


Will. It Is very true: but the Master of the House, he got well by them; and
the Drawers of that House are become notable Boys, they can talk of State
Affairs, it would do your Heart good to hear them: and for any thing that I
know, when these Boys come to set up for themselves, and keep Taverns in the
City, they may be the fittest men they will have to serve in Parliament: they
will now, as young as they are, make fine Speeches to their fellow Prentices,
when any Rout of them meets together, and have their Lessons full ready on any
occasion; and will back a Petition of the Common Hall to the Purpose.


Sam. A Pox on 'em, it is such work as this that makes the King leave London,
and will undo us all at Dochet: But this is all still out of the House.


Will. It is impossible I should tell you a tenth part of what they did in the
House: but the remembrance of Men and Things they fell upon will put me in mind
best; and therefore the first I think on, is the Kings Majesty, God bless him,
him they cried Nochell.


Sam. What, as Gaffer Block of our Town cried his Wife?


Will. I don't know what he did, but they Voted that no body should either
Borrow or Lend, nor Sell or Buy with him under pain of their Displeasure.


Sam. This is almost as ill as the Parson said of the Gun-Powder-Treason-day,
that the Pope would have done with Queen Elizabeth, for he forbade any Body to
Borrow or Lend with her, Sell or Buy, Eat or Drink; Nay, he forbid her to come
in either Church or Market.


Will. But then to make him amends, they took care to kill him an Old Lean Lord
at Christmas; and that is all I remember they have done for him since they met.


Sam. What did they then do?


Will. Next they took the Duke into handling.


Sam. And what would they do with him?


Will. They would have taken away his Birthright, whatever he had done to them
I know not, but they were resolved to have worried him.


Sam. What was it provoked them so much against him?


Will. They said he was a Papist, and was for the Pope and the Plot; but the
Truth on it is, I think the true Reason of their Cruelty was, because he put his
Brother in mind who were, and had been Rogues, and were sure to prove so in the
end: and for this they would never forgive him; and with talking with one
another, they were got to that pass, they mattered not what they said; for they
were permitted so long, they thought no body durst gainsay them.


Sam. Why, I thought no man living durst have meddled with any of the Blood
Royal.


Will. Thou art a Fool, did not they behead the last King, and kept this
banished a long time? and all that was still a House of Commons.


Sam. What would they have done with the Duke think thou?


Will. Hanged him if they could have caught him, but-being he was out of
their reach, have taken away all his means, and all he was ever like to have,
if (which God forbid) he should have survived the King.


Sam. They were very bold.


Will. Thou may swear that; when the Foreman of Old Townsend's Shop, a
blind Scrivener was so bold as to speak a saucy Speech against his Highness.


Sam. What was he, a Prentice?


Will. No, he was out of his Time, and had set up for himself.


Sam. Why, I thought no such Hand-crafts men had ever been chosen Members.


Will. Any body that has money to pay for Drink, Gentle or Simple that will
spend his Guinneys upon some Town in the West Country is good enough: for I Will
tell thee, as I heard Squire Kites Huntsman say, that he cared not for above
three or four Couple of Hunting Dogs amongst twenty Couple, so they would give
their Tongues and go along with those that were Hunters; no more do they in the
Parliament care whether the greatest part of their Members have any Wit, or
none at all, so that they will Vote with the Old ones.


Tom. Well, though it was sore against my will, I was Pressed once into the
Service when the Duke was our Ambral, and I dare swear never a man in the Fleet
had a better Heart than he.


Will. Pox on you Rogue, you staid but one Bout and run away; but we that staid
and were in both the Hollands Wars, know the Duke well enough; and let them do
what they will at Westminster, I am sure all the Seamen and Watermen in England
will be for him against any Body but the King, God bless him.


Tom. And I am sure he will never be a Rebel, as many of those that are his
Enemies have been.


Will. Rebel! they would like him better if he would stand in the Kings Face
and do what he pleased, whether the King pleased or not; do not see how they
love D. M. for coming home whether the King would or no.


Tom. Well, I hope to see the Duke at Oxford, and there he will be welcome, I
dare say, let London and the Devil say what they will.


Sam. For London, surely it is not London that does all these ill things you
talk of.


Tom. Thou art in the right of that, for I never heard that the Houses met
together to Petition or raise Tumults, there is no fault in the place; it is some
roguish People that lives in it, whom nothing will ever make better Subjects
than they have been: I have known them long enough.


Sam. But prithee Will, go on with thy Story.


Will. Now I think on it, I should have told you, that I am now going to say,
first of all, that is, what they would have done about the Church; for I have
heard the Church should take place of both the King and the Duke.


Sam. Ay, but not of the Law, for I know a Wise man as any in Buckinghamshire,
an Attorney, that says, That the Law was above both Church and King.


Will. Why then, according to that Rule, I should first have begun with the Law.


Tom. No matter, amongst us we are not so punctual, go on, now thy hand is in,
with the Church.


Will. As for the Church, I carried a Member up to Putney, and he told me, they
had resolved to Overhall all the Nine and Thirty Conditions of the Church, and
that they had already heaved away Three and a half of them.


Sam. Belike, if they had gone on, they would have hove away most of them;
Three and a half in one day was a great step.


Will. No, I do'nt believe they would have hove them all away, but they would
quite have new molded them so, that one should scarce have known them. Ha'nt I
seen an old Ship that has been a long time at Sea, when she has been in the
Dock, her Rigging Overhall'd and Tarr'd, new Painted, Carved and Guilt, a man
that has sailed in her, could scarce have known her.


Sam. Thou art in the right of that, and I do believe that the Church was grown
very old and much decayed, and had need of repairing, and it will never be done
but by a Parliament. I was at Vxbridge last Saboath-day, and there at the
Meeting the Minister said, That the best Church in the World should be repaired
once in a hundred years; and that the Church we now have, was repaired (but he
had another Word for it) about a Hundred and Forty or Fifty years since.


Tom. Was it not Reformed? the Scholars at Oxford talk much of that Reformation.


Sam. Ay, Ay, it was Reformed, that he said; and that the Church (but more
especlally the Churchmen) should be Reformed.


Will. Besides, this Member told me, the Parsons must use the Surplice no more.


Sam. That was only for the good of the Woollen Manufacture. I carried a
Clothier over the Ferry not long since, that said they were hereafter to wear
Flannel Surplices, and the Bishops were to wear white Crape, in stead of Lawn
Sleeves.


Will. And then for the Bishops Courts, that as we call the Bawdy-Court, they
would have mauled those Rogues to some purpose.


Tom. A Pox on 'em, they made me pay above five Pounds about a Bastard, a Whore
laid to me, that a Scholar of Oxford got, I dare say; for I kept reckning and
the Child was got when I was gone down with the Barge to London; and for want
of a Flash, we lay above ten Weeks before we came again.


Will. It seems thou diserved'st for it however.


Tom. That which troubled me most, was, that I must have done Penance in a
White Sheet, and then my Wife and all my Friends would have known it; and so
faith, I was forced to borrow the Moneys, and make my Peace with them: And
after all, they would have had Ten Shillings more for a piece of Parchment no
bigger than my Hand: I was even glad to pay them a Noble to get clear of them.


Will. As far as I could understand, they would have taken these Courts away,
and have made the Bishops spoor Gentlemen: They would have clipped their Wings,
if not quite staved them. O this Member, as we passed by Lambath-House, shaked
his Head at it, and said, There were Rags of Popery kept there; and so did he
at Eulhum, when I landed him at Putney.


Sam. What did he mean by that?


Will. Why the Archbishop of Canterbury lives at Lambeth, and the Bishop of
London has a Countrey-House at Fulham.


Sam. Well, but Will. Thou said, they would also have had a Fling at the Law.


Will. For any thing of the Law it self, I heard not so much of it; but they
were in hand, to have rockoned with almost all the Judges in Westminster Hall,
some for one Fault, and some for others.


Sam. What had the Judges done?


Will. Whether they had strained a Pin, to do something extraordinary for the
King and the Court, I know not; but the main matter was, that most of the
Talkative Men of the House, were Lawyers, and the only way for them to get
Preferment, was by turning out of the Judges, that they might get into their
Places.


Sam. I think in my very Conscience, these Lawyers are the Bain of the Kingdom:
For they are so accustomed to talk against their Consciences for Moneys, at
Westminster Hall; that when they come to talk in the House, it is the same
thing: So that whatever they think for their Advantage, they never want broad
Consciences, nor smooth Tongues, to drive on to the utmost.


Sam. Pray thee Will. tell me one thing, are not these Lawyers the Men, that
either do, or should understand the Law?


Will. No doubt of it.


Sam. Well then, when the Rebellion was begun, and carried on in our King's
Father's Time, and in his own, did not the Lawyers know, that the War was
contrary to the Law?


Will. Certainly they did.


Sam. Then do I say, That as many Lawyers as Sided with the Rebels in those
days, deserve yet to be Hanged for what they did then.


Will. O! but they were wise enough for that: For they got the Act of Oblivion,
to pardon, not only their Faults by-passed, but those that were to come; and
abundance of those very Men that talked the People into that Rebellion, are yet
living, and as willing to do Mischief, as ever they were.


Sam. It goes beyond my Understanding, how, and why they are admitted to abuse
the People at this rate: For if they can set poor ignorant Men on a Mischief,
for which they may be Hanged, and can talk themselves off again, it is time for
poor men to have a Care.


Will. I am of this mind, that had I been the King's Advisar, when he forgave
all the Rebels, I would not have forgiven one Lawyer; for they could not plead
Ignorance.


Sam. And that it was a Rebellion is clear: For if it had not been, what need
was there of an Act of Oblivion?


Will. Thou art in the Right of that too.


Sam. Nothing troubles me so much, as that these Lawyers, are not only Lawyers
to follow and maintain the Law; but they can make what they will to be Law, and
what they like not to be no Law: Nay, they will hang the Honestest man in
England, and find Law for it; and save the greatest Knave, and find Law for
that too.


Tom. Did not Judge Bradshaw pronounce Sentence against King Charles, and Coke
plead against him? And both these were great Lawyers: Nay, an a bungling
Lawyer, that is a Justice of the Peace, at the Quarter Sessions, will take upon
him to talk more than all the Bench, and be very angry at any Justice that
dares oppose any thing he says.


Will. There is reason for that: For there is not one Lawyer of twenty, but is
certainly bribed (though they call it feed) of one Party in all Controversies, at
the Sessions, and frequently by both. O they make great Gains at a Sessions;
for there they are both Judge and Lawyer. and all goes as they will.


Sam. I Will tell thee, for that I had a wrangling Quarrel once with a Drunken
Fellow at the Ferry; and upon some Words, I up with the Boat-hook, and broke
his Head. He went and fetched a Warrant for me: I was advised to go my self to
the same Justice, being a Lawyer, and bind my self over: Which I did, and would
have given his Worship an Angel; for so my Friend advised me: He said, he would
take no Moneys upon that Account: For indeed, it seemed, he had taken before
from my Adversary; but he said, if I would give any thing to his Wife, I might:
Upon which, I sent a sat Wether, worth a Mark, in the Night time to her
Worship; and within two days, both he and I were sent for, before Mr. Justice;
and after he had talked a great deal of Law, and seemed angry with us both, he
made us good friends, and got both our Moneys.


Will. There may a thousand Stories be told of them: I hope at one time, both
the King and the Kingdom will see what they are, and never let them have more
to do, than with matters of Law; and then those that employ them may take the
monds in their own Hands, as I do, when I go to the Alehouse: for all mischief
principally comes from them.


Tom. A Pox and Plague light on 'em, they will never be quelled: For they have
always either one or other great Lawyer in Power with the King, and that keeps
them up: So let us talk no more of them. What did the Parliament next fall
upon, honest Will. thou have a pure Memory?


Will. They would have banished a plain bundance of Courtiers and
Privy-Counsellors; and without any more ado, sent to the King to desire him
(they called it Humbly) to turn them out of his Service.


Sam. But did they tell any good Cause, why they would have him turn them away?


Will. None at all, but because they liked them not.


Sam. That was an humble Trick indeed; but sure they had some Reason for what
they did.


Will. For no reason, but because they were in Favor with the King, and
themselves would have their Places: Nay, there be some of those men they
complained of, were as ready to complain of those were in place before, such as
the last Treasurer, and the like, as these are now against those they would
have now turned off: for in all this Parliament-Doings, and Peaching one
another, it is not for Faults done against the King, or the Government, but
against the House of Commons.


Sam. But I hope these Noble Men are not turned out of their Services, are they?


Will. No, they have escaped this Bout; how they will do at the next at Oxford,
time will show.


Tom. If they escaped at London, I Will warrant them at Oxford, no man is
Gondemned there, but he has (as the Scholars call it) pro and con for it: But
was that all their Faults, that they were in Favor with His Majesty?


Will. God help thee, do not thou know, that it is a suffiicent
Parliament-Crime to be a Favorite. I have heard my Father say, that he wore the
Old Duke of Buckingham's Cloth, and was Master of his Barge; and that there was
one Parliament before I was born, would have hanged him; but the Devil a Fault
could they find, but his being in mighty Favor. So the King would not let him
suffer.


Sam. But they put away my Lord Strafford, I can remember, that my self, and
they say, because they could find no Law to condemn him, they made a Law.


Tom. So then, he suffered for breaking a Law before it was made.


Will. So he did.


Tom. That is as much as to say, that if the Parliament have mind to hang a
Man, or undo him, if they have not sufficient Law or Matter to do it, they will
make some: God bless me and mine out of their Clutches.


Will. But I have heard, they were so Civil, as when they made this Law against
the Earl of Strafford, they then made it so, that no more should suffer by the
same Law.


Sam. That was very kindly done to him indeed: I would rather, if I had been in
his Clothes, they would have saved me, and hanged who they would beside.


Will. This shows plainly they had a particular Malice; and then down a must
go, right or wrong: There are some of those Old Dogs yet alive that hunted him
to Death, and would as willingly give their Mouth for making away more Noblemen.


Tom. I have heard many say, the King repented himself at Oxford, that he
consented to the Earl's Death.


Will. But those Rogues that procured his Death, never repented at all, nor
does not do yet: Nay, they have tought some young Whelps to be as good
Bloodhounds as themselves. A Man has a brave time that should come to be tried
for his Life in any Court, and have half a dozen of these to chase him out of
the World.


Sam. It Is strange the Noblemen does not stand for one another against those
Lawyers, who, if they might have their Wills, would hang them all: Especially,
being there is no body of the Jury, when the Lords are to be tried, but Lords.


Will. They had such a Power when my Lord Strafford was Headed, that neither
the King, nor the Lords, durst stand against them: They made Routs of Prentices
to run down to Westminster, and call out for Justice, and threaten all those
Lords that would have saved him; and in the end they had his Blood.


Tom, I have heard many say, that there were very few of those many that
prosecuted the Earl; but they were after Ringleaders in the Rebellion against
the King, and continued so to his Death, as violent against him, as they were
against the Earl, and against our King that now is (God bless him) till the
Soldiers and Seamen joined with Monk to bring him in again.


Sam. And yet I Will warrant thee, these were as ready to welcome Home his
Majesty, and make show of their Duty and Affection to him, as his best Friends.


Will. Ay, and pretended they had as much a Hand in his Restoration, as the
General that brought him in; and talked themselves, not only out of the Faults
they had committed; but by Bribery, and means of some Lawyers, that had been
Abroad with the King, they got suddenly into such Favor, that a Round-Headed
Lawyer had more Power than a Cavalier Colonel that fought for the King all
through the War: And so they have carried it ever since: And now thou may
see what they have brought it unto, at long run: For nothing but the Ruin and
Death of a great Number of the King's Courtiers and Counselors will please
them.


Tom. They will not stay there if they have leave to go on: The Old Game must
be played over again; but I hope the King's calling them at our Town of Oxford,
will mend this matter: For I have heard hundreds say, that if his Father had
called the Rump Parliament thither, instead of Westminster, there had not been
so much Mischief done as there was: But pray thee Will. was this all they did?


Will. This, no, not the hundred part: For any one Man's Fault or Suspicion,
that he was against them, they would have ruined a whole Country. There was a
Waelsh Nobleman, I know not his Name, that they had a Spite to, that was
Steward of a great Wapentake-Court in Wales; and out of Malice to him, they
would have taken that Court away, though it was a great Benesit to all that
Quarter of the Country: Nay, there was one day a Member, so angry at a
Waterman, for asking an unusual Fare, for bringing him from some place, in the
West-Country, that he said, he would have a Bill brought into the House, for
his sake, to restrain the Numbers of Watermen; and that all the Wherries that
go upon the River, should be forced to take a License, and should be Figured on
the Back-Board, as the Hackney Coaches are. Upon which, the Waterman civilly
replied, That God bless the King, he hoped that being a Freeman of Waterman's
Hall, they could never make him take a License: with that the Member said,
Sir, for your sake, and such saucy Rogues as you are, we will have that
Watermans-Hall pulled down, as well as we have pulled down the Court of the
Marshes of Wales: That was the Court I was talking of.


Tom. I hope thou heard'st them say nothing of the VVestern Barges Will.
did thou?


Will. No, Hang you, you are below their Consideration; but they talked much
about Seamen, and the Fleet, and against Soldiers: And then for the Papists,
they would have utterly destroyed them; and no great matter if they had; for
those Rogues have been the occasion of all this Poder, has been even since the
Beginning of these Times: And they say, they Fired the City, and brought the
Plague out of France, and set it amongst us at London.


Sam. How should that be? For when the Visitation began at London, I heard of
no Plague in France.


Will. But I heard a Doctor, one of the Royal Society, say, as I carried him
once, There be Rogues that will bring Bottles of Infected Air with them, if
it were out of Turkey, that as soon as they are opened, will infect a whole
House; then they take an Antilop, that no Infection can touch themselves: And
that some Papists did this, I have heard a Justice in the City took
Examinations upon it, and it was proved.


Tom. But what would they have done against the Presbyterians, Independants,
Anabaptists, and Quakers: The Scholars at Oxford, say, those are as great
Enemies to the Church and the University as the Papists.


Will. They would have made them as good Protestants as any is in Oxford.


Tom. Which way must this have been?


Will. Why, they would have made the Churchmen have left out some of their
Prayers, and given over the Surplice, and some other Popish Tricks; and then
they would have come to Church, and been all one.


Tom. That is, the Churchmen must have become Presbyterians, and then all
would have been right.


Will. Indeed, I think they would not have yielded much to the Bishops: For
they were bloody mad at them; and I think if they had sitten till now, they
would have sent them to the Church from the House, to pray to God; but not to
have letten them prate any more to the House of Lords.


Tom. It will be good for them to talk no such Talk at Oxford, the Bishops are
in great Power amongst the Scholars.


Will. Then as to their own Members, they turned them out, and took others in
at their will and pleasure; and if they made any Fault, they expelled them; and
wherever any stood in Competition for any Town, him they knew, would give his
Vote along with them was admitted, right or wrong: And then they terrified all
the Sherriffs, Mayors and Bailiffs in the Kingdom, besides abundance of
Gentlemen, and other honest Countrymen: For on the least Complaint of any
Man's misdemeanor, or Information from any Member, immediately a Sergeant at
Arms was sent for them, and so much a Mile, and Hour paid, and down on their
Mary-bones to their Worships, and a sound Scolding from Mr. Speaker; or else to
the Tower, or the Gate House they went: The King, God bless him, never took a
quarter of that State on him they did.


Sam. It seems they would have all the World to ask them Forgiveness, whether
they made them any Fault or not; and they themselves would ask no body Pardon
for what they had done.


Will. It was brought to that pass, that two Foot-boys, Boxing one day in the
Palace Yard, he that was beaten, proved to belong to a Member, and told the
other Boy, if he knew his Master, he would cause him to be sent for in Custody,
for keeping such a Rogue as he was, that had committed a Breach of Privilege,
in beating a Member's Servant. The Boy replied, if it would do him any
Kindness, he would beat him again, and tell him his Master's Name into the
Bargain; and would lay him a Crown, that though his Master should bid the
Speaker, and all the House of Commons kiss his -- they durst not send a
Sergeant at Arms for him. The beaten Boy much netled at his Speech, laid down
his money, as the other did. Now, said the Boy, my Master is the King of
France, and I am come over with some of his Servants, to fetch Horses out of
England: Go bid thy Master, and the House of Commons send a Sergeant at Arms to
fetch him over.


Sam. Before my Heart, is was a good Answer: I hope he won his Moneys.


Will. So he did; but it was put into a Waterman's Hands, and when it was
demanded, says the Beaten Boy, Sirrah, give it him if you dare, if his Master
be the King of France, I Will make you answer it before the House of Commons. The
Waterman durst do no other but give either their own Moneys: There is no
contending with Parliament Men, or Parliament Men's Men, nor Boys.


Tom. And yet I know a Bailiff has nabbed several of them, and matters not a
Straw to arreast any Member of the last Parliament.


Will. That Is nothing, they are now no Parliament Men; but let us see if that
Stout Fellow dare nabb any of them when they are new chosen.


Tom. That I don't know.


Will. O those that are in any danger of Bailiffs, are mighty cunning at their
Times, and know their Hits to a Minute; they appear abroad at London a certain
Number of days before the Sitting of the House, as sure as Swallows against
warm Weather; and after the Sessions they are Presto, begone, not one to be
seen: except it be that we chance to carry them by Water from the Temple or
White-Friars, to Scotland-Yard; they have a strong Garrison in either of those
Places out of Privilege time, as they call it.


Sam. Well, but pray thee Will. let us have it all out what they did.


Will. It is impossible as I told thee, For me to tell a quarter what they did;
they stopped Irish, Scotch, and Welsh Cattle from coming to the City, and Pork,
Mutton, Veal and Lamb, from any of those Places; and it was said, if they had
sat long enough, they would have stopped Essex Calves, and Hampshire Hogs.


Tom. And yet the City still doats upon these Parliaments.


Will. Nay, they would have made such Laws about wearing of Cloth, and Woollen
Stuffs, as would have beggared an hundred thousand Souls that are Silk-Weavers,
Silk-Dyers, and such like.


Will. What matter they, if they can but find a way to make Acts, to set their
Grounds dearer, and rack their poor Tenants, they care not if half of the
Kingdom starve.


Sam. And yet they talk so much for the General Good, and against the absolute
Power of the King and the Court, how can they make this out?


Will. They call that Power which they themselves both do act by, and would
govern all by, the Liberty of the Subject, though no Subject, but a few Members
have any Liberty at all: But if his Majesty, God bless him, should act by the
same Power, and do the same things which they do; then they call the very same
Power flat downright Tyranny.


Tom. Do not thee remember, Will. one day the last Summer, when our Barge
lay against York Stairs, there was a great Noise about the Head Bailiff of
Westminster, breaking into an Embassenders House, to seize upon some Goods
which belonged to a Man was condemned to be Hanged at Tyburn; and upon
Complaint of the Embassender to the King, the said Bailiff was taken and clapped
into the Tower; and every body said, he would be hanged at the least, for
breaking the Common Law of all Nations: But the next News we heard, was, that
he had got some sort of a Warrant, was made by the Long Parliament, that set
him at Liberty within three Hours after he was committed.


Will. I remember the time very well, they call those Warrants Habeas Corpuses,
and they will fetch a Prisoner committed by the King, out of any Goal in
England; but not one Committed by the House of Commons: And this they call
Privilege of Parliament.


Tom. All these Gentlemen that were fetched up by Messengers and Sergeants,
they might by the Common Law have chosen whether they would have come or not.
There was a Knight in our County at Oxford, that was sent for by a Messenger,
and he told the Messenger, he had something else to do, and would not come, and
said he would justify it.


Will. Surely this was just about the time they were Dissolved, otherwise he
durst not have been so bold.


Tom. He said he had been a Member himself many Years, and knew no Law to
compel any Man to come before the House of Commons, unless they had a mind
themselves; and therefore they sent to the King, to get his Majesty's
Proclamation, to fetch him before them.


Will. So then His Majesty's Proclamation, issued out at the desire of the
Commons, is of Force; but when sent out by himself is worth nothing at all.


Sam, Why so?


Will. Because I remember there were several sent for in Custody, for obeying
the King's Proclamation against Petitions, and brought to their Knees: If
therefore that had been a good Proclamation, why should any body have suffered
for it? And for any thing I know, if his Majesty should have made a
Proclamation to fetch up that Knight, or any body disobeyed their Messenger, it
had deserved as much to have been disobeyed as that about Petitions, unless the
House of Commons can make a Proclamation, contrary to Law, a good one, as this
would have been: For, what need had they of the King's Proclamation, if there
had been Law to have fetched those men before them.


Tom. Now if those Men were fetched up, did dare to sue, and the Lawyers did
dare to do their Office, and the Judges did dare to give Judgment, I am of
Opinion they might bring Actions of false Imprisonment against the Messengers
that fetched them up: For if they had not full Power to punish those who did
not obey them, then surely those who were fetched had wrong done them.


Tom. But I dare assure thee, neither Lawyer nor Judge dare meddle with any
such matter: If any of these Gentlemen would be so ventersome, they will find
no Law to stand against the Votes of the Commons, till they find they are as
much brought under, as they say Harry the Eighth brought them; they durst not
prate in his Days, as now they do.


Will. What did he do?


Tom. I have heard a Fellow of Maudlin College, say, he tumbled them, and made
them do what he would himself, and not what they had a mind to; and not a word
of Tyranny or Arbitrary Power.


Sam. But pray thee Will. some more of their Doings.


Will. I have told thee it is without end; and therefore I will tell thee the
last thing they did, which was, they Voted, that if any man advised his Majesty
to Prorogue them upon any Account but to disinherit the Duke, he was an Enemy
to the King and Kingdom: Nay, he was a Pensioner to the French King.


Tom. What, whether he ever received any Money from the French King or not?


Will. Ay, though he never received Penny of Money from him, or any body else by
his means or order.


Tom. For any thing I know, they might as well have said, that he had been my
Lord Mayor's Bull-rider: I have often heard say, that a Parliament can make a
Man into a Woman; and now I see, they can make a man into a Pensioner of France
though he be none.


Tom. What then was done?


Will. That very day, notwithstanding all this, they were Prorogued.


Tom. Then surely, they will say, either they were Prorogued by the Advice of
some Body, who, for that Advice, are Pensioners; or if his Majesty Prorogued
them on his own Head, then they will think, though they dare not say, that he
himself is a Pensioner.


Will. And within fevv days after they were Dissolved, and ather ordered to
be called at your Town of Oxford.


Tom. Well, for all that Sam's Parson said, There was a Parliament called at
Oxford, that was called the mad Parliament, yet will I be hanged, if ever
that was half so mad as this thou have told us of: For according to thy Tale,
this Parliament let nothing 'scape them; to his Majesty they would have given
nothing, nor let any body lend him any thing; but would get from him what
they could: From the Duke they would have taken his Birthright; the Church
and Religion they would have cast in a new Mould; the Bishops and Clerks,
they would have nevv-fashioned, if not utterly laid aside, banished many of
the Nobles, taught the Judges of Westminster Hall new Laws, and made them pay
for practicing the Old, terrified most of the Loyal Gentry of the Kingdom,
with Sergeants, Messengers, and Expensive Journeys, the same with Mayors,
Sheriffs and Bailiffs, Fault or no Fault, taken away Courts and Privileges
from several Shires, to their great harm, to revenge themselves of particular
men; not only hindered Irish Cattle, and other Provisions, from the City, but
Beggared many thousands of Families of Silk-Weavers, and other poor
Handicrafts-men.


Sam. Nay, these very Men were got to that Height, they would have abused any
Body they met with, Gentle or Simple, not paid a Farthing for crossing the
Ferry, but said, they were Frank in Parliament-time, as their Masters Letters
were at the Post House.


Tom. Was not this then as mad a Parliament, as that Parliament they talk on at
our Town? If this next prove a madder than the last, if it sit at our Town,
I Will give any man leave to hang me at the Mast of my Barge.


Sam. For all this, I believe they will not sit at Oxford: for they say, a many
Noblemen have Petitioned the King's Majesty against it.


Will. And I can tell thee, his Majesty said, they should Sit at Oxford for all
that.


Tom. Pray thee, who were these Noblemen that Petitioned?


Will. I cannot tell thee who they were by their Names; but he that was the
Rump's first General delivered it.


Sam. He! thou art a Fool Will. he is dead at least thirty years since: I
remember I have seen him, as if he had been alive, in a Buff Coat, amongst the
Tombs at Westminster.


Will. Well, I am sure he bears the same Name, and probably it may be his Son;
for this man follows that man's Steps: Then there was him that was General of
the Horse to the Rump, that I am sure is the very Man himself, and another Lord
that sat in the Rump House of Commons, with a Blew Garter about him, a thing
was never done before.


Tom. That cannot be, I remember that Lord my self, he is dead, I am confident.


Will. It may be then it was his Son; there was besides another, whose Father
some say Beheaded the King; but if he did not, it is certain he was in Disguise
on the Scaffold: And then he that set them on all this, as it is talked, is a
little, lame, purblind Lord, that has been a Man in all the Times ever since
the first Rebellion, and still turned time enough to save himself, though
others were Hanged for the same Fact: He now sets them upon all the Mischiefs
done, and if he live to it, will leave them in the Lurch.


Tom. That Is Old usual with him, and yet he is no better than those that stood
it out to the last, and deserved Hemp many a fair Year since.


Will. He Will come to it yet; for all his Cunning, the Devil will cozen him at
last: All the rest were Covenanters, or their Sons, except one or two disguised
Lords.


Tom. I hope his Majesty will remember what these men did with his Father, and
not be advised by any such.


Sam. Well, when all this is said, I am still of Opinion London is the fittest
place in the Kingdom for a Parliament; for there every Body finds their
Convenience: His Majesty his House at Whitehall, the Nobles their own Houses,
the Members convevenient Accommodation of Lodging, and every Body their Ease.


Tom. I question whether too much Convenience for Parliaments be not hurtful to
Business: For when they are less commodiously served, they will mind their
Business the better, and make more haste with their Work, that they may get so
much sooner home: Not but that I know, they may have all Conveniences at our
Town, and sufficient Accommodation for all the Followers of a Parliament that
are requisite to attend it.


Will. The plain truth is, there are nowadays abundance of People do follow
Parliaments, over what there used to be in former Times, as I have heard People
say: And this London has such New Buildings, that it lodges them all
conveniently, if they were five times as many.


Tom. Thou art in the right of it Will. that there does more People follow the
Parliaments a late time, than formerly, that is, the Scoundrel Rabble of
London, who are ready, and have been this Forty Years to back any Seditious
Petition; and to come down to Westminster and Whitehall, like a Land-flood in
our River, that threatens all the Country: These encouraged by Discontented
Members, when they cannot get the Lords to join in their malicious Acts,
threaten no less now, than they did to his Majesty's Father, God bless him: And
I think it no great loss if these Gentlemen be left at Home to mind their
Trades at London.


Sam. But the Scholars of Oxford, are thought, by many, will be as unmannerly
as the Prentices in London.


Tom. I Will tell thee Sam. if the Parliament will behave themselves as they
ought, to the King's Majesty, and the Royal Line, and offer no Injury to the
Church, Bishops, Clergy, University, nor Scholars, and give the King his
reasonable Requests, I Will warrant thee, the Scholars will be as civil as can
be; but by my Faith, if they find either the Church, or themselves touched
upon, it will be a hard matter to rule them: They are like Seamen, one and all.


Sam. Still I am for Old London, thou know the King has borrowed many
Hundred Thousand Pounds of the City and the East India Company, and never
needed to want Moneys for a fair word to the City.


Tom. It Is very true; but he always paid double Interest for what he had of
them: So that it was a greater Courtesy to the City, to lend it, than to the
King to have the Loan. But now that Business is over, they will lend no more
Money, but upon Parliament-Security: Had they continued to have been the same
City they were in 1660, and some Years after, I believ the King would never
have removed the Parliament to Oxford; but since they now are become that City
they were in 1640. I think the King does wiser to remove the Parliament to
Oxford, that True, Loyal City, where every man loves the Name of the King, and
that showed so much Fidelity to his Father: Then let the Parliament and the
Factious City of London send him to Oxford as they did his Father.


Will. Then let us all go to Oxford, and pray for the good Success of this
Parliament.


A SECOND DISCOURSE BETWIXT Sam. The Ferryman of Dochet, Will. The Waterman of
London, AND Tom. The Bargeman of Oxford; Upon the Coming of the Two Last down
the River, from OXFORD.
Sam. HOW does all our Friends at the Court at Oxford? It Is strange, Will. thou
should come again so soon!


Will. Thou know, I told thee, I mostly follow the Court; and 'faith, at
this time, he had been a cunning man that had gone before it; his Majesty gave
not so good warning of his Return to London, as he did of his going to Oxford.


Sam. But what says Tom. now to his mad Parliament? I hope he has no reason to
complain of this Parliament.


Tom. But the Town of Oxford will have reason to complain while they live: But
the best op't is, some Londoners will have Houses to set in Oxford, at as good
Rates as they took them: Had his Majesty made a Cocking, or a Hunting-Match at
Oxford, he had done it a better Turn, than to have brought such Guests as these
were.


Will. I heard some say, they were so mad they were called from London, that
they resolved to do something at Oxford, should make them be suddenly sent
away again; and so bilk the Town of their Expectation.


Sam. They say the Town much mattered not the Court, and the Mayor, and the
Aldermen of Oxford, were as much against it as the Common Council is at London.


Tom. O, that is because the University is so much for the King, God Bless him,
and his Household: For this is a certain Rule, if the University be for the
Court, the Town will be for the Country, as they call it: Nay, if the
University be for Jesus Christ, the Town holds themselves obliged in Conscience
to be for the Devil.


Sam. But still Tom. this does not answer what thou said of this Parliament,
which thou would a warrant would do such brave things, if they sat at
Oxford.


Tom. I must confess I was mistaken, as my Father was before me: For he took
once a London Boy to be his Prentice; and though he knew him to be a little
light-finger'd, and given to Lying and Swearing, yet he hoped if he could get
him to Oxford, he could cure him; and took infinite Care and Pains about him,
and daily told him what would be the end of him, if he would not lay aside his
London Tricks, and become a downright, honest Oxford Bargeman; but all in
vain, what was bred in the Bone, would never out of the Flesh: He fell by
little and little, to downright Thieving, and Hanged he was in the End; and as
my Father afterward learned, the Rogue's Father and Grandfather, and many of
his Kindred had been Thieves before him.


Will. What Is all this to the Purpose, what have either we or the Parliament to
do with thy Father or his Thievish Prentice? He was not the first Bargeman by a
hundred, that have been Hanged.


Sam. Well said Will. here is a precious Story indeed, and nothing to the
Purpose.


Tom. You don't know the meaning, I perceive, of a Parable, or an Aesop's
Fable; when ye have taught these Shavers at London, with your Rehearsals, and
at Westminster, with their Votes, Resolves and Stories, to nose their Master,
and abuse their Fellows, then you send 'em down to Oxford, to be cured of the R
-- When it is too late they are no more be reclaimed than a Sheep-Worrier; nor
will any thing cure them, but that which cured my Father's Prentice: Now
there is the precious Story you talked of so much. And yet for all this, you
cannot dash us in the Teeth with any Oxford Acts of Parliament: Had their Noses
been kept to the Grindle-stone as close at Westminster, as it was at Oxford,
they would not have been so high in the In step. I was sure, if they sat at
Oxford, they must either make good Acts, or none at all.


Sam. A will have it one way or other; these Oxford Rogues learn to wrangle of
the Boys, and will never yield Right or Wrong.


Will. Well, but for all his Bragging, there was that done at this Parliament
at Oxford, was never done at Westminster.


Tom. Pray thee what was that?


Will. There was as near a Lie, not to be the downright Lie, given to the
King, as Heart could think.


Sam. How so man?


Will. I Will tell thee, for Example sake, If I should say, it is an
unwarrantable thing for any man to pull down Windsor great Park Pail, and ride
through to Bagshot Market, if thou say this is a warrantable Trick, though all
the World knew the contrary, do not thee come very near to give me the Lie,
what think thou by this?


Sam. Surely he that did this, had his Breeding at Billingsgate, or at Hog
Norton.


Tom. But if he had a foul Tongue, he had a good pair of Heels, for he gave
Ground a Hundred miles, in a very few Hours.


Will. That was but to be out of the way while the thing was hot, it will
quickly be forgot I Will warrant thee, once in a short time, I shall see this
very man come in his Coach to Westminster Hall, with a Quoif on, if not a Red
Gown. Such mannerly Behavior as this, has been an only way to Preferment.


Tom. But I think he better deserves to go up Holborn in a Wooden Chariot, and
have a Horse Nightcap put on at the farther end.


Will. These kind of People do no more matter what they say, than a Dog does
that has stolen a joint of meat from the Cook: they only run away for a while,
and when they think all is quiet and forgotten, then they come again with as
much Confidence, as if they had never done no mischief at all.


Sam. The reason of this is, because they never light of the Whip for their
Roguery, and so scaping Scot-free, makes them so bold.


Will. Ay, Ay, let a man suffer a Prentice to prate and talk, and the next, he
gives you two words for one; and then, if you offer to correct him, have at
your Ears, Black Tom. of Lambath, that was an honest, good Fellow, as ever took
an Oar by the end, suffered his Prentice so long, that when he would have
corrected him, it was too late; and being a lusty young Rogue, he threw him
over Board into the Thames; and had not I come by, by chance, he had been
drowned.


Tom. Nay, nothing madded me so much, as that the House of Commons praised this
Fellow, and ordered him Thanks for his Complement he made.


Will. O brave Oxford still; for at Westminster, they always used to have so
much good manners, as to give his Majesty Thanks for his Speech, whether it
pleased them or not; and now they thank a man that gives him the Lie.


Sam. But pray, my Masters, what did they do that little time they sat; or, at
leastwise what would they have done?


Tom. I Will tell thee, thou say, the Parson told thee of a Parliament once at
Oxford, was called the Mad Parliament; I think this may be called the Foolish
and K -- vish Parliament: They were in hand to make such a King of the Duke, if
he should have Survived his Brother, as thou never heard'st of in thy life.


Will. A King, why, the Portingals King, that they keep a Close Prisoner, in an
Old Castle, at the Rock of Lisbon, is an Emperor in Comparison of that they
would have made him: A must have had the Name of a King, but none of the Power;
nor have lived in any of his Dominions, or within 500 Miles. Would not this
have been a brave King?


Sam. Pray thee tell me, what have they to do with Scotland?


Tom. With Scotland? O, they make a good Title to Scotland: For Oliver
Conquered it for the Rump, and these being the Rump's Heirs, they think
Scotland belongs to them as well as England: For as sure as thou stands there,
they keep the Commonwealth's Title a Foot in their minds, though they dare not
publicly own it.


Sam. How should that be?


Tom. I Will tell thee, if I have a Crown in my Pocket, and thou have a mind to
have it from me, there is but three ways to get it, either by Slight of Hand,
to pick it from me, or by words, to persuade me out of it, or take it from me
by Strong Hand. Now the first and last not being so convenient nor easy: if
thou can use Words to make me give it thee, is not that the best way?


Will. No doubt of it Tom. then Words have prevailed a great way, and will
possibly be attempted farther; but if those will not do, thou know what
follows next: Besides, it is apparent, they aimed now to make a Push for a
Commonwealth: For they affronted the King in the first place, as I have told
you; then in the next place, they Voted the Lords Denial to Try Fitz-Harris,
was a Denial of Justice, and Hinderance of Discovering of the Popish Plot, and
twenty Stories more they called it; which was as much as to say, they were not
fit to sit in that House: For if they were unjust in their Doings, and
countenanced the Popish Plot, what worse could have been said of them? And if
this had taken, at the next Vote they had been useless, and then welcome the
Rump again; they would only have wanted him that was Headed at Tower hill
Twenty Years ago, what did you call him?


Will. I believe thou meanest Sir Har. Vain.


Tom. Ay, Ay, that was he, if he had been alive to have joined with the
Purblind Lord, and the Colonel with Cut Fingers, and a few more, all had been
right.


Sam. Pray thee Tom. what would they have done with this Fitz-Harris, what is
that Fellow?


Tom. 'Faith, I think no Body knows what he is; but I take him to be a
Cross-Biter; but if he chance to be Hanged, as he is like to be, it is doubtful
he will be Cross-bitten himself.


Sam. Why the Parliament were Bloody mad at him, and would needs have Hanged
him themselves.


Tom. O Sam. thou know not Parliament-Craft, the next way Home, sometimes is
the farthest about: If they could have gotten the Lords to have received the
Impeachment against him, they would have kept him alive, and played more Tricks
than thou can imagine; they would have made him Bowl off and on, as thou do
at Nine pins; and made his Evidence good and right in what they had a mind; and
errand Lies in what they liked not: And he had been as far from Hanging by
their means, as the Lords in the Tower; only they would possibly have found Law
to have Bailed him; which could not be found for the Treasurer Danby, whom they
know they have no power to Hang, unless they do with him, as with the Old Earl
of Strafford.


Will. But for all their Cunning he may yet come to be Hanged; and if he be,
stand clear, I believe there will be Stories told, some will not be willing to
hear.


Sam. Before my Heart, you two are gotten very cunning at State Affairs, I
believe you did nothing but listen and hearken after News.


Tom. If the Parliament had sat at our Town a Twelvemonth, I would not have
wrought in my Barge an Hour; but if ever Parliament deserved a By-Name, this
little Short Ars'd one, deserved that I have given it, both for meddling with
what they did so simply, and meddling with those People and Places out of their
Power.


Sam. Well, but now this Parliament is Dissolved, all this is over, and now
they have power to Vote, nor Act, nor nothing; neither and I hope we shall have
Quietness, and the Court at Windsor.


Tom. It Is true, they are unroosted from their Public Sitting Places, both at
Westminster and Oxford; but the Men that shape out all the Work are not idle;
that will appear e're long in the Common Hall of London, and from other places
where they have Power to set Mischief on Foot.


Tom. I remember Gaffer Tompson of Abbington, had a Dozen Men and Boys that
labored his Barge; and to his Cost, he found they were all plotted together to
Rob, Steal, and do him any Mischief they could: Nay, would almost tell him to
his Face, they would have what they list: He was a Quiet, Honest Man, and loved
not Trouble, and hoped, in vain, for Amendment a long time; but at last, he
took a Resolution, and turned them all off at once, and got a New Floor full,
that knew nothing of the Roguery of the other Crew; and then all things went
well with him.


Will. He was in the Right of that: For if he had left any of the Old ones in
the Barge, they would have corrupted all the rest.


Tom. Do not think, there are some Old Rumpers has done a great hurt amongst
the Members?


Will. I am for a New Floor full, or none at all; there is no Hopes of any Good
from Tompson's Old Crew.


Tom. Gaffer Tompson had a special Care, not only to keep his New men from
companying with the Old Ones at London and at Abbington; but also, that they
should not come and Rob him by Strong Hand.


Will. They durst hardly do that; for then it had come to Hangum tuum: However
it was Wisdom in him to have an Eye to them: For they met often together, to
consult which way to be revenged of him; and however he knew the Laws of the
Land would protect him, which must protect every Body.


Sam. I pray God Bless His Majesty, and give him Power to put his Laws in
Execution; and then, I think, none but his Enemies will have occasion to
repine; and let the Disbanded Reformadoes do what they dare. Amen.


FINIS.

