Englands Defense.

A Treatise concerning INVASION: OR, A brief Discourse of what Orders were best
for repulsing of Foreign Forces, if at any time they should invade us by Sea in
Kent, or elsewhere.

Exhibited in writing to the Right Honorable Robert Dudley Earl of Leicester,
a little before the Spanish Invasion, in the Year 1588.

By THOMAS DIGGS Esquire Muster-Master General of all her Majesty's Forces in the
Low Countries.

To which is now added, An Account of such Stores of War, and other Materials
as are requisite for the Defense of a Fort, a Train of Artillery, and for a
Magazine belonging to a Field Army.

And also a List of the Ships of War, and the Charge of them, and the
Landforces designed by the Parliament against France, Anno 1678.

Also a List of the present Governors of the Garrisons of England; and of all
the Lord Lieutenants, and High Sheriffs of all those Counties adjacent to the
Coasts.

Lastly, The Wages of Officers and Seamen serving in his Majesty's Fleet at Sea
per Month.

Collected by THOMAS ADAMSON, Master-Gunner of his Majesty's Train of
Artillery, Anno 1673.

And now thought fit to be published for the use of the Protestant Subjects of
his Majesty's Kingdoms and Plantations.

LONDON, Printed for F. Haley, in the Year 1680.

To the READER.
THat the Strength and Glory of France is now far more great and apparent than
was that of Spain in 1588, is so visible a thing to every intelligent and
unbiassed Englishman, (whose Faith and Reason is not imposed upon by Interest,
Faction, Prejudice, Humor, or a Spirit of Contradiction) that to use more
words to prove it, than only to say it is so, would be impertinent; and
therefore certainly I shall not need to urge any Arguments to convince my
Countrymen, that that thing which has bin may be again.

There was once a Spanish Invasion, (which Action from its success I confess
was laughed at then by the whole World) and there may be a French one, (though I
do not pretend to prophesy) and how that may succeed is probably guessed at; in
regard they are a great deal nearer us, have Calice and Dunkirk, two
considerable Places (once in our hands) in their Possession; have Ships and Men
enough, run not that hazard of the Seas as the Spaniards did, are a warlike
well-experienc'd and disciplined People, and at this juncture have nothing to
do, being at Peace upon pleasure with all Europe, so that if they should make
any attempt upon us, they may reasonably have better success now than the
Spaniards had then: And besides, they have a discontented Party here of Papists
(upon the account of this horrid and unhappy Plot) that will undoubtedly join
with them: And we all know that the Popish Gentlemen of this Nation, have bin
trained up, and many of them Officers of the French Army, which may much
facilitate the Conquest, as knowing all the Country. And as for their taking
occasion to quarrel with us, we need not think they will want one, considering
how they have dealt with their Neighbors in Flanders, Holland, and the Duke of
Lorrain; as also their impudence some Years, since, in printing their
Pretentions to the Crown of England, and their great Preparations now in
raising of Men, buying of Corn, hiring of Vessels to bring them down to our
Neighboring Coasts, cannot certainly but be an Argument of some ill Design
they have on Foot; and whether it be against us or Holland is all one, for the
loss of one is the ruin of both, and the whole Protestant Interest all over
Europe.

Now by all that has bin said, we may expect the French, but I hope no
truehearted Englishman fears them at all, (for forewarned forearm'd); yet if
the Governor of any place should be such a Traitor to his Country, as to let
the Enemy land or enter by consent, (for indeed French Pistols are very
powerful) the Inhabitants and Soldiers may justify the killing of him, and
defend themselves. Which Position I hope neither Divine nor Lawyer will deny,
seeing the end of Government is to preserve the People, (Salus Populi suprema
Lex) and upon an Invasion People may forthwith Common Law, see 7. H. 4. Brook's
Tenures 44, and 73. Fitch Protection 100. Coke 7. Re. 7, b. Calvin's Case. 2
Rolls Title Imposition 165. etc. 1 Inst. 69. b. in fine. Anderson 2 part Case
49. Shepherd Office of Justice of Peace, page 43. Hale Pleas of the Cr. page
14, 15. Stature Law, s^^. ^. Ed^ 3. cap. 11. H. 7. cap. 1. H. 7. cap 18, etc.
Records 14 Iohannis Regis. 26 Edw. 3 See the Case of the Bankers, Sect. 5.
rise and defend themselves, for every Man's House is his Castle, and his Land
his Patrimony; and if any Man refuse, the Justices and Sheriffs, ex Officio,
may compel him, without any special Commission or other Warrant: And tho the
Invader be in Amity with us, he is yet to be repelled as an Enemy, as is
affirmed by Stamford, Coke, Hales, and other eminent Lawyers. So that certainly
the Inhabitants of those Places that are nearest the Sea, having so much Reason
and Law on their side, shall not need to have any exhortation to take care of
their own, but that their Prudence and Courage, both to defend their King,
Themselves, and Country, will enspirit the rest of the Nation to assist and die
with them in the opposing a Foreign Enemy; disarming all Papists at home, and
securing his Majesty's Fleet in Harbor, and not to run away (as at Chatam in
1667) to the ruin of their Country, and their own shame and destruction.

And now for my part, my only design in publishing this, is to secure the
Government established by Law, and not to stir up Rebellion, it being only
calculated for the highest and most urgent Necessity the People can ever be
drove to, which is an Invasion; neither do I believe that any Person will
censure the Contents of these Sheets, except some Sycophant Persons, who by
their impertinent Discourse teach Passive Obedience, and publicly affirm, that
absolute Monarchy is Jure Divino, and that there is no such thing as Property
and Liberty, but all is at the Will of the Prince: Nay, tho an Enemy should
invade us, yet we must not defend our selves without special Order. But such
Doctrine as this will not preserve us: It is not crying, when we are fallen
into the Ditch, Lord help us, but we must use the utmost of our endeavors to
get out thereof, God now working by Means, not by Miracles; and such kind of
designing (as well as silly) Rascals as these, being influenced by the Jesuits
and Popish Clergy, are as great Traitors to their Prince, as to their Country,
and will endeavor to help forward a French Conquest, and introduce Popery
here, which the whole Nation is bound to oppose: But it is hoped, one time or
other, a Law will be made to hinder such destructive Principles here (as it is
in Holland) upon pain of being severely punished: For as he is certainly a
great Rogue that would endeavor in the least to take away any part of the
King's just Prerogative; so he is in the same quality, who would in the least
give away and betray the Property and Liberty of the Subject.

But thanks be to God we live under a most gracious and good Prince (for the
preservation of whose Life we ought constantly to pray) who has by his
Promises, Proclamations, and his late most approved choice of some Members of
his Privy Council, as a Committee for the further examination of the Plot,
given us sufficient and satisfactory assurance of his great care for the
Protestant Religion and our preservation. But notwithstanding all, his
Neighbor being Great, Powerful, Ambitious, and Designing, may also be False,
and of a sudden pour those Forces upon us, that will otherwise pull him out of
'his own Throne if he has no employment for them; and therefore this Treatise
is only given you as a Remedy or Medicament toward half your Cure; and that if
his Majesty's Life should be taken away by any violent means, (which God of
Heaven forbid) and an Enemy should take that opportunity of our Sadness and
Divisions to invade us, you know how to receive them both by Land and Sea, and
what Materials are useful toward either offending our Enemy, or defending our
Selves. But that which will be most necessary of all, is a Union of Hearts and
Affections, which that God would make upon such an occasion more especially, is
no doubt the hearty and constant Prayers of those who have often fought (and
will still to the last drop of their Blood) for their King and Country.

A Treatise concerning INVASION:
OR, A brief Discourse what Orders were best for repulsing of Foreign Forces,
if at any time they should invade us by Sea, in Kent or elsewhere. Exhibited in
Writing to the Right Honorable Robert Dudley, Earl of Leicester, a little
before the Spanish Invasion in 88, by Thomas Diggs Esquire Muster-Master General of
all her Majesty's Forces in the Low Countries.
THe accustomed Order has bin by Firing of Beacons to put the Shire in Arms,
and presently all Forces to repair to the Landing-place, there without delay to
give them Battle. But because there are other Opinions, I think it first
convenient to set down the Reasons of each Opinion, and then a Resolution what
I find best. Such as maintain this old accustomed Order, allege, besides the
good success that many times it has taken; that in Reason also it is best
dealing with the Enemy at Landing before he has firm footing, and before he
shall have leisure to range his Men in due Order or Battle, and before he shall
be able to Land his Ordnance, Horse, and Carriages; and that a very few Men
thus in time shall be able to give greater annoyance, and do greater Service
upon the Enemy, than ten times so many when the Enemy is Landed, and settled in
strength of Order, with all his Horse, Ordnance, and Carriages. They also add
these Reasons ensuing for confirmation of their custom.

The Reasons.
First, The fury of the Country upon the first firing of the Beacons is great,
every Man, pro Aris and Focis, violently running down to the Seaside to repel
the disordered Enemy at the first confused landing; which fury if we suffer to
grow cold, we shall not so easily inflame again.

Secondly, Every Man knows how great advantage they have, that have firm
footing on Land, to encounter an Enemy that must land out of Boats, in a
confused straggling manner, and therefore more willingly and speedily will go to
enjoy the Benefit of this Advantage; whereas if you suffer the Enemy to land,
and put himself into Military Order, he becomes more terrible unto us.

Also, while the Enemy is landing, if he find any Difficulty or Danger, being
in Boats, they are ready to retire to their Ships again; but if they be once
landed, with their Artillery, Horse, Carriages, etc. it is not possible for
them to retire to their Ships again, without extreme danger of their Lives upon
the Retreat, and the dishonorable Loss of all their Munition, etc. and
therefore Necessity enforcing them to fight, and all hope of Escape by flight
being taken away from them, they become ten times more dangerous Enemies to
deal withal than before.

Further, there is in this Realm (as in all States divided in Religion) no
small Numbers of Traitorous Minds, who having time to confer, and seeing an
Enemy of Force already landed, may and will then discover their Malice, which
on a sudden they dare not, nor cannot.

Another Opinion.
Some others hold this old Custom of running to the Seaside to be a barbarous
Custom, void of Order and Warlike Discipline, very perilous to our selves, not
hurtful to the Enemy, but rather a means to lose all; and therefore with, by
especial Commandment that Order of Repair to the Seaside be restrained, and
the Enemy suffered to land quietly; and in the mean time to drive and carry
away all Cattle, Victual, Forage, Carriage, etc. and certain Places of Assembly
appointed a good distance off the Sea, from whence they may march in Warlike
Order, and so by driving and carrying away all Victuals, and fortifying of all
Streights and Passages, to weary the Enemy with Time. And these be the Reasons
for maintenance of this second Opinion.

The Reasons of the second Opinion.
First, It is said, the invading Enemy brings a select Company of disciplined
and well trained Soldiers, whom we seek to encounter with a confused Multitude
of Men untrained, in which Match there is no Comparison, but Loss certain.

Again, it is said, An Enemy of Force meaning to land, will do it in despite of
us, and then the Country offering to repel him, and finding themselves not
able, grow much more fearful, than if quietly without resistance we had
suffered the Enemy to land.

Again, while we suffer the Enemy to land, we may drive away all Cattle and
Provision further into the Country, and then maintain Streights and Passages,
well fenced and fortified, so as the Enemy shall be forced to approach us upon
our own Strengths and Fortifications, to his great Peril and Danger.

Again they say, If in this manner we keep Victuals from them by Land, and her
Majesty's Navy also in the mean time keeping the Seas, the Enemy for want of
Victuals only shall be forced to retire, and glad to withdraw himself.

Further, it is alleged, how doubtful a thing Battle is, and how dangerous for
a King to commit his Crown upon it, and therefore that temporizing Course
extolled.

These I think be the Reasons most effectual to impugn the speedy Repair to the
Seaside, and to maintain the Opinion of suffering the Enemy to land quietly,
and by driving and carrying away Victuals and Forage, and fortisying of
Streights and Passes, by Time and Famine to weary the Enemy.

But having attentively weighed the Reasons on both sides, and by experience of
former Invasions, examining the Success and Sequel of the like Attempts, as I
am far from allowing of any confused disorderly running to the Seaside, to
encounter a select, trained, well disciplined Enemy invading: so am I also
utterly against that second Opinion, viz. to suffer the Enemy quietly to land
all his Forces, Munition, etc. not doubting but a mean Course, far more
serviceable than either of them both, may be taken, whereby the Benefit of that
old Custom may be embraced, and the Disorders of the other well noted may be
reformed, and no Advantage to annoy the invading Enemy omitted; as by these
Reasons ensuing better may be judged.

The Reasons.
First, I say, one of the chiefest Forces of this famous Island of England,
consists in this, That it is fortified naturally with such a Trench or Ditch,
as the Sea is, whereby it is not so subject to Invasion, as other Countries
lying on the Main: Which singular Benefit, and peculiar Advantage of this our
Country is utterly lost, if we suffer the Enemy quietly to land all his Forces,
Munition, etc. and to take firm footing quietly on the Main.

Again, Whereas this noble Island has such a Number of Mariners, and good
Shipping, both of her Majesty's Royal Navy, and also of Merchants, as may hope
with good Success to encounter on Sea the Force of any Foreign Enemy, we lose a
great part of this our chief Strength, if relying on this second Opinion, we
should suffer the Enemy quietly to land, and then temporize afterward.

Again, There is no Man of any mean experience, but knows with what danger
Men land out of Boats, if there be but any mean Force before Landing to resist
them; for if therewhile any Storm arise, the Sea alone fights for us, and
with any small Resistance on Land, will drown great Numbers of our invading
Enemies.

Also any small Trench on Land shall lodge Shot in safety, to spoil as many of
our Enemies, as in Boats shall offer to land, before they can approach the
Shore.

Also in landing, before they can have time to put themselves in Order, what an
Execution may a far less Number of Bills, or Swords, and Targets, do on them,
before they shall have time to unite their Forces.

Again, After the Remnant shall land, if they be not all drowned, slain, or
repelled in or before their Landing, how easy a matter shall it be for a few
Lances, joined with the Weapons aforesaid, to put such a confused, dispersed,
scattered, Sea-beaten Company to the Sword, before they shall ever be able to
advance Standard, or put themselves in Order of Battle.

Besides all this, if her Majesty's Forces by Sea should not in time be
assembled of such Strength, as to be able before landing to give them Battle;
yet any mean Force assailing their Ships, while their Men are in landing,
cannot but greatly annoy them, if not utterly defeat them.

Also in most places, except the Enemy bring his Tide justly with him, he
cannot land, and then if part land, and any mean resistance made, to give
Impediment to the rest, till the Tide pass, their divided Forces may more
easily be defeated.

Again, It is no small time that is requisite to land an Army, with Horse,
Carriages, Ordnance, Munition, and Victuals, without which an Invader shall
never be able to prevail; and then if any mean resistance be made at the
landing, it much prolongeth the same time; so as any Storm happening, the
Winds, Tides, Shelves, Rocks, Bars, and Seas fight for us, wholly in our
favor, and to the ruin of our Enemy. And therefore I utterly disallow that
Opinion to give the Enemy leave quietly to land, and then by device to
temporize afterward.

Further, If such a Resolution by the Prince and State be taken, that the
invading Enemy should be suffered to land quietly, to spoil and burn at their
pleasure, and the inward Forces of the Country not permitted, even at their
first landing, to come to their rescue, it would cause no doubt all the
Inhabitants of the Coast to abandon their Towns, and leave the Frontiers naked
and desolate, which the wise Kings and grave Counselors of this Land have ever
fought to make populous, by granting many Privileges and Immunities to allure
Inhabitants on the Frontiers.

But touching driving or carrying away of Victuals, and leaving the Country
waste, and thereby to famish our landed Enemy, it is a thing more easily wished
than performed. I confess, in Ireland, where most of their Substance consists
of Kine, it is easily done; but in this rich and wealthy Country of England, it
is not possible but that the Enemy, if he be once landed with all his Forces,
shall find Houses full of Provision, and Barns full of all kind of Forage and
Corn all the Country over, unless our Prince should command all to be wasted
with Fire; which Precedent we see seldom or never put in ure, neither in these
late Wars of France and Flanders, nor in any former Invasions that we read of;
for it would make the Prince odious, and alienate extremely the Subjects Minds,
and therefore not to be used but upon great extremities, when all other Means
fail.

And here in England, above all other Countries, it may worst be done; for our
Towns are poor, weak, unprovided, and unfortified, the Country full of
Habitation, populous, rich, and abundant of all Commodities. In the
Low Countries, by reason of the great store of their strong well-fortified
Towns, they might much more easily drive and carry to their Cities at hand all
Victual and Forage, etc. And yet when the last great Armies of the States and
Don John were in the Field, notwithstanding all the Boors and Country People
were fled and retired to the next walled Towns, and had knowledge long before of
the approaching of the Armies, yet were they not able so to drive and carry
away the Victuals and Forage, but that the Enemy found Barns full in every
place, in such sort as we never were forced at any time to forage four Miles
from our Camp: So difficult and impossible a thing it is to carry away Victuals
and Forage, or to leave the Enemy a waste Country. But if here in England we
should drive or carry away our Victuals or Forage to the next walled Towns, the
Enemy being quietly landed with his Munition, should have his chief desire,
knowing not only how weak and unfortified our Towns are, but also how
unprovided for all Necessaries to abide a Siege, if Fortification on sudden
could be made. Wherefore I could wish all provident Means used to give the
Enemy annoyance before and at the Landing, and by no means to suffer him to
land quietly, or to trust to that temporizing Course, which is rather to be
practiced when all other Means fail, than to be relied upon at the beginning.

I grant it perilous for a Defendent Prince to hazard his Crown on a Battle,
and more dangerous for Men untrained to encounter expert disciplined Soldiers,
and most perilous to us that have no strong Towns to make head, if we lose a
Battle: Aad therefore it is no part of my meaning to wish our Prince to give
any Invading Enemy Battle with all our Forces, how well prepared and ordered
soever we should be. But my meaning is, to have such Provision in every Shire,
as we may be able readily on any sudden to give the Enemy all annoiance
possible, before and at the Landing, while the inward Forces of our Country may
the better assemble, and put themselves in Military Order, to proceed after as
shall be found most convenient.

And therefore to avoid as well confused Assemblies of our own Forces, as also
to be able, like Soldiers, orderly to annoy the Enemy, by all means at the
landing, and nevertheless to reserve all Advantages of temporizing afterward,
if we should not defeat or repel them at or before the landing, these Notes
ensuing I would wish to be considered.

Notes to be remembered in the Musters and Ordering of Men hereafter.
First, That all bad Armor, Weapons, and Furniture, be defaced or taken away,
and such new provided as may be serviceable; and this to be better executed,
without favor, indifferently on all degrees.

That better Consideration be had of selecting or enrolling of Soldiers, that
only active and able Bodies be appointed for Weapon, the rest for Pioneers or
Laborers; and that such Laborers be enjoined also to have in readiness their
Spade, Shovel, or Pickax with them, accordingly as at the Musters shall be
appointed. These well directed, shall do service with the best in the Field. I
would not have them denied, but rather allowed every Man also his light Pike,
or Black-Bill, to execute when Time shall serve.

That good regard be had to maintain still full Numbers of armed Pikes, for as
we grow by Wealth more delicate, we shall seek generally with the Italian and
French to leave that Weapon, and thereby greatly weaken the Forces of our Land.

That some Games be erected in several places in every Shire of England, to
allure Men to shoot in Muskets, etc. and to bestow their Bullets surely; for
the usual manner of Training by wasting Powder is ridiculous, and no Service in
the World in it.

But especially that Provision be made of one kind of Weapon and Serviture,
that in all our former Musters has bin omitted, and in my Opinion ought
specially above all others to be provided in all Shires fronting on the Sea,
where Invasion may be made, I mean the Argoleteir.

These Argoleteirs need no such chief Horse, as the Lance, or Man at Arms, but
every mean Gelding and ordinary Hackney will serve this purpose, whereby it
shall be more easy to have in readiness a thousand of these Argoleteirs than an
hundred sufficient Lances. And yet would I have most part of their Horses such,
as were able for four or five Miles, when need shall be, to take up and carry a
Foot-Shot or Musquetier behind him; and so shall they be able for repelling
sudden Invasions, to do singular Service, being well directed, and far above
any other heretofore in our Musters provided.

The Pioneers or Laborers also, being great Numbers, will always readily be at
hand to cast Trenches, or make Sconces, to lodge Shot in Safety to annoy the
Enemy, and fortify Streights and Passages; and finally, when time is, on the
scattering or flying Enemy to do execution also.

It shall not be difficult in every Shire to find some such two or three places
of Assembly, within a few miles of the Coast, as may discover the Enemy on the
Sea far off, and plainly perceive on what part he means to land, from whence
Supplies accordingly may be sent.

And first I would wish of those Argoleteirs, and Shot on foot, some convenient
Companies be sent to the Coast, and Order given, that all the Laborers of
those parts should attend on them, to make Trenches or Sconces to stay the
Enemy, as they should be directed; in which time the armed Pikes, accompanied
with Lances, may have space to range themselves in Order Military, without
confusion or disorder, to march toward the Enemy. And if these Argoleteirs and
other Shot should happen by the Enemy to be repelled, yet by the aid of the
Laborers of the Country, they may retire in such sort from one Strength to
another, as the Enemy with great loss shall very slowly follow them.

And forasmuch as Kent is the most likely Shire of all other for many respects
to be attempted, whenever any Invasion shall be by Sea, it were requisite
beforehand by Men of Skill to have the Landing-Places well surveyed, and
convenient Places of Assembly appointed, and all Passages or Streights well
considered, that good direction may be given where to assemble, and how to
proceed upon any sudden, when occasion shall require. For at this present, not
only among the common sort of ignorant Captains, but even among some of good
Judgment and Experience, if such an occasion should suddenly happen, there
would be found such repugnance of Opinions, as perhaps the worst and most
perilous Resolution might be taken. In other Arts Errors are not so dangerous,
but upon better deliberation they may be corrected; but in these Military
Causes, especially in matter of Invasion, an erroneous Resolution at the first
may utterly overthrow the State for ever. I would wish this Matter, of so great
Importance effectually considered, before imminent Danger, while Time is. And
so is there no doubt (the natural Fortification of this Island considered) with
the great store of Shipping and Mariners, and the abundance of Armor and Weapon
now in England, and able Bodies also to use them, if they were duly trained and
exercised; but we may with good Order repel the Fury of all Foreign Enemies
whatsoever.

Thus far Mr. Diggs.

And now I must not omit one thing, which is to let you know that the great
strength of this Kingdom lies in Chatham-River, and at Portsmouth, (and I could
heartily wish all his Majesty's Ships there were in that River too). As for the
first, it is sufficiently secured by the New Fortifications at Sheerness, and
thereabouts; but for the latter, if an Invasion should happen in those parts,
the Enemy may land at Stokes-Bay, secure Gospar with a great deal of ease,
destroy the Navy there, and beat down the Town of Portsmouth about their Ears;
therefore that Bay ought to be secured upon the first Alarm.

I would have given you a List of the last thirty Ships, but that they are not
all yet finished, but when they are, will make the most glorious Fleet in the
World.

Requisite for the Defense of a Fort.
FOr Men, the Governor must require them according to the Enemies Strength, the
number of the Bastions, and capacity of the Place. For Provision, according to
the number of Soldiers, and the time, whether it be six, eight, or twelve
Months Provision. Spare Ordnance, a quarter as many as are mounted, for a
supply in case any shall be disabled. Shot of all sorts, as well for great Guns
as for Muskets. Muskets, Bandaliers, and Pikes, to spare, as many as are
requisite. Powder answerable to the number of the Rounds of great Guns and
small Arms. Shovels 1000. Spades 800. Pickaxes 400. Wheel-barrows 150.
Hand-barrows 200. Rammers 20. Drugs 2. Match proportionable to the place and
number of Men. Spare Carriages half as many as are mounted; with good store of
Wheels, Axeltrees, Planks, Joists, Deal-boards and Spars; a Carpenter and his
Men, with all his Tools. Cannon Baskets 500. Musket Baskets 800. Canvass Baggs
3000. to be filled with Earth, and laid upon Brest-works. Calthrops 10 or 20
thousand, useful to lay upon Bridges, and to strew on the Ground. Beetles of
diverse sorts to drive Palizadoes into the Ground, 40 or 50. Palizadoes three
inches thick, six foot high, placed with Iron at the points, four or 500.
Turnpikes twelve foot long, and five inches diameter, in a six-angular form, as
many as are needful. Two large Morter-pieces, and one small, with
Granado-Shells, and all Materials belonging to them. Hand Grenades fitted with
Fusees, two or 3000. Ginns two or three. A Smith with a Forge and all his
Tools, great store of Iron and Steel; a Steel Mill for grinding of Corn, and
two or three Ovens. All manner of Ingredients for Fireworks, and an able
Fire-master to make the Fusees, and all other Fireworks, and to shoot exactly
into the Enemies Batteries, Redoubts, and other Places, as the Service may
require. Lastly, The Master-Gunner must be provided with all necessaries
belonging to the Guns.
Requisite to be carried into the Field with a Train of Artillery.
FOr Battery, Whole Culvering of Brass, mounted upon Traveling Carriages -- 10
For Field Service, Saker -- 10 Three Pounders -- 6 Note, you must carry as many
great Guns as the Design requires, as sometimes 40 or 50, and so shot, etc.
proportionable. SpareCarriages for wholeCulvering 10 For Saker -- 10 For Three
Pounders -- 6
Spare Wheels and Axeltrees for each sort of Ordnance -- 6 Fore-Waggons -- 29
Spare Wheels for the Fore-Wagons 6 Block Wagons to lay Ordnance on 12 Spare
Fore and After-Wheels -- 6 Spare Thillers for Block Wagons 2 Spare Axeltrees
and Draughts -- 2 Sledges to draw Ordnance on -- 4 Manteletts -- 3 Iron Crows,
Handspikes, and Levers of each -- 20 Brass Pullies -- 10 Winches or Hand-skrews
-- 10 Iron Bolts -- 8 Sallet Oil for the Engines -- 50 pound Wadhooks -- 10
Grease Boxes -- 12 Hogs Grease for the Carriages 600 lb. Ladles for whole
Culvering -- 30 Spunges -- 30 Rammers -- 30
Ladles for Saker -- 30 Spunges -- 30 Rammers -- 30
Ladles for three Pounders -- 18 Spunges -- 18 Rammers -- 18
Copper Nails for Spunges -- 600 Sheepskins -- 200 Wooden Leavers for the
Ordnance 20 Iron Crows -- 5 Round shot for whole Culvering 2000 Double-headed
shot for whole Culvering -- 100 Partridges for whole Culvering 300 Round Shot
for Saker -- 1000 Double-headed shot for Saker -- 50 Partridges for Saker --
500 Round shot for 3 Pounders -- 800 Partridges for three Pounders -- 800 Cases
of Wood for whole Culv. 200 For Saker -- 100 For three Pounders -- 150 Beds --
20 Coins -- 40 Field Staves -- 40
Cannon Baskets are generally made in the Field, and their number must be
answerable to the Service. Powder for the Ordnance 30000 lb. Canvass Bags --
5000 Match in bundles -- 2000 lb. Budg Barrels, with each a Dish and a Wooden
Hammer -- 30 Hair Clothes -- 30 Hurdles to plant Ornance on -- 300 Hand-barrows
-- 50 Musquet-Baskets -- 500 Thiller Harness complete -- 60 Spare Ropes and
other Harness 60 Plated Cross Staves for the drawing Ropes after every couple
of Horses -- 80 Hangers with Belts -- 100 Whipcord to bind withal -- 100 lb.
Horse Collers -- 400 Drawing Ropes of 40 fath. a piece 30 Half drawing Ropes --
30 Windlass Ropes -- 4 Stricking Ropes -- 4 Drawing Lines -- 30 Neck Lines --
20 Ramming Blocks to drive Palizad. 20 Horse Halters -- 200 Small Rammers -- 10
Spare Ropes -- 6 Great Iron Hammers -- 5 Beams and Underlayers for Platforms,
etc. 10 foot long -- 300 Stockadoes -- 400 Planks for Bedding, etc. -- 2000
Spars or Palizadoes -- 3000 Deal-boards -- 100 Spades -- 1000 Shovels -- 1000
Wheelbarrows -- 500 Axes -- 300 Handbills -- 300 Pickaxes -- 200 Mattocks --
200 Handbarrows -- 100 Lanthorns -- 30 Candles -- 200 lb. Leather Pails -- 50
Canvass pieces for Blinds -- 20 Packthread -- 30 lb. Sayl-yarn -- 4 lb. Bolts
and Clinchers for Axeltrees 40 Bolts for Thiller Carriages -- 40 After Hooks
for the Carriages -- 10 After Nails -- 50 Spare Clenchers for the Ordnance 40
Wedges for the Block-Wagons -- 100 Iron Staples -- 50 Tow -- 100 lb. Bundles of
Bar-Iron -- 400 lb. Small Bars for Smiths -- 1000 lb. Steel -- 500 lb.
Ladle-Hooks -- 40 pair. Linch-Pins -- 40 pair. Spikes -- 40 pair. Tampeons --
26 Forelocks Keys -- 40 pair. Great melting Ladles -- 3 Small -- 2 Scaling
Ladders -- 50 Nails of all Sorts -- 10000 Formers of Sorts -- 50 Tan'd-Hidesl
-- 40 Druggs -- 2 Ginns or Windlasses -- 2 Paper Royal -- 20 Reams. Canvass for
Cartrages -- 50 Else. Starch -- 10 lb. Needles -- 40 dozen. Thread -- 40 lb.
Twine -- 50 lb. Gunners Horns -- 50 Priming-Irons -- 6 dozen. Aprons of Lead --
30 Linstocks -- 4 dozen. Wire -- 10 lb. Morter-pieces Great -- 2 Small -- 1
Granadoe shells, for each -- 100 Hand Grenades fitted -- 5000 Petars fitted
-- 6 Wagons for the Train -- 40 Horses for the Train, with all manner of
Harness, complete -- 500 All Tools for Miners, Carpenters, Wheelwrights,
Smiths, Coopers, Turners, Collermakers, Armorers, Basket-makers, and all manner
of Ingredients and Instruments for the Fire-Masters, and Petardiers.
Requisite to be carried into the Field to make a Magazine of in the Army.
POwder for Musketeers 1000 Bar. Match in bundles -- 90 C. Lead for Bullets --
50 C. Moulds to cast-Bullets -- 50 Hair-cloaths -- 60 Old pieces of Sails to
make Blinds -- 1000 Spare Muskets -- 1000 Spare Bandaleers -- 1000 Spare
Musquet-stocks -- 500 Long Pikes -- 2000 Half Pikes -- 200 Corslets and
Headpieces -- 300 Javelins double-pointed -- 1000 Match-Horns to blind
lighted-Matches upon an Enterprise 2000 Running Wagons with two Wheels and
Javelins put through the Axeltrees -- 300 Short Palizadoes -- 6000 Iron Hammers
-- 40 Wooden Mallets -- 200 Great Borers to bore with -- 9 Calthrops -- 10000
Swords with Belts -- 500 Pieces of Bullrush-Bridges to pass over a Moat or
Ditch -- 150 Hand-barrows to carry Sods with 150 Great Beetles -- 100
Water-scoops -- 200 Mathematical Water Horse-Mills to drain out Water -- 2
Spitters to spit Sods with -- 300 Bagger Nets to Work in a Gallery 25 Crooked
Iron Shovels with long Hafts to work in a Gallery -- 12 Spades -- 1000 Shovels
-- 1000 Mattocks -- 500 Pickaxes -- 500 Wheelbarrows -- 400 Great Iron Hammers
-- 50 Axes of all sorts -- 600 Hatchets and Handbills -- 100 Great Pincers -- 8
Small Hammers -- 20 Spare Holsters for Cavalry 500 pair. Spare Pistols for
Cavalry -- 500 pair. Spare Carbines -- 500 Spare Partisans -- 40 Iron Crows of
all sorts -- 30 Draggs -- 25 Tents for Persons of Quality -- 200 Trench Tents
-- 10000 Spare Drums -- 200 Nails of all Sorts -- 100000 Lanthorns and Blind
Lanthorns -- 40 Candles -- 500 lb. Torches -- 1000 Colors -- 100 Fire-Lights
-- 25 Pitched Ropes -- 600 pieces. Barrels of Pitch -- 6 Barrels of Tar -- 4
Woolsacks -- 150 Hour-Glasses -- 40 Drawing-Lines to draw Vessels against the
Stream -- 60 Baggs to fill Earth with upon an Approach -- 3000 Ammunition
Chests to put them in -- 6
Blinds of Canvass 150 foot long each piece -- 150 Planks, Spars, Beams of all
sorts good store for Ordnance, Palizadoes, Stockadoes, Galleries, some shorter
and some longer, as occasion may serve. Great Block-pile Drivers, with all
their Ropes and Appurtenances 2 Cordage of all sorts -- 400 lb. Two-handed
Rammers for two Men to drive Palizadoes with -- 20 Spare Bridles, Saddles, and
other Accoutrements for the Horse, as many as are requisite. Fifty pieces of
Bulrush-Bridges, covered over with Canvass, with their Ropes and Cords, to
fasten them one to another, and Anchors, each piece being 10 foot long, and six
broad. Cork-Bridges, each Bridge containing 10 pieces joined together, and each
10 foot long -- 2 Spare Trumpets -- 40 Windlasses fitted -- 2 Leather Pails --
200 Saws of all sorts -- 250 Augors of all sorts, Wimbles and Adazes -- 40 Good
store of Carpenters Tools. All things necessary for 40 Carts to carry Earth in,
complete. Wheelbarrows -- 1000 Spare Wheels, and Iron Pins for them -- 400
Single-sawn Planks for the Wheelbarrows -- 200 Haspells and Turnpikes with
their Javelins, small and great -- 100 Halberts -- 100 Copper Ovens -- 40
Kitchin-Tents -- 6 Hospital-Tents -- 10 Wagons for the Lord General, and all
Persons of Quality, etc. -- 200 Horses with all Harness complete and to spare
-- 1200 Kneeding-Troughs, Dow-knives, Pails, and other things belonging to the
Baker, as many as are requisite. Bread, Cheese, Oats, Hay, and other Provisions
answerable to the number of the Men and Horse, etc. in the Army.
An Account of the Sea and Land Forces ordered by the House of Commons, the
Charge being calculated for a Month, and the standing Pay of every Land-Officer
per diem.
THe ninety Ships of War, with Fireships and Tenders, the number of Men,
consisting of about 25562, at 4 l. 5 s per Head, Wear and Tare, that is, for
Wages, Provisions, Ammunition, etc. will amount to per Month 108040 l. 10 s. or
thereabouts.

The 26 Regiments of Foot, 1000 Men in each Regiment, besides General Officers,
will amount to 34282 l. 14 s. 8 d. per Month.

The four Regiments of Horse, 490 Men in each Regiment, will amount to 9418 l.
5 s. 4 d. per Month.

Thetwo Regiments of Dragoons, each 960 Men, Officers included, will amount to
5429 l. 13 s. 4 d. per month.

The total Charge for the Army for a month, comes to 49130 l. 13 s. 4 d.

The total Charge of Navy and Army, to 157171 l. 3 s. 4 d. per month, besides
the Train of Artillery.

A Land Tax to maintain this Navy and Army, will come to above three shillings
per pound for a Year; for it is observed that 70000 l. per Month, comes to 18
d. per l. by a Land Tax for a Year.

A List of the 90 Ships of War and Men designed by the Parliament against
France, Anno 1678.
4 First Rates
Men. CHarles -- 710 Charles Royal -- 780 Prince Royal -- 780 James Royal --
780 5 Second Rates.
French Ruby -- 520 Catherine Royal -- 540 Rainbow -- 410 Victory -- 530
Unicorn -- 410

16 Third Rates.
Cambridg -- 420 Defiance -- 490 Drednaught -- 355 Dunkirk -- 340 Edgar -- 445
Harwich -- 420 Henrietta -- 355 Lion -- 340 Mary -- 365 Montague -- 355
Monmouth -- 400 Royal Oak -- 470 Plymouth -- 340 Rupert -- 400 Swiftsure -- 420
York -- 340

33 Fourth Rates.
Adventure -- 190 Antelope -- 230 Assistance -- 230 Assurance -- 180 Bristol --
230 Centurion -- 230 Charles Frigate -- 220 Constant Warwick -- 180 St. David --
280 Diamond -- 230 Dover -- 230 Faulcon -- 230 Foresight -- 230 Greenwich --
280 Hampshire -- 220 Happy Return -- 280 James Frigate -- 220 Iersey -- 230
Kings Fisher -- 220 Leopard -- 280 Mary Rose -- 230 Newcastle -- 280 Nonsuch --
180 Oxford -- 280 Phoenix -- 180 Portland -- 240 Portsmouth -- 220 Reserve --
230 Ruby -- 230 Stavereene -- 230 Swallow -- 230 Sweepstakes -- 180 Woolwich --
280

10 Fifth Rates.
Dartmouth -- 135 Garland -- 130 Guernsey -- 130 Hunter -- 130 Mermaid -- 135
Norwich -- 130 Pearl -- 130 Rose -- 125 Sapphire -- 135 Swan -- 135

6 Sixth Rates.
Drake -- 75 Francis -- 75 Greyhound -- 75 Lark -- 85 Robuck -- 75 Soldado --
75 To which is to be added 14 Merchantmen, 4th Rates, bearing each 220 Men 3080
And two Merchants ships, 5th Rates, of 130 Men each -- 260 Total -- 24390

The General Officers pay for a Foot Regiment.
l. s. d. A Colonel 00 12 00 Lieutenant Col. 00 07 00 A Major 00 05 00 A
Chaplain 00 06 08 A Chirurgean 00 06 08 An Adjutant 00 04 00 A Quartermaster
00 04 00 Per diem 02 05 04 Per mensem 63 04 08 Per Annum 882 00 08

The General Officers pay for a Horse Regiment.
A Colonel 00 12 00 A Major 00 05 06 A Chaplain 00 06 08 A Chirurgean 00 06 00
Per diem 01 10 02 Per mensem 42 04 08 Per Annum 549 00 08

The General Officers pay for a Dragoon Regiment.
A Colonel with 3 Horses 00 15 00 A Lieut. Col. with 2 Horses 00 09 00 A Major
with 2 Horses 00 06 08 A Chaplain 00 06 08 A Chirurg. Mate and Horse 00 08 06
Adjutant and 2 Horses 00 05 00 Quartermaster and 2 Horses 00 05 00 Per diem 02
15 10 Per mensem 77 04 08 Per Annum 947 00 08

A Foot Companies Pay.
l. s. d. A Captain 00 08 00 A Lieutenant 00 04 00 An Ensign 00 03 00 Three
Sergeants, each 2 s. 00 06 00 Three Corporals, each 1 s. 00 03 00 Two Drums,
each 1 s. 00 02 00 100 Soldiers, each 8 d. 03 10 00 Per diem 04 16 00 Per
mensem 129 14 08 Per Annum 1686 10 08

A Troop of Horse Pay.
A Captain and 2 Horses 00 14 00 A Lieutenant and 2 Horses 00 10 00 A Cornet
and 2 Horses 00 09 00 Quartermaster and 2 Horses 00 06 00 Three Corporals, at
3 s. each 00 09 00 2 Trumpeters, 2 s. 8 d. each 00 05 04 Sixty Soldiers, at 2
s. 6 d. 07 10 00 Per diem 10 03 04 Per mensem 284 13 04 Per Annum 3700 13 04

A Dragoons Companys Pay.
A Captain and 3 Horses 00 11 00 A Lieutenant and 2 Horses 00 06 00 A Cornet
and 2 Horses 00 05 00 3 Corporals, at 2 s. each 00 06 00 Two Drums, at 2 s.
each 00 04 00 80 Soldiers, 1 s. 6 d. each 06 00 00 Per diem 07 12 00 Per
mensem 219 16 00 Per Annum 2857 08 00

Note, That the Colonel, Lieut. Colonel, and Major, have Captains Pay, besides
their Pay as Field Officers.

The Officers pay of a Train of Artillery, per diem.
l. s. d. A General of the Artillery 04 00 00 His Secretary 00 05 00 A
Lieutenant General 03 00 00 Adjutant to the Lieut. Genesis 01 00 00 Two Clerks,
each 4 s. 00 08 00 A Comptroller 00 15 00 His Clerk 00 03 00 2 Commis. Genesis
each 10 s. 01 00 00 Four Clerks, each 3 s. 00 12 00 Paymaster and his Clerk 00
08 00 An Engineer 00 10 00 His Clerk 00 02 06 Comptrol. to the By-Train 00 10
00 His Clerk 00 02 06 Waggon-Master General 00 10 00 Four Assistants, 4 s. 00
16 00 Commissary of the draught Horses 00 08 00 His four Assistants, each 4^ 00
16 00 His Clerk 00 02 06 Gentlemen of the Ordnance 12, at 4 s. each 02 08 00
Quartermaster 00 05 00 Purveyor 00 05 00 Master-Gunner 00 05 00 His Mate 00 03
00 Eighty Gunners at 2 s. 08 00 00 3 Battery-Masters at 5 s. 00 15 00 3
Work-Baces, at 3 s. 00 09 00 Provost-Marshal 00 06 00 His 4 Assistants, at 2 s.
00 08 00 A Pettardier 00 05 00 Two Assistants, at 2 s. 6 d. 00 05 00 A
principal Conductor of the Matrosses 00 05 00 Conductors 224 for the Train and
Carriages, at 2 s. 6 d. 28 00 00 Matrosses 160, at 1 s. 6 d. 12 00 00 A
Bridg-Master 00 04 00 his 6 Assistants, at 2 s 00 12 00 A Chirurgean 00 04 00
His 2 Mates, at 2 s. 6 d. 00 05 00 A Messenger 00 03 00 A Tentmaker 00 04 00
His two Assistants, at 2 s. 00 04 00 A Tent-keeper and two Assistants, each at
18 d. 00 04 06 Ladle-maker and Servant 00 03 06 A Master-Armorer 00 02 06 Three
Armorers at 18 d. 00 04 06 A Master Smith 00 04 00 Four Farriers, at 2 1. 00 08
00 Ten Smiths, at ^^ 01 00 00 A Master Carpenter 00 03 00 Ten Carpenters, at 18
d. 00 ^5 00 Master Wheel wright 00 03 00 Ten Wheelers, at 18 d. 00 15 00 Master
Collermaker 00 03 00 Four Collermakers, at 18 d. 00 06 00 A Master Cooper 00 02
06 His 2 Servaunts, at 18 d. 00 03 00 Gunstock-maker 00 02 00 Turner 00 02 00
Three Gunsmiths, at 18 d. 00 04 06 2 Captains of Pioneers, 4 s. 00 08 00 Four
Sergeants, at 2 s. 00 08 00 Six Corporals, at 18 d. 00 09 00 200 Pioneers, at
12 d. 10 00 00 2000 Drivers, at 12 d. 100 00 00 A Chaplain 00 05 00
Basket-maker 00 00 00 Per diem 187 19 06 Per mensem 5261 06 00 Per Annum 68396
18 00 Total charge of the Arms, Powder, Shot, and all Provisions of War for an
Army of 26000 Foot, and 4000 Horse out of Store 23543 l. 05 s. 02 d. To be
provided by ready Money 52943 l. 01 s. 06 d. Total 76486 l. 06 s. 08 d. Total of
the Train 66259 l. 04 s. 04 d. Total of both 142745 l. 11 s. 00 d. Total of the
Draught-Horses for the Train, and all the Wagons and Carriages for the Army
amounts to 10860 Horses, and at 8 l. a Horse, comes to 86880 l. so in all it
amounts to 229625 l. 11 ^ Transportation-Charges not here computed, nor the
number of Miners. The Train was to consist of 50 Guns, 30 Petards, and 20
Morter-pieces, with all other Materials proportionable.

A List of the present Governors of the Garrisons of England.
BErwick, Henry Cavendish* Duke of Newcastle. Deputy Governor, Ralph
Widdrington Esquire Carlisle, Charles Howard Lord Morpeth. Chepstow, Henry Somerset
Marquess Worcester. Chester, Sir Ieoffrey Shakerley. Dover, Colonel Stroud.
Dartmouth, Sir Edward Seamour. Deal, Sir John Berry. Guernsey, Christopher Lord
Hatton. Gravesend and Tilbury, Mr. Leak, Son of Sir Francis Leak deceased. Hull
and the Block Houses, John Sheffield Earl of Mulgrave. Holy-Island, Col. Daniel
Collingwood. Jersey-Island, Sir John Laveer. Landguard-Fort, Sir Charles
Littleton. St. Mawes-Castle, Sir Ios. Tredenham. Pendennis-Castle, Richard Lord
Arundel of Treriff. Plymouth and St. Nicholas Island, John Greenvil Earl of
Bath. Sir Hugh Piper Deputy Governor. Portland-Castle, Humphrey Weld Esquire
Portsmouth, Col. George Leg. Sir Roger Manly Deputy Governor. Sandgate-Castle,
Sir Thomas Allen. Sandown-Castle, Capt. Freeman. Sheerness, Major Nathaniel
Dorrel. Silly-Island, Sir William Godolphin. Scarborough-Castle, Sir Tho.
Slingsby. Tinmouth-Castle, Col. Edward Villers. Tower of London, William Lord
Allington Constable, Capt. Thomas Cheek Lieutenant Governor, Capt. Thomas
Hawley Deputy Governor. The Master of the Ordnance's Place is held by 3 in
Commission, Sir John Chichley, Sir Christopher Musgrave, and Sir William
Hickman. Upnor-Castle, Rob. Minors Governor. Windsor-Castle, his Highness
Prince Rupert Constable, Capt. Potts Lieutenant Governor. York and Cliffords
Tower, John Lord Frechivile. Isle of Wight, Sir Robert Holmes. Hurst-Castle,
Sir Iohn-Holmes. Calshot-Castle, Col. James Halsey.
A List of all the Lord Lieutenants and High-Sheriffs of all those Counties
adjacent to the Coasts.
NOrthumberland, Henry Cavendish Duke of Newcastle. Sheriff, Edward Blackett
Esquire Durham, Dr. Nathaniel Crew, Bishop, Lieutenant, and Sheriff. Yorkshire,
East Riding, John Sheffeild Earl of Mulgrave. Sheriff, Sir Thomas Daniel.
Lincolnshire, Robert Bertue Earl of Lindsey. Sheriff, Ralph Maddison Esquire
Norfolk, Robert Paston Earl of Yarmouth. Sheriff, Philip Harbord Esquire Suffolk,
James Howard Earl of Suffolk. Sheriff, Sir Robert Brooks. Essex, Awbrey de Vere
Earl of Oxford. Sheriff, -- Barret Esquire Kent, Henneage Finch Earl of Winchelsey.
Sheriff, Ralph Petley Esquire Sussex, Charles Sackvil Earl of Dorset. Sheriff,
George Luxford Esquire Hampshire, Mr. Noell. Sheriff, John Cumber Esquire Dorsetshire,
John Lord Pawlet. Sheriff, William Weston Esquire Devonshire, Christopher Monk Duke
of Albemarle. Sheriff, Sir Edw. Seamore. Cornwall, John Greenvile Earl of Bath.
Sheriff, John Cotton Esquire Somersetshire, James Butler Duke of Ormond. Sheriff,
Sir Will. Windham.
For all these Counties Following, Henry Somerset Marquess of Worcester is Lord
Lieutenant.
PEmbrokeshire, Sheriff, Thomas Jones Esquire Carmarthenshire, Sheriff, Sir Rice
Williams. Glamorganshire, Sheriff, George Bowen Esquire Monmouthshire, Sheriff,
Thomas Morgan Esquire Cardiganshire, Sheriff, Richard Herbert Esquire Merionethshire,
Sheriff, William Narmy Esquire Anglesey, Sheriff, Thomas Wyn Esquire Carnarvan-shire,
Sheriff, Robert Cotymore Esquire Flintshire, Sheriff, Thomas Pindar Esquire Cheshire
and Lancashire, William Stanley Earl of Darby, Lord Lieutenant. And Edward
Leigh Esquire Sheriff of Cheshire. Lancashire --. Westmoreland and Cumberland,
Charles Howard Earl of Carlisle. Sheriff of Cumberland, Sir George Fletcher.
The Wages of Officers and Seamen serving in his Majesty's Fleet at Sea per
Month.
Officers. 1 Rate. 2 Rate. 3 Rate. 4 Rate. 5 Rate. 6 Rate. l. s. d. l. s. d. l.
s. d. l. s. d. l. s. d. l. s. d. Captain 21 00 0 16 16 0 14 00 0 10 10 0 08 08
0 07 00 0 Lieutenant 04 04 0 04 04 0 03 10 0 03 10 0 Master 07 00 0 06 06 0 04
13 8 04 06 2 03 17 6 Capt. is Mr. Masters Mate 03 06 0 03 00 0 02 16 2 02 7 10
02 02 0 02 02 0 Midshipman 02 0^ 0 02 00 0 01 17 6 01 13 9 01 10 0 01 10 0
Boatswain 04 00 0 03 10 0 03 00 0 02 10 0 02 05 0 02 00 0 Gunner 04 00 0 03 10
0 03 00 0 02 10 0 02 05 0 02 00 0 Purser 02 00 0 01 16 8 01 10 0 01 06 8 01 03
4 01 03 4 Carpenter 04 00 0 03 10 0 03 00 0 02 10 0 02 05 0 02 00 0 Quarter
Master 01 15 0 01 15 0 01 12 0 01 10 0 01 08 0 01 06 0 Boatswains Mt. 01 15 0
01 15 0 01 12 0 01 10 0 01 08 0 01 06 0 Gunner's Mate 01 15 0 01 15 0 01 12 0
01 10 0 01 08 0 01 06 0 Chyrurgeon 02 10 0 02 10 0 02 10 0 02 10 0 02 10 0 02
10 0 Chyrurg. Mate 01 10 0 01 10 0 01 10 0 01 10 0 01 10 0 01 10 0 Quart. Mr.
Mate 01 10 0 01 10 0 01 08 0 01 08 0 01 06 0 01 05 0 Yeomen 01 12 0 01 10 0 01
08 0 01 08 0 Coxswain 01 12 0 01 10 0 01 08 0 01 08 0 01 06 0 Corporal 01 15 0
01 12 0 01 10 0 01 10 0 01 08 0 01 05 0 Cooks 01 05 0 01 05 0 01 05 0 01 05 0
01 05 0 01 04 0 Armorers 01 05 0 01 05 0 01 05 0 01 05 0 Gunsmith 01 05 0 01 05
0 Carpenters Mt. 02 00 0 02 00 0 01 16 0 01 14 0 01 12 0 01 10 0 Mr. Trumpeter
01 10 0 01 08 0 01 05 0 01 05 0 01 05 0 01 05 0 Quart. Gunners 01 06 0 01 06 0
01 05 0 01 05 0 01 05 0 01 05 0 Carpent. Crew 01 06 0 01 06 0 01 05 0 01 05 0
01 05 0 Steward 01 05 0 01 05 0 01 05 0 01 03 4 01 00 8 00 17 6 Steward's Mate
01 00 8 01 00 8 01 00 8 01 00 8 Able Seamen 01 04 0 01 04 0 01 04 0 01 04 0 01
04 0 01 04 0 Ordinary 00 19 0 00 19 0 00 19 0 00 19 0 00 19 0 00 19 0 Gromits
00 14 3 00 14 3 00 14 3 00 14 3 00 14 3 00 14 3 Boys 00 09 6 00 09 6 00 09 6 00
09 6 00 09 6 00 09 6

One Shilling per Month is abated out of each Man's Wages, to pay to the Chest,
Minister, and Chirurgean. And all the rest of the Inferiors have each of them
able Seamens Pay.

FINIS.

