THE MYSTERY OF INIQUITY Anatomized.

BY WILLIAM DILLINGHAM, D. D.

For we are not ignorant of his Devices.

2. Cor. 2.11. For the Mystery of Iniquity does already work.

2 Thessal. 2.7. LONDON, Printed for Jonathan Robinson at the Golden-Lion in
St. Paul's Churchyard, MDCLXXXIX.

THE Mystery of INIQUITY ANATOMIZED.
WHEN in the Fullness of time the Son of God (the second Person in the blessed
Trinity) did assume humane Nature, uniting it in the same Person with his
Divine Nature, that being God-man he might redeem Mankind, and save his People
from their Sins, and instate them in a blessed condition to all Eternity; he
was born of a Virgin, and with such other wonderful Circumstances, as might
well give Satan a just Apprehension that this was He, whom all the Prophets had
foretold, and God had from the beginning of the World promised under the notion
of the Seed of the Woman, that should break the Serpents Head; disappoint all
his malicious Designs against the Glory of God and Man's Salvation, and undo the
Work of the Devil; utterly destroying his infernal Kingdom, which he had long
exercised over fallen Mankind: Which he being sensible of, thought it concerned
him to bestir himself to the utmost; and to stir up all his Malice, Power and
Subtlety (if it were possible) to prevent it.

And therefore in the first place he sought to take away the Life of our
Savior, and that betimes; that so his being incarnate might signify nothing:
This he attempted by Herod's means, putting a Jealousy into his Head, that his
Kingdom would be endangered by one, who was at his very Birth bespoken and
proclaimed the King of the Jews: that so by Herod's Jealousy for his Kingdom,
he might ease himself of the Fears which tormented him of losing his own.

But that Trust being put by through the Providence of God, his real, and the
care of Joseph, his reputed Father, Satan found himself so manacled by the
Divine Power, that he could make no more Assaults upon his Person, than God was
pleased to permit him. Wherefore for above thirty Years we find not that he
made any Attempt upon him. But God did then give way to his boiling Malice to
set upon him by Temptations. And though perhaps he had but small hopes of
prevailing, yet in a desperate Case he resolved to put it to the push in hopes
of a Possibility, and therefore he thought if he could by any means draw him to
Sin, then he would be his own in Fetters, and in no Capacity to deliver others
out of those Chains of Darkness, wherein himself should be held his Prisoner.
But when he saw that no Temptation could enter; but that the blow did ever
recoil upon his own head (which was still wounded by that Sword of the Spirit,
the same Word of God, which had fatally denounced his Destruction) he then did
more sensibly perceive that Christ was more than his Match, and more than Man;
and consequently the Person designed for the ruin of his Kingdom; and
therefore he departed from him for a season, hoping still for a more favorable
Conjuncture in time to come: but he found himself in the mean while going down
the Wind apace, being daily dispossessed and cast out of one Garrison after
another, and that a whole Legion were unable to man one single Man, to hold out
against his Almighty Word and Command. He found that Sins were forgiven,
Diseases cured, and some Dead were raised, and many believed on him, returning
to the Obedience of their Maker, being convinced by his Heavenly Doctrine, and
perfectly Holy Conversation, and the unresistible Power of his miraculous
Works; against which he found himself unable to bear up. Yet between Rage and
Despair he filled the Hearts of the Jews with all Mischief, making them to
blaspheme and revile him; charging him in particular to be a Blasphemer against
God, i. e. himself; and (which was a notable fetch) that he was confederate
with the Devil, by whom yet themselves spoke and acted all. This our Savior
did refute, to the confusion of all his Accusers. But the Devils and their
Malice ceased not until after many bafflled Attempts, they did at last
(according to the determinate Counsel of God, permitting and ordering it) bring
him to a cruel and ignominious Death. For He was numbered with the Transgressors.

Now was it that Satan began to triumph, as if he had wholly broken all God's
Measures, and secured his own Kingdom from so dangerous an Attack. But the
Death of Christ in such a manner was the very way and means, whereby God had
fore-appointed to bring about his great Work for his own Glory and Man's
Salvation, through the ruin of Satan's Kingdom; to which himself did cooperate
by his own utmost Power, Malice and Subtilty, and by all the Instruments that
he could make: Thus the Wisdom of the Father did turn the Subtilty of the
Serpent into the greatest piece of Folly that ever was in the World.

And this the Devil soon became apprehensive of; and therefore applied all his
Arts to hinder the after-game, and recruit of a Resurrection; which would prove
the greatest Miracle of all, and would at once revive and confirm all the
Doctrine which Christ had taught, and so become more dangerous than all the
rest, if he should have his Prison, the Grave, broken open (for he had the
Power of Death) and the Keys thereof ravished from him by a stronger hand. And
when he could not hinder the thing, he endeavored to stifle it in silence,
that it might not be known unto the World; and for this purpose he retained the
Jews to be his Brokers, who suborned the Soldiers with large Money; but all in
vain. For the Sun would rise in despite of Clouds, which seemed to obstruct
him; and being up, did soon dispel those Mists which the Devil had raised, and
by the powerful Beams of his Doctrine, and the miraculous Works taught and
wrought by the Mouths and Hands of his Apostles, did proclaim to all the World
that he was risen, and so had led Captivity captive, and both received and
dispensed such Gifts unto Men, and Graces also, as were like to lead the whole
World in Triumph after him. While Satan's Oracles were nonpluss'd, his Altars
cast down, his Worshippers converted, his Schoolmens Books burnt, and all his
Cheats laid open to the view of all Men.

Thus Christ went on conquering and to conquer, rescuing his People from their
Sins, loosing the Bands and Fetters of Sin, and putting on them other Chains,
the Golden Chains of Grace and Gratitude, the most potent Obligations to love
God, and to yield him new Obedience.

In the mean while, neither the Devil's Malice nor Subtlety were idle; for in
pursuance of the first he resolved never to give over persecuting the Church of
Christ, both Teachers and others; making use at first of the Jewish Nation, and
by them fermenting the Heathen World into the utmost Rage against the Christian
Faith, and the Professors of it. And though he has been much restrained from
doing what he desired, yet has he never wholly ceased Day nor Night from
opposing, vexing, tempting, persecuting and accusing them to God and Man.

But in the mean while he summoned up all the Methods and Devices which his
Subtlity and long Experience, whetted with Malice and Rage, could suggest unto
him. And at length he thought it a matter feasible, that seeing there was no
stemming the Tide of the Gospel, nor preventing the whole World from becoming
Christian; he might at least seem to resign his Kingdom, and to be dead of his
Wound, by suffering Mankind to comply with the Gospel in an outward Profession,
while they reserved their Lusts and spel in an outward Profession, while they
reserved their Lusts and Corruptions immortified; whereby he should still
retain them under his Power, and as certainly destroy them, as in the times of
Paganism he had done. Which he thought he might accomplish the more securely,
because under a Cloak and Pretext of Compliance with Christ and his Kingdom, he
should establish his own in the Hearts and Lives of the far greater part, even
of such as should make Profession of the Christian Faith; holding them still
fast in Sin and Error, which they should retain in Mystery and Disguise. And
which was still more, he hoped so far to prevail himself of the Gospel, and to
debauch the Christian Religion and Worship, as to pervert the most Holy
Principles and Practices of it, and make them become the most refined and
effectual means to carry on a Mystery of Iniquity, which is no other than his
own Kingdom new modelled, and of the last Edition.

For he conceived it not altogether impossible, to make some Men, out of a
blind Devotion unto Christ, instead of worshipping his Person, to adore and
give Divine Honor to every thing that had any relation to him, from the Manger
to the Cross; and all this out of the mere Honor, which they should pretend to
bear unto him. So should they through a blind mistake, instead of his Person,
fasten their Devotion on his Garments, thereby losing both their Savior and
their Souls together.

And the subtle Spirit did well understand that the earthly Mind of corrupted
Nature, would be very prone to terminate its Acts (even the most Religious)
upon some sensible or present Object which it finds it self best able to master
and comprehend; and therefore he craftily put Men upon devising other than the
true Objects of Worship. Which being their own Creatures, they would easily
become so fond of, as to fancy them into God's; and give them Divine Worship;
or semi-Divine, and so ill distinguished, as that it should easily slide and
melt into it.

He understood well that the way to establish his own Kingdom was to lesson
that of Christ's; which might be effected by dividing his Worship, and
parcelling it out among many other Participants; whereby his due Honor and
Worship (which is his Tribute and Revenue) would be lessoned and imbezil'd; as
is a great River by being sliced into many petty Channels. And therefore he
would not only put Men upon worshipping Christ's Appurtenances, instead of his
Person: but also make them give their Worship unto Saints, because of their
Holiness, and their Sufferings for Jesus Christ: wherein they should make
account they paid no small Honor unto Christ himself, while they gave it to
others for his Sake. And unto Angels likewise, those menial Servants of his,
who minister daily for the good of his Saints. Both these they should make
their Mediators unto Christ, or unto God, next way; and that not only of
Prayer and Intercession, but also of Merit and Satisfaction, however they
should strive to mince the Matter. For the Honor and Worship they should give,
should be no other than that which is due to Christ alone, and to God himself.
Jesus Christ is the only high Priest of his Church; who, by the Sacrifice of
himself, once offered upon the Cross, has perfected for ever them that are
Sanctified, Heb. 10.14. Yet Satan will have him Crucified again and again, even
as often as the Sacrament is celebrated; which Christ had instituted only as a
Memorial of his Death and Passion. And while they did this, they should give
Divine Worship to that which by Nature is not God, but Bread; though it be, by
being blessed according to Christ's holy Institution, invested with Sacramental
and Mystical Privileges, becoming the Sign to represent, a Seal to confirm,
and an Instrument to convey Christ and all his Benefits unto believing Souls.
But, as if it were the very natural Body of Jesus Christ united, together with
his Soul, unto his Divine Nature in the Hypostaical Union, they should give
unto it the Divine Worship properly due unto that Person, for the Sake only of
the Godhead dwelling in him, and compounding him.

Now the Devil knew that they being mistaken in their Judgment of the Thing
they should Worship, would become guilty of real Idolatry. And thus should be
pervert that Ordinance which Christ instituted for his own Honor, and the
Union, Comfort, and Salvation of his faithful Servants; and turn it unto
Christ's Dishonor, by Idolatry, into Schism and Contention, and the
Persecution of the Faithful, and Damnation of many Thousands, who should
thereby be made Idolaters.

And while God's Worship is thus given to the Creatures [ Rev. 9.20.] and their
Images, and unto God by his Images; Satan knew that however Men might direct
and superscribe it, God would never accept of it, having declared his Mind to
the contrary; and so of Course all must fall to his Share, as waved and
escheated. [1. Cor. 10.20, 21.] For God will be worshipped alone, and he will
not give his Honor to another. And Jesus Christ is jealous of his own
Prerogative, being the only Mediator between God and Man; and takes himself to
be slighted by such as go about to piece out his Satisfaction [as if it were
defective, and insufficient] by humane Penances and Merits. He is the only High
Priest of his Church; and he is our alone Intercessor, who can by his own
Merits, of infinite Value, prevail with his Heavenly Father, and obtain at his
Hand all Blessings, and eternal Life for all his elect Members, and recommend
their Petitions, put up in his Name, and perfumed by the incense of his own
Merits, so that they shall not fail of Acceptance and a gracious Audience. And
his love to his Church is so great, that he is very jealous, and takes it ill,
that she should wave his Intercession, or not come immediately to him through a
kind of diffidence of his Love to Her (though pretending unworthiness,
Humility, and to exalt his Honor thereby) but direct her Petitions to her
Fellow Creatures (though to be handed to him) who can neither know nor help her.

And for his Prophetical Office, the Devil contrived to invade that, by
stifling the Evangelical Law, locking it up in an unknown Tongue, suppressing
part of it, and adding to it by Writing and Oral Tradition, on pretense of its
being an insufficient Rule and Direction for Man's Salvation, without the
Addition of such Things as should, in Truth, subvert and contradict it; and by
giving it such a gloss as should be sure to corrupt the Text, which he hoped to
make uncontrollable, if he could so bring it about, as that all Corruptions
both in Doctrine and Worship might be made incurable by a persuasion in the
Minds of Men that the Proposer and Director of them was assisted by an
infallible Spirit, and could not Err; and had received a Power of Dispensing
with the Law of God it self, and that there were still on Foot a Power of
working Divine Miracles employed for the Confirmation of his Doctrines.

And then for his Kingly Office, the Devil would raise up such an one, which
should pretend to a Donatio Christi, as well as Constantini, which should
invest him with a Power both in Spirituals and Temporals equal to that of
Christ himself; and therefore make him his Deputy and Plenipotentiary even unto
Adoration [2 These. 2.4.] or if that should fail, the Devil had one ready
sealed, which he had made tenders of to Jesus Christ. Luke 4.6, 7. upon a
certain Condition; and though he rejected it with Scorn and Abhorrence, yet he
doubted not to find one, who would thankfully accept of it; the Draught whereof
was already entered among the Divine Records, and his bold Claim to it then made
should be a sufficient Evidence of his Right. But because the Men of the World
were like to be something stiff and refractory to part with their Temporal
Rights and Possessions; therefore he should content himself with what he could
get for the present, for fear of Knocks; yet giving away Kingdoms to those, who
would adventure for them, (which giving, should prove his Right to retain or
dispose of them) and deposing whom he durst of those, who would not allow him
Power to dispose of their Temporals in order to his Spirituals, which himself
should claim to be the sole Judge of. One that should, in pursuance of this
Claim, pretend to pardon Men's Sins against the Law of God, and erect a
Purgatory, or Prison, for Offenders, whereof himself should keep the Key on the
same Bunch with those of Heaven and Hell, which he should pretend to wear
always at his Girdle. One, who should exercise Dominion over Men's Faith and
Consciences, minting new Articles of Faith at his Pleasure, to be believed by
them under no less pain then eternal Damnation.

Thus Satan thought it a thing not altogether unpossible for him to supplant
and defeat Christ in all his Offices, and thereby degrade him from that Honor
wherein his Father had invested him; who had given him a Name above every Name,
that the Angels of God should worship him, and that to his Power and Authority
every Knee should bow; that his Humane Nature, as existing in his Person, and
his Person as God-Man, and consisting partly of his humane Nature, should
become the Object of Divine Adoration, his humane Nature being assumed into
that high Privilege and Prerogative of partaking of that Worship, which God
will not suffer to be given to any that is not God; and also that all Acts of
Grace should be dispensed unto the Church as the alone purchase of his Merit,
and at his sole Instance and Intercession.

And if Satan could but gain this Point and Design upon the Person and Offices
of Christ, he hoped to lay his Faith and Religion low enough, and in a great
measure to defeat the great Design of the Gospel, the Salvation of Men's Souls.
Which he should the more easily hereby retain under his Command, and keep them
still in their Sins and natural Corruptions. Which that he might cherish and
inflame to the utmost, under the mysterious Covert of the Christian Profession,
he cast about how he might make Provision for the Flesh, to improve the
Corruptions of Humane Nature unto their utmost Pitch and A^m^.

And therefore he contrived it so, as that the Profession of Religion should
not hinder, but rather promote the enjoyment of all worldly Honors, Riches,
and sensual Pleasures; the Lust of the Flesh, the Lust of the Eye, and the
Pride of Life. That Men might pursue their Pride and Ambition, their
Covetousness of Riches and Possessions, and their earthly and carnal Pleasures
and Delights; and yet all the while go for good Christians, abusing others, and
perhaps themselves also, into a foolish Persuasion, that they were in the first
rank of those who should be saved.

The first of these Corruptions is Pride, which being the Devil's firstborn,
and the principal Master-Lineament of his Image, wherewith he had poisoned
Humane Nature at the first, and being the main Root of all Rebellion and
Apostasy from God, he took a special Care for its Accommodation in this new
Model of his Kingdom. And therefore when Men had taken upon them the Profession
of the Christian Faith, and brought along with them high thoughts of
themselves, of the acuteness of their Reason, and the (...), or uncontrollable
Freedom of their Will, (both which the way of believing and taking things upon
God's sole Authority, and the necessity of the Grace of God for the
Sanctification of the Heart and saving of the Soul, seemed to cross and
mortify) the Devil gratified them in this by setting up Opinions of Religion to
the same effect. Which have proved a Seminary of most of the Heresies, which
afterward infected the Church of God for many Ages; as proceeding from a
corrupt Self-Love, or love of corrupted Self, and setting up Man's Understanding
and Will against those of God, whereby Men became (...), and (...), no longer
subject to him.

Men's Reason was entertained with Notions contrary to the mysterious Truths of
the Gospel, called by the Apostle the Mystery of Godliness; The blessed Trinity
of Persons in the Unity of the Divine Essence, and the Union of the two Natures
in the Person of Jesus Christ; God manifested in the Flesh; Our Redemption by
his Death, and Justification by Faith in him; Sanctification by his Word and
Spirit; the Resurrection of the Body; and such like. And their proud Wills were
stroaked and soothed with an opinion of Merit, and the self-sufficiency of
Natures Stock, without being beholden to God for Gospel Grace.

But the main and top-branch of Pride did show it self in (...), in the
asserting of a Superiority and appearing on the top of other Men.

Therefore to gratify this Ambition, he resolved first to make use of those
Eminencies, which he found in the Constitution of the Church. Christ himself
gave some Apostles, some Prophets, and some Evangelists, and some Pastors and
Teachers, Ephesians. 4.11. So that there wanted not Gifts and Offices, which Men of
Demetrius his Complexion, who loved the Preeminency, might pretend and aspire
unto.

And if this were not enough to satisfy their Ambition, they might build
themselves higher Stories by drawing Disciples after them [ Acts 20.30.] and so
heading of Sects and Colonies: or by usurping, and lording it over God's
heritage; [1 Pet. 5.3.] and not only over the Plebs Christiana, but also over
all those Orders and Powers, which Christ had planted in his Church; and raise
themselves up to a Sovereignty over all others of their Brethren, and become
Universal Bishops of the whole Church of Christ on Earth, and Ecumenical
Rulers in matters relating to Christ and his Kingdom.

But the Devil might easily foresee, that, when he should start this game,
there were like to be many pretenders; at least many, who thinking themselves
of equal Power, and as capable as others, of such a Prelation, would be glad to
have it, if there must be one: but all could not be gratified with one place,
so that there must needs be a Simultas of more Competitors.

This affectation of Empire should first lift up its Head in the Eastern
Church, but at length prevail in the West, after it had been decried and
severely censured there as Antichristian.

For so great an Authority to be lodged in one Person, there was no pretext
could be made so plausible; as to hold Vicegerent under Christ Jesus; of whom
the whole Family of Heaven and Earth is named; who is King of Kings, and Lord
of Lords: to whom all Power was given by the Father in Heaven and Earth. But
that this new Spiritual Monarch might not seem to be the first in the Claim, he
was to pretend to be the Successor of St. Peter the Apostle, for whose
Investiture and Institution he was to combat the Gospel, and to find it out
there; though neither Peter himself, nor St. Paul have any thing like it in
their Epistles; and the Primitive Fathers and Councils were stiff against it,
especially the most ancient of them; who by their Canons, and Carriage, and
Writings, seem not to have had any belief that any particular See on Earth was
their sole Sovereign Lord and Emperor in Spiritualibus. But to silence all such
Gainsayers, both ancient and modern, in this and all other matters; he should
claim the Authority of infallible interpretation of Scriptures and Fathers;
whom having first garbled, and cut out the Tongues of many of them, that spoke
against him, he should infallibly pronounce to be all for him; Notwithstanding
that the most considerable part of Christianity might judge and know the
contrary.

But that this his Empire and Sovereign Dominion might not be thought the
effect of Pride and Arrogance, so contrary to the precept and example of Jesus
Christ, (whose Vicar he should pretend to be) and so expose him to the envy of
others; he should cloak it under the humble Title of Servus Servorum (tho he
should carry it liker Dominus Dominantium) and in humility seal Annulo
Piscatoris, with the Ring and Seal of St. Peter the Fisherman Apostle; who yet
perhaps never had any such thing.

But be it as it will, it is resolved that a Prince he shall be [ Rev. 13.1,
11, 12, 14.] but alas! what is a Prince in Cuerpo alone, without welt or guard;
without a Court, a Council, and a Guard? especially if he want both personal
Wisdom, Learning and Virtue to recommend him to his Subjects, and protect him
from Affront, Envy and Contempt? It was therefore thought fit in the next
Consult, That there should be a convenient number raised out of the Clergy to
uphold the Mystery (though of inferior rank at first) till the state should be
formed and come into request, by suitable Power and Riches; and receive some
considerable Address from the rest of the World. Hereby the Empire would rise
by Degrees, and at length be able to invite Politic Heads from Noble and
Princely Families, and entertain the Minds of such of the Clergy, whose
Advantages should tempt them to aspire to the supreme Dignity, and for the
present quiet their pretentions in hopes of obtaining, when there should a
favorable Conjuncture offer it self. And 'ith mean while they would be true to
the Sea, which they might hope in time would be their own; and enjoy all the
most sublimated exercises of their Wits and Lusts; and all this under the
Mystery and pretense of administering the Spiritual Kingdom of Jesus Christ for
the Salvation of Men's Souls, and the Glory of God the Father.

And for this end the Revenues of the Church (given and devoted by pious
Christians to God, for the Maintenance of his true Worship and Relief of his
poor Children) must be amassed upon these spiritual Courtiers, to enable them
to maintain a Port becoming the Children of Pride, and provide Fuel for their
burning Lusts; while the Churches, whose Titles they should wear, would be
pilled by them, and the care of Souls neglected, and Religion betrayed. And
because Bishoprics and Ecclesiastical Benefices would prove an insufficient
Fund for their occasions; therefore there were other Provisions to be made, as
we shall see hereafter.

But neither Court nor State can subsist in Prosperity and Reputation without
Dependents, Intelligence, Forces, and Means to support them. All which might
very easily be supplied by the means of Priests, Missionaries, and other
Persons, under the Mystery of Religion.

As for Dependents, the getting into their Hands the Disposal of all
Ecclesiastical Benefices, and Church-Revenues, would give them an Opportunity
of boring through the Ears of many Millions, and of making them their Vassals;
while so many whole Orders in their vast Number of Monasteries, and all their
Members, Tenants and Retinue, yea and Revenues also, would, upon occasion, be
at their Devotion and Command.

And for Intelligence, there might be a select Number of Priests of choicest
Abilities sent into the Courts of Princes; who under pretense of being helpful
to their Souls, by preaching, directing, and confessing them, should be able to
discover their greatest Secrets, and most private Counsels; and be under an
Oath to discover them unto the Governors of the State Ecclesiastic. And others
also in prodigious Numbers might be sent into all Nations, who should be
Eyewitnesses of what is done by Men of all Conditions, and have a Key into
their Hearts and Consciences, so that not so much as a Thought should stir, but
it should come to their Knowledge, and be under their Management and Disposal.
And all under pretense of taking care of their Souls. Others under pretense of
voluntary Poverty, should not only abuse the Charity of ignorant People, but as
they beg, pry into their Families, observe their private Behaviors, Company
and Acquaintance, their Abilities, and the several Degrees of their Devotion to
Ecclesiastical Interest. Besides these, those of the mystical Council, being
picked out as Persons of Interest from several Nations, and some out of
Princely Families, whose Secrets and Interests they are acquainted with, or by
their Friends and Acquaintance can easily come to the Knowledge of. These, I
say, can supply Intelligence, how every Vein and Artery of any State and
Kingdom, and almost of every single Person in them, does beat.

As for Forces, Though the Temporal Princes are too wise to suffer this Empire
to have its Armies, Garrisons, and Castles, its Forts and Citadels in the Heart
and Bowels of their Dominions; yet in effect it should have all these in
Mystery, in the Monasteries listed under the Banner of Prayers, as if they had
no other Weapons, which they could or would use. But these would be able to
raise their Tenants, and list themselves, when occasion should serve, (as they
have done sometimes) and a numerous Swarm of Priests might be ready, at the
Signal given, to animate the Subjects against their Prince, and by laying an
Interdict or Imbargo upon the public Worship of God, provoke them to join with
them in a Rebellion. Whereby all Princes should have but precarious Titles to,
and Possessions of their Kingdoms, and no firm footing in the Hearts of their
Subjects to trust unto, but lie at the Mercy, Pleasure, and Disposal of this
Universal Spiritual Monarch.

And for the support of those mighty Armies, through the cheating of
Confessors, and the Ignorance of People, their Charity might be fooled into a
conceit of buying Heaven, as it were by Bill of Exchange; and by parting with
their Lands to maintain a Company of lazy and vile Persons, who should subsist
by a Pretense of the Efficacy of their Prayers to God and special Interest in
him.

Whereby a great part of the Revenue of a Nation would be either exported or
misspent at home, or else employed to the weakening of the Prince and Nation;
and sometimes employed against them both: who would also hereby be enervated
both by Superstition, and by the want of those who should defend them.

But to say no more of this Spiritual Monarchy, nor the Ambition and Polity of
it; there remained two other Particulars, wherein carnal Minds were to be
gratified, in which the Gospel of Christ designed to mortify them; Luxury, and
Covetousness, or Worldly-mindedness.

And as for the first of them, a Provision might be made that all the Pleasures
of Sense might be enjoyed to the full, and that under a pretense of shunning
and disclaiming them, viz. by the Doctrines of a celibate or single Life, and
that of Fasting, and such like other pretended Mortifications of the Flesh. But
such Restraints being of mere humane Institution, which could not make them
confer Grace, would probably but inflame the Disease, instead of curing it, and
(like Water on Lime, or Oil on Fire) increase the Heat, and inrage the
Distemper. Yet the Clergy were to be interdicted lawful Marriage, though
honorable and of Divine Institution; and that too, as if it were such a
defiling thing, and altogether inconsistent with the Holiness of Priests, and
the Perfection of Devotion, and therefore to be forbidden [1 Timothy 4.3.] and
vowed against (but in truth, lest the Expenses of a Family should hinder the
Subsistence, and so lessen the Multitude of Priests, so necessary a Tool in the
Spiritual Monarchy) yet Satan foresaw that thereby they might be let loose to
Variety, and therefore the Stews were to be instituted, or at least encouraged,
and Concubines to be granted, as necessary in the case (which themselves had
made) and be counted less impure than Matrimony, though God's own Ordinance and
Institution. But to make it amends, it should be advanced into a Sacrament for
such as would; and that which could confer Grace to all (excepting Priests and
religious Persons.) But for a further Relief of the Priests Celibate, they
should have wanton Legends, and fair Opportunities of Mortification from the
private Confession and secret Converse with the weaker Sex. And though in some
Countries the Laity might find a necessity by a Law to abridg them therein, and
to constrain them to keep their Concubines for prevention of Inconveniences to
their own Wives and Families: yet for the most part they would have the Law in
their own Hands, and absolve one another upon easy terms. Though we read indeed
of some of late times, who having been so impudent as to demand the tenth night
of Wives, and to avouch it unto the Bishop himself to be a legitimate cure for
Nuns, did not escape so easily; the one being burnt, and the other immured or
buried alive, but more for fear than Justice in those who did it.

But to quit my Hands of this dirty Subject, the other Palliation for Luxury,
was to be the pretense of mortifying Men by Fastings, and other voluntary
Tormentings of Nature, by scourging and such like Severities. But as the Wip
does not use to quench Sin, when of the Sinners own laying on; nor an hairy
Shirt worn next the Skin, to mortify more deep and inward Corruption: So
neither would Abstinence from some grosser Meats, much chastise the Appetite;
which in the mean while might be gratified with more delicious Food, and
entertained with choicer Junkets. As some have been heard to profess that they
were so great Lovers of a Fish-Diet, that in Lent-time they have often made
their Meal of roast Beef and Fowls in pure Humiliation and Self-Denial. So that
by fasting (as some Men call fasting) the Pleasure of eating is often time rather
refined than restrained, and the Appetite but whetted and quickened for the
future.

And as for Clothes, (another point for Luxury to wrap it self in) the Purple
and Scarlet, the Splendour and Ornaments of the Sovereign Court, the rich
Jewels, Pearls, and precious Stones, wherewith the Temples, together with the
Altars and Images in them, would be decked and adorned, might be sufficient
Consolation against creeping to the Cross in Sackcloth and Ashes, and washing
the Feet of the poor once a Year, that their own may be kissed all the Year
after.

And though some Orders should go meanly clad, yet there might be a Pleasure
even in that, if affected; and though they might with the Cynick be (...), yet
(...); and their Souls wear Scarlet, while their Bodies were clad in Rags and
Russet.

But Covetousness must not be forgot, but be allowed its Place and Appartment
in this new Model and Mystery of Iniquity, [2 Pet. 2.3. Rev. 18.11, 12, 13.]
The Gospel indeed had spoken severe things against Covetousness and
Worldly-mindedness, and having called Men out of the World, required them to
leave behind them, and abstract their Minds from all the Riches and Furniture
of it, and to set their Minds on things above, to have their Conversations in
Heaven, and there to seek after a more enduring Substance, and the true Riches.
But this seemed an hard Chapter to worldly and earthly Minds; and therefore a
way was to be found out, wherein Men might either possess Wealth under an
outward Profession of Poverty, and the having nothing; or else with a bold Face
outbrave the Gospel-Rules, and despise the meanness of primitive Christianity
and deride even St Peter's Folly, and beggarly Motto, Silver and Gold have I
none.

They might pretend to run from the World, to decoy it into their Cells; and
disclaim it in public, that they may with the more ease enjoy it in a Corner;
and fugit and Salices --.

To slake which immortal Thirst after Rices, the Veins of all Europe must be
sucked, and those of India come swimming in, (though at second hand) to make
that affluence, and Euphrates of Gold and Silver, which might be a sufficient
Supply for Babylon the Great.

It would be a Labor worth a good deal, but to reckon up all the several
Streams, which empty themselves into this great Channel; But I shall name only
some few of them. 1st. It might be foreseen that a great Revenue might be
raised by a voluntary Benevolence from Princes, and other great Men of the
World, who would be glad to bestow some of their Wealth at parting with the
World, that they might thereby make some Amends for the Sins by which they got
it, and purchase to themselves an Elbow-Chair in Heaven; which they could
believe to be feasible by seeing the Porter St. Peter or hisSuccessor, who kept
the Keys. Yea, a Pretense to a Donation would in tract of time create a kind of
Title by Custom and Prescription, especially of as much as they could get and
keep Possession of; and when this way would reach no further, it might be
pieced out, by taking what would not be given; and this might be effected by
many ways and means. As for Instance, by Sale of Red-hats to such Princes as
had a mind to prefer a Friend, or provide themselves of a Proctor; also by sale
of other Court-Offices. By Sainting of some, when any Nation desired to worship
their own Countryman and Acquaintance, that he might more naturally
superintend their particular Concernments. By setting up a Purgatory to cast
Men into a Sweat, that they might be well paid for rubbing of them dry again,
by a Pardon fringed with a Multitude of Masses; by making Penal Laws on purpose
to be dispensed with at greater rates. By Sale of Ecclesiastical Benefices in
their own bestowing, which they might charge with annual Pensions, and then
release at five Years purchase; and exacting Fees of all other Benefices, as
First Fruits, Tenths, and other Perquisites from the smaller sort; but from
Bishoprics, for their Palls, Investitures, etc. an unknown Sum might come in
from all Countries; as also for Vacancies of Collegiate Churches, and Abbeys,
and many more, too tedious to be recited.

By such ways and means were the Triumvirate of Pride, Lust and Covetousness to
be provided for. But for the perfecting of the Mystery of Iniquity, and the
making it work more effectually, there were a couple more of Ingredients to be
added, which are indeed the very Cremor Tartari, the Systole and Diastole of
the Devil's Heart, and the necessary Instruments of his Polity, Fraud and
Cruelty. And as himself was a Lier and Murderer from the beginning; so these
two Characters of Antiquity could not be spared, to make the Mystery look like
its Author. There are two principal Lineaments of the Image of God, which the
Gospel came to repair in Man, Truth and Love; that so he might be renewed after
the Image of him that created him, who is called Truth, and cannot lie; and
also Love: which two things are especially recommended in Scripture, as the
main Characters of an Evangelical Spirit and Conversation, and therefore Satan
could not make his Mystery enough Antichristian, unless he should extirpate
these two out of his Commonwealth, by implanting their Contraries, Fraud and
Cruelty, in the Minds of all his cordial Subjects, but especially those who
should have the Management of his Kingdom and Affairs.

The First whereof was indispensibly necessary for carrying on the Mystery,
both for keeping it secret, and trapanning Men into Principles and Practices so
directly contrary to the Doctrine of the Gospel, and that under a Pretense of
complying with it. And therefore the Apostle tells us aforehand, That the
coming of the wicked One should be after the working of Satan, with lying
Wonders, and all Deceivableness of Unrighteousness, [2 Thessalonians. 2.8, 9.] Speaking
Lies in Hyprocrisy [1 Timothy 4.2.] being a seducing Spirit. The Mystery of
Iniquity was to be carried on, (...), through the Hypocrisy of Liars; who being
Liars, should pretend to Truth: and therefore so long as they made use of her
Garment, they were to have no further regard to her self, either in Thought,
Word, or Deed; but having feared Consciences, to give up themselves to believe
what they once knew to be false; and to spare no Lies, nor false Oaths,
Circumventions, Treacheries nor Treasons; having first persuaded themselves,
that nothing can be Sin which is serviceable to their Holy Designs. In
Pursuance whereof fabulous Legends, new Doctrines, and new Articles of Faith
were to be minted, and dug up out of that dark and bottomless Pit of
Tradition, and varnished over with a seeming Gloss of wrested Scripture.
Councils were to be packed, true Authors corrupted, and false ones suborned.
And to warrant all, there should be an Order of Men instituted; who by their
disputacious Subtilty should duel all Opposers, and spin out Truth into so fine
a Thread, that few Eyes should be able to discern what color it was of; and
then weave it into a Cobweb-Lawn or Spiders Web, rarefying Faith into vain
Speculations, and snarling the plain Truth into a thousand Perplexities, till
it can neither be believed nor understood.

And as for Cruelty, thereby they should fight Satan's Quarrel with the Seed of
the Woman, and gratify their own Principle, which he should infuse into them,
of Hatred and Revenge. And seeing the Mystery of Iniquity was to be carried on
against all Right and Reason, it was like to meet with opposition enough from
others, who would adhere to such Principles; and therefore all those soft and
foolish Principles of Love, Pity and Humanity, were to be thrown overboard,
and all the Methods and Modes of Cruelty were to be devised and made use of for
the tormenting, and destruction of all such as should either oppose, or not
comply with the great Silver Diana, and the Golden Image which Satan should set
up for himself to be worshipped by; who having great Wrath against the Woman,
shall make War against the Remnant of her Seed, which keep the Commandments of
God, and have the Testimony of Jesus Christ [ Rev. 12.17. chap. 16.6. chap.
17.6. chap. 18.24.]

Thus have we briefly seen how Satan has contrived his Mystery of Iniquity, so
that it should not only dethrone Jesus Christ from his Worship, and supplant
him in all his Offices, but also gratify and uphold Sin and Corruption; (which
he came to save us from, and heal us of) and thereby revive his Kingdom in
Mystery and Masquerade, and destroy Millions of precious Souls to all Eternity.

But now perhaps, it will not be amiss to take a short and particular View of
several Doctrines of our Christian Faith, and Ordinances of Christ; and observe
how subtily the old Serpent contrived to pervert them; that he might make them
subservient to the several Interests of his Kingdom of Darkness, and the
Polices thereof.

First, for Preaching the Gospel, which is the means of the Propagation and
Edification of the Church, and saving the Souls of Men; this the Devil knew
might be made a Gladius Delphicus, and was capable of being turned upon the
Gospel it self, by making the Pulpit a Mortar-Piece to discharge his Granado's
from, and to cast his fiery Darts of Sedition, and damnable Heresies, among the
People; by taking Care that when it was used, the Doctrine might be corrupted
by a preverting Gloss, and by mixing with it Legends and feigned Miracles, and
cunningly devised Fables, to keep the People ignorant, and from the sight and
knowledge of the Scriptures, lest they should know too much, and discover his
Errors; lest they should be wiser than their Priests, and so despise them; who
should have neither parts nor means for Learning, which might recommend them;
but be, like Priest, like People; Priests of the meanest of the People, and the
People made pliable to believe any Doctrine that should be offered to them, and
readily practice whatsoever Superstition or Idolatry should be injoined; and
while Ignorance is the Mother of Devotion, the Devotion must needs prove Blind,
and never be able to grope the way to Heaven; and yet so it must needs be,
while Prayers are recited in an unknown Tongue.

But because it might be too great a Mortification of Men's Curiosity to let
them see no further then their Noses, therefore he resolved to furnish them
with Prophecies of his own dictating, whereby they might be amused, without
danger of being made wiser or better by them, as they might be by the
Scriptures; And remembering how his heathen Romans were wont to have their
Curiosity hushed with the lullaby of the Theater; he resolved to entertain
Christians with Images and sine Pictures on the Church-Walls and Windows, and
Theatrical Representations of Gospel-History, which should be instead of
Scripture to them, and were like to be taking with those empty Souls, who knew
no better.

Then for the Sacraments, they might be easily laid lower in esteem, by joining
others in Commission with them, which should be so slightly grounded, that
People might be tempted to suspect the true Coin, as if of no better Metal; or
else think that Men could make Sacraments, and add Grace to accompany them. But
as for the sealing and assuring Power of them, it should be enervated, by
suspending their Efficacy upon the Intention of the Priest, which none living
but himself could be assured of without a Divine Revelation; and therefore not
know but they might be Idolaters in worshipping an unconsecrated Wafer; nor
whether they had so much as been baptized or no. And besides, the Sacraments
were capable of being corrupted by superstitious Ceremonies, and by impious
Uses and Applications; viz. Baptism might either be totally rejected, as
childish and ridiculous, or neglected and deferred; or, by misapplying it to
Persons against their Wills, or to the Ignorant, or unduly to the Children of
Unbelievers; or else defiling it, by adding to it Cream or Spittle, and
Exorcisms; or shamefully profaning of it, by Christening of Bells, etc.

The Eucharist might be perverted by worshipping of the Elements instead of
Christ himself, giving the Priest a power to make his Maker, which would
advance the Priesthood into Admiration, and balance other just Causes of
Contempt, and make the People beholden to him for his Intention, which alone
could keep them from being gross Idolaters. By abusing it as an Amulet to
Preserve, or an Opportunity to Poison; a Charm to Exorcise, or a Pawn for
securing a Debt, thereby turning the Host into a Hostage; and the Natural Body
of Christ (as they should believe it to be) into Gold or Silver, by a strange
kind of Retransubstantiation. (Which a certain Emperor is recorded to have
done.)

However, while this sacred or solemn Mystery, instituted by our Savior's
dying Breath, and bequeathed as a Legacy to his beloved Spouse (whom he
purchased with his own Blood) as a Divine means of her Comfort and Union, shall
become the (...), matter of Contention, and occasion of the most mortal hatred
that Satan himself could infuse into the Minds of Men: and while the due
Commemoration of Christ's most Precious Death, shall be made to many Men the
cause of their own; while, I say, this sacred Mystery shall be thus perverted
to contrary Ends, the Devil will triumph, as having turned it into a Mystery of
Iniquity, to the defeating of the Gospel, especially while so many Men, by
unworthy receiving, do eat and drink their own Damnation, and give possession
of themselves unto Satan by the livery and seisin of the Sop.

And as for that Authority and Power of the Keys which Christ left with his
Church, Satan knew how to serve himself of it, for excluding out of the visible
Church those of the Household of Faith, and the letting in of Thieves and
Robbers. How to make it a Pick-lock to Men's Purses and Consciences, and to
employ it upon trivial and pecuniary Errands; which would render it 'ith' mean
while not only useless to its proper End, but also pernicious, by absolving Men
into Presumption.

Yea and the Government of the Church, ordained for the Union, Order, Safety,
and Edification of it, might be in a great measure defeated, by reducing the
choice of the Persons into the Hands of Temporal great Ones, of whom while few
would be good Men, the Persons chosen would likely be accordingly; and by
intoxicating their Minds with Temporal Riches and Honors, which would make
them think their primitive Duty too far below them, and have neither care nor
leisure to mind it. And lastly, by making their Precincts so large, that it
would be impossible for any one Man (though never so Good, Able, and Diligent)
to administer one of them as he ought. And all this might be brought about
under the specious pretense of the flourishing Condition of the Church, and its
having Princes for its nursing Fathers. And as for those blessed Ends of this
Institution, above mentioned; while some should delight themselves in imposing
upon others their own Opinions and Commands in matters doubtful or needless;
and others please themselves as much in a pertinacious holding and propagating
of their contrary Opinions, and a sturdy noncompliance with what they desire;
both Sorts would be so stiffly set upon having their own Wills, and maintaining
their own Reputations, as to forget that they were Brethren, and to neglect the
Peace of the Church, which Christ their common Savior purchased with his own
Blood. But yet in the mean while (even in all Ages) truly gracious, and humble
Persons would endeavor to keep their Peace with God, studying and believing
plain Truths, and faithfully practicing all their known Duties, to have Peace
in themselves, and to show forth a brotherly-Love unto others, yielding as much
as is possible for Public Peace sake. According to St. Paul's Exhortation,
Romans 12.18. If it be possible, as much as lies in you, live peaceably with all
Men; in patience possessing their own Souls, and so with a silent meekness slip
through the World, and lay hold on eternal Life, leaving others behind them to
question and commune with their own Hearts, about their own Share and Interest
in that sweet and blessed Legacy of our dying Lord, John 14.27. Peace I leave
with you, my Peace I give unto you. And to bethink themselves what account they
can hereafter give unto him of that great Depostitum.

And when all Church Censures, how duly soever dispensed, and the Municipal
Laws of particular Nations (whereby the loose Spirits of Men were held to their
Duty, and to the observance of the Divine Law of both Tables) shall be
Suspended and Despensed withal, and thereby Men turned loose, to do every Man
what is right (or wrong) in his own Eyes, and to follow the inclination of his
own Mind; into how forlorn a Condition the Church and Worship of God must needs
be reduced, any considering Man may easily apprehend.

When a justifying Faith shall be reduced to the same form with that of the
Devils; Assurance of Salvation be branded for Presumption, and Men discouraged
from making their Calling and Election sure, in spite of the Apostle's
Exhortation; when Sin shall be pardoned for Money, or of course; when
Repentance (which is a godly and hearty sorrow for Sin, joined with an
abhorrence and forsaking of it) shall be laid aside, as too harsh for the
delicate Flesh, and instead thereof, an hanging down the Head, a pale and
distorted Countenance, in a few Grimases, the saying by rote a few Paters and
Aves, the chastising of the Body by some outward Severities, rather than part
with the Sin of the Soul; a Whip and a lousy Coat; and denying themselves
something which they do not much care for, shall be accounted the only
Self-denial and Mortification a-la-mode: When there shall be no Charity left
but that of Alms, and that applied for vain Glory, given with the sound of the
Trumpet, and to maintain a lazy Superstition, whilst the same Persons shall
have so little true Charity or Mercy, as to imbrue their hands in the Blood and
Tears of the true Members of Jesus Christ. When Charity shall grow cold, and
Persecution hot, and Men become Lovers of themselves, of their Pleasures and
Riches more than of God, abandoning themselves to all manner of Licentiousness,
and making it the chief of their care to make Provision for the Flesh: Then may
Men come to be assured that the Mystery of Iniquity is busily at work in the
World; as the Apostle tells us it had begun in his days. But how much of it
has been since executed and wrought off, and the woeful Effects which it has
produced, I shall leave to the Histories of the Church in all Ages to report,
and to the Judgment of all wise Men to make the Application.

But let every Nation and Church, and Party of Men, on which any of these
Corruptions shall be found, bear its own Burden; repent and reform what it
finds amiss in it self, and never dream of excusing it self, by casting all the
Blame upon others: for it is most certain that the Mystery of Iniquity is as
large as the Dominion of Sin, and Kingdom of Darkness is within the visible
Church, and under the Profession of the Christian Religion; and there is not a
Nation under Heaven, wherein the Devil has not ten times more of real Subjects
than Jesus Christ.

FINIS.
Some Books newly printed for Jonathan Robinson at the Golden-Lion in St.
Paul's Churchyard.
A Third Volume of Sermons, preached by the late Reverend and Learned Dr.
Thomas Manton; in two Parts: The first containing sixty six Sermons on the 11th
Chapter to the Hebrews; with a Treatise of the Life of Faith. Part the 2d. A
Treatise of Self-Denial; with several Sermons on the Sacrament of the Lord's
Supper, and other Occasions: with an Alphabetical Table to the whole. Folio.

The sure trial of Uprightness, opened in several Sermons upon Psalm 18. ver.
23. I was also upright before him, and have kept my self from mine Iniquity. By
William Bates. D. D. Octavo.

-- His three Sermons at the Funerals of Mr. Clarksm, Dr. Jacomb, and Mr.
Benjamin Arshurst.

Legal Exceptions and lawful Prejudices against Popery; or a large Deduction of
Historical Evidences; proving that the Papacy is the real Antichristian
Kingdom. By Peter Jureiu. Octavo.

A new Systeme of the Apocalypse, or plain and methodical Illustrations of all
the Visions in the Revelation of St John; proving the Pope to be Antichrist.
Written by a French Minister in the Year 1685. and finished but two days before
the Dragoons Plundered him of all except this Treatise. Faithfully Englished.
Twelves.

Primitive Episcopacy, evincing from Scripture and Ancient Records, that a
Bishop in the Apostles times, and for the space of the first three Centuries of
the Gospel Church, was no more than a Pastor to one single Church or
Congregation. By the the late Pious and Learned David Clarkson, sometime Fellow
of Clare-hall, Cambridg. Octavo.

-- A Discourse concerning Liturgies, by the same Author. Octavo.

A plain Representation of Transubstantiation, as it is received in the Church
of Rome; with the sandy Foundations it is built upon, and the Arguments that do
clearly evert and overturn it. By a Country Divine.

A brief account of the first Rise of the Name Protestant; and what
Protestantism is; with a Justification of it; and an earnest Exhortation to all
Protestants to persist in that Holy Religion. By Samuel Bold, Rector of Steeple
in Dorsetshire.

A Discourse concerning Idolatry and Transubstantiation, in answer to the late
Bishop of Oxford's Plea. By Gilbert Burnet, D. D. now Lord Bishop of Salisbury.

Wonderful Predictions of Nostredamus, Grebner, David Pareus, Antonius
Torquatus; wherein the Grandeur of their present Majesty's, the happiness of
England, and Downfall of France are plainly delineated; with a large Preface,
showing that the Crown of England has not been obscurely foretold to their
Majesty's, King William the 3d. and Queen Mary, and the People have duly
contributed thereunto in the present Parliament. Folio.


