A CLEAR AND LEARNED EXPLICATION OF THE HISTORY OF OUR BLESSED SAVIOR JESUS
CHRIST: Taken out of above Thirty Greek, Syriack, and other Oriental Authors,
by way of Catena:

BY DIONYSIUS SYRUS, Who Flourished most Illustriously in the Temh and Eleventh
CENTURIES.

And Faithfully Translated By DUDLEY LOFTUS, Doctor of the Laws, Master in
Chancery, and Judge of Their Majesty's Court of Prerogative in Ireland.

DVBLIN: Printed by Samuel Lee in Skinner-Row MDCXCV.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE The LADY DOROTHY CAPELL, CONSORT To the Right
Honorable HENRY LORD CAPELL, Baron Tewkesbury, One of Their Majesty's Lords
Justices for the Kingdom of Ireland; And One of Their Most Honorable Privy
Council of England and Ireland.
(...)
Right Honorable,
I Make bold in this my Humble Address, to take my Rise from the Usual Phrase
of the Egyptian Christians Exoptative of Good Success to suchlike Addresses;
and therein I do not only wish warmly from my very Heart, That Almighty GOD
would be pleased to Conduct You with Honor and high Reputation, as His Divine
Majesty has hitherto done, through all the Transitions of Your Life; but also
that this Address may succeed answerable to Your Ladyships Expectation, and my
Design; which is, To give Your Honor Information out of the Catena of
Dionisius Syrus, Extracted by way of Commentary above Seven Hundred Years
since, from near Thirty Authors, Syriack, Greek, and Egyptian, who writes in
Explanation of the Three First, and Three Last Chapters of St. Mathew's Gospel;
wherein is Luculently set forth the History of our Savior CHRIST, concerning
his Genealogy, Conception and Birth, his Flight into Egypt, his Reduction to
Nazareth, his Passion, Death, Crucifixion and Burial, his Resurrection, Actions
and Apparitions after Death, etc. Finally desiring Your Ladyships Acceptance of
this my Dedication, I rest

Right Honorable, Bound in a very high Obligation, Your Ladyships most humble
and devoted Servant, DVDLEY LOFTVS.

THE TRANSLATORS Account of the AUTHOR
Reader,
THere is hereby presented unto you a small Parcel of the ample, learned, and
profitable Works of the Great Dionisius, whose Fame has been carried through
the World from East to West, on the Triumphant Chariot of Illustrious Names,
Viz. Dionisius Syrus, importing his Country; Dionisius Exiguus, denouncing the
Severity of his Life, and the Humility and Benignity of his Behavior; Jacobus
Bartsaliby, signifying a Son of the Cross, denoting also a Voluntary Asperity
of a strict Conversation in a holy Life. He is also made more Famous by the
Titles of many Learned Books, truly attributed unto him: The one being an Ample
Commentary on all the Books of the Old Testament; Another, a Large Catena of
many Ancient Fathers, Syriack, Greek, and Egyptian, on the Four Evangelists;
wherein he shows himself a Great Critic, Linguist, Divine, Historian and
Mathematitian. Another Book which is a Commentary upon all St. Paul's Epistles:
Another, styled Controversal Discourses for the clearing of doubtful Points of
Divinity. Another Book de Cycles, wherein the Doctrine and Hypotheses of the
Eclipses of Sun and Moon, are treated of. Another, being a Treatise of Faith,
wherein are showed the Differences of the Nature of things Intellective and
Sensitive.

And Lastly that which has raised his Reputation to the size of a larger
Esteem in the Learned World, is the Value which the most Learned, Pious, and
most Reverend Doctor, James Usher, Primate of Ireland, had for him; and his
desire to have published all his Works; as also his Grace's purchasing at a
dear Rate, and transporting the said Dionysius his Catena on the Four
Evangelists, in Manuscript, and in its Original Syriack, from far remote
Eastern parts, into this Kingdom of Ireland, where it is conserved in the
Public Libraries of Trinity College Dublin, as also in the Public Library of
the University of Oxford in England; and is also entirely Translated into
Latin, and made ready for the Press by the Translator hereof; and will prove,
when Published, of great Advantage and Utility to the Public, as also to the
clearing and opening of very many Passages of Scripture, and to the further
Glory of the Author, whereof this Parcel, as a Specimen, may be an Argument; as
also his own Preface to this Catena, herewith Published in Latin, by me the
Translator,

Verba DIONYSII SYRI PRAEFATORIA Ad CATENAM suam in Quatuor EVANGELISTAS Ad
ipsos particulatim habito respectu
DUo Apostolorum scripserunt, and duo Discipulorum, Marcus erat Petri
Discipulus, and Lucas Johannis. Non scri pserunt quatuor Apostolorum, tum quia
nihil egerunt gloriae captandae gratia, tum etiam ne parvi penderentur
Discipuli, and ne dicerent homines, quod non fuerunt participes cum Apostolis
praedicatione, and scripturam coegit quisque quatuor Evangelistarum, candemque
in libro ordinarunt, nonnulli dicunt quod Eusebius Caesariensis quando
observaverat Eumonium Alexandrinum, consecisse Evangelium Diatesaron vocatum,
id est e quatuor confectum, and adherentiam verborum mutasse; similiter etiam
fecisse Titianum Graecum Haereticum, ipse coegit ista quatuor, and eorum
singula seorsum scripfit, Alii dicunt quod Johannes Evangelista ordinavit eadem
in unum Librum quando ad eum tria allata fuerunt, quae suo adjunxit.

Postquam Paulus electus fuerat, and necesse erat ut Apostoli abirent in
Regiones ad praedicandum, inceperunt tres Evangelistae scribere Evangelium,
Mathaeus antequam sparsi erant Apostoli, postea vero Marcus and Lucas; and
quando scripta Mathaei ad fideles in Epheso pervenerant Johanni persuadebant ut
scriberet ipse etiam de his quae defiderabunrur:

Occasio scribendi Mathaeo oblata. Orta jam persecutione contra Apostolos,
lapidato Stephano, occisoque Jacobo, factum est ut dispergerentur Apostoli, and
ut praedicarent Evangelium Gentibus: Haebrei vero qui credide runt, hoc
observato Mathaeum accesserunt, rogaruntque ab eo ut quicquid iis verbotenus
dixisset, ipsis in scriptis traderet, quod etiam praestitit, Tres Evangelistae
ea solummodo, quae in uno anno egerat Dominus noster, scriptis man larunt, ab
incarceratione scilicet Johannes, usque ad Ascensionem exceptis Nativitate and
Baptismo, and Te^^tione, allisque nonnullis sine quibus fieri vix potuit, ut
narrationum suarum caperent exordium, Johannis vero scripsit de Divinitate and
de hujufmodi rebus, quae duobus praecedentibus annis secerat Christus, a
tempore quo incepit praedicare Johannes, usque ad tempus quo in carcerem
Inciderat, scopus vero suarum scriptionum suit adventus Domini nostri in carne,
beatitudinesque nobis ab eo prosluentes.

Mathaeus in Regione Palestinae scripsit Haebraice, and Marcus Romae Lingua
Romana, id est Lingua Francorum, Dominus tamen Junnius dicit, quod Marcus
scripfit in Egypto; Lucas scripsit Graece in Alexandria, Johannes scripfit
Graece in Epheso, tribus Linguis scriptum suit Evangelium quia tres hae Linguae
supra Crucem Christi scriptae fuerunt, Haebraice, Graece, and Latin, Haebraice
Ratione Judaeorum, Graece Ratione Pilati, Latin ratione Herodis, and in
ipsissimis Linguis quibus usi fuerunt in accusatione ejus hosts, ejus
Evangelium praedicarunt Evangelistae.

Lucas processit secundum rerum ordinem, and omnia proprio ordine disposuit,
and prout gesta erant a Domino nostro scripsit, Johannes etiam similiter fecit,
salvo eo quod nonnulla in medio reliquit, quia dicta fuerant per Socios suos,
Mathaeus vero non eodem processit modo sed usus est Doctrinae Methodo
cohaerentiae insimul collocando, Leges enim quas Instituit Dominus noster in
uno capite ordinavit, alteri vero Evangelistae, sparsim eas tradiderunt, and
Marcus sequitur dispositionem Mathaei, multi vero non Intelligentes, modum quo
quisque eorum respective scripsit, existimarunt se suisse sibi invicem
contrarios.

Quia principium Evangelii, fuit Baptismus Christi, prout supra diximus,
propterea inde exorsus est Marcus, Mathaeus enim altius ingressum fecit apud
Geneologiam familiaram, ut monstraret Haebreis quod sicuti praedixissent
Prophetae Christus ortus est, Lucas vero altius orditur and pertingit usque ad
Nativitatem Johannis, ut subaccusaret eos qui praefatione omissa aggressi
fuerunt scriptionem Historiae Christi, Johannes ascendit usque ad sermonem
divinum, ut monstraret quod etiamsi socii sui scripsissent, Christum hominem
suisse quatenus incarnatum, erat tamen Deus, and cum Patre fuerat, and postea
incarnatus, and homo factus suit, Doctrina eorum medio Plataearum, and alta
voce fuit praedicata, ipsis dicentibus Deus revelatus est in Corpore, and
tolleravit passiones in carne, mortuus fuit, and Resurrexit, and confirmata
fuit eorum praedicatio, per Miracula quae fecerunt.

Johannes loquutus est de sublimibus, and socii sui de inferioribus, Mathaeus
quidem quia ad Judeos scripsit, ei curae fuit ut natra^et Generationem ejus,
and consuetudinem in carne, Marcus vero, solicitus fuit ut scriberet contra
Simonem qui praedicaverat Filium dispensationem suam egisse per Phantasium, qua
propter confirmavit ea quae ad corporationem spectabant, dicitur quod in
mandatis dedit ei Petrus, ut scriberet vice sua and hac ratione ut nonnulli
existimant) ne propter Petri Eminentiam soc^orum suorum scripturae parvi
haberentur, ipse mandavit ei, ut scriberet de ejus abnegatione accurate,
similiter Lucae mandavit Paulus, ut scriberet in cujus Imitatione extense,
admodum Oratoris Loquitur in confirmatione Theophili.

Corrigenda, in Epistola ad Lectorem, p. 2. line 3. pro Cycles, lege Cyclis.

A Clear and Learned Explication OF THE HISTORY OF OUR BLESSED SAVIOR JESUS
CHRIST, etc.
Matthew begins saying, The Book of the Nativity of Jesus Christ. Matthew said
not as the Prophets, that the Lord said unto me, or I saw a Vision, for, by
reason that the Jews were carried about after false Prophets, it behoved them
to say so, but Matthew, forasmuch as he wrote to the faithful, he needed not to
have imitated the Prophets, nor did he put his Name to the Book because he
wrote to those who were near at hand, after the manner of a Narrative. Yet Paul
because he wrote to those who were afar off, he wrote in the manner of an
Epistle, and therefore it was necessary to put his Name thereunto, he calls the
Book the Book of Nativity, because the Nativity of our Savior is the source of
all Blessings, or even as Moses names his Book from the Creation whilst he
Treats of such other things as were transacted and performed in the World for
the space of two thousand, two hundred and sixteen years, and calls another
Book by the name of going out, yet wrote therein of other things, so it is
called the book of Generation, by reason that this is the principal matter,
that God should be born in the Flesh; though he treats of the rest of his
Conversation on Earth, for it is the principal part, as being the best part
that gives Denomination, say the Philosophers; and although Baptism be the
beginning of the Gospel, yet he commenceth from the Nativity, that he might
instruct the Hebrews, that this was the Messiah whom God had promised to
Abraham, and David, that he should spring out of their Seed, and that he was
the Giver of the Gospel.

Nativity is spoken in many senses; First, as from a Woman. Secondly, as from
Baptism; according to that, he who is not born of Water and the Spirit;
Thirdly, from the Grave; who has heard such a thing, who has seen such
things, that the Earth should bring forth in one day, or that a Nation should
be born in one hour? Fourthly, Nativity is said also of things remote from the
Birth, Esa. 66.8.
according to this; 1 Cor. 4.15.
for in Jesus Christ I have begotten you, and he was pleased to beget us in the
Spirit, and, I know not what to morrow is to bring forth, and, who has
begotten the drops of Rain, and, he Travelleth with Iniquity, Joh. 38.28. Psalm.
7.14.
and has conceived falsehood, and brought forth Destruction.

Fifthly, as the beam and splendour which is begotten of the Sun, or fire, and
as the Eternity of the Son is begotten of the Father according to the Divine
Nature, but here he does not speak of the Eternal Generation from the Father,
but of the Temporal from the Virgin, and though it be called in Scripture the
birth of Abel and Jacob, yet it is not there said of any of the Fathers, the
book of the Nativity, except of Christ, to the end, that we may take notice,
that Christ, is not mere Man, but God, made Man. And, that he was not born
according to the ordinary Course of Humane Nature, of Father, and Mother, but
Supernaturally of the Holy Ghost, and the blessed Virgin.

Moreover, he begins at the Genealogies, to signify, that although Christ was
reputed by the Jews to be the Son of Joseph, yet they were not persuaded of his
Eternal Sonship; yet of Joseph there was some doubt, whether he were the Son of
David or not; and this is accurately made known by the Genealogies, and the
doubt Resolved.

The Greek has it, the Book of making, or being, and making, or being is said
to be nine fold; First, when of nothing, something is made; as the Heaven and
Earth were made of nothing. Secondly, when of something something was made; as
the Firmament, and Trees were made of something. Thirdly, by way of Contempt,
as God said, Adam is made as one of us. Fourthly, by way of Transmutation, as
Lots Wife was made a Pillar of Salt. Fifthly, Impersonally, the Evening and the
Morning were the first day. Sixthly, by way of help, or assistance, as, the
Lord was with Moses. Seventhly, Temporally, and I was as one who hears not.
Eighthly, Of Grace; according to that, Moses was a God with Pharaoh. Ninthly,
Without Transmutation, when one is become that which he was not before; so was
Abel a Herdsman, and David a King and a Prophet, and Aaron a Priest, without
changing humane Nature from what it was; and thus we say, The Word of God was
made Man, God being not changed in his Nature.

The Son of David, the Son of Abraham; he calls him not the Son of Joseph,
because he had not to do in his Generation; neither does he call him the Son of
Mary, although he was made Flesh by her, it being not agreeable to the custom
of Scripture to compute Genealogies from Women; but he mentions David and
Abraham, because the beginning of his Generation of Chist is referred to them:
For he said unto Abraham, In thy seed shall all the Natious of the Earth be
blessed: And unto David, Thy Children shall sit upon the Throne for ever. And
to show unto the Hebrews, that he descended from David, as the Prophets had
foretold.

Moreover he calls him the Son of David, thereby to raise the greater esteem of
him; he was a Nazarite because nursed in Nazareth, according to what Philip
said unto Nathaniel, We have found Jesus of Nazareth.

The Promise was made unto Abraham, because he was the first who was converted
from Idolatry. It was also made unto David, forasmuch as he was the first King
who kept the Commandments, and for that he pleased God, and brought up the Ark,
and was desirous to build a house unto the Lord. He sets David before Abraham,
by reason of his Kingdom, his Majesty, and the Renown of his Time; for the Fame
of his Deeds were celebrated in the mouth of all men, and from him they
expected that Christ should arise; according to that, Was it not from the seed
of David, and from Bethlehem, that Christ was to spring? And they called all
good Kings which ruled over them by the Name of David, as, David my Servant
shall rule them; and, I will set over them David my servant: And it was with an
oath said unto David, The Lord swore unto David in truth, and will not repent,
Of the fruit of thy Belly. And, I have sworn unto David my servant; and, A Rod
shall sprout out of the Root of Jesse.

Again, he places David before Abraham, because the Promise made unto Abraham,
was, That he should be Father of Nations; but it was promised unto David, That
Christ the Redeemer should spring out of his Seed; and it was meet that he from
whose Seed Christ the Redeemer was to come, should be preferred to him who was
Chief of the Nations: For the Redeemer is more to be esteemed than they who are
Redeemed. For this cause it is that he mentions Abraham after David, because
unto him was the Promise of calling the Gentiles.

The Son of Abraham; that is to say, He calls Christ the Son of Abraham
according to the flesh; but he neither calls him the Son of David nor of
Abraham, as of Marital Conjunction, but according to Genealogy and Descent; and
he whom Matthew calls the Son of David, Mark calls the Son of God, and Luke the
Power of the most High, and John the Word of God; but he was called God, and
the Word, and the Power of the most High, because he was so, and he was named
the Son of David and of Abraham, for that he was made so; and he was one and
the very same, and not different Persons.

Abraham begat Isaac; he sets down this Genealogy to show that Christ came, as
God formerly had promised to Abraham and to David, and that he was the Messiah
expected by the Jews, and that they were inexcusable if they would not believe
in him.

Isaac begat Jacob, Jacob begat Jadah and his brethren: He did not mention the
Brethren of Isaac and Jacob, because they had no Commerce with the Stock of
Israel, for they were Heathens, and the Sons of Ishmael, Arabians, and
Edomites, and not by reason of their being wicked, as others say; for the
Scripture mentions those who were more wicked than they. He mentions the
Brethren of Judah, because that from his Lineage is derived the Genealogy of
Christ, who was of the Seed of David.

Judah begat Pharez and Zarah of Thamar; He mentions Thamar who was of the
Gentiles, and was guilty of Fornication; hereby we are instructed of the Mercy
and Goodness of God, who was not only made Man, but was born from suchlike
Ancestors as these; and by reason all men were brought under the yoke of Sin,
there was a necessity of his coming upon earth; and if Judah sinned, and David
committed Adultery, how much more was the transgression of others? He by his
coming absolved those who were under the reproach of guilt, and his Gospel
accepted of every Believer, Adulterers, Fornicators, and as many of all sorts
as were Penitents. And it was for our Consolation that he made mention of
Thamar, that we should not be ashamed of our wicked Ancestors, but be comforted
by the Virtue, Pulchritude, and Ornaments of our own minds; for a man is not
scandalized by evil Parents; for if a Fornicatrix be converted into virtuous
habits, her former evil manners will be no reproach unto her: How much less
reproach is it to a man to have been the Son of a Fornicatrix, or the Adultery
or Sins of his Forefathers, if his own Manners do not reproach him?

Moreover, he mentions Thamar to reprove the Jews, who boasted of Abraham,
and yet were destitute of a good Conversation; as if he had said unto them,
Behold, she who committed Fornication was the Mother of David.

Furthermore, we say, That Thamar did not sit there with a purpose of
Fornication; and it is manifest from what Judah said, She has been more
righteous than I; but that she might minister to the Generation of our Savior
Christ, Genesis 32.26.
who was concealed in Judah, and this is known from hence, that she did thus
with him, and no other man; and thus she did after the death of his Wife, that
she might not seem to offend, for the Law was not then written which prohibited
the same.

Again, she had the greater proclivity in her affections to Judah, in regard of
his want of Children, for destitution of Children was reputed a disgrace to
every man.

Moreover, Thamar prefigured the Church and the Gentiles, who committed
Fornication with Idols, and by the offspring of Thamar were redeemed.

Thamar was of the offspring of the Gentiles, so also was the Church; Thamar
committed Fornication, so likewise did the Church commit Fornication with
Idols; and as Thamar was mixed in the Genealogy of Christ, so was the Church
made a parcipitant of the Body and Blood of Christ.

Thamar is expounded the Church, as calling Christ unto her (...) Come my Lord
unto me, inhabit with me Wherefore does he mention Pharez, and Zarah? Zarah
signifies the East, they appeared in the light of Gods Worship as Enoch, Shem,
Japheth, and Melchizedech, and he sprouting out for a while, and stretching
forth the hand, their place was contracted, and as it were a certain partition
was made

Secondly, Moses is hereby hinted, who came between, for when Zarah drew back
his hand; there was a partition like to an Hedge, and Pharez came forth, that is
to say, the dispensation by Moses, which Paul calls a partition Wall, and
Pharez is expounded an hedge, partition, or division; and after him came again
the dispensation of the Gospel; and it was Zarah, who cast the first beams of
Light into the World at the first, and yet came last into it. Zarah therefore
prefigured the Gentiles, and Pharez prefigured the people of the Jews, and as
Zarah showed his hand, and afterward withdrew it; so also a New People; and
the Institutions of Moses showed themselves in the days of Noah, and Abraham,
and afterward drew back, and the People, and Rites of Moses Entered, as Pharez
was born first, and afterward a New People appeared, and as Zarah, who was
born after Pharez, our Savior sprang from Pharez as to the flesh.

Salmon begat Boaz of Rahab; He mentions Rahab to show, that Christ came not
as a Judge to Punish, but to Cure our Iniquities; and as he took an Harlot, so
God Espoused a Nature which went a Whoring after Idols, and clave thereunto,
teaching us, that he admits of such as are Penitent.

Rahab is Expounded an Association of Gentiles, and of Gods peculiar People.

Boaz begat Obed of Ruth. Ruth was of the Gentiles, and he mentions her to
show the calling of the Gentiles, for the Law drove out the Amorites, and
Moabites from the Congregation, from whom was Ruth; but the Gospel by Faith in
Christ called them; and as Ruth derived her self from the Gentiles, so are the
Gentiles called; wherefore she is mentioned to reproach the Pride of the Jews;
for behold, David proceeded from her; and as the Poverty of Ruth was not
despised by Boaz; so neither was Christ ashamed of those of his Church, though
destitute of Honorable Extraction. Ruth is Expounded by the word (...) which
signifies Reconciliation.

David begat Solomon of the Wife of Vriah; he brings into remembrance the Wife
of Uriah, thereby signifying, that he was not ashamed to write the Truth, and
to declare the Sin of David, who by means of the Gospel, and the descent of a
Physician who had no Sin, was Cured, and freed therefrom; and from the Murder
of Uriah; for when David increased in Virtue, and became Eminent, he
immediately obtained Remission by him.

He also committed Adultery with Bethshebah, but he Repented, and Wept,
whereupon it was Revealed unto him, Psalm. 132.9.
that the Lord should come and heal him from Sin; and when he enquired
concerning the place of his Son, he said, I will give no Sleep to my Eyes, etc.
and after he received the Promise of God concerning this; he spoke, Psalm 29th
and the 16th, concerning the condescension of a Physician even to Death, who
saved the Souls of Sinners; and if any one shall be offended that David Sinned,
let him take notice, that he committed this one Sin, the whole time of his long
Reign; and therefore he offered a long, lasting, and a great repentance; and he
was permitted to fall into Sin, that he might be a good Example for Sinners to
repent as he did; and therefore he made Solomon to Reign in his stead, that all
Men might know, that his Sin was remitted, and that the Jews might not conceive
that Solomon was a bastard, as was the other Boy whom God smote, and he dyed.

He mentions four Women, thereby signifying the four Corners from whence the
Chuch is gathered.

Solomon begat Rehoboam. After he had mentioned a strange Woman, he brings
these into remembrance, that he might reproach the foolish Jews, who boasted of
their Genealogy, and to teach them, that it is not the Noble Kin, but a mind
fearing God, that is to be deemed Honorable; for behold David was greater than
his Forefathers, and Solomon's Mother did not debar him from the Kingdom, even
so the Gentiles, if they will believe, their stock of Idolatry is no hinderance
unto them.

Jehoshephat begat Joram, and Joram begat Hosiah. Wherefore did he pass out
Achaziah, Jehoash, and Amoziah? Some do relate, that Affricanus Bishops of
Emaus says, the reason was, because they were Sinners of the Seed of Jezabel,
unto whom we say, that they were not of the Seed of Jezabel, for Jezebel was
the Wife of Achab, but Joram took to Wife Atalia the Daughter of Omri, the
Sister of Achab, and of her begat Achaziah, although in one place, according to
the sense of the Septuagint she is called the Daughter of Achab, by a mistake
rising from the similitude of Writing, according to the Exposition of Severus,
and the Mother of Jeoash was called Thoba, of Bersheba, and of Amotsia,
Jehoadan, which were of Jerusalem; wherefore they were not of the Seed of
Jezabel, nor were they greater Sinners than Solomon, Achaz, and Manasse, who
are Written. Saint Severus says, that Joram the Son of Joshephat took Athalia,
the Daughter of Achab, and of her begat Achazia and Joash, and Amotsia, whom
Matthew omitted, because the Jews held in abomination the Idolaters of the House
of Achab; and for this reason it was, that he was silent as to those who were
born in Idololatrical Marriage, remembering this, That Punish the Sins of the
Fathers upon the Children, unto the third and fourth Gene ration, of them who
hate me; unto whom some say, That Athaliah the Wife of Joram, and Mother of
Achazia, was not the Daughter of Achab, but the Daughter of Omri, and the
Sister of Achab, and if out of regard to the Hebrews he forbore to speak of
those who came from Athalia, how comes (...) comes to pass, that he mentions
Ozia, who was more Unclean and Abominable to the Jews than these?

Origin says, that he therefore left out these, that the Generations from
David to the Captivity might be adjusted to the Number fourteen, for thrice
fourteen Generations amount to forty and two; and it is a Figure signifying,
that as at the end of forty two Progressions, the people of Israel inherited
the Land of Promise; so at the end of forty two Generations, Christ arose, and
gave the Inheritance of the Temporal Earth to the Saints. Georgius de Gentibus
says, That Matthew did not omit these three persons, nor did he change the
Number of the Generations, nor said (...) fourteen instead of seventeen; but
forasmuch as he wrote his Gospel to the Jews, many of whom were skilful in the
Greek Tongue, and desirous to Translate it out of Hebrew into Greek, and the
Greek Tongue could not express the Letters of their Names Cheth, Aign, and
Tsadi, according to the pronunciation of the Hebrew, and Syriack Language, and
that it has not in its Alphabet guttural Letters, deeply sounding in the
Throat; so that the Interpreters when they came to Joram, the Words being, that
he begat Achasia, and he begat Jehoash, and he begat Amotsia, and Amotsia begat
Hosia; they wrote the Names thus, that Joram begat Achosia, and Achosia Joash,
and Joash Amosia, and Amosia Osia: Others who followed them coming to Write the
Gospel in Greek, began from hence, that Joram begat Achosia, and that Joram
begat Osia, by reason of similitude of Names, and the variation of them in the
one Letter Coph; and this perhaps they did unwillingly, or willingly to Adapt
their Genealogy to fourteen Generations, for those of the Jews who believed
were mightily taken with the Number seven and fourteen; and so the Syriack
Copies were derived unto all Nations.

But we Answer him thus; This is not true, and if it had been an Error, or
mistake of the Writer, and Matthew himself had not left out those Names; then
Matthew must have said, that from David to the transmigration had been seventeen
Generations but for as much as Matthew wrote afterward fourteen Generations, we
understand that Matthew omitted them. Others say, that the Hebrew Christians put
these three out of the Text, to Adapt the Generations from David to the
Captivity, to the Number of fourteen, which was delightful unto them, for there
is extant a Syriack Copy as Ancient as that Translation from the Hebrew, which
sets down these three Kings in the Genealogy, and at the end of them computes
fourteen, and not seventeen Generations, and this computation of fourteen
Generations, the Hebrews introduced in the place of seventeen for alliance to
fourteen, which was a Number grateful unto them; for that on the fourteenth day
they departed from the Bondage of Egypt. Others say, that Matthew omitted those
Names, because they were abominable in the Eyes of the Jews, for Achasia
associated himself to the House of Achab, having sent Ships to fetch Gold, and
ascended unto the High Places of Ramath Gilead with Ahab, and reproved the
Prophet, and was afterward slain by Jehu, and Joash by reason of the Sons of
Jehojedah the Priest. Amotsia also was slain in Rebellion, having excited the
King of Israel to War with him, and by occasion of him, and by his hands, was
the Wall broken, and the Sanctuary violated, wherefore Matthew omitted them, for
the stock will take up that which is pleasing unto him.

Josiah begat Jocaniah, and his Brethren in the Babylonish Transmigration; in
the Book of the Kings, and in the book of Bar Jamin it is not Written, that
Josiah begat Jocaniah, but that Josiah had five Sons, Jehu, Achaz and Eliakim,
who was Joiakim, and Shalon, and John, and Tsedekiah, who was Mathania. Others
say, That Josiah begat Jehoas, who was John, and Jojakim, who was Eliakim, and
Tsedekia who was Mathania, and Shalon who was Jokania; others call Shalom
Jokania; the book of Bar Jamin, that is to say, computing the Sons of Josiah,
and Joiakim, who is Eliakim, begat Jokaniah who is Joiakim, who was led Captive
to Babylon, and how is it that Matthew does not write, That Josiah begat
Joiakim, and Joiakim Jokaniah; and Georgius says, That he wrote so, but says,
that the Transcriber mistook, and wrote Jocaniah, instead of Joiakim. Others
say, That Matthew omitted Joiakim, because he was despised, and slew Euria the
Prophet, the Son of Shamaiah, and had Defeated, as he thought, the Prophets.
Jokania his Son departed, least the Sanctuary should be reproached, and was
perfect, and therefore he sets down his Name. Others say, That Manasseh was
worse than he, how then does Matthew set down his Name? But we Answer, that
every one of them was called by two Names, as Joiakim, and Eliakim, and Joiakim
and Jokania the Son of Joiakim; wherefore Jokania was the Grandson of Josiah;
and he calls him his Son according to the Usage of Scripture, which calls Lot
Abraham's Brothers Son, his own Brother; for, Abraham said, We are Brethren, and
Laban the Sons of his Daughters.

Moreover, Nathania, and Jehoaaz, who were the Uncles of Jokania, he calls them
his Brothers.

Again, Josiah begat Jehoaaz who was called Shalom, and Eliakim, who was
Jojakim, and Mathania who is called Tsedekia; and from the time that Pharaoh
the Lame slew Josiah, he made Johoaaz his Son to Reign, whom when Pharaoh had
bound and loosed, he placed as King in his stead Eliakim his Brother, the Son
of Josiah, and Pharaoh called him Joiakim; and after the death of Jojakim, he
made Jojakim the Son of Jocania to Reign, and afterward he was called by the
Name of his Father Jojakim, and him Nebuchadnezzar led away captive, and placed
in his stead Mathaniah his Uncle, who was called Tsedekiah by Nebuchadnezzar;
all these the Evangelist records, in saying, Jeconia and his Brethren; for the
Kingdom was derived by all of them.

In the Captivity of Babylon. He mentions the Captivity of Babylon, to show
that the Jews were not amended from their iniquity, no not after they were led
into Captivity. And again, for that the Captivity remained for Generations, he
said, From the Captivity until Christ, Fourteen Generations.

Moreover, because there was a necessity of the coming of Christ, that he might
redeem us from the Captivity of the Devil, and of Death, he does not mention
the going down into Egypt, as he does the Captivity of Babylon, for that
descent was a long time before, and this was but newly past; and that was not
for their Sins, but it was for their Sins that they were led Captive into
Babylon.

Furthermore, they did not fear the Egyptians, but they were in a continual
dread of the Babylonians; but forasmuch as Josiah did not see the Captivity of
Babylon; wherefore did Matthew say, That Josiah did beget Jokaniah, and his
Brethren in the Captivity of Babylon? We answer, That therefore the Captivity
is computed from the time of Josiah, because then Jeremia prophesied concerning
it: Even as God said unto Abraham, Thy seed shall serve in a Bondage Nine
Years, where the years are reckoned from the day wherein those Words were
spoken, until the going out of Egypt. So in the time of Josiah Jeremiah
prophesied concerning the Captivity, and from that time made his Computation,
and for that reason accommodates the Captivity to Josiah; on the thirteenth
year of Josiah Jeremiah prophesied concerning the Captivity, and from that time
to the thirtieth and one year of Josiah his Reign.

Jocaniah begat Shelathiel, and Shelathiel begat Zorobabel. Jeremy said
concerning Jocania, That his Seat was despised, as being without Sons, and that
none of his Seed should sit on the Throne of David; yet Matthew here said, That
Christ did descend from him by Genealogy, according to that, The Lord will give
unto him the Throne of David his Father; and Ld. Severus says, That this of
Joconiah, the Prophet speaks so, for that the Earthly Kingdom was held in
Judah but the Kingdom of Christ, and his Throne, was not the Earthly one, but
that which is heavenly, in respect whereof, he said, My Kingdom is not of this
World, yet is he King over the ends of the Earth.

Others say, That Joconia who was before and in the Captivity, was not the same
of whom Matthew said, that he was after the Captivity; but that other who was
before the Captivity, of whom mention is made in the Book of the Kings, is he
who was after the Captivity, and in the Book of Jeremiah is mentioned, whom he
cursed, and called Joiakim.

Others say, That the Joconia of whom Jeremy speaks, was not the same with that
of Matthew, and he of whom Jeremy speaks, was Tsedekiah the Son of Josiah, whose
Children were slain before his face in the Captivity, and he died in Babylon,
grinding in a Mill; but he of whom Matthew speaks was Jokoniah the Son of
Jojakim, and his Mother was called Shushan, and she was the Sister of Jeremy
the Prophet; and this Jokoniah begat Shelathiel.

It is now necessary to enquire whether Shelathiel and Zorobabel, mentioned by
Matthew, be the same with those of Saint Luke, or others; and if they be the
same, wherefore does Matthew call Shelathiel the Son of Jokonia, whom Luke calls
the Son of Neri? We answer, That St. Severus wrote that oftentimes Matthew and
Luke produced the very same Persons; for Families are used after the similitude
of Rivers, which run in divided Channels to run together again, and being
divided from one another, to be intermixed by intermediate Persons after they
have been long separated; for behold, both the Evangelists make mention of
Shelathiel, for Matthew names him the Son of Jokonia according to the course of
Natural Generation, and Luke calls him the Son of Neri, in respect of Legal
Deduction.

Malchim Neri, according to the Law. Nahashtha the Wife of Shelathiel Joiakim
Jokoniah, according to Natural Propagation.

Malchim, the Father of Neri, who was derived from Nathan, took to wife one who
was called Nahashtha, the Daughter of Eliathan from Jerusalem, and of her begat
Neri; and when Malchim died, Jojakim the King took Nahashtha for her Beauty,
and begat Jokonia, and this Neri and Jokonia were Brethren by the Mother; and
Neri took a wife and died without Children, and Joconia his Brother took her,
and of her begat Shelathiel, according as was commanded by the Law, that if a
Man should die without Children, his Brother should take his wife, and raise
Seed to his deceased Brother; and Shelathiel was the Son of Jokonia by Natural
Propagation, and the Son of Neri by Legal Institution: And Matthew said, that
Jokonia was the natural Son of Jojakim, and Luke says that Shelathiel was the
legal Son of Neri; wherefore both of them are in the right.

Georgius says, that they were not the same; but that Neri, who was derived
from Nathan, being willing to resemble his Son by the Son of Jokonia the King,
called him Shalathiel after his name, even as Shalathiel in emulation, willing
to represent his Son by the Son of Shelathiel, called him Zorobabel, And this
is certain from hence, that there are many Names imposed by Matthew from David
and under, which are synonimous with those of Luke, such as are Joram, Eliezer
and Eliakim, for there was oftentimes a Synonimity in the Genealogy, either by
Chance, or Design, as say the Philosophers.

Moreover, it is doubtful how Malkim being from Nathan, took at first Nahashta,
and after that he begat Neri from her, and died, Jojakim the King should take
the Widow, he being Eighteen years of Age, and of her begat Jokonia; or after
that he was slain, that she became wife to Malkim, and brought forth Neri: Both
these Opinions are doubtful; this, that we should believe that Jojakim in his
youth should take to wife a widow woman, or that she who had been a Queen
should marry one of a mean condition, being of another Tribe.

Besides it is written in the book of the Kings, that Nebuchadnezer led Joiakim
and his mother, and his wife into captivity; and if Nahashta the mother of
Joiakim descended with her Son into captivity, it is unlikely that she was
married after the death of Jojakim her husband, neither would Josiah have taken
the widow of Malkim for a wife to his Son Jojakim, therefore Neri the Son of
Shelathiel, the Son of Jokonia, of whom Matthew wrote, is not Shelathiel the Son
of Neri, whom Luke sets down, neither is it written either in the book of the
Kings, or in the book of Bar Jamin, that Jokonia had a Son called Neri who
dying childless, Jokonia took his wife, and of her begat Shelathiel. In the
book of Bar jamin it is written thus concerning the Sons of Josia, Jehoaaz,
John, Jojakim, Tsedikia, Shalom; and that Jokonia was the Son of Jojakim;
therefore they are not the same who are mentioned by Matthew and Luke, neither
do they agree in Name.

Zurubabel begat Abiud. Zurubabel is expounded the Seed of Babel, because he
was there begotten, and born, Matthew said, That Zurubabel begat Abiud, and Luke
says, That Zurubabel begat Resa; my Lord Severus says, That Zurubabel had two
Sons, Abiud, and Resa, and that Matthew reckons the one, and Luke the other, and
as from David the Genealigies are divided between Nathan, and Solomon; and they
descend to Joseph, Matthew taking up the Genealogy of Solomon, and Luke that of
Nathan; so also from Shelathiel the Genealogies are divided between Abiud, and
Resa, and they likewise come down to Joseph.

Georgius de gentibus says, That the Zurubabel who begat Abiud, and the other
who begat Resa, of whom Luke speaks, were different persons; others say, That
Abiud the Son of Zurubabel was called by two Names, Abiud saying I and Resa,
and therefore every of the Evangelists call him by a particular Name, even as
the Sons of Josiah were every of them called by two Names.

Mathan begat Jacob, Jacob begat Joseph the Husband of Mary, from whom Jesus
was born, who is called Christ. By the word (...). from whom, had it not been
pointed, it might have been thought that Christ had been born of Joseph, but
the Supernal Point over the Word (...). thus written, (...). shows that he
was begotten of the Virgin, and not by Joseph, and according to the Greek
Translation it is not so written, but Joseph the Husband of Mary, (...) in the
Feminine Gender (...) Wherefore if Matthew had omitted the Gender, it would have
been thought that he had been the Son of Joseph; but forasmuch as he wrote
(...) and not (...) ex qua, and not ex quo, he makes it manifest that he was
born of Mary, and not of Joseph.

Moreover, by reason he added the Husband of Mary, he shows, that he recited
the Genealogy with regard to Mary, and that she was of the House of David, and
of Abraham, and therefore he brings in her Name. Matthew calls Joseph the Son
of Jacob, and Luke calls him the Son of Heli, for that there was a certain
Man whose Name was Mathan, of the Lineage of Solomon, and he took a Wife whose
Name was Esther, and of her he begat Jacob; and Mathan dyed, and Esther became
the Wise of Matatha, of the Progeny of Nathan; and of her he begat Heli, and
Esther had two Sons, one by Mathan, and one by Mattatha, and Heli took a Wife,
and died Childless, and Jacob his Brother took his Wife in conformity to the
Law, that he might raise Seed to him who was Dead, that his Name might not be
forgotten, and Jacob begat Joseph, and Joseph was the Son of Jacob according to
natural propagation, and to Heli according to the disposition of Law, and
Matthew calls him in respect of Nature, and Luke with regard to the Law, for,
naturally the traduction of Seed constituted by Law was his, who begat
(Children) in the name of his deceased Brother, who died Childless.

Wherefore does Matthew proceed to Solomon, but Luke sets down Nathan, and so
they run down to Joseph?

Some say, that Mary was derived from Solomon, and Joseph from Nathan, and
Matthew sets forth the Genealogy of Mary, but Luke that of Joseph, and if it be
so, wherefore does Matthew declare this concerning Jacob, that he begat Joseph,
whereas naturally he did not beget him? And if they shall say that Luke speaks
of the Genealogy of Mary, and Matthew of that of Joseph, wherefore did Luke
impose this upon the stock from whence Christ was born, that he was supposed?

Philoxenus said, That Matthew wrote concerning the natural Genealogy, and
therefore said, such an one begat such an one, but Luke treated of Legal
Genealogies, and therefore wrote this, that he was supposed.

And hereunto Affricanus gives Testimony, who said, that the Names of the
Genealogies were reckoned among the Hebrews, either naturally, from the account
of Seed, or according to the direction of Law, as, he who is born by Adoption
to one who dies without Children, or of one who begets in the Name of his
Brother dying Childless, for, as yet they had no hope of the Resurrection; and
the Evangelists computed both the Natural and Legal Genealogy, for the
Genealogies of Solomon and Nathan were intermixed: Wherefore each of them from
Nathan as well as from Solomon, was the Father of Joseph; Eli who was of
Nathan, and Jacob who was of Solomon; and he was by Nature the Son of Jacob,
but by Institution of Law the Son of Heli, that is to say Eli. And whereas
Matthew showed, according to the Natural Account of Genealogy, that Joseph was
derived from David, and some Men seemed to oppose him, and said that Joseph was
the Son of Heli, and not of Jacob, prevaricating in respect of the Legal
Genealogy: Wherefore Luke, minded to confute their folly, showed, that though
Joseph should be referred to Heli by Legal Institution, yet even so the Lineage
of Christ would be found to proceed from David. For, he did not place the
Genealogy on Mary, nor did he say, such an one begat Mary, of whom Christ was
born; for it was not the Custom of the Hebrews to derive Genealogies by Women,
wherefore he computes not Mary but Joseph, that he might not seem to confound
Order.

Moreover, we say, That in the Commemoration of Joseph, the Virgin also is
notified with him to have descended from David; for every Tribe was knit with
its own Tribe; although some rare Examples there are of departing from Tribe to
Tribe: But Joseph and Mary were near related to one another respectively, as
the Grandchildren of two Brothers; One Eliezer begat two Sons, Mathan and
Jotham, and Mathan begat Jacob, and Jacob begat Joseph; and Jotham begat
Tsadock, and Tsadok begat Mary; and her Mothers Name was Dinah, and she was the
Sister of Elizabeth; and this was she of whom it was said, Behold, Elizabeth
thy Kinswoman.

The matter was ordered by hint of Divine Providence, that the Kingdom and
Priesthood of David and of Levi, might receive accomplishment in Christ.

Moreover, for this reason he reckons Joseph, and not Mary, for that if the
Jews had known that Mary had not conceived from Joseph, they had stoned her;
her Virginity was concealed from all Mankind, except Joseph, who learned it
from the Angel, and Elizabeth who learned it from the holy Ghost.

John says, Christ was not willing that they should know the manner of his
Nativity, viz. that he was born of a Virgin, but reserved the knowledge thereof
to its proper time, that the Virgin might be free from punishment; for if the
Jews had learned thus much at first, they had not believed that a Virgin could
bring forth, and they had stoned her: For if they called him who drove out
Devils, The Prince of Devils, how would they believe that a Virgin should bring
forth (a Son?) It may be enquired, Where were the Fathers of Mary, for her
Father was called by many Names, Joiachim, Jojachim, Jonchir, Tsadok, Jezedik,
and her Mother also was called Dina and Hana?

Jacobus Auraeus says, That Histories do recount that Mary was the Daughter of
Jojachim of the Tribe of Judah, who was the Son of Asther, in the Original
Panthir, and Asther was the Brother of Malchi the Son of Neni in the Original,
he who was of Neri, and descended by the Genealogy from Nathan, and was on the
Mothers side from the Tribe of Levi, and dwelt in Galilee, in a place of the
City of Tiberia; he calls Joseph the Husband of Mary, when he was her Spouse,
according to the Custom of the Scripture; for it is said in Deuteronomy, If
there shall be a Wife betrothed unto a Man, and a Man shall find her and lie
with her, take them both forth and let them be stoned; the young Woman, because
she did not reveal it; and the Man, for that he lay with his Neighbors Wife.

It is known from hence, that he who is betrothed is called Husband; and she
who is espoused, is called Wife; whence it is known that Christ and the Virgin
were of the Seed of David.

We say it is manifest that Christ is of the Seed of David according to the
flesh, from this, That he was born of Mary, who was of the House of David, and
of his Seed; and it is certain that the Virgin descended from David, because
every one took a Wife of his own Tribe, that Inheritance might not be in
Commixture, nor Confusion be in the Lands, nor War amongst them; and Joseph
observed this Commandment, and took Mary a Daughter of David; for had she not
been from David, she had not gone up to Bethlehem with Joseph the Son of David.

But how did Christ fit on the Throne of David? We say, That there seems to be
a threefold kind of David's Throne; the one was corporal which was made of Wood
and Ivory. and was Adorned with precious Stones. Secondly, They were accustomed
to call the Throne of the Kingdom the Primacie and Authority over the whole
Nation. The third is according to what God promised to David, I will build thy
Throne for ever and ever; and, His Throne shall be as the Sun before me; but
these things which were promised to David but not fulfilled, were accomplished
in our Savior, according to the Word of Gabriel, who called the House of
Jacob, The Gentiles who believe in him.

Fourteen Generations: For he does not say the forty two Generations
altogether, nor does he divide them into six parts, for the Number Seven was
dear unto them; but he divided the Total into three parts, hinting thereby,
that as it was not grievous unto them, that they were changed from the
Government of Judges, to the Government of Kings; and from the Government of
Kings, to the Government of Highpriests; so it should not seem strange in your
Eyes, that ye are changed from these to the Government of Christ, tho Christ
also was a Judge, a King, and an High Priest; for as his ancient Types
Ministered unto him, so he applied them altogether unto himself.

The Jews Accused the Apostles as introducing new Laws to the Creature, and
Matthew willing to show that they were far from blame, he signified that the
Government of God always varied in the Administration of Affairs, accordingly
as was expedient, and agreeably to the Mutation of things, divided the Number
of Generations; from Abraham unto Saul they were subject to Judges; Matthew
accounts Saul as a Judge, for that he Governing filled up the time and was
rejected. They were under Kings ceased in the Captivity, they were Governed by
the Chief Priests; wherefore, according to the change of Constitutions he
divided things, and he hints, that it is no wonder, if he who at first set up
Judges, and afterward Kings, and then Rulers, should set up the Government of
his Son, for neither did the change of State Affairs amend the Jews; but
whilst they were Governed by Judges, Kings and Rulers, they still continued in
the same Sins.

Philoxenus said, That therefore he divided the Generations into three parts,
because the Father revealed the Promise concerning his Son in three Places; to
Abraham; saying, in thy Seed shall the Nations be Blessed. To David, I will
Establish thy Seed for ever; Moreover by another Prophet, that David my Servant
shall feed them,

Others say, That this Promise was made to Adam at his Creation, and that for
this Reason, he Ascended unto Adam, he divided them into doubled Sevens, that
is to say fourteens, that by Weeks he might Illustrate the Words of Daniel, and
(to show) that he was the expected Messiah, and that the Prophets preached
concerning him.

This was Chrysostom.
In the last of the Generations, whereas he sets down but twelve; said they were
fourteen. And the Lord John says, that he put the Captivity in the place of a
Generation, and George says, de Gentilibns.
that Christ was reckoned a Generation; for as the word (...) [until] did not
exclude David from the Fourteen Generations in the first part, so neither does
the word (...) [until] exclude Christ from the last part; but the middlemost
was made Fourteen, by the leaving out of Three.

Others say, That the last part was made Thirteen, by leaving out One between
Shelathiel and Zorubabel, that is to say, Nadabia, that the Number of Fourteen
may be made up of Mary, for that instead of her Forefathers, she entered into
the place of a Generation, or he brought Christ into the place of a Generation,
as we have said.

Eusebius says, That he does not reckon Fourteen Generations by the Number of
Men, but some certain quantity of years, which was divided into Fourteen parts:
The first part consisted of eight hundred years, and the Generations thereof
were Fourteen; but the middlemost consisted of four hundred years, and its
Generations were Twelve; the first and the last were equal as to the Number of
Persons, but he computes the the middlemost with the Two, by reason of the
paucity of Years and Persons.

The GENEALOGY, according to the sense of Georgius de Gentilibus.
The Genealogy of the first part. The Genealogy of the second part. The
Genealogy of the third part. Abraham Solomon The Captivity Isaac Rohboam
Shelathiel Jacob Abia Zorubabel Judah Asa Abiud Pharez Joshapat Aliakim Hetzron
Joram Azor Aram Ozia Zadok Aminadab Jothan Achin Nahashon Achaz Eliud Salmon
Hezechia Eliezer Boaz Menase Mathan Obed Amon Jacob Jesse Josia Joseph David
Jochania Christ Fourteen Generations. Fourteen Generations. Fourteen
Generations.

The Genealogies of the Two Evangelists, and the Difference between them,
according to the Judgment of St Severus.
The Holy Genealogy of St. Luke alone.
ADam, Sheth, Enosh, Kain, Mehalliel, Jered, Henoch, Methushelah, Lamech, Noah,
Shem, Arphaxad, Kainan, Shalech, Eber, Phaleg, Arao, Sarug, Nahor, Therah: From
Adam hitherunto Twenty Generations and Fathers.

From hence Matthew and Luke agree, Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, Judah, Pharez,
Hezron, Aram, Aminadab, Nahashon, Salmon, Boaz, Obed, Jesse, David. Glory to
Christ the Lord, to whom all things are easy.

Moreover, Those of Luke from Abraham to Joseph, were fifty five Fathers; and
from David to Joseph were forty two, and those of Matthew from Abraham to Joseph
were forty and two, taking into Computation the Captivity and Christ.

Whence did Matthew and Luke learn the Genealogy? We say from the Holy Ghost,
as the Prophets taught hidden things, and from the book of Bar Jamin, and from
the books of Esra. Moreover, it was the Custom of the Jews to repeat their
Fathers Genealogies by word of Mouth, or Tradition. I such a one the Son of
such a one, from one to another, unto Adam. Wherefore Paul commanded Timothy to
abstain from Fables and Genealogies. Matthew because he wrote to the Hebrews,
began from Abraham and David, because to them the Promise was made, and that
was sufficient to Answer his purpose; but Luke Ascended to Adam, because he
wrote to the Gentiles, to show that Christ also sprung from Adam, and to abate
the Pride of the Jews who gloried in Abraham. Again he Ascended to Adam, in
mystery of Baptism, to show that he who is Baptized and Regenerated, is to
Ascend to God whose Sons we are made. And moreover, to take away that doubt;
How can a Virgin bring forth a Child, he showed, that as the Spirit was able in
the beginning to form Man without Copulation; so was he able at last, and
formed the body of the Word from the Virgin without Copulation, for it was the
one and the same operation of the Father, and of the Son and of the Holy Ghost;
and for that the Father framed Adam, it is certain that the Son and the Spirit
framed him.

Wherefore does Matthew descend in the Genealogy, and Luke Ascend?

We say, that this is the Custom of the Scripture, it is written in the book of
Ruth, Pharez begat Hezron, and Hezron Aram, and Aram Aminadab, and Aminadab,
and so forth until he descended to David. It Ascends where it says Helkana the
Son of Jochom, the Son of Elihu, the Son of Aho, the Son of Resoph. Again
Matthew descends to show, that the Word of God descended, and came for our
Redemption according to the Promise first made. But Luke Ascended, to show that
they who are Baptized mount up to Heaven; and this is manifest from hence, that
he spoke of the Genealogy, in reference to Baptism.

Moreover. Matthew recounts the Natural Generation, to signify, That the
Natural Generation brought us downward; but Luke the Legal Generation, to show
that the Legal Generation is to us an adumbration of Adoption, and of the
Resurrection, and that we are to Ascend by the Laver of Regeneration, and to be
made the Sons of God.

Wherefore does Luke compute so many Names from David to Christ being forty
three, and those of Matthew are but twenty eight, besides those omitted by the
Writers, being revera thirty two?

We say, That there was not an equal course of Generations in all Families; for
it was one progeny that draws from Nathan to David, according to Luke; and
that is another which is by Solomon as Matthew Wrote; for we have seen many
being of equal years who took Wives, some of whom have Children and Grand
Children; so that in the one may appear three descents, and in the other one;
wherefore it is no wonder, if one Genealogy be more or less fruitful than
another in descents. Moreover, Matthew reckons the Natural Fathers from David to
Christ; but Luke computed Natural and Legal, and therefore Luke has more than
Matthew.

Wherefore does Matthew compute the Natural Genealogy, and Luke the Legal?
Because Luke had formerly learnt, That the Jews blamed Matthew concerning the
Genealogy, for that he had mentioned culpable persons, as Jochania.

Moreover, They said that Joseph, although he was Naturally the Son of Jacob,
yet it being not fit, that his Name should have been Written with his Name;
Luke.
but that Eli was he on whose Name the Seed was Established; He being willing
to solve this Querie wrote the Legal Progenies, and Ascends to Genealogy of
Persons, who were differing from Nathan; and comes again to call the Progeny,
and shows, that although Joseph should be referred to Eli, yet so Christ
appears to be of the Lineage of David.

An Objection of Julian the Wicked: If Luke wrote the Legal Genealogies,
wherefore speaks he of Obed the Son of Boaz as according to Nature, and not of
the Son of Malion, according to the Law as it is written in Ruth?

And we answer, That the Madman did not understand the matter; for the
Controversy concerning Joseph was Whether he was from David or no; and there
was no Controversy concerning this from David to Abraham, for all the Jews
were from Abraham; therefore Luke from Christ to David computes the Legal
Fathers, and from David to Abraham the Natural, and from Abraham to Adam the
Legal Pedigree.

Wherefore does Matthew mention the culpable Men and Women, and Luke the
virtuous?

We answer, That it was Mathews design to show that God came to call Sinners to
Repentance, and did not disdain that Mankind whom he created, should be united
to him, and that he should Justify the same; and for this Reason he mentioned
the Culpable: But Luke having a design to teach that it was unfit that such as
we^ baptized and made the Children of God, should be subjected to Sin, he
computed the blameless Lineage of Nathan, and for this reason does not mention
Jochania, and the like of him.

Aphricanus and Eusebius place Malchi in the third place from the end, as also
Mathan, who is written before Joseph; Joseph the Son of Eli the Son of Malchi:
But in the Syriack Copy of Luke, remaining with us, he is set in the fifth
place, Joseph the Son of Heli, the Son of Matthath, the Son of Levi, the Son of
Malchi. Moreover Aphricanus places Fifty Persons in Luke from Abraham to
Joseph, and in the Syriack Copy of Luke there were Fifty six, and it is
necessary to enquire after the Truth.

Gregorius Theologus says* There were Seventy Seven Generations from Adam to
Christ according to the discourse concerning Genealogies of Luke; the Glossarie
and Jacobus Batanensis in the Epistle to Maron says, That from Abraham to
Christ were forty two Generation as Matthew wrote, and according to Luke Fifty
Seven. If therefore according to the Sayings of these Doctors, and according to
our Copy of the Gospel, there were 77. Generations from Adam to Christ, there
remain 57 from Abraham to Christ, as says Dominus Jacobus; so that taking one
from 57, to wit Christ, there are left 56 from Abraham to Joseph; and not fifty
only, as said Aphricanus, and our Syriack Copies are true; and Aphricanus is
not so in setting down only 50 persons. And this also we are finally to take
notice of, that in the Syriack Copy, there are written 55 persons from Joseph
to Abraham, and not 56, as said Theologus, and Jacobus Batanensis; and we are
of opinion, that the Scribe omitted one Name, and so it was left out of many
Copies, computing the Names from Christ to Nathan the Son of David. In the
Greek and Syriack Gospel, there are found but 42; so, that adding thereunto 14
Generations from David to Abraham, they make up only 56, and not 57, as said
Jacobus; which being all put together, amount to 76, and not to 77, as said
Theologus, there being one Name forgotten about the Middle.

And the Nativity of Jesus Christ was thus: For our Lord is called in Scripture
by 52 Names; whereof some agree to the time before his being made Man, as the
Word, the Son, Splendour and the like; and some to the time of being made Man,
as Jesus Christ; and some denote his Union, as Emanuel, so called from the
Divinity and the Humanity, which Word Emanuel is Expounded, God with us.

Here it behooves us to inquire, what the Name Jesuah signifies? We say, That
Jesuah is an Hebrew Name, and with us imports a Redeemer; but the Grecians call
him Jesus, and say, that it is Expounded Healing; therefore he is a Redeemer,
because he Redeemed his people from their Sins; and he is Healing, because he
Healed and Cured those who lay under the Calamity of Sickness and Diseases; and
Moses imposed first the Name on Joshuah the Son of Nun; and he was a Type of
Christ, and was at first called Hoshea; and as this Name was imposed from
verity of Fact, so the Name Emanuel signifies this, that by Birth from a
Woman, The Word of God was with us. The Word Christ teaches us, That as Man he
is said to have been Anointed after the manner of Men, as the Name Jesus
signifies, that he Revived and Redeemed us; wherefore the Names of Jesus,
Christ, and Emanuel, are the same in force of Understanding; Moreover, The Name
Christ signifies an Unction in Christ, a certain kind of Election.

The Ancients had three sorts of Anointing, first Parabolically with Oil, as
Kings and Priests; Or by Grace, That is to say, by the Spirit in an hidden
manner, as Prophets and Priests; or for Honor and Distinction by direction of
Actings as the house of Abraham, Cyrus and Hazael; and the name Anointing is
used in seven manner of ways. First, For quantity, as what is measured by
Cubits, or Palms, and as the Angel measured Jerusalem a thousand Cubits, and as
with a Span measures he Man. Secondly, For Grace as the Prophets, who were
Anointed privately with the Spirit: Thirdly, for Oil, as the Kings and Priests
were Anointed with Holy Oil, and Men likewise with ordinary Oil. Fourthly, in
the way of Honor, as it was said of the House of Abraham and Isaac, Touch not
my Anointed. Fifthly, by way of Distinction, as they who are set apart to do
somewhat by Direction, as Cyrus and Hazael, who being separated for a design,
were called Anointed: Sixthly, for Faith, as, That which is of Faith, and
Baptism is as the Body of Christ. Seventhly, for the Holy Ghost, even as the
Word Anointed his Body, that is with his Godhead and with his Spirit; for the
Christ whom we Worship; we do not call so, as the Man born only of Mary, and
afterward Anointed by the Spirit, and Sanctified, as the Heretics say; but we
call Christ the Word of God, who was begotten of the Father from Eternity, and
we call him Christ, because he vouchsafed to be Anointed with the Spirit, and
to be Sanctified in the Flesh, and as his Nature was high and above the Birth
of a Woman of Passion and Death; and yet vouchsafed to be born, and to suffer,
and to dye in the Flesh for us; so did he take upon him to be Anointed with the
Spirit, being the Giver of it, and Holy in in his own Nature, he was pleased to
receive the Grace of the Spirit, as not needing it, and therefore received it,
that he might bestow it upon us. And in all things he was the beginning to us
as the Second Adam, according to the saying of Paul, That by his means he might
give us the Holy Ghost. Moreover, we call him Christ, because the Spirit
descended into the Womb of the Virgin, as the Angel said; and this Spirit
framed the body of the Word of God, and Anointed and Sanctified it, and so the
Word was United to this Body; and this the Spirit did, not that it was unable
to frame and Sanctify the body out of the Womb, but that it might be known,
that he that was born was God coequal in Nature with the Spirit, who formed and
Sanctified the body, and not mere Man. Again the Spirit formed the body of the
Word, and Sanctified and Anointed it, that the distinctions of persons in the
Trinity might be made known. It was the Fathers pleasure the Son should be
incorporated, and it was the Holy Ghost who made him a Body, in that he formed
his body of the Virgin: The same Order was observed in the Creation. The Father
commanded things to be made, and the Son made them, and the Spirit finished and
accomplished them. Furthermore, the Father said Anoint, and the Son was
Anointed; and the Spirit supplied the place of Oil; wherefore we call the Word
of God Christ or Anointed.

Again, we call the Word of God, Christ, for two Reasons, and the first is, for
that he vouchsafed to be Anointed in the Flesh by the Holy Spirit, though equal
in Nature with the Giver of the same; Secondly, because the Holy Ghost Anointed
and Sanctified his body, being United to the Word: Moreover, this Name Christ
teaches the whole Doctrine of the Trinity, it was the Father who Anointed, the
Son who was Anointed, and the Holy Ghost was the Oil or Unction; he who said,
That Christ was made Man Naturally, and that he was Anointed by the Spirit for
Sanctification, let him tell us, where he was Anointed? if before his
Conception? he had then no body in the Womb of the Virgin; and behold, it is
not written that he was Anointed at his Baptism; but behold, he was called
Christ at his Birth: Some Heretics there are, who say, that Jesus Christ
signifies one made Man, against whom we say, that Jesus Christ signifies the
Word of God, not as he is God alone, but as he is made Man. Again, The Name of
Jesus Christ does not denote Man from Mary, nor God and Man together, but the
Word of God, and it is most certain from hence; for Jesus says thus to the
Jews, Him whom the Father sanctified and sent into the World, do ye say, Thou
art a Blasphemer? Who therefore was he who was sent from the Father, Man? Or
God and Man together? Or the Word? as says Paul, that God sent his Son, and he
was made of a Woman. Therefore he who was sent to the World is the Word which
was from the Father, and he is called Jesus, and is the same who is said to be
Sanctified, and not mere Man, neither God and Man together, but the Father
Sanctified the Word by the Holy Ghost who Anointed him; not as he is God, for
so he is equal to the Father, and the Spirit, and the Giver of Holiness; but as
he was made Man for us. Moreover, Christ said, before Abraham was, I am; who
therefore was before Abraham, the Man who was of Mary? or God and Man together?
For the Man who was from Mary was so far from being before Abraham, that he was
not before Mary, but after Mary, being born of her; it is certain therefore,
that the Word of God who was called by this Name of Jesus Christ, was before
Abraham.

Furthermore, Jesus said to the Jews, What say ye concerning Christ whose Son
is he? They said unto him the Son of David, and he said unto them, How did
David call him in the Spirit Lord? for he said, The Lord said unto my Lord, sit
on my right Hand; if David called him Lord, how was he his Son? he therefore
who is the Lord of David, is the Man from Mary, who as yet was not in the time
of David, nor Mary of whom he was born. Either he calls Man and God together
Christ; for he calls one in the singular Number, my Lord, and not many Lords;
it is therefore certain that he calls the Word of God coequal with the Father
in Nature, Lord, according to this, The Lord sent down Fire from before the
Lord on Sodom; and according to this also, There is born unto them to day a
Redeemer, who is the Lord Christ, wherefore he calls him Christ; again, it is
written, That thy Throne is for ever and ever, after he had called him God, and
said, Thy Scepter is for ever and ever, that is to say, there is no end or term
to his Kingdom; he said, God has Anointed thee, that is, the Father has
Anointed the Word of God by the Holy Spirit. but not as God, but as he was made
Man; and accordingly as the Word said, He whom the Father Sanctified and Sent.
Moreover, the Prophet said, He has Anointed him above his Fellows, that is, he
has Anointed him above us, and above the Prophets and Apostles, and others who
are Anointed, for all Men who are Anointed of the Spirit, receive what they
stand in need of; but the Word being Sanctified and Anointed with the Spirit,
received it, tho not in want thereof, but full, and a bestower thereof on
others, as said John, That of his fullness we have all received; and being equal
in Nature, and a Giver of the Spirit, he vouchsafed to be Anointed therewith;
that by means of him he might give us his own; wherefore the Word of God is
called Christ, not for that he was Man, nor Man of Merry, nor Man and God
together; and this John confirms, saying, There are different Spirits, some are
of God, and some of this World; every Spirit that says Jesus Christ is not
come in the flesh, this is not of God, but of the World, this being certain;
that he who came in the flesh is the Word of God; and John calls him Christ,
and he is not Man, nor Man and God together. Moreover, Paul says, We have one
God, the Father, from whom are all things, and one Lord Jesus, by whom are all
things, and this further, that in Christ all things were created.

Again, Paul says unto the Philippians, That Jesus Christ being the likeness
of the Father, thought this no Robbery to be compared with God; what therefore
is this comparison, or equality? Who therefore is to be compared with God the
Father? the Man (born) of Mary? or God and Man? or the Word? For Man is not
only not equal to God, but is also a Creature and a Servant; but the Word of
God is to be compared with God the Father, because he is of the same Nature and
Coequal in Essence, and did not Usurp this, but had it Naturally: Again, who
was it that emptied himself? Man of Mary? or Man and God together? or the the
Word of God? Man was already empty, necessitous and indigent, and the Apostle
does not speak of both God and Man, nor are there two that stand in comparison
with God, and did empty themselves; but the Word emptied himself, because he
was made Man; and he it was who emptied himself in the Flesh, without being
changed.

Furthermore it is written, that he assumed the likeness of a Servant, he
assumed, and was not assumed; for Man was assumed, and did not assume, it being
impossible that both of them should assume, but the one assumed, and the other
was assumed: Again, That he emptied himself, what is it? it is this, that being
God, he was voluntarily made Man without being changed. Secondly, That being
equal in Nature with the Spirit and Giver thereof, and had Sanctity naturally,
he did vouchsafe to be Anointed by the Holy Ghost, inasmuch as he was
Incarnated. Thirdly, That his Nature being High and above Passions, he took
sufferings upon him, and suffered death in the Flesh, not as God, but as Man;
yet he suffered natural Passions, but not culpable, Hunger, Thirst, etc. and he
bore Evil and contemptible Names of Reproach, being God, and Lord, and King.
And the three hundred and eighteen Fathers call the Word Jesus Chrst, and not
the Man from Mary, nor Man and God together, for they said, And in our Lord
Jesus Christ the only Son of God.

Again we say to those (who maintain this Error, that if the Word Christ
signifies God and Man as they say, and both of them were Anointed; wherefore
the Name is applicable to both) that there are three Names; the first is he who
applies the Ointment; the second signifies the Operation it self, and the third
him to whom it was applied: Wherefore if the Name [Christ] signifies both God
and Man, then according to their saying, Man is Anointed, and God also is
Anointed; and if it be so, wherefore do ye fly from what ye say, That the Word
of God is Anointed of the Father by the Holy Ghost, as he was Man.

Again, if the Name of Christ signifies God and Man, there seems to be two
Christ, and not one; as the Name Horse signifies a Land-Horse and a Seahorse,
and each of them peculiarly, and again both of them together, and both of them
are called Horses; so then when ye say, That Man is Anointed, and God Anointed
him, therefore ye call him Anointed, Anointing, and Ointment, and not Anointed
only. And that ye say, that Man who was Anointed, being in Union with the Word,
and communicating unto the Word this Name of being called Christ or Anointed,
it were fitting that the Word also should communicate unto Man his Name of
being called One Anointing, for which Reason we call the Word of God Christ;
not that he is, but that he was made Man; and he is not Earthly who was made
Man, but Heavenly who was made Earthly, as he said, that he came down from
Heaven, and was to go to his own: The Doctors also speak in Confirmation of
this, that the Word is called Christ, and that he was anointed by the Spirit in
as much as he was made Man.

Gregory Nyssen says, the holy Ghost calls (...) the Anointing of the only Son
of God a Divine Word; and a little after, If therefore Christ be the only Son
of God, and Anointing be the holy Ghost, the Name of Christ signifies Regal
Authority, for Anointing is a sign of Regality, the holy Ghost also
communicates of the Power. John (Chrysostom) in his Exposition on the
Gallatians, says he is called Jesus, from delivering his People from their
Sins; and also hints by the Name of Christ, the Anointing of the Spirit.
Severus in the forty second Chapter against Grammaticus, It being said after
the manner of Men, that he was Anointed, We all are they who are Anointed in
him, for he being baptized, we are they who are baptized in him.

St. Philoxenus, He is therefore called Christ, because the Father by the
Spirit revealed that he was his Son by Nature, and that He is God as He is
Himself; according as he said, Glorifyme, O Father, with the Glory which I had
with thee; and a Voice was heard, I have glorified, and will glorify; and
concerning the Spirit he said, When the holy Ghost shall come, he will glorify
me.

But when was Christ Anointed? Whether in the Conception, or before he was
Conceived, or after he was Born?

The Heretics say, After he was born of the Virgin; but they are not in the
Truth; and it is manifest from hence, that Matthew says, The Book of the Birth
of Jesus Christ, for hereby he shows that he was born being Christ; but some
of the Doctors say, that he was Anointed before he was Conceived in the Womb,
because they call his Mission from the Father his Anointing, according to what
he said, Whom the Father sanctified, and sent into the World, and who ascended
into heaven, and brought down Christ. But we say, That the Word was Anointed in
the very Conception in the Womb of the Virgin; for in as much as the Spirit
descended into the Womb, and purified her, and formed of her a Body to the
Word, he anointed and sanctified the Body, and the Word was united thereunto
personally; and that is evident from this, That the holy Ghost shall come, and
the power of the most High shall dwell upon thee.

And the Generation of Jesus Christ was thus] It has been showed to the
Hearers, That Christ was to come when the Princes of the People should fail,
and the Seventy Weeks of Daniel should be accomplished; here he teaches the
manner of his Corporeal Birth. When thou Husband shall hear this, do not think
that he is to be born according to the Law of Nature, who prescribes a Law to
Nature; and when he came to Joseph, he said, who begat Christ; and therefore he
says afterward, That the Generation of Jesus Christ was thus; that is to say,
he was not born as all other men, but this his Generation was of a new kind,
and it was above the nature of ordinary Generations; wherefore he said it was
thus, that he might expound the Novelty of that kind of Generation.

When Mary his Mother was espoused to Joseph] They were Espoused, but without
Marital Conjunction; and before such Association she was found to have
Conceived, wherefore did she not Conceive before she was Betrothed?

That this matter might be concealed from the Prince of the World; for Satan
did not know from the manner of his Nativity, that it was God who was
incarnated; for St. Ignatius says, That this Prince Erred in the Virginity of
Mary, and in the Birth and Death of Christ.

Again, Mary did not conceive before the Espousals, that the matter might be
concealed from the Jews, and that the Virgin her self might be free from
punishment, that under the name of a bounden husband, she might not be stoned
as a whore, and because the Genealogies were not written in the name of women,
therefore she assumed the name of a Spouse.

Before they came together, he says, that she was found to have conceived, but
not before her coming to his house, for she was in his house, for also the Sons
in Law of Lot dwelt in his house, and Jacob dwelt with his spouse in the house
of Laban, and so the Virgin dwelt with Joseph in his house; for it was the
Custom for Women betrothed to dwell with their Husbands for the space of three
years, and afterward they came together, to show thereby that they came
together not as overcome of lust, but for the procreation of Children, who
reputed them as the Reward, Wages, and Fruit of Righteousness.

She had need of a betrothed Husband, that he might be an Help and Protection
to her from the Jews, who observing her to be with Child, might have thought
her to be with Child by her reputed Husband, and so forbear to stone her; and
that he might flee away with her, when Herod designed to destroy the Child; and
that the Virgin might not suffer disgrace; for it was a shame for a Woman to
remain without a Husband among the Jews, as said Isaiah, Only let us be called
by thy Name.

Moreover, whoever was a Votary amongst the Jews, was Unmarried; and the Virgin
being a Votary, espoused Joseph, being well stricken in years, that no thought
might arise against her, like to the common desire of an Husband amongst Women.

And it is manifest from hence, that Joshua the Son of Nun, who was a Votary,
did not redeem himself for a Price, and therefore took no Wife.

But to what kind of Betrothing was she Espoused?

Gregory Nyssen, St. Athanasius, and Jacobus Auriensis say, It was by way of
Custody, and that by Command of the Priests, because she was a Votary; and it
is known from this, that in one of the Copies it is written, that she knew not
man; but Jacobus Sarugensis, and St. Severus, say, that she was espoused in
reference to Marriage.

Before they came together] That is to say, they had scarce associated, or had
almost associated, when this Miracle prevented Concubition; And moreover, it is
known, that he espoused her as to Marriage, because that when she conceived,
Joseph was not accused as one who had violated his Vow to God, for Joseph was
not far from association.

She was found to have Conceived] That is to say, she appeared to Joseph to
have Conceived. Perhaps, some one might doubt where, and how; for it is the
nature of Women to Conceive from Men; but she Conceived without knowledge of
humane Consociation; But he briefly resolves the doubt, saying, From the holy
Spirit. In that he said the Spirit, he shows that she did not Conceive of any
other humane Consociation besides Joseph's; and in as much as he said the holy
Spirit, he showed that she did not conceive of an ordinary or accidental
Spirit; for sometimes Women conceive certain kinds of Accidental Winds, as
said Isaiah, They conceived and brought forth, as they who brought forth
Winds. The word from, is said in many senses; naturally, as the Beams are said
to be from the Sun; by way of generation of what is generated, as the Son from
the Father Eternally; Efficiently, as a Stool from a Joyner; by way of
Creation, as the Creature from the Creator, and other ways: But here the
words, From the holy Spirit, are taken efficiently, for the Body was framed
and made by the holy Spirit, and so the Word was united thereunto, and by the
holy ghost, that is to say, the Spirit of Omnipotent Power, who from the
beginning framed the first Man of Earth without Copulation, and took Eve out of
his side, and made the Rod to bud forth, and made Waters spring from the Rock,
and from an Arid, that is to say, a dry Cheek, and from a Tree a Ram, and from
a Root Children; and here he of the Virgin framed pure Body for the Word of God.

Furthermore, This Body united to the Word was from the Virgin, because she
afforded whatever Women contribute to the framing of a Body; and he was from
the Spirit, because the Spirit supplied the part of a Man, and created it,
framed it, and anointed it; and the Word was united personally to the Son. But
thou when thou hear that the Spirit did this, believe, and be confirmed, and
do not curiously enquire: Nor were Gabriel, and Matthew able to say, how this
was done; for, it was a miracle beyond Comprehension, they declared only who
did it, but how it was done, they were not able to explain.

St. Cyril: It is demanded, when the Word was to be conceived, and incarnated
of the Virgin, why was it that the Holy Ghost for that cause should come unto
her, that he might take from her that Curse, In sorrow shall thou bring forth
Children, and that he might purify her, and Sanctify her, and fill up the
place of a Man, and constitute into one person with the word this holy body,
and that he might receive it first.

Joseph was a just Man, and unwilling to put her to Shame. It is therefore here
called Justice, not to defame, or disgrace a Man, and he who has one Species
of Justice, is justly said to be just, and here he does not call just, one that
is Adorned with all Virtues, and behold Justice was contrary to the Law, which
says. Thy Hand shall be first upon her; he knew, that either she was Innocent
or Faulty; if Faulty, it was his Duty to put her to Shame, and to Accuse her;
and if Innocent, to keep her with him, and to be careful of her; but he was
Just, and Merciful, his Justice did not permit him to maintain a Whore in his
House, and Pity Councelled him to dismiss her privily, and therefore he thought
to send here away privily: And therefore he thought to send her away secretly,
that he might not seem to cohabit with a guilty person, or to be a Transgressor
of the Law. And he sent her thus privily away, as having compassion on her,
that she might not be disgraced, and condemned to death.

Again, he was Just in this Respect, that he did not Disgrace her, because he
knew no Sin in her.

Moreover, for that he had heard of Elizabeth's being with Child, of Zacharias
loss of Speech, and of John's Exaltation, and he thought also that this was a
Miracle, and therefore he did not repute her a Whore, though he did not detain
her as Righteous.

Others say, That there is said to be a twofold Justice, the one is that which
gives unto every Man according to his doing, the other is Grace, which does not
Revenge Offenses, but forgiveth. So one is said to be Just two manner of ways,
the one is of the Law, who gives blow for blow, the other is of the Gospel,
who Blesses him who Curses him; such a Righteous Man was Joseph, who in his
Mercy, which was his Justice, was minded to send her privily away.

He was minded to send her privily away, when as the Jews knew nothing hereof:
When he discerned that she was with Child, he demanded whence she came to be
with Child; and she answered of the Spirit: But he stood in doubt, as says
Jacobus Batenensis; if it were from the Spirit, he ought not to come near unto
her; and if from an Adulterer, his Righteousness was not to be joined with the
Body of one guilty of Fornication: He was minded therefore to dismiss her
privately that the Jews might not put her to death, and that he might not be
guilty.

Others say that Mary said nothing unto him, as knowing that he would not
believe her words, for it was a wonderful thing; and moreover, that he would be
troubled in mind at the hearing of it; she was also persuaded, that he who was
pleased to be incarnated from her, would plead her excuse, and she thought it
not decent to reveal such a mystery as this that the Angel had whispered unto
her; he that is faithful in his spirit conceals a matter.

Whilst he meditated on these things, that is to say, to dismiss her privily,
that the Jews might not take notice and stone her, and that she might not be
blamed.

There appeared unto him in a dream the Angel of the Lord, and said unto him.
Wherefore did not the Angel appear manifestly to Joseph, as he did to Zachary,
to the Virgin, and to the Shepherds? Because he was one ready to believe, and
needed not a manifest Vision; as witnesses this, that he doubted not after the
Vision of the Angel; he appeared likewise to the Virgin, by reason of the
difficulty of the thing; and for that it was supernatural to the Shepherds
also, because they were rude and simple Persons: For Dreams are manifested in
sundry kinds, either from God, as the Dreams of Joseph, of Pharaoh, and
Nebuchadnezzar, and Daniel, and of Pilate's Wife; or from Satan, as the
imaginations of Fancy, by an Operation transporting the Soul out of a
correspondency with the Body, not differing from the Phantasms of Sleep, and
offending the Brain, as also the Spirits, and stupifying the Understanding,
which they call Frenzy; or from the Cogitations of the day, as whatsoever a
man does, or meditates on in the day, occurres to him in his dream, or from
some predominant Temper, as say the Physicians; for if Blood be predominant in
a man, he sees slaughter, and effusion of blood; and if Melancholy, he sees
darkness, and caves, and solitary houses, and all things that import fear and
terror; and if Phlegm, he sees rain, rivers and running brooks; and if Choler,
he sees fire, the Sun, the Sun Beams, and conflagrations, and in other manners
are dreams seen.

Joseph's Dream here was from God: Wherefore did not the Angel come unto Joseph
before he meditated on these things?

We say that he permited him to put her away, that he might not doubt, or be
like Zachary; but when as she had conceived, and the Angel soon made faith
thereof, he easily believed; but Mary therefore held her peace, and did not
publish it, because she conceived he would not give credit to her words; for
that the woman was already subject to capital punishment, if he had heard such
like a matter.

The Angel came to the Virgin before she conceived, that she might not be
surprised by the change of condition, for, if she had conceived without having
had notice thereof beforehand, she not knowing from whence she did Conceive,
had murdered her self, that she might have escaped from reproach, or had dyed
for grief; but he did not come before to Joseph to tell him of it, as he did to
Zachary, because he would not have believed, and the same would have happned
as in the case of Zachary.

Moreover, he hearing that it was from the Spirit, he had fled from her as from
a descending fire; and had not dwelt with her.

And moreover, it was fitting that the Mother of the Child should perceive it
before others.

Joseph the Son of David, he calls him the Son of David, and not the Son of
Jacob, or the Son of Heli. aceording to the Law, to put him in mind of the
Promise made to David, and that it was he who had the Promise, that he should
spring from his Seed, as is said by the Prophets.

Fear not to take Mary thy Wife, by the Words fear not, he exempted him from
fear; for, Joseph was afraid that he might have sinned before God, in taking
unto him an Adulterous Wife, but the Angel encourages him in taking away the
doubt which he had in his mind, and showed that he was sent from God.

To take Mary, That is to say, to keep her with thee, for in thy Resolution
thou have sent her away, because God now delivers her unto thee, and not her
Parents.

Thy Wife, He calls her his Wife, to signify, that she was not an Adulteress,
for, had she been an Adulteress, he had not called her his Wife; for it is
certain, That one is called a Man's Wife, rather from betrothing, than
Consociation; for, though a Man accompany himself with an Adulteress, she is
not called his Wife; neither does he persuade him to approach unto her, in
saying, Fear not to take her, but he said unto him, Thou shall not fear to come
near unto her, as conceiving her to be an Adulteress; but as thinking her to
have conceived from the holy Ghost, Sanctify thy self before thou approach
unto her.

Again, He calls a Spouse a Wife, as it is written in the Law, and as the
Scripture is used to call one but betrothed Son-in-Law; and as he called Mary
the Mother of John before she bore him. So does the Angel call Mary the Wife of
Joseph, though he knew her not: the Angel does not threaten Joseph as he did
Abimelech, because the Administration to Joseph was great, and much differing
from the other, and Joseph was confirmed by him, who revealed unto him his
thoughts, and by the promise which he made to David, and by the Testimony of
Esaiah to the House of David, and from the Majesty of the Generation, and over
and above these Considerations, he added a Declaration whence she Conceived.

For he who is begotten in her, is from the Holy Ghost. The Power therefore of
the Most High, that is to say, God the Word, being to be United to the Flesh
dwelling in the Virgin, the Holy Ghost first Sanctified the Word, and framed
into one Person with the Word, his Holy Body; for always the Spirit creates
with the Word, according to this, That by the Word of the Lord they were made;
and, Thou sendest thy Spirit, and they are Tormented: for these Words, Begotten
in her, in this place signify as much, as Conceived in her, for if the Word
Birth, or Nativity, be said of remote things as this, I know not what to morrow
will bring forth, and the rest of other, the like places whereof we have spoken
formerly, it is certain, that Conception may be spoken of Nativity.

Moreover, to show, That this Child was not of the Seed of Man, nor yet of
Mary's own Concupiscential Seed, but of the Holy Ghost, and of the Virgins own
Body, for he says, Born in her, and not from her; for, he does not speak a Man
newly created, but of God Incorporated, for we, because we took beginning from
our Mothers, are said to be from them, as having had no other being before, but
he, because he was before, yet Conceived in her, and not Born before; the Angel
said, in her, but the Words from her, are said of mere Man, who derived his
beginning from a Woman, and because he had no being, it is said, that he is born
from her; and in her, is said of God, who was from the beginning, and dwelt in
the Virgin; therefore, because it was God, who was Incarnated, the Angel said
in her, who had an Eternal being beyond all times, and because he was
incorporated, he said, that he was born in her. Concerning the Word from, we
have before set forth how many ways it is taken.

Of the Holy Ghost; that is to say, as his Creature; and his work, for the Body
of Christ is from the Holy Ghost, not by way of Generation, for whatever is
Generated, is Flesh from Flesh, and whatever is from Spirit, is Spirit, though
not yet naturally, for it is above Nature, when the effect does not participate
of the same Essence in Generation. It remains therefore, That he was from the
Spirit, as his Creature. Saint Severus, For the Spirit made the Child, after
the manner of one who gives Shape and Figure to things.

But Mary contributed without deficiency whatever belongs to women of their own
nature to contribute to generation without deficiency, except sin and
Concupiscence, because Adam and his wife fell by Concupiscence of the Tree,
therefore the being and generation of their children was also by Concupiscence;
and God the Word being minded to renew our decayed inveterate nature, it was
fit that there should be nothing of Concupiscence in his conception.

And shall bring forth a Son He did not say, to thee, because he was not born
to him, but to the whole world, and again, because he had nothing to do with
his generation he did not say, to thee.

And thou shall call his name Jesus That is to say, though he were not his own
Son, yet for as much as fathers imposed names on their Children, I give thee
authority to impose a name on him, that thou may not be made a stranger to
the Administration: And it was said of Joseph in the Masculine Gender.

Thou shall call his name; but Luke said that the Angel spoke to Mary in the
feminine gender, Thou shall call; and these are not contradictory, because it
is the part of the Father and the Mother to give names. Jesus is expounded
Redeemer, and that we might not think him to be a sensible Savior, and that he
was to free us from bodily bondage he said,

For he shall quicken his people from their sins, he did not say, who shall
redeem, for he came to revive those who were dead in sins; and he did not say
the Gentiles, that Joseph might not be grieved at the passing of a Redeemer
from the Jews to the Gentiles, as it happened unto Jonas. But the Intelligent
know that not only the Jews, but also all they who embrace his knowledge, are
his people, according to that, The Gentiles shall expect him.

But how did he save his people? By Faith in him, and Baptism, and Repentance.

Moreover in as much as he said his people, he gave notice before hand of his
power and coequality with his Father, calling the people of the Jews, his
people; as also he is said to be Father of his people; for these two things
belong to God and not to man, that the people should be his; as it is written,
That the People of Isreal is the Portion of the Lord, and to quicken his people
from sins; as said the Jews, It is God only who forgiveth sins; wherefore
Christ is God who was made man.

All this was done; that is to say, because Joseph wondered at this matter, he
said, All this was done. And what was all this? The Virgin who conceived
without carnal Copulation, God, who became a humane Child without being
changed, the middle wall of Partition broken down, Reconciliation made between
God and Man; and ye are not to think this as a new thing, for it was manifested
many Ages past in Types and Mysteries; and therefore he says,

That it might be fullfilled which was said of the Lord by the Prophet; that
is to say, The Angel does not set this down as the cause, as if a man should
say, that the Lord did this because Esaiah said it, but because what he was to
do he signified unto Esaiah, and he prophesied; for by this, What was said of
the Lord, he signifies, That these were the Words and Speech of the Lord; and
by these words, by the Prophet, he declares that the prophet was the Organ of
the Lord; that although Esaiah spoke these words, yet they descended from on
high: And he produces this Testimony, to teach that this Administration was
anciently promised, and to make it clear that the Conception of the Virgin was
not adulterous, but as Isaiah prophesied, Behold a Virgin shall conceive; and
if it chance that thou shall forget the Dream when thou shall awake, in
remembering the words of the Prophet, thou shall call to mind the Vision.

For behold a Virgin shall conceive, and bring forth a Son: A Jew will say that
other Interpreters render it a young Woman, and not Virgin: Unto whom we say,
That the Seventy Two are true, and more to be relied on than all other
Interpreters, first of all for their Number, their Truth, and Agreement of
their Words; secondly, because they made their Interpretations long before the
coming of Christ, and are free from all suspicion of Fraud; but those
Interpreters who followed after, are of less esteem, because they interpreted
after Christ, and being in Judaism hated Christ.

Moreover, these words, A Virgin shall conceive, the Lord gave as a Sign unto
Achaz, and how had it been a sign that a young Woman should bring forth with
carnal knowledge? For a Sign is a Work above Nature.

Furthermore, the Scripture usually calls Virgins young Women, for it says,
The young Woman went forth to fill Water; and in Deuteronomy it is written
concerning a Virgin that is corrupted, The young Woman because she did not cry
out; and the young Women were Virgins whom the Benjamites Ravished.

And they shall call his Name Emanuel, which is interpreted God with us. He did
not say, Thou shall call, but they shall call, that is to say, from his Works
it shall be known, that it is God who came unto us, who shall converse bodily
with us.

Which is interpreted; that is to say, Expounded, and he has been called
Emanuel by approved Doctors, and Doctors are Men; and this is like to that of
Zachary; behold a Man, and his Name is a Branch, or Splendour, where also from
the matter of Fact it was known, that he was the Light and Splendour which arose
to those who sat in Darkness, though not by Name so called.

And if the Jews shall say, That Christ was not called Emanuel by Men, let us
ask them, when was Esaiah called by the Name of, Swift to Captivity, and given
to Prey? But they cannot show it unless by matter of Fact; because of the
Captivity and Prey which happened in his days, he might have had that Name.

It is Written also concerning Jerusalem, That it shall be called the City of
Righteousness, and the City of Fidelity; yet we have observed it not to be so
named, but it retained the Name Jerusalem, though from matter of Fact it might
have been denominated from those two Qualities.

In like manner it is as to Emanuel, whom the Prophet Names so from matter of
Fact; That is, because he conversed with us bodily; for it is the Custom of the
Scripture to use the thing done instead of a Name: Emanuel signifies God who
conversed openly with Men; and if they shall say, that he also conversed with
the Just, according as he said to Jesus; as I have been with Moses, so will I
be with thee, by way of Assistance, and is not there called Emanuel; We say,
That here he speaks concerning his bodily Nativity, being made Man, and
conversant with us on Earth.

Moreover, The Angel said Emanuel, that is to say, God with us, and not God
with him, as Wicked Nestorious would have it, for the Word is not only United
to one Man, Framed, Assumed, and Segregated, but also has drawn and collected
by the power of his Operation, our whole Nature into Union with himself.

When Joseph arose from his Sleep, he did as the Angel commanded him; that is,
he Teaches us by the Obedient Conscience, and awakened mind of Joseph, in that
he did nothing indiscreetly, and readily obeyed Divine Pleasure, and was very
desirous to get an Excuse for the Virgin.

And he took his Wfie, and knew her not; he calls her his Wife, that the
present Mystery might not be disclosed, and to prevent an Opinion of Adultery;
it being the custom of the Scripture to call the Spouse Husband, according to
that, If there be a young Virgin betrothed to an Husband; behold, she calls the
Spouse Husband, and commands him to be Stoned who abused her. This, That he
knew her not* He speaks of commixture by Carnal Conjunction.

Until she brought forth her first born Son. This Word Until, is taken three
several ways, signifying either a fixed term, or the ceasing of things, or an
indefinite term; a fixed term, as this, The people removed not, until Miriam
came into the host, after she was Cured; in token that after her coming, the
people did remove; and according to this, The Scepter shall not depart from
Judah until he shall come whose it is; and it is known, that after his coming,
then the Scepter, that is, the Kingdom, departed; it signifies the ceasing of
things, as this; hitherto the end of the Speech, And Eliah walked in the
strength of the Meat to the Mountain, and it is certain, that he rested after
he came to the Mountain, and that his Discourse ceased after he had spoken, and
that there was an end and term to his Speech.

Sometimes it is spoken indefinitely, and as an unfixed time, according to
this, The Raven went forth, and did not return until the Waters were dried up,
and it is certain, he returned not after the Waters were dried up; and it was
said to Jacob, I will, not forfake thee, until I shall do for thee what I have
said; and afterward he forsook him not. And Malchil brought not forth until
her death, and if, whilst she lived she brought not forth, much less after her
death: and, And behold I am with you until the end of the world, is he
therefore afterward to forsake them or be remiss? No. And these words, Thou art
Lord from generation unto generation, do not impose an end to God, and this
Expression, amplitude of peace until the moon shall pass away, does not infer
an end to this beatitude; and, Christ shall reign until he shall put all his
enemies under his feet; and, it behooves him that the heavens contain him until
the end of times; Is he therefore thereafter to be cast out of heaven, or to
become a Stranger to his Kingdom? No, wherefore the Word Until, in these, and
other the like places, are not spoken desinitely.

In like manner the World Until, is not so to be understood in this place, as
if he knew her after she brought forth, but that he knew her not, and it is of
a fence unfixed to term, and of an indefinite signification.

Moreover, This word Until, is not to be understood by way of distinction, as
if before she brought forth he knew her not, and that he did know her after she
brought forth, that is to say, (...) being the same with (...) it being the
custom of the Scripture to use this Expression; and that Joseph did not
approach unto her, is evident from the honor due unto her Son, and that she
was an Habitacle to the Spirit, and that she received the Virtue of the most
High, and that she was the most blessed of Women, and that it was indecent that
she should bring forth with pain and curses.

For all these and the like Reasons, he durst not approach unto her; it is also
certain from hence, that our Lord in the time of his Passion commended her to
his Disciples as a single Woman.

Others say that the Word has a twofold signification: For, First, It
signifies the knowledge of Carnal Copulation, as Adam knew his Wife Eve. 2dly.
It is taken for Knowledge properly so called, according to this second sense
it is said (in words of the same derivation) And there was none who knew me;
according unto that of Simon to our Lord, Thou know; and we say, That this
which the Evangelist said, He knew her not, is as much as if he had said, He
knew not that she was the Mother of God, until she had brought forth her Son,
and he had seen the Miracle of the Angels, and of the Shepherds, and of the
Star, and of the Wise Men.


That she remained a Virgin after she brought forth, is evident from the common
opinion of Men; for as God being born of her was not changed, so the Virginity
of her who bare him was not lost, for she was not corrupted; for the Scripture
calls her The Undefiled in Marriage; and Zachary in the Temple ranketh her
with the Virgins.

The Heretic says, If he did not dissolve Virginity, neither did he assume a
Body; and if he did assume a Body, therefore did he dissolve Virginity in his
Exit.

And we answer, That if God confirmed the Mother of God a Virgin, so that she
remained in Virginity after bringing forth, it was also a Miracle that she
being a Virgin did bring forth: And if thou requirest proof or illustration,
hear how he came forth of the Sepulcher unopened, and entered into the Parlour
being shut up: So he came forth of the Womb not prejudicing Virginity.

Furthermore, that a Body penetrated a Body without any open passage, we have
showed many ways, as Eves coming out of the side of Adam, the Waters which
flowed from the Rock, the Waters which sprung from the Jaw Bone of an Ass, how
much rather then did he who is incorporeal, come forth in his Birth from the
Virgin, without corrupting of her Virginity?

Her firstborn Son: Not that she brought forth any one after him, but he is
called the firstborn, because he was first in Generation, for the Scripture is
used to call him the firstborn who opens the Womb, according to that, Every
one who opens the Womb, shall be called Holy.

The Scripture calls one the firstborn, before he have Brethren; so our
Savior: Although Joses, and James, and others, were called his Brethren, yet
they were not called so as being born of the Virgin, but because they were the
Sons of Joseph by another Wife, and they were in the way of his dispensation
called his brethren, as Joseph was called his Father; and Christ is said to be
first born, four several ways, first as says saint Matthew by opening the womb,
and he does not call him her first born only, for he was not only the first
born of Mary, but of all creatures.

Secondly, first born of the whole creation, for he is first born by nature,
because all creatures were made by him.

Thirdly, the first born of many brethren, because he has many brethren from
baptism, that is to say, Regeneration.

Fourthly, the first born from the dead, because he was the first who arose to
Immortality.

And she called his Name Jesus, that is to say Redeemer, as said the Angel; in
the Greek it is in the Masculine Gender, as if Joseph called him so: We have
already showed that it was the part of the Father, and of the Mo^^er to impose
names on their Children.

He was born of a Virgin, and not of a married wife by marriage consummated,
that it might be known that God was made Man, and not mere man deified; for to
be born of a Virgin was of God only, and that the Heathens might not conceive
he was a mere man who was born of a woman who had known a Man.

Moreover, because we were made guilty by Eve; it behoved that we should be
made righteous by a Virgin; and as the World was born of a Virgin above nature,
so also he begat us from baptism above nature.

And how could a Virgin bring forth? We Answer, that what things are impossible
with us, are possible with God; and in Luke we have written fully concerning
this Matter.

Wherefore was he born of a Virgin betrothed? That Virgins might not be Exalted
above married women, and that it might be known, that marriage was commanded by
God, and not by Satan, as the Heritick Mary's taught.

Christ is known to be God from hence, that his nativity is not written as
others are, and for that he was begotten without Carnal Copulation: And because
he was Incorporated by the Holy Ghost, and for that he was born of a Virgin who
kept her Virginity, for that he Accomplished Promises and Prophecies.

Moreover, for that he revived Men from their Sins, for that he got a Name
before he was born, and for that he was called Emanuel, which is Interpreted,
God with us; for after Matthew had finished his Discourse on the kind of his
Nativity, he begins to show, how he was Born, and what things were done at his
Birth, which do not a little manifest his Majesty and Deity.

CAP. 2. Mathaei.
AND when Jesus was born in Bethlehem of Judah, in the days of Herod the King.
He therefore sets down the Region, that is to say, the Place, and the Time, and
the Person, and Authority, that by all these he might teach us, that the
Prophecies are fulfilled; and he mentions the place to put us in mind of that
of Micah, And thou Bethlehem Ephratah, and that he might make it known that he
was the Son of David, who was Taxed in the City of David. He set down the time,
and person of Herod, to show that the Weeks of Daniel were ended, and that
Christ was come, and the Authority of Herod, to signify, that that Prophecy of
Jacob was accomplished, The Scepter shall not depart from Judah. We are to take
notice, as to the Name of Bethlehem Ephratah, that Caleb the Son of Jophena,
when his Wife died, he took to Wife a Widow, who was called Ephratah, and he
took for an Inheritance from Joshua the City Cobedth, that is to say,
Honorable and Illustrious; and he added unto the City Cobedth, a second City,
which he Builded, and called it Ephratah, that is to say, Fruit-bearing* after
the Name of his Wise Ephratah, and he begat Sons of Ephratah, and the first he
called Lehem, afterward he begat Amor, and other Sons, and for the Love which
he bore unto his Son Lehem, he Builded a Third City, which he United and joined
to the two former, and called it Bethlehem, that is, The House of Lehem, or the
House of Bread.

Moreover, it is fitting to take notice, That Kings Reigned from David to the
Captivity, and after the Captivity the High Priests Assumed the Government, who
were of the Tribe of Levi, but their Genealogy was deduced from Judah, by
reason of the commixture of the Tribe of Levi; especially of the Highpriests
with the Royal Tribe of Judah. Afterward, when Aristobulus and Aurkay being
brethren, contended with one another for the Chief Government, after much
conflict who should take up the Government, at last the Kingdom remained in
Herod the Askalonoite, and he confounded the Book of Jewish Genealogies, for he
was no Jew, and he put the Stole of the Priesthood under his Signature, that
is, under his Seal.

In the time of this Herod, Christ arose, when the Kings and Rulers of the
people were ceased, according to that, The Scepter shall not depart, etc.

In the time of these brethren Aristobulas, and Aurcanus, the Kingdom ceased
from the House of David, and Herod Ruled, and Christ came, whose the Kingdom
was; in the thirty fifth year of this Herod our Lord was born, on the fourth
day, others on the sixth day, others on the first day of the Week, at Night,
before Cock Crow, about the time that he Arose from the Sepulcher, and is to
effect, the Resurrection, on the twenty fifth of December, and the three
hundred and ninth year of the Greeks. In other Copies it is Written the
Seventh, which is the forty third of Augustus Caesar, he was born of the
Virgin, being then thirteen years of Age, and she died in Ephesus being Aged
fifty one years, and John the Evangelist, and his Disciples buried her; and at
the time of the Birth of our Lord Cyrenus the Governor was sent, and the
Wisemen came in the Month of Nisan.

Matthew omits her putting him into swaddling Clothes, and her laying him in a
Manger, the Angelical Hymas, the Circumcision, and other things, and writes
only of the coming of the Wisemen, from whence is made known the fraud of
Herod, the Murdering of the Children, etc.

The Wisemen came from the East to Jerusalem, and said, It is to be enquired
therefore, of what Nation were these Wisemen? Eusebius, and Gregory Nyssen
say, that they were of the Sons of Balaam; Jacobus Auriensis, than they were of
the Progeny of Elam, the Son of Shem; others, that they were descended from the
Kings of Sheba* and Seba, as David said, They shall bring Gifts unto him; and
they were Men of Note, and came from Persia; but how many were they? Some say
they were three, in respect of the three Offerings which they made, and that
there were with them a thousand Men, and therefore Jerusalem was troubled.
Jacobus Aurihensis says, that they were not three as Painters draw them, but
twelve Princes, and that they had more with them than a thousand Men. Others
say, they were eight, as said Micha, We shall raise against him seven
Shepherds, and eight Shepherds, that is, Governors; and that they had with
them a great Army. Others, that they were three Sons of Kings, and nine Noble
Men of their Countries, and that the King who sent them was called Pirshabor,
and their Names,

Hidondad the Son of Artabon, Shethoph the Son of Godephor, Areshock the Son of
Mahedes, Zodonad the Son of Varud, Arihu the Son of Cosare, Artehoth the Son of
Havilith, Ashtonbozan the Son of Shishoron, Mahodok the Son of Hevaham, Ahirosh
the Son of Tsonikeban, Tsardonnah the Son of Beldon, Merudok, the Son of Bil.
And there were with them about three thousand who bare Arms, and five Ships of
Burden; and when they passed Euphrates, they heard of a Famine in Jerusalem,
and they lest their Forces to abide about Euphrates, from Kalinikos, that is to
say, Raka unto Ktesiphon, and those twelve Princes went on with an Army,
consisting of a thousand Men, and carried Gifts with them.

Saint Cyril, and Johannes say, That Christ was an Infant, and wrapped in
Swaddling Clothes when the Wisemen found him; for, they say, that before the
time of his Birth, a Star appeared to the Wisemen, about eight days before his
Nativity, as Saint Cyril says, to Guide them unto him.

Moreover, They say, that it was fitting that he should be Worshipped in
Swaddling Clothes, and laid in a Manger, that the Miracle might appear to be the
greater.

Others say, That in the very same Night and Day he was born, the Wisemen
came, and it is manifest from that which is written, That when Jesus was born
the Wisemen came. Epiphanius of Cyprus does not Assent hereunto, for he says,
That our Savior was born in Bethlehem, and that he was Circumcised in a Cave,
that he went up to the Temple; and that he was carried by Simeon, and that he
went to Nazareth, and that the next year they brought him to appear before the
Lord, and then he went to Bethlehem, and thence returned to Nazareth, and at
the end of two years, they carried him up again to Jerusalem, and went to
Bethlehem, for they loved often to frequent this place wherein he was born, and
whilst they were in Bethlehem, the Wisemen came.

And this is clear from that which Matthew said, And they came into the House,
and saw the Lad with Mary his Mother, and they fell down, and Worshipped him;
for here he says an House, and not a Cave; and Moreover, the Lad with his
Mother, and not such an one as was wrapped in Swaddling Clothes, and in the night
he appeared to Joseph, to take away the Lad, and his Mother, and to depart into
Egypt. And hereby also he shows, that he was two years Old, for Gnoba the
Scripture calls one that is wrapped in Swaddling Clothes, and Taloio Lad, one
that Rowls himself, and creeps and goes and herewith agrees Eusebius, and the
Lord Ephraim in his Exposition says, it was the Second year. And Jacobus
Auriensis, or Sarugensis in his Sermon on the Star, and the Wisemen, says,
that they saw him when he was two years old, and from hence are verified the
Words of Matthew, and of Luke; Luke says, that he went from Bethlehem to
Nazareth, and Matthew says, from Bethlehem to Egypt, and both are in the Truth,
for they went to Jerusalem after forty days, as says Luke, and afterward to
Nazareth, and at the end of two years, from Nazareth to Bethlehem, and from
Bethlehem to Egypt, as Matthew says, and he was in Egypt two years until the
Death of Herod, and that Archelaus his Son Reigned.

Behold, it is known, that Christ was then two years old from this, that those
whom Herod slew, were two years old, and under, according to the time he
enquired of the Wisemen, and if it were said, that he should fly that Night
into Egypt, or that he was of eight days old, how went he to the Temple, or was
born of Simeon, Herod being filled with Rage.

Magic is an Heresy composed of Gentilisme, and of Caldaisme, for it
Worshipped the Elements according to the Gentiles, and Worshipped the Stars, and
went by the help, and knowledge of Luminaries, and the Signs of the Zodiac, and
by the directions of the Stars, as the Chaldeans, and every of them lived by
themselves, and were called Rational, Gentil, and Chaldean; his Divinity was
revealed to Strangers, and not to the Jews, because the Testimony of Strangers
is more credited then that of Domestics, and that the Gentiles might overcome
the Fraud, and Calumny of the Jews, least they should have said, We know not
when, nor where he was born, and that those of the Jews who did not believe in
him, might be without Excuse, who not Receiving the Words of the Prophets, the
Wisemen came, and Preached before them, and although the Sign of his Nativity
was manifested to the Wisemen, yet by them it was published to all Creatures,
and as a Sign was given, not only to Ezekia, but so, as all the Creation
perceived the turning back of the Sun, so by means of the Wisemen all Nations
perceived, and as he fled into Egypt, and by his going thither, and return
thence, the Fame of his Nativity was Published to the Inhabitants, so the
matter was disclosed to the Wisemen; and because Persia, and Egypt were most
immersed in Heathenism of all others, therefore in the beginning he healed them
first; for, his Nativity was not revealed to the Edomites, and Philistines, who
were Neighbors to the Jews, but to those afar off, that his Gospel might be
enlarged, and that to his Honor they might come from the remotest bounds.

He was Revealed to the Wisemen rather than to others, because he came to call
Sinners, the Wisemen were more infected then all other. Nations with Idolatry,
and they used Divinations, and they were yoaked with the Gentiles, and
therefore he was first revealed unto them, that he might first cure them; and
he was not revealed to all Wisemen, but to those whom he knew in his
fore-knowledg, that they would believe in him by their free will, and the
Wisemen who came were godly persons; and this is a Testimony thereof, that
they were not afraid of Herod and the Jews, and that they openly proclaimed
him, and for his sake sustained the hard Travel of all that way, and were
Preachers of him when they returned, and were the first calling of the
Gentiles; for, they saw in the Star a young Virgin sitting, and bearing a Lad
in her Arms, and there was on his Head a Regal Crown; wherefore they were drawn
after him.

Others say, That they saw these Letters written in the Star, This is the Star
of the King of the Jews who is born; as the similitude of a Cross appeared unto
Constantine in the Heaven, and it was made known unto him, that thereby he was
to overcome.

Others say, That they saw this Star shining with its Glorious Light from
Heaven, and there appeared together with the Star an Angel, saying, There is a
King born in Judaea, go unto him; and from whence did the Wisemen receive a
Command to go unto Christ? Some say, from Balaam their Ancestor, who
Prophesied, that a Star should arise from Jacob, and said, A King shall be born
to the Jews, and when he shall be born, go and offer Gifts; and they wrote down
this matter; and a long while after seeing the Star* they took up Gifts and
came. Others, that Daniel Prophesied to the Babylonians, hence Seventy so and
so, A King shall be born to the Jews, and when at his Birth a Star shall arise,
go and offer Gifts unto him; and the King of the Babylonians Engraved this in
Tables of Gold, and when the Star arose, and the Wisemen saw it, they came to
his Worship.

Others, That in the time of Daniel, when Nebuchadnezar Reigned, there came Men
from Sheba to offer Gifts unto the King, and to learn Astrology, and Daniel
faid unto them, When Christ shall be born, your Kings of Seba, and Sheba shall
offer Gifts unto him, and they wrote it in a Bibliotheke, that is, in their
Library, and when ye see the Star, go.

Others, That Asdrushta the Southsayer, foreshewed this, and others say it was
Baruch, and because the Gift of Prophecy was not bestowed on him, he was
offended, and departed to the Gentiles, and taught twelve Tongues. And it is
written in a book of his, that Zardushta sitting on a Fountain of Waters, where
was the King's Bath; he said unto his Disciples, That in later times, an Hebrew
Virgin shall bring forth in the Flesh and without Copulation a Son, who is of
the Nature of God, and at his Nativity a Star shall appear, go, and offer unto
him three Gifts, Gold, Myrrh, and Frankincense, and spoke of his Passion and
Resurrection.

They had therefore no Reward, because they came not of their own Will, but as
ordained; nor had Balaam any Reward for his Prophecy.

Secondly, because, he did not afterward believe the Truth.

Others say, That when Daniel's Family was carried Captive unto Babylon, they
did read this, The Scepter shall not depart from Judah, and the Prophecy of
Balaam, that a Star shall arise, and this, The Kings of Sheba, etc. which David
said before the Sons of the Kings of Persia, of Sheba, and of Seba, who were
Neighboring Princes, and they asked the Hebrews concerning whom these things
were said, and Daniel and his fellows Answered, Concerning Christ, and that in
the day of his Nativity a Star should arise which would shine as the Sun and
they kept these things to themselves, and when they returned to their places,
they committed this Mystery to writing, and it was derived by Tradition until
the birth of Christ.

The Lord John says, That God put it into their Hearts, and made them take
Gifts, and to sollow the Star, as he made Cyrus, inciting to lead the Jews into
Captivity. And the Wise Men came from the East to Christ, because Paradise was
planted in the East, and the Sun begins its Course from the East. So also from
the East begins the Sun of Righteousness, and because they were to bring Gold,
and there was no Gold like that of this part of the World, the Scripture
saying, that the Gold of this Land is good, and the Prophets Prophesied, that
the Wisemen should come from the Sun Rising to the Sun Setting, and Malachy,
that from the East thereof, and at his second coming, he is to come from the
East, and at the time of our Lords coming, the Persians Ruled from Nisibis to
the East and from Nisibis to the West the Romans, and God so ordered it, that
at that time there should be Peace between them, that the Wise Men might not be
hindered in coming.

Where is the King of the Jews born? That is to say, they do not enquire after
a King Sitting upon a Throne, as if his time were already, but after him of
whom Esaiah says, That there shall be a Root of Jesse which shall Rise as a
Sign to the Gentiles, and in him shall the Nations hope, and he is the hope of
all the ends of the Earth; We seek him who is now born, and not Herod, and they
said not where is the Son of God, for Frankincense was a Figure of him, because
the Jews expected a King, and a Redeemer, therefore they spoke of a King.

Again, the Names of Christ are threefold, of Excellency as God, the Son of
God, and Lord; of a middle Nature, as King, Redeemer, and Ruler. Of low
condition, as the Son of Man, Man, and Servant: The Wisemen made use of a Name
of middle Nature, calling him King, as more acceptable, it being the beginning
of his Government, and Supereminent, or low Names, were not very acceptable.

Furthermore, They enquired after a King, because Micah called him King, from
thee shall go forth a King

For we have seen in his Star in the East, and are come to Worship him. He drew
the Wisemen by a Star, condescending with their weakness in what was
accustomable unto them, for, as they declared the Death of Saul by Sorcerers,
and taught Balaam his Power by those things he did unto Balak, and as he
allured the Children of Israel by Sacrifices which they affected according to
the custom of the Heathens in Egypt, and as he took the Apostles by the taking
of Fishes, and as Paul did when he spoke with the Gentiles who produced an
Illustration from Ports; and as Fowl is taken by scattering before them what
they are accustomed unto; so did he unto the Wisemen; he first calls them by a
Star, and afterward by an Angel speaks with them, and so draws them by degrees
unto Virtue.

So he did unto the Philistians when they cut their Buttocks, and called their
South sayers, and said yoke Heifers under the Ark, and the Plague is known, if
such an one, it is from God, and if such an one, it is by chance; and if God be
Counseled of Sorcerers, it was not thought a shame unto him that Enemies
should Testify unto Truth; so the Wisemen by Stars after which they wandered,
foreshewed his Nativity.

And again, because he was of an Heavenly Nature, he hooked them up by a Star
of Heaven, who also calls the Heaven his dwelling.

Moreover, he drew them by a Star, according to the word of Balaam who called
him a Star, and Esaiah Light, and Malachi, the Sun, and Jeremiah a sprout of
Righteousness, and our Lord calls himself Light.

Furthermore, That they might be lighted to the Sun Christ by a Star, and
therefore when they attained the Sun, the Star was swallowed up in obscurity,
for, it is the Nature of a Star to disappear when the Sun shines in its
Brightness; so Divination, Chaldaisme also ceased, for, among the Persians, a
Star was reputed a God, which was called Nain, and by that which was true in
their conceit, he allured them to the Truth.

Again, three bodily Preachers Preached him, the Star, because he was Heavenly,
the Shepherds, because he was a Shepherd, and a Lamb, the Wisemen, because he
was a propitiation for Sins.

Moreover, He declared his Divinity by a Star, and that he was altogether High,
and Sublime who was born, whose Ambassador, and Nuncioes were such as by the
Wisemen were reputed Gods; and as before the sensible Sun, the Morning Star
Ascends, so before the Rational Sun, a Star was the Herald, and that he might
show that he was the Creator of all the Creation, Old and Spiritual, for in
that he began first with Light, and in this he drew the Wise Men with a Star,
neither was it a Star indeed which appeared to the Wise Men, for, it is known
that it descended, and stood over the House, for that it descended, is as much
as that it lest its sublime station, and came down very near over the place,
otherwise it could not have distinctly indicated the place as with a Finger;
for behold the Moon, which is greater than the Star, remaining in one place,
seems to be over many and sundry Places, not being able to show one of them
distinctly; and this Star, if it descended, and distinctly showed the place, it
is evident that it was no natural Star, but one of the sublime host: And to
these agree Cyril, Johannes, and Theodotus Ankorensis.

Furthermore, there are two sorts of Stars, some of them are fixed in a Sphere,
and are in an immovable station, some of them never cease from motion, this
moved, going before the wise men, and stood, thereby demonstrating the Place,
and sometimes went on, and sometimes stood still, wherefore it was no natural
Star.

And furthermore, the Stars in the Sphere some of them proceed from East to
West, and the wandering Stars from West to East; but this held its course from
North-East to South-west, for so is Persia situated, in relation to Palestine:
And natural Stars are not usually seen in the day time; but this appeared night
and day, which is not agreeable to the nature of Stars: For when they came to
Jerusalem it disappeared, and when they departed thence it manifested it self;
and from that it appeared to the wise men, and not into others, and afforded
light indifferently day and night; and from that it did shine and not burn,
being descended very far from the place of Celestial Stars, to direct the wise
men in the way, as with the singer; and from that that it overcame the Beams of
the Sun with its brightness, when the Sun was in its Meridional Altitude; We
say it was no natural Star. Whence therefore was it?

Some say that it was a concealed power of the Lord that appeared in the
similitude of an Angel others, as we have said before, one of the Angels
assumed the likeness of a Star, and was constellated and led the wise Men, and
it was not a phantasme or Automaton that is to say of its self. Moreover, it is
known to have been no natural Star from this, that it held its progress from
East to West for so Persia is placed in position on the East of Jerusalem, and
Jerusalem on the West of Persia. Others say, that it proceeded from the
South-East to the North, and from the North to the west, for so was the Course
from Persia to Palestine; and when they entered into one of the Cities or Towns,
it was obscured; and this was as it were by way of Question and Answer, that
the Nativity of Christ might be made known; nor had it a progressive
indication, but when it behoved them to proceed; It did proceed like to the
Pillar of Israel.

Some men desirous to establish the Caldean Learning, say, Behold a Star
appeared when Christ was born; against whom we say, that if the Astrologers say
that he was born by this Power, how did he suddenly destroy Caldaism, and the
efficacies thereof? And men's Nativities are not calculated by one Star, but by
many, by Twelve or Seven.

Furthermore, Astrologers from the Stars foretell concerning a man's Kingdom,
or what befalls him, as their Judgment, and perhaps some may say, that so they
made this computation concerning the King of the Jews.

In answer to whom we say, Behold he said, My Kingdom was not of the World;
neither had he Ministers, nor Army, not House.

Moreover, Caldaisme does not establish a Nativity upon one Star, but from the
seven Wanderers, which are called Planets, which do not stick to the Body of
the Heaven, that is to say, The Sun, the Moon, Mars, Mercury, Bell, that is
Jupiter, Balti, which is Aphrodite, Saturu, who is Cheon; and from the Twelve
Signs of the Zodiac in Heaven, Aries, Taurus, the two Images, which are
Gemini, Cancer, Leo, Spica, that is, Virgo Spicifera, Libra, that is, a
Balance, Scorpia, the great Image, that is, Sagittary, Capricorn, Aquarius,
Pisces; and we say, that the Seven proceed from East to West, and Twelve from
West to East, with the Body of Heaven, which turns as the Circumference of a
Wheel round about the Earth, and the Earth being fixed as the Center of Heaven,
as a Ball blown up, and a Grain of Millet in the midst of it: And they
attribute the days of the Week to these seven Planets; the first day of the
Week to the Sun, the second to the Moon, the third to Mars, the fourth to
Mercury, the fifth to Jupiter, the Preparation to Aphrodite, that is, Venus,
the Sabath to Saturn. And moreover the Astrologers denote the Parts of Man also
by the Planets, to the Sun is attributed the Brain, to the Moon the Skin, to
Mars the Blood, to Mercury the Nerves and Veins, to Jupiter the Bones, to Venus
the Flesh, to Saturn the Hair; and as to the Twelve Signs, they say, That they
are Types of the Twelve Months, and some of them are Males, and some of them
Females, and every one of them dispose one of the parts of Man, according to
the Will of God.

Aries disposes the Head, the Heifer the Neck, the two Images the Hands,
Cancer the breast, Libra the side, Virgo the Loins and back, Leo the Belly,
Scorpio the Testicles, the great Image the Leg, Aquarius the Thighs, Capricorn
the Knees, Pisces the Feet: These things we have Transcribed here from the
Error of the Chaldaeans, to the end that none of them who are furnished with
Reason, may be led Captive after their Errors, or rely on their Stories.

Julian the Heathen says, That this History of the Star is not true, because
Astronomers have not spoken thereof; in contradiction to whom we Answer, Behold
the Stars have sometimes appeared upon great occasions, as those which are
called Lances, Beams, Comets, therefore it was not beside order, that by the
good pleasure of God, an unusual Star should arise at the Nativity of our
Savior, and should be the Herald, when perhaps one of the Angels was
Constellated, and appeared to the Wisemen only, and when they proceeded, was
seen; as the Pillar of the Cloud was to Israel, so was the Star to the Wisemen.

Again, they said his Star, and not the Star, for as much as his Star did
imply, with a Star, the person whose it was, for a Star is of naked
Signification, and the Wise Men came to Christ, that they might see him, and
Adore him as God and offer Gifts unto him as to a King.

And Herod the King heard; and was troubled; because he was of a strange
Nation, and received from Augustus the Kingdom of the Jews Unjustly; he was
greatly troubled, and moved when he heard the report of the Birth of a King,
for, he hoped that he had Power in the Land, and was afraid least they might
put him to Death, and take his Kingdom.

Moreover, he was troubled for the multitude of the Wisemen, and the Majesty
of their Persons, and for that in the Metropolis, to Wit, in the Mother of
Cities, they had proclaimed a King, and did not inquire merely after a King,
but after the King of the Jews.

And all Jerusalem with him. Why was she troubled at the coming of a Savior?
because she was unwilling to be saved, she turned her face from a Redeemer. By
the Name of Jerusalem, he signifies the Inhabitants thereof, for they were
troubled, yet such was their Sottishness, that they did not so much enquire
after their Redeemer, as after the Wisemen; it was troubled also, as when he
entered thereinto upon an Ass, and that was, because it envied him, but as yet
they showed not their Envy, for they produced Testimonies in his behalf, as
this, That he was to be born in Bethlehem.

And he Assembled all the Chief Priests, and the Scribes of the People, that
is, he Assembled them all, and not a part, that he might not fail as to the
place where he was born.

And he asked of them where Christ was to be Born. The Wisemen Asked
concerning a King, and Herod with the Priests concerning Christ; from the
Questions of the Wisemen made to the Chief Priests, he Learned this, or from
this, that he had heard from those who read the Prophets, that Christ was to
Arise, and when he saw the Wise Men, he understood that he was a King; and
because Herod, and his Councillors were troubled, he did not accuse the Wise
Men, nor did he say unto them, how is it that ye proclaim another King besides
me? And if he be born to the Jews, what are ye concerned in the discovery of
him? And if ye say true, show me his Star. But he dissembled, that he might
take him by a Wile.

And they said in Bethlehem Judah; for they did not contest against the
Interrogatory, for they expected the coming of Christ, and they Revealed him
opportunely, and alleged the Testimony of Micah in that behalf.

Others say, That they made the discovery out of their Envy, that he might put
him to death; and it is manifest from hence, that they did not make the
Discovery concerning the King of the Edomits, and others, but concerning the
King of the Jews.

Others say, they being not as yet filled with Envy, did reveal him because
they were well pleased his Nativity should be heard of. Others, because they
were at last to reveal him; according to that, From whence Christ comes we
know not; and so they revealed unto them; and from the Number of Weeks which
the Scribes computed; and from this, The Scepter shall not depart from Judah;
and for that Herod governed as a King, when the Scepter departed they knew that
the time of his birth was come.

Also thou Bethlehem of Judah art not. That is, in him thou art magnified, and
honored, and the Nations come from the Ends of the Earth to see the Manger,
and the Cave wherein he was born

For he shall feed my People Israel. Those he calls so who believe, whether
Jews or Gentiles, according to Paul's interpretation, Not all those who are of
Israel are Israel; therefore he calls the Gentiles Israel, but did not so
declare concerning them at the beginning, that the Jews might not be offended;
and if he were to arise from Bethlehem, wherefore was his conversation in
Nazareth, and did the Jews forget?

We say that he did not conceal, but reveal the Prophecy, for in Nazareth he
was conceived, and at the time of his Nativity, his Mother went up to
Bethlehem, and he was there for the space of Forty days, and Simeon and Hannah
proclaimed him in the Temple; and when the Jews took no notice of him, he was
hidden in the mean time, and after two Years the Star published him, and the
wisemen adored him, and lest the Jews might have said that they knew not when
he was born, he drew the wise Men.

Moreover, the Prophet did not say that he was to dwell or converse in
Bethlehem, but to come out thereof, that is, born there; for there he was born,
and dwelt in Nazareth, for that he was first to come thence, the Jews did not
say, for they did not know the sense thereof, or it was no necessary answer to
Herod's question, or they were willing to please Herod in omitting it. For the
Jews took these words, Of thee shall come forth a Shepherd, to be spoken of
Zerubabel; but we say that their Priests did expound this passage of Christ,
and the coming forth of Zerubabel was not from the beginning; neither was he
born in Bethlehem, but in Babylon, and there he was conceived and born, as said
my Lord John, for they who are skilled in the Aramaian Tongue, that is the
Syriack, know that the name of Zarubabel, is compounded of Seed and Babel.

Then Herod privily called the Wisemen, and learned from them at what time the
Star appeared unto them

He being inquisitive to learn where he was born, he privily called together
the Chief Priests, that it should not escape his knowledge; and being desirous
to learn concerning the Star, he used privacy: First because he was ashamed of
his kindred, least the Wisemen might learn who, or whose Son he was of the
Jews.

Secondly that the Jews might not perceive that his inquiry after him proceeded
from Hatred, for he thought that the Jews had a regard for the Child.

Thirdly that his parents might not perceive, and fly away with him.

Fourthly, That the Craft which he designed might not be discovered, he
enquired of the time of the Star, and not of his Nativity, out of Craft. For he
thought with himself, If I shall ask when he was born, the Jews will apprehend
that I seek to slay him, and they will go and hide him; but I will ask
concerning the time of the Star, as to the time of the year or month, and
accordingly put to death the Children of Bethlehim. But Fool as he was, he
understood not that his power could not reach his design; from hence that the
Star proclaimed him, and the Persians came to worship him, and the Prophecies
were concerning him; and if it were true, it could not be salsifyed; and if
false, why should he be troubled, or be afraid? But it is the nature of Envy so
to blind the Understanding as not to discern Reason.

Go enquire concerning the Lad: His Envy would not let him call him King, but
Lad; for he could not endure to attribute unto him any Name of Power.

Show me, that I may also go and Worship him. He designed to deceive, and Cozen
the Jews in promising to Worship him.

And moreover, That the Wisemen might return unto him, to the End, that
without any Man's taking notice, he might Murder the Lord, and that without
fear he might possess himself of the Kingdom.

And some say, That Herod gave a Viaticum to the Wisemen, and promised them
some Reward at their Return, but the Wisemen did not suspect, that Herod
intended Evil unto him.

And behold the Star which they saw in the East went before them: When they
came to Jerusalem it disappeared, that the Jews might not enquire after him,
nor Learn the Prophecy, and perceive; but now it began to Conduct them. None of
the Jews went out with them to Conduct them, because they hated him; but this
seems not to be true; for many went out to see what was Worthy of Admiration,
although they hated him, but Providence forbad them, for if any Man should have
Conducted them, it had been superfluous for the Star to have appeared, and
there had been no use thereof.

Besides, none was to place a Favor on the Wisemen for coducting them, for he
who began would finish; and the Jews were not to conduct the Gentiles, as says
the Scripture, He is the hope of the Gentiles; for this Star went before them
from North to South; for, such is the posture of Bethlehem from Jerusalem; and
hence it is known, that it was no natural Star.

Until it came, and stood over the place where the Child was. That is to say,
the Star descended until it stood over the Child, and pointed at him as with a
Finger, for he was not in a House of great Note, and because he was to Worship
the Lord of the House, therefore he approached near to the top of the House,
according to that, Praise him ye Stars, and Light, and ye Creatures that are
nigh praise him.

And when they saw the Star, they rejoiced with great gladness, That is to say,
that their Labor was not in vain, and that their hopes did not deceive them.
But what became of the Star after it showed the Child?

Some say, That it went to a Field near Bethlehem, which was called the Star,
and which Anciently prefigured this Star; for, if Bethlehem, which is
interpreted, an House of Bread, did Typifie the Bread of Life which came down
from Heaven, which was the Word, who was Incarnated; it is not improbable, that
also a Village called Cocheba, or a Star, might have prefigured the Star which
Conducted the Wisemen. But we say, That it was an Angel that Assumed a
Similitude, who after he had performed his Ministry, Ascended into Heaven, and
Ranged himself in his Order.

And they went into the House, and saw the Lord with his Mother. It Is said,
They went into the House, and not into the Cave, and that they saw the Lad, and
not a Child newly born, and put in a Manger; from whence it is evident, that
the Wisemen saw Christ when he was two years of Age, nor were they Scandalized
when they saw the Lad without Glory, like to his Star, by reason of the
Greatness of their Faith, and the Testimony of the Chief Priests, and the
Prophecies concerning him, which they heard from the Scribes, and the Tumult,
and Commotion of Jerusalem, and therefore they were not offended when they saw
him in an Empty and Low Condition.

And they fell down, and Worshipped him. His Divinity shone upon them, and this
it was that made them Worship him, as also the Aspect of the Star which
Conducted them, did persuade to Worship him; they Adored him out of knowledge,
and not by constraint, for the sight begat Admiration in them, and Knowledge Joy.

Concerning the Coming of the Wisemen, David Prophesied, The Kings of Sheba,
and Seba shall bring Gifts unto him, and Jacob, the Nations shall expect him;
here it is apparent, that the Gentiles preceded the Jews in Worshipping him; and
how was it, that he did not at first say, Go, and Teach all Nations, but at
last? Because it behoved, That the Types should go first, for it was fit, that
the Jews should offer first. But forasmuch as they would not, but rejected
help, the Word turned himself unto the Gentiles.

And they opened their Sumptures: That is to say, their Gifts were fixed, and
under Seal, according to the Custom of Kings, who sending Gifts to other Kings,
seal them up.

And they offered unto him Gifts, Gold, Myrrh, and Frankincense: That is,
according to their Custom they offered these Gifts; for they were accustomed to
burn Incense to their Gods, and to give Gold to their Kings, and to embalm
their Dead with Myrrh: And forasmuch as they understood that he was God, and a
King, and that he was to Dye, and to be Anointed, they offered unto him these
Gifts; Frankincense, in relation to his Divinity; Gold, in relation to the
Majesty of a King; and Myrrh, to his Death, the cause of Life.

Moreover, Gold denotes that Worship which is preferred before Gold, is
returned to its Lord: Myrrh and Incense signify that he is the Physician who
binds up the Fracture of Adam.

Again, It is said, That to him every knee shall bow, of Heaven, and of Earth,
and under the Earth; these Gifts were a Mystery of the Trinity, which from
Divine Revelation was made known unto us; by Gold, the Worship of Celestial
Natures, he signifies that he was heavenly; by Frankincense, which is
Terrestrial, that he is King of Earthly Concerns; by Myrrh, in the third place
under the Earth, that he is Lord of his own, and the Causer of them.

Again, By Gold they signify the Purity and invincible nature of Faith; by
Frankincense the truth of Hope in him, for he helps and comforts the Souls
which believe in him: By Myrrh they parabolize Love, which is the Bond of
Faith, which bind^ and knits together the Members of the Church, as is the
property of Myrrh.

Again, In as much as Gold is the King of all insensible things, it is justly
offered to the King of sensible and insensible things; and as Gold only of
Earthly Constitutions does not contract rust, and is only of that Soluble and
Combustible Substance which is not diminished by the heat of fine, so also the
Kingdom of Jesus is not to be diminished, or to perish, as it is written.

Again, By Gold they signified the purity of his flesh, for he committed no
wickedness, nor was he guilty of deceit. By Myrrh they notifyed his passion,
for his body was perfumed with an hundred weight of Myrrh. David says, That
thy Garments are perfumed with Myrrh, Cassia, and Storax; by Frankincense they
thought that we were to be, through Christ, a sweet savor unto God, among
those who are to be saved.

Again, By Gold* they offered as it were the Chief of all insensitive things;
by Frankincense, all Trees, whereby also is signified the sweetness which we
receive from our Lord; by Myrrh all Perfumes. Moreover he hints the approbation
and difficulty of his Commands, according to that, how narrow is the gate, and
straight the way. But from whence did the Wisemen learn that they were to
bring gifts? Some say that they were treasured up by Adam in a Cave; and that
he commanded Seth, that by tradition they should be delivered from one to
another in succession, so that the Wisemen at the coming of Christ might come
and offer them; but this declaration is not approved of by understanding Men.

Others say that they learned this from Divine Revelation. Others, That they
knew from the Star which appeared unto them, that he who was born was God, and
King, and that he was to dye; they went and offered unto him Gold, Myrrh and
Frankincense.

Here Julian objects, Since that Frankincense was offered to Christ, wherefore
do ye not burn Frankincense in the Churches* but more precious Aromaticks.

We answer, That they did not offer Frankincense unto Christ at his own
request, but of their own discretion offered it according to their custom, and
he accepted of it, not as regarding the gift, but the intention of the giver,
for they bestowed them with a pure conscience; but we burn sweeter Aromaticks
in the Temples, that the Faithful may be perfumed with a sweet odor when they
enter into them. But what became of the offerings? We answer, That Joseph and
Mary took them, and brought them with them to Egypt, for they were not so
great, nor so many, but that they could carry them; nor were they offered for
the abundance of them, but they offered them for the mystery and significancy
of them, as first fruits; for God does not respect the abundance, as one that
is indigent, but the intention of the givers; as in the case of the widows
Mites.

And it was showed unto them in a Dream, that they should not return to Herod,
and they were not offended, nor did they say to the Angel* Wherefore are we to
fly away? But gave Obedience to Divine Intimation, for Faith does not dispute
when it is commanded. And what appeared to them in a Dream? Some say, That
Herod appeared unto them, brandishing his Sword, and approaching to the Lad to
kill him. Saint John says, That an Angel appeared in a Dream and said unto
them, Do not return to Herod. And moreover, that he conducted them, and
Transported them to their place by another way. And wherefore were they
prohibited to return to Herod? Some say, That they should not know the
intendment of Herod, who designed to kill the Lad; others say, That Joseph and
Mary might have opportunity to fly, for, had they returned unto him, he had
immediately sent* and caused the Lad to be put to Death, and they would not
have an opportunity of Escape.

And they went another way to their Country. This was Ordained by Divine
Providence, that they might Preach to other Nations who did not understand, for
the Nations who did not understand at their coming up to them, they Preached at
their going away, for, if they did Preach in other Climates, and openly to
Herod, how much father in their own Countries?

Arise, lead away the Lad, and his Mother, and fly unto Egypt. He did not say
Lead away the Lad, and thy Wife, but the Lad and his Mother; to show, that he
lived holily with her, even after she brought forth, and to teach him* that it
was not lawful to come near unto her, for when she Conceived, he called her his
Wife, for he knew he could not come near her, by reason the Holy Ghost
possessed her* and that to free her from suspicion of Adultery; for, if she had
been guilty of Adultery, he had not called her his Wife; here he showed the
Faith of Joseph, that it was not less than that of the Wisemen. Sometime he
said unto him, that he would save his people from their Sins; and now, Fly into
Egypt; for, he did not object to the Angel* How sayd'st thou, that he will save
his people, and now say, fly away with him; and he who saves not himself,
how can he save others? But such was the abundance of his Faith, that he did
not make such Objections to the Angel.

But the Heathens object thus, That he who fled from Herod, is not God, but
feeble.

We Answer, That he did not Fly from Herod, and if he would have fled, it had
been better to have fled with the Wisemen, or to have been hidden in that
Country; as many times they laid their hands on him, and he passed thorough
them and went his way; for, he it was who put a Legion to Flight, and did drive
out Devils, and Diseases, and stilled the Sea. How did he fly, who preserved
Moses in an Ark, and struck them with Blindness, who followed Elisha, and
delivered David from Saul, and preserved Jeremie, and Baruch in Jerusalem, and
struck the Sodomites with dimness of Sight; how did he fly away? Wherefore he
did not Fly of Weakness, but by Gods Ordinance he took upon him humane
Exinanition; and as he said, I repent that I have made Man, and that I have
made Saul a King, though he did not at all Repent; and said to the
Congregation, I have Espoused thee to my self in Righteousness, though God does
not Espouse; so the Scripture says, He fled; though he did not fly as God, nor
did he change from place to place, but fled as he was Man, by reason of Divine
Ordinance; and for these Causes:

First, That that might be done in Egypt which was done in Persia at the coming
of the Wise Men, for when he came into Egypt, he subverted all the Idols that
were there, and they fell; to those two Nations who most abounded in Error, he
first tendered his Doctrine; to Persia, by a Star; to Egypt, by going thither
in his own Person. Secondly, That he might fulfill that Prophecy, Out of Egypt
have I called my Son; and, Behold the Lord rode upon a thin Cloud, and came
into Egypt. Thirdly, That he might Illustrate by Example that saying, When they
Persecute you in this City, Fly unto another, and do not resist Evil. Fourthly,
That he might not prejudice the free will of Herod, and calumniate his prime
Creature; and that the Fame of his Birth might be spread among all Men, by the
trouble of Herod, and the Slaughter of Children, whilst Men asking the Cause
thereof, they might learn, that it was because Christ was born. And that this
Dispensation might be admired, for if from the swaddling clothes temptations
attended him, let us not be offended if they befall us; He Sent away the
Wisemen speedily, that they might teach other Countries and Persia. And lastly
that he might lenify the foolish insanitie of Herod, and teach us not to oppose
things too strong for our resistance.
Again, if he had not fled, one of these two had happned, he must either have
been killed, or not killed. And if he had been killed it had been absurd, for
his dispensation had not yet been fully administered; according to that, My hour
is not yet come. And if he had turned the edg of the sword, and had not been
slain, it would not have been believed that he was clothed with a Body; for if
when he Exerted many humane operations, Men presumed to say that he was not
clothed with a Body, what would they not have objected if he had performed all
his Actions agreeably to the Power of his Divinity? And if any one shall say,
that the Martyrs blunted the Edges of Swords, and the three Youths extinguished
the Fite, really and not apparently. We Answer, That these things they did
after they had testified that they were Men, and their Victory is attributed to
Divine Power; for the Word was God; and after he had testified that he was made
Man, he wrought Miracles, but he did not work Miracles immediately after his
Nativity, that he might not be thought a Phantasme, and therefore he fled into
Egypt.

And be there until I shall tell thee. He does not appoint the time of his
Flight within any limited term, but without limitation, as did Elia to Shemaia;
saying, Until I shall tell, to show that all things which he did, moved from
Divine Revelation.

For Herod will seek after the Lad to destroy him: That is, and not to Worship
him, as he politickly gave out, but to Slay him; yet Joseph is not hereat
offended, but remembering the Revelation of the Angel, and the coming of the
Wisemen, besides other things, he received the Command in Faith.

And Joseph took the Lad, and his Mother, and Fled into Egypt; And some say,
That they fled that Night destitute of all things, having not so much as hired
an Ass, because that was reserved for Entrance into Jerusalem. Others say, That
they had nothing, except the Offerings of the Wisemen, and the Carpenters
Tools of Joseph. But Mary, when she heard this, she took up the Lad on her
Shoulders, and went her way on foot, and charged Joseph to hire an Ass, and to
bring what they had, and to come after her. Others say, That she came to Egypt
with difficulty, because the Destruction of the Children who were strangled by
Pharo came into her thoughts, and for these Causes Mary had need of an Espoused
Husband to be an Assistant to her.

Out of Egypt have I called my Son. The Jews say, That this is said concerning
us who were called out of Egypt. And we say, That it is the manner of
Prophecies, that when they pronounce Words concerning certain Men, they are
accomplished in others; for behold, Jacob said to Simeon and Levi, I will
divide them in Jacob, and scatter them in Israel; and it did not come to pass
in them, but in their Offspring; and that of Noah concerning Canaan was
accomplished in the Gibeonites, the Offspring of Canaan. And that of Isaac to
Jacob, Thou shall be the Chief among thy Brethren: So here this is fulfilled in
Christ, and not in Israel, and the going down and coming up of the Children of
Israel from Egypt, was a Type of our Lords going down and coming up from Egypt;
And this, That Israel is called the Son of God, is like that, My Son, my first
born Israel, and this Name was by Grace Communicated unto them, but they have
lost it by Worshipping Baal and and Idols, and they are called of John, a
Generation of Vipers, and our Lord, the Children of Satan; but Matthew, when he
saw our Lord went into, and came out of Egypt, he said, Now is fulfilled this,
that I have called my Son, and not in the time of Israel. The Angel did not
say, I will go down into Egypt with ye, and come up with ye, for the Power of
the Lad is sufficient for all these things; for he was God who was made Flesh,
without being changed, and having been the Creator of Times, is subjected to
the Stature of Time.

Herod when he saw that he was deluded by the Wisemen; that is, inasmuch as
they did not come and make discovery concerning the Lad, but contemned him, he
did not believe that his Fraud was known.

He was very angry; That is, against the Wise men, pouring forth his rage
against the Wise men on the simple Children.

He sent and slew all the Children of Bethlem and all the borders thereof from
two Years old and under, according to the time he had inquired. For he slew the
Children that with them he might murder Christ, and because he did not know
him, he slew all their Children, and slew also the Children in the Borders
thereof, because it was suspected they might have made him fly into one of the
bordering Villages, and that he might not escape death. And in saying All, he
showed that there was not one omitted. He said, From two years old and under,
because he enquiring of the Wisemen, they answered him, It was two years since
the Star appeared unto us; therefore said the Lord Ephraim and Eusebius, that
the Wise men came in the second year of our Lords Nativity. And the Lord John
and St. Cyrill say that the Star appeared two years before, and that the Wise
men tarried long before they came in the way, and when they came, our Redeemer
was born, and worshipped in a Manger, and in Swadling-Cloaths.

But whether these or they be in the right, the Discourse of the Evangelist is
certainly true, which says, According to the time he had inquired: Some they
killed waking, some sleeping, some having hold of the Breast, some swimming;
others they snatched from their Mothers Embraces, and washed with their blood
their Mothers and the Earth, and there was great Lamentation and weeping
because there was not an house wherein a Boy had not been murdered and from the
contest and inquisition of some, saying the Lad is two years old, and of (...)
saying he is not; and of some saying there is a Child here, and of others
saying to the contrary, and the like, there was a great clamor and Lamentation.

Some men demand, How many Children were slain? And this is not known; but some
busybodies babble, saying, That Herod sent forty Head-Officers, and with
every of them forty Butchers or Man-slayers, and every of these Butchers killed
forty Children: Wherefore there being forty Officers, and the Butchers with
them being 1600, the Children who were slain must be 64000. This we have not
writ as believing it to be true, but for delight of the simple.

Wherefore did our Lord withdraw, the Killing of the Children, and was our Lord
or Herod the cause of the Killing of them?

We answer, That Christ was not the cause of their being slain, no more than
David was the cause of killing the fourscore Priests whom Saul slew; but as
Saul himself was the cause of killing the Priests, so Herod was the cause of
slaying the Infants: And as Elia was not the cause of burning the two Captains
of Fifties, and those who were with them, but those who sent them: But we say,
As Peter was the cause of killing the Soldiers, so Christ was the cause of
killing the Children.

Moreover, The execrable wickedness of the King was the cause of their
destruction; for had Herod seen the Walls broken, and the Doors pulled open, he
might have put the Soldiers to death; but all things being sure, he ought to
have worshipped the Doer of Miracles, and not to have slain the Keepers; for God
was willing to have converted the King, and not that the Guards should have
committed destruction. So here the coming of the Wisemen, the assembling of
the Scribes, the Testimony of Prophecy, were, that Herod might believe, and be
saved, and not that he should kill the Children. And wherefore did God permit
them to be slain? Some say, That the, Fame of his Nativity might be made known
in every place; others, that the Prophecy might be fulfilled, according to
that, a voice was heard in Rama. But these are not approved expositions. We say
therefore that this permission was given that they might not be as their
parents, nor partake of Innocent blood. 2ly That they might receive an Earnest
of the Kingdom long since prepared for them, as an Inheritance, and might at
his second coming enter into possession thereof.

Again, All our Sufferings are of two kinds, either for our Sins, or that a
Reward might be given to us for the same; and it is evident from what Paul said
of him who committed Fornication; Deliver him to Satan in the Body, that he may
live by the Spirit, in the day of our Lord. And David when he overcame Shimei,
commanded he should not be put to Death, and he said, Behold my Subjection and
Labor, and forgive me all my Iniquity; they therefore are not miserable who
suffer Evil, if they patiently suffer, whether they be corrected of God, or
Persecuted by Satan for their Sin; and for Sufferings of the second kind, to
wit, for Wages, or Reward, that of Job may suffice for Illustration; wherefore
the Children suffered in the second kind, in relation to Wages or Reward. And
what Sin was it that was Attributed to the Children? For behold they sinned
not. We Answer, it was sufficient for them that they were to be Rewarded with
Bliss after Death; he did not impugn the Free Will of Herod; for Free Will is a
great Gift, given unto Men for the doing what they will, and God does not
Reverse his Gift, and if they perished, they obtained great Trophies of
Victory; and we say, that if God had known that they would have proved
Virtuous, he had not permitted that they should dye; for if he forbears the
Wicked, how much less would he have permitted them to have been overcome; but
they went away being Innocent, and escaped Evil, and became Martyrs, because
they bore Testimony for Christ, and the Baptism of Blood supplied the Place of
Water Baptism. But how were they Martyrs, being slain without knowledge? We
Answer, that in this kind or manner, Children receive the Gift of Baptism
without Knowledge, and it is a true Gift unto them, and so Slaughter was true
Testimony.

Rachel Weeping for her Children. Jeremy said this, personating the Jews led
Captive to Babylon, and by Rachel adumbrated the Tribes of Benjamin and Judah.
Matthew makes use of this Text in reference to the Murder of the Children.
Others (with whom we also agree) say, That Jeremy hereby Typified the Children,
and it is evident from the subsequent Words, which run thus: Restrain thy Voice
from Weeping, for there is a Reward for thy Tears, for they who were led
Captive to Babylon, had no Reward for their Tears, for they were led into
Captivity for their Sins; but the Children being put to Death in their Infancy,
there was a Reward reserved for them; it is therefore evident that Jeremy spoke
in Relation to them; and Rama belonged to the Children of Benjamin, and
Bethlehem of Judah also belonged unto them; and because Rama was the Capital
City of the Tribe of Benjamin, therefore it was reputed also the City of his
Mother.

But, Since Rachel dyed so long before, wherefore are the Children imputed to
her? We Answer, because it is agreeable to the Law of Nature, and to the
Scripture; accordingly all the Children of Men are called the Children of Adam,
and the Israelites are called the Children of Israel; and because the Children
were of Rama, therefore they are computed the Children of Rachel. But sithence,
the Children were slain in Bethlehem, as well as in Rama; Wherefore does he
apply the Weeping to Rama only? Some say, because the Prophet foresaw, that
more Children were slain in Rama than in Bethlehem; therefore he uses the
Names of Rachel and Rama. Others say, because Rama is nigh unto Bethlehem,
therefore he applied Weeping unto Rachel, and her Children are called of Rama,
because it was as the Inheritance of Benjamin her Son, and of Bethlehem, by
reason of the Vicinity of her Sepulcher thereunto.

Others say, That as there were two Men who came before the Judge, and the one
was guilty of Death, and the other not, and as he who was guilty was silent,
and he who was Innocent cried out and pleaded for himself; so he was born for,
and in respect of Ramah, and Bethlehem, but Rachel was not born for them, and
therefore he applies Weeping to Rama, because they were not guilty nor
injurious.

Wherefore does he apply Weeping to Rachel and not to Jacob, since they were
his Children who were Slain? And some say, That both of them were the Children
of one Husband and Wife, and therefore he applies Weeping to Rachel and not to
Jacob; to whom one replies, That if they were of both, it had been fit to have
applied Weeping to them both. Others, because they were slain in their Mothers
Arms (their Fathers not being present) Weeping is Attributed to the Mother*
Again others, because the Love of a Mother is much more abundant than that of
Fathers. Again, Rachel died in Childbed, and these were slain soon after they
were born. Samuel said unto Saul, behold, Three Men are to meet thee in
Tsaltsach near Rachels Sepulcher in the Border of Benjamin. Moreover, Rachel
was buried a Persian days Journey from Ephrata, which is Bethlehem, and perhaps
they who were slain, were buried in her Sepulcher.

And she would not be Comforted; First, because of the multitude of them who
were slain in all the Confines. Secondly, because they were slain Execrably,
Deceitfully, and Unmercifully.

When Herod the King was Dead: From this time he received his Judgment; for
Eusebius says, That Josephus wrote thus concerning him, That he fell into a
Devouring Disease, being Worm-Eaten, and oppressed with sadness of Spirit, and
that his Lower Parts, to wit, his Testicles, and prolific Member became
putrid, and that in a furious Rapture of his mind, and in his Tribulation, he
slew his Wife and his three Sons; and when they made him sit in Oil, and in a
hot Bath, his Eyes were Transversed, and he miserably forsook the World.

Arise, take the Lad and his Mother. He does not say Fly, but Go, to show, that
he was to obtain Rest after Afflictions.

For they are Dead, who sought the Soul of the Child. He says Soul, That he
might not give Advantage to them, who say, That our Savior did not Assume a
Soul, but that the Divinity supplied the place of the Soul.

And he Arose, and took the Lad and his Mother; That is, according to the
command of the Angel, without repugnancy.

But when he heard that Archelaus Administered as a King in Judea, in the place
of his Father, he was afraid to go thither: First, Lest with the Authority of
his Father, he might Inherit an Enmity toward the Children. Secondly, He
feared the Mothers of the Children, lest they seeing the Lad, and calling to
mind thereby, that their Children were slain for him, might either Murder him,
or accuse him before Archelaus, and he slay him. Neither did Elizabeth return
for fear of the Jews, till the end of her Life. But how does he say, That
Archelaus Governed in Judea, whereas Pontius Pilate had the Government thereof?
We Answer, that so soon after the Death of Herod, the Kingdom was not divided
into Provinces; wherefore at his Death, his Son took hold of his Government. He
says, in the place of Herod his Father, to distinguish him from another Herod,
who was the Brother of Archilaus. Antipator the Askalonite begat that Herod who
slew the Children, and he begat Nine Sons of seven Women; that is to say,
Antipater, Alexander, Aristobulus, Herod and Archilaus, and Herod the Tetrach,
and Herod and Philip, and one that was cut out of his Mothers Womb.

But how many Herod's were there who occasioned Error, being of the same Name?
They say, four; Herod the first a Priest, who belonged to an Idol Temple of
Askalon, a City of the Philistines; he begat Antipater, whom the Edomites took
Captive, and Educated him in their Rites, and Antipater begat Herod the King,
who flew the Children; and he begat Herod the Tetrarch and his Brethren; and
this Tetrarch (that is one of four) slew John, and in his days our Lord
suffered, and the Tetrarch begat that Herod, who is called Agrippa, who was
clad in Royal Robes, of whom mention is made in the Acts of the Apostles*
Jacobus Aurihensis faith, That there were five Herod's; Herod who slew the
Infants, begat of Dusis the first Antipater, who was call by the Name of his
Priesthood, and of Mary the Queen, the Daughter of Arcanus, the King and
High Priest, Alexander and Aristobulus; these their Father slew, together with
their Mother, being accused of Rebellion against him; and of the other Mary,
the Daughter of the High Priest, Arcanus, and Herod and Antipater; and of
Cleophta the Hierosolymitan, Herod and Philip. And of Phelis, Phesil; these
were the Sons of Herod the First; the Herod who was called Antipater, and was
Tetrarch, slew John; him Julius Caesar bannish'd into Spain with his Wife
Herodias, where they died miserably. Herod, who was Brother of Philip, by
Father and Mother, was King in Kanshrin, being betrothed unto Bernice his
Fathers Sister. Herod Agrippa mentioned in the Book of the Acts to have died at
Caesara, was not the Son of Herod the First, nor of the great Tetrarch, but the
Son of Aristobulus who was slain, and he was Grandson to Herod the First.
Archelaus was not afraid of the King who was born, as was his Father; either,
because he thought he was slain with the Children, or because he saw his Father
died a miserable Death, he feared the like misfortune might befall him.

And it was showed him in a Dream, that he should go into the Region of
Galilee; But if he were afraid to go into Judea, by reason of Archelaus, he had
reason to fear going into Gallilee, because of Herod; but the place being
changed, the matter was concealed, for all the fear was about Bethlehem, and
the Borders thereof.

In the City which was called Nazareth; That is, he came hither first, to avoid
Danger, and that he might inhabit in his own Region better, and be confident;
and he received Direction from the Angel, to make this place his Habitation,
that this Prophecy might be fulfilled; He shall be called a Nazarite. Matthew
faith, he came from Bethlehem to Egypt, but Luke to Jerusalem, and from thence
to Nazareth* and both declare the Truth; but this of Luke was first, for he
abode forty days in Bethlehem, from the time he was born, and afterward went
to Jerusalem and offered Gifts, and Simeon bore him, and from Jerusalem he went
to Nazareth; and at the end of that Anniversary, he came to Jerusalem, and so
returned to Nazareth; and at the end of the second year, he came from Nazareth
to Jerusalem, and from thence to Bethlehem; and there the Wisemen Worshipped
him; and from Bethlehem he went to Egypt, as says Matthew; and Luke declares
where he was born, and what things were done at his Nativity, and that he went
up to Jerusalem, when the days of her Purification were accomplished; and when
they had performed what the Law required, they went unto Nazareth: Matthew
afterward sets forth, that the Wisemen came and found him in Bethlehem after
he was Circumciz'd and had offered his Gifts, and was two years old and then it
was told Joseph that he should carry him by flight into Egypt, and he remained
three years in Egypt and suddenly returned to Nazareth, and hence it is known,
that the Wife-men worshipped him when he was two years old, for there was no
Congruity with reason or convenience that they should bring him up to the
Temple whilst Herod breathed forth destruction against the Children.

Which is called Nazareth: The Jews question in what book these two passages
are written, viz. He shall be called a Nazarite, and, Out of Egypt have I
called my Son: To whom we say, that these are not allegations of praise and
exaltation, but of humiliation, for this word Nazareth they spoke of it as an
house of Indecency, out of Nazareth, etc. And the other is applied to flight,
and had they not been True, Matthew had not produced them because they were not
of advantage. Moreover many books perished, as the book of Barjamin teaches
us, for the Jews continually were drawn into the Error of Idolatry, and some
of the Books they lost, and some of them they tore, as Jeremia declares, and he
who wrote the Book of the Kings faith, that Deuteronomie was scarce found after
a long time, which was hidden and plundered. For if when they were free from
War, they had so little care or regard for Books, much less had they in the
time of war; And if they shall say, if it was not written in the time of
Christ, whence does Matthew produce it? We answer, that it was the daughter of
a Voice.

And in the time of Matthew it was delivered and propagated from mouth to mouth,
and therefore Matthew wrote it, or it was in the Books which were Lost, or the
Spirit which dwelt upon him in the Parlour Revealed it unto him, or in his
time, it was preserved in Books and after Matthew wrote it, perished in the
destruction of the City by the Romans. And if a Jew will endeavor to Falcify
the Gospel because this allegation is not Extant, he may be Reprehended from
his own Books wherein are many Speeches written said to be in writing, and are
not written; wherefore we may hold theirs in the like repute.

Moses speaks to Aaron concerning the death, of his Sons, I will be Sanctified
by my near ones and I will be praised before all the People; yet this is not
found any where, and it is said in the Book of the Wars of the Lord. A Flame in
the Whirlwind in the Torrent of Aron. Moreover, To teach the Children of Israel
the use of the Bow; behold, it is written in the Book of Jasher: But neither
did he reveal what is the Doctrine of the Bow. It is said of Jeroboam the Son
of Jehu, I will turn the Border from the going in of Hamath, to the Book of the
Sallows; as said the Lord by his Servant. Jonas the Son of Mathi the Prophet in
Gad-Hether; and this is not written any where; no not in Jonas. And, Thou have
said, the World shall be Built in Grace; and also in Esaia, This Word the Lord
spoke concerning Moab; and it is unknown where these two passages are written;
therefore let the Jew take our Excuse from his own.

Moreover, The Gospel, according to Custom, and with regard to the
accomplishment of things, produces an Allegation; for Isaiah says, There
shall come forth a Rod from the Root of Jess, and a Bough shall sprout forth:
And in the Hebrew a Branch or Bough is expounded a Branch, and Nazaren one who
sprouts out; and when Matthew saw that Christ came and dwelt in Nazareth, he
expounded this of Esaiah; A Branch shall sprout out, He shall be called a
Nazaren; and he was called a Nazaren from Nazareth, that is, (...) one
sprouting out, from (...) a Sprout; so they are expounded in the Hebrew Tongue:
Others say that (...) which is (...) is expounded New, and that Nazareth
signifies New, and signifies Typically that the Son would newly be made Man
for Men: Others say, That Nazareth signifies Justice, and Nazaren signifies
Just; and if they shall say, that because he was born in Bethlehem, and not in
Nazareth, Esaiah calls him (...) let them know that the Apostles called him as
did the Prophets, and that this of Bethlehem was not hid as to the Prophecy,
but chiefly intended, according to that of Nathaniel. who from this was moved
to make Enquiry, and said, From Nazareth, etc. For Nazareth was a contemptible
place, as was Galilee, and our Lord was not ashamed to be called from thence,

After he had discoursed concerning Christ's Nativity, etc. at last he came to
the beginning of the Gospel, which is the Baptism of Christ: And so he
Continues his Discourse, on toward his Passion.

MATH. III.
ANd in those days came John the Baptish: He does not understand by those days,
the time when Jesus returned from Egypt to Nazareth, for in those days Jesus
was five years old; but the time of his abode in Nazareth being Twenty five
Years, he was Thirty Years of Age when he came to Baptism, as says Luke.
Others are of opinion that he calls those days, the time when he came to be
baptized; for it is the custom of Scripture to term by the Name of those days,
the days wherein any matter, what-e'er it be, is acted or done. Others think
that he calls those days, the time wherein the Jews had neither King nor
Prophet; forasmuch as the Prophecy of Jacob was fulfilled, The Scepter shall
not depart, etc. but Tiberius then Reigned, as Luke says.

Others say thus, In those days, that is, our Lord did not (immediately) after
his teturn from Egypt come to John, but when he was Thirty Years of Age, being
Two years old when he went down into Egypt, where he remained Three years; and
afterward dwelt in Nazareth Twenty five Years, and in these years he paid the
debt of our Nature, and fulfilled the Law, and abrogated it; and it is the
Custom of Scripture not only to compute a long time by days, according to that,
In the days of Amraphel, and, In the days of Hosiah, but also by a day, as
thus, The whole day of Warfare afflicted me; and, The whole day of my shame is
before me, speaking of an extended duration of time.

Others are of opinion that Matthew spoke not these things as immediately
referring to the time wherein the things above spoken of relates, for John did
not suddenly begin to baptize when he returned from Egypt. But when our Lord
was baptized he was Thirty Years of Age. So that Matthew intended to say that at
a certain time that John came: So when he says, then came Jesus or then was
Jesus led to the Wilderness, he does not speak in the series of time relating
to what immediately was before spoken of, for it is the Custom of Scripture to
speak thus, for though when he sat in the mount of Olives, and spoke of the
destruction of Jerusalem, and the Finishing of that Generation, he subjoyns a
Declaration concerning the End of the World, which were far distant the one
from the other: So here he includes the whole time of his infancy, and that of
his abode in Nazraeth, and also the Thirtieth year (of his Age) with one of
those times that John came. Augustus reigned fifty Six years, and in the forty
first year of his Reign Christ was born, and his Son Tiberius took upon him the
Kingdom and in the fifteenth year of his Reign came John the Baptist; so that
the years from the Taxing which was in the days of Augustus when our Redeemer
was born, to the fifteenth of Tiberius being computed, make up thirty years.

Came John the Baptist: That is to say, from the Ziphian Wilderness to the
Region of Judea; he calls him the Baptist, because God sent him to Baptize with
the Baptism of Repentance: Matthew does not definitely declare those days, but
Luke speaks definitely.

It behooves here to make inquiry of many things; from whence therefore came
John? We Answer, from the Ziphian Wilderness where he was brought up; for at
the time the Infants were slain; forasmuch as the Wisemen returned not unto
Herod, he began again in Rage to enquire of the Priests, where Christ was born,
and one of those who stood by, said unto him, There is born in our
Neighborhood a Boy the Son of a Priest, and it is given out, that he is the
Messiah; and he sent immediately to make pursuit after him, and when Zachary
came, he demanded of him, saying, Where is thy Son, and Zachary Answered, He is
in the House, and he sent Soldiers with him to fetch him, but one of the
Standers by, made haste, and gave notice thereof to Elizabeth, and she took him
up, and departed in haste, and went to the Ziphian Wilderness; Zachary then
coming to the House, and finding, neither Elizabeth nor John, he was afraid to
return, and went his way, and took Sanctuary at the Altar; but Herod sent
thither, and caused him to be slain.

The Lord Ephraim says, That she received Direction by Vision, to fly from the
Sword of Herod, and that she made him a Coat of Gamels Hair, and a Girdle to
bind his Loins; and that they grew together with him, thirty years, as the
Garments of the Children of Israel increased with them forty years. John was
two years and a half Old when he fled; Others said, That an Angel snatched him
from his Mothers Arms, and that neither his Mother nor Father knew the Place of
his Abode.

Others say, That when his Father perceived the Sword of Herod drawn against
him, he carried him up to the Temple, where his Conception was Denounced, and
betook himself to his Prayers, and that he was thence Translated to the
Wilderness, which when the Jews apprehended, they asked him, Where is the Lad?
And he Answered, I know not, but they said, Thou have destroyed thp Son out of
Envy to our Redemption; he then betook him to the Altar for Refuge; but such
was their Accursed Profaneness, that they flew him there: Others say, That the
Jews slew Zachary out of Spleen and Envy, because he did not deprive the Virgin
of her place among the Virgins; but we agree with those, who say, That Herod
slew him; yet this Blood remained, Crying with a fervent Voice fifty eight
years, until Titus the Son of Vespasian coming against the City and subduing
it, entered into the Temple, and saw the reeking Blood; and there hearing the
Cry, enquired, and found this to be the Cause; and then upon the place gave his
Command, and accordingly the Priests were Slain; and at this time ceased the
Cry, and Reeking of the Blood.

John as they say, until he Arrived at fifteen years of Age, sucked of his
Mothers Milk in the Wilderness, and was Nourished with Roots, and his Mother
went about, and lived by the Alms of Passengers, the remainder of the Thirty
Years, John abode in the Wilderness, and the Holy Ghost accompanied him, and
supplied him with Food and Raiment, and Enriched him with Revelations, and
taught him what it behoved him to know;

But why did he Fly to the Wilderness? We Answer, That there might not be any
absurd pretext, or opinion among Men, concerning what he was to Testify of
Christ; as first, That either he should Testify of him, for their being of
Kin, or for the Love of their Parents, or for their society from their
Childhood; wherefore he was of Favor Translated to the Wilderness, and
remained there full thirty years, until both of them arrived at that perfect
Age, wherein those things that were to be spoken concerning the Gospel, were to
be believed and confirmed; and he came to open the Fountain of Baptism; and
this was not of his own Will; but of the Will of God, as says Luke. The Word
of God was upon John; That is to say, His Command; and he came by the
appointment and Word of God.

And he who sent me to Baptize, said unto me, He whom thou see.

He was sent to baptize that he might proclaim Christ to Israel; and that they
hearing that he did baptize, the Jews might from all parts be gathered unto
him, and he preach concerning Christ: And because they were polluted with sins,
John came to put them in mind of their sins, preparing them to Repentance by
Baptism.

The Lord John says, That there was no Remission of sins in the Baptism of
John, because Christ was not yet sacrificed on the Cross, nor was the Spirit as
yet given, nor was Sin slain: And Paul says, That John baptized with the
Baptism of Repentance, but adds not, for Remission of Sins?

But how then do Mark and Luke say. That John did baptize for Remission of sins.

The Lord John says. Because the Jews were Impostors, and that they might not
only not suffer for their Sins but also purify their Souls, it was necessary
that John should say, I baptize for remission of Sins, that he might put them
in mind of their Sins, and prepare them for the baptism of Christ which confers
remission of Sins, as Paul said, Ye have been washed; ye have sanctified, not
by the Baptism of John, but by the Name of Christ, and by the Spirit of God.

Some say there were three sorts of Baptism:

The First of John to Repentance, when they returned from dead Works. The
Second was that of the Disciples in the Name of Jesus; and they who were
baptized by the Disciples, received Remission of Sins. The third is that which
followed the Descent of the holy Ghost, vizt the Adoption of Sons, for without
the holy Ghost there was no capacity for Adoption.
Saint Theologus, and Moses Bar Cepha, and Johannes de Dara, and others, are
for Eight Baptisms.

The first is that of the Flood, as that which was given for the Cutting off of
Sin, and purged the world from Evil. The Second was that which was by the cloud
and the Sea, as St. Paul said, the Sea, signifying waters, and the Clouds the
holy Ghost. The third is the Figurative Law by Moses, which is called of
Purification, and they eat nothing out of the Market without washing; for those
who were clean by Nature, but by Accident otherwise, as he who had touched a
dead Carcass, or was defiled with Nocturnal Pollution, or had tasted what was
prohibited, or went to the House of Mourning, was therefore to purge himself by
washing, and was not clean until the evening. The Fourth is that of John, by
water indeed, but to repentance, which was superior to that of the Jews, but
inferior to ours, it having neither the holy Ghost, nor remission of Sins;
which is manifest from hence, that Paul did again baptize those who had been
baptized therewith by Apollo of Alexandria; and it served as a bridge to pass
from that of Moses to this of ours; there were not therein Bodily cleansings,
but it advised us to eschew evil, and to perform works agreeable to Repentance.
The Fifth is that which Christ bestowed upon us being perfect, and bestowing
Adoption, Conferring Grace, and granting Remission of Sins, and freeing from
debts, and is the Gift of the Spirit. The Sixth is that of Martyrdom, for the
Martyrs who were not baptized with water, and received the holy Ghost, and bare
Testimony of Christ, and were Crowned, the blood of their necks supplied the
place of their baptism. The seventh is that of Tears, which also procures
remission; for being it is Impossible for those who have been once baptized,
when they are spotted with Sin, to be rebaptized, God gave Tears, that when a
Man weeps for his Sin, he might receive Remission, and so the Gift of Baptism
which he lost, might return unto him; as David was baptized with Tears, when he
sinned and committed adultery. The Eighth is another baptism which is by Fire,
whereof speaks Theologus, which happens when we are baptized in fire.
But with what baptism was our Lord baptized? St. Severus is of opinion that
it was that of John, which was of repentance, for he who was no Sinner was
reputed a sinner, and he was not baptized as if he had stood in need of
repentance, or to have received Remission of Sins, or the holy Ghost; for he
committed no Sin, nor was there any guile in him; he said, Who reproves me of
Sin? And he had no need of the Spirit, for he was of the same nature with him;
wherefore as not wanting it, was he baptized with the baptism of repentance,
the overruling of Controversy, he was therefore baptized with the baptism of
repentance and adoption, as being not baptized for himself but for us; it was
said to be one and the same baptism wherewith he was baptized, but he was
baptized for us, that he might Sanctify us by his baptism; he abolished the
baptism of the Jews, and gave us that of adoption, as he Celebrated the
Passover, abolishing the old, and instituting the new. Philoxenus, He was
baptized with our baptism that he might bestow it upon us, for it is a type of
his death and resurrection; and as he died and rose again, and was to us the
first fruit from the dead, so was he baptized for the sanctification of our
baptism, and presently he bestowed it upon us, for he was baptized that he
might be proclaimed to Israel, and that he might fulfill the whole Law, that is
righteousness, and that he might prepare adoption for us, and make us his Sons
and Domestics, and that he might draw the holy Ghost on our flesh by the means
of his flesh, and that he might make void the first Condemnation, and that he
might open unto us the Heavens which were shut up, by Transgression of the
Commandments, and that he might Sanctify Waters, and show them unto us, as
Enlightening, Holy, and Conferring Remission, and that he might Sanctify the
Baptist, and that he who once cast into the Water, in the time of Pharaoh, the
known Serpent which crept in the Water, might bruise his Head, and that he
might Root Sin out of the Waters, as he took it upon him when he was
Crucified, and that he might Reveal the Trinity upon the Waters, and that he
might put an end to (former) VVashings, and bodily Purifications, and that
Spiritual Baptism might be believed, which is from Water and the Spirit;
whereat, Nicodemus made difficulty; and that he might wash away the Filth of
Sin that is in us, and that he might by the Spirit and Water, perfect Jordan,
as he is Spirit and Flesh.

Wherefore did he Establish Water for Baptism, and not something else?

1. Because as our first Frame was made of Water and Dust, so also our last
renovation ought to be accomplished by Water and Fire; and as there, he
breathed into the Face of Adam a Living Soul; so in Baptism he breathed into us
the Holy Ghost. 2. Because sensitive Creatures are therewith sustained. 3.
Because Water has it in its Nature to give increase, and to fructify; as it
received from the beginning, so it now causes Men to be fruitful and increase,
and fits them with Wings to fly to the Meeting with our Lord. 4. Because the
Water Arms us against Thirst and Fire; wherefore being Baptized therewith, we
drive away from us the Flames of inordinate Passions, and so quench the last
Fire that it may not prejudice us. 5. Because Water has a pure clearness by
Nature, which frames the similitudes of such persons as look into it; so
Baptism exhibits unto us the like; framing in us the Characters of
Incorruption. 6. As Water washes away the Dirt and Filth out of Garments; so
does Baptism purge the Sins of Soul and Body. 7. As Water takes out the Spots
which fall upon us, so Baptism takes out the blot of Sin which Adam cast upon
us, when he became Debtor to Sin and Death. 8. Water Strengthens those who are
Weak, and dip themselves in it; so after we are Baptized therein, it fortifies
us to the performance of Spiritual Service. 9. Potters Vessels which are Burnt
in the Fire, unless they be steeped in Water, crumble away, and fall in pieces
as dry Dirt; so we, unless we be dipped in Baptism, return into. Dust and
dryness, void of Godly Waters. 10. There are two Cleansing Elements, Water and
Fire; and they who are not here Cleansed with Water, shall there be Tormented
with Fire. 11. Water washes all things, and wants no Cleansing, and he who
is washed with Baptism, needs no other Cleansing. 12. Water is a thing exposed
to the Use of all Men; and that no Man might be deprived of Baptism, therefore
was Baptism thereof Constituted. 13. Because, by Waters were washed away the
Filth of Noah's Family; and because the Egyptians were drowned, and the
Worshippers of Balaam were thereby tried; therefore baptism was Established.
14. To abolish the Evil Opinion of those Fools, who said, That Water was Evil,
because therein was the Common Deluge, and Pharaoh was Drowned therein: He
shows, that Water by baptism gives Immortal Life. 15. Because, by Water were
made the Espousals of Rebecca, of Rachel and Tsiphora, tipifying the Water of
Baptism, whereby the Church is Espoused. 16. Because the Passage of the
Children of Israel was made by Water, and also of Eliah and Elishah in Jordan;
and the Cleansing of Naaman, and that Torrent, of Esechiel, and the washing
Shiloah, did all of them Typifie our Baptism. And in the place through which
Joshua passed Jordan, and Elias and Elishah also, was, as they say, Christ
Baptized.
Thus much for the Third Chapter.
MATH. XXVI.
ANd it came to pass when Jesus had finished these speeches he said to his
disciples, Ye know that after two days the passover will be. Our Redeemer spoke
this on the mount of Olives, but Luke says that he came on the day of
unleavened Bread; and John said, fix days before the passover; he who heard
those, how can he these? Jesus came to Bethanie on the Sabbath day when he
raised Lazarus, and he made him a supper, and he raised Lazarus, and Martha
ministered, and Mary washed his seet; the next day after, which was the first
day of the week, he entered into Jerusalem with Hosanna's, as said John; and on
that first dayof the week, he went forth into Bethanie and lodged there, as
said Matthew; and in the morning of the second day of the week he returned to
Jerusalem, and dried up the fig Tree, as Matthew said; and again on the third
day of the week he went forth to the mouth of olives, as Matthew said, and sat
upon the Mount, and his Disciples came unto him, and spoke unto him, and he
taught many things; and on this third day, he said unto them there on the
Mount, After two days will be the passover; that is, after the fourth and fifth
day of the week the passover was to be Early in the morning of the preparation,
and on that third day Christ was anointed in the house of Simon the Leper, in
the town of Bethanie, as say Matthew and Mark; and from Bethanie where he was
anointed, he sent two Disciples, Peter and John, to Jerusalem on the fifth day,
to prepare for him the passover, as Luke says, The Day of Vleavened Bread
being come, etc. and when it was the evening of the dawning of the Friday, he
came to Jerusalem, and lay down in the Parlour, with his Disciples as says
Matthew; and the first day of the passover and of unleavened bread was the
Friday, as John says, which was the preparation of the passover, and they
entered not into the Pretorium, that they might not be defiled; and if thou
shall reckon from the Sabbath whereon Lazarus arose, until the preparation,
there will be six days, as says John; from whence it is apparent that the
Evangelists agree with one another, for Matthew said, Ye know that after two
days shall be the passover, that is, on the third day of the Week, he said this
unto them; and the fourth and fifth days of the Week were two intermediate
days, and on the Friday happened the first of Unleavened Bread, whereon the
Passover of that year was slain, and whereon Christ was crucified, as said John.

And the Son of Man shall be betrayed to be crucified: First of all he
introduced the matter of the Passover, that he might conceal that which would
have affected them with sadness, that is, that he was to be Crucified.

Then were gathered together the chief Priests and Scribes: For the Law had
commanded there should be but one High Priest, and that when he died another
should succeed; for with the life of this one, he measured the flight of those
who had involuntarily slain a man; but at this time their Laws were corrupted,
for instead of one Chief Priest, many succeeded.

Moreover, he set up unto them two Chief Priests, to the end that if there
should happen to one of them Nocturnal Pollution, or any Liquefaction, and he
should be polluted, the other might administer without any disappointment to
the Feast. But Herod when he reigned as King, he made one High Priest every
year, that they might not rebel against him: He made them also to exercise that
Priesthood for certain years, as Zachary.

And they took Counsel against Jesus to take him by deceit: For they were
assembled unto the Court of Caiaphas the high Priest, and after four days from
the raising of Lazarus, being the fourth day of the Week, they took Counsel for
his Death; and therefore the Apostles appointed that on the fourth day of the
Week, on the Friday, and on the first day of the Week, there should be a Fast,
and the holy Mysteries. On the fourth, because they consulted his Death on that
day; on the Friday, because thereon he was Crucified; and on the first day of
the Week, because on that day he arose.

Some say, That even the Beasts, on this Friday Honor the Fast. Not in the
Feast, lest there be a Commotion among the People: Observe, That they were not
afraid of God, but of the People; And observe, The Devil did not consent, that
Christ should suffer in the Feast, that his Passion might not be Public; but
because, They were overcome with overflowing Rage unlawfully, and found Judas
ready to betray him; they could not Govern their Rage. They Consulted in the
Court of Caiphas; because, He was the Chief Priest for that year: And some say,
That he was Josephus, and afterward Repented, was Converted, and Believed in
Christ; but we say, That the Josephus who fought smartly with the Romans, and
afterward was taken by them, made a Disciple, and wrote many Books, concerning
what happened in the time of the Machabees; and also, concerning the War of
Jerusalem, was another than this Caiaphas the High Priest; and Eusebius
Caesariensis in his Ecclesiastics Testifies unto us the same; but Josephus
was called the Second Joseph by the Romans, by reason of his Wisdom; and he
said of Vespasian, It will come to pass that he shall Reign.

Jesus being in Bethany in the House of Simon the Leper. This Bethany was the
Village of Mary, and of Martha, wherein Lazarus arose from the Dead; and it is
Interpreted, The House of Praise, and this is differing from Jerusalem; and it
is evident from this, That when the Sinner Anointed him there; he said
afterward, Go unto the City, and prepare the Passover for us; hereby the
Evangelists showed, That he sent them from Bethany to the City of Jerusalem:
This Simon was a Leper, and was Cured, and the Name of Leper remained on him;
perhaps, for that afterward he grew Leprous in his mind, and was Scandalized
in our Lord.

There came unto him a Woman who had with her an Alabaster. The Woman was
encouraged to come unto our Lord, from this, That she saw he had Cured Simon
the Leper, and for that he had Cured many Women, the Canaanite, the Samaritan,
she that was Wounded, and others; and she did not come unto him as a Man, but
as to God made Man. But some say, That the Evangelists are contrary to one
another* by reason that Luke says, she was a Sinner, and that it was in the
House of Simon, and in Nain; but Matthew says, in Bethany, in the House of
Simon the Leper, but does not signify her Name; but John manifestly signifies
it, and says, that her Name was Mary. Some say, That they were two, by reason
of the places; Others, That she was one and the same, she having Anointed him
twice, and being the Sister of Lazarus, which was called Magdalen; Others say,
That Simon the Pharisee was Simon the Leper, the Father of Lazarus and Mary;
Others, That they were three; the Whores Anointed him twice, and Mary once;
once he was Anointed at Nain, and a second time by Mary the Sister of Lazarus,
in Bethany, in the House of Lazarus her Brother, six days before the Passover;
Luke says, That she Anointed him in the House of Simon the Pharisee; John
says in Bethanie, in the House of Lazarus; Matthew and Mark say, in the House
of Simon the Leper; The Lord John says, That he was Anointed twice; Saint
Severus, unto whom we assent, says, That he was Anointed thrice, once at Nain,
as said Luke, the intermediate Evangelist; and it is evident from this, That
soon after he Raised the Lad, the Son of a Widow in Nain; and another time, the
Sister of Lazarus Anointed him in Bethanie, six days before the Passover, in
their House, when her Brother Lazarus rose from the Dead: Moreover, The third
time in Bethanie, two days before the Passover; and John said, that she
Anointed the Feet of Christ; but Matthew, two days before the Passover, when he
was in the House of Simon the Leper, there came a Woman, and poured Oil on
Christ's Head, as he was at Table; and from that which he said to Lazarus, and
another to Simon; and John saying, That she Anointed the Feet, and Matthew the
Head; it is clear, That he was thrice Anointed, and from the manner, and from
the Place, and from the time, it is evident, That it was not one Anointing but
three, and three Women; and if she who was the Sinner in Nain, were the same
that came unto him two days before the Passover and Anointed him: There will be
computed two Women according to the Discourse of the Lord John, and three
Anointings, according to what Saint Severus has written

Then Judas went away; That is, when he saw that Simon was Cleansed, and that
the Woman poured out Ointment upon him.

One of the Twelve; That is, of those who were first Elected, and to whom the
Mysteries were Revealed, and who had freedom of Speech, and was not of the
Second in Order; that is, of the seventy and two Evangelists.

Judas Iscariot; That is, he calls him from Scariot his City; and moreover,
That he might distinguish him from Judas the Zealous.

What will ye give me? Heaven and Earth are too little to be the Price of what
thou were to sell; because, they are Creatures, but he is the Creator; and the
Creature is not at all to be exchanged, or to be a Price for the Creator; it
was not conceived how he should betray him, who had revived three dead Men
before him; and had he not yielded, permitted, and been willing, they could not
have Crucified him; yet in this, That Judas betrayed him, and the Jews
Crucified him, they did not perform his Will, but the contrary; because, He for
the Redemption of Men, was willing to be Betrayed and Crucified; but Judas and
the Jews did not betray him for the Redemption of Men, but to Murder him, and
to destroy his Name; Therefore, though he was willing, yet they did not Act his
Will, but the contrary; and therefore they are Accused and Condemned: Satan
entered into Judas, and not into his Fellows, because he found in him the
Passion of Coveteousness. Luke adds, and the Prefect of the Militia of the
Temple; that is, an Officer of the Guard; for, because the Principality of the
Jews was fallen away, and the Highpriests were continually in Commotion among
themselves; the Romans placed in the Temple with them, Officers of the Militia,
that they might not be unruly, and they remained in the Temple with them.

And they agreed with him for thirty Pieces of Silver; That is, thirty Denares;
the Name of the Syriack Word Cospho is a generical Name; and sometimes it
signifies Gold, sometimes Silver, and also Didrachmas and Denares: Moreover,
Thirty Pieces of Silver, that is with an Inscription, to wit a Sign Engraven,
that Represented the Prince whose Money it was; they were thirty Staters of
Silver, for a Stater of Silver was twenty Didrachma's, so that the Value of
them all, was six hundred Didrachma's, which make up the Sum of Thirty Denares.

And from that time he sought an opportunity; That is, a Convenience* to wit, a
time and season, free from the Clamor, or Tumult of many: Moreover, He sought
a time when the people and multitude which he taught might not be found with
him, because he was afraid of the people.

One of ye shall betray me. Hitherto, he spoke Mystically, concerning his being
to be betrayed; but here, plainly; and by these Words, One of ye, he troubled
them all, every one of them was afraid of himself, lest it might be lie; and by
this, that he said, one of all them; he showed, that he did not mistake who it
was; but he did not Publish him, in respect that he might be Converted, and he
terrified them all, that he might preserve him.

And they were very sad. Fear and grief laid hold on them, and they began to
say unto him, every one of them particularly; for they believed his Words,
more than their Knowledge, and they Confessed, that he knew them better, than
they knew themselves; John. They looked one upon another; because, they knew
not of whom he spoke, and every one asked in the behalf of himself.

Then he Answered and said, He who dips his Hand with me in the Dish; That is,
he detected him, that his Fellows might not dye with fear; and he struck him
with the Name of Traitor, that peradventure, he might Repent; for this, Shall
dip wlth me, is thus Expounded by Sanctus Johannes; he was so Unmannerly and
Impudent, that he did not honor the Lord, but dipped with him; but it seems to
me, That he spoke to make him ashamed, and as drawing him to Lover; Ye are they
who Eat with me freely, and yet one of ye shall betray me? That is, He who
shall betray me is not from without, but is of those who dip the hand with me
in the Dish; Was it requisite that they should dip in any thing, since that it
is commanded in the Law, That nothing shall be Eaten, that is made with Fire?
We Answer, That they dipped in fitting Sauces, where with Roasted Meat was to
be Eaten, as being a young Creature; for they did also eat a Roasted Lamb after
the Old Rule. Saint Hypolitus, Although all the Disciples stretched forth their
Hands with him into the Dish, yet when our Lord stretched forth his Hand, they
drew back their hands, but Judas did not so, but impudently stretched forth his
hand, together with him into the Dish, as if he had been his equal; and this is
that he, who shall dip his hand; and when from hence the Disciples did not
understand who was the Traitor, he dipped Bread and gave, and immediately they
knew him: Others, They did set before them two Dishes and each six of them
dipped in one Dish, and Judas was of that Company which dipped with our Lord,
and therefore he said, That he who shall dip with me shall betray me: Some say,
That he did not Reveal the Traitor, until he washed their Feet, and gave them
the Mystery; but this is not true.

And the Son of Man goes away; That is, shall dye, As it is Written of him;
and if it be so Written concerning him, That he shall dye; Wherefore was Judas
to be blamed, who accomplished what was Written? We Answer, That he did not
accomplish what things were Written, that he might fulfill them, or with a good
iniention; so neither did his Crucifiers Crucify, him for the Accomplishment
of Prophecy, but for an Evil Intention; and neither, because things were
foretold, do they who accomplish them, remain without Judgment and Vengeance;
for between the Speech of the Lips, and the accomplishment of things; there is
placed a freedom, and every one shall be Rewarded according to his Freedom and
Will; and if thou shall not require the Will of him who is to perform the Deed,
thou shall free the Devil from many Accusations, and those who perform his
Will; and if Judas had not betrayed him, without all doubt some other had
betrayed him, and if another had not, Providence had been extirpated: for he
who is Wise in all things, knew how to Govern and Dispense his Affairs, and
also without the Treachery of Judas, or the Evil Intention of the Crucifiers,
for his Wisdom is Opulent, and his Doings Incomprehensible.

But Woe to the Man by whom. He bestows a Woe on the Man who was Minister by
constraint of Providence, and encouraged those his Disciples, that they might
not think that he was betrayed out of Weakness.

And Judas the Traitor gave unto them a Token, he it is whom I shall Kiss. For
it was the Custom of the Disciples, that he who came from afar off, should Kiss
Christ on his Mouth, and Judas made use of this Custom for a Token to the Jews;
Others, Judas thought that he might have deceived our Lord herewith, when he
shall see me Kiss him, he will think think that I kissed him out of Love to
him, and not that I am to betray him; whereas Christ, who knew Seerets, knew
very well what he designed: Wherefore had the Jewish Ministers need of Judas to
betray him; had he been willing to have concealed himself; for he had Power, as
Lord, at all times, to change his Visage; and had he designed not to have been
known, he had neither been known by his Voice, nor by his Visage, no more than
he was known to Mary Magdalen, when he arose from the Dead, and afterward made
himself known by his Voice, when he called her Mary; and it is evident from
this, that John Reports, Whom seek ye? And they said, Jesus of Nazary; because,
they did not know him: But how was it, That Judas who was continually with him,
did not know him? Because he did conceal himself from them, and they did not
know him, until he was so pleased, and Revealed himself, and said, I am he:
Moreover, the Jews stood in need of Judas, to betray him unto them, that he
might be an excuse for them, they saying, That his Disciple betrayed him; and
had he not been Wicked, his Disciple had not betrayed him.

And they laid their hands on him, and took him; That is, forasmuch as he had
fulfilled his Dispensation, and there remained the Passion, Death and
Resurrection; he yielded up himself, and was taken.

MATH. XXVII.
WHen the Morning was come, Verse. 1.
they took Council against Jesus; That is to say, that they might put him to
Death; for they considered and consulted together, early in the Morning;
Forasmuch, as they feared, lest the people should Rise in Commotion, and Rebel
against them, as at other times they had done; and they understood not, that he
had consented to put himself into their Hands.

And they bound him. Verse. 2.
Viz. They bound his Hands behind him, and led him to Pilate. Viz. Forasmuch as
their Authority was Abolished, and they could not put any one to Death. They
led him to Pilate, that they might make show, that they did not Murder him by
their own Power, or Tumult of the People, but in the Form of a Legal proceeding
Judicially, as a Traitor to Caesar, and a Seditious Person; (...) This Word is
by Exposition a Judge, Governor, Prince.

Then Judas the Traitor, Verse. 3.
when he saw that Jesus was Condemned, Repented himself; That is to say, in
such manner as the Evangelists recites his Condemnation; for had our Lord been
Righteously Condemned, Judas had Rejoiced, and would not have Repented, nor
would he have called that Innocent Blood which he had betrayed; but the Cause
was, that the Priests had unjustly pronounced Sentence against him: And
observe, That Judas did not Repent, till his Sin and Iniquity was accomplished;
for so the Devil deals with his Servants, not permitting them to observe their
Iniquity before it be fulfilled: Wherefore was not Judas accepted since that
the Evangelist says, that he Repented? Because, he Repented of Disposition,
and not voluntarily, and for that he did not perfectly Repent, for that he went
out, and hanged himself, without applying himself to Repentance, was the work
of a Devil, who caused it. Others say, that his Repentance was not sincere and
spontaneous, but proceeding from fear, for he did not truly Repent, but seared
the same fate with the Sodomites, Dathan, and Abiram, because he had betrayed
innocent blood. Others are of opinion that he was not accepted, for as much as
he did not believe that Christ suffered on his own accord, for had he been of
that belief he had been converted, as was Simon, and had not hanged himself.
Thirty pieces of Silver, viz. Thirty Pence.

I have sinned in that I have Betrayed the innocent Blood, Verse. 4.
lest it should be thought that he had betrayed him as finding some Evil in
him, it was so ordered by Divine disposition, that he should say before the
Chief Priests, I have sinned in that I have betrayed Innocent blood.

What is that to us? Thou know. Hereby they cast the blame on Judas as if
they had been clear of the matter; whereas if they had been so pleased, he had
not been Crucified.

And he Cast down the silver in the Temple; Ver. 5.
viz. he earnestly contended with them to take it back again, and they would
not receive it; he therefore cast it down in a fury and went his way.

He went and hanged himself. Acts. 1.18.
Matthew says thus; but Luke in the Acts writes that he burst in sunder in the
midst, and all his Bowels gushed out; A Reconciliation of the difference
between the Evangelists concerning the Death of Judas.
and both are in the Right: For there was strangling and bursting in the case,
and every of the Evangelists writes of the one; for after he had cast down the
Silver in the Temple, he cast a Rope about his own Neck in a Wood belonging to
his House; and it happening that some passing by saw him hanging, and loosed
him before he was choked. Others say the Rope brake, and that for some days
after he was sick, and swelled to so large dimensions as that a Cart could not
bear him, and his head was sore puffed up, and his eyelids so swollen, that he
could not see. And Papias says, That his privy Members were mightily enlarged,
and that putrid matter, abominable stench and Worms proceeded from them.
Epiphanius says, That he lived four days after his Suspension, and that he was
cut in twain, Epiphanies his Opinion.
and that his Bowels gushed out. Others, That he died of that Disease, and they
did not bury him, for that it was a custom to leave those unburied who hanged
themselves: Wherefore he did stink and became offensive, and a Nuisance to the
Inhabiters round about, and they were forced to remove him thence on a Bier;
and when they lifted him up he fell, and bursted, and all his bowels gushed
out. It is said by St. Luke in the Acts of the Apostles, Let his habitations be
waste; That is to say, Acts 1.20.
after they had buried him, the ill savor of his house offended the
inhabitants, and they removed thence the stones and the rest of the materials,
and so his habitation became waste, to wit, Scariot, and uninhabited. His house
was seated in Jerusalem.

Because it is the price of Blood. Verse. 6.
Hereby they plainly show that they bought his blood at a Price, and did not
put him to death as guilty.

And bought with them the Potters field to bury strangers in. Verse. 7.
That is to say, for a Sepulcher of strangers, and to cover the wickedness of
the murder by their pretended provision for strangers, and while they labor by
pretext to conceal their fraud, God on the contrary ordains that the names of
both should perish, as well of the Potters as of the strangers, Verse. 8.
for it was called the Field of Blood; he calls Agorsa the Field or Land which
belongs to one that makes Potts and Vessels and such like Potters ware, and
this man was one of these three; either he made Earthen Ports, or his Ancestors
were Potters, or his Name was such as imported Potter, as they call men by many
and sundry Names.

Took the thirty pieces of Silver; Verse. 9.
those things which the Jews did wickedly and voluntarily, were the
accomplishment of the Prophecy. These words were set down as a Parable, which
the Prophet converts by application into matter of Fact, An Error of the
Translator Corrected. John 18.33.
as this, Out of Egypt have I called my Son. These words Took thirty Pieces of
Silver, are not written in Jeremy, as we find in Matthew; but are written in
Zachary; and by Error, the Translator wrote Jeremy instead of Zachary.

Pilate entre'd into the Praetorium, Viz. the place where the King or Judge sits
and gives Judgment in public Causes.

Art thou King of the Jews? Verse. 11.
Because the Jews accused him they added that he said of himself that he was
King, and Pilate being above all other thing most Solicitous hereof asked him
this question; for he thought this a matter against the Roman Government, and
that it behoved him who was set up in the place of Authority, as a Warden or
Judge, to be more inquisitive thereof than all others,

Thou say: Ver. 12.
Which was a much as if he had said, I am.

And he gave him no answer; that is to say neither to Pilate nor to the Jews;
for they had not profited by his Answer moreover over that the words of Isaiah
may be fullfilled, He was dumh and opened not his mouth.

And he wondered mightily: Ver. 14.
that is to say, it being so easy for him to speak and get the victory, there
being no cause of death alleged against him he was silent. Luke 23.9.
Luke says that Jesus answered him not a word; that is, to Herod he gave no
answer, nor wrought a miracle before him, lest they should rescue him from the
Crucifiers by force (he being a Gallilean) and so retard his sufferings from
the Cross, which he was prepared to undergo. But Herod contemned him, because
he neither answered him nor wrought a miracle before him.

Chastise him therefore and let him go: Luke 23.16.
That is to say, cause him to be scourged and permit him to depart, for Pilate
himself perceived that they conspired against him, and it was the custom to
dismiss at the Feast one that was Chastised.

The Jews said unto him, Joh, 18.31.
It is not lawful for us to put any one to Death; That is to say, it is
lawful for them to execute to death in another manner than that of the Cross
(which is manifest by their stoning of Stephen, but as to Christ they said, It
is not lawful for us to put him to death as a Traitor or Rebel against Caesar;
and as one that taught the Jews to rise in Rebellion against the Romans; so
that being to be put to death under that notion, he might not receive any
favor at his Death, being one that suffered for a Capital offense.

Moreover it is not Lawful for us; his transgression is not only against us or
our Law: but his insolency reaches so far as to offend Caesar also.

Again Divine Dispensation uttered this by their mouths, that the speech of our
Savior before he was betrayed, might befulfilled

My Kingdom is not of this World: Jo. 18.36.
That is to say, The matter is not as the Jews Accuse me, that I am a Rebel, an
Usurper of an Earthly Kingdom.

If it were of this World: That is to say, this Temporal Kingdom is Slippery
and Deceitful; and it needs Ministers or Soldiers to content for it; but my
Kingdom needs none such; because, it is Powerful, and sufficient of it self;
and by this he showed, That he was by Nature the Son of the Father, the
Heavenly King, and Creator of all things; and that he was not as the Jews said,
One that would Raise a Rebellion against Caesar, Usurp an Earthly Kingdom, or
Power.

It was a Custom to loose a Prisoner to the People; Mat. v. 15.
That is to say, the Released one at a Festival, in show of commiseration, and
not at every Feast, but that of the Passover; and this was, That they might
Grace and Honor the time of whereon they were Released from the Egyptian
Bondage.

Called Barabba. V. 16.
Jesus was his Name, who is here called Barabba; for so it is Written in the
Gospel of the separated; and it is more evident from what Pilate said, in the
22d. Verse. What shall I do with Jesus, who is called Christ? Wherefore he was
called Jesus; and the Evangelist was unwiling to Write his Name, that none
might in his Book bear the same Name with the Lord Jesus.

Have thou nothing to do with this Just Man. V. 19.
She did not speak to him in the House; because, she was not acquainted with
the matter; for, what was done in the Night by the Highpriests unto Jesus, she
knew not, he being not brought to Pilate till the Morning; and then hearing
that her Husband sat on the Tribunal, to Condemn Jesus, she sent unto him, that
he should have nothing to do with that Just Man. Or, when she Dreamt, she
understood not the Interpretation thereof, otherwise she would have told him of
it; but when she saw the City in Commotion, she understood the Dream, and
speedily sent unto her Husband: Nothing appeared to Pilate in a Dream; either,
because he was unworthy, or for that, if he had seen any thing in a Dream, the
Jews would not have believed him, but would have said, These things he
feighneth, as having a mind to save him: Or, perhaps he would not have Revealed
the Dream, lest he might have been Accused, knowing that he should not thereby
have saved him. Pilate's Wives Name was Lognia.

19. An Error of the Calcedonians and Armenians retorted.
For I have suffered much in my Dream this Day concerning him. The
Calcedonians, and with them the Armenians, may be ashamed for computing the Day
from the Morning; for behold, Pilate's Wife in the Night was affected with the
Dream; and computed the Morning together with the Night, which was passed, as
Matthew Writes: The day therefore is composed of 24 Hours, and begins from the
Evening, as we compute. Inasmuch, as she said, I have suffered: This is
signified, that when she was disturbed with a Terrible and Violent Dream, and
designed to keep her self awake, and to decline it, the very day Light inclined
her to Sleep, and vexed her, and that often.

Why Pilates Wife revealed not her Dream at home to him
But why did she not declare the Dream to her Husband at Home? Some say, That
he lay elsewhere that Night, and therefore she sent unto him. My Lord Ephraim
says, That it was so wrought by God, that she forgot the Dream, and did not
reveal it to her Husband in the House, in that sending to him in the Court,
after it came into her mind, the Hearers might fall into Admiration; and when
the whole City was in Commotion against her Husband, concerning Jesus* she sent
word unto him, That he should not fulfill the desire of the People, but preserve
Jesus.

Several conjectures of her Dream.
But what was it she saw in a Dream? Some say, That she saw Dragons
encompassing her, and endeavoring to hurt her; but Christ did not permit them
so to do. Others are of Opinion. that she saw our Lord as Judge of all Men,
extending his Power to the utmost reach of Jurisdiction; and before him the
Billows of a fiery Sea. and he sitting on an exalted Throne, and a dreadful
Tribunal, the Angels Ministering in his Sight, and all Creatures trembling
before him, and Voices proclaiming bodily, This is Jesus King of the Jews, who
is to be judged before Pilate.

Others say, That she saw terrible and Hideous Sights, full of Horror in her
Dreams; but they set not down what they were. The causes of Dreams.
Now Dreams are thought to proceed from Diurnal Meditations and from the four
Humors; The 4. humors.
to wit Effluctions therefrom, as the Physicians say, When Black Choler
prevails, one perceives Dark Places and Obscure, being Imprisoned in Darkness;
but when Yellow Choler is predominant, one perceives Fiery Flames and Torches,
Wine, Merriment, and Singing: When Blood abounds, one fancies Slaughter and
Effusion of Blood; and when Phlegm is redundant, Rain. Swimming, Rivers and
Floods are fancied: But Dreams which come from Satan, are according to the
Fantasy; Satan.
such as are pleasant Embraces, and Kisses. God.
But such as proceed from God, are as this of Pilate's Wife, of Joseph,
Pharaoh, Nebuchadnezar, and Abimelech, of Daniel, Visions.
and of Joseph the Husband of Mary.

But the High Priest persuaded the multitude to ask Barabbas: Ver. 20.
And all this was out of a desire they had to Murder him; and they saw that
the Rules complied with the multitude in what they asked of Pilate.

Who will ye that I let loose unto ye? Ver. 21.
He made them Arbitrators, or referred the matter to their Election, for he
hoped they would have been ashamed, to say openly; Let Christ he Crucified; but
neither could the Words of the Judge shame them, nor would they be Prohibited by
the Feast; nor by the Admonition; Beware how ye Crucify the Just one;
wherefore the Judge adds unto Jesus, the Name of Christ, to distinguish him from
Barrabbas, who was also called Jesus. Moreover, he termed them Lords, hoping
they would be ashamed, and dismiss him.

But they said Barabbas: Although, of Evil Will they asked Barabbas, yet Divine
Dispensation concurred with them, V. 21.
whether they would or no. For Barabbas resembled Adam, for as Barabbas Sinned
and was bound; so Adam by reason he had Sinned was bound in Hell, and as Christ
was Crucified and Barabbas loosed; so was Adam loosed from the Chains of Hell,
Christ being Crucified for him.

They all said, Let him be Crucified. V. 22.
Instead of Accusing him of any Fault, as he did so. or so; they were made
Judges, which was very absurd; What shall I do unto him? They snatched him from
his place; because they were made Judges; and this was, either, because he was
Blind, and did not understand, or because he was afraid.

Crucify him; 22.
That is to say, hang him on a Tree; for they did not say, Murder him, or put
him to Death; but, Crucify him; that they might give out concerning him, that
he was a Seducer, and Blasphemer; therefore deserved to be Crucified; and for
that Crucifixion was a Reproachful Death, they cried, Let him be Crucified:
Moreover, That they might bring him under the Curse of the Law; Cursed be every
one that hangs on a Tree; and although, they did fulfill this out of an Evil
Conscience, yet Divine Dispensation confirmed that by their Mouths what he had
foretold, he would bring to pass, that He should dye the Death of the Cross:
Moreover, As the Crucifying of him was the Cause of many Evils; so the
ingeminating of the Word, Crucify, Crucify, was a great indication of their
Fury.

He took Water and washed his Hands; V. 24.
For he was brought to a straight, by the Commotion of the People against him;
because of his Words, which imported that Christ was Innocent; therefore he
called for Water and Washed, that by the Washing of his Hands, he might
signify the Purity of his Intentions, from being guilty of this Judgment,
which was beyond the Law of Righteousness; yet Pilate was culpable, because he
appeared to be Pusillanimous, Pilate proved guilty of Christ's Death.
and Timorous; had respect to persons, and was willing to please the Jews; for
he might justly have suffered him to have escaped from them, if he had pleased,
as the Centurion permitted Paul to go his way; for he also knew it was a
Commotion and Tumult, yet would not therefore permit the Jews to put him to
Death: But some say, Pilate durst not set him at Liberty; because, they said,
he made himself a King; but it behoved him to have inquired, whether he had
found in him any kind of Rebellion; whether he had provided any Ammunition,
whether he had Raised Soldiers. Now since he discovered no such thing, and was
induced to have respect to Persons, Christ did not free him from Guilt; it is
certain therefore, that his Fault was a sluggish Weakness, or softness of
Temper.

Others say, That forasmuch as he saw that his Wife had sent unto him, and the
Jews were stirred up against him, he knew not to which Party he should incline;
and being thus brought into Doubts and Shame, he should according to the Custom
then in use amongst them, have freed Jesus; for every Feast they let loose a
Prisoner.

Pilate was a Type of the Gentiles, who were not guilty of the Blood of Christ;
for though he were of the Gentiles, it behooved the Jews to Repent, by reason of
what Judas said, I have Sinned, and for that he hanged himself; as also for the
Dream of Pilate's Wife, for the Washing the hands of Pilate himself, for his
Prayer in their behalf; Father forgive them; and for the Miracles which were
wrought on the Cross.

His Blood be upon us; That is to say, let his Judgment be Avenged on us, if we
have not justly delivered him unto thee. Moreover, They say, that even sensibly
in matter of Fact and Reality, this sticks unto them, for the Smell of Blood
continually Reeks from them. Furthermore, O Jew! if he did offend, wherefore
do thou draw his Blood on thy self, and showed, that he is blameless;
forasmuch as thou have drawn his Blood on thy own Head. Again they drew Blood
on themselves and their Children, and engaged for the Infidelity of their
Children; and that Rebellion should stick unto them; but our Savior did not
confirm the Sentence upon them, but received as many of them as Repented, as
Paul, the Pharisees, and very many of those who believed in Judea.

And Scourged Jesus with a Whip. Here again Pilate Condemned himself, for
though he could not save him, 'twas not lawful for him to Scourge him; but this
he did to gratify the Jews, and that he might place a favor on them: This
Scourging of him fignifies, that he commanded; and they bound him to a Pillar,
and Lashed him with Whips. Again, this was the Law with the Romans, that he
that was to be Crucified, must first be Scourged with Whips; which he practiced
with our Lord, whom he Scourged, and then delivered him over.

Then the Soldiers of the Governor; That is to say, the Executioners, who
Ministered under him, went to the Pretorium in which Caesar's Image stood, and
wherein was drawn together the Army.

The whole Band; That is to say, the Company of Roman Soldiers.

And they took off his Garments. This is the Mystery; as the Sheep was before
the Shearers, and the Shearers fleeced the Sheep of his Wool, he taking off his
Garments, disgraced Principalities and Power; for as the first Adam was Naked
among the Trees; so the Second Adam was left Naked in the place of Judgment.

And they put on him a Scarlet Robe. When a King or Emperor of the Romans was
inaugurated, these Five Things were done unto him.

1. He was Clothed with Purple Robes. 2. A Diadem of Pearls was put on his
Head. 3. A Scepter of Gold was put in his Hands. 4. His Ministers fell on their
Knees and Worshipped him. 5. They Saluted him, saying, Hail our King.
And because they said, that the Cause of his Death was Treason against Caesar;
therefore, in this deluding manner did they put on him this Purple Robe, and
set on his Head the Crown of Thorns, and made him hold in his Hand a Reed, and
Worshipped him; saying, Hail King of the Jews; for behold, now thou art made
King of the Jews, as thou soughtest to be, and as Pilate called thee. This Coat
called Clamys, had no Seam, and one of the Kings Dedicated, and gave it to God
and the Temple in Jerusalem; 'twas Dyed in the Blood of a Fish called in the
Latin Tongue, Murex. Garments dipped in this Blood, yield two different Colors
in two different places; in the Light of the Sun it appears Purple, but in the
Shade Scarlet; and not as some say, that the Figuration thereof was Purple, and
the ground Scarlet: But John instead of a Clamys, says Purple. These were
placed in the Temple, and were bestowed by the Egyptian and Grecian Kings, on
the Kings of the Macchabees; these the Priests fetched from the Temple, and
presented them to Pilate, and said, Behold the Purple which befits him, seeing
that driving at the Kingdom, he Rebels against Caesar.

Some say, That this Coat was given by the Grecians to Jonathan Machabeus.

Others say, That this Garment wherewith the Soldiers enroabed him, was brought
by the Priests from the Temple, and did so, because they feared he should fail
to dye, and therefore brought this Robe from the Temple, and Clothed him
therewith; that if any thing should happen in hindrance of his Death, they
might have said, He cannot be saved, because he touched the Holy Vestment,
being no Priest; and it is certain, that the Law requires he should dye.

Others say, This happened by Divine Providence; for seeing they were to strip
the Altar of his Father, he sent a Garment to cover it: Furthermore, They
Clothed him with a Clamys of Scarlet, for it was lawful only for Kings to wear
Scarlet.

Others think there were two Garments, and that at first, they put on the
Scarlet, that is to say, the Red Robe, and afterward that of Purple, and every
one of the Evangelists say the same thing; Matthew calls it from the Ground,
others from the Figure.

Others say it was one, but yielded a show or cast of two colors, Moreover by
their clothing him with Purple, he restored unto us the Glory whereof we
divested our selves in transgressing the commandments, and this shall be
completed in the world to come.

Purple signifies his Kingdom, his Humanity, his Divinity, but Scarlet
signifies his Humanity, his Blood, the Bloody Sin which he nailed to the Cross.
Furthermore, John says that they plaited a Crown of thorns and covered him with
purple Clothes, and Matthew says that the Soldiers of the Governor clothed him
with a garment of Scarlet, and therewith derided him; Mark says that the
Soldiers led him to the Praetorium or Judgment seat, and clothed him with
Purple, and put on him a Crown of thorns: Luke says that Herod as well as his
Soldiers despised him, and derided him, clothed him with Scarlet Robes, and
sent him to Pilate, both Herod and the Soldiers derided him, and desired to
apply unto him such things as belonged unto the King, and one made thorns a
Crown for him, and another put into his hand a Reed, after the similitude of a
Scepter; and one of the chief Priests brought the Robe and gave it to the
Soldiers thereby to deride him.

Jacobus de Sarug says that these were one of the Purple Robes of one of the
Kings which had been offered to the Temple as we have formerly said, and in
this Gospel it is only written that the Soldiers of Herod did put it upon him.

And they plaited a Crown of thorns that is to say the Crown which they put
upon him, there were two things in it, a circumference (or circle) and thorns
of brambles, which were great and blossoming, and they grew in Woods and watery
places; the Crown of thorns was for a Diadem, he was adorned with a Crown after
the manner of a Victorious Champion, as God, and King; the Crown of thorns in
token of rooting out the Curse against Adam, the Earth is Cursed for thy sake.
Furthermore, as the first Adam planted the Curse and Briars, so the second Adam
has Eradicated the Curse, and the briars, by a Crown of thorns. Moreover he has
taken away the universal Sin which encompassed the world, for his Crown was
Circular, wherein were tormenting thorns, a type of Sin tormenting the Soul.

And a Reed in his right hand; A Reed instead of a Staff of Government; that is
to say, a Scepter and Rod of Gold, such as Kings used to bear in their hands,
but otherwise then they designed, they signified the truth of things which were
to come to pass; for by the Reed in his right hand, he gave a demonstration of
his never failing authority, signifying that by this Scepter he would cancel
the Instrument of Obligation, which was written against us by Adam; a
Signification also it was, of the Killing and Wounding of that Serpent which
Enchanted Eve; for a Reed is naturally terrible to a Serpent; and we are used
therewith to torment and kill Serpents.

And they Kneeled on their Knees. Genuflection and Worship signify, the
Conversion of the Gentiles to our Savior, and delivery from Idolatry, and that
he would make us his True Worshippers.

And they Spat on his Face; That the Prophecy of Isaiah may be fulfilled; I
have not turned my Face from the Contumely of Spittle; and the Pharisees who
are Domestics, my Heavenly Father has permitted them to be Rebels and Actors
against me.

And they took a Reed; Viz. The Reed which he held in his Hand, and struck him
therewith on the Head, that he might Exalt our declined heads, who by our Deeds
was brought low. During the time of all these contumelious Reproaches, neither
the Priests, nor Elders, nor People of the Jews drew near, but stood afar off;
and Judged, that forasmuch as they had not yet Eaten the Passover, and had
preserved themselves from familiarity with the Gentiles, they should be
unpolluted; for though they might have eaten it from the Evening, they put it off
till they had put Christ to Death, that so they might eat the Passover without
fear.

Thou had had no Power against me at all, had it not been given thee from
above; That is as much as to say, The Father has withdrawn his Grace, and left
thee to thy Liberty of doing this; and it is known, he was guilty of Sin, from
what follows in the same Verse. Wherefore, he that betrayed me unto thee, his
Sin is greater than thine; whereby he shows, That Pilate was guilty of Sin,
although the Sin of the Jews was greater than his; and he concludes him under
Guilt, because he pronounced him Innocent; and yet set at Liberty one that was
Guilty.

A Place called the Pavement; Viz. A place which was laid even, and flagged
with Stones.

Pilate said unto them, shall I Crucify your King? Hereby he Reproached them,
but they would not be put to shame: Moreover he derides them.

They say unto him, We have no King but Caesar: Hereby they would have
terrified Pilate; and because they denied him, even at this great Feast came
upon them the mighty Destruction of Titus.

They found a Man of Cyrene, whose Name was Simon. Our Lord first bore his
Cross, and went out of the Pretorium, and afterward they made Simon the Father
of Alexander, and Rusus to bear it: The Wood of the Cross was called Sahka
which signifies Pardon or Remission, and they took it from Solomon's Porch, and
one of the Crosses was of Cedar, another of Fig Tree. My Lord John says, That
this Wood was set up as a Sign, to the end, that though they could not approach
unto it, yet they might see it; others say, That it was of that Tree which held
an Offering in the place of Isaac; for Abraham cut it down, and brought it for
a Testimony, and it was preserved till the coming of Christ; and they perceived
that it was placed in the Porch, and brought it away; and the first Judgment
that was given in the Porch, was that of the two Harlots whom Solomon Judged,
and the latter, was that of our Lord; after which it was destroyed, and no more
Judgments given therein.

Him they compelled to bear his Cross. Observe, they accused Christ, because he
bad the Man sick of the Palsy to take up his Bed; and these, on a Day to be
doubly Honored, compelled Simon: he who gathered Sticks on the Sabbath Day was
Stoned, and these made a Jew bear Wood on the Sabbath, and that which was
worse, they Crucified Christ, and the Thieves on the day of the Feast.

Others say, That Simon was a Jew, but of the Gentiles; they gave his Cross to
Simon to bear, by way of Disgrace; as others bear Ensigns of Royalty to a King,
so they made Simon bear his Cross. And this is certain from hence, that it is
not Written, that the Thieves did bear their Crosses, but that there came with
him two Malefactors. And as Simon bare his Cross and was not Crucified, so our
Lord was Crucified not for himself, but for others: Furthermore, when Satan
perceived what good things there came from the Cross, he made the Jews give his
Cross to another, that the Good which was to be wrought by his Death, might
come to pass by other means, and not by the hands of Jesus; and that all the
World* might look upon him who carried the Cross, and not upon Jesus. Yet the
Will of Satan was not performed; for though another bore the Cross, yet the Cross
bore Jesus, and all the Good was wrought by him.

Again he did as did the ancient Patriarchs and Prophets; for they indeed
prophesied and did not suffer; but Simon carried the Cross, and another was
Crucified: Moreover, it was to teach us, that whosoever will be his Disciple,
must take up his Cross; and that the Prophecy might be fulfilled, that his
Dominion is upon his shoulder; that is to say his Cross, by which he exercises
Dominion over things in Heaven, and Earth; and as Isaac bore on his Shoulder
the Wood of his Sacrifice, so our Lord bore upon his Shoulder the Cross.

Wherefore did not God permit Abraham to slay Isaac? That the Seed of Abraham
might not follow the Custom of the Profane Gentiles, who Sacrificed their Sons
to Devils, and to learn by Abraham, that God delights not in Slaughter, but in
true Love.

But since there are many kinds of Death, Why did he suffer the Death of the
Cross? To the end, that when he should be lifted upon the Cross, he might draw
all Men to him from the Earth; and that he might Sanctify the Earth, by the
Sprinkling of his Blood: Moreover, That he might publish the putting off his
Flesh to the Principalities; for the Powers of Satan for the most part reside
in the Air: Again, because by the Tree also, Death entered; so by the Tree came
Salvation, when he was mounted thereupon; and that he might free us from this
Curse, Cursed be the Earth for thy sake; he suffered a Cursed Death, according
to what he said, Cursed be every one who hangs upon a Tree; and that he might
bless us with all the Blessings of the Spirit.

And there came behind him a multitude of People and Women, who Lamented; This
was the custom, that when any sad thing happened, the people gathered
themselves together, and Women grieved and wept.

And this is it which is said in John; Ye shall seek me, and shall not find me.
My Lord John says, Here they sought him Lamenting and Weeping for him. Cyril
says, That they Wept and Lamented, because Woman kind are prone to Tears,
because of their soft Constitutions, or Tenderness of Conscience: Moreover, the
Weeping and Wayling of the Women, was a Sign of the Destruction of their City.

But Weep for your selves and your Children; That is to say, a bitter
Destruction is coming upon you.

Blessed are the Barren; That is to say, you shall count them happy who have no
Children, when ye shall see this sharp Destruction from the Romans.

If with the Green Tree. Green he calls himself, who was Delightful and
Fruitful; That is to say, he wrought Miracles, affording Teaching and
Preaching; and if after these things, the Romans and Grecians Reproached and
Despised me; What will become of you? What will they do with you, who are dry
Wood, and fruitless; because they find nothing useful in you, they will have no
Pity for you. Christ is the Green Tree, the Jews the Dry, and the Romans the
Fire.

And they came to a place which is called Gagultha, which is Interpreted a
Skull; that is to say, the Syrians call the Pan and bone of the Head, a Skull;
but Interpreters say, that when Noah entered into the Ark, he took with him the
Bones of Adam; and that going out of the same, he divided them among his three
Sons; to Shem as to his first born, he gave his Head, to Ham and Japheth the
rest of his Bones; accordingly, he divided the Earth between them three, to
Japheth fell the Northern part, to Ham the Southern, and to Shem the
Middlemost, to which belonged Jerusalem; and they say, that by way of Mystery,
the Skull of Adam was buried in the self same place and Earth whereon Christ
was Crucified; and that when Christ was Crucified, they fixed his Cross in the
Mouth of Adam, to the intent, That in the very place where Death and the Fall
first happened, Life and Resurrection might there begin. Moreover, he was
Crucified in this place; because, therein were Administered the Mysteries which
prefigured the Crucifixion; for from Generations, and many years it was kept
for this Use. Therein Melchizedeck exercised the Sacerdotal Function, and
effered Sacrifice and Oblation thereon: Also, David built an Altar, and
interdicted Death; and finally, this was the Threshing Floor of Arnon the
Jebusite.

And they gave unto him to Drink, Vinegar mixed with Gall. Mark says, They
gave him Wine mixed with Myrrh, but he did not take it; for it was a Law with
them, to give Wine to him who is Crucified, to the end he may become forgetful,
and unsensible of his Passion: and they gave him Wine mixed with Gall; but he
drank it not.

First, because his time was not yet come. Secondly, The Prophets did not
Prophecy of him, that he should drink Wine mixed with Gall. They oftentimes
offered him Vinegar to drink (thereby deriding him) before and at his
Crucifixion, which is manifest from hence; that they did not offer it to the
Thieves that were Crucified with him; and he drank not the Vinegar; because, as
Matthew says, The time was not yet come.
They divided his Garments by Lots, That the Prophecy of David may be
fulfilled; but this did they by way of Derision.

And they divided them into four Parts; because there were four Chieftains of
the Soldiers; and he had a Tunick, an head-covering, a Shash, and Sandals; and
because the Shash was small, they were willing to divide the Tunick, and to add
to the Girdle, for the which (because they divided it not) they cast Lotts, and
it fell to one of them.

They divided his Garments into four Parts: The Mystery hereof is, that they
were guilty of fourfold Sin.

What every one should take; that is to say, what part of every one of the
Soldiers should take of his Garments, and who should have the Tunick, or Girdle

His Tunick was Seamless from the top, being all Woven: It was the custom in
the Land of Palestine, to weave two pieces of Cloth, and to stich them together
above the shoulders, and so make a Tunick, and they called it without seam from
the top, that is to say, woven without, that stitch above the shoulders.
Moreover that it was seamless, shows the meanless of his attire. Furthermore,
he calls his Body a Tunick, and that it was without seam from above, shows,
that he brought not his Body from Heaven but that it was united to him from
Mary; and in as much as it was entirely woven, is signified, that the Word
united to it self a complete living Body, endowed with a Rational Soul; and
that they did not divide it, shows, that after this union, Our Lord was not
to be divided, or separated into two subsistances. Again his Tunick signifies
faith, which is one and undivided, and that there is one Lord undivided into
two, and incomprehensible; his Coat fell to the Soldiers, who were of the
Gentiles, and not of the Hebrews; because, the Gentiles were heirs to the faith
in Christ.

And they sat and watched him; that he should not be snatched away by his
Kinsfolks; and this they did peculiarly, as to our Lord, at the command of
Pilate; or they watched him, to observe whether or no he was dead; and they put
over his head, the cause of his Death: Luke and John say, That it was written
in three languages; Hebrew, Latin, and Greek; Pilate did this, that he might
be revenged of the Jews, and that he might excuse himself, for that they
accused him as a Malefactor; moreover, this was the guidance of divine
providence; for the Crosses were hidden under ground; and a long time after
this was known to be that of Christ, by the Table which the Judge had placed
thereon,

Others say, that he feared, least that when enquiry should be made after his
death, and he found innocent, he himself might be accused and therefore wrote
on the Cross, the pretense of his Death, in three Tables, that three languages
might testify that the Jews crucified their King: Moreover three witnesses
gave testimony, alluding to this, that they Crucified one of the Trinity. But
the Writing pleased them not because they thought they should be thereby
reputed Rebels, if he who was their King were crucified; they said therefore,
Write that he said he was King; and not that we owned him as such; but he did
not alter the Inscription, because Judges are not accustomed to vary from what
they write, as also that he might reproach the Jews.

And two Thieves were crucified with him; he on the right hand was called
Titus, and he on the left hand, Domeus. Moreover they did this with an impudent
intention, that forasmuch as they crucified him with Thieves and Murderers, he
might be deemed one of like guilt with them; and that by a pretended community
in so flagitious a Crime, his Majesty might be obscured. But against their will
he fulfilled the Prophecy, in that he was crucified with evil doers.

Destroy the Temple and baild it in three days: Mark fayeth Ah thou that
destroyest the Temple, and buildest it in three days; and these words denotes
their reproach and blasphemy, as if they had said, He that gave out that he
would build the Temple in three days, is not able to preserve himself.

If thou be the Son of God, come down from the Cross: But he did not descend
from the Cross, because he was the Son of God; for he who knows that if he
dies, he shall not rise again, flies from Death; But it became not him who is
assured to rise after 3 days, and by his Deaths to destroy Hell, and triumph
over Death, to have come down until Justice had been fully satisfied by his
Death.

And likewise the High Priests reviled him: That is to say, the Seribes, the
Doctors of the Law, the Priests and the Elders who were there assembled, to
take care that the Execution should not be delayed nor prevented.

He brought others to Life, inasmuch therefore as they testified that he
revived others, they condemned themselves; for if he revived others, he might
not have dyed; or Dying he might rise again.

Let him now come down from the Cross and we will believe in him, for if he
were King of Israel they sought to abolish his Kingdom, and if he had descended
from the Cross they had not believed in him, which is manifest from hence that
he wrought great miracles before his suffering on the Cross, whilst he
suffered thereon, and after he had suffered; and yet they believed not, so
neither had they believed, had he descended from the Cross; and he did not
descend from the Cross for at that time his Agony and contest was not with
them, but against Death, to destroy it.

He trusted in God: Are therefore the Prophets no Prophets, or the Righteous
not righteous, because God did not deliver them from Dangers and Sufferings?
But it is certain they were Prophets and Righteous; so in the Son of God.

The Thieves also who were crucified with him, reviled him: Some say that one
of the Thieves only reviled him, and that he took up the reproach of one, and
extended it to them both, according to the custom of the Scripture: As for
Example, On my Raiment did they cast Lots;. whereas it is evident that they did
not cast Lots upon is whole Raiment, but on his Tunick only.

Like unto this, Some of them doubted; whereas Thomas only doubted.

Matthew and Mark say, that both of them reviled him, and all three say true;
for when our Lord was nailed to the Cross, both reviled him; but after that he
on the Right Hand saw the Wonders and Signs which were wrought on the Cross,
and knew that they were not effected for his or his Fellows sake, and heard the
Jews repeating high things of him, and calling him the Son of God, and King of
Israel, and saw the Inscription of Pilate in three Tables, proclaiming him
King, he confessed his Majesty, and ceased to blaspheme, and began with Praise,
even reprehending and accusing his Fellow. Moreover the Thief on the Left Hand
had one reprehensible property, for he blasphemed, as did the Jews, judging him
to be God:

But there were five praiseworthy Actions to be observed in the Thief on the
Right Hand:

1. He rebuked his Fellow. 2. He confessed the wickedness of his Deeds. 3. He
Justified Christ. 4. He acknowledged him to be King. 5, He begged, saying,
Remember me, my Lord.
How knew the Thief that Christ was King?

We answer, That either he knew it by Divine Revelation, the Testimony of
Pilate, who said, Shall I crucify your King? or of the Jews, If he be King, let
him come down. For the Faith of the Thief is to be praised, for that he
believed on him when he was in disgrace, and on the Cross, and not in his
Kingdom and Majesty. So also the Christians, great was their Faith, and Rewards
shall be given unto them, because they believed in a Crucified Savior, who
notwithstanding is God over all.

Again, The Thief being a Malefactor, who with one Word gained a Kingdom,
shows that Christ is a Propitiation for Sins, and Lord of a Kingdom; but he
was not Crucified as he was God, but as he was made Man; according to this,
That the Word was made Flesh, and dwelt in as; and according to this, God sent
his Son, and he was made of a Woman.

Some demand whether on the Friday he took up the Thief into Paradise? Some Men
say no; for, if he had entered into Paradise, he had already received the
fruition of Happiness promised to the Saints: And that none of the Saints has
yet received this fruition, Paul firmly asserts; saying, that None of those who
have born Witnesses to the Faith, have received the Promise; for God has
provided for us, that which is better, that they may not be made perfect
without us. Unto whom we Answer, That the fruition which he promised to the
Saints, is not reserved in that Paradise, out of which Adam departed, but in
the Kingdom of Heaven, whereunto Adam has not yet entered. The Paradise wherein
Adam was, Adam's Eye saw, and his Ear heard; as also Eve saw and heard; but
that which is in the Kingdom, no Man has yet seen; but after the General
Resurrection, all the Saints shall enjoy it, and Adam together with them.

Others say, That in this he said, to day, he did not speak of that Friday,
that the Thief should then be in Paradise, but concerning the Consummation (of
the World) and they say, the very Truth, to day; hereunto they subjoyn a Coma,
and then these Words follow, Thou shall be with me in Paradise; that is to say,
at the end of the World; and this is like to that Expression, In the day thou
shall eat the Fruit thereof, thou shall dye; whereas it is certainly known, that
he did not dye that day; no, not till he saw 930 years: But we say, that the
Soul of the Thief entered into Paradise the self same Friday, for it was very
congruous he should be admited to such an Entrance; forasmuch, as it was not
from Divine, and Supercelestial means, and Inducements, but Human and Natural,
that he confessed him. When Christ died on the Cross, his Soul only was
separated from the Body; for the Divinity was separated, neither from the Soul,
or Body; for it was once Supernaturally, and Incomprehensibly United, to both
the Soul and Body; and when the Soul was separated from the Body, the Body was
laid in the Sepulcher, and the Soul went directly to Hell in the Inferior
Parts of the Earth, where all Souls from Adam to this time were imprisoned, and
he Preached to all the Souls then kept in Custody, as says St. Peter; and all
the Souls that believed in him, he led, and brought them from Hell, and
conducted them, together with the Soul of the Thief, that self same day to
Paradise, out of which Adam departed; and so performed his Promise, he being
that day with him in Paradise.

But those Souls which did not believe in him (as some of the Doctors say) he
left in Hell.

Others say, he brought them thence, and left them in the Air, and that they
were Transported by the Devils, to the extremities of the habitable world, and
there take up their mansion until the General Resurrection, and from that
Friday hitherto, every Soul departing from the Body, if it be just, goes
accompanied with Angess to paradise, but if it be evil, the Devils carry it to
the utmost bounds of the habitable World.

Furthermore to those who were alive athis coming into the flesh he preached in
his own person; and to those who were before his coming, that is to say, from
Adam til his Soul descended into Hell, he preached in Hell; and to those after
his coming, by the Apostles and Evangelists. This Hell is a strait and dark
Prison, placed in the lower-most parts of the Earth, and it is the Prison of
all Souls; and because the Souls there could not plainly see the Divinity, a
Soul Clothed with the Divinity of God, the Word, went thither, and set up his
Light, and Preached to Souls, and Released, and brought away all thosse Souls
which he knew, by his Omniscient foreknowledg, to be capable of Mercy; he
brought away the Souls of them, who would have believed in him, had he been
Revealed in their time; and conducted them, together with the Soul of the
Thief, into Paradise; and when he Preached to the Souls, they had Reason,
Understanding, Consideration, Memory, Cogitation, Liberty, and with these
Repentance also, without which, his Preaching had been in vain; and there was
confirmed on them, a New Gift, That out of the Body they should be Condemned,
or Justified; the like whereof had not been, nor shallbe.

And when his Body was placed among the Dead, the Bodies also were sensible of
his Power, as John was sensible thereof in the Womb; and those who believed in
him, there he Justified; wherefore (as we said) he Preached Life in his own
Person, to these, and to those who were to be born, by his Apostles, and to
those who were departed by himself. The which he, as Clothed with the Divinity,
performed; and even as he was clothed with a Body, and spoke with Men; because
they were not able otherwise on Earth to see him; so in Hell, because the Souls
could not see him, he was Clothed with a Soul, and Preached unto them; and even
as on Earth he performed Miracles and Wonders, and some believed in him, and
some not; so in Hell, he exhibited unto them a great Light, and of those Souls,
some believed in him, and some not; and this St. Peter confirms, that he also
Preached unto the Dead, that they might be Condemned, or Judged, as alive in
the Flesh; and from the time his Soul departed from his Body, till it was
United to it, it was in Hell, the Divinity being United with the Soul and Body,
as we have said: Now, the Miracles which he performed in Hell were these; He
hound Satan, loosed the Imprisoned Souls, and made his Light shine in the
Bowels thereof.

Moreover, We have said, That the Devil before Christ was Crucified, might have
Repented; but forasmuch, as he did not Repent, it is Written, that he is
Tormented. So many Souls have hardened themselves in Hell, and have not
Repented, for which Cause they remained there.

Again, The Thief asked a Kingdom, which is manifest from his Petition;
Remember me my Lord in thy Kingdom; but Christ gave Paradise unto him, because
as yet none of the Saints had received the Kingdom. Furthermore, the Kingdom
and Hell are referv'd, as Rewards for the Good and Bad; and, neither on that
Friday, or as yet, is that Reward come; but it is a time of Service.

It was the third Hour when they Crucified him. It is requisite in the first
place, to know in what hour our Lord was Crucified; whether in the Third, or
Sixth Hour, as the other vangelist say, That on the Sixth Hour, Pilate sat on
the Tribunal, in a place called the Pavement, and said to the Jews; Behold your
King.

Some say, That he was Crucified at the Sixth Hour, and that Mark was not
present at the Crucifixion, but wrote what he had heard from his Master Peter.
Others, with whom we agree, say, that he was Crucified at the third hour, as
Mark says, and it is manifest from what Matthew and Luke have said, That there
was Darkness at the Sixth Hour, until the Ninth; for this, that they divided
his Garments, and the Title of his Death written, and the Soldiers offered him
Vinegar, Blasphemed against him; and the Words of the Thieves were between the
Sixth and the Third Hours, and from the Sixth to the Ninth, Darkness prevailed;
and there was not opportunity for the doing of these things, wherefore Mark
speaks the Truth, In the Morning, our Lord was Condemned; at the third Hour he
was Crucified; and from the Sixth Hour to the Ninth, there was Darkness:
Moreover, John did not design, to speak precisely of the time of the
Crucifixion; but after he had made a Relation, as his Fellows had done, and
wrote what he had particularly received from them. He said plainly, (not
exactly) it was about the Sixth Hour, when these things were done; That is to
say, these Words were to the Miracle of the Darkness, and the things performed,
and not to the time. Again, we say, That Christ was Crucified for Adam; and the
Second Adam agrees directly with the First; and its most certain, That Adam was
created in the Morning, and by Divine Appointment, began to impose Names on the
Wild Beasts, Cattle and the Fowl of the Air, from the Morning to the third
Hour; then there passed three Hours; and then he cast on him a Sleep; and
framed Eve of his Rib; and at the time of the third Hour, they were both placed
in Paradise, and received the Commandment, and at the very time of the third
Hour our Lord was Crucified, and the time of the sixth hour they Transgressed
the Commandment, and were Naked, and Clothed themselves with Darkness; so on
the Sixth Hour, when our Lord was stripped Naked on the Cross, Darkness
prevailed, and the Creatures were Clothed with Darkness.

Others are of opinion, That the third hour whereof Mark speaks, is thus to be
understood; Viz. That Judgment was pronounced against him, that he entered into
the Praetorium, and was examined until the Sixth Hour, and then was Crucified.

Others say, That this which John says; Viz. The Sixth Hour, proceeded from
the Error of the first Transcriber, by Reason of the nearness in similitude of
Characters, between the third and sixth Letter of the Alphabet; That is to say,
of Gamma and Epsilon; Gamma being written thus G, and Epsilon thus E; G
therefore signifies three; whereunto being added to the back a stroke at the
bottom, it became Epsilon, Quere Var^atione Alphabetae.
and signified Six; John therefore wrote the third, but the Scribe mistook and
wrore the Sixth: Moreover, this Sixth day which is here called Gnarutha, we do
not find any where, that it was called Gnarutha until the time of Christ, but
was called the Sixth day; it is called, mixed or obscure; because, therein the
Sun was obscured, and for that the Law and the Administration thereof was
benighted: Moreover, Vices ceased, That is to say, were at an end, and Goodness
approached. Old things were Abolished, and new things were introduced; Gods
care of the people ceased, and arose to the Gentiles. The fiery Cherubin, and
blazing Sword of Destruction were extinguished from the Gate of Paradise; for
there did set the Sun of the People which slew their Lord; and the Sixth day
signified the Six thousandth year, wherein he sufferd: Wherefore was our Lord
Crucified on this day? For that on this day Adam was created, therein
Transgressed the Commandment, received Judgment, and on this day departed
Paradise; and on the self same Hour, that the Cherubim took up the Sword to
Guard the Tree, was Christ Wounded with the Spear, and disarmed the Cherub; and
in the very hour that Adam went out of Paradise, did our Lord bring the Soul of
the Thief into Paradise; and the New Adam Corrected the Old Adam.

There stood at the Cross of Jesus, etc. Some say, these were the Mary's, Mary
the Mother of God, and Mary the Wife of Joseph, the Mother of James and of
Joses, and Mary the Sister of Eliezer, and Mary the Wife of Cleophas, and Mary
Magdalen

Others say, That there were four, and that he calls the Mother of James, and
Joses the Mother of God, but not rightly, for their Mother was Machatha.
Jacobus Auriensis says, That Machatha was not the Wife of Joseph, and they
call her the Sister of his Mother, according as Men are used to call their
Brothers Wives, Sisters. Cyril, Severus, and Philoxenus say, That Mary the
Mother of God, and Mary the Wife of Cleophas were Sisters, and he calls her the
Sister of his Mother.

St. Philoxenus: Joseph and Cleophas were Brethren, and Mary the Mother of
Christ; and Mary the Wife of Cleophas were Sisters, and these two took two
Sisters; And in the Harcalian Translation it is so written, His Mother, and the
Sister of his Mother the Wife of Cleopha; for inasmuch as he did not add the
Letter Samech unto Mary the Wife of Cleopha, he shewcth that she was the Sister
of his Mother.

Others say, That he called another Mary the Wife of Joseph, of whom he begat
Jacob, after another way; First, Mary the Virgin, and Mary the Wife of Joseph,
and Mary the Wife of Cleopha, and Mary the Mother of Mark, who as some say, was
the Wife of St. Peter, and Mary Magdalen the Daughter of Simon the Leaper, the
Sister of Lazarus; she was called Magdalen, because she inhabited The Tower of
Astrat, or the Tower of Shiloah; or from pleated, because her Hair was pleated.

Others say, That Mary the Sister of Lazarus was an Harlot, and was called
Magdalen; but they do not agree with what is the Truth, for Mary the Sister of
Lazarus was Chaste, and no Harlot.

The Adulteress in the Gospel was another, and her Name the Evangelist did not
declare; Thou shall not have to do with an Adulterer, or Adulteress; how then
was the Sister of Lazarus, who was a Friend to Christ, an Harlot? Therefore
Mary Magdalen was another, and was called Magdalen, from the Tower which she
built her self, out of what she got by playing the Strumpet, as the Work of
this Uncleaness; and they call her seven Devils, the sulfilling of Unclean
Affections; she by her Conversion, figured the Conversion of the Gentiles.

Others say, she was Tempted by Unclean Devils, and not by the Unclean Passions
of Impudicity. They were called Seven; either for that they were Seven in
Number, or by reason of the Asperity of the Temptation; and when our Lord-Cured
her, she improved in a Virtuous Conversation, so far, as that she was called
Magdalen, from the Tower of Righteousness which she built for her self, which
she mounted to Heaven.

Eusebius says, there were two Magdalens, the one was she out of whom he drove
seven Devils, the self same of whom thou have heard said, Come not near me.
And the other was she of whom Matthew said that she was of Magdala, Mary of
James, to distinguish him from James the Son of Alphoeus whom he calls Great,
because he was reckoned among the Twelve; this was called the Less, for that he
was of the Seventy.

He said to the Disciple behold thy Mother, and Woman behold thy Son: Hereby
he teaches, us to have a care of (and affection for) our Parents to the end of
our Lives, especially if they bring us nearer to God, but if they bring us
farther from him, we are not to own them; according to that, Whosoever does not
forsake Fathers, etc. He calls Mary the Mother of John, and John her Son, that
by these Names he might mutually unite them to one another in Love, as Mother
and Son.

At what time did Christ recommend his Mother to John? Some say* When he hung
on the Cross; others say, When they led him away to be crucified, when the
Women wept, at which time seeing his Mother among them, he committed her to
him, although it be not written in its proper place.

They filled a sponge with Vinegar, and put it on Hyssop, and set it to his
Mouth, and they put it on a Reed: That which is here rendered Sponge, is
Sea-Wool, this they dipped in Vinegar, whereof it received abundantly; and they
put it to his Mouth that he might suck thereat and drink; for Hyssop is a Plant
or Tree growing in Palestine, from the top whereof sprout out small shoots like
singers round about; and it is very convenient whereon to put any thing; this
the Executioners brought with them, and tied it to the end of a Cane, and
filled a Sponge with Vinegar, and put it on this Hyssop, and put it to his
Mouth to drink.

Others say, That they called Zupa a certain kind of Basket, which they put and
bound to the top of a Cane, and they put within it (that is to say on the top
of it) a Sponge full of Vinegar and Gall, and so reached it out.

Others say, That Zupa is like a certain Gourd which is bound to the top of a
Cane, and therewith conveys Water from place to place, for they put a Sponge,
as asoresaid, on this Gourd, and lifted it up with a Cane, and so put it to his
Mouth.

There is a Root called Zupa and is like to a Mandrake, and contains Blood in
its Leaves. Others say, That Zupa was some bitter thing which they pounded and
strewn upon a Sponge repleat with Vinegar, and so gave it him to drink: For
this reason they gave him Vinegar in a Sponge, because his Hands were bound,
and fixed with Nails; and he that was so crucified, could not hold a Cup in his
hand, etc.

From the Sixth Hour there was Darkness over all the Earth, until the Ninth
Hour: That the Jews might understand that it was he who caused Darkness in
Egypt; for there was Darkness when the Legal Passover was to be sacrificed, and
here was darkness, when Christ was sacrificed on the Cross, and to signify
that it was the Creator of all things who was Crucified, therefore the
Creatures contracted their Light, that the Prophecy of Zachary might be
fulfilled; The Sun shall grow dark at Noonday.

Concerning the Covering of the Sun; at what time is it? In the space, from the
twentieth of the Moon, until the Thirtieth, the Sun may be Darkened. It Is true,
that on the thirtieth, the Sun may be Darkened on the day, whereon they both
meet under one point; and although it happen, that the Sun is but once totally
Eclipsed; and yet it is not really Darkened, but appears to us as if it were
dark, it being not deprived of Light, nor does it appear Dark in all places,
but in some peculiar places, and this but once a year; for when the Sun happens
within one of those Circles which are called, Darkning Terms, and is placed
behind the Moon, and they are in direct opposition under the point. The Moon,
being under the Sun, the Sun is said to be Eclipsed. The Moon when it is
darkened, the cause thereof is, That it happens in the Circle, or Darkning
Limit, and the shadow of the Earth; that is to say, its extension does not
permit the Light of the Sun, to Illustrate that part of the Circle, wherein the
Moon at that time holds its Course, and it is obscured immediately; and after
it passes that place, it borrows Light from the Sun.

But at the Crucifixion of our Lord, the matter of Fact was contrary; for the
Moon was so far from being in Conjunction with the Sun, that it was distant
from it, the space of half the Sphere, which was the space of the Suns Course,
which it runs in an hundred and eighty days, and sixty five Minutes, and
fifteen degrees, that is to say, Days, and half the Zodiac.

And this was an Indication of the Majesty of him who was Crucified; and that
it was the Lord of Lights who was Crucified, they therefore contracted
themselves: And this at the time of Christ's being Crucified, had three
properties, which are strange to Reason.

First, That it was at Full Moon. Secondly, That it remained three hours.
Thirdly, That it spread over he whole Earth; so that all the Grecian and
Chaldean Philosophers wrote, That one of the Trinity fuffer'd that day; and
this is the meaning of what David wrote.
The Kings of the Earth Arose; That is to say, from their Thrones, and wondered
at the Miracle which was then wrought, for this Darkness was like to that which
was in the beginning of the Creation, the whole Creation being Clothed with
Mourning for its Lord. The Heavens became Clothed with Cypress, and the Moon
grew Red as Blood; and though it was not the time of its Birth, it appeared de
novo in the East, it ran (for fear) to the West, and there was in Conjunction
with the Sun, and both of them sat in Sadness, as good Servants who are
Fellow Sufferers with their Lord.

Again, it is certain, That this Darkness at the time of his Crucifiction was
not an Eclipse, as is evident by these Tokens.

First, An Eclipse does not continue three Hours, as did this Darkness.
Secondly, An Eclipse never is over the whole Earth, as was this Darkness.
Thirdly, An Eclipse of the Sun happens on the 30th of the Moon, but this
Darkness was the 15th of the Month; the Sun being distant from the Moon the
whole extent of its Course; That is to say, an hundred and eighty days, and
stood opposite in the division of the Sphere of the Firmament. Concerning the
Darkness of the Sun and Moon, and the Natural Cause of their being so, we have
largely discoursed in the book of our Epistle which we made, wherein Faith is
Treated of, together with the Natures of things Intellectual and Sensitive,
which is Entitled, The Book of Resolutions.
And about the Ninth Hour Jesus cried, Elohi Elohi, which is Interpeted in the
Syrian Language, God, God, wherefore, as said St. Mark.

The Arians say, That the Son and the Word spoke this, as of his own person,
with regard to the Father. But the Nestorians and Calcedonians say, That the
Son of Man who was Crucified, spoke this, in respect of God who dwelt in him,
or in regard of the Divine Nature, which departed from him at the time of the
Passion. But we say, that Jesus the Son of God was he who cried out in these
Words. The same whom Mark describes in the beginning of his Gospel. The
biginning of the Gospel of Jesus Christ the Son of God; and at whom the Devils
exclaimed, What have we to do with thee Jesus, thou Son of God?

For as he was not born for himself, but for us; and was neither Baptized,
Tempted, nor suffered Hunger for himself, but for us, and in our stead; so
this, that he cried to the Father Elohi Elohi, was for us, and in our Persons.
For if he took upon him the Person of Adam, and came to pay his Debt, it
behoved him to Cry, and Speak as in the Person of Adam; and it is evident, that
he did cry, as in the Person of Adam, and of us, because he said afterward in
the Psalm, Thou have departed far from me, my Redeemer, by reason of my
Offense; for he had no Offense, and he said, I have purged the World, and who
arraigns me of Sin; and Isaiah said, He has not committed Iniquity, nor was
Guile found in him; wherefore he cried in our behalf, who saw into what
condition we were fallen.

Moreover, The Son therefore expostulates with the Father, My God, my God,
wherefore have thou forsaken me? That what is written in that Psalm might
appear to us to have been spoken in the Person of the Father, Therefore I have
forsaken thee that thou might suffer and be crucified, that all the ends of
the World may remember and be converted to the Lord; and the Lord said; By his
Stripes we are healed.

Furthermore, Because he is like unto us in all things except Sin; for he was
hungry, and thirsty, was weary, and slept: He asked, How many Loaves? And,
Where have ye put Lazarus? As if He who knew all things before they were, could
be ignorant.

Moreover, He cried to the Father, to show that it was he only who suffered,
and not the Father nor the holy Ghost; for the whole Trinity was not born,
because the Son was born of a Virgin; nor did it suffer, for that the Son
suffered these things in his Person; neither for that he was equal to the
Father and the Spirit; for neither did the Father and Spirit suffer these
things which the Son suffered in his Person; for these things he received in
Separation from them, and not in equality with them; not as God, but as he was
Man.

But some object, How was the Son forsaken of the Father, whereas he says, I
am in the Father, and the Father in me?

We Answer, That as he is in the Father, so is he in us, as he himself said, I
am in you and you in me, that we may be together perfect; for he is in the
Father by reason of coequality of Nature, and he is in us by Incorporation with
us; and it is certain as to the first, the Father did not forsake him, though as
to the last he did forsake him, for he was impassible and immortal, the Son
remained in his nature as did the Father; but as to the Person, he left it to
suffer and to dye, that he might be like unto us therein for he suffered and
died as he was Man, remaining impassible and immortal as he was God.

Again, he cried, Elohi, Elohi, that the wickedness of those who crucified him
might be revealed, and that Satan and Death might believe that he was slain.

Moreover, That the Son said Elohi, Elohi, it was in Wonder and Admiration, and
not by way of Interrogation, Perscrutation or Doubt.

Moreover, Against the Nestorians, who say, That the Man who was crucified,
said, God, God, in respect of God who dwelt in him.

But we reply, Sirs, The Man who was Crucified was crucified either willingly,
or was led by constraint of the Word; if willingly, wherefore was the Word to
be blamed for forsaking him, or departing from him? But if he was constrained
by the Word, there was in truth an occasion to cry out and say to him who
forsook him, Wherefore have thou led me to suffer, and have now forsaken me? In
wonders thou have been near unto me, and in my passion thou have left me; I was
thy Minister in what concerned thee, and thou have not accompanied me in my
Concerns. God the Word seemed as weak, and as a Prevaricator; weak, as that he
did not bear the Sight of the Cross, but forsook him and fled; injurious, for
that he ministering to him in Miracles, he did not administer help unto him at
the time he suffered the passions of his Nature; Man also seemed to be more
powerful than the Word, for he sustained the passions, whilst the other
forsook him and departed; he appeared also as forsaken, for that he finished
the former transactions of his Life by him, and had no help administered unto
him at his Passion and Death, but was left to himself: And if he were Man who
was crucified, and said, God, God, it did not behove him to confess the
Divinity of him who forsook him. And if they shall say, That He left him,
because he was in his Nature impassible, they may take notice that therefore
they own him impassible, even whilst he remained under Passion; as the
Adamantine Stone, which is tried chiefly in this to be impassible, and not to
be broken with Iron, when they hammer it without doing hurt thereunto; in like
manner a Tule-stone is proved to be capable of no prejudice by Water, when
being steeped in Water it is not dissolved; and a Salamander is known to be
incapable of prejudice by Fire, when it is put into Fire, and extinguisheth it:
Moreover, it is neither place, nor enclosure which conserve God from harm, but
his Nature; for he is naturally and highly exalted above Death; for he whom
Place or Enclosure conserve from suffering, is continually in Fear, and
subjected to Passions. And if he suffered with him in Hunger, Thirst and
Labor, wherefore did he not suffer with him on the Cross? and if they shall
say, That at those times He permitted him to be Tempted with those Passions,
they may take notice, that it is not written that he was forsaken, save only
here, when he said, God, God.

Again, if it were, That he should not suffer with him, it proves him passible,
because he did not leave his former Passions, but was passible; for an Angel
fears not Death, as being Spiritual; much less, the Lord of Angels, and God who
is incomprehensible, and goes not from place to place; for He is God, and did
not in Will depart from the Father; nor did He really depart from Man, which is
manifest from hence, that he darkened the Sun; clest the Rocks, and Raised the
Dead, which was the mere work of God: Furthermore, Had he not known wherefore
he was forsaken (as ye say) then had the Prophets been more priviledg'd, than
he, who Prophesied of his Passion, and knew that he was to be Crucified and to
dye; but it is certainly known, that he is greater than the Prophets (as ye
have said) and were it true, that he had not known wherefore he was forsaken,
then was it false which was written concerning him, that he is the Wisdom of
the Father; and if he knew not then, neither did the Father know; for he said,
As the Father knows me, so know I the Father; but if ye shall say, That the
fear of Death hindered him from knowing his Death, let them take notice, That
it has not been written, either of the Martyrs or Prophets who sustained
Passions, that they were hindered so, that they could not know of their Death.

Now let us reprove the Arians, who say, That it was the Son who was forsaken
of his Father. Against whom we say, How did he forsake him? Since that the Son
himself said, I am in my Father, and my Father in me; and whether did he
depart, who is every where without Limitation? And how did the Father forsake
his Power, and his Wisdom spontaneously? For behold, Paul said, That Christ is
the Power and Wisdom of God the Father; for as he spoke this, I thirst, for two
Causes,

First, That he might fulfill the Prophecy, (as said the Evangelists; And
Secondly, That he might give us Drink who were Thirsty; and as he asked Water
of the Samaritan Woman, not in behalf of himself, but to induce her to ask
Water of Life from him, for behold, it is not written, that he drank of the
Waters which he asked of her; which is evident from hence, that as soon as she
perceived him, she began to demand of him Living Waters; and behold, it is not
Written, That he drank of the Waters which he asked of her; wherefore he asked
it, not for any other end, but that he was willing to confer on her the Drink
of Life. So when he said to the Jews, I thirst, he sought to give us Water of
Life. Moreover, he said, I thirst in respect of his Human Nature, which
Thirsted, after the knowledge of the Holy Ghost, for as he demanded in the
matter of her who was Healed; Who touched me, when the multitude pressed upon
him; that by the asking of a Question, the Faith of her may be Revealed who
touched him; so here, he asks, Why have thou forsaken me, not that he was
Ignorant, but that the Auditory hearing this Interrogation, might inquire and
be informed, that it was not He who was forsaken, but the Human Nature.
Moreover, He calls the Father his God, because He was Man; for as he was not
to be Blamed or Reprehended when he exercised Divine Function because he was
God; so was he not to be Reproved or Contemned when he spoke as a Man,
forasmuch as he was a Man.

He calls Elias; for the Word Eli, my God, and Elia are near a like in the
Hebrrw Language; for Eli is Interpreted God, and Elohia is Interpreted Divine.

And one of them ran and brought a Sponge, and filled it with Vinegar; For he
was a Jew who offered him Vinegar and Myrrh, as is evident from hence, that the
Jews said, Behold he calls Elias. They many times offered him Vinegar in
derision, and he drank, but here he did not.

And Jesus cried with a loud voice, and gave up the Ghost; that is to say, he
showed that voluntarily and freely he gave up his Soul, and not by constraint,
for he dismissed it; and it was not taken from him, as ours, which is taken by
force: It is said of us Creatures, Thou take their Spirit, and they die; but
he was Creator, and did give it up of his own free will.

Some Men ask of what kind of Death died our Lord? Whether that of ours, or of
his own? And we answer, That ours is the Separation of the Soul from the Body,
but the death of God is the Separation of the Divinity from the Humanity, and
this he did not suffer, wherefore we say that he died our death; for his Soul
was separated from his Body, and not his Divinity from his Humanity: For though
his Soul was separated when he died on the Cross, till he arose from the Grave,
yet his Divinity was not at all separated, neither from his Soul nor from his
Body, for his Divinity was united to his Soul and to his Body, with an
unseparable Union, that is to say his Divinity to his Humanity, for his
Divinity remained with the Body, and with the Soul went into Hell, and preached
to the Souls there detained, which did not obey the preaching of Noah, as Peter
said in the Acts: for the Divinity is unlimitted, and therefore with his Body
and Soul, and by him are all things, and without him nothing, and within him
are all things: we say also of Christ that he was God, for it is said of the
word of God, that it is God and the very same is Man who is God. John said, And
God was that Word; and that he was Man, the same John said, The Word was made
Flesh, and dwelt in us; and Paul says, God sent his Son, and he was made of a
Woman; therefore that word of the Father is God, and was made Man; and as he is
God, he is not limited by space or place, nor to be comprehended with words or
thoughts; but as He was made Man, He was with the Body in the Sepulcher, and
with the Soul in Heaven.

Moreover, Jesus cried twice with a loud Voice:

First, My God, my God, wherefore, etc. as Matthew writes. Secondly, Father,
into thy hands I commit my Soul, as Luke says.
The first time as in the Person of Adam, My God, my God: The second time in
his own Person, My Father into thy hands: He calls him, My Father, to show that
he is God, and equal in Essence with the Father; and God, to show that the same
was made Man: And in saying, I commend my Spirit, he shows that voluntarily,
and of his own free will, he laid it down, and that no other took it from him
by constraint, as is our case. Stephen in saying, Christ, into thy hands I
commit my Spirit, signified Christ accept of my Spirit. From Adam to this time
the Souls of the Righteous and of the wicked were sent to Hell, as we have
said before, and from the time that Christ cried, Father into thy hands I
commit my Spirit, until the end of the World, the Souls of the Righteous are in
the hands of God, as Solomon said; that is to say, they are near unto him, and
dwell in Paradise.

He bowed his Head, and gave up his Spirit: With us, first the Soul departs
from us, and afterward our Heads fall down; but with Christ it was not so; but
first he bowed his Head, and presently gave up his Soul; that is to say, of his
own accord and free will he delivered it up, and not by constraint.

Furthermore, In saying, I lay down my Spirit, he shows that after a short
time he was to take it up again; according as he said, I lay down my Life that
I may take it up again; I have power to lay it down, and to take it up: For the
Spirit is called Soul: For the Soul is called by three Names, Soul,
Understanding, and Spirit, as we have writlen in our Book of Distinctions
concerning Natures Intellectual and Sensitive.

It behooves us therefore to enquire how on the Friday, and at the same time,
was our Lord in these three places, in the heart of the Earth, as he said, The
Son of Man shall be in the heart of the Earth; and in Paradise, as he said to
the Thief, This day shall thou be with me in Paradise; and in the hands of the
Father, according to that, Into thy hands I commit my Spirit.

Immediately the Preface to the Gate of the Temple was rent. The Preface to the
Gate he calls the Curtain which hung before the Gate of the Temple, which is
called a Veil.

Why was the Veil of the Gate rent? Because the holy Spirit departed thence,
who dwelt there in the Mysteries of the Law.

But in what manner was it rent? They say, That this Texture of the Veil was on
the one side, and the Woof on the other, which was wonderful.

It was rent; That is to say, The Veil was divided, for that it could not
suffer the Passion of him who was principally typified thereby; and to signify
that the Grace of the holy Ghost was departed thence, and that the Sacrifices
of the Law ceased, and that it was designed for Destruction: And after the
Ninth hour, the Darkness was dispersed, in token that the Ancient Sorrows which
came by Sin were to cease.

The Earth was moved, as a Dish in the Water. In the first place forbidding the
Disputation of the Arrogant, it is to be considered that it was established on
a Foundation of Immobility, and that an Earthquake was never over all the
Earth, and at once; yet this motion was in all the Earth, and the whole Body
thereof was moved as a Dish in the midst of the Water: So also this Darkness
was over all the Earth, and not one part thereof only, as it is wont to be.

And the Stones were Cleft; that it might be known that it was the Creator who
was Crucified, and it was known from hence that the Creatures Suffered in
Compassion with him. Moreover the Rocks were cleft, in reproach to obdurate
hearts for all this odious Deed. Moreover, because Rational Creatures were
silent out of crafty Policy, the Stones Cried out, and this is meant by those
words, If these should by silent, the Stones would cry out. Again, because God
many times instructs men for their Conversion by Irrational and Insensitive
Creatures, as he instructed Baalam by an Ass, and Jeroboam by an Altar, and
Ashes, and Pharoe and the Egyptians by the Elements. So he removed the Earth
out of it is place, and cleft the Rock, in Reprehension of the Jews, who he
desired might have been converted from their wickedness, and they would not.

And the Sepulchers were opened, and many Bodies; That is to say, Arose on the
Ninth hour of Friday, and they were not of those who were dead long before, but
such as fell asleep about three years, more or less before the Passion of our
Lord; and they were Saints, because they believed in our Lord before their
Death; And they were of Jerusalem, and arose out of the Sepulchers round about
the City, and entered into Jerusalem, and were known, some to their Fathers,
some to their Brethren, and some to their Mothers, and reprehended them,
saying, What wicked ^eed is this which ye have done, that ye have Crucified the
Life, and the Giver of Life; and they remained there three days Eating nothing,
but were preserved by Divine Efficacy as was Moses and Elias in their Fasting,
and their Bodies were really United to their Souls; and concerning this, Matthew
said, That many Bodies of the Saints Arose, and abode three days in Jerusalem,
and there Preached, and afterward returned unto their Sepulchers and fell
asleep; but did not go into Paradise, neither were they dispersed to the utmost
Limits, nor were they seen of all Men. And it is certain from what Matthew said,
That they appeared unto many, for many are not all; and so our Lord after his
Resurrection was not always seen, but sometimes, and that not unto every one,
as at first, but to his Disciples, and to those who were Worthy. Others say,
That they were Prophets who knew the Holy Scriptures, and believed in him
before their Decease (as says Ignatius) and had Preached the Resurrection of
Christ and their own, the Dead arose in manifestation of this Raiser from the
Dead. Johannes de Dara, The Dead who Arose did not enter the City to Preach,
until he Arose. Others, That they remained at their Sepulchers Standing, and
giving Praises. Others, That they were Assembled at the Mount of Olives.
Others, That they went into Paradise.

And they went into the Holy City Jorusalem: Some say, That he does not call
this Earthly City which was polluted Jerusalem, but that which is in Heaven,
and when Christ cried on the Cross, they were revived and remained in their
Graves as Jonas did in the Fish; and after his Resurrection, they also Arose
Spiritually, and when he Ascended in abscondito to his Father in the Heavens,
they also Ascended privately with him to the Holy City which is in Heaven.

Others say, That Jerusalem, as to the Upper part thereof, was Holy, and that
many believing Persons dwelt there, but that the Lower Part was Profane, by
Reason of the Deceit practiced there, and he calls the Upper Region thereof,
the Holy City, whereunto the Dead who Arose, Entered, and Preached to the
Believers who Lamented his Death.

Others, That he calls by the Name of Jerusalem the whole Terrestrial City,
into which they Entered, and Preached; and more then 500 Souls returned to their
Bodies, and Entered, and appeared to many; and they appeared to the Grief of
those who knew not that they had Crucified their Lord, and therefore he spoke
to them who were bitterly grieved in Spirit.

Others say, That they at first appeared in Gallilee, and in many other places,
and that after the Resurrection they came to Jerusalem and appeared to many,
that they might declare, that the Resurrection was no Phantasm. There were five
Miracles when Christ was Crucified, whereof some were in the Heavens, some in
the Air, some on the Earth, and some under the Earth. In the Heavens, the Sun
and Moon were Darkened, in the Air the Veil was Rent, on the Earth the Rocks
were Cleft* and from under the Earth the Dead Arose; and some of the Miracles
were Universal, as that of the Eclipse of the Sun, and the Emotion of the
Earth, some also were particular, as that the Rocks and Veil were Rent, and the
Dead Arose.

Who therefore was he who hung upon the Cross? God, or Man? If he were God, it
were impossible that the Nails should be fixed in his Hands, and a Spear in his
Side, for his Nature was higher than to receive such Impressions; and if he
were but mere Man, who was it that wrought Miracles, who darkened the Sun, Rent
the Rocks, and Raised the Dead? For all these things by mere Man could not be
effected; wherefore it was God Incarnate who hung on the Cross, and did these
things.

And the Centurion and those with him who had the Custody of Jesus: From
somewhat which the Centurion and they who were with him saw, they were
frighted, and being constrained by fear, they did confess that he was the Son
of God. Luke says, Truly this was a Just Man, and both were true; and the one
of them Matthew wrote, and Luke the other.

But whence was it that the Centurion, and they with him, knew that he was the
Son of God?

Either from Christ himself when he taught, or from the Jews who accused him,
saying, He made himself the Son of God: And by adding the word Truly, he
confirmed that he was Naturally the Son of God, for so he was not mere Man.

They returned striking their Breasts; That is to say, that they might free
themselves from the iniquity of them who crucified him, crying out, God forbid
that we should partake of his Innocent Blood; and that they might show the
audacious iniquity of the Jews. These Multitudes were they who assembled from
all parts to be there at the Feast of the Passover.

There were there many Women: Observe the infirm Sex of Women, how it appeared
more courageous than Men; for they adhered unto him even in the midst of Perils
and Passions, and therefore observed all things.

That these Bodies might not lodge on their Crosses: The Law commanded that
Bodies should not remain on Crosses, and therefore the Jews showed their care
for the Honor of the Sabbath, that it might be observed, and not profaned,
and that their Law might be kept: Wherefore they petitioned Pilate that their
Thighs might be broken, and they might take them down from the Crosses before
the Approach of the Sabbath.

And the Soldiers asked leave of Pilate, and they brake the Thighs of the first
and of the second, because they were not yet dead; but when they came to Jesus,
and saw that he was already dead, they brake not his thighs, that this Prophecy
might he fulfilled, A Bone of him shall not be broken.

Here Christ did not continue to the term of Humane Nature, it being a very
great Wonder that he should dye so soon, and so speedily, according to what
Mark said, Pilate wondered that he was so soon dead.

But one of the Soldiers struck him on his side; The Spear wherewith he wounded
him in the side was less than a Sword Some say that he struck him to try
whether he was dead or no; but we say that he struck him to please the Jews, as
hereafter; and that the saying of Zachary might be accomplished, They shall
look upon him whom they have dug.

Moreover, He struck him, that Water and Blood might issue from him, which are
the Mysteries of our Redemption, and a true Token of our Faith; Whence the
Church has learned to make Wine and Water the Mystery of his Blood, and not as
the Armenians and others, who celebrate only in Wine, etc. Moreover Wine and
Water descended into the Mouth of Adam, for the Cross of the second Adam was
fixed in his Mouth.

And he who saw it, testified: That is to say, I perceived with mine own Eyes,
that when Christ was struck with a Spear, there gushed out Blood and Water; and
I did not hear it by relation from others. This was John the Divine.

But when it was Evening: He calls Evening the time near to the coming in of
the Sabbath.

There came a rich Man: Matthew calls this rich Man Joseph, but Luke calls him a
good and just Man; John, a Disciple of Jesus, one of the Seventy Two; but Mark
calls him Bouleutes, that is, a Counselor, one of those who give Advice unto
Princes; Boule is expounded Counsel.

From Ramath, where the Children were slain by Herod; and Joseph was of Ramath,
and from on high, Life was given to Adam.

John says, That Nicodemas also came and associated himself with Joseph in the
Sepulture of Jesus; that Nicodemus who formerly came to him by Night, and
brought an Ointment of Myrrh and Aloes; Aloes is that which we call Psabboro
and Myrrh is a Gum somewhat black, and like unto Olibanum. Hatzso and Sedona
signify the same thing, being a Linen Cloth.

An hundred pound weight: This abundance of Ointment was in confutation of the
Jews, who said that his Disciples stole him; for how could they separate the
Clothes and the Linen Cloth, which stuck altogether, and afterward set in
order the Under-Garment in another place by it self, not besmeared; for this
Ointment usually daubs the Clothes of such as are anointed therewith, and is
not suddenly or easily taken off.

And he put him into a new Sepulcher of his own: Jacobus Sarugensis says, That
this Sepulcher did belong unto Joshua the Son of Nun; and that it was reserved
for a Mystery, and conveyed from one to another unto Joseph, Others say that it
was Joseph's, and that he hewed it.

Hewed in a Rock: He was laid in a Stone-Sepulcher, and not buried in the
Earth; thereby alluding to the Church, which is not to be removed by Floods of
iniquity: He was laid there himself alone, to show that his Body only was the
Propitiation which was laid on the Altar of the Church, giving Life to those
who receive him.

There was in the place where he was crucified a Garden, and in that Garden a
Sepulcher where no man had been laid: This of the Garden was not Real, but
Allegorically shows that he was Reigning in Paradise to cancel the Debt which
was contracted in Paradise, that is to say, a Garden; and that Righteousness
should enter where Sin had entered before.

And that he was placed in a New Sepulcher, was done as of Divine Providence,
first, least by the Resurrection that was made, it might have been pretended to
have been of some other who had been buried there. Again, as he arose from the
Virgins Womb without breaking the Seals and Virginity of her who bore him; so
from his own Virgin Tomb did he arise, the Marks, Seals and Stones entire and
inviolate.

The Stone that was on the Sepulcher: It is reported that this Stone was the
same with that out of which gushed Rivers; if it be a truth, let it be
received; if not, let the Report go with the Winds.

And the other Mary who sat over against the Sepulcher: That is to say, Because
they were so inflamed with love of him, therefore they sat over against him.
The other Mary he calls the Mother of God.

And they Rested on the Subbath as was Commanded; That is to say, they
returned, having prepared Sweet Odours, but they came not on the Sabbath, by
reason the Law commanded they should do no Work on the Sabbath; and therefore
they prepared Sweet Odours as the Custom was that they might perfume on the
third day the Body, for the Love they bore unto it.

But the Morrow after; That is to say, it was the Sabbath day after the Friday,
or Preparation.

The Chief Priests Assembled together; That is to say, to desire Pilate to
grant them their Pleasure.

Our Lord, we Remember that this Deceiver. They called Pilate Lord, and denied
Christ; and by the Words, we Remember, they showed that they knew all things
which were said by him. But observe, how void of Pride Matthew was, who wrote
all Words of Reproach, and was not ashamed to express the Word Deceiver, and
others the like.

Command therefore that they watch the Sepulcher. They desired Watchmen,
because, they were moved with his Speech, That he was to Rise the Third day.
Secondly, Because the Watchmen were to be Preachers of the Resurrection to the
Region of the Jews. Pilate said unto them, Ye have Watches, go and have a Care.
Pilate did not send a Guard of his own, nor did he Seal the Sepulcher, that
they might not have occasion to say, That he took a Bribe, and permitted his
Disciples to take him away.

And they Sealed the Stone, the Soaldiers being present. Some say. That they
made the Soldiers to stand as Centuries at the Stone, and tied them thereunto,
and fixed the Impression of their Seals on their Necks, or their Thighs, or
their Loins, or their Feet.

Others, That they placed them on both sides of the Stone, with their Faces one
against the other, and that they stretched forth their Hands over the Stone,
and knit their Fingers together about it, and Sealed them.

Others say, That they sealed the Stone over the Sepulcher, with all their
Rings, as did Darius the Cistern with his Ring, and the Ring of his Nobles: And
if they had not sealed it, and appointed Keepers, they might have a pretense to
say, that he was stolen away; but this fell out more to their Shame, That the
Keepers themselves became Preachers and Witnesses of the Resurrection, and that
the Seals and Signs gave concurrent Testimonies with the Keepers that they did
not Lie. And he calls Keepers, those who were appointed to keep Prisoners in
Custody, or those who were ordained Executioners in Capital Causes, and there
were 15 Keepers, whereof some were Hebrews, and some Romans. There were three
Captains, and twelve under Command and this is Written in St. Paul's Roll, and
in other Hebrew Histories.

A Discourse against Heretics and Gentiles.
AS to those who weigh and refer the Exinanition of Christ to Human Nature, we
have opposed Supereminencies, for John said, When ye shall lift up the Son of
Man; by listing up, meaning the Cross, and brings him, saying, as it were thus:
Had I not quieted the Sea, yet when I shake the Earth and remove it out of its
place; were it so, that I had not made Straight those who were Crooked, yet
when I do Rend the Veil of the Gate, and the Stones; and did I not restore
Souls to their Bodies, yet when I make the Holy Ghost to depart from the
Temple; were I not the Light of the World, whilst I cry out, yet when I darken
the Sun, and the Moon, and all Creatures; did I not set at Liberty Mouths that
were Chained up in Silence, yet when I open Sepulchers, securely shut up; Nay,
I Raise to Life those who were Buried, and had I not Cured the Sick and
Diseased; yet when I do renew the whole Creation as well Visible, as Invisible;
then will ye confess who I am, That is to say, then shall ye by Conviction be
forced to confess who I am, and to believe upon these Tokens, That I am God who
was Crucified in the Body which I assumed, and not a mere Man, nor divided into
two Substances after that Union made.

The Divine Excellencies of our Savior.
THE Word was begotten of the Father from Eternity, he is in all places without
Limitation, he is by his Nature God the Word, he is Rich as God, Simple as God,
he is Perfect in his Essence, he gave the Law as God, he is Obedient to God his
Father, he was Baptized by the Holy Ghost, he is above Passions and Indigences,
he is Immortal in his Nature. John Danced in the Womb at his Approach, he fed
thousands with a small quantity of Bread, he cleansed the Leapers with a Word,
as God; he Interdicted the Winds and Sea, and they ceased, as God; he created
Eyes to the Blind, as God; he remitted the Guilt of Sin, as God; he knew the
Secrets of all Hearts, as God; he commanded the Apostate Devils into the Sea,
he stilled the Tempest of the Sea, as God; he heard the Prayer of the
Cananitish Woman, as God; he said to the Disciple, Fear not Death; he called
Lazarus, and Raised him as God; he called the Young Man, and Raised him, as
God; he was Sanctified of the Seraphims, as God; he made the Earth to tremble*
and cleft the Rocks, as God; he Darkened the Sun and the Firmament, as God; he
changed Water into Wine, as God; he caused the Spirit to depart from the Jewish
Temple, he opened the Sepulchers, and Raised the Dead, as God.

Things belonging to the Humanity and Exinanition of our Savior.
HE was Born of a Virgin in time, and took his beginning in the Womb of a
Virgin, and appeared comprehensible as to the Flesh, but incomprehensible as to
the Divinity; he was made Man by his Grace being unchanged, he was made
Comprehensible, because he was made Man, being Rich in his own Nature; he had
in him the Composition of Soul and Body, he increased in bodily Stature, he
kept the Law in Person, as Man; he was Tempted of Men, and suffered
Indigencies, as Man; he Tasted our Death in Humane manner, as Man; he Fasted
and was Hungry in the Wilderness, as Man; he was Clothed with Contempt, as Man;
he Slept and was Immersed in Sleep, as Man; there Gushed out Tears from his
Eyes, as he was Man; he sat down with Publicans and Sinners, he besought the
Samaritan Woman, as Man; he was bound by the Rebellious Jews, as Man; and he
said, My Soul is troubled, as Man; he Prayed in his Passion for us, as Man; he
showed, that he was afraid of our Death, as Man; he asked, Where have ye laid
Lazarus, as if he were Ignorant; he said, Into thy Hands I commit my Soul, as
Man; the Jews cried, Crucify him, as Man; he was Crucified between two
Thieves, as Man; he was Hanged on the Cross, and Pierced with Nails, as Man; he
was Buffetted on the Cheek by an Impudent Servant, as Man; he was Wounded in
the Head with a Cane, as Man; he Drunk Vinegar on the Cross, as Man; his Side
was Wounded with a Spear, as Man; he was laid in a New Tomb, as Man; and there
are many the like Instances, but we do not admire the Miracle of Christ, for it
behooves not us but Strangers; yet as being Domestics we admire his Exinanition
and Low Estate; the First of these were Natural unto him, and Humane knowledge
cannot Reach them, but the Latter are of extraordinary. Dispensation, and are
Miracles and Signs, and we Believe them; and by these very things whereon the
Heretics reputed him a Man, we know him to be God; and by things whereon they
depended and fell, have all of us Risen, but they shall be constreined to
confess him, when they shall see him coming in Glory, and bringing with him the
Cross, which is one of the least, and shall account him Holy, as he said, That
then shall be seen the Sign of the Son of Man; and that of his Lifting up, he
does not call his Ascension, but his Ascent to the Cross, That is to say, I
shall then be known to be God by Miracles.

MATH. Chap. XXVIII.
BUT in the Evening of the Dawning of the First day of the Week. Concerning the
diversity of Men's Opinions touching the times, whereof all the Evangelists have
severally Written, we have spoken, but not of the time when our Savior Arose,
for that is unknown to Angels and Men, but he knows it, and his Father, and the
Holy Ghost; Matthew says, They came in the Evening, John in the Morning, Luke
at the dawning of the Day, Mark when the Sun Arose.

In the Evening of the dawning of the first day of the week came Mary Magdalen
and Mary the Mother of God, to visit the Sepulcher, and they were told by an
Angel that the Lord was Risen, and they saw our Lord and took hold of his feet,
and he sent them to tell his Disciples; but the Keepers went into the City and
declared it to the Priests, and received a Bribe, and said he is stolen away;
Mary Magdalen hearing that he was stolen suffered somewhat of humane Infirmity
as did Thomas, and She returned to the Sepulcher the second time, early in the
morning when it was dark, as John said, and she saw the Stone removed and an
Angel sitting thereon, whom she saw in the Evening sitting on the Stone; then
she became more doubtful and came to Simon and John, and said, they have taken
away my Lord, and I know not where they have laid him; and when the Disciples
went and saw the Sepulcher, and the Linnin. Clothes they were assured, and
returned believing, but Magdalen stayed at the Sepulcher, surprised with doubt
of what had happned unto him; and when she saw two Angels which had not
appeared to Simon and John, and when she looked back she saw our Lord, and he
sent her-unto his Disciples, and she returned unto them, and declared unto
them, that She had seen our Lord and she found there those women who came from
Gallilee with him, who were prepared to come to the Sepulcher with Sweet
Odours, and she returned with them, and also the mother of God, whom Luke calls
the mother of James, and he was beautiful as said Luke: And they saw there two
Angels in the Similitude of two Men, and their Garments Shone, and their faces
were Illustrious; there came Mary Magdalon, and the mother of God, with the
Forraigner, the Wife of Shalom, who was not in readiness to come with the other
women; and they saw an Angel like unto a Young man clothed with a white Stole,
and they wondered, and then* it was that the Sun arose, as says Saint Mark.
These are the four times that women came to the Sepulcher, as the Evangelists
wrote; Saint Severus reconciled the several times wherein women are said to
have come to the Sepulcher. Magdalen came five times to the Sepulcher. First,
in the Evening as said St. Matthew. Secondly, at the break of day when it was
yet dark alone, as said St. John; and she came unto Simon and John, and it was
the third time of her coming with Simon and John; The 4th time she came with
John and the mother of James, at the Dawning of the day, as said Luke, the
Fifth time was, when the Sun arose with Shalom and the mother of James, as mark
said.

The mother of God came three times; the first time, when he said the other
Mary, the second time, when Luke said Mary the Mother of James; The Third
time, when Mark said the mother of James and Joses: Jacobus Auriensis calls
the other Mary, the first Wife of Joseph who bare James and Jose, The Patriarck
Severus calls the other Mary the mother of God, and likewise calls the Virgin
Mary the mother of James and Jose, according to the accustomed Speech.

Simon went twice to the Sepulcher. First of all with John. Secondly alone, as
Luke says, And he went with his Soul filled with Admiration; and at this time
he saw, as said the Eleven, and the Household of Cleophas, That our Lord was
surely Risen, and appeared unto Simon, as Paul and Luke do Testify; Moreover,
about the time wherein our Lord Rose from the Sepulcher, he is to cause the
General Resurrection according to Severus, and that such an hour bears a great
Similitude and Image of the last Hour.

And in the Evening of the Sabbath at the dawning of the first day of the Week;
That is to say, we are to enquire of four times, and to distinguish them one
from another, in reference to the Day, the Night, the Morning and the Evening,
for these four Seasons the Sun makes with us, and the Day is the time when the
Sun is above the Earth, and the Night is the time when the Sun is below the
Earth, or hidden behind the Northern Mountains, as is the Opinion of some, for
the Evening is the End of the Day, to wit, the time when the Sun is obscure to
us, the Morning is the Beginning of the Day when the Sun Beams peep out, and
the Night is at an end: That there is an Evening of the preceding day John
testifies who said, When it was the Evening of the First day of the Week which
he spoke of, he does not call the Evening of the coming in of the Sabbath, but
the Evening of its going out, for the Evening of the day is the going out and
end thereof, whether it be Artificial or Natural; for so Moses said; for after
the Light was Created and the Day was ended; and the Hours thereof he said, it
was the Evening and the Morning calling the Evening the end of the first
Artificial day which was created, and the Morning the end of the Night, and he
does not call the Evening of the Sabbath the time of the Sun setting of the
Sabbath, otherwise he had said, in the Evening of the Sabbath and no more; but
forasmuch as he added the Dawning of the first day of the Week, to wit, the
waxing Light; he shows that he calls here, the Night of the First Day of
the Week the Evening of the Sabbath in Respect of the Dawning; Much of the time
was passed, insomuch, that it was about Cock crowing, that is to say, the time
when we in Fasting begin to abstain from Meat and Drink; and we begin at the
First, and not at the end of the Sabbath.

Johannes de Dara. And in the Evening of the Sabbath; That is to say, also
concerning the Passover, it is written, that it was slain on the 14th in the
Evening, for although it was reputed the Night of the day to come, by reason of
the Course of the Moon; yet it was reckoned the Evening of the Day, and not of
the Night; others say that Matthew by the Evening, intended the whole Night of
the First day of the Week, according to the Phrase of the Scripture by a
Synechdoche of the part for the whole, according to this, the Evening and the
Morning was the First day; and again, Let all Flesh praise the Name of the
Lord; and the Soul of Israel died in the way. Others, in the Evening of the
Sabbath, when the First day of the Week Dawned. Eusebius; Matthew by way of
Exposition adds after this, of the Evening of the Sabbath the dawning of the
First day of the Week, denoting the Hour and time of the Night after the
Sabbath, which was when the First day of the Week dawned. It Is true, Matthew
wrote in the Hebrew, and he who Translated the Scripture into the Greek
Language, rendered the Dawning of the Day, the Evening of the Sabbath; and
Matthew, by the Evening, means the whole Length and Evening of the Night; as
John calls the passing away, or the least part of the Night, Day; and therefore
adds, whilst it was yet dark, least it should be thought, that he spoke of the
Morning; so Matthew also, when he said, the Evening of the Sabbath, lest Men
might think it was spoken of the Evening Season, he adds, When the First day of
the Week began to dawn.

Our Lord appeared many times; but six times more Remarkably.

First, To Mary Magdalen, and to the other Mary, as says, Matthew. Secondly, To
many Women, as say Mark and Luke. Thirdly, To Mary Magdalen, as says John.
Fourthly, To Cephas as says Paul, That he Arose and was seen of Cephas.
Fifthly, To those two who went to Emaus, as says Luke. Sixthly, To the Eleven,
when they were Assembled in the Upper Room, and afterward many times for forty
days.
Mary Magdalen and the Mother of God said nothing to Shalom and John, that they
might go and be assured by the sight of the Sepulcher, and of the Angels, and
not by their Words: But this, Who shall Roll away for us the Stone, etc. was
spoke of John and Shalom; Magdalen therefore and the Mother of God saw before
the Stone was Rouled away.

And the other Mary to behold the Sepulcher; That is to say, that they might
cast in Sweet Odours, as was usual on the third day; and wherefore would they
cast in Sweet Odours; some say for the Sepulcher, but we say for the Body; and
it is evident from what Mark said, they bought Aromaticks, that they might go
and Anoint Him and not his Sepulcher; Again, who shall Roll away for us the
Stone? By the Rouling away the Stone, it is clear, that they sought to cast
Odours on his Body.

And behold there was a great Earthquake. It was not here as at the Cross, for
that was an Universal Earthquake, but this was particular, and the Keepers and
the Women only perceived it, and the Keepers were Terrified, and the Women
comforted therewith; and he explains what kind of Earthquake it was, for an
Angel of the Lord descended from Heaven, drew near and Rouled away the Stone;
it was the Angel Gabriel, the same who Administered in his whole Dispensation on
Earth, and the other who appeared with him was Michael; he says, that he
descended from Heaven, and appeared to the Keepers; because, it is thought that
Heaven is their place, though some of them be with us in this World, such as
are sent.

Jacobus Sarugensis says, That a Fire appeared to the Keepers, and that a
multitude of Angels were heard in the Air; and they saw Christ face to face, as
he came out of the Sepulcher, uncorrupted, and with that Angel, other Angels
Descended, and a Light shone, and a Ladder of Fire was put up that Reached from
Earth to Heaven; and Christ stood not above it to Descend, but below it to
Ascend; and there were Angels ascending and descending, singing Praises.

Furthermore, We say that it is unknown to the Creatures at what time our Lord
arose, but the Evangelists have written of the several times that the Women
came to the Sepulcher, as we have said above. Matthew says that Mary came in
the evening and saw our Lord, and because the Keepers came in the Night, and
signified that he was risen, the Priests published by Proclamation that his
Disciples had stolen him away; and when it was heard that he was stolen away,
Magdalen suffered somewhat of humane Infirmity, and ran to the Sepulcher, as
John has written; and afterward she returned with the Women bringing
Aromaticks, as says Luke; and when the Sun arose, with John, as Mark has
written, they saw six Angels at the Sepulcher; Matthew says they saw one, Luke
says two Angels; John two, Mark one: First of all the Soldiers saw that the
Lord was risen, the Seals remaining as they were, and they were terrifyed; and
at the time before the Women came, the Angel descended, who rolled away the
Stone, and for fear of him it was that they who kept him were terrifyed, and
became as dead Men, and they saw also the Angel who sat upon the Stone, and he
was like to Lightning; and that they might not fear, he said unto them meekly,
Be not ye afraid, as are the Keepers; and after he had encouraged them, he
preached unto them the Resurrection; and when the Women went away, the Keepers
were awakened, and hastily went to the City, and declared to the High Priest
what had happened.

And came near and rolled away the Stone. He did not roll away the Stone that
Christ might go forth of the Sepulchor, for he Arose before the Angel
descended, but that the Women who saw that he was laid in the Sepulcher
perceiving it empty, and he not there, might believe; for he went out of it the
Stone being Sealed, and the Impressions remaining as they were.

But how was it possible that the Body should go out, the Door being shut. We
Answer, That all things are easy and expedite for the Lord to perform, for as
he came out of the Womb, Virginity being preserved, and darkened the Sun; and
Raised the Dead; and as the Angel came unto Daniel in the Den being Sealed up,
and as the Apostles got out of Prison, and Simon walked on the Waves, and the
Egyptian Waters were turned into Blood, and the Hebrews kept sure footing in
the Region of the Sea, and Moses his Rod was turned into a Serpent, so he came
out the Sepulcher it being Sealed up.

And his Countenance was as Lightning. It is the Custom of Angels to show
themselves in Shapes and Figures according to the several Works of their
Ministry; to Joshua the Son of Nun, and to David they appeared as Soldiers in
Armor, to Zachary in Red Colors and Spotted, and to the Women in a comely
Shap^ and full of Joy.

And the Keepers were Terrified for Fear of them. The Angel appeared as he
pleased, to the Women Pleasing and Splendid, but to the Keepers Angry and
Terrible, and all this they so much feared that they became as Dead Men,

Wherefore was the Resurrection first manifested to the Keepers? Because the
Jews were more ready to give Credit unto them, than to the Disciples and to
Women. For God is used to draw the Perverse by what they have Relation, or
Affinity unto, as by a Star he drew the Wisemen.

The Angel answered and said unto the Women. He did not only comfort them with
a Joyful Apparition, but with Speech also.

Fear Ye not. He said Ye, in Comparison of those who Crucified him, for Fear
belongs to them; but Ye are worthy of Honor. Luke says, They Remembered his
Words, that is to say, I shall Rise again; and he Arose again, as Matthew said.

I know that Jesus who is Crucified; Not to deride him, as did those who
Crucified him, but to Honor him; and if an Angel was not ashamed to say that
he was Crucified, how are the Calcedonians and Nestorians ashamed to say that
he was.

FINIS.

