A DISCOURSE Concerning EXCOMMUNICATION, As Executed by Officials. And
concerning the Common Law Writts, De Excommunicato capiendo, and De Cautione
admittenda; For the punishment of persons Excommunicated, and their Deliverance
from the punishment.

Wherein is Examined, Whether the Execution of the former as Executed by many,
be not a profanation of a great Ordinance of God; Whether by the second the
Subjects in many Cases be not unwarrantably oppressed; As also by the difficult
granting of the other, which is a Common Law Writ, and the right of every
Subject to be obtained without difficulty?

Discoursed in a Letter to an Honorable Friend, by one who is a Friend to the
English Liberty.

Wrote before the Parliament which Sat from March, 1678, to the end of May,
1679, and now published.

Acts. 19. 15. Jesus I know, and Paul I know, but who are you?

Job. 6. 25. How forcible are right words? But what does your arguing reprove?

Hujus [Scilicet Papae] potestatem, huic cum divino munere sublatam esse
manifestum est, and ne quid superesset, quo non plane fractam illius vim esse
constaret, leges omn^s, decreta, atque instituta, quae ab Authore Episcopo
Romano profecta sunt, prorsus abroganda censuimus.

Epist. Hen. 8. praesixa libro cui Titulus, Reformatio Legum Eccles. impr.
Londini. Anno 1641. London, Printed for Tho. Parkhurst at the Bible and Three
Crowns at the lower end of Cheap Side, 1680.

To his highly honored Friend, J. B. Esquire
Honored Sir,
THE charitable design of this Paper is (amongst the many oppressed, which His
Most Sacred Majesty, in conjunction with His two Houses of Parliament, has
made to go free,) to show you one species of Prisoners, whom no Parliament has
had leisure as yet to take notice of; who beseech your Honors, that you would
also allow them to be Prisoners of hope, being such as no Act of Habeas Corpus
will relieve. The Adversaries of the Non-conformists, could not be satisfied
that their Ministers were outed of their livings, and (many of them) of their
whole Subsistence for themselves, Wives and Children, and by another Act
forbidden to reside in any place where they might expect a relief from the
Charity of good People, but many of them have been pursued to Excommunication
upon the Statutes for not coming to their Parish Church, (though certainly they
being Ministers of the Gospel, were themselves obliged to Preach on Lords
Days,) and being excommunicated, they have had the old Common Law writ, de
excommunicato capiendo taken out, and some of them upon it have been detained
3, 4, 7 Years; nor at the end of that Term, have their merciless Enemies been
willing to let them out, or let them take the advantage of the Law to come out,
and amongst the ordinary people, not a few have been thus used, to the ruin of
many Families, the exhausting great Sums of Money most injuriously from many
persons, and the prejudicing the Trade and Commerce of the Nation; and all this
by the abuse and profanation of a great Ordinance of God, that I mean of
Excommunication, using what was ordained of God for the purging of his Church
from persons not fit for its holy communion, merely to serve their Lusts of
malice and revenge; and to keep worthy Patriots from being chosen Members to
represent their Countries in your Honorable Assemblies, among many instances
of which nature you had one the last Parliament at Berwick in the case of Mr
Rushworth: and you have one yet more notorious this Parliament in
Leicestershire: as if their Excommunications disseised men of their Freehold,
or (which indeed looks more likely) the Subjects subjection to their Courts
brought them into the Notion of Bondmen. A practice which (if not timely by
your Honors taken notice of, and restrained) will give the Monoply of
suffrages into the hands of Registers, Officials and Proctors. This, Sir,
certainly will give our Honorable Senators just cause to inquire,

1. Whether Excommunication as now practiced by Officials in Ecclesiastical
Courts, be not an horrid profanation of a great Ordinance of God, and fit to be
reflected on by our Governors?

2. Whether the imprisonment of persons Excommunicated, by virtue of the writ
de excommunicato capiendo, be not as practiced a great oppression of the
Subject, and worthy of a Parliamentary consideration and relief?

3. Whether the writ de cautione admittenda, being the only relief provided by
Law for persons so imprisoned, has its just and free course?

The Honor and Glory of God being the first and principal concern, as well of
great Councels, as of particular persons; the first of these questions
deserves and challenges the preference, in disquisitions of this nature.

Whatever be the Judgment of some Foreign Divines, and whatever has been said
by Erastus, or others to the contrary; It is manifest, That our Church looks
upon Excommunication, as an Ordinance and institution of Christ, for the
keeping of the Church pure and unspotted (as the Spouse of Christ should be)
and this appears as from other evidence, so from the very form of Sentences
at this day usual in the Ecclesiastical Courts, which they usually begin In Dei
nomine, in the Name of God, and they tell us, they proceed to such sentences,
Christi nomine prius invocato, having first called upon the Name of Christ, ac
ipsum solum Deum praeponentes, setting God alone before them. Our Articles,
1552 tell us,

That excommunicate persons are to be avoided, as being rightly cut off from
the unity of the Church, and ought to be taken of the whole multitude of the
faithful, as Heathens and Publicans: Which Article is also verbatim in those
1562, and manifestly allude to that Text of our Savior, Matthew. 18. 17.
generally judged to be the Institution of this Ordinance under the Gospel; Nor
can any thing be clearer, then the declared Judgment of Archbishop Cranmer,
Bishop Goodrick, Dr. Cox, Dr. Peter Martyr, Dr. May, Dr. Tailor, Mr. Lucas, and
Mr. Goodrick; who were the 8 Persons, (part of 32 afterward intended) who
according to Three Acts of Parliament made in the case, were appointed by the
Letters Patents of Edward the 6th. Dat. Nov. 11. in the Fifth Year of His
Reign, and authorized to revise the Canon Law, and out of it to draw up a body
of Canon Law, which should alone be used in England, who did meet and draw up
such a body, (though King Edward lived not to confirm what they had done by His
Royal Sanction,) as may be seen by a Book, called Reformatio Legum
Ecclesiasticarum; printed 1670, and reprinted 1641. These great Divines tell us
in their Chapter about Excommunication;

That it is a Power and Authority derived from God to his Church, etc. and
Chap. 2. That the Church receives these keys from Christ.

To multiply words in this cause were vain, for none that ever owned
Excommunication, owned it in any other notion then as an Institution of
Christ's. And there is no pretense for any to seclude men from the enjoyment of
the means of Salvation, but Christ who is the Lord of the Church. Which being
granted, the true notion of excommunication is this.

It is a power granted by Christ to his Church, to remove lewd Persons, or such
as are Heretical, and are pertinacious in their lewd opinions and practices
from the Communion of the Church, in the holy Sacraments, and the fellowship of
Christians, till they reform: Which exactly agrees with the notion of it given
us in these words by Archbishop Cranmer, and other of our first Reformers in
their Book called Reformatio Legum Ecclesiasticarum. De Excommun. cap. 1.

Excommunicatio potestas est, and authoritas ad Ecclesiam a Deo profecta, quae
facinorosas personas, vel de religione nostra corrupt sentientes and ad suam
improbitatem adhaerescentes, a perceptione Sacramentorum and Reform Leg.
Eccles. Ed. 1641. p. 159.
etiam Chhristianorum fratrum usu, tantisper summovet, donec sensus sanos
recollegerint, and salutarium cogitationum apta signa dederint and poenas etiam
ecclesiasticas subierint, quibus ferocia carnis comprimitur, ut spiritus salvus
fiat.

Excommunication being thus universally agreed, to be a Divine Institution, it
must as to the use of it, be regulated by the Divine Rule. None can
Excommunicate, but those who are by Christ thereunto appointed. None ought to
be Excommunicated, but by warrant from the word of God, and Excommunication
must proceed with that gravity and leisure, which the same word has directed.
And every one sees that where any thing of this nature is done otherwise, It
is an horrible profanation of the Ordinance of God, and a woeful abuse of a
power which none but God could give unto any. That this power is given to the
Church from Christ, is agreed on all hands: Whether it rests in the whole
Church, or in the Governors of the Church, is the only question here.

That this power according to the institution of Christ belongs to the whole
particular Church, to whom the offender relates, is to me as clear as the
light. According to the Primitive direction, Matthew. 18. If he would not hear
the Church, he was to be us an heathen and a publican. The Apostle speaks to
the whole Church at Corinth, 1 Cor. 5. 4. That in the name of the Lord Jesus,
when they were gathered together and his spirit, with the power of the Lord
Jesus Christ, they should deliver such a one to Satan; and Excommunication
being not only a seclusion of the party from the enjoyment of Ordinances, but
from the intimate Communion of the Members of the Church; It is very absurd for
Officers in a Church, to think of secluding any from the communion of those who
will yet have fellowship and communion with them; and consonant to this was the
Judgment of the Ancient Church, that none ought to be excommunicated
dissentiente plebe, without the consent of the people, from whose communion he
was to be secluded. And without doubt as to the Major Excommunication, it is
the most rational thing imaginable, and our first Reformers in the
aforementioned Book called Reformatio legum Eccles. page 161. cap. 6. on this
subject, says; Totius Ecclesiae consonsus quanquam optabilis esset. That the
consent of the whole Church is desirable, but because it can very hardly be
procured, they ordain as there follows. That no one person should exercise
this power, etc. but that the Archbishop, or Bishop, or some other lawful
Judge, with a Justice of the Peace, and the proper Minister of the place where
the party accused dwells, or some other appointed by him, and two or three
other Religious Ministers should meet, in whose presence after a due and full
handling and weighing the cause, the party should be Excommunicated. Some will
have Excommunic^tion the Act of the whole Church only denounced by the
Minister. Others will have it the Act of the Presbytery or Governors of the
Church: Others who fix the Government in Bishops, will have it the Act of the
Bishop; but our Primitive Reformers would not have him do it, but with a
Justice of the Peace, the Minister of the place, and two or three other grave
Ministers, who all together, should hear, examine, and ponder the cause, and
agree, the person deserving such a punishment, which they might then Decree,
and the Minister of the place might Publish.

It being an institution of Christ's, it ought also to be denounced against none
but such only, as he has in his word appointed it for, which is not only
determinable from the letter of Scripture, but from reason concluding from the
End of the Institution. In the letter of Scripture, there is no pretense for
Excommunication of any, but for such crimes as shut a man (without Repentance)
out of the kingdom of God; those are either damnable Heresies, according to St.
Paul's direction to Titus, Chap. 3. v. 10. An Heretic after the first and
second admonition reject, and the example of St. Paul, 1 Timothy 1. 20. who
delivered up to Satan Hymeneus and Philetus, having made shipwreck of Faith; Or
lewd and vile practices, for which we have a president in the incestuous
person, mentioned 1 Cor. 5. and conform to this has been the constant judgment
of the Church, and our aforementioned Reformers in the book, and place
aforementioned determine, that they must be personae facinorosae and de
Religione nostra corrupt sentientes and ad suam improbitatem adhaerescentes.
Lewd persons, corrupt in their sentiments of Religion, pertinaciously adhering
to them, and yet more plainly in their third Chapter, which I shall Translate:

Excommunication ought not (say they) to be used in minute offenses, but upon
atrocious horrible crimes, when the Church is grievously scandalized, either
because Religion is overthrown, or good manners perverted by them, of this sort
are those of which St. Paul says, that those who do such things, shall not
enter into the Kingdom of God, or shall not inherit the Kingdom of God, or
because of those things the wrath of God comes upon the children of
disobedience. These horrible wickednesses ought to be punished by
Excommunication, so as they who are guilty of them shall be thus punished,
unless they in time reform, and when they are admonished, withdraw themselves
from these courses, and be willing to satisfy the Church for the damage it
has sustained from their offenses: for Excommunication is not to be used, but
when men have hardened themselves in their wickednesses, which happens two
ways, either when being called to answer for such offenses, they will not
appear; or if they do appear, they will not obey the admonitions of Judges.

This was the opinion of holy Cranmer, and Tailor, (two of our blessed Martyrs)
and those other good and learned men, that lived in King Edwards days, in the
very beginning of the Reformation, and were known to be none that could be
justly called Presbyterians by any who understand what Presbyterians are.
Besides, this is evident from the end of this Appointment, which is keeping the
Church pure as the spouse of Christ. Now how can the communion of any Church be
corrupted, but either by damnable Heresy, Superstitious or Idolatrous worship,
or by the lewd conversation of its members? from whence what was said before
follows, that none but damnable Heretics, Idolatrous, and persons lewd in
their lives, and Pertinaciously resolved to continue so, can by any right, or
authority from Christ be Excommunicated.

3. Further, it being an Institution of Christ, it must be used, as by those
persons whom he has appointed to it, and toward those persons only whom he
has willed should be so punished, as a means in order to their Reformation; So
with those circumstances and in that order only which he has prescribed, what
is that? let us look Matthew. 18. 16, 17. we shall find it must be after first,
second, and third admonition. St. Paul says, Titus 3. 10. After the first and
second admonition; Conformable to this has been the practice of the Primitive
Church, and such was the Judgment of our first Reformers, as may be seen in the
book beforementioned, cap. 4. page 160. I will translate the whole Chapter.

No Judge shall Excommunicate any person, unless he has admonished him once,
and again, and a third time if occasion be, that if it might be he might
seasonably reform his life, and there shall be a certain time allotted to the
offender for him to think and conclude with himself, whether he will obey the
admonition. But he that is rightly called [that is for such crimes as
Excommunication ought to proceed against] if he appears not prejently, runs
the danger of Excommunication.

From the premises naturally follows, That it is impossible that the holy
name of God our Savior should be more profaned, in the pretended use of any
institution of his, Then for them to meddle with it, whom he never appointed
thereunto, and for it to be applied to those whom he never directed the
application of it unto, and for it to be used in a method or manner contrary to
what he has directed. And for this Ordinance, it is an institution which he
has appointed for purging his Church from stubborn Heretics and lewd livers,
which he has ordained his Church, and the officers of it, should discreetly,
and with great gravity, leisure, and seriousness, use in order to that end.
First, calling before them persons accused of such guilt, then gravely
admonishing them, a first, second, third time giving them due leisure to think
upon their pious and grave counsel, and to amend, and if they do not, then they
are to declare them Separated from the Church in the Communion of all
Ordinances, but such as Heathens may communicate in, and such with whom the
members of the Church must have no intimate and unnecessary communion with
them, though they may buy and sell with them, as they may with Heathens, and
they ought to admonish them occasionally as they meet them, as those who have
formerly been Brethren, not counting them as Enemies. 2 These. 3. 14, 15.

Let us now, Sir, Examine, how this grave and dreadful Sentence is made use of
by Officials, for what end, upon what persons, and in what manner.

1. Excommunication among us is decreed by Officials, who are most of them
Doctors of Civil and Cannon Law, some of them but very few ordained persons,
but seldom or never by the Bishop or Minister of the place to which the
concerned person belongs; We indeed plead the necessity of Bishops for
jurisdiction, of which this is the main, but in practice confess there is no
such need, for persons are cited, admonished, Excommunicated, laid up in Gaols,
and the Bishop never knows of it. For persons not in orders to Excommunicate,
is an abomination not allowed in the Popish Church, and for any in orders to
excommunicate persons to whom they stand neither in the Relation of Chief
Pastors (as Bishops are accounted) nor curates, or subordinate pastors, is what
is warranted by no Authority from Gods word, nor any true primitive Authority,
nor the judgment, or practice of any other Reformed Church, nor the judgment of
our own first Reformers: So that plainly the institution is perverted, profaned
and abused, as to the Administrators of it. But let us enquire further.

2. All Excommunications proceed upon contempt, and ought not otherwise to
proceed. This contempt may be,

(1.) When persons duly cited for such Crimes, as by the rule of Christ men
ought to be censured for, do not appear.

(2.) When appearing, they yet refuse to obey the Ecclesiastical Judges
admonition of them, to amend such courses and practices as according to the
word of God they are to avoid, or if they persist in, to be cast out of the
Church. For, our Officials cause men ordinarily to be cited to their Courts,
not only for erroneous Doctrines, or for their lewd practices, such as
Drunkenness, Fornication, Adultery, Incest, Cursing, profane Swearing, etc. but
for any Crimes or Offenses which they take their Courts to have jurisdiction
of, which (as they make them) are almost innumerable; if they appear not as the
day, they are presently Excommunicated, though it may be, they were cited for
not paying a Churchwardens rates; and it may be where they were unjustly
taxed, or a Proctors Bill, which it may be is thrice what by Law it should be,
or for not coming to prove a Will, and an Hundred such like trivial things.

If they do appear, and the Judge admonishes them to appear next day, and they
fail, or to answer a Libel, which is illegal, and they are not in Law bound to
answer: Or an Hundred such like light things, they are again, if they obey not,
Decreed Excommunicate; So the punishment which Christ has appointed for the
most vile and flagitious Crimes, is daily made use of to punish the most minute
and trivial Offenses; expressly contrary both to Scripture, and to the Judgment
of all Reformed Churches, and our own Primitive Reformers.

3. According to the Rule of the Word of God, the Judgment of all Reformed
Churches, and our own First Reformers, Excommunication ought not to be agreed,
or decreed by any single persons, nor before a first, second, and (if need be)
a third admonition; and those so given, that the presumed guilty person, have
due leisure to consider with himself what to do, and to digest his pious
admonitions. But the way of our Officials is to admonish thrice in a Breath,
saying, I admonish you the first time, I admonish you the second time, I
admonish you the third time; I decree you Excommunicate, all in the Tenth part
of an hour.

Now, Sir, I offer it to your serious consideration, and the Reflection of any
person of Religion and Sense, whether this be not as high a profanation of an
Holy Institution of our Saviors, as can reasonably be imagined: Nor had it
been so long endured in this Reformed Church, had not King Hen. 8th. first,
then Edw. 6th. dyed before they had called together the 32 Persons which each
of them was by Authority of Parliament, designed to call together to revise the
Canons, and compile one body out of them, as may be seen by the Act 25, Hen.
8th. 19. and another Act in Hen. 5th. time, and another in the 3. Edward 6th
There being but Eight of them called, and those by Edw. 6th in the Fifth year
of his Reign, (as appears by his Commission, dat. 11. day of Nov. that year,
and preferred to the book before mentioned, called Reformatio Legum
Ecclesiasticarum.) But that Excellent Prince dyed, before that he had added his
Royal Sanction to that new formed systeme of Canons: So as though we have had
considerable Reformation in Doctrine and Worship; yet, we have had none in
Discipline, but 25. Hen. 8. 19. 14. Car. 2.
proceed according to all old Popish Canons and Methods, where they are not
contrariant or repugnant to the Kings prerogative, or the Laws of the Land,
which the Stat. restrains. I beseech you Sir, seriously consider* whether this
practice be not apparently a profanation of a Divine Institution, and taking
the Holy Name of God in vain; who has said, He will not hold him guiltless,
that takes his Name in vain. If it be, whether it be fit any longer to be
endured in a Nation that professes to Christ, especially considering, that by
the common Execution of this sentence, in stead of purging out the rotten and
putrid members of the Church, the soundest members are cut off; I mean, persons
of soberest Principles as to Faith, and the severest Lives; and men's Lusts are
served instead of Christ Our Excommunications being grown ordinary revenges of
particular spite and malice, when they have a mind to get a person out of a
City, or County, they know not why, or to be even with those, that would not be
awed to give their Suffrages for such Members to serve in Parliament as the
Officials, Registers and Proctors would have had. To all which is considerable,
the eminent oppression and ruin of many Persons and Families consequent to
this practice, which brings me to the second question propounded.

2. Whether the Imprisonment of persons upon the Writ de Excommunicato
capiendo, be not (as practiced) a great oppression of the Subject, and a
grievance worthy of a Parlimentary consideration, for Relief?

Our Common Law is, That when a person has stood Excommunicated 40 days, the
Bishop may send into the Chancery a Writing, signifying so much, (which Writing
is usually made, and the Bishops Hand and Seal set to it of course without his
knowledge;) upon which the party suing for it, shall have a Writ, which is
called the Writ de excommunicato capiendo, directed to the Sheriff, commanding
him to seize and imprison the person concerned, where he must lie without Bail
or Mainprize. This may be done as to any person who has stood Excommunicated
so long, but is seldom done, but where any Official, or Promoter, or
Churchwardens have a particular revenge to execute, or where the Registers
want Money; But these Writts within these few years, have flown abroad at a
very strange rate. If the Register can take any persons, they will serve out 5,
8, 10 pound, and set them at Liberty. Others shall lie in Prison during their
pleasure, till their Families be impoverished and ruined for want of their
Labor and care; and themselves have contracted some fatal disease, that either
they dye there, or soon after they come out, or live a valetudinarious Life
ever after. My self have known, One, a reverend Minister, kept thus 7 years,
another 4 years, others a long time: One poor man I knew, dragged out of his
deathbed, (so it was then like to prove, and in few days did prove,) by
Bailiffs, and his Friends enforced to redeem him for five pounds paid to the
Register, which proved but the dear purchase of a few hours life, abundance of
such instances might be produced. These punishments are all inflicted by the
civil Magistrate, he issues the Writ to the Sheriff, whose Bailiffs by his
precept seize the person, and whose Jaylour keeps them. Sir, I have oftenstood
amazed to think how any intelligent civil Magistrate could answer this dealing
with people before God. Admitting a person unduly Excommunicated, (and it is
not one of ten but is so) either for a cause which the Law of God will not
justify, (and that alone can justify the lawfulness of an Excommunication,)
or for causes, or in manner and methods which the Law of men will not justify,
only the ignorance of honest simple souls, or their want of money keeps them
prisoners. I would gladly know of him that can answer me, upon whom the blood
and ruin, of these persons or their wives and children must lie, and who shall
account to God for it another day? For an account must be made, and the cry of
the innocent shall be heard and adjudged.

In the case admitted, here is plainly an Act of high unrighteousness,
oppression and cruelty, and what before God amounts to no less then Murder or
Robbery. The question is, who is guilty of it? It is true, the Kings Name for
form sake is used in those Writts, but he is not concerned in the guilt, nor
knows any thing of it. It shall not lie upon me, says the Cursitor, I did
issue out the Writ indeed, but that is the duty of my place to issue out any
Common Law Writ; Not upon me says the Sheriff, I did but Execute the Writ,
Nor upon me says the Bailiff, I did but Execute the Sheriffs precept upon the
Writ; Nor upon me says the Jailer, I did but keep him according to the
Sheriffs Warrant. I do not think any one can be excused, who knowingly has had
an hand in the action. Neither the Official who decreed the Excommunication.
Nor the Minister that published it, nor the Officials or Register that
signified in the cause; nor the Cursitor that issued out the Writ, nor the
Sheriff that Executed it; nor the Bailiff or Jailer. I am sure in other causes
at our Law, the Justices or other Officers illegal warrant will not justify the
Constable or Jailer for false imprisonmen. We had another Writ much of the
same batch taken away by the last Parliament; upon which the Sheriff burned
honest men, judged Heretics by the Churchmen. I would gladly understand who
were guilty of those worst of murders. The Sheriff there did but Execute the
Common Law Writ in the cause, would that excuse him, think we? It seems my
Lord Cook did not so judge, for before he would take the Sheriffs Oath, he got
the clause abated, by which he should have been obliged to persecute the
Lollards; but admit, Sir, that all these inferior Ministers of Magistracy were
excused, because they do but Execute an unrighteous Law: The guilt must then
lie upon those that made the Law, and that suffer it still to continue in
force, having power in their hands to annul it. I take it to be true in
Divinity, that no command of man can justify any Minister before God, in any
act of impiety or unrighteousness, much less alter the nature of the action,
and make that pious and righteous, which is predetermined by the Law of God
impious or unrighteous to assert any such Atheological position, is in plain
terms to make the Creature paramount to God, and a Controuler of his Creator;
but if it would, still the guilt must lie somewhere.

2. But, Sir, Does it no deserve some further deliberation, whether the Civil
Magistrate has any obligation from God upon him thus to corroborate
Church Censures? I do know that our Common Law Writ de excommunicato capiendo
says, -- qu^a querelis Ecclesiae deesse non debemus: But I want one Text of
Scripture to prove any such thing. The great ends of excommunication are

1. Purging the communion of the Church. 2. The Reformation of the offender.
The first end is obtained by Excommunication; if indeed an Excommunicated
person will intrude into the Communion of the Church, it is a breach of the
peace, and falls under the Magistrates cognizance.

For the Second end, A Gaol in ordinary cases proves a very inadequate medium
to the Reformation of any person, and where it does one good, it is found upon
experience to do hurt to an hundred: Humane Nature is rarely tamed by such
rough applications: I never yet knew any cured of their Nonconformity by being
laid up in Prison: It Is such an Anti-Evangelical way of Cure, as has not met
with any success, that can farther commend it. When our Blessed Savior
instituted the purgation of his Church, He spoke not a word of a Gaol; He
ordained, that his Church should send for an Erroneous and Scandalous person,
endeavor to convince the Gainsayer of his error, instructing him with all
meekness, rebuking him with all gravity, by the Mouths of their grave Pastors
and Teachers. That if doing this once would not produce the desired effect,
they should do it a second, then a third time, waiting to see if God at any
time would give him a heart to repent. If this would not do, That the Church
being in the Name of Christ gathered together, should declare such a person cut
off from the Communion of his People. This now done by persons not guilty of
the like or worser Crimes, and clothed with the Authority of Christ, is a
probable means to reduce the offender; however, the Church is cleared from such
a person, and its Communion is kept pure; though the Person be thus cut off
from Communion, yet the Church shall not count him as an Enemy, but mourn over
him, pray for him, admonish him as a Brother. How came in the Writ de
Excommunicato capiendo; as if the Ordinance of God had not sufficient Authority
for its ends? For 300 years after Christ, the Church could have no such
assistance, nor do we read that it complained for the want of it, possibly here
and there God might make some pertinacious Heretic or debauchee, an
extraordinary Example of his Vengeance. He has done so in our Age, in the case
of Mrs. Hutchinson in New England; but that God ever did. This ordinarily for
the first 300 years can be proved by no Scripture, no Authentic Authority; But
as the Popish Government crept up by degrees, so pretended Church Officers
began to enlarge their jurisdiction, and to excommunicate for slight and
trivial causes without any pretense of Authority from God, but merely to
subjugate people to their Wills, and get fees for Chancellors, Officials,
Registers, etc. They had no reason to trust God any longer to vindicate their
usurped Authority, and to justify their groundless and impious
Excommunications and Anathemaes. They must therefore now call in the Civil
Magistrate to do that which they could not expect that God should ever do. Now
come Writts to be invented. To imprison persons excommunicated. To take
Apostates. To burn Heretics, etc. The Ordinance of God, was first turned into
Ridicule, by dealing it out as Solomon says, Prove. 26. 18. the mad man casts
firebrands, arrows and death, and most lewd and vicious persons employed to
dispense this grave sentence, principally to be used against lewd persons, so
as every one that heard them, cried out, Physician heal thy self, and all sober
persons thought they heard God speaking to them; What have thou to do to
declare my Statutes, and that thou should take my name, or my authority, or
my censures into thy mouth, seeing thou hate instruction, and castest my
words behind thee? and then the civil Magistrate was called in to help the
Church, in her male-administrations, whose work indeed was to have whipped these
buyers and sellers out of the Lords Temple, and then the glory of the Lord
would again have appeared betwixt the Cherubims, Excommunication would have
appeared dreadful enough without the appendix of a Gaol. There was never any
need of Gaoles to punish excommunicated persons, till persons came to be
excommunicated for not paying Sextons wages, Proctors fees, Easter two-pences,
Tythe-piggs, and Geese, not coming to the Parish Church, not signing with the
Cross, not wearing Surplices, not kneeling at the Sacrament (crimes not
mentioned in the word of God) yea for preaching the Gospel, meeting together to
pray to God, or to hear a good Sermon. And it is not a Gaol will convince those
offenders that they do evil. Obj. But I hear some say, These are all acts of
disobedience to Authority, and disobedience is as the sin of witchcraft. Resp.
Disobedience to the Law of God, (of which Samuel speaks) is indeed as the sin
of witchcraft, but yet every disobedience to the Law of God is not to be
punished by Excommunication. It will be hard to justify it to be the will of
God, that persons should be excommunicated for every idle word, of which they
must give account, or for an 100 things forbidden by the Law of God, much less
for all things forbidden by the Law of God. Nor is a Gaol the punishment set
for every disobedience to the Law of man.

3. But, Sir, admit a person were duly Excommunicated according to the Law of
God (which not one of a hundred is, not one of ten duly according to the laws
of men, witness the Judges relieving many by Writs of prohibition, habeas
corpus, supersedeas, etc. and many more would be so relieved, were they
acquainted with the law, or had they purses to take the advantage of it;) yet I
very much doubt, whether the Civil Magistrate with a safe Conscience can send
him to prison, and so be a means of his ruin. My reason is because he has had
no knowledge of his crime, further than that an Official has told him, he has
been excommunicated 40 days. I take for granted, and I appeal to your reasons,
whether any Magistrate ought not to do what he does out of judgment and upon
certain knowledge? Our law suffers not the Magistrate to grant an execution
against any for forty shillings, till he has been arrested, and he has heard
what he or his Council can say in his own defense; but in these cases, the
Magistrate commands a person to be imprisoned and ruined, and neither does, nor
may hear any thing of his cause. It is true at our Assizes and Sessions
Malefactors are condemned, to be whipped, branded, imprisoned, hanged; but the
Sheriff who is to be the Executioner of these sentences, has his place there,
and a liberty to hear the persons case tried, and he does hear the case argued,
so as that he is or may be convinced the person deserves such a punishment,
which done, as a Minister of God and of Justice he may proceed with a
conscience not rebuking him. But in these cases, the Civil Magistrate has no
such liberty, but proceeding upon the credit of the Official, and his supposed
justice and honesty.

4. I cannot discern a figleaf to cover the nakedness of this, but what is
usually objected; That this is according to Law. The meaning of which is no
more then this; That this has been a custom in England, and there is a Common
law writ in this case, formed by Judges in Popish-times, and not since
corrected by Act of Parliament. If this plea be good, we have reason to bless
God, that we were not burnt at stakes before the writ de combu^endis Haereticis
was by the last Parliament annulled, there was then as much law for that, as
for this. But is it to be wondered, that while the Nation was enslaved to the
Pope, such things should be? A Magistrate under Popery, is but the Popes slave
and Executioner. If a Magistrate would not do what the Church (as they called
it) commanded, he was Excommunicated, his Nation interdicted, no Priests durst
perform any divine Offices in that unholy ground, and no sooner is a Prince
Excommunicated by them, but every subject is by them made a Traitor, authorized
to poison, stabb, shoot him, or to rise up in Rebellion against him, and all
his neighbor Princes are armed with what authority the Pope can give them to
invade him, and despoil him of his Dominions. Now that magistrates under these
circumstances should have temptations, to burn, and hang, and imprison men,
never knowing why, or whether they were any way guilty of any thing worthy of
any such death or bonds, is no way to be admired. But that in a Protestant
Country, where Magistrates are under no such temptations to fear, such things
should be done, is matter of just admiration; and no Magistrate ought to punish
persons under pretense of an usage and custom so to do, before they be
satisfied, that they have deserved such a punishment.

5. But further, Sir, Admit That the practice has been Law, as they call it,
that is a custom in England time out of mind; and that it is law, that is, that
there is such a Writ still may be had from Cursitors. This custom had never
been continued after the Reformation, had not King Hen. 8. and K. Edw. 6. both
dyed, before they had perfected what by Act of Parliament they were to do, and
had began to do, as appears by the Epistle of Hen. 8. and the Letters Pattents
of Edw. 6. prefixed to the book Entitled Reformatio legum Ecclesiasticarum. It
is true (as it may appear from the 13 chap. of that Book) persons that stood
Excomunicated 40 days, should have been imprisoned. But therefore none was to
be Excommunicated, but a Civil Magistrate, as well as the Bishop, etc. was to
hear his cause, and if any Judge Excomunicated any, unless for such notorious
crimes as are mentioned chap. 3. and with such deliberation as is mentioned
chap. 4. himself (as appears chap. 8.) was not for a months space to enter into
Church, (unless to receive the Commuinion.) The Superior was to relieve the
person so injured, and to annul the Excommunication, and the Judge that so
Excommunicated, was to pay all the charges, and further punished at the
pleasure of the Superior Judge. -- That (say they) Judges may be afraid of
bringing persons into so great calamity without a most weighty cause. And may
not such a custom be rescinded by a Statute law? have not many old Popish
Customs been so abolished? Is there not reason sufficient? are not the cries
of people in all corners of the Nation against it? Is there not in the skirts
of it great quantities of the blood of Innocents? Have there not within these
late years been more presidents then ever before of most unrighteous
Excommunications? were there ever before 100 in one place, 5 or 600 in another
decreed Excommunicated, whose greatest crime (whatever is pretended) was their
giving free Suffrages for Members to serve in Parliament?

Let Sir, I beseech you the cry of the oppressed come before you, for your God
does not despise it. Let the honor of Magistracy be valued by you, let them no
longer be mere blind Executioners of the lusts and malice of men, and
vindicators of the illegal and impious actions of others. There is no Sober man
in these Nations, but dreadeth Excommunication duly administered and applied,
because of the authority of God in it. But they must then see it used only
against the enemies of God; Drunkards, Unclean persons, Cursers, Swearers,
Heretics, Idolaters, Perjured persons, Blaspemers, etc. and applied to them by
grave and holy Bishops and Ministers, before it, once and again, laboring to
convince them of their sin from the word of God, and advising them to reform,
and waiting for their Reformation, and at last with grief and tenderness, with
gravity and seriousness, proceeding to so dreadful a sentence. How forcible are
such right words? but what or whom have our arguings of that nature reproved?
who will, who can believe, that is bound in heaven, which by these hands, and
for these causes, and in this slighty and praecipitant manner is bound on
Earth? But, Sir, there is yet one thing more in this case, which I must crave
leave to offer to your Deliberation.

3 Qu. Whether the Writ de Cautione admittenda, being almost the only Writ for
the relief of persons imprisoned, upon the Writ de Excommunicato capiendo, has
its free course yea or no?

The tenderness of our forefathers for the liberty of the Subjects person, is
obvious to every one, who has the least knowledge of the Law of England. If a
man be unduly imprisoned, he may relieve himself, 1. By Action upon Magna
Charta, which provideth that none shall be imprisoned, but upon the judgment of
his Peers, or by the Law of the Land. 2. By the Writ de Odio and Atia. 3. By
the Writ de Homine Replegiando. 4. By a Writ of Habeas Corpus, Supersedeas,
Prohibition. etc. in diverse causes. But because by an old custom, persons
imprisoned at the Churchs desire were not Bailable, There was a particular Writ
devised for their relief. For our forefathers never intended the Subjects
should lie at the Officials mercy. The old Law therefore provided, that persons
so imprisoned sending to the Bishop, and tendering him a Caution for their
future obedience, to that command of the Ecclesiastical Court which they had
disobeyed, they should be discharged, three legal Cautions were prescribed. 1.
By Pledge. 2. By Bond* 3. By Oath. The Subject tendering any of these might be
discharged, by the old Law of England, under the greatest Popish Tyrrany and
Usurpation. The Law further provided a Writ (if the Bishop refused the Caution)
to command him to take it. I will transcribe it as I find it in the Register of
Writs, immediately following the Writ de Excommunicato capiendo, (as they say
the God of Nature has in some Countries planted Antidotes in view of poisonous
plants. v. Reg. Bren. Orig. and Judicialium, Londini, 1634.) It has this
Rubric:

Si Episcopus idoneam cautionem de parendo mandatis Ecclesiae ab hujusmodi
excommunicato imprisonato admittere recusaverit, volens ipsum per prisonam
gravare. Tunc mittat amicum ad Curiam and fiat ei Breve sic. That is, If the
Bishop having a mind to oppress the party, shall refuse to accept a fit
Caution, then let him send any friend to the Court, and let a Writ be made to
him thus. Whence I observe,

1. That even in those times, Officials were for keeping Persons in Prison
contrary to all Law and Justice.

2. That to remedy that Evil, this Common Law Writ was invented.

3. That it is of the same Authority and as much Law, as the Writ de
Excommunicato capiendo.

4. That it is not a Writ of Discretion, which may be g^anted, or refused, as
Officers please, and therefore to be obtained by Petitions or Motions, but a
Writ of Common Justice, which ought not to be denied by Cursitors to any
Friend of the Imprisoned Person, coming to the Cursitor, and demanding it.

5. One thing I might further add, that it is upon the point, the only remedy
provided in Law for persons thus imprisoned. The party is not remediable by
action, or indictment upon Magna Charta, because though he be not imprisoned by
the Verdict of his Peers, yet he is imprisoned per Legem terrae, by the Custom
of England; nor by the Writ de Homine replegiando, because that runs. --
Unless the party be imprisoned for something, for which according to the custom
of England he is not repleviable, which is the case here; nor by the Wit de
Odio and Atia, for it is hard to make out that such a Person is imprisoned out
of malice, though he indeed be so: Nor by any Writ of Supersedeas. Indeed by
the Writ of Habeas Corpus, a person thus imprisoned, may bring himself before
the Judges at Westminster, but they shall only judge whether he be justly
Excommunicated from the Significavit which is before them. If the significavit
says it is for contempt of the Court, being legally cited to answer for such
Crimes as are Cognoscible in that Court, whether he were ever legally cited, or
no, The Judges cannot relieve him, the parties Remedy lies against the
Official, by Action of the case, and if he tries that way, if the Apparitor
has sworn in the Court, that he did duly cite him, whether he did or no; No
action will lie but against the Apparitor, which is a lamentable remedy. If
indeed it be contained in the significavit that he has been accused for
Crimes, which have been legally proved, and he admonished, and not obeyed, but
suffered himself to be Excommunicated, and stood so forty days. And the party
can make it appear, That the pretended Crimes were no Crimes, or not
cognoscible in that Court, or that they were not legally proved by two
VVitnesses, or that they have been pardoned, or that he offered the Bishop
caution, and he has refused, or that he did not stand Excommunicated 40 days,
or that the Writ of Excommunicato capiendo, was not legally taken out as is
limited by the Stat. 5. Eliz. 23. Or that he has appealed according to Law; in
these cases he may be relieved by Habeas Corpus, or it may be a less chargeable
way by Supersedeas (of which yet I am not certain if the Writ be Executed)
but the true legal relief of the Subject, if the Bishop refuses Caution, I
take to be by this Writ de cautione admittenda: Though it be advisable for
every Excommunicated person, as soon as his Excommunication is published, to
send one or two to the Bishop, and to offer a Cautionary bond, which by Law he
ought to take; if he refuses, it may be advisable for him, as soon as he
hears the Writ is out against him, to move for a supersedeas upon that
suggestion, or a Prohibition (if it will bear it;) if not, without more ado,
to yield himself a Prisoner, and then bring this Writ de Cautione admittenda,
you shall find the Writ in the Register of Writ, Printed in Lat. 1634. p.
66. in English thus,

The King to the Venerable, etc. On the behalf of A. whom upon your
denunciation, we have commanded by our High Sheriff to be Imprisoned, as a
person excommunicate, and contemning the Keys of the Church, until he shall
give Satisfaction to Holy Church, as well for his contempt, as for the injury
done unto it. It has been showed us, that although A. aforesaid has often
offered you a fitting Caution for his obeying the Legal Commands of the Church,
that so he might have the benefit of absolution; yet, you to our admiration
have hitherto refused to accept such Caution. And because we will not have the
said A. detained in Prison against Justice; We Command you to accept the
aforesaid Caution, and deliver A. from the Prison in which he is detained upon
the aforesaid Account. Otherwise we will do what is our part to perform.

Our wise Ancestors foresaw some Bishops might refuse Obedience to the Kings
Writ, and in that case they provided that the Prisoner should have a second
Writ directed to the High Sheriff of the County: The tenor of which in
English is thus, as it stands upon Record in the Register of VVritts in the
place aforementioned.

The King to the High Sheriff of the County of L. Greeting. On the part of A.
whom we Commanded you to Imprison according to the custom of England, as being
Excommunicated, and contemning the Authority of the Church, until he should
satisfy, etc. And it was showed us, that although the aforesaid A. often
offered the Bishop a fitting Caution, etc. yet, the said Bishop (which we
wonder at) refused to accept the said Caution, etc. Because we will not that
the said A. should longer be kept in Prison, contrary to Justice, we Command
you to go in person to the Bishop aforesaid, and in our Name admonish him, and
effectually declare [Our Will] unto him, that taking the Caution of the
aforesaid A. he command the aforesaid A. to be delivered from the prison
aforesaid. And if the said Bishop refuse in your presence to do it, do you
Command A. to be delivered from the Prison aforesaid, if he be kept there on no
other account.

Our forefathers ordained that both these Writts might be had with sicut alias,
and pluries, and not resting here ordered an Attachment against the Sheriff, in
case he refused to yield obedience to the Writ, which Attachment is in the
Register thus:

The King to His Coroners in the County of K. Greeting, If W. of W. Clerk, etc.
Causes you, etc. Then put, etc. W. the High Sheriff of our County aforesaid to
give security, that he shall be before us such a day, to show Cause why,
whereas we lately commanded the body of the aforesaid William to be Imprisoned
according to the custom of England; upon the Bishop of Ely his denunciation of
him as Excommunicate, and contemning the Authority of the Church, until he
should satisfy the Holy Church, etc. and we hearing that although the
aforesaid W. often offered the Bishop fitting Caution, etc. yet he has refused
to accept it; by reason of which we often commanded him our High Sheriff
aforesaid, in person to go to the said Bishop, etc. and that he should command
the said A. to be delivered, or signify the cause to us, why he disobeyed our
commands, etc. or to appear before us, etc. and there to have our Writ
directed unto him; yet, the High Sheriff aforesaid despising our Command to do
the premises, or at least give us a reason why he would not, or could not
Execute the same, or appear before us the day aforesaid; and regarded not to
make return of our Writ as we hear, to the manifest contempt both of us, and
our Commands aforesaid, and the no small damage and oppression of the said W.
And we command you, that you taking a fitting caution of the said W. for his
obeying the Commands of the Church according to Law, and deliver him from the
Prison aforesaid, if he be there detained upon that and no other account.

This, Sir, is the known Law of England, in the case of persons so imprisoned;
nor is it possible, any English Liberty should be more fortified.

But, Sir, My Lord Chancellor Hide (to whom we are beholden for more of this
nature then this) by what Authority I cannot tell, turned this Writ of Common
Justice to be granted readily, and of course into a Writ of Discretion, making
an Order, That it should not be granted, but upon a Petition first offered for
as to him, or the Successive Lord Chancellors, or Lord Keepers; which Petition
he took a liberty to grant, or not to grant as he pleased: (We were beholden
to him that he did not put the like restraint upon all other VVritts of Common
Justice, for he might have done it by the like Authority.) Hence this Writ is
not gained but with great charge and difficulty. I mean the first Writ to the
Bishop: With what Justice this is done, Sir, I leave to you to determine.

When it is granted, some Bishops have taken themselves to be at liberty,
whether to Obey it or no. Some have utterly refused it, with the expression of
great anger, and threatening Persons that they should seek to come out of Prison
that way, [that is, by an established Common Law Writ.] Yet, all that these
men have to say against the Non-conformists, is their not obeying the Law, and
what Law can be plainer then this, or more strong and just?

When the Bishop has thus refused, (which has been often,) I beseech you,
Sir, inquire what success they have had, who have moved for the Second Writ to
the High Sheriff. It has been often moved for; I beseech you Sir inquire what
the reason is, that all His Majesty's Subjects cannot obtain these Writts of
Common Justice from Cursitors. Why the Writ de Excom. capiendo flies about so
freely, and the Writ de Cautione admittenda is got so difficultly, when the
latter is as good Law, and as much the demanders right, as the former; and the
latter is for the Liberty of the Subjects person, (which all the Law of England
highly favors) and the former is for the restraint of it. If Sir, (till a
Statute can be obtained to procure good men's Liberty from an old Popish
Writ,) the Law must have its course on that hand: I pray let it have its
course on the other hand also; and let us not have the Liberty of our persons
at the mercy of every Register that wants Money.

Sir, I would not be mistaken, I very well know, that in such Chancellours
Court, in the Court of the Arches and Delegates, etc. many great and weighty
causes of great and momentous natures are heard, and they at present have no
engine, no method of Law, but by way of Excomunication, prescribed to force the
appearance of persons to answer charges, or to force an obedience to their
decrees. I have nothing to do to direct my Sovereign, or a Parliament by what
Courts or Judges, such or such causes shall be tried, be they by whom his
Majesty and his Parliament please; nor is it reasonable that they should be
without a Coercive power, both for appearance at their commands, and obedience
to their Decrees; Your Honorable Assembly knows how to reach them out a sword
fit for their use, though they take not this which God has laid up as Sacred
in his Sanctuary, In our Common Law, there is Judgment by default; in our
little Courts, there are Amerciaments; In the High Court of Chauncery, there is
an Attachment, and then a Writ of Rebellion. May it please you, Sir, to put any
of these swords into their hands. But oh forbear this edged tool, which wounds
both soul and body, and is not to be used but by them, to whom, and against
them, whom, and in the manner wherein our Common Lord has said smite, and what
you bind on Earth shall be bound in Heaven. I beg your pardon for so long a
letter, I should truly judge it tedious, were it not upon an unusual subject,
and where the matter led me to it, and did I not know your great zeal for the
Glory of God, the Subjects just Liberty, and your compassion for many persons,
and families, already undone, and every day undoing, if your Honorable
Assembly comes not seasonably in to their rescue. Humbly committing them, Sir,
together with your Honorable Assembly to the God of all Order, and Government,
and the fountain of all wisdom, I take my leave, and rest, Sir, etc.

FINIS.

