THE Dilucidation of the Late Commotions OF TURKEY.

Containing an Exact and Distinct Account of all the Causes and Motives of the
deposing of Mahomet, and of the advancing of Soliman to the Imperial Throne of
Constantinople.

Gathered from the Letters of a Person dwelling in, and Minutely informed of
the Affairs of that City, and Consecrated to the ever August Merit of the most
Serene Elector of Bavaria.

Printed in Italian at Venice, and Translated into English by the Author of the
Monthly Account. To be Annexed to Numb. 10. of the Monthly Account.

LONDON, Printed by I. B. and Published by Randal Tailor, near Stationers' Hall.
1689.

A Full and Distinct ACCOUNT OF THE Late Commotions IN Constantinople.
AMong the Considerations that may move the minds of Great men to enquire with
exact Diligence into things that daily occurr in matters of State, none of the
smallest is that of shrifting into the rises and Motives of Changes and
Tempests of Government, by reason that very often from a a most inconsiderable
Cause are derived the total subversions of Kingdoms, though barely to reflect
upon the beginning of these vicissitudes, would be esteemed a thing rather
worthy of ridiculous Contempt, than of mature Consideration. The first Monarchy
of the World, which was that of the Assyrians had its fall from a most
frivolous and accidental Contingency, through Sardanapalus their last King
suffering himself to be seen in a Female Habit by his General, whence that of
the Modes had its rise, which again merely by a Dream was tumbled down the
Precipice, and so the others that started up can hardly boast any more
considerable Origin of their Ruin. Thus it is not only useful, but also
necessary for Princes to observe minutely the train of things, in the matter of
the winding up the fate of Great Potentates, that so in the School of the
Events of others they may find their own instruction, and so provide themselves
with Preservatives against the intervention of the like Cases.

The Ottoman Monarchy, which for many Ages has been raised up to the highest
pitch by Victories and Conquests, now like to the former, is running on to a
ruinous Precipice: And though it has used its utmost efforts to uphold it self
against the violence and Impetuosities of contrary Accidents, which guide it to
a Fall, yet must it suffer the vicissitudes of Natural things, which after
having increased to a certain pitch of greatness, pay the necessary Tribute to
their Decay and Debasement. The late Convulsions which have been for some
Months at Constantinople have more than a little contributed to the Depression
of that Empire, with the Deposing the Grand Signior Mahomet, and the advancing
of Soliman his Brother; adding thereunto the total Change of the Principal
Ministers, who with the spilling of their own Blood have stained the new
Monarchs Purple. The Knowledge of this is come to and spread throughout the
whole World, but altered either by passion or affection, conformably as
Interest or Adulation requires, and the particulars of those Convulsions have
been divulged neither with that Evidence nor that Clearness, as my intention is
to do at present, desiring to give the ensuing Account, as it was taken upon
the Place of the Occurrences herein related, and from such Persons as would
secure it of the judicious consideration and virtuous Curiosity of the most
noble Geniusses.

Before that the Elector of Bavaria seconded by other Imperial Squadrons had
near Esseck disordered, put to flight and utterly routed the Ottoman Army,
Intestine Dissentions overwhelmed the same by the means of Soliman Pacha, Grand
Vizier, and Osman Chiaus Pacha, because that this Latter having ever before
been used to be the head of the Asiatique High-way-men, and to scowr over all
without any Military Discipline, one while Plundering one Village, and then
another, and withal not scorning to robb and strip Passengers, he could not
confine himself to the streights of a Pass assigned him by the Grand Vizier in
order to guard it, and very bitterly bore with the being subordinate to other
Peoples Commands, whereupon the Pass being attacked by the Imperial Troops, the
Most Serene Elector of Bavaria having advanced at the head of them with
incomparable Resolution, he presently made Osman sensible that his Dastardly
Retreat was the having to do with Martializ'd Men; that his pretended Valor
was only the false Bravery of Highway-Men, and that it was a Temerarious
Presumption in him to think chat the Conduct or flashy Gallantry of a Robber
could entitle him to the Soldiery. This occasioned the Grand Vizier's and
Osmans Impraching each other at the Port of the Unhappy success of the Ottoman
Armies. But the Viziers Party prevailed as being grounded upon Reason, and as
having made appear that he in the Retrenchments of the Quarters, and in
ordering of the Troops, had not been wanting to exert the Talents of a Prudent
and Experienced General; if the other had shown that of a Faithful Minister
in maintaining so very important a Post as was left to his Fidelity and
Custody. In the mean while orders were dispatched from the Port to the Grand
Vizier to secure Osman and his Adherents, by putting them in Prison or else to
Death, conformably as he should judge most Expedient for the weal of the
present Posture of Affairs. He, however being of a Nature very distant from
imbruing his Hands in the Subjects Blood, considered, that it was not then a
time to foment the boiling humors of the Army that was in overgreat Dejection
and Confusion through the late Defeat, he judged it more advisable to conceal
and surcease the supreme order, and to connive at all patiently till a more
convenient season, or that a more happy conjuncture afforded him the
opportunity of executing it without a noise. But Osman who had by other means
penetrated the secret, managed himself with Extraordinary Caution, ever
laboring under Apprehensions of being unexpectedly surpised, and being a
Person that knew how to captivate the Affections of the Militia by the hopes of
Booty, attempted, and sped in making them Mutiny against Soliman, who having
neither forces to resist, nor means to pacify the Soldiery, esteemed it a
judicious Resolution by flight to escape from the Rage of the Mutinous Troops,
as he did in the Company of the Tefterdar or Grand Treasurer, and the Raise
Effendi or Great Chancellor, going in a Boat upon the Danube as far as Russe,
and from thence passing Post to Adrianople, where he stayed to attend the Grand
Signiors orders.

But because the rout of the Army had occasioned a more than ordinary Confusion
in the Grand Signior's Mind, Regeb Pacha, the Kaimecam, found it a difficult
Province to pacify him, and to make him sensible that it was an effect of
fortune, and not any want of failure in the General: It becoming Regeb to be
more than ordinary urgent to uphold Solimans Reputation, as having been
advanced by him to the Office of Kaimacam; And accordingly he at length
succeeded, and withal obtained a Promise from the Grand Signior to be made
Grand Vizier.

In the mean while Osman Chiause's Mutinous Troops gave no small matter for
Apprehension; seeing after having Sacked and Plundered the Tents and Movables
of the Vizier Soliman upon his flight, they would also make appear to the Port,
this to have been done through a Motive of just Resentment, and not the effect
of a Rebellious Spirit. For this intent they elected out of the Body of the
Army four Commissioners, whom they sent to Constantinople, at the same time
that the Grand Signior to quiet them had ordered that a Vest and Sword should
be dispatched to Osman declaring him Seraskier, and had permitted Soliman to
repair to Constantinople. While Soliman was on his way thither, he had notice
from sure hands of the foresaid Commissioners or Deputies journey, and
understood, that the Demand they had to make in the name of the whole Army,
was, that they would absolutely have him deposed from being Grand Vizier. Upon
this he made a halt, and having consulted several Opinions, he determined to
consigne the seal and Prophets Standard to the Tefterdar and to Raise Effendi,
that they might present them to the Grand Signior, and he having left the high
Road god privately into Constantinople. He would not go directly to hazard his
own Person at a time that the Deputies of the Army might have inculcated some
distaste in Grand Signier's Mind, whom fear did easily make suceptible of any
impression; but thought expedient to keep private, hoping that by the means of
the Kaimecan his Creature to facilitate his ingresse to the Grand Signior, and
that he might with the more Security make his vindication, when the Deputies
were departed.

These Deputies had their Audience, and their Demand being understood, the
Grand Signior was at a loss for Council, and compelled by the present
necessity, he determined Osman Chiaus Pacha for Vizier, dispatching the Seal to
him with the Prophets standard by the Selicter, who is the Officer that carries
the Grand Signiors Sword; furthermore commanding expressly Raise Effendi, and
the Tefterdar to return with all diligence to the Camp.

While that in Constantinople such Resolutions were preparing to apply speedy
Remedies to all these Evils, came notice to the Court, that the Soldiery being
become more contumatious than ever, were not only intent upon their own
satisfaction, but proceeding from Military to Political matters, pretended to
lay hand to the Helm, and with the Sword cut through the Chain of the present
Government. The Soldiers considered, that the Principal Ministers, being
brought into discredit with, and Suspicion of the Prince, he would have neither
force nor Council to resist the Violence of a Resolute Army. The Grand Signior
labored under such a daunting surprise that he would have postpon'd any
Political consideration to the Preservation of his own Person and Degree;
whereupon the Soldiers having gained their Point of placing in the management
of public Affairs Ministers depending on them, might the more freely give a
loose to their Rapines, Insolences and undue and boundless Pretentions of Pay,
without fearing Correction, seeing those who were to obviate such exorbitances
were of their party; and then having once set foot upon the Authority of their
supreme Lord, it would be no difficult matter in other Occurrences to improve
the same means for the attaining of their Demands. In the mean while they
marched away for Constantinople with a firm Resolution and most solemn Vow to
reform the present Government, and to cause to fall as victimes to their own
establishment the Head of the Kislar Aga, and Chief of the Black Eunuchs, who
was the Grand Signiors Chiefest Favorite, and many Others as well within as
without the Seraglio.

This unexpected Advice did in such manner surprise Mahomets mind, as not being
a person used to such like Encounters, that he absolutely lost all hopes not
only of interrupting the execution of this Design, but also of making the least
opposition. Indeed Regeb Kaimecam did with a Courageous and undaunted Spirit
face all these threatening Dangers, and advised the Grand Signior to retire into
the Great Seraglio, and to provide it with his choicest and valiantest Troops
as a Bank against the inundations of the Rebellious squadrons. He made a shift
to give his Prince to understand that the suddenly giving way to the temerity
of mutinying Subjects, was a giving them Liberty and Encouraging them to have
often recourse to the like disloyal way of proceeding, which they would the
less doubt their succeeding in, seeing they had already traced out a path to
the accomplishment of their rash and insolent Demands. That the making head in
such like cases was the showing that to Command and Authority he had united
sense and Courage to maintain them. That the insolent Multitude was like an
airy vapor, that upon the bare appearing of the Rays of it is Lawful Prince
immediately dissolves away, and is reduced to the state of true Obedience. That
did he but stand Firm and Constant in not suffering the Rights and Prerogatives
of his Crown to be Usurped, he would by the effects find the steadyness of his
Councills. But such Exhortations as these prevailed little upon the Grand
Signior, because that fear having possessed and darkened his understanding, did
not suffer him to discern the Clearness of these Reasons. This notwithstanding,
this Trusty Minister would needs have recourse to new Means to obviate the
Inconveniences, that were abrooding, and repairing to the Mufti he would have
procured of him to issue out a Proclamation or Sentence, by which to declare
guilty of High Treason and Rebels all those that should have the insolence to
oppose and not punctually obey the orders of the Grand Signior. But the Mufti
knowing such a Declaration to be void, when the not executing the Supreme
Orders is an immediate Offense of Delinquency, judged it sounder Counsel, to
decline such a Province, and the rather, seeing Force and not Law prevailed in
the present Juncture.

Regeb being excluded from those hopes, did for his last shift feel the Aga of
the Ianizaries Pulse, meaning, (upon a supposition of his being steadfast and
constant in his Loyalty to his Prince) to try whether he was able in some
manner to bring down the Arrogance of the Tumultuous Soldiery, and both fix the
staggering Throne to its Lawful Sovereign, and divert the impending ruin; and
he found him not averse to his Intentions. But so much Diligence used by the
Kaimecam for the Grand Signior's good, brought forth a most sinistrous effect,
because while he was contriving and procuring the Safety and Maintenance of his
Emperor's State and Grandeur, he pulled down upon himself the loss of his
employ, Liberty, and finally of his very Life. For the Kizlar, seeing so many
motions of the Kaimecam, grew more than a little jealous of all these Goings
and Comings, doubting that he kept Intelligence with and fomented the Seditious
Army, and was minded to strike in with the Mutinous Troops: Yet this suspicion,
however contrary to the Truth, being communicated by the Kizlar to the Grand
Signior, had such efficacy, that Orders were given to take the poor Kaimecam
into Custody. This must necessarily have been a piece of wantonness in Mahomets
Fortune, that must needs make him himself the Author of his own Ruin, and thus
push from him the only Prop that contrived all manner of means to uphold his
sinking Authority. Wherefore Bostangi Pachi being commanded to secure Regeb, he
went to his House, and showing him the Supreme Order, it was received by him
with all manner of seeming unconcern and Resignation; And thus showing a most
ready Obedience, he immediately ordered his Servants to get him a Horse ready,
going along with the Minister to the Stairs foot, where being come he told the
Bostangi Pachi, that it would not be inconvenient that he returned to his
Lodgings, to take some Zecchins along with him, and knowing frankness and
Gayety to be very efficacious means to speak his Innocence, he cried,
jestingly, Money even makes those Clean, that are really tainted, and the
Ministers train being already far advanced, he was only accompanied by the Aga
to his Closet-door, wherein entering, and having opened a Backdoor that led
into the Garden, he that way slipped out of the hands of his Guards, and rov^d
from Constantinople through the fields for the space of twenty Miles; but his
flight being known by the Grand Signior he ordered some to go in pursuit of him
with all Celerity and Diligence, and he was found in a field not only
overwhelmed with his misfortunes, but likewise with weariness and hunger, and
thence conducted a Prisoner into the Seraglio.

Every shadow of suspicion that came into the Grand Signiors Head was
sufficient to put him upon the Extremest Resolutions: And now doubting that the
Mufti confined to Bursia, and the Deposed Vizier Ibrahim, Exiled to Rhodes, did
foment the tumults of the Army, he thought Expedient to Banish the former to a
more remote Place; that so the Distance might deprive him of the Convenience of
Tampering with the Militia; and then sent the Capigi Pachi to Rhodes, with
orders to take off the said Ibrahims head. This Pachi was carried by a Beg, who
was much Ibrahims friend; and was the same that with his own Galley had
conducted him to his Banishment in Rhodes. Insomuch that this Beg being come to
Ibrahims House, he found him discoursing with some Company, and having paid him
his Respects, he was asked, if there were any orders concerning him, he
answered no, for that the Capigi had kept them secret: While they were
discoursing in came the Capigi, and having kissed Ibrahims Vest, he sat down to
drink Coffee in the others Company, which being done he laid his hand upon his
Breast, from which Ibrahim conceived some suspicion, as conjecturing what
effectually followed, for immediately he imparted to him the order for the
having his head.

This News so much afflicted Ibrahim that having embraced a little Son that sat
upon his Knees, he remained a while without speaking, then kissing him, and
weeping, he commanded that they should take the Child away, then turning to the
Capigi he said him: Was it not sufficient for the Court the having divested me
of all my Wealth and means, confined to this Place divested of all conveniences
and of Liberty it self, but that it must also deprive me of my Life; what can
the Blood of an Unfortunate Wretch avail the Prince, and what suspicion can
redound to the Crown from a Man deposed from all Authority and Convenience. I
must indeed confess that misfortunes never go alone, but like to a Chain one
ring is linked within another: and casting his eye upon the string that was to
strangle him, and perceiving it to be too thick, he cried that such a Cord was
only fit to dispatch a Dog or other Beast, and immediately sent a servant to
fetch a Bow-string, and he himself made a knot in it, and while he was washing,
before he said his Prayers, he lather'd the Bow-string with soap, and then
having ended his Prayers, he was strangled, and his Head being cut from his
Body was carried to Constantinople.

The foresaid Scelectar being sent by the Grand Signior with the Seal and
Standard for the new Vizier Osman met the Army at Nisse near Sophia, just in
the time that the Soldiers had in a Tumult killed Emir Pacha, and the
Tefterdar, for having abandoned them and followed the Vizier in his flight:
They also killed Ali Effendi the said Emir's Predecessor in the Treasury, and
one Aghen Zade, a man of above Eighty years old, who formerly was Raise Effendi,
merely because he admonished them not to spill Mussulmen Blood, was by them
pursued to death, but he escaping into the Vizier's Tent, was by him covered
with his own Vest; but then seeing the Soldiers would inexorably take away his
Life, that he might not endanger both his own Authority and Throat, he gave him
over to their fury.

In the Beginning of their rage Raise Effendi made his escape, and since that
time we have had no certain Knowledge of him.

The two Secretaries of the Chancery, desired to be strangled secretly, rather
then to be put into the Soldiers hands, and were gratified in this their
Request, and were put to Death behind the Vizier's Tent, and afterward their
Bodies exposed to the view of the whole Army.

The Ianizary Aga Mustafa Pacha, who was in the same Employ at the Siege of
Vienna, and in the Attack of Buda was made Seraskier, did in these tumults run
a great risque of his Life, and it was not without very hard shifts that the
Vizier was able to save him; But because he was a Ianizary, they contented
themselves with divesting him of his Employ, sending him to Command at the
Dardanells instead of Mustapha Pacha the Son of Kiupergli; who was sent for by
the Grand Signior and created Kaimecam of Constantinople. Mahomet judged that
this man being a Person of great fame as well for his own merit and virtue, as
in regard of his Father and Brother, who were Viziers, but much more for being
the Chiaus Bacha's Kinsman, his Wife being Mustafa's Sister, he would be the
most proper man to divert the Imminent Mischiefs, and allay the tumults of the
insulting Militia: Insomuch that being come to Constantinople on the 22d. of
October in the night, he repaired the next day to the Serraglio, and was
declared and invested by the Grand Signior with the Employ of Kaimecam.

On the 4th. Ditto in the Morning was held a Council, at which time there
entered into the Grand Signior's Serraglio, the Mufti, the Kaimecam, Nachib
Effendi, or Chief of the Green-Heads, the two Coodeleskiths, and four other Old
Preachers, or Scheyhs. There they consulted with all Secresy of the Course they
should take to repress the Insolency of the Mutinous Soldiers, but none had the
Boldness to speak freely, as not trusting one another, but fearing that having
given besitting Council to the Grand Signior, some Partizan of the Troops would
reveal it to the Army, and so they might draw their own Ruin upon their Heads:
All knowing, that People armed without Law and Authority, give themselves a
loose into all manner of Injustice, and Woe be to him that does at that time
provoke their anger. Whereupon it was concluded on by a Common Consent, that
considering the present posture of Affairs, the Grand Signior had not
sufficient Power to suppress the Military Arrogance, and that therefore the
most Efficacious Course was Dissimulation, using all means to quiet and lull
them asleep, in order to which there was not any more powerful potion than
Gold, and the blood of those whom they esteemed their Adversaries. This Opinion
being embraced, the Grand Signior to begin the Execution of it, did two hours
after send the Chiaus Pachi to the Gate House of the middle of the Serraglio,
where Soliman Pacha was imprisoned, and who the day after Regebs flight, was
taken by the Bostangi Pachi in his own house, upon the Canal of the Bosphorus,
and put into the Gate House of the middle of the Serraglio, with order to take
off his head. As soon as Soliman saw the Chiaus Pachi: I know said he, to what
purpose you are come, but the Will of God be done; I have washed, but I have
not said my Prayers, and then going into a Withdrawing Room, and having said
his Prayers, he did anew call the Chiaus Pachi; who had been his Creature, and
weeping told him: My Hands shall be upon the^ in the Day of Judgment, if with
all Sincerity thou do not acquaint the Grand Signior with the things I have
to tell thee: The first is, that all my Slaves both Males and Females are Free,
and I declare I have given them full and total Liberty: The other, that my
Servants be not Tortured to discover my Wealth, because I protest before the
face of God never to have been a Man of much Money, and the little I had was
left a Prey to the Soldiers in my Tent, when I made my escape from the Camp:
True, indeed, that in my House in Scutary, I have some pretty things, but of no
great value, which I humbly beseech the Grand Signior that he would vouchsafe
to leave to my Son, if out of his Clemency he should not think fitting to
conv^^^ them to his own use, in which case he is absolute Master: And this is
all I desire thee to tell: And having said this, he turned his face to the Wall
and bid the Chiaus do his Office, and then was strangled and his Head being cut
from his Body, was carried to the Kaimecam's House, and from thence to the
Grand Signior, who the day following sent it by the Nassachi Agosi to the Army,
further offering them the Heads of all those they should require, even those of
his own Sons: Promising likewise to satisfy them in all their Pay behind-hand,
which was about fifteen Months, and to augment it, and give them a Donative, as
if he was a New Emperor, and to this purpose sent them four thousand Purses,
each containing above five hundred Dollars, to Adrianople, in case they would
stay there, esteeming that place convenient and befitting to Winter in, both
for that it abounds in all things, as also that it lay near to take the Field
again in the Spring. The Grand Signior did too much dread the coming of the
Army to Constantinople, knowing the great Damage, that must thence ensue;
seeing that but some days before the bare suspicion conceived by the People,
that some Troops had entered the City in the Night time, and that the remaining
part of the Army was at hand did in a trice Occasion all the shops to be shut
up; but these fears immediately vanished, because that Nissangek Pacha was
forthwith dispatched throughout the whole City and proclaimed that on pain of
Death they should all keep open their shops.

In the mean while the Soldiers did not show themselves any wise pacified with
the satisfactions given them by the Grand Signior; and as concerning that of
Solimans Death, they openly cried, that they had not in the least required his
head, but that they aimed at having him alive in their hands, to make him give
an Exact Account of the Moneys Leavied the last year for the Service of the
War, and wherein he had consumed them.

The Nassachi, that returned from the Army with their Answer, found that the
Kislar-Aga was imprisoned in the Seraglio, and that in his stead Ali-Aga was
made Kasnadar. In like manner the Bostangi Pachi was taken into Custody, and he
declared to have the superintendency of that Employ. There were also imprisoned
the Seigmen Pachi, or Ianizar-Aga, the Tefterdar, with whom were likewise the
Empresses Chiaus and Steward, the Moxur Aga, the Chief Tekragu, Stanni Effendi,
Casan Elebi intendant of the Arsenal, Ornar Aga, Regebs Kiaia Giaban Age, or
Chief Commissioner of the Customs, who was imprisoned the day of Regebs flight;
and then tormented to reveal the Treasure and the place where he had hid it;
And all these were sent to the Army, by whom they were clapped under Arrest, but
the Bostangi Pachi, and the Seigmen Pachi were set again at Liberty, the former
being further sent Pacha to Metelino, and the second for Seraskier against the
Venetians in the Morea. Nay and the Mokur Aga was sent to command the
Ianizaries in Candia, and all this was done by the Armies order. But the
freeing the Kizlar-Aga was not with the Consent of the Soldiers, but of the
Grand Signiors own Motion, though Condemned to pay three hundred Purses, and
all the Estate he had in Constantinople to be confiscated. He took his march
for Egypt where he possessed vast Riches, having been in that Employ for 18
Years together in which time he always stood possessed of the Grand Signiors
favor, who suffered himself to be governed by him more than by any other
Minister, insomuch that all the Visirs and Fachas caressed and presented him to
be in his favor.

But the Grand Signior on the 22th of October was resolved to put Policy upon
the stretch, and like a Candle that is ready to go out, he tried the most
efficacious means to revive the Blaze of his decaying Authority; for that
reflecting, but too late, that he was deprived of his most trusty Ministers and
Confidents, and surrounded by those that were assigned him by the Army, and
that all the means he had raised, to satisfy the Militia, did in no wise avail
but rendered them bolder than ever, he came at Midnight into Constantinople. He
attempted the Cunningest stratagem to fix himself by main force in the Throne,
even to the shame of angry fortune, and feigning to know it to be impossible to
maintain himself in the Imperial seat, He asked to speak with his Brother
Soliman, giving to understand that he meant to recommend his Sons to him,
seeing it became him to give way to the force of his Destiny; but nevertheless
under this fiction he fostered a resolute Spirit to take away his own Sons and
Brothers Lives, that so the Army might be compelled to continue him at the
Helm, there being no others of the Imperial Line. But the Bostangi Pachi and
Kizlar-Aga conceived some suspicion of this matter, and immediately made the
Kaimecam acquainted with it, who coming instantly ordered the Giuka Aga to go
into the streets near the Wall of the Seraglio, and admonished the Grand
Signior not to make any Attempt against his own Blood, and to forbear giving
any suspicion, by seeking to enter into the Apartments of his Sons and Brother,
because that the Ianizaries had surrounded the Seraglio, and would surprise him
if he did not remain quiet. This Enterprise being also thus interrupted, he
found himself Excluded from all means of maintaining himself in the Sovereign
Degree.

But now was the hour come that he was to Experience the Vicissitudes of
Humanity, passing from the Possession of a vast Empire to the narrow Compass of
four Walls, and the first storke that presaged the effect, was his being given
to understand that his Sons were taken from him and put under a safe Guard,
with the greater security to cooperate for the Brothers safety. Then he more
evidently knew it when he saw himself under Confinement, the Bostangi Pachi
having Express order from the Kaimecam, not to suffer him to enter into a Boat,
nor so much as to stir out without his first being made acquainted with it.
Thus was the Unfortunate Grand Signior penned up in the Serrail, without having
other Recreation in his tormenting Circumstances, than a harsh Remembrance of
his passed Grandeurs, which served the more to rack him: He repaired often to a
Kiosch upon the Seashore under the Wall of the Serrail, to divert himfelf a
little from the Melancholy thoughts which possessed his Mind. In the mean
while his Greatnesses terminated on the 29th of October, and upon his Ruins
his Brother Soliman laid the first foundation of his felicities.

The Army was come within two days journey to Ponte-Grand, and at Midnight
entered Chiabeck, where the Lieutenant General of the Ianizaries, with ten
Companies of that Militia, studied to bring about the alteration, without any
Hurly-Burly in the City or Serrail.

In the mean while, the Bostandgi Pacha, and the Kizlar-Aga repaired about
Midnight to the Grand Signior Mahomet, in pursuance of the orders they had
received of putting him into safe Custody. He in great Confusion knew not what
answer to make, but that he did not know of his having committed any Error, by
which he might merit such a punishment; to which the Ministers replied, that he
should call to mind, that he had reigned forty years and upwards, and that this
ought to suffice him, being the Course of a Man's Life.

Before day the Kaimecam, Mufti, Caydelesker, and some Principal Persons of the
Law, re-assembled at St. Sophia, and having performed their morning Devotions,
at the first Dawn of day they sent the Chiaus-Pachi to the Serrail, and
followed him: As ^oon as they were admitted, they required Sultan Soliman, who
being brought forth was immediately placed upon the Throne, auguring him all
manner of felicity, and that God would bless his undertakings for the Honor
and Weal of the Empire. He upon so great and unexpected tidings was not at all
ruffled or changed; but with great Modesty and Humility laying his hand upon
his Breast bowed down, and in few words rendered them thanks, and they thus
leaving him went their ways, and at three a Clock in the Afternoon he was
proclaimed Emperor thronghout all the parts of the City. It is a matter Worthy
of Reflection, that a few Squadrons of Mutinous Soldiers should be sufficient
to bring about the Changing of an Emperor by so long a train of years rooted
in the Command of so great and populous a City, without the least Combustion or
Disorder, attending such a Revolution, and without meeting Opposition and
Resistance; and this case seems to renew the ancient practice of the Roman
Soldiery, who at their pleasure Elected their Emperors, and by barely
appearing at the Walls of Rome, forced the People to concur with their
Opinion. But however, he that shall consider the consternation, under which
People labored in Constantinople, will have little Room for Wonder, that they
had so quietly suffered the total Topsy-Turveying of the Monarchy, because
that their minds being dejected by continual advices of unhappy Successes, and
their Persons terrified with the Presence of armed Soldiers, they had neither
means nor forces to oppose themselves against the Current of these respective
Events. And besides, the People hoping to change fortune with the shifting of
Persons, did the more easily comply with the New Government. Moreover the
Ministers proceeded with a prudent Cautiousness in the Exaltation of the New
Emperor, not staying for all the Soldiery to come into the City, whence would
have ensued most heavy Inconveniences, and of considerable Prejudice, if the
Military Insolence had had the honor of solely advancing Soliman to the
Commands.

Its thought that the Deposed's Life will be but very short, by reason of it is
being the usual Custom of that Nation to step out of Prisons into the Grave, as
also because that Mahomet being for so many years accustomed to Pastimes, to
the Exercises of Hunting, and to Riding daily, and what is more to Government,
could very ill brook to see himself clapt-up in a Chamber, deprived of all
Recreation and Authority, whence he must in a short time be conveyed to his
Tomb, although his Death should not be hastened by the new Grand Signiors Command.

On the 31th of October the Kaimecam, and all the Great Personnages went to
meet the Vizir, accompanying him two Miles from the City. The Chiaus-Pachi was
secured by the Soldiers, and in his stead was elected the Person that had the
same Employ about the Vizir.

On the first of November the Vizir made his Solemn Entry into Constantinople,
accompanied by a Cavalcade of all the Great Men Military and Civil, and on his
Left hand rid the Mufty, and in this manner repaired to the Serrail, delivering
up to the Grand Signior the Seal and Prophets Standard, from whom he received a
new Seal with his own name.

Afterward, the Spahies and Ianizaries assembled in the Hippodrome and Meidan,
requiring the Heads of their Enemies, their Pays and other Dues. The Former
were in the Hippodrome and the Latter in the Meidan, and they all demanded that
Regeb the late Kaimecam should be put alive into their hands, but prevailed
not. He was indeed strangled in Prison, and his Body Exposed upon the Place of
St. Sophia before the great Gate of the Serrail upon an old Matt until the
Morning of the sixth day, and then it was removed. This was a great Man both
for his Capacity and Courage, and if the Deposed Sultan had listened to his
Persuasions, he would either have continued upon the Throne, or at least made
his fall a difficult Enterprise by some Act of Generosity.

After Regebs Death one Cochiuc Mehomet a Ringleader of the Mutinous Spahies,
endeavored to persuade the Soldiers to be quiet, and content themselves with
three Pays instead of five; This man had indeed great Authority among the
Soldiers, nay more than the Vizir himself, and because great Persons sent him
rich Regales, and that he dwelt in a Sumptuous Palace, went abroad in a
Magnificent Garb, and rode about with a Guard of Armed Men, these things made
the Soldiers jealous that he was corrupted with Moneys, and at their cost
procured his own Greatness; wherefore toward the Evening the Soldiery went to
find him out in his own Palace, and meeting him with slaves and knives
miserably killed him.

There is some appearance, that the Spahies and Ianizaries will jump in Accord
with what concerns their own Interest, but nevertheless are not really united.
However the Vizir to pacify them, promised to give them all their Pays that
were owing to them, and that on the 8th of the same Month they should certainly
be satisfied; but this not being performed, they were forced to deferr the
Solemn repairing of the Grand Signior to the Mosch of Iup, for the receiving
from Nachib Effendi Chief of the Green-Heads, or the true Offspring of the
Prophet, the Sword with which he had been lately girt. This Pomp was appointed
to be on the Friday, but if Moneys be not to be found out to satisfy the
Militia, they, thinking they are imposed upon, will occasion new Tumults.

In the mean while the Soldiers would not suffer the Prey of Kizlar-Aga to
escape out of their hands, He having been freed by the deposed Grand Signior,
and was going for Cairo. For they dispatched some after him to seize him, and
having overtaken him at Nicea, the Eunuch Capigi Pachi, had not the Courage to
attacque him, as having 200. Persons with him; but having united the Country
People, they enclosed him on all sides, and so being taken Prisoner by the
Soldiers, they carried him Prisoner to Constantinople, where he will certainly
in a short time be beheaded; in the Interim they have made him Confess where he
hid all his Wealth, knowing him to be Extraordinary Rich.

Mahomet, the late Grand Signior, has anew besought the Emperor to grant him
the Company of his Sons, and he is indulged in his Request, they all being in
the very Apartment where for so many Years, the same Soliman was confined in
the Serrail.

So short a space will not allow Us to pass a Judgment on this Emperors
Inclinations; We know indeed that having for so many Years been used to study
and the reading of Books, he has levelled his Genius that way; Whence he would
make a better Master of a School than a Head of Armies.

His Mother was removed from the Old-Serrail, where she has allwaies been kept
from the time of Sultan-Ibrahims Death to the Grand-Serrail, to participate in
the Honors and felicities of her Son, and she is Valide; but she is said to be
crackbrain'd.

We since understand by the Letters of the 26th of November, that Tumults had
ensued between the Spahies and the Ianizaries, who jointly refused to receive
the Pays, without the usual Donative of the new Emperor; but the Scarceness
of the public money, by the Exchequers being wholly Exhausted, occasioned no
small Difficulties.

The Ianizaries being discontented with their Aga, turned him off, and
requiring, as has been Customary in former times, a Ianizary-Aga out of the
Serrail, the Scelicter was put into that Station, a Man in no wise fitted for
the Dignity, having ever been shut up in that Serrail, and of no Practice in
Military matters: but this was much for their purpose, desiring to have a head
that had need of being ruled by them, and not they commanded by him.

These to provide themselves with money, sent for the Principal Commanders,
who are four, of that Cursed Crew, and they Sess'd several Persons some a
hundred Thousand, some fifty thousand Realls, according to each man's means, and
made use of their Houses for the Quartering of Soldiers at Discretion, until
they had fulfilled the Payment of the Sums prescribed.

In other matters the Concerns of the Soldiery go on quietly, and the Reigning
Grand Signior went on the 7th to the Mosch of Iup, in order to the being
Solemnly girt, as has been said, with the Sword of Nachib-Effendi, and chief of
the Green-heads, which is the Equivalent of a Coronation.

The four Chiefs of the Mutinous Soldiers, leading the Militia, as it were, in
a string, do truly command the Visir, without his being able to contradict them
in any thing, their Insolence owning no other Authority then their own pleasure.

After the so many forementioned Butcheries, there followed not any shedding of
Blood, save only that of Lokiuk Mahomet, their Principal Commander, out of a
suspicion of his being corrupted with the money of the Serrail: and that of the
poor Regeb Kaimecam, who was strangled, (as was before related.) He that fled
toward Cairo is imprisoned in the Seven Towers, and they have despoiled him
of all his Wealth, but it is not known who will Succeed him.

The Reigning Grand Signior has prevailed for the life of the new Kizlar-Aga,
he having got his Redemption by dibursing a hundred thosand Realls; the like
befalling all the Minions of the deposed Grand Signior, by whose favor having
enriched themselves, they must now buy their Lives at a Dear rate.

The new Kaimecam Mustapha Bacha Kiuperli is the favorite of the present
Emperor, who has declared himself that he would not take away the Life of his
deposed Brother, but only that he should be kept as he himself had been.

They are now in hopes of enjoying Tranquillity in Constannoble, for that the
Soldiers having received all their paies, if they do not harbor other perverse
Designs, they will return to their own homes: the greatest pressure they labor
under it present is, to find out Money sufficient for the Ensuing Campaign,
giving out that the Grand Signior will go in Person to the War, and will
Assemble his Army in Adrianople.

Great Reformations have been made in the Expenses of the Serrail, calculating
that they have spared a Million of Reals for this year; because that this Grand
Signior is not used to the Luxuries of the Court, and pretends to govern wholly
in Conformity to the Laws, and the Writ his Mother make's not any figure in the
Court.

Since these Occurrences we have Letters of the 17th. of September, in which we
have the Confirmation of all before related, assuring us that there had not
only ensued the slaughter of all the Ministers of the deposed Grand Signior,
but likewise that all those of his Party are slain, and their estates
confiscated, the management of the Government being left to the new Kaimecam,
and his Kinsman Chiaus Grand Vizier.

They further advise us of the frequent sitting of the Divan to consult about
the means of furnishing to the Occasions of the ensuing Campaign. The truth is
that they have been hampered afresh by the tumults of the Soldiery, part of
whom still adherr'd to the deposed Sultan, whence they have judged it a prudent
Resolution to Separate the Peaceable from the Tumultuous, whereupon a number of
the Militia were transported into Asia, and thus the Hurly-Burlies were a
little allayed and quieted. After which the Divan came to a Determination of
utterly abandoning the thoughts of Hungary, seeing there were no hopes of
keeping it, thinking it sufficient to send some Troops for the defense of
Belgrade, and the neighboring Places, contriving to unite the whole strength
of the Soldiery under the Grand Vizier, and send him to Negropont to maintain
that Country, which much more conduces to the advantage of the Ottoman Empire,
and at the same time the Tartars should with their own forces oppose the
Muscovites and Poles, as they had done in the late Campaign.

But these Resolutions were quite interrupted by the coming of a Tartarian
Envoy, at the same time dispatched by the Cham of the Crim Tartars, who in the
name of his Prince represented to the Port; that the Tartars ever constant in
their fidelity and good Correspondence with Turkey, had at all times exerted
their Affection, even at the Cost of their Lives and fortunes. That they had
the last Campaign by artifices deluded the formidable forces of the Muscovites
and Poles, without suffering them to gain any Advantage over the Countries that
are at the Grand Signiors Devotion. But that is for the ensuing Campaign, they
know it impossible for them to make Resistance against the great Military
Preparations, that were making by those two forementioned Potentates, in case
they were not assisted by the Port with notable Succors of men and money.

This Seemed a Thunderbolt, that put the Divan into the utmost fright,
Insomuch they were all Nonplust and in confusion at this unexpected proposal.
Wherefore they altered all the Resolutions they had already taken, and made
new Projects more suitable to the present Exigency, some Ministers urged that it
would be a mighty help to dispatch Ministers to the Christian Potentates and
Allies and by any means to procure Peace. That they should send a blank signed
Paper to Poland; that so that Crown laying hold of so great an Advantage, might
serve for a means to quiet the Muscovites, though not give Peace; and it is
thought this opinion may prevail; thus we expect what Resolution they will six
upon; because that the Ottoman Monarchy is certainly at present like to a man
in great danger of being cast away, and who to save himself catches hold on the
very Briars. Thus it will strike in with any Course, though Disadvantageous, so
as that it but tends to re-feat it, and buoy it up amid the Tempests that toss
it at present.

The End of the First Part.
The Second Part. The Prosecution of the Account of the Commotions of Turkey,
Correlative to the Dilucidation, taken upon the Place, and fitted for the
Public Curiosity.
WHoever lives tossed amid the Tempests of unhappy Successes, has not any other
Glimmering left of friendly Light, save the hopes of getting at the long run
out of those Intricate Labrinths of Misery by the third either of Prudent
Resolutions, or of precipitous Attempts. In the Dilucidation of the late
Commotions of Turkey, we left the Ottoman Ministers busy in providing means to
procure a Peace with the Confedrated Princes, as the scope of all their
Desires, and this not speeding, to make ready all the forces possible; to stem
and make a Bank against the Current of the Catholic Victories, which being
more then ever aggrandiz'd by vast Additions of Troops and Warlike
Preparations, they foresaw were likely to Seize the nighest and most Important
Places of their Dominions. And after the manner of expert Physicians knowing
that is is in vain to apply Remedies to outward Distempers, when the inward and
Principal parts are infected, they attempted to purge Constantinople of the
Seditious Soldiers, and giving them entire satisfaction in all their paies
besides opulent Donations, they remanded the Asiaticks with all their Leaders
to their own Homes. But because that every bettering of a distempered Person is
ascribed by Persons concerned for a sure Prognostic of restored health, the
Turks thought to have enjoyed most peaceably the new Government, being allured
by a momentaneous Serene of Quiet, because that the Asiaticks being separated
from the Europeans, almost all the Spahies dismissed, they had hopes that the
remaining part of the Army would peaceably attend the Grand Signior's orders,
and march for such Places as should be appointed for the ensuing Campaign. But
they do not consider, that when they do not utterly root out the Distemper,
every appearance of health, serves only to brood more pernicious ills, and more
dangerous Relapses. For Six Chieftains of the Mutinous Troops being left in
Constantinople, one Chieftain and two Assistants for the White Banner, and the
like for the Red, and likewise four hundred Bolakhaski, or Captains, two
hundred for one Party and two hundred for The Other, these pretended that the
Grand Signior ought to own the aggrandizement of his fortune to them, aiming to
regulate the Government according to their own sense and pleasure, without
ackowledging either the Superintendency of the Ministers, or the Sovereignty of
the Emperor, and mingling the Profession of Arms with the Exercise of managing
the affairs of the City, they framed out and demized the public Revenues with
an Intention, perhaps, of Exacting from but of never satisfying the Prince.
They went to Audience of the Vizir with their Swords by their sides, in a
posture rather of Commanding than of representing Requests, and in short would
needs be Judges of all the most Important affairs of the Monarchy.

The Vizir durst not openly oppose himself against the temerity of the
Mutiniers, the Example of the preceding Ministers miserably butchered by the
Soldiers serving him for a rule to square his measures by, he made a show of
condescending to all their Demands; but it is not known whether out of an
Intention of lulling them asleep, that he might afterward surprise them
unprovided, and overwhelme them with a blow, so much the heavier as it was
Unexpected, or through the faintness of his Spirit, or the want of artifices
and evasion, being a man absolutely void of the knowledge of Letters, and so
forced basely to submit to the Will and Pleasure of a few Soldiers, fearing
perhaps that as their tumults had raised his fortune, the same means would
bring his ruin. Certain it is that hitherto he has not given the least
Instance of a Politician, nor of a man versed in public Concerns, some further
questioning whether in the Sovereign Command of the Armies he is like to Speed
better than he has hitherto done in Political Administrations; But time which
unfolds all will f^rther make known the effect of these suppositions. True it
is that the giving way so easily to a few Youths raised from an abject
Condition, to some fortune, by the Infamous means of Rebellion, is the Maxim of
Cowardly Men, when they will not confess, that they themselves having likewise
by the same ways obtained their Employ cannot show ends different from the
means which served them for their Agrandizement.

And because among all the weighty Considerations which the Port may have at
present, the principal is to accumulate Moneys by all manner of means, as being
the main Nerve of Armies, and the securest way to remove all Turbulencies, by
sending the Soldiery away, hence it came that instead of shedding the Blood of
those they deemed worthy of Punishment, they now squeez them of their Gold; and
because the Kizlar-Aga, who as we said in our foregoing Dilucidation, had been
Imprisoned in the Seven Towers, he was freed thence, being nevertheless bound
to pay to the Public Five hundred thousand Crowns, besides vast Sums disburst
to the Ministers for the obtaining his Delivery. It was no difficult matter for
him to find out so many Sums of Money, because that having been, as has been
said, so many Years in Possession of that Employ, and what is more in the
Deposed Grand Signiors favor, he had heaped up infinite Treasures, and
principally in Egypt he had made Acquisitions of vast Territories, and
therefore being now made free he took a journey by Land toward Cairo. Nor had
Ali Aga Asnadar, who was the formers Successor, any better fortune, seeing he
was likewise compelled to redeem his own Life with the disbursement of a
hundred thousand Crowns, and likewise with his repairing to Cairo by Sea having
left as Successor in his Employ the Aga of the Old Serrail.

There went likewise for Cairo the Selectar, or Sword Bearer of the Grand
Signior, having been appointed by the Court for Pacha of those Countries, and
it is reported that for the making that Voyage he had hired two French Ships
for Alexandria, and that further from the Ambassador and Merchants of the said
Nation he had borrowed a hundred and fifty Purses, yet with depositing Pledges
proportionable, which were to remain on board till such time as that the said
Moneys were fully paid in Alexandria.

The Life of the degraded Grand Signior seems to give no small suspicion to
Soliman's Ministers, as Persons that have a Prospect of the Progress of their
Fortunes from upholding the New Emperor. Besides they have insinuated into him
that he should not grant Mahomet the favor of the Physicians he required, to
cure the Indisposition of his Legs, that were very much Swollen, and to open anew
certain parts that had been cut, all having proceeded from a Total Change of
this Princes way of Living, seeing now he is forced to remain penned up in a
Chamber without any manner of Diversion whatever, whereas before by the
Exercizes of Riding and Hunting, he was, as it were, in continual Motion. And
to palliate this Act of Barbarity, they have persuaded him to answer his
Brother: that as for his own part he would most willingly cooperate in all
things to his satisfaction, and should chiefly desire to see him recovered from
his Indispositions, under which he labors,, if he was sure he should be freed
from the Distemper; but that the Cure being uncertain, and there being no
security that the Physicians will be helpful to him, he will not incurr the
Blame of having occasioned, nay procured his Death; and that this he looked
upon as a necessary Result, well-knowing that the People would suspect, and
with reason, that he under the pretext of having him Cured would procure his
Death by Contrary Medicines. In the mean while, he supported (with a Constancy
worthy of him) the Malady, praying God (in whose hands is the Life and Death of
Men) that he would grant him perfect Health: and with this feigned Pretext
denied the poor Prince so just a demand.

This notwithstanding, there are not wanting Adherents to Mahomet that breath
after the reprocuring him his lost Estate, and there are Others that propose it
as a matter more Expedient to advance his Son to the Throne, giving out, that
Soliman being altogether inexpert in Government, by having through the whole
space of his Life been confined to a Chamber, without knowing the Maxims, which
ought to concur for the Establishing a fortunate Monarchy, and without
experience of politic Management, from which every Body of Monarchy receives
its Spirit and Vigor. And then the seeing him far from Veneriall Inclinations,
by having reformed the Serails of the Women, under color of taking away
superfluous Expenses, makes them believe that as he promises little ability for
the Establishment of the Empire, so he affords no great prospect of giving a
Succession of Progeny, so necessary to Monarchs.

Nevertheless the Concerns of the new Government are far from being well
settled; Nay they give less hopes than ever of continuing in any good posture;
for there are three Factions on foot, the first for the Reigning Soliman, the
second for the deposed Mahomet, and the third for his Son, who being in his one
and twentieth year of Age seems much more capable than the others to receive the
Crown; because that Mahomet who was lately shouldered out of the Throne, will
very hardly be placed again in his former station, seeing this will never be
assented unto by those, that have been the Occasion of his being deposed, with
justice suspecting, that being advanced anew to the Helm, he will aim at
securing to himself the Dignity, by laying the foundations of his establishment
upon the Carcasses of his Adversaries. Now Soliman being as it were deprived of
the Spirit, Vigor and Capacity requisite for the ruling such a Monarchy, by
having been buried in the Sloth of so long an Imprisonment, has neither the Age
nor Capacity to learn those Maxims, which Constitute a real Emperor, seeing
by that time he can get information and insight into those matters, he must
through old Age leave the Helm together with his Life. Thus the only hopes
remain in Mahomets Son, a Sprightfull youth, fit to receive all Impression as
well of a Martial as a Politic Prince.

The very People, though such as ought not to be meddling in matters of Empire,
discourse things conformably as they are directed by their Desire or
Inclinations: Giving out, that the Vizier, to give some essays of his valor
and to acquire merit with the Port, will go into the Morea the ensuing
Campegne, with Armies of between forty and fifty thousand Soldiers, with a
Prospect of recovering that Realm, and of Signalizing his Name by setting anew
in the Ottoman Crown the precious Gem of that lost Kingdom. That for this
Purpose the Capigi Pachi was dispatched to Algiers to let them know that the
Port would assign them ten of its ships, that so being united to those of that
Republique, the Algerines might make head against the Naval Power of the
Venetians. But as these Particularities are not grounded on an evident
Certainty they give Occasion to our suspending our total Belief, expecting
that the Benefit of time will Clear the event of such like Reports. Besides
there is great Probability that the Turk will, in the Ensuing Campaign, bring
greater Forces against the Republic than they did the year before.

In the mean while the Ministers of the Port put their wits upon the stretch to
find means to raise money, making Diligent Enquiry into all Peoples Estates,
and after forfeitures, and such as may be liable to fines and Confiscations,
that so by such means they may furnish the things Necessary for the Ensuing
Campaign, yet all Contrivances of this kind falling short, for that the
Insolency of the mutinous Soldiers having quite drained the Exchequer, and
gorged a great part of the Revenues belonging to the public, the Vizier tried
one method which made him absolutely incur the Odium of the Soldiery, and
finally drew on his Ruin. Certain public Revenues were assigned for the
Soldiers which the Vizier advised to be stopped and detained, therewith to
supply the present Occasions, thus despairing the Soldiery of their Security of
being satisfied as to their Arriers. The other Ministers proposed that in
imitation of what had been done at other times, when the Prince had labored
under a want of money, and that he had no other way to be furnished, that a Tax
of a Zecchin should be laid upon each firehearth of Constantinolpe, Bursia and
Adrianople, nevertheless only taxing the Turks Chimneys, not those of the
Christians, because that the latter having been burdened with other manifold
Impositions, they had not wherewithal to answer this new Leavy. But the
Mahometans, being beseig'd on all sides with Distress and Penury, did
absolutely deny to assent thereunto; because that the interruption of all Trade
and Commerce with so many parts of Europe had more than a little diminished
their Gains and Incomes, and the temerity of the mutiniers had made them
contribute large Sums beyond what was customary, and besides the methods to
augment the Burdens of Subjects, afflicted on all Parts, are not so easy to
practice, when they do not perceive that such Courses redound to their Benefit,
either in securing their Commerce, or defending their Religion, their Estates,
substance and goods from Enemies and Seducers* whence seeing that so many sums
that had been exacted had been converted to the Benefit of a few Mutiniers, and
the public drained and exhausted to pamper and fatten private Persons, nay and
the very Enemies of the common weal and quiet, it is not to be wondered at if
the People assess'd did so openly declare that they neither could nor would
assent thereunto. Thus was the Execution of that Decree suspended, Employing
the Moneys they had in sending Men and Provisions to Negrepont and Canea, and
to make the Necessary Preparations for the fitting out the Fleet, consisting in
forty three Fusts and Briganties, and one Galley, which they built, Twenty of
the said Vessels being now in a readiness, the speedy Equipping of the rest
are recommended to the Ministers upon severe Penalties of Nonperformance, the
Public Cry being that the aforesaid forces ought to be Employed to secure the
Black-Sea, from the pinching Invasions of the Cossacks, who continually
scouring that Sea occasioned infinite Damage, as well to Commerce, as more
particularly to all Commodities that furnished to the Maintenance of
Constantinople. And the more to quicken and spirit the People to Contributions,
and to Encourage the Soldiery, the Sultan had given order for the setting up
the Horses Tails, by them called To^, which serve for an infallible sign of the
Courts taking the ^^eld, giving the Vizier also to understand that he must in
Apr repair to Adrianople, reporting at the same time that he was to send and go
along with the greater part of the forces into the Morea, leaving the Residue
for the Defense of Belgrade, and that little of Hungary they have remaining.
But the Accidents which afterward ensued, broke to pieces these Resolutions,
having given clearly to understand, that the tolerating the Insolences of the
Rebellious, without Punishment, was the flushing them still to commit greater,
in hopes of coming off still at the same rate. In the mean while, the
Immoderate Pretensions of those Rebellious Officers at Constantinople did daily
increase, who not contented with seeing under their feet the Sultans Supreme
Authority, and that of the Principal Ministers, wresting the Government
conformably to their Interest or Caprice, but would needs be continually the
Abettors of Innovations, whence the Grand Signior coming at length to know that
he had fostered and nested a Serpent in his Bosom, that would at the long run
deprive him of his Life, and that the any longer tolerating the temerity of
those, was to show himself utterly deprived of Authority, and in a worse
Condition than his very Subjects, seeing he suffered himself to be ruled at
their Will and Pleasure, he determined upon making use of his Force and Power,
seeing Reason had not sufficient Light to make known to those Minds, adumbrated
by Contumacy, the Duty of Subjects, and the terms wherein they ought to contain
themselves; In order to which he commanded the Ianizary-Aga, that he should
speedily remedy these matters, by Employing Chastisement for the Reducing to
due Obedience, such as were repugnant to and would not comply with their Duty.
The Aga, not willing to hazard himself in acquanting unitely all the Rebels
with the supreme order, derived also from the common Consent of the Divan,
well knowing that the opposing the Resolute will of the worst People does often
lead into those precipitous Resolutions, that are the Daughters of Turbulent
minds, and alienated their due Obedience, he repaired to Fetuaggi the
Rebell-Leader, and showed him the Grand Signiors Decree, endeavoring by all
the means of Persuasion to bring him to a sense of his Duty; but he more
Insolent than ever, esteemed a note of Infamy what was only a petty Resentment
in respect of his perverse Operations. This Carriage, nevertheless, very much
provoking the Aga, he commanded his follower to seize the Rebel, but he
thinking to find the same faint-heartedness in the Soldiers he had Experienced
in the Populacy, he laid his hand to his Sabre, attempting to defend his own
Liberty, by hewing his way with Iron through the Midst of those Armed Men, as
resting secure that if he should have the luck to get out of their hands, and
run into the Midst of his Adherents, he should easily have escaped all manner
of danger: but the effect proved contrary, because that being surrounded by the
Aga's Soldiery, notwithstanding his Resistance, he was cut to pieces, they thus
Sacrificing this Infamous Victim to the beginning of the Public Repose. In the
mean time, the notice of this being brought to the Ears of forty Rebels, the
followers and Adherents of the aforesaid Fettuaggi, not being sure of their
being able alone to remedy the Accident, and take their Revenge for their slain
Leader, moreover suspecting that they might possibly be surprised by a greater
Multitude, they ran immediately to the Meidan, where the other Rebels were
assembled, informing them of what had happened, animating them to maintain with
the most steady Resolutions and the most grievous Extremities their Authority,
which was threatened with Ruin, unless they made head against and used their
utmost Endeavors to disappoint this beginning of Depression then impending.
Whereupon they resolved upon not giving way in the least to the Grand Signiors
Resolutions, but on the contrary more than ever to assert their own Power, ever
hoping that Soliman having been advanced by them to the Dignity of Emperor,
and the Vizier made to ascend to such an Employ by the means of their Valiant
Assistance, would in no wise have forgotten such a Benefit, nor have attempted
any Innovation against those People, whom they knew to have as well the forces
and means as the Will and Pleasure to give and take away Dignities. The meeting
these Rebels being understood by the Aga, and thinking with the Grand Signiors
bare name to have pacified all the Tumults in a Trice, and that the wanting of
a Head would dishearten all the Rest from adventuring upon new Commotions,
being so well farther tutored and instructed, as he thought, by the so very
fresh Example of Fettuaggi, he leapt on Horseback, repaired to the Meidan, to
make them understand publicly the Grand Signiors Intentions, and the
Punishments that menaced such as should neglect the Execution of his Wills. But
the Mutineers temerity did not permit his Publication of the Supreme Decrees,
but perceiving him to be the Minister appointed to correct their temerarious
Insolences, without having any regard to the Personage he represented, or to
the figure and Employ he bore, they laid hands to their Sabres, made a
Miserable slaughter of the Aga, and of all such as went about to make any
opposition, only leaving such alive as by flight found Protection from their
Rage. The truth is, the Aga showed but little Experience, not only in Political
matters, but likewise in Military, confirming by so unhappy an End the
Prognostic passed in our foregoing Dilucidation, that he was like to prove a
Minister of small Credit, having been ever penned up in a Serrail, far from all
Intrigue and Management, and consequently void of all Experience in Affairs
either Military or Civil. Wherefore he ought to have been satisfied with
having surprised a Rebellious Chief in his own House, and with having
sacrificed him to the Wills of the Grand Signior, without Exposing himself to
the fury of an Army in Mutiny, with the bare Attendance of a few Soldiers, well
enough knowing that he should be received by the Mutineers as an Enemy, having
deprived them of their Leader. But he ought after Fettuaggi's Death to have
united himself to the Vizier, and with a greater nerve of men, and so in the
language of main force make the Rebels acquainted with the Grand Signiors
orders, without hazzarding the Supreme Authotity to an Evident Contempt, and
his own Life to a Certain Peril. Be it as it will, the Rebels not accounting
this Revenge sufficient to atone for the loss they had suffered in their
Leader, their Stomach and Courage being augmented with the preseut issue, did
esteem it an easy matter to accomplish their other Meditated Enterprises.
Whereupon being hurried with the same fury, they went to the Treasurers House
to serve him in the same manner they had done the Aga; but he being better
versed in the course that is practiced of flying from the Encounters of an
incensed Army, having understood the Pertinaciousness of the Soldiery, and the
Butchery of the Aga, did not suffer himself to be found, meaning to give time
opportunity, which probably might afford him a more secure access to his
Appearance abroad. In the mean while their vexation at their being disappointed
of venting their Rage upon the Person made them Exercise it upon the House,
plundering it with all imaginable fury, and only leaving there the footsteps of
an implacable Rage.

All these Attempts reached the Viziers Ear, although being made cautious by the
Perils of others, and besides knowing that the Soldiery stood not well
affected to him on the score of the abovementioned Exaction and Detainment of
the Moneys appointed for their pays, and also doubting that they might suspect,
that the order issued out by the Grand Signior proceeded from his Contrivance,
he thought sitting to secure both his House and Person with four Companies of
Ianizaries, and with three Pieces of Canon, not being willing to be taken
unprovided, being sufficiently informed what the fnry of a Mutinous Army may
attempt, and truly a Prophet of what was like to ensue; for lie was no sooner
got home and had caused his Gates and Doors to be locked and barred with all
Diligence, but that the Rebels came thither, and having Surrounded the House,
began to try with force to break open the Gates, those within opposed them with
a Dauntless Courage and thus followed a fray and Combat, those on one side
fighting as being guided by fury, and urged on by the hopes of getting a rich
Booty, and of Extinguishing with the Viziers Blood, whom they accounted the
Abetter of all the Councills taken against them, the implacable thirst they had
of Revenge, and the other side in defense of so great a Minister, and to
suppress the Impiety of Rebels to their Prince. The Conflict lasted for many
hours in such sort, that on both sides there remained four hundred killed, and
in those of the Vizir's there would not have been wanting Constancy, if they
had not had want of Ammunition; but being deprived of Arrows, Powder and Ball,
not finding any longer the means to resist so much greater a Multitude, and
such too as were provided with all necessaries for a longer Engagement, and for
that fearing to remain a prey to such enraged Enemies, they esteemed it a more
advantageous Expedient to provide for their safety by flight, and having opened
a Gate they made all have away, abandoning the House with their Patron and
Master into the hands of implacable Enemies. The Vizir was left alone but not
without Military Courage; for seeing the Soldiers enter his House, valor did
not depart his Breast, but he resolved to honor his Death, with a Glorious
End, selling his Life at an Extraordinray Dear Rate to the Enemies, for having
made a vast slaughter of them with his Sabre in his hand, being Surrounded by
the Multitude, and covered with Wounds, he was compelled to yield to his
Destiny, falling Extinguished upon a Mountain of the Rebels Carcasses which he
had slain with his Right hand. This Minister did manifestly give to understand
that though Fortune had disappointed him of giving Instances of his valor by
taking him out of the way before he had had Occasion of engaging in Enterprises
becoming and worthy of his figure and Character, it could not however deprive
him of the means of making his worth known at least in Death, thus curing the
World of the Conceit that he had not given any token of an Experienced Person.
And the Truth is, that Dignities acquired by infamous means, do often come to
terminate in an end much of the like nature, and those very Persons that are
the founders of a Fortune acquired by unjust courses, are often also the
Origin of the Ruin of those very People whom they Exalt to the first Honors,
and that a Dignity which has not for its Basis Merit and Honor, does easily
meet with a Fall, as it easily got its Advancement. Be it as it will, the
Vizier being thus slain, the Soldiers after having vented their Rage upon his
Body, vented their Avarice upon his Goods, plundering his House and carrying
away all that was in it. Nor did here their fury stop, but they Exerciz'd their
Avidity upon the Deceas'ds very Women, despoiling them of all they had, and
finally the very little Sons of the Dead Vizier were the Innocent Relics
consigned to the unextinguishable Covetousness of those Perfidious Wretches,
seeing that having taken them from the House, they dragged them to the Market
Place, and at the Price of three hundred Piastres sold to a Turk those that
were the Sons of the First Minister of so great a Monarchy.

Nor ended here the Military Insolence, but gradually with their Wicked Actions
the Rebels boldness being augmented, they Proceeded to Exercise their
Barbarities upon the Grand Siguior's own Servants, and having the force in
their hands, they had a Design in their minds of putting him himself to a most
Enormous Torture: In the mean while they killed two of their Emperors
Querries, as also his Capigilar, leaving no means untried for the Establishing
their Usurped Authority upon the common Ruin. The Grand Signior being
overwhelmed with so many unhappy Events, void of all Prospect of remedying the
present Insolences, seeing those means, which he had made use of to give Peace
to his State, had produced so much the more pernicious Tempests, he was utterly
deprived of Council. He had often thoughts of assembling Men that he might
with force oppose the stubborness of the Rebellious Soldiers: but as he had
neither the Heart to make himself their head, nor the means to make himself
obeyed, he laid aside this form as useless and impracticable. Then he was
inclined to convene the Divan, in it to consult about the means of repressing
so intolerable a Malep^rtness, but considering that the Greater part of the
Ministers were either taken from him by the Rebels Swords, or distanc'd
through the fear of Incurring the like unhappy Exits, neither did he strike in
with this Course. But at the long Run suffering himself to be guided more by
fear than Courage, and fixing upon the Vilest of all Remedies, namely his
Inclination and the Dictates of his own Genius, he caused publicly to be
Exposed out of his Serrail the Standard of Mahomet, causing to be proclaimed,
that all those who had any spark of Religion and Obedience should repair ^rm^d
under the Ensign of the Great Prophet without any Delay, in not doing of which
they should be esteemed Rebels to God and their Prince, and that they ought
openly to take up Arms against the Mutineers, and with their Blood Extinguish
that fire of Rebellion, which those Persidious Wretches did more th^n ever
endeavor to spread in Constantinople. The truth is, this Resolution taken by
the Grand Signior was that of an unexperienced Person, meaning that Religion
should serve for a Buckler to defend his own Authority, and to secure himself
from the forces of the Mutinous Soldiery.

The Relying alone upon the Law when the juncture requires the Chastisement of
Rebels armed and at war with the force and Power of Justice, and incapable of
being reduced to a sense of their Duty, otherwise than by the Dint of Iron and
open Resistance, is to show, not the Spirit of a warlike Prince, but, the
faintheartedness of a timorous Religious. If Soliman could not do, like
Semiramis, who only with her Royal Presence and with Powerful words was able
to interupt the Course of a most furious Insurrection made by the People of
Babylon, because that being a new and green Prince, not advanced for his Merits
nor in vogue for his Enterprises, nor having experience or Address in Affairs,
but lifted up upon the Throne by Tumultuous Squardrons upon the bare
consideration of his Birth, he had not the Credit to suppress such Sturdy
Commotions, he ought at least to have convened all the Militia, and armed men
that had no hand in the tumults and were not infected with Rebellion, and with
open force make head against the Mutiniers, making them experience, that as
they had judged him worthy of the Crown, he had a Head to sustain it, and a
Spirit to exert his Dignity.

Yet this shift of Setting up the Standard, dictated to him by a Desperate
necessity, did so far avail him, that if it did not serve to make him known for
a Prince of High Mettle, it at least sufficed from the Military Insolences to
secure both his Life and the Imperial Crown: Because that upon the bare sight
of this Standard, an innumerable Body of armed men got together, and thorough
all the Buroughs, Wards, Quarters and Serails of Constantinople the People
flocked in arms, by which Concourse the Grand Signior being animated, he caused
Proclamation to be made, that the Soldiers of the Insurrection were Rebels to
the Prince and the Laws, and by Consequence Worthy of the Severest Punishments,
and that therefore every man of them ought to be sought out with exact
Diligence, to make them with their Lives pay the penalty of so many slaughters
as they had committed in the Princes Ministers and Servants, and to give Life
to the Public Peace by utterly extinguishing those Contumacious Enemies of the
universal Welfare. Their Temerity was become Intolerable, and if this
Pestilence had not been quite rooted out, it would quickly have infected all
the Country with evident Danger of the total fall of the Ottoman Monarchy.
These Words seemed a Trumpet that revived in all Peoples minds the Desire of
running precipitously to the slaughter of the Mutiniers, Insomuch that in a
Trice the People were seen with their Swords in their hands to search the most
hidden Recesses and most concealed sculking Places, that so they might not
leave any seed of so pernicious a Brood. Thus were they cut to pieces in all
parts of the City, without any distinction of Degree or Person, having no hopes
of any Refuge, seeing the Grand Signior had caused Proclamation to be made,
that all those should be judged Guilty of High Treason, and worthy of Death,
that should give Aid, Harbor, or in any wise defend or conceal the foresaid
Rebels, so as to impede the Correction due for the Crimes they had committed;
By which means was rooted out in a little time the Plant of this Contumacious
Brood, which from a despicable seed had in a trice grown to such a Height, as
to shade the whole Monarchy with its Branches. A Ringleader of the Mutineers
being surprised by the Loyal Party, he would have redeemed his Life and Liberty
by disbursing three hundred Purses; but he offered what was no longer his own,
seeing the bare declaration of a Rebel did deprive him of whatever he
possessed, which devolved to the Imperial Fiscal and Excheequer, and besides
these were Moneys pinched in sacking the Houses of the Grand Vizier and
Treasurer, thus he only restored part of the Booty, and not paid out of his own
stock a Redemption for his Life. Therefore was he also strangled, and his
Carcass thrown with others into the Public Place, Yet durst they not do the
same to the Mufti, seeing the Reverence to the Sacerdotal Degree did not permit
them to embrue their hands in his Sacred Blood, notwithstanding he had been no
small Abettor of the Commotions of the Mutinous Soldiery; but they contented
themselves with deposing him from his Office, esteeming it a greater Punishment
than Death it self, seeing he must ever live a private Man, with the tormenting
and infamous Remembrance of his having been deposed from his Dignity by having
fomented the Insurrections of Men against their Lawful Prince. The Mufti his
Predecssor was restored to that Post, and in the Place of the slain Vizier the
Grand Signior put the Nisangi Pacha, pro Interim, being a man almost decreped,
but of great Merit, and this possibly to honor his Death, and to have time to
provide another, the Importance of such a Dignity not allowing of its being
left vacant. In the mean while, the Grand Signior laid mightily to heart the
Death of the Vizier that was slain by the Mutineers, as well because he owed
all his Greatness to his Procurement, as that by his Death he had given signal
Instances that he would have proved a Valiant General, if the Barbarousness of
his Soldiers had not nipt off the flower of their conceived Hopes. Wherefore to
remunerate in part his good service, He caused immediately Proclamation to be
made, that whoever had, held, or knew the Place, whither the Goods of the said
Vizier were removed by the Rebels upon the Plunder of his House, they should
within the term of three Days bring them or declare them to the Imperial
Chamber upon pain of Death to the Transgressors, commanding that the same thing
should be done with the Treasurers Goods. This Proclamation was of great use,
for almost all the Goods were restored, and about thirty Greeks and Armenians,
that brought not in the Goods they had bought, were staked. The Grand Signior
caused all these recovered Goods of the Viziers to be restored to his Sons,
having had them again from the Turks, who had bought them.

Constantinople seemed to breath again after the Oppression of so many Tyrants,
but was under Apprehensions of being tormented with new Impositions, because
that the Rebels in the Sacking of the aforesaid Houses, had Seized on fifty
thousand Purses of Reals, which they had divided among themselves, and these
being to have supplied to the War, the Treasury was quite drained. And what
likewise augmented the suspicion of new Disturbances was the answer given by
the Pacha of Natolya, of whom the Divan having required Succors in the Grand
Signior's name, he freely answered, that he knew no other Sultan than the
deposed one, and that if they did not replace him upon his Throne, he would
come with all his forces to Constantinople, and joining with the Christians
make slaughter of all the Turks; During these Transactions the Christians have
been much better treated by the Turks than they were ever heretofore, nay the
Divan has issued out a Proclamation, that if any Turk should upon whatever
Occasion molest any Christian, the Artizans should be bound under the severest
penalties to rise up against the Offender. I suppose the Turks do this, hoping
by the means of these good Treatments to facilitate with the Confederated
Princes the attainment of the so much desired Peace; seeing that to this effect
they had designed to send a Minister to those Princes to require it, though
upon understanding the small Disposition they have thereunto, had made them
suspend the Mission. Besides they do this to recompense by some Acknowledgement
the good intention of the Christians themselves and the Desire they have shown
for the public Repose, seeing that in their Quarter of Galata they had killed
about eighteen Rebels, not allowing any Harbor to the Mutiniers in the Places
of their Habitation. These are all sufficient Causes whence to deduce the
effect of the aforesaid better usage; but some look upon as the most essential
one, the great Zeal and Assistance of the Most Christian King's Ambassador in
those parts, who with Singular and ever Memorable Earnestness to second the
good Intentions of his Sovereign, omits no manner of means untryed to procure
Repose, which has been so often interrupted and denied them; and Employs the
utmost force of Authority to acquire for them still greater advantages in what
concerns the usage of those that live free, but with incomparable
Exemplification trys all forms to get out of the Chains of Slavery those
Miserable Christians, that live oppressed under its weighty and insupportable
Yoke, and accordingly now lately he has dispatched from those parts into
Countries of the Christian Religion about six hundred or upwards of Slaves that
were the followers of Christ, and thus freed out of Servitude. No small
augmentation to the Afflictions of Constantinople has been occasioned by a Fire
accidentally kindled in that City about the same time, having reduced to Ashes
thousands of Houses, and what more especially regards the Public damage is the
Custom-house which was also Subjected to the fire, Abundance of Commodities
being thereby consumed, and which belonged not only to Turkish, but also to
Christian Merchants.

But what is further worthy of note is the advice brought to the Port, that the
Soldiery that was sent back to their Quarters being risen under a Rebellious
Leader, do now ravage and infest the Countries hostilely, seizing on all that
offers it self to their hands; having lost all respect for the orders issued
out by the Grand Signior, they resolve no longer to pay any Military Obedience,
but freely to scour those Territories and Countries, living upon the means,
Product and Incomes of those wretched Inhabitants.

This is Exactly the present state of Affairs of the Ottoman Monarchy, whence,
whoever shall minutely Examine all the Circumstances of the fore-related Events
will have occasion to deduce the Necessary Consequence; that the Port this Year
is manifestly reduced to an impossibility of making any Resistance against the
Confederated Arms, as being utterly deprived of Soldiers versed in Martial
Exercises, some being gone to their own Habitations in Asia, others in
Mutinying and in an Insurrection in the Country, the Vizier made for form sake,
being old and unable to undergo the fatigues of Traveling and of War. The
Ministers either suspected, or unexpert. The Prince in no wise fixed in the
Throne. The Factions more vigorous than ever. The Deposed Mahomet not only
fomented by his Adherents in Constantinople, but also by those Abroad. His Son
esteemed by many, and looked upon as the Rising Sun, born to disperse the dark
Shades of so many unhappy Successes. Soliman now reigning, not only deprived of
the ability to six and settle his fortune, but likewise Impotent to rule it.
The Exchequer Exhausted in such manner that there seems not any possibility of
restoring it to a state of contributing to such various Expenses as are
required, because that the People being burdened by so many impositions they
have undergone to pay the tumultuous Soldiery, and besides compelled by the
Rebels to unjust and Exorbitant Contributions, there seems not the least
prospect of their being able to contribute the least assistance to the present
Exigencies. In short all Concurrs to better the cause of God; Insomuch that if
Christian Princes minding the Benefit they may reap from the present
Conjunctures, did not spare any means to make notable Acquisitions, they might
not only procure the Augmentation of their States, but also the Increase and
Extention of the Catholic Faith.

FINIS.

