A SERMON AT THE FUNERAL OF THE Lady ELIZABETH ALSTON. WIFE of Sir THOMAS
ALSTON, Knight and Baronet; Preached in the Parish Church of Woodhill in
Bedford-shire, September. 10. 1677. By WILLIAM DILLINGHAM, D. D. and Rectour
there. Now Published at the Instance of her nearest Relations.

LONDON, Printed for Jonathan Robinson, at the Gold Lion in St. Paul's Church
yard. 1678.

compartment or black outline of the shape of a tombstone

Imprimatur.

November. 1. 1677. C. Alston, R.P.D. Hen. Episc. Land. a Sacris Domest.

2 TIMOTHY 4.7, 8. I have fought a good Fight, I have finished my Course, I have
kept the Faith. Henceforth is laid up for me a Crown of Righteousness; which
the Lord, the Righteous Judge, shall give me at that day.


IT is not at all to be doubted, but that the blessed Apostle St. Paul, who (as
he reports of himself,) did die daily, and was in Deaths often, did live under
a constant Sense of his own Mortality. But yet at the time of his writing this
Epistle, (which was, as the Postscript tells us, when he was brought the second
time before Nero) he seems to have had more than ordinary apprehensions of his
approaching End. Death was now already in his view, and coming toward him. So
much he lets us know in the Verse before the Text: For I am now ready to be
offered, and the time of my Departure is at hand. (...) not so much imminent,
as already come.

Now seeing that Death is an Enemy which we must all encounter; it is all our
Concernments to prepare for it. And that we may so do, it will be of singular
use and advantage to us, to have observed how St. Paul, a good, old, and tried
Soldier of Jesus Christ, does prepare himself to receive the Shock, and to
cope with this King of Terrors; and to know what Cordials he makes use of to
support his Heart against the Fear of Death approaching.

The Text presents us with a twofold Meditation of St. Paul.

1. A Meditation of what was past; a Reflection upon his former Life
vvell-spent. I have fought a good Hight, etc. Ver. 7:

2. A Meditation on what was future; being a Prospect into the Life to come,
and the Glory of it. Henceforth, etc. Ver. 8.

The Apostle's Work, and his Reward; his Fidelity, and his Crown. The first
whereof has an Order and Subordination to the other. The way to Happiness is
by Holiness without which no man shall ever see the Lord. And the way to have
assurance of Eternal Life is, to get the Testimony of a good Conscience, that
we have led our Lives well here on Earth. And this double Assurance joyn^d
together, did enable St. Paul to look upon Death but as a Departure, a mild and
harmless thing; a Departure, and that not from home, but from an Inn, to go
unto his Father's House. The time of my Departure is at hand.

Medit. 1. I shall begin with St. Paul's first Medication, or his Reflection
upon his vvell-led Life. Wherein we have two things to be considered by us. 1.
A Character of the Nature of a Christian Life. 2. The comfortable Testimonial
which Paul's Conscience gave him, viz. that he had led his Life well. I have
fought a good Fight, etc.

1. We have here a Character expressing and setting forth unto us the Nature of
a Christian Life; and that under a threefold Metaphor and Allusion. 1. Of a
Fight. 2. Of a Course, or Race. 3. Of the Custody or Keeping of something
committed to our Trust.

1. The Christian Life is here compared to a Fight, and figuratively so called.

Sometimes the Life of Man is compared to a Warfare, in respect of those many
Labors and Difficulties which he is wont to encounter vvithal. Thus Job 7.1.
Is there not an appointed time to Man upon the Earth? Where for an appointed
Time, the Marginal reading is a Warfare, by which is meant a Time of Warring.
According hereunto we find, that the Roman Legionary Soldiers had a certain
Period or Term of Years, sometimes ten, sometimes twenty, or more Years, during
which they were to continue listed in the Muster-Roll, and to fight under
their Emperor's Banner: but when that Time was once expired, then they were
said to be Emeriti and Exauctorati, discharged of their Oath, and dismissed
from serving any longer, and honorably rewarded with Gifts and Possessions.
To such a Term of Time Allusion is made, Isa. 40.2. Where it is said of
Jerusalem, that her Warfare is accomplished. And so Rev. 3.12. He that
overcomes, shall go no more out, that is, to Warfare, he has his quietus est.

But if the natural Life of Man be a kind of Warfare, a Christian Life is much
more deservedly to be so accounted, a Spiritual Warfare. And thus Paul
expresses it, 1 Timothy 1.18. That thou might war a good Warfare. And 2 Timothy
2.3. Endure Hardship, as a good Soldier of Jesus Christ.

There is a double sort of Fighting, which Paul has Allusion to, when he
speaks of the Christian Life.

Sometimes he speaks of Fighting in a Military sense, as one Enemy fights with
another in the Field, which is properly called Warring. And of this he speaks
in the place but now mentioned; (...), that thou might war, (...), a good
Warfare.

Otherwhile the Apostle speaks of Fighting in an Agonistical sense, as Men were
wont to fight of old in the Greek Olympicks, or in the Roman Cirque and
Amphitheater, when they contended for Masteries, where the Victor's Guerdon was
Life and Glory. And unto this Paul seems to allude in the Text, as the Word
(...), here used by him, does import. But I shall not be curious to observe the
Difference, but speak of them promiscuously.

The Life of a Christian is fitly compared unto a Fight or Warfare; as will
appear by the following Considerations.

1. As in War there is always some Cause or other contended for; whether it be
to revenge Injuries, or to defend Life and Liberty, or to obtain Dominion, or
to win Glory and Renown: So is it here; Christians have a Cause which they
fight in, the Cause of God, the Cause of Christ, and of their own Souls; they
contend for the Glory and Honor of God, for the Name and Faith of Christ, for
the eternal Salvation of their own Souls. All these are concerned in our
Christian Warfare; all these does Satan seek to hinder and destroy.

2. As in Wars and Fights, so here, are two adverse Parties, Enemies and
Antagonists to one another, fighting and contending with one another. And those
we find to be listed under opposite Generals. On the one side, Jesus Christ,
the Prince of Life and Salvation: and under him do fight all true Believers. On
the other side is Satan, the Prince of the Power of the Air, and of the Kingdom
of Darkness, who rules and commands in the Children of Disobedience; and
under him are listed Legions of Apostate Spirits, and wicked Men.

The Devil and the World fight against us by Temptations on the right hand, and
on the left, enticing and alluring us to Sin; terrifying and persecuting us, to
drive us from God and Gooodness. And with this Host assaulting us from without,
do combine a Party within us, our mutinous Lusts and Corruptions, the Flesh
lusting against the Spirit; without which all Satan's Attempts upon us would be
in vain, as we see those against Jesus Christ were; because, as our Savior
says, Joh. 14.30. The Prince of this World comes, and has nothing in me. No
Corruption to side with him, no combustible Matter for his Wildfire to take
hold of; so that all his Attempts against him were in vain. And so would they
be against us also, were it not for those Bosom-Traitors which harbor in our
Breasts, those Lusts which war in our Members. It is the Tinder within us, that
makes Satan's fiery Darts and Temptations so dangerous to us.

These our Enemies are represented unto us as very formidable and dangerous;
and so they are, whether we consider,

1. Their Number. They are very numerous, Legions of Devils, and a whole World
of wicked Men. But yet if Beelzebub commanded only an Army of Flies, though
never so numerous and swarming, the danger were not so great. But add to their
Number,

2. Their Power and Might. They are Angels; and how great the natural Power of
one single Angel is, witness the Camp of the Assyrians, 2 Kin. 19.35. where one
Angel in one Night made a Carnage of no less than an hundred eighty five
thousand Men. Hence it is that Angels are said to excel in Strength, Psalm. 103.
20. And although Satan and his Train be fallen from their Happiness and
Holiness, and extremely debauched in their Morals; yet their natural Powers do
still continue very great; and therefore they are called Principalities and
Powers, and spiritual Wickedness in high Places, Ephesians. 6.12. In high Places,
surely a great Advantage in Wrestling, and no less in Fighting.

But although our Enemies were never so numerous, and never so strong, yet if
they had no Wisdom to order their Numbers, and to manage their Strength, they
might come to Ruin by their own Weight; as we know that great Armies have
proved sometimes unweildy and cumbersom to themselves, and by frequent Mutinies
have in time fretted themselves to nothing. But,

3. Our Enemies are subtle Enemies, managing their Force with exceeding great
Policy and Cunning, and are wont to prevail more by Sleight than Power.

The Devil is called the Old Serpent, (Rev. 12.9.) A Serpent, subtle by Nature;
but much more by long Use and Experience, and old Serpent, He has many
Windings and Turnings, many Devices and Stratagems, many Wiles and Methods to
circumvent us by.

4. Our Spiritual Enemies are Cruel and Merciless, which makes them still the
more dangerous. This adds Will to their Power, and sets their Subtlety on work
to contrive Mischief against us. In this respect Satan is said to have been a
Murderer from the beginning, John 8.44. And called a red Dragon, Rev. 12.3. A
roaring Lion, seeking whom he may devour, 1 Pet. 5.8.

5. This his Malice to our Souls makes him watchful and restless, exceedingly
industrious to work us Mischief, and to bring Dishonor unto God. We see with
what indefatigable Industry he prosecuted our Savior Christ, by tempting him
again and again, by slandering and blaspheming him, by crucifying him, and even
after Death, by denying and belying his Resurrection. He left no Stone
unturned, that by any means, if it had been possible, he might have hindered
God's Glory, and Man's Salvation.

Thus we see what a dangerous Adversary we have to fight against: whom resist
steadfast in the Faith; for we are not ignorant of his Devices. And now it is
high time to bethink our selves wherewith we may oppose him, and defend our
selves.

3. As in other Fightings, so in this Christian Combat, we are furnished with
Weapons, both for the offensive and defensive Part, and those both of them
tried and approved. 2 Cor. 10.4, 5. The Weapons of our Warfare are not carnal,
but mighty through God, to the pulling down of strong Holds. And we have the
whole Armor of God, which is to be put on by every one of us, that we may be
able to stand against the Violence and Wiles of the Devil. The several Parts
whereof we may see described, Ephesians. 6.13, etc. Truth, Righteousness, and
Faith, the Word of God, and Prayer.

Stand therefore upon your watch, having your Loins girt, fight the good Fight
of Faith, quit your selves like Men: but be sure you take Christ for your
General; he is the Captain of our Salvation, Heb. 2.10. He has baffled the
Devil, and overcome the World: therefore be of good Comfort; (...). God will
give us the Victory through Jesus Christ our Lord, 1 Cor. 15.57. The Quarrel is
ancient, as old as Genesis 3.15. Our Enemies are formidable; but our Cause is
good, and God is on our side, and so long who shall be against us? who can
stand against him? Not the Gates of Hell, (the Plots and Power of it) nor the
Depths of Satan, nor all his whole Militia shall be able ever to prevail
against the Church of Christ. Be thou faithful unto Death, and he shall give
thee a Crown of Life. For those that conquer shall be rewarded; as shall be
showed anon.

So much briefly of the first Metaphor whereby the Life of a Christian is set
forth unto us: It is a Fight, I have fought a good Fight. A good Fight it is in
respect of the Cause, good also in respect of the Nature of the Fight, which is
to be managed by well-doing; and good also in respect of the Success, which is
Victory and Happiness. But I hasten to the next Resemblance of a Christian Life.

2. The Christian Life is compared to a Course, or Race, I have finished my
Course. A Course of Life is a Phrase in ordinary use with us at this day; as
Spatium vitae decurrere, was with the ancient Romans. But it seems in this
Place to have been borrowed by the Apostle from the running of a Race used in
the Olympic Games by the Grecians, called (...), the very word here used by
St. Paul. To this we may observe him often alluding in his Epistles. Heb. 12.1.
Let us run with Patience the Race that is set before us, laying aside every
weight. And Phil. 3.14. He says of himself, I press toward the Mark, for the
Prize of the high Calling of God in Christ Jesus; where the Expressions of
pressing toward the Mark, and for the Prize, have manifest allusion to the
running of a Race.

Now the Race of a Christian is no other than a careful and conscientious and
zealous walking in the ways of God, which lead unto Salvation; wherein we shall
meet with many hindrances. (1.) The Sin that so easily besets us, which is
spoken of in Heb. 12.1. Our Corruption within us, which hopples and intangles
us, so that we cannot do the things which we would. (2.) Without us we shall
meet with many Rubs laid in our way, many Snares, many Scandals, many
Stumbling Blocks, laid by Satan to entrap us, and make us fall. The World's
golden Ball of Pleasure and Profit is cast before us, to entice us out of the
way; Satan's wildfire of Persecution is flashed in our Faces, to affright us
from our Christian Course; our way is hedged up with thorns; or else carnal
Relations and worldly Interest hang about our Necks, to pull us back. So that
there needs much strength of Grace, much Courage and Resolution, much
Earnestness and Contention, much Labor and pressing forward, that so we may
lay hold on the Prize, Eternal Life, the Crown of Glory, which is held forth to
us for a Prize, and shall be given unto us by the Judge, the (...), and
Rewarder, if we strive lawfully, and run well. So run therefore, that ye may
obtain, 1 Cor. 9.24.

3. The Christian Life is here set forth unto us under the Metaphorof keeping a
Trust; I have kept the Faith.

Where by Faith some understand Faithfulness or Fidelity, that Engagement which
is usually given by Soldiers to their General by an Oath, which is called
Sacramentum militare. And so to keep the Faith is to keep the Oath, by fighting
faithfully, and not falsely betraying the Cause of Christ; neither by a
treacherous running over to the Enemy, as a Transfuga partium; nor yet by a
cowardly running away and drawing back from their Colors, deserting the Cause
of Christ and the Gospel, which they had sworn to defend; as all of us have in
our Baptismal Vow.

But by Faith in this place, I think is rather to be understood Fides quae
creditur, the Truth and Faith of Christ in the Gospel: in which sense the
Saints are described. ( Rev. 14.12.) to be such as keep the Commandments, and
the Faith of Jesus.

The Metaphor of keeping this Faith, seems to have been borrowed either from

1. The keeping of a Fort or strong Castle. The Faith and Truth of Christ is a
strong Hold, which is committed to the keeping and defending of every Christian
Soul; and while we keep this Fortress, that will keep us safe, safe from the
power of the Enemy, and we shall be kept by the power of God through Faith unto
Salvation, 1 Pet. 1.5. Where the Word (...), signifies properly kept as a
Garisson is kept. Or,

2. The keeping of a precious Jewel or Treasure, committed to our charge and
custody. The Faith and Truth of Christ is a Depositum committed to us, and
entrusted with us. To this St. Jude seems to allude, ( Jude 3.) when he exhorts
all to contend earnestly for the Faith which was once delivered unto the
Saints. The like Allusion has St. Paul, when he exhorts Timothy, 1 Timothy 6.
ver. 20, 21. O Timothy, keep that which is committed to thy trust: and what
that was may appear by the Opposition there subjoined, Avoiding profane and
vain Bablings, and oppositions of Science falsely so called; which some
professing, have erred concerning the Faith. The Faith was the Depositum, and
the god thing committed to Timothy, as Paul phrases it, and exhorts him again
to keep, 2 Timothy 1.14. the same which in verse 13. he had expressed in other
word, viz. Hold fast the Form of sound Words, which thou have heard of me, in
Faith and Love which is in Christ Jesus.

If we keep this Faith and Truth, that will keep our Souls: for by keeping his
Faith we trust in him, and commit our Souls to his keeping, who is the faithful
and watchful Lord Keeper of his Israel. And therefore St. Peter exhorts, Commit
the keeping of your Souls to him in well-doing, as unto a faithful Creator, 1
Pet. 4.19. And this did encourage St. Paul to say, (2 Timothy 1.12.) I know whom I
have trusted, and I am persuaded that he is able to keep that which I have
committed unto him against that Day. And as our Savior Christ did pray to his
Father, ( John 17.11.) that he would keep all his Elect, Holy Father, keep
through thine own Name, those whom thou have given me: So he promises ( Rev.
3.10.) to the Church in Philadelphia, Because thou have kept the Word of my
Patience, I also will keep thee from the hour of Temptation.

3. Or else this keeping of the Faith may allude unto a Soldier's keeping of
his Station, or a Wrestler keeping of his Ground. But the former are (as I
conceive) more proper to the place; and therefore I shall pursue this no
further, but come to consider what the thing is which is here meant by keeping
the Faith. Now to keep the Faith is,

1. Truly and firmly to believe the Truth of Christ, to assent unfeignedly to
it, to receive it, not into the Ear only, but into the Heart also, and there to
keep it and cleave unto it.

2. To keep the Truth and Faith of Christ is to obey it; as to keep God's
Commandments is to obey and do them. The Truth and Faith of Christ are kept in
an holy Life.

3. To keep the Truth and Faith of Christ is to hold it fast by Profession.
Thus Christ commends the Church of Pergamus, Rev. 2.13. Thou hold fast my
Name, and have not denied my Faith; and likewise the Church in Philadelphia,
Rev. 3.8. Thou have kept my Word, and have not denied my Name.

4. Lastly; The Faith is kept by holding out, and constant Continuance and
Perseverance in all these, believing, practicing and professing it. This is
that which receives the promised Reward, Mat. 24.13. He that shall endure unto
the end, the same shall be saved. Rev. 2.10. Be thou faithful unto Death, and I
will give thee a Crown of Life. Paul must finish his Course before he shall
receive a Crown. Without this we shall come short of the Prize.

Thus we have briefly surveyed the Character of a Christian Life, which was the
first thing observed in St. Paul's first Meditation.

II. The second thing propounded to be considered is, the comfortable
Testimonial which Paul's Conscience gave him concerning his past Life and
Conversation; he was able to say in the sincerity of his Heart, I have fought a
good Fight, etc.

St. Paul had long since made it his Exercise, his constant Care and Endeavor,
to have always a Conscience void of offense toward God, and toward Men, Acts
24.16. And now you see here he reaps the fruit of it.

Accordingly as we use our Consciences, so will they deal by us; if we wound
them, they will wound us. If we keep not Peace in our Consciences, how can they
speak Peace to us? But if we keep them tender and pure, they will be able to
comfort us in our greatest Streights and Difficulties.

St. Paul reflecting upon his Life past, his Conscience told him what he here
professes of himself.

First, That he had fought a good Fight, in a good Cause, and that he had
fought it well, observing therein the Commands of his General; That he had been
painful and industrious, courageous and undaunted in the Work and Cause of
Christ, not only as a Christian, but also as an Apostle and Minister of the
Gospel.

He had encountered with Elymas at Paphos, Acts 13.

With the Retrivers of Jewish Ceremonies at Antioch, Act. 15.

With Stoics and Epicureans at Athens, Acts 17.

With beast-like Men, such as Demetrius and his Followers, at Ephesus, 1 Cor.
15.32.

With Alexander the Copper-Smith; with Hymeneus and Philetus. And in all these
Conflicts the Gospel still prevailed, and carried the Victory.

And for his Sufferings, the Instances of his Christian Patience, and passive
Fortitude, take that Inventary which himself had drawn up sometime before in
his second Epistle to the Corinthians, chap. 11. v. 23, etc. Where he has with
great Eloquence described his Adventures to us: In Labors, abundant, in
Stripes above measure, in Prisons frequent, in Deaths often. V. 24. Of the Jews
five times received I forty Stripes save one. 25. Thrice was I beaten with
Rods, once was I stoned, thrice I suffered Shipwreck, a night and a day I have
been in the Deep. 26. In journeying often, in Perils of Waters, in Perils of
Robbers, in Perils by mine own Countrymen, in Perils by the Heathen, in Perils
in the City, in Perils in the Wilderness, in Perils in the Sea, in Perils among
false Brethren. 27. In Weariness and Painfulness, in Watchings often, in Hunger
and Thirst, in Fastings often, in Cold and Nakedness. These and such like were
the Scars and Marks of Honor, which he had received for the Cause of Christ
and the Gospel; for the Truth of which he vouches the God of Truth for witness,
v. 31. The God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, which is blessed for
evermore, knows that I ly not.

Briefly; his Conscience told him, that he had run his Race well in the ways of
God's Commandments, with Zeal, Industry, and (which is the Crown of all) with
Constancy. 1 Cor. 9.26. I therefore so run, not as uncertainly; so fight I, not
as one that beats the Air. His Conscience told him that he had kept the Faith
committed to his charge; and as Jesus Christ had counted him faithful, putting
him into the Ministry, 1 Timothy 1.12. So he had obtained mercy of the Lord to be
faithful, 1 Cor. 7.25.

But to wave the Metaphor, I shall show you plainly these two things. 1. What
it was that Paul's Conscience did testify. 2. What use he made of that
Testimonial.

1. What it was that Paul's Conscience did testify; what was the Answer of a
good Conscience to him: which may be reduced unto these two Heads. 1. Faith and
Love and other Graces unfeigned. 2. A sincere and constant Endeavor of
universal Obedience.

1. By reflecting upon the Actings of his own Soul, he could discern that he
did firmly assent and cleave unto the Truth of Christ with all his Heart; that
he did rely upon and trust only unto the Righteousness wrought by JESUS CHRIST
for his acceptance with God, the pardon of his Sin, and his right to the
heavenly Kingdom; that he had the other true saving Graces wrought in his Heart
by the Spirit of God, whereby he was enabled to side with the Law of God in
Judgment and Affection, [(...),] to vote with and to delight in the Law of God,
and to overbear the Ebullitions and Insurrections of the Flesh, and to mortify
it by the Spirit, or renewed Part, and Principle of Spiritual Life that was in
him, which is called the inward Man, Romans 7.22.

These Principles, Habits, and Acts he knew he had; for upon reflection, he by a
rational sense might feel them enabling him and proceeding from him, and so be
conscious of them. And that his Faith and Love and other Graces were unfeigned
and genuine, he knew by the Light of the Spirit of God shining through the
written Word upon its own work in his heart, and by its special Concourse and
Assistance enabling his gracious Soul to exert and put forth such vigorous and
lively Acts as might easily be observed by a diligent Reflection.

The holy Spirit of God is called a Spirit of Wisdom and Revelation, Ephesians. 1.17.
A Spirit of Revelation in respect of the Object, a Spirit of Wisdom in regard
of the Faculty.

The visible Object must be enlightened, else it cannot verge or send forth its
visible species, without which it cannot be seen; and the Eye must be
enlightened also by an internal Light, else it cannot see the Object, though
never so conspicuous in it self. Thus also is it here, the Spirit of God does
discover to us the things that are freely given to us of God, the (...), the
things of the Spirit; not only Truths which it propounds to us from without,
but also the Graces which it works within us: and thus it may be said to reveal
the Object to us. But then it does also inlighten the Eye of the Mind with a
spiritual Wisdom, a Spirit of discerning, whereby it distinguishes and discerns
the Work of Grace to be true and genuine, by the Characters which are given of
it in the written Word.

2. St. Paul by examining his own Conscience concerning the discharge of his
Duty in the whole Course of his Life there recorded, could observe (in the
latter part of it, viz. ever since his Conversion) a sincere and constant
Purpose and diligent Endeavor of universal Obedience to the Will of God, in
pursuance of that resignation of himself, mentioned Acts 9.6. Lord, what will thou have me to do? His Obedience was sincere, though not sinless; and perfect,
though not legally, yet with the allowance of the Evangelical (...). According
to which, aliquid fieri dicitur, quando quod non fit, ignoscitur; when
Obedience is sincerely endeavored, and the Failings of it pardoned.

And these Fruits gave Letters credential to his Faith, that it was a living
Faith. Hereby we do know that we know him, if we keep his Commandments, 1 John
2.3. And we know that we have passed from Death to Life, because we love the
Brethren. Love is argumentative to prove that we are in a state of Grace, and
the Fruits of Love bear witness unto that, 1 John 3.14.

Paul's Conscience told him, that in his Actions he had not dissembled with
God, but that he acted out of a Principle of unfeigned Love to him, and in
Conscience of his Command; and that he directed his Actions to God's glory as
his chief end. Thus much he might be well assured of from the Records of his
Conscience, which he had made it his care to keep clear and legible; and though
it gave him notice also of his Sins and Failings, yet at the same time it
represented them as expiated and cancelled in the Blood of Christ, apprehended
by his Faith.

And thus you have seen what the Testimonial was which Paul's Conscience gave
him. Now let us come to see,

2. What Use St. Paul makes of this Testimonial. A double Use.

1. To assure him of a Crown of Righteousness, and by that Assurance mediately
to comfort him against the Fear of Death; of which I shall speak afterward. 2.
By this consideration to comfort himself immediately, and next way, against the
Fear of Death.
The Testimony of a good Conscience, Conscientia recte factorum, does arm and
support a man against the ghastly aspect of approaching Death. For,

What is it that makes Death so terrible unto Mortals, that the very mention of
it makes them tremble like an Aspine-leaf? The Apostle tells us, The Sting of
Death is Sin, 1 Cor. 15.56. The guilt of Sin upon the Conscience is that which
puts the Heart into such a palpitation: For the Conscience knowing, that for
all those Impieties, whereof it keeps the Register, it must come to judgment,
and the Books must be opened, and every one must be judged according to what is
found written in the Books, it dreads Judgment to come, (as Felix did) and
cannot but look upon Death as on the grim Sergeant, that comes to arrest us,
and to summon us to judgment. This is the Sting in the Tail of Death.

But now a good Conscience, sprinkled with the Blood of Christ, that sincerely
reports unto us, that we have by Faith in the Blood of Christ received him for
the Pardon of Sin, and gives us in an holy Life in evidence of the Truth of our
Faith, does thereby show that the Promise of the Gospel, which was made
conditionally, is now become absolute unto us; and that therefore we are
already passed from Death to Life. And then being once assured that our Debts
are pardoned, and the Handwriting cancelled, we fear no longer Death's Arrest,
but may say with this Apostle, O Death, where is thy Sting? Thanks be to God,
who gives us the Victory through Jesus Christ our Lord, 1 Cor. 15.55, 56. Thus
we see that the Testimony of a good Conscience, (and nothing else without it)
can give us true and solid Comfort, when we come to die. A wicked man may,
through the hardness of his Heart, and searedness of his Conscience, be
senseless and stupid in his Death, and so fall down like a Log into Hell-flames.
An erroneous Conscience may make a man brave it out, and (with Curtius) leap
desperately into the Gulf of the Bottomless Pit. An Hypocrite's Conscience may
set a fair outside upon it, and die (possibly) with seeming Joy; but in the
midst of Laughter his Heart is sad: his Joy is but like the risus Sardonius,
when Men seem to die laughing; but it is rather a Rictus than a Risus, a grinning
of the Teeth than Laughter, and shall end in gnashing of Teeth in another
World. It Is only the Testimony of a good and pure, sincere and enlightened
Conscience, that can yield a man good ground of true and solid Comfort.

And therefore St. Paul, being now (as it were) at Death's door, takes this
Cordial before he knocks, has recourse unto his own Conscience for his Letters
Testimonial, drawn up from a Survey of an holy and wellled Life; and here he
finds support. And the like he had done before, 2 Cor. 1.12. For our rejoicing
is this, the Testimony of our Conscience, that in Simplicity, and godly
Sincerity -- we have had our Conversation in the World.

This also has been the Practice and Method of other Saints and Servants of
God in Scripture; who, when they were under the apprehension of their
approaching Departure, have fetched their Comfort from the lame Topic, which
St. Paul here made use of, viz. the Testimony of a good Conscience concerning
their passed Lives and Conversations.

Thus good Hezekiah, Isa. 38.1, etc. having received that doleful Message, the
Sentence of Death, pronounced by the mouth of the Prophet, Set thine House in
order, for thou shall dye, and not live, whence does he look for his Comfort,
but from the secret witness of his own Soul, testifying unto him the Sincerity
of his former Course, which he is willing to have tried by the Sunbeams of
God's own Knowledge, v. 3. Remember now, O Lord, I beseech thee, how I have
walk I before thee in Truth, and with a perfect Heart, and have done that
which is good in thy sight.

Thus Elijah, sitting under the Juniper-tree, 1 Kin. 19.4. could not with any
comfort have desired seriously, as he did, that God would take away his Life
from him, had he not had this assurance written on the Table of his own Heart,
that he had been very Zealous, or Jealous, for the Lord of Hosts, as himself
professes v. 10.1 And how could good old Simeon with joy have sung his Nunc
dimittis, had he not known in his Conscience what the Gospel reports of him,
that he was a just and devout Man, waiting for the Consolation of Israel? Luke
2.25.

As ever therefore we desire to find Comfort in our Death, let us lead holy
Lives, and keep good Consciences, as Paul, and these other Servants of God did.
There are scarce any so profligate, and given up to all Impiety, but do desire
Comfort when they come to die. But, alas! by their wicked Lives they have stopped
the Minister's mouth, seared the Breasts of Consolation, and cut off those
Conduit-pipes which should have conveyed Comfort into their Souls. There be
many, who will be ready to say with Balaam, O let me die the Death of the
Righteous, and let my last end be like his; but they will not live the Life of
the Righteous. Mark the perfect Man, and behold the upright; for the end of
that Man is peace. Psalm. 37.37. But, alas! what Peace can thy Conscience, or
any other, speak to thee, while thy crying Sins and Impieties are so many?
Light is sown for the Righteous, and Joy for the Upright in Heart, Psalm. 97.11.
A man may with as much reason expect to reap where he has not sown, as to reap
Joy and Comfort in Death, without sowing the Seed of it in an holy Life. Sow
then in thy Lifetime what thou would reap when thou come to die.

And thus I have done with St. Paul's First Meditation, or his Reflection upon
his former Life well-spent. I come to the Second.

Medit. 2. St. Paul's second Meditation is a Prospect into the Life to come,
and the Glory of it, together with his own Share in it.

Wherein we have these Severals to be taken into our Consideration.

1. The Reward it self, called a Crown of Righteousness. 2. The Certainty of
it, in those words, laid up for me. 3. The Bestower of it, the Lord, the
Righteous Judge, shall give me. 4. The Time, when it shall be bestowed, at that
day.
I. The Reward it self, which is no other than Eternal Life, the Glory and Joys
of Heaven. Which we have here set forth unto us under the Metaphor of a Crown
of Righteousness.

The Joys and Glory of Heaven are called a Crown.

1. Because Eternal Life and Blessedness are promised to us under the Notion of
an Heavenly Kingdom, Luke 12.32. Fear not, little Flock; for it is your
Father's good pleasure to give you the Kingdom. And Christ has made all his
Members Kings and Priests, Rev. 1.6. A Royal Priesthood, 1 Pet. 2.9. And
therefore a Crown or Diadem, which is the Ensign of Majesty and Royalty, is
very aptly used to express their future Estate by: which is an Allusion to the
Political use of the Crown.

2. Eternal Bliss is called a Crown, in allusion to those Crowns or Garlands,
which were used in rewarding such as conquered in the Olympic Contentions;
which was an Agonistical Use of the Crown, to which St. Paul seems here to have
alluded. Those who conquered in Fighting, or overcame in Running, or in
Wrestling, had their several Crowns bestowed on them. Now Paul had fought a
good Fight, and had finished his Course; and therefore his Reward shall be a
Crown: not like theirs, a corruptible Crown of Flowers, or Herbs, which are
soon withered; but (...), that never fades, 1 Cor. 9.25. Which is called by our
Savior, a Crown of Life, Rev. 2.10. And by St. Peter, a Crown of Glory, 1 Pet.
5.4. And here by St. Paul, a Crown of Righteousness; and that not as if it were
merited by his Righteousness, (as some would have it) but,

(1.) Because it is a Reward of Righteousness, not of our deserving, but of
God's free giving. The Crown is given to such, and such only, as are Righteous,
though not for the merit of their Righteousness. God rewards and crowns his own
Graces in his Children. Godliness has the Promises of this Life, and that
which is to come. (2.) Because it is a Crown due unto the Righteousness and
Merits of Jesus Christ, who has merited it for us, and has made us Kings and
Priests unto his Father. (3.) Because it is a Crown which God in Righteousness
will give unto us, as merited for us by Christ Jesus. Hence it is said
emphatically here, which the Lord, the Righteous Judge, shall give me. Christ
shall give it adjudicando, by adjudging it to us; and his Father tradendo, by
delivery: Christ by Sentence; the Father by actual Execution.
So much be spoken of the first Particular, the Reward it self. The second
follows, which is,

II. The Certainty of this Reward, laid up for me. Wherein we have a double
Certitude expressed, 1. Objecti, sive Rei. 2. Subject live Spei and Fidei.

1. Here is a Certitude of the thing it self; the Crown shall certainly and
really be bestowed and conferred upon Paul in the Issue, he shall not miss of
it. Thus much is intimated in the word, laid up; which implies,

(1.) That it is appointed and set apart for him: and so it was Designatione
Patris, by the Father's election; Merito Filii, by Christ's purchase; and
Promissione Verbi, by the word of Promise. (2.) It is prepared and provided.
Hence it is called a Kingdom prepared for you from the foundation of the World.
Mat. 25.34. And our Savior tells his Disciples, John 14.2, 3. I go to prepare
a place for you. And surely great must that needs be which He prepares, and
which has been so long in preparing. (3.) Laid up, implies, that this Crown is
kept safe and preserved: hence said to be reserved for us in the Heavens, 1
Pet. 1.4. whither none can break through to steal it away. (4.) Laid up also,
out of sight, to be seen only by the Eye of Faith; Hope which is laid up for
you in Heaven, Col. 1.5. Not seen, but nevertheless sure, because safely laid
up; and being discerned by the Eye of Faith, it ministers abundant cause of Joy
and Comfort, as may be inferred from 1 Pet. 1.8.
2. Here St. Paul professes a Certitude or Assurance, which he had in his own
Soul, that he should receive the Crown: For me, for him in particular. David
says, Verily there is a Reward for the Righteous; but Paul says, for me, by a
particular application to himself.

A true Believer then (it seems) may attain unto an assurance of his own
salvation. He may be assured of his present state, that he is passed from Death
to Life; and he may be assured also, that he shall persevere, and be kept by
the Power of God through Faith unto Salvation. And therefore St. Peter exhorts
to give all diligence to make your Calling and Election sure, 2 Pet. 1.10. Our
Election by our Calling: observe the order. And St. Paul speaks expressly,
Romans 8.38, 39. I am persuaded, that neither Death, nor Life, -- shall separate
us from the Love of God which is in Christ Jesus our Lord. There he declares
his assurance of Perseverance; and he speaks for others as well as himself,
separate us. And so here in the Text, Not to me only, but unto all them also
that love his appearing. And the way to attain unto this assurance of
Perseverance and Salvation, St. Peter has showed us, 2 Pet. 1.5, 8, 10. Add
unto Faith Virtue, and to Virtue Knowledge, etc. (1.) Get true Grace into your
hearts, a Principle of spiritual Life, and grow in Grace. (2.) Act Grace
vigorously. For if these things be in you, and abound, they make you that you
shall neither be barren nor unfruitful: for if ye do these things, ye shall
never fall. And surely they may know that they do them. In like manner St. Paul
argues here, I have fought a good Fight, etc. Henceforth, (...). The word in
the Greek has the force of an Illative, therefore, ergo or igitur, (and so we
may find it translated in H. Stephan.) as if Paul had here said more expressly,
Hence I conclude and infer; it remains and follows, not only in sequence of
Time, but by consequence and force of Argument; relinquitur tanquam emergens e
praemissis, it follows from the premises of an holy Life; There is laid up for
me a Crown of Life.

Where St. Paul's way of arguing himself into his Assurance is very observable,
and deserves to be taken notice of, as the best and most usual way whereby all
Believers may come to be assured of their Salvation. And thus he argues:

All those that love Christ's appearing, shall receive a Crown of Righteousness:

But I am one of those who love Christ's appearing: Therefore I shall receive a
Crown of Righteousness.

The Major, or the first of these Propositions, is express in the end of this
8th Verse, which Paul was assured of by Faith in the Promises, made in general
in the Word of God: Whosoever believes, shall not dye, but has everlasting
Life, etc.

The Minor, or second Proposition, he gives us the Proof of, in that his
Profession; I have fought a good Fight, I have finished my Course; I have kept
the Faith; which whosoever do, do also love Christ's appearing: And therefore
they are put here by Paul, as Characteristical of the same Persons.

If you will have the Argument in form take it thus: All that have fought a
good Fight, love Christ's appearing:

But I have fought a good Fight:

Therefore I love Christ's appearing.

How St. Paul came to be assured that he had fought a good Fight, I showed
before; briefly now; He knew that he believed, that he had fought, and run, and
kept the Faith, by reflecting upon the Operations of his own Soul; as a Man
that thinks, may be assured that he thinks, by a kind of rational Sensation,
whereby the Soul is conscious of its own Acts. But that his Faith and other
Graces were true and genuine, he might gather from the effects and fruits of
them, as here (we see) he does from his Fighting and Running, and from
observing his own Sincerity in the answer of a good Conscience and Faith
unfeigned; while the Spirit of Grace does by shining upon its own work in his
Heart illuminate the Object, and by enlightening the eyes of his Soul enable the
Faculty to apprehend and discern that Object, that it is indeed the genuine
Work of the Spirit in his Soul. And thus the holy Spirit of God, by making us
to know the things that are freely given unto us of God, 1 Cor. 2.12. does bear
witness with our Spirits, that we are the Children of God, Romans 8.16.

I will not deny but that this Assurance which Paul had was a special
Privilege, not common to all, nor to many true Believers. All true Believers
have not Assurance; some have not yet attained to it, others may have lost it;
yet all must endeavor after it, and all may attain to it, seeing the Grounds
and Arguments whence it may be inferred, are common to all in some degree. But
they being eminent in St. Paul, his Knowledge clearer, his Love stronger, his
Zeal hotter, his Obedience greater than those of others; hence his Assurance
was fuller, and few can arrive to his pitch. Yet since all true Believers have
like kind of Evidence, in suo quisque modulo, according to their several
measures, and have the general Promises; do believe and endure to the end, and
are faithful unto the death; therefore all true Believers may possibly attain
to be assured of their present state of Salvation, and that they shall
persevere therein, and so in the end enter into the Kingdom of Glory, and
receive the end of their Hopes, the Salvation of their Souls.

No danger that this Doctrine of Believers, being assured of their Salvation,
should encourage them in the least to indulge themselves to commit Sin, seeing
it arises and is cherished ex intuitu, from the beholding of the actings of
Grace in our hearts and lives. Holiness of life is the ground of Assurance; if
that once flag, this must needs also fail: for if upon reflection we find our
lives unholy, this cuts the sinews of Assurance by taking away the Argument, by
force whereof it is, and without which it cannot be, inferred or concluded.
Extra studium Sanctitatis and usum Mediorum, non potest in actum exire haec
Fidei persuasio, was the Suffrage of our Divines concerning assurance of
Perseverance.

But I am called away to consider the other particulars, which yet remain to be
spoken to; and I shall do it very briefly.

3. The Bestower of this Reward. The Lord, the righteous Judge. By the Lord
here, is meant the Lord Jesus Christ, as appears by that which is added, the
righteous Judge; for unto Him has God the Father committed all Judgment, even
to the Son. The Person of CHRIST God-Man, shall execute and actually exercise
the Acts of Judging at the last Day. Hence it is said, Act. 17.31. God has
appointed a Day wherein he will judge the World by the Man CHRIST JESUS. And
Christ himself says, Mat. 7.23. I will profess unto them, I never knew you;
depart from me. And Rev. 2.10. I will give thee a Crown of Life.

There is one in the World, who undertakes to dispose of earthly Crowns and
Scepters to whomsoever he pleases; yea, and of the Crown of Righteousness too,
and the Kingdom of Heaven; wherein yet he falls short of the modesty of him,
whose true Vicegerent he is, for He pretended no further than to give all the
Kingdoms of the Earth, and the glory of them. Luke 4.5, 6. All this is
delivered unto me, and to whomsoever I will, give it. But what ever others may
pretend unto, The Lord Jesus Christ is the only dispenser of this Crown of
Righteousness, the Crown of heavenly Glory. Jesus Christ he is Judge.

Which speaks infinite Comfort unto all true Believers; their Advocate shall be
their Judge, and therefore they may promise themselves all lawful favor: But
he is a Righteous Judge; this affords further comfort, He is faithful who has
promised; His Promises are Yea, and Amen. By his free Promise he has made
himself a debtor; though not so much to us, as to himself, and his own truth.
So that it is now but a righteous thing with God to recompense rest unto his
persecuted Servants, 2 Thessalonians. 1.7.

4. The last thing to be considered in the words, is the time when this Crown
of Righteousness shall be given to Paul. At that day, viz. when (...) the Lord
Jesus shall be revealed from Heaven with his mighty Angels, as we have it in
the place last cited. Which time our Savior points out by (...), Mat. 7.22. in
that day, by way of emphasis. And so St. Paul loves to call it, as he does
three several times in this Epistle. Chap. 1.12. He is able to keep that which
I have committed to him against [that Day.] And Verse. 18. The Lord grant that
he may find mercy at that Day. The Day of the General Judgment lay uppermost in
Paul's mind, and his thoughts ran much upon it; and no wonder if his eye was
always upon his Crown, for that is the time when he shall receive this Crown of
Righteousness.

It is true indeed, that at the day of Death, when the faithful Soul shall
return to God that gave it, and be resigned up into the hands of Jesus Christ,
it shall be perfected in Holiness, and enter into the Kingdom of Heaven: but
the glory shall not be perfect and complete until such time as the Body, which
has been the Souls yoke fellow and companion in doing and suffering for Christ
here, shall be redeemed from the Grave, (for which we are said to wait, Romans
8.23. Hence the Souls from under the Altar cry, how long? Rev. 6.10. and hence
it is that the Spirit and the Bride say, Come, Rev. 22.17. Come quickly, v.
20.) Then shall the Soul and Body (now again united) be presented to Jesus
Christ at his appearing, and so the whole Man shall be rewarded, and be for
ever with the Lord.

At the day of Death shall be a privy Sessions for every particular Soul; but
the general Assize shall be at that Day, that great Day of Universal Judgment.
The believing Soul at the day of Death shall enter into the Heavenly Kingdom;
but the Solemnity of its Coronation shall be deferred till that day; then, and
not till then, shall its Glory and Happiness be completed.

And thus much briefly be spoken concerning St. Paul's Second Meditation,
wherein he expresses his Assurance of a glorious Reward, a Crown of
Righteousness. Now let us only see what Use he makes of this Assurance, and so
conclude.

Assurance of Salvation is of use unto Believers, to encourage them to set upon
their Duty with zeal and cheerfulness, by inflaming their Love to God, the
Principle of their Obedience. Who will not be encouraged to fight courageously,
that is assured of Victory? And the Labourer works cheerfully, when he is once
assured that he shall receive his pay when his work is done. And therefore St.
Paul exhorts, 1 Cor. 15.58. Therefore, my beloved Brethren, be ye steadfast,
unmovable, always abounding in the work of the Lord; forasmuch as ye know that
your Labor is not in vain in the Lord.

But the Use which St. Paul here makes of his Assurance is, to comfort him
against Death approaching. The Testimony of his Conscience cleared from the
guilt of Sin, did take away the Sting and Fear of Death: but this his Certainty
and Assurance of Glory does make Death, not only not formidable to him, but
desirable; when once he could say, as he did, 2 Cor. 5.1. We know that if our
earthly House of this Tabernacle were dissolved, we have a Building of God, an
House not made with hands, eternal in the Heavens. It is no wonder if he said,
( Phil. 1.23.) that he had a desire to depart, and to be with Christ. And when
he had said, 1 Thessalonians. 4.17. So shall we ever be with the Lord; he might well
add in the next verse, Wherefore comfort one another with these words. This
Consideration affords Comfort unto all faithful Souls in respect of themselves;
so also to the surviving Relations of such, as have with St. Paul, fought a
good Fight, and finished their Course, and kept the Faith, inasmuch as for all
such there is laid up a Crown of Righteousness, a Crown of Life and Glory,
which the Lord, the Righteous Judge, shall give them at that day.

In which Number we may confidently reckon that virtuous Lady, and precious
Servant of Jesus Christ, the Lady Elizabeth Alston, whose Funerals we now
celebrate. Concerning whom very much might with truth be spoken in her
commendation; but the suddenness of the Occasion, and the time of the Night,
will not allow me to speak much; yet something I crave leave to speak of her.
Not that she her self, when alive, desired the praises of men; nor that she
needs them now, being already in the possession of heavenly Glory: but that we
by recounting to our selves some of her Virtues, may become sensible of the
greatness of our own loss; and setting her eminent Graces before our Eyes, may
both make them the matter of our giving praise and glory to God, and also the
Copy and Example of our Christian Imitation.

She was descended of an eminent Family, the Saint-Johns of Woodford in
Northamptonshire. But she was more highly descended than so, and better born,
being born again, (...), from above (as some interpret the word) and so, nearly
related unto him who is called the Branch, or Dayspring from on high, the Lord
of life and glory, the Prince of Peace, and Savior of us all. By this Line she
was a Child of God, and born Heir apparent of the Kingdom of Heaven. For God
did even in her tender years season her Heart with Grace, and thereby take
possession of her, bespeaking her (as it were) betimes, and fitting her for
that work, which he afterward made use of her in, viz. the seasoning of others
with Religion, and the holding forth the power of Godliness in the midst of a
crooked and perverse Generation, among whom she did shine as a Light in the
World, and did let her Light, so to shine before men, as that they might see
her good Works, and glorify her heavenly Father.

She was toward her Conjugal Relation, a most loving, faithful and dutiful
Wife, an Help meet for him.

Toward her Children, a most tender and careful Mother, whom she did not
satisfy her self to have once brought forth, but (as St. Paul says he did of
his Galatians, Gal. 4.19.) she travailed again of them, that Christ might be
formed in them.

She was to her Servants kind and merciful, especially to their Souls. Toward
all her Friends true and faithful. Toward all with whom she conversed,
exceeding humble and courteous; condescending very much toward them of low
degree, and especially loving those among them in whom she observed but any
inclinations to God and Goodness.

But remarkable were her Charity and Piety.

Her Charity, in supplying the wants of the Indigent, not only with Food and
Physic for their Bodies, (wherein she expended not a little) but also with
Physic for their Souls, by her wholesome counsel and advice, which she was
ready to bestow on all that needed it.

Her Piety toward God was most eminent, she being careful to walk closely and
conscientiously with him; and as he had blessed her with good natural
Abilities, so she was careful to improve them by diligent Reading and
Meditation, and thereby having gained a good stock of Knowledge, she reduced it
to practice, the right end of knowing.

Witness her constant Closet-devotions, and seeking God in private; to which
she received many gracious Returns, if not in kind, yet in kindness; if not in
the particular things which she asked for, yet in submission to God's Will, and
in the graces and comforts of his Spirit, as she her self had made the
observation. Witness her conscientious care that the Duties of Religion might
be maintained and kept up in her Family. And how diligent she was in her
attendance upon the public Preaching of the Word of God, most of you are
Witnesses; and how desirous she was that all others should do the like. And it
is well known to some how much she bewailed the vvithdrawing of others from the
public Ordinance, the means of their Salvation, endeavoring to reclaim them.

This was the constant course and tenor of her Life, which was a living
practice of Piety, and a constant vvalking with God, (as Enoch's life was):
and God took her unto himself; her, who had lived to him here, to live with
him for ever; her, who had walked with him on Earth, to rest with him for ever
in Heaven.

Indeed her departure hence was very sudden, (as it has been of many others
lately hereabouts) yet it was more sudden unto others than to her self. For
Death is not sudden to those who expected it, and provided for it.

That she was provided and prepared for Death, I do not in the least question;
her holy Life was a continual preparation for Death, so that she might say
with St. Paul, I die daily. Those many Afflictions wherewith God was pleased
to exercise her, frequent sickness, and many bodily infirmities, loss of
Children and other near Relations, had weaned her from the World, and taught
her humbly to submit to God's will when ever he should call; but the sense of
God's Love in Christ to her Soul, had made her more than vvilling to depart,
and to be with Christ.

As for her expectation of Death, she had long expected that it would be
sudden, having been often heard to say that she should die of an Apoplexy,
which usually gives no great warning. But for her expectation of death at that
time when it came, I have not heard it was of any long standing, she being on
Saturday last (the eighth of September) about ten in the morning surprised with
an extraordinary coldness in her left hand, which caused her hasten up into her
Chamber, where within a little time the disease took her Head, (the fountain of
Sense and Reason) and from thence sliding down into her Heart, (the Citadel of
Life) did within the space of two hours put an end unto her days: (Watch
therefore, for ye know not what hour your Lord comes.) But as sudden as her
end was, she was so far aware of it (blessed be God) that she was able to say
with St. Paul, (in the verse before my Text) The time of my departure is at
hand; for to that purpose did she express her self to one of her Servants,
saying, My time is but short, shorter than you imagine. And then in the words
of holy Job, declared her firm trust in Christ, I know that my Redeemer lives.
And the last words which she was heard to speak were Jesus Christ, into whose
hands (as we may well suppose) she did at that time commend her Spirit. The
Lord Jesus Christ, her Savior, whom she had in her heart while she lived, she
had in her mouth as she died, and now doubtless has him in her arms, and shall
be ever with the Lord. Indeed she had expressed formerly a desire that God
would please to give her time to speak to her Friends at parting: This he was
not pleased to grant her, but the actions of her life, and those many good
Counsels which she gave in her lifetime are still vocal; and by them, though
dead, she still speaks. And I hope her nearest Relations, and others also,
will allow her living Counsel and Example, the force of dying-words, to be
continually sounding in their ears, and always thought upon in their minds, to
excite them to the practice of that which she thereby left recommended to them.

But in the easiness of her passage God granted, if not prevented her desires.
The Jews say Moses died binshikah, by a kiss from the mouth of God, because it
is said, Deuteronomy. 34.5. that he died (...) upon the Mouth of the Lord, or
according to the Word of the Lord; and that God drew his Soul out of his Body
with a Kiss. But thus much we are sure of, that God said unto him, Deuteronomy. 32.49,
50. Get thee up, and die in the Mount. So did he seem to say unto this his
Servant also, Go up into thy Chamber, and die there: and so she did. The
Messenger of Death took her by the left hand, and led her home unto her
Father's House. Where let us leave her to her eternal rest, and pray earnestly
to God, That as she brought Religion, and a Blessing along with her into this
Worthy Family, and this Unworthy Place; so in answer to her many, many Prayers,
the Blessing and good Presence of God may be continued to us now she is dead
and gone.

FINIS.

