A DISCOURSE Concerning the Nature, Power, And Proper Effects Of the Present
Conventions IN BOTH KINGDOMS Called by the Prince of Orange.

In a Letter to a Friend.

LONDON: Printed for J. L. and are to be Sold by Richard Baldwin, near the
Black Bull in the Old Bailey. MDCLXXXIX.

A Discourse concerning the Nature, Power, and proper Effects of the Present
Conventions in both Kingdoms, called by the Prince of Orange.
SIR,
BY your last I perceive, that You and Others you have conversed with in the
Country, are strangely amused with the Conventions called by the Prince of
Orange, in both Kingdoms, not knowing by what Authority they are called, or
what their Nature and Power can be, seeing they are alien from all the Courts
and Judicatures of the Kingdoms, without any mention of them, or warrant for
them in Law, and thereby they can be capable to do nothing Authoritatively, or
warrantably: You do suppose that I being upon the place can be able to give you
a better account of them then does occur to your Apprehension: I am very
willing to satisfy your desire in a matter of so great and common a Concern,
as far as my Reach can go: For these Conventions can most properly explicate
their own Power.

I shall endeavor to clear to you, what the Nature of these Conventions are,
and what Power I conceive them to have, and by what Warrant they are called.

You must then consider, that in all Commonwealths constitute by Men, there
must be two Contracts and Agreements, Express, or Tacit, by Word, or Deed; One
amongst these Families who unite themselves into one Body Politic, whereby
they are incorporate, and become one People, and for distinctions sake this may
be called the Popular Contract: The other is between the Sovereign Power and
the Body Politic, which two makes up the Commonwealth, and settle the
Government of it in such Person or Persons, and with such Powers as they agree;
this may be called the Rectoral Contract, by which the Sovereign Power is to
govern and protect the People in all their Rights, and whereby they become
Subjects obliged to Obey.

The Popular Contract must have been entered by the Fathers of the Families
incorporated, for before the Erections of Commonwealths there was no other
Government amongst Men, but the Patriarchal Government of the Fathers of
Families, over their Wives of sp^ing and Servants, which was no less extensive
while the Fathers lived, during so many hundred of years, than many civil
Societies that now be, and comprehended all Authority, Sacred, Civil, and
Criminal, and contained not only Power over the Familes, but also an obligation
imposed of God to exercise these Powers, whereof their Fathers could not
lawfully exoner themselves, and lay that Burden or any part of it upon others,
unless there had been a Divine Institution allowing it, and though the precise
time of that Institution be not expressed in Scripture, as neither is the
Institution of Sacrifices, yet both of them are acknowledged in Scripture, and
the Institution of a Public Judgment, and of Civil Powers, are clear from the
13th Chapter of the Romans, The Powers that be are ordained of God, and he that
resists the Power resists the Ordinance or Institution of God. The Jews
(who of all Nations had the clearest Records of time) did attribute the
Institution of a Public Judgment to the Precepts or Laws of God delivered to
Noah, and by his Posterity propagated through the World; by which, they judged
all in their Territories that were not Israelites; whereof you may have a full
account by the learned Treatise of Mr. Seldom.

The Divine Institution of a Public Judgment which is the Original of both the
forementioned Contracts, is in God's Wisdom and Goodness so sufficient and
full, that thereby not only all things clear by the Law of God, or the
consistent Laws of Men could be effectuated, but all doubtful things that could
be controverted within the Commonwealth might be determined, without necessity
of any Sedition, Tumult, or Intestine War, and consequently private Judgment
behoved so far to cede to that Public Judgment, as to submit to it, even when
Erroneous, if the matter were dubious, seeing God did not appoint Infallible
Judges which yet cannot be extended to things clearly contrary to the Agreement
and Constitution of Commonwealths, otherwise all Contracts betwixt Sovereign
and Subject, and all Constitutions and Goverments thence arising were Elusory,
making Sovereigns only punishable by God for the breach of them, but stating no
Right of Exaction in the People ensnared by them, instead of Subjects to become
Slaves: Seeing Sovereigns might securely take their Lives, Liberties, and Goods
at their Pleasure, which no considering unbyassed Person can imagine to have
been the purpose of God in Instituting a Public Judgment, God did Institute
the Power of this Public Judgment, but not the Persons that were to exercise
it, or the manner how it was to be exercised, but left these free to be
constituted by Men; and therefore St. Peter calls it a humane Constitution or
Creation.

From this Divine Institution arose Civil Societies in Commonwealths, the
Powers and Duties of Sovereigns and Subjects, and the just measures of
Sovereignty and Liberty, and the Constitution of Commonwealths, by the
forenamed Contracts.

The Popular Contract is always in Nature, and sometimes in Time, anterior to
the Rectoral One: By it the Fathers of Families engaged each to others for
themselves, and their Families, to keep Commerce together, and to concur in
Defense and Vindication of their Rights, by the direction of the Sovereign
Power that should be agreed to be set over them, by the Suffrage of the
plurality of the Fathers of these Families, who before could not be obliged by
a Plurality, but only by their own Consent; ninety nine could not engage the
hundredth person, tho all met and conferred together, till they agreed that the
plurality should be as effectual as the whole, whether it were one plurality,
or several pluralities of several States; for it cannot be presumed that these
who were Noble and Rich, would agree to have no more than an equal Suffrage
with meaner Citizens; unless some great necessity or advantage could induce
them; nor that the Poor that could not bear Burden in the Commonwealth, should
be admitted as Citizens, nor Servants, nor even Sons in their Fathers Families,
during their Lives, tho by him they did then enjoy Privileges, and after all
of them succeeded to him as Citizens; yet by making them equal in Power with
himself, he should have lost his Paternal Power of Governing them: And there
may be, and have been many other Restrictions and Qualifications of Citizens;
all the rest, though Sbjects, being but Incolae, or Inhabitants: Citizens have
always some share in the Government, either by their proper Birth right, or by
being represented by Election. All the Kingdoms of Christendom, after the
Fewdal Right prevailed, gave none share in the Government, but those that had
the Right of considerable Lands within the Limits of the Commonwealth, whether
belonging to singer Persons, or to Incorporations, except in Denmark or Sueden;
and Laws were made, and Taxes imposed by Emperors and Kings, with the Advice
and Consent of the Plurality of all these in one Assembly, or of diverse States
in separate Assemblies; of the Prelates of the Church, for Church Lands; and of
the other Barons, for the Temporal Lands; and of Delegates, representing
Incorporations, for the Lands belonging to them in common; but afterward the
Barons being multiplied, the minor Barons were all allowed to be represented by
Commissioners Elected by them.

The Sovereign Power was at first stated in Kings and Princes, who were very
many, every considerable City making a several Commonwealth; whereof
multitudes are mentioned in Scripture: These Princes were Leaders of their
Armies, and Judges of their Controversies, in their own Persons, without
Deputation, till the Commonwealths swelled to that greatness. That as Jethro
advised Moses, they found it necessary to have subordinate Deputies for smaller
Matters, and afterward even for the greater, without appeal to themselves, who
otherwise would be overwhelmed with Affairs Civil and Military; yet so that the
Malversation of these subordinate, might be punished by the Sovereign Power, or
by such as were delegated for that purpose.

In the diffusive Kingdoms of the Assyrians, Babylonians, Persians, and Medes,
their Kings could hardly be restrained, because their Subjects could not
Convein as in the lesser Commonwealths; and many of them were not united by
Popular Contracts, and so were not one Body Politic.

The Excesses of Monarchs gave the rise to Aristocracy, where the Sovereign
Power was in the Plurality of more Persons; and Democracy, where the Power was
in so great a number, that they could not deliberate together; that what was
said ought to be heard by all: Yea, all these former came for the most part to
be regulated by general Laws, to be made with the Advice and Consent of others;
then these that were in the Sovereign Power.

In the Athenian Democracy the People could not deliberate, but in those things
that were advised by their Praeconsultores, whose Advice, but not their
Consent, was required.

The Romans in their Popular Estate, could make no Laws, unless they were con
veined by a Senatorian Magistrate, or Tribune of the People, and in most things
the Authority of the Senate behoved to proceed.

All the Kings in Christendom by a long tract of time made no general Laws, but
by consent of their Estates, being conveined by themselves, or their Deputies;
though some have pretended that they were only called to give their Advice: But
the constant style of their Laws, and their frequent Declarations evince, that
not only their Advice, but their Consent was necessary.

I crave your Pardon that I have so long continued in Generals: But you will
find it was necessary for resolving your Doubts. These Conventions then of the
two Kingdoms, are Representatives of the Body Politic of the respective
Kingdoms, such as might have been before these Bodies Politic, entered in a
Rectoral Contract with the first of the Kings of the Race that now Reigns,
and they are no Judicial or Authoritive Judicatures; and I suppose, will claim
no Power to make Laws, to judge Persons, or to impose Taxes: Neither are they
any of the Judicatures of the Commonwealth, deriving Authority from a
Sovereign Power; but do proceed by the Judgment of Discretion, not as they are
Subjects or Parts of the Commonwealth; but as they are the Parties Contracters
with their Kings, and their Race; as to which Contract they were, and must be
considered as unsubordinate; for they were not Subjects in that Contract, nor
their Kings Sovereigns, but by and after that Contract; and therefore they have
the same native and inherent Right to deliberate, and resolve how far they were
obliged by that Contract, and how far the present King has observed or
violated the same: and therewith, the Constitution of the Kingdoms, and the
Laws and Liberties of the Subject, and what they may justly and warrantably
declare thereupon, in this extraordinary Conjuncture; wherein the Body of the
Nation has arisen against the Actings of the King, having voluntarily
concurred with the Prince of Orange, who upon the Invitation of many, as the
sense of the most, came with an Army to encourage them to appear for
themselves; which they did, before any Act of Hostility by him, or his coming
near to the Places where they rose in Arms, and declared for him, upon the
Grounds of his Declaration: So that even his Army, though far the stronger, would
not assist the King in that Cause, but the most of them joined with the Prince.
So that the King being left to his liberty, removed beyond Sea, sheltering
himself under the Wings of the most eminent Oppressor of Protestants. I hope
this will give you light to consider what is the nature of these Conventions.

The next Point is, What Power these Conventions have, and what they can
warrantably do. I have shown you what I think they should not do; now I shall
tell you what I think they may do. 1. They are the Representatives of a Body
Politic, which by the Popular Contract uniting therein, may judge who are
Members of the Meeting, and by the Plurality of the Lords, and of the Commons
of England, in their distinct Assemblies, may overruled the minor part of those
who meet, sufficient intimation being made to all, or of the Estates of
Scotland, in their meeting jointly.

Secondly, They may resolve whether the Constitution of the Kingdom, and the
Rectoral Contract, whence it arose, be violated on the King's part, and may
agree upon the several violations. I shall not insist on all, but shall give
some eminent examples; as first, They may declare, whether the King has
violated the Constitution, by assuming a Dispensing Power over the Laws of the
Nation, and that his Judges in his view, if not by his instigation, have by a
solemn Sentence declared, That he may dispense with Law, even in the Case of
Propriety, accruing to a private Person, from a Statute of Parliament: And that
those Judges who dis-assented, were thereupon immediately removed; yea, the
same has been fully and publicly declared, by his Public Declaration in
Scotland, That He is an Absolute Monarch, to whom Obedience is due in all
things, without reserve. By these the Constitution of both Kingdoms is totally
overturned, for they are beyond question Legal Monarchies, Regulated by Laws
made by the Consent of the Representatives of the Kingdoms assembled in
Parliament. And if these Sentences and Declarations were effectual, they would
be Arbitrary Monarchies, governable without the necessity of any general Law,
with, or without the Consent of the Houses, or States of Parliament; which is a
greater violation of the Constitution, then if the Monarchy had been turned
into an Aristocracy or Democracy, for there is far less importance in the
Persons that Govern, than in the Power of Governing.

Thirdly, There is nothing more contrary to the Government of England, than to
overturn the Constitution of the Parliament, by manifest corruption of the
Election of Members to serve therein, in overturning the Constitution of the
Cities and Buroughs, in annulling the Charters of some upon pretended
Malversation of these in the Magistracy, though it was not in the Power of the
Incorporation to restrain them; so that the Magistrates themselves were only
punishable; that if they were removed, the Incorporation might name others. And
by seducing and threatening those who had Power to Elect in the Counties,
Cities, and Buroughs, if they did not first give assurance to Elect such
Deputies, as would consent to take away the Test and Penal Laws against
Papists. Hence many of the Cities, and Buroughs, seeing what became of their
Neighbors, did thorough fear deliver up their Charters without Sentences; and
such whose Charters were taken away, had new ones, of Persons to be in their
Magistracy and Council, wholly depending on the King; that the House of
Commons, whereof the far greatest part consists of the Deputies of Cities and
Buroughs, might be packed at the King's pleasure, and the whole House in
danger to be corrupted by these prepossessions; never attempted by any King of
England, and destructive of the Constitution of Parliament, and to the Security
of the Subjects.

Fourthly, There is nothing more contrary to the Constitution of England, than
to be governed by the Sword, and Martial Law; yet the King raised and kept a
standing Army of a great strength, which did bear down the Kingdom, until the
Prince of Orange put them in capacity to Rise for their Vindication, and many
Persons were Executed by Martial Law.

Fifthly, As the former Violations were of the very Constitution, so the most
important Law of the Kingdoms, for securing the Religion therein Established by
Law, was openly and atrociously violated; by which Law Papists were made
incapable of all Public Trust, Ecclesiastic, Civil, or Military; and yet not
only they were put in Vacancies; but Protestants frequently put out, that they
might be put in, and none left in Public Trust, who being required, would not
give assurance to concur in abolishing the Penal Laws against Papists; whereby
at once the Law excluding Papists was acknowledged as needing a Repeal, and yet
was commonly and knowingly broken without the same.

Sixthly, The Violations of the Constitution of the Kingdom of Scotland
(designed as a leading Preparative to England) were yet more gross and
palpable: First, by an Act of the Parliament holden in the Year 1685, the King
was declared an absolute Monarch, to whom Obedience is due without reserve;
which could not fail if it were effectual to overturn the Constitution and
Government of that Kingdom, from being a legal Monarchy, regulated by Laws,
made by the Consent of the Estates in Parliament, into a Despotick or Arbitrary
Monarchy, wherein the King might command all things to be done at pleasure,
even though they were in themselves unlawful, there being nothing reserved. But
the most benign Construction could not bring it lower, then to import Active
Obedience in all things that were not in themselves unlawful; so that if the
whole Parliament were commanded to resign the Parliamentary power in the Kings
hands, that there should never be another, it were no less lawful to them to do
so, then to consent to that Act, which was obtained of them, which no man can
think could proceed upon any other Ground, then that they were all in Terror
to be reached for their Lives and Fortunes by Converse with these who had been
in Rebellions, whereof there were known and dreadful Examples. Or if a
Corporation or City should be commanded to resign their Charters, or
Privileges; or if all, or any of the Subjects should be commanded to resign
their Estates or Dignities in the King's Hand, and become Tenants at Will: They
might lawfully do these things, though they were very Inconvenient, and
therefore by that Act they were bound to Obey.

May not then a Convention of the Estates of that Kingdom consider and resolve,
whether such an Act were in the Power of a Parliament, or if it were in itself
simply null, without the necessity of a Repeal upon this Consideration, that
the Parliamentary Power is founded upon the Constitution of the Kingdom, and
therefore every part of it is a Fundamental Law, and a part of the Rectoral
Contract betwixt the King and the body Politic of the Kingdom, which contract
was not with the Parliament, and therefore could not be changed without the
consent of the parties who entered in it by a more special Warrant, then that
general one of the Deputies for Shires or Buroughs. Is there any so impudent
as to pretend that the States could effectually resign in the King's hands all
the Lands of the Kingdom? Or that he with their Concurrence could alienate the
Kingdom, or subjugate it to become a Province subordinate to another Kingdom;
or could they turn it to a Democracie? In a legal regulated Monarchy no general
Command can be given, but what is warranted by a general Law, though Commands
may be given severalty in every Cotroversie; for though it be said that
Subjects ought to obey their Sovereigns in all things lawful; it is only to be
understood of what is lawful by the Constitution, and Laws made thereupon, and
not that which is licit, not being prohibited by God, otherwise it were
applicable to no Government, but that which is Despotick, and could command all
the Services the Subjects were capable to do, and all their Goods and Estates.
It is a Childish pretense from the command in the Gospel, to Wives to obey
their Husbands; Children their Parents, in all things, to extend it to all
Monarchs, unless Natural Affections betwixt Parents and Children, and the
Incommunicable Affection betwixt Husband and Wife were infused in Sovereigns
and Subjects, and though they could, these general Commands are only in
relation to the Domestic Society, and the Government thereof, and not to the
property of the Wife and Children, nor could the Husband thereby command the
Wife to become a Slave, he remaining free, or to renounce her Jointure.

There is another Act procured by the King when Duke, for taking a Test, which
is very good as to the Religion, and for excluding Papists; but there is
thereto adjected an Oath, Declaring it unlawful for Subjects upon any Pretense
whatsever to Convocate, Convene, or Assemble in any Councils, Conventions, or
Assemblies, to Treat, Consult, or Determine in any Matter of State, Civil, or
Ecclesiastic, without His Majesty's Command, or Express License had thereto.
This overthrows all the Ordinary Judicatures, Civil, or Ecclesiastic in the
Kingdom, which meet by a Warrant of Law, without necessity of a special Command
or License; and thereby does evidently and heavily encroach upon the
Constitution of the Kingdom. There follows another Clause in the said Act,
declaring, That there is no Obligation to endeavor to alter the Government as
it is now Established in Church and State, which was not only imposed on these
in Public Offices, and upon Members of Parliament, but upon all those who had
Vote in Elections of Members to Parliament, whereby many were excluded,
conceiving themselves obliged to endeavor some alterations in the Government,
either by Divine Right, or by Oaths, they were commanded to take, both by King
Charles the first, and second, being personally present in Parliament, and with
the consent of the Estates, and though there had been no such hindrance, it was
an alteration of the Constitution, whereby all Freeholders of the King of any
considerable Land, Estate, had a Share in the Government, by their Birth right,
in being capable to Elect, and to be Elected Members of Parliament. And when
this King came to the Crown, he did extend this Oath by an Act of his first
Parliament to all Landed-men, whatever the Tenor or Extent of their Lands were,
they being Protestants, whereby Papists were excepted. Might not this Meeting
of the Estates consider and resolve whether these parts of that Act were beyond
the ordinary Parliamentary Power, and a Violation of the Constitution, and so
null without Repeal: In all the Zeal against Popery, no King or Parliament did
by any Act exclude the Electors in Shires or Buroughs, nor was there any such
thing in England, though their Test was only made for preservation of the
Protestant Religion, and excluding Papists from Public Trust; albeit in both
Kingdoms Papists are excluded by Desuetude.

Seventhly, In both Kingdoms Justice run in the Channel of the Ordinary
Judicatures Established by Law, that nothings can be done amiss, for which
there are not some persons accountable; yet by an Act of the Parliament of
Scotland, held by this King when Commissioner for his Brother, it is declared,
That all Government and Jurisdiction does Originally reside in the King, and
that the Offices and Jurisdiction bestowed by him are not privative of his
Jurisdiction; and therefore in a dutiful and humble Recognizance of His
Majesty's Royal Right and Prerogative as to this Point, it is declared, That
notwithstanding these Jurisdictions and Offices, His Majesty may by himself or
any Commissioned by him, take Cognizance and Decision of any Cases or Causes he
pleases. Enervating the Power of the Ordinary Judicatures, and giving ground to
pick out Commissioners for every Cause, as the Parties are favored, which
breeds a general distrust in the Nation, and was the ground of making the
Officers of the Army, Sheriffs, and Justices, who acted not only with, but
without, and contrary to the Ordinary Judges, and Justices, though they had
neither Skill nor Will to do Justice, but did commit these Insolences under
that pretense, which are mentioned in the Prince's Declaration for Scotland:
May not then the Meeting of the Estates in Scotland resolve whether this Act be
a Violation of the Constitution? and if so, whether it be void in it self
without a Repeal? These of that Nation who are acquainted with the matter of
Fact, might show many more Encroachments upon the Constitution and Laws of that
Kingdom; but I only mention some of these I read in public printed Records.

If these and such Violations be found, the next point is, what that Meeting
may do thereupon, whether they may not declare themselves free of Subjection to
the Violator, or any of his Race begotten since these Violations: Upon this
Consideration, that the Rectoral Contract betwixt him and the Body Politic of
these Kingdoms represented in these Conventions, does by the Nature of a Mutual
Contract necessarily imply, that if the one Party violate his part of the
Mutual Engagements, the other Party has two Remedies, he may at his Option
cither force the Failer to perform, or declare himself for ever free of that
Contract; as to the Failer, it is true, that by the Law or Custom of some
Common wealths, if the Failer purge the Failure while his Party is in Suit, he
may be reinstated, which is not by the Nature of a Mutual Contract, and
therefore it is never pretended in the Mutual Contracts of Kings and States; and
though sometimes Subjects after such Violations have declared themselves
willing to continue in subjection, that was an Act of Favor, not of Justice or
Debt: But after a Dispensing Power above Law is assumed and asserted, nothing
can be said or done which it cannot as easily surmount, as it has the Laws
made, and Oaths already taken, even though the Dispensing Power itself should
be disclaimed; it can as easily dispense with that Disclamation, as what was
either Law, or promised before: If then these Meetings shall declare
themselves, and the Body Politic free, Can they in Justice but declare, the
Crown to be devolved upon the Princess of Orange, and in Justice, Gratitude,
and Remuneration, they, cannot but declare, that the Matrimonial Crown belongs
to the Prince of Orange, during all the days of his Life, for it is
inconsistent with Royalty to be for less time then Life, and so to see a King
of Britain relapse into a Prince of Orange again, and how Incongruous and
Ungrateful were it to force him, who has delivered Britain to leave it, or
staying there to become a Subject to his Wife; for though a Queen in possession
superinducing a Husband may justly be strictly dealt with, as Philip of Spain
by Treaty, was excluded from any Act of the Government, with Queen Mary, though
he had the Title of King, which he was to leave after her Death, even though his
Child by her should succeed: It imports nothing to this Case, where the
Princess was first a Wife, and then a Queen, Married to the nearest Male to the
Crown, and the Case being so contingent and unlikely, it is not to be thought
the Princess of Denmark will grudge at it, for if he had not come, neither of
the three were like to have enjoyed the Crown. When Ferdinand of Arragon
married the Queen of Castile, he assumed the Matrimonial Crown of Castile, both
in her Life, and after her Death, though he had Children by her. The Courtesy
both of Scotland and England, gives the survivancy of the Estate of Wives
Inheritance to their Husbands, during their Life; and though Custom has
restricted it to the Case of a Child born in the Marriage, without requiring
that Child to survive the Marriage; which might have imported a rational
Consideration, to prefer the surviving Child in the Mother's Inheritance to her
Husband; yet that not being required, there is no ground to extend it to
Sovereigns.

These Conventions have yet a further Power and Use: That seeing the ordinary
Parliamentary Power can alter nothing in the Constitution, without a further
Warrant from the Body Politic; these Meetings may give Warrant to establish a
Liberty of Conscience in a just latitude, as the Parliament shall judge
reasonable; and may also give Warrant for an Act to exclude a Popish Successor,
wherein the Sovereign Power shall also concur. These Acts will be Irrepealable,
and Unalterable, without the like Warrant of the Body Politic, being convened
with the consent of the King, for the time; which will give very much ease to
the minds of good People, and also give much security against Popery. The House
of Commons past several Votes to exclude a Popish Successor, which came not to
perfection, and was not designed to exclude the apparent Heir of the Crown,
being Popish, and born; in which case it is dublious whether it could be done
without consent of that apparent Heir. But there can be no question that it may
be done by the King and Parliament, warranted by these Conventions, though it
exclude Collaterals, and Heirs not yet existent. Albeit Queen Mary and
Elizabeth were excluded to succeed to the Crown by their Father, and a
Parliament, yet they both succeeded, and neither they nor the Parliament, found
the necessity of a Repeal, in respect these Acts were in themselves void, as
changing the course of Succession, by an ordinary Parliamentary Power.
Likewise, these Meetings may give Warrant to Unite the two Kingdoms, which the
ordinary Parliamentary Power could not reach to, unless it were confirmed or
consented to after the Act made, by the Body Politic, for the Uniting of the
Kingdoms is certainly an alteration of both, making two Politic Bodies one, and
making one Crown for two; but can well be done, if these Two Conventions give
Warrant for it. And there appears a general inclination, as well as convenience
in both Nations, more than ever before.

I shall not be much difficulted now to show, by what Authority these
Conventions are called: The Meetings of the ordinary Judicatures are determined
by Law and Custom, and any other way of Meeting is declared Illegal. But there
is no determination of the Calling or Meeting of these extraordinary
Conventions; and therefore whatever way they meet, they are valid, otherwise
they are not possible; and yet they are in many Cases undeniably necessary; as
if the Race of the Kings should fail, or that a King should be a Child, or
become fatuous, or furious, or should absolutely desert, or renounce the
Kingdom. In none of these Cases could there be a Parliament called, till first
there were a Protector or Regent named, which only could be made by such
Conventions; but a Protector where there is a King of Age and Discretion, is
without Rule or Example; and therefore these Conventions must either declared
themselves Free, or they must remain the King's Subjects, and be obedient to
all his Commands, according to Law; they cannot mids the matter. Can any have
so good an Interest to call these Conventions, as the Prince of Orange who is
the nearest Male, and the Husband of the nearest Female to the Crown, who has
put the Kingdoms in Capacity to hold such Meetings, and declare their just
Rights?

It is like some upon real Affection to the Prince, and others upon that
Pretense, but upon intention to shake the Monarchy, and to make way for a
Commonwealth, may make use of some Matters of Fact that have happened in either
Kingdom prejudicial to the Lineal Succession, which cannot infer a Right
against the frequent Declararations of Kings and Parliaments, nor is like to be
acceptable to the Prince, not only from his Affection to so Excellent a
Princess, but from his Declaration in which he has set her Interest before his
own.

I hope I shall not need to give you further trouble, seeing the Event by the
Conventions Resolutions will quickly appear, and cannot admit of delay; and
therefore shall only add, that I am

Yours

FINIS.

