A LETTER TO THE Late Lord Bishop of L. and C.

UPON HIS Translation to VV.

Showing The ill Consequences of such REMOVES.

LONDON, Printed in the Year 1699.

My Lord,
SOME Occasions having called me to Ireland, a little before I left it, which
is not long since, there happened the Death of a Bishop, which occasioned a
Remove in the Church, that gave no small offense to all her Well-wishers; and
among others, I was resolved, as soon as I got home, to give the Party
concerned my thoughts of it: but fore I could do this, we had the account of
your Lordship's Translation to W -- r, tho 'twas not believed at this distance
by any here that pretend to be of your acquaintance, till confirmed by the last
Post.

Your Character, for the most part, has been such, that I have been always one
of your Admirers; and had I not happened into the Conversation of some
discerning Men here, who see the ill consequences of such Removes, that
Admiration might perhaps have still continued, which now, I confess, is
wonderfully lessened; and as a reason for it, give me leave to lay before your
Lordship their Sentiments, which I shall do truly and plainly, having neither
Will nor Skill to do otherwise.

They say, my Lord, you have now a second time given the Church her self, as
well as that sacred Order to which they believe you unworthily entitled, a
more severe Blow than any of her pretended Friends, nay, her most cruel and
professed Enemies were ever able to do. You have, they say, declared to the
World, what those of your Order (generally speaking) propose to themselves in
desiring and accepting that Office, which the Apostle calls A good Work. You
have given encouragement to that deluge of Atheism which has broke in upon us,
and espoused their Cause, whose hope extends not beyond this present World, and
look for no other reward for all their best Services than what this Life
affords: and this at a time when you are just leaving it, have more than one
foot in the Grave, and will not (without their being the Prophet of your Woe)
live long to enjoy it.

They wonder what remorse of Conscience must needs seize you, when you consider
what you have done, how you have opened the mouths of Adversaries who lie in
wait for advantages of this kind, and are of themselves, without any manner of
occasion, too ready to revile and asperse your Profession; nay, have given your
very Friends reason to conceive most desperate Prejudices against your high and
holy Calling. And some of these Gentlemen have an account from London, that
several who have been formerly attackt, but never could be prevailed with to
desert the Church, have upon this Translation of yours, turned their backs upon
her, and chose rather to join themselves to those Societies, where such
unwarrantable Practices are not allowed, and where their Teachers seem to have
an eye for all their Services and Labors to a future Reward, than to abide in
the Communion of a Church, where their very Governors and Guides by their
daily Practices declare, if they can, by hook or by crook, no matter how, add
to their Wealth and Grandeur here, they value not what may be feared or hoped
for hereafter.

You have, say these Gentlemen, very unhappily given us a sad instance of this;
and the Ground thereof (pretend what you will) it is like proceeds from
something too near Atheism. It is not very likely, say they, you believe there
is a God, or that the Scriptures are his Word, which, besides that inward
Peace, Comfort and Satisfaction which naturally attend the performance of a
man's Duty, propose no other Reward than what chiefly relates to a future
State; whereas you seem, say they, to despise this, and are altogether for the
present: who for the lucre of not many 100 l. a year, have forsaken (they wish
they could say your first) your second, nay your third Love, and left a
Diocese, where, by knowing and being known, you might be much more serviceable
than where you are altogether a Stranger, and cannot expect to live to be
otherwise, and in diverse respects unfit to succeed him that is gone, who yet,
besides his learned Works, left no great Character behind him, nor found out
the way of doing so much good as might have been expected from him, and which,
they fear, may much less be hoped for from your Lordship.

Ambition and Avarice have been, as they conceive, the two great Rocks you have
in your Christian Course split upon. The former carried you from the Vicaridg
of St. M rt-ns to the Bishopric of St. A --; the latter from thence to L. and
C. and now from thence to W. In your first remove, you declared your self
sensible of the temporal Loss you sustained; but the pretense was, the desire
of doing good (a very warrantable inducement) to which you said your being a
Native of the Country, and skilful in the Language, would conduce much. But
being either weary of doing good, or unable to do any to others, you began to
think of doing good to your self, and laid hold of the first opportunity to
give your poor Countrymen the slip, and got into a Diocese of much greater
profit, as well as of a far larger extent; and in which (as to a great part of
it) you are, as I am informed, as much a Stranger as he that writes this, who
was never within the Verge of any part thereof. These Gentlemen would fain ask,
what answer you will make when you shall be called to give an account of your
Stewardship: Will it be sufficient to say, a great part of your time was taken
up at London in minding the Affairs of State, which yet notwithstanding you
could never comprehend, no less in managing the private concerns of your
Family, and so much in indulging your aged and decayed Carcass, that you had
little or none left for the business of your Calling?

However, my Lord, all this is no stumbling Block to me, who have learnt to
distinguish between the personal failings of Men, and their Office: but others,
not so well satisfied, desire to know, from which of the Apostles or Primitive
Bishops (from whom you boast of a Succession) do you derive Authority for this
unwarrantable Remove? As the former were for the most part no where fixed, and
therefore can afford us no precedent in this case; so it is well known how
industriously the latter waved all opportunities of forsaking their first
Charge, and could never be brought to it, but when the pressing Necessities of
the Church required it; and then 'twas often from a greater, to a place of less
Profit.

Nor is this all; you have hereby exposed your Profession and Order not only in
your own Person, but cast a Temptation in the way of another.

The Bishop of O --, in every respect a single Man, being unable to live upon
700 l. a Year, tho he never spent 200, removes from O -- the Seat of the Muses,
and the sweetest preferment (especially considering his other Circumstances)
the Church affords, and snatches at L --, not much more than 2 or 300 l. a Year
better. But there is this to be said for him, that nothing else (if he may be
believed) could have tempted him to such an unaccountable Practice; and there
are Letters here from some who pretend to know him well, averring, he would not
have accepted of W -- rc -- r, or any other except L -- and C -- in England;
which being his Country, the place of his Birth, as O -- d was of his
Education, it was but almost natural for him to affect it. So that something
may be offered for him; but for your Lordship, nothing more than that you have
given those who are Friends to the Church occasion to take offense and grieve,
(and woe be to them by whom such Offenses come) and those who are her Enemies to
rejoice and insult; who, tho they are silent, make their own Observations,
laugh in their Sleeves, and whisper to one another, Let them go on, by these
irregularities they will bring themselves into Contempt, and all in good time do
their own work.

One would think, since Dr. T -- is thought worthy to be a Bishop, and no Body,
I suppose, doubts it; he might have been more serviceable at W -- r, where he
has lived so long D -- n, and must needs be acquainted with the Constitution of
the Diocese, and Temper of the People, than elsewhere: or if there was a
necessity to comply with your Lordship, by giving you this lift; why might not
Dr. A -- n the Dean of L -- have been thought of to succeed? A Man by his
useful and good Works better known to the World, than any of those concerned in
these Removes.

You know, my Lord, one of the great outcries in the two last Reigns, was, that
Interest (especially in Churchpreferments) carried all, without any manner of
regard to Merit: God forbid it should prove a just Complaint in this, wherein
it was particularly promised to be reformed.

Or yet farther; if these irregular Changes, unknown to the Primitive Church,
in which we so much glory, must be continued; we know it has been usual for the
Bishops of B -- l (a See very mean and low in its Revenue) to have the
advantage of a Remove: and so perhaps it had been now, but that the present
Bishop stands adjudg'd guilty of two terrible faults in a Bishop of our Times.

The first is, he is moderate in his Principles, not fond of a high-flown
Jurisdiction; and it may be thinks it needless in the Church, where the
Magistrate is Christian in the State. The other, and more intolerable, is, that
he is a constant and painful Preacher, a Crime not to be forgiven by those
(except a very few) of his own Order, for that he thereby lessens himself, and
instead of ruling and governing (his sole and proper Business) slaves and
drudges in the Work of the Presbyters. These, no doubt, may prove blocks in his
way* while your Lordship* and others of your Order, ride on successfully,
without troubling your selves either with Preaching or Praying* the latter
especially (tho it be the more honorable of the two) being thought so much
below your Dignity, that it were a prodigy to find a Bishop in the Desk,
reading Divine Service. Nay, I have been assured by a Gentleman come lately
from London, that going to Evening*prayer on a Weekday, in one of the
Out-Churches there, the Congregation being gathered, and the Reader, on some
occasion or other, failing, the People were dismissed without Prayers, tho there
were two Bishops present. O tell not this to the unconverted World: publish it
not in Askelon, tell it not in Gath; declare it not in the Streets of Rome or
Jerusalem, lest Turks and Infidels abroad, as well as our Fellow Christians at
home, deride and laugh us to scorn.

You your selves, who by a great and good Example, should influence others to
the contrary, contribute not a little to the contempt of our public Service,
while out of Sloth, or Pride, or both, you scorn (at least omit) to minister in
it* whereas you ought to esteem it your greatest Glory.

And it were well if you were only short in this; but are you not so in all the
other Duties of your Function? Do you know what it is to preach in season and
out of season? Do most of you know what it is to preach at all, unless now and
then at Court you are pleased to harangue the Auditory? Can you tell when you
visited a sick Bed? comforted an afflicted, instructed an ignorant, informed an
erroneous, or resolved a doubting Conscience? What differences in your
Neighborhood have you composed? What care have you had that your Clergies in
their several places do duly and conscionably discharge their respective
Duties? What Encouragement and Rewards have you dispensed to those that do?
What Frowns, if not Punishments have you cast upon those that do not? What
Hospitality have you kept? What Charity have you exercised? How many naked
Backs have you at your own Expense clothed? How many hungry Bellies have you
fed? What Sick and Needy have you visited and relieved? No, these are matters,
that for the most part, come not within the compass of your Care. To live in
State and Splendour, to look scornfully upon your Brethren, to carry things with
a high hand against those that will not truckle, or upon any occasion stand in
your way, and to heap up Wealth for your Families, have been too much the Care
and Business of your Lives: and that this last will be always yours, your late
proceeding, in coveting what you ought by no means to have thought of, does
sufficiently manifest.

You may indeed derive a Precedent for this, from what has lately been done in
Ireland, where by the death of the Bishop which I mentioned before, two
Bishoprics became void; and the Government there, who consider, it seems, how
destructive Pluralities of any kind are to the Church, recommended two several
Persons to them; (tho by the way, one of them was looked upon by the Clergy
there very unfit, and every way unqualified for that Office; but he is Chaplain
to the Government, and that is enough.) However, these Recommendations were
laid aside, and at the instance of some at Court, who it may be neither
understand the Constitution, nor are capable of consulting the good of that
Church* a Gentleman well nigh as aged as your Lordship, is removed from a
Diocese where he has been 20 years Bishop, and had his Residence in the second
best City of the Kingdom, to almost a waste Country, which, as I was informed,
affords not a House fit to live in, nor three Churches that are rooft, nor six
British Families fit to be conversed with; and yet the advantage not above 100
or 150 l. a year. These inconveniences, they say, may be avoided by the
Bishop's living at Dublin, as his Predecessor before him always did. For tho
the Inferior Clergy be enjoined Residence, yet a Bishop there is above all
Rules, and may live where he will. And as for this Bishop, I mean he that is
removed, I had such a Character of him, that if my Authors erred not, he may be
looked upon as a Prodigy in nature. Some of them had been his Scholars, others
his Parishioners at Dublin, and some his near Neighbors and intimate
Acquaintance at C -- k, where he was Bishop; and yet they all assured me that
the whole Country where he was concerned, tho much troubled for the Slur cast
upon the Church by his Remove, will yet greatly rejoice that they are rid of
him, who was always upon every little occasion, jarring, quarrelling and
brow-beating them. He was, they say, a great part of his time a Schoolmaster,
which so sower'd his Temper, that he is scarce fit for civil Conversation; and
as they describe him, is defective in every one of those Qualifications which
the Scripture requires in one of his Order; so far from being blameless, that
he is in all respects and relations whatsoever, faulty: but his Faults for his
Order's sake ought not to be exposed. They own him (considering his Station)
apt to teach, but so positive and singular in the very Pulpit, as renders his
Doctrine harsh and nauseous. He is allowed by all to be a man of Letters and
Parts; but his Infirmities are so many, that they eclipse any thing that is
valuable in him. They added to all this, that he is (if not a downright Enemy)
yet no Friend to the Government: He sat all along in King James's Parliament,
wanted either Courage or Will to thwart or protest against their proceedings;
and still voted with them against the few Protestants and other discerning
honest men amongst them; was often in private with that King, and still, they
say, retains much of that Leaven.

And now, my Lord, can you think such a man as this a Pattern worthy your
imitation? and will his Translation any way justify yours? I know one thing
cunningly urged for these Translations is, That they are an advantage to the
Crown, by reason of the first Fruits that arise from them: but is this
Consideration fit to come in the balance with the great Scandal and Dishonor
they bring upon the Church? How little does the King value these Mites, who yet
suffers extremely in this matter? And the Reproach extends not only to the
Parties immediately concerned, but (tho very unreasonably) to his Majesty
himself.

It is very well known there are not wanting too many restless and discontented
Wretches, who would fain do ill Offices between the King and his People, and
among other things suggest (tho falsely) that he has no manner of regard for
the Church, and therefore all Courses are taken to bring her into contempt and
disgrace; and I find it a common observation among the very Clergy at Dublin,
that except four or five, none since the Revolution, but the lowest, in some
sense or other, of the People, (as in Jeroboam's time) men meriting as little
from the Government as from God and the World, have been graced with the chief
Preferments in the Church; which has given great offense to many, as if it
were done purposely to expose her. All this may be true; but why should it be
imputed to the King? It being impossible for him to know men, but as they are
represented; and no doubt of it, but unqualified Persons have been recommended
by some, purposely to bring an Odium both upon him and the Church; and it is to
be feared they have had too much of their design this way. And it has been the
business of others, especially in Ireland, to recommend Men for no other
Qualification than their Super-conformity: they seemed to be jealous of
Presbytery, and sought out Men, however otherwise unqualified, that would be
sure not to dispense (tho to save a Soul) with a Syllable of the Rubric.

But nothing has been more fatal to her Reputation, than those seandalous
Removes of her dignified Clergy, of which, as I was informed, there have been
more in that Kingdom since the Revolution, than in all the last four Reigns.
The late Duke of Ormond, a great Lover of the Church, knew this well enough;
and therefore would never endure it, unless from a Bishopric to an
Archbishopric, and that only in cases extraordinary. The greatest Sticklers
for Episcopacy, when the times required striking for it, who would never
consent to part with any of the least Privileges annexed to it, were
sufficiently aware how mischievous and destructive this Course was to its very
Constitution; and therefore always declared against it, and not only consented,
but in all Debates relating thereunto, earnestly pressed, that no Bishop should
remove, or be translated from the Bishopric which he should first undertake,
unless when the necessary good of the Church, rather than the convenience of
the Person to be removed, required it. But your Lordship has, it seems, been of
another mind, and 'twere well if you could yet live to be otherwise. Have you
not Win -- r or any other better than Worcester -- r now in your eye? and are you not
ready to make the other step when occasion serves? when will you settle at this
rate? when will you allow your self a resting time, that you may prepare for
another Journey which you must soon go? I have often heard it said that the
Church could never be destroyed but by her self; and I am persuaded, were it
not for the scandalous Lives of many, and the cold, dead, lazy way of preaching
of almost all our Clergy, together with such irregular, covetous, and
unwarrantable Courses as are practiced in these Removes, and (...) but she
would, in spite of all opposition, still flourish. And that she may, and your
Lordship hereafter contribute to it, shall be the daily Prayer of the Church's
and your Lordship's Well-wisher,

E. D.

FINIS.

