A DISCOURSE AGAINST PROFANE Swearing and Cursing, Wherein I. Those Vices are
described and reproved. II. Both Magistrates and Private Persons are excited to
their Duty in order to the Suppressing 'em by the Execution of the late Act of
Parliament against 'em. III. And the Objections commonly raised against the
present practice of Private Informations are modestly considered.


A Discourse concerning Profane Swearing and Cursing.

Imprimatur cui Titulus,

August 2. 1697. Narcissus Dublin.



DVBLIN; Printed for Matthew Gunn at the Bible and Crown in Essex-Street near
Essex-Gate, School.

A DISCOURSE CONCERNING Profane SWEARING and CURSING.
I Hope I need not make any long apology for a Discourse on this subject. Where
an Epidemical Distemper reigns, no man can be blamed for his regular
endeavors, either to cure the Infected Persons themselves, or to stop the
spreading of the fatal Contagion to others. And I fear, as to these Vices the
Infection is too general, and the Disease too deeply rooted, to render any
attempts unnecessary that are truly conducive to attain the proposed end. And
for the method insisted on in this Discourse, I shall only suggest, That I
thought it needful first to lay open the Nature of these detestable Sins (as
the late Act of Parliament justly calls them); Partly, That if possible Men's
Conviction concerning the absurdity and folly of them, may happily prevent the
occasion of penal severities (which how gentle soever are never any farther
desirable then they are absolutely necessary). Partly, To satisfy all
unprejudic't persons that those concerned in promoting the Execution of this
Law, are acted by no other principles then their regular Zeal for the honor of
Almighty God, and their sincere Charity to the Offenders themselves, the
generality of whom, it is to be feared, are too stupid and hardened in their
wretched practice to be reasoned out of it, and seem only capable of this last
and harshest method of Cure.

I shall therefore in prosecution of my present Design treat on these 3 general
Heads.

I. I shall briefly represent the heinous Nature of those two common Vices of
the Age; Profane Swearing and Cursing in order to dissuade men from the
practice of them. II I shall offer something to excite both Magistrates and
private persons to their duty, in order to the suppressing these Vices by the
Execution of the Law lately made against them. III I shall modestly examine
what ground there is for the loud Complaints lately made against Clandestine
Informations.
I. I shall briefly represent the hainousness of those two common Vices of the
Age, Profane Swearing and Cursing in order to dissuade men from the practice of
them.

And to prepare my way for this, It will be requisite to premise some account
of the nature of these Sins by stating the true notions of them. And

First, For the Sin of Profane Swearing, We shall the more clearly apprehend
what it is, it we first consider the nature of an Oath in general.

Now an Oath has been defined by the Masters of Heathen Morality, A Religious
affirmation, or A calling the Deity to witness in a controverted matter. And it
has been defined by the generality of Christian Writers to the same purpose, An
appeal to some supernatural Power, as the witness of the truth of what we
affirm or promise, and the avenger of our falsehood and perfidiousness if we
lie. And indeed all do agree, that such an Appeal is an Oath in the most strict
and proper sense.

But this account of an Oath seems only to agree to those wherein we swear by
some real or supposed Deity, or at least some Inhabitant of the invisible
World, that cannot be produced as a witness here on Earth. Whereas men may
swear by inanimate and insensible Creatures themselves, who are not capable of
giving any Testimony at all to the truth of what they say.

Thus the Heathens were wont to swear by the Heavens or the Earth, by the Sun
or the Stars, etc. The Jews by Jerusalem, the Temple, or the Altar, etc. And
therefore those who place the nature of an Oath in such an Appeal to a higher
witness that is not producible in human Courts of Judicature, do suppose that
such expressions, as by the Heavens, by the Earth, etc. are only Oaths in an
improper sense, or rather the abuse of an Oath, being senseless appeals to
those things as the witnesses of the truth of what we speak that are not
capable of giving any such Testimony.

But on the other hand, since such expressions were accounted Oaths in the
common judgment of mankind, and our Savior himself mentions them as proper
Instances of Swearing, (See 5. Matthew. 34, 35, etc. compared with 5. James 12.)
others have rather chosen to give such an extensive notion of an Oath as may
include these as proper Instances of Swearing, and therefore define an Oath
robe, The pawning some supposed undoubted being as a pledge of the truth of what
we say, with an implicit imprecation of some penalty on our selves in case we
lie. Thus as when men swear by God they pawn his Being and perfections for the
truth of what they declare, and in effect wish if they lie to be dealt with as
those that deny them; so when they swear by the Heavens or the Earth, by the
Sun or Stars, etc. The meaning of the Oath is, as sure as there is a Heaven and
Earth, a Sun or Stars, so true is what I speak, and if I lie, let me be
esteemed and dealt with as if I had impudently denied the existence of these
things. So when men swear by their Faith or Conscience, or hope of Salvation,
they do in effect pawn these for the truth of their assertions or promises, and
in effect wish if they lie to be treated as persons that have renounced all
pretensions to Faith, to Conscience, or to the Hope of Salvation. So when Men
swear by their Head, they make that a kind of pledge of the truth of what they
speak, and vertually imprecate some mischief on it in case they lie. So that
this latter description of an Oath seems at first somewhat different from the
former, and more comprehensive; and indeed if what is called swearing by
Creatures, be in the strict and proper sense an Oath, this seems the more clear
and accurate account of it.

But yet we may in a great measure reconcile these two descriptions of an Oath,
and make 'em of equal extent, if we take what our Savior suggests in reference
to swearing by Creatures in its utmost latitude, viz. That on the account of
that relation they all some way or other bear to God, there is in all swearing
by Creatures, tho not an express yet an implicit Invocation of God and appeal
to him. Thus he charges those that swore by the Heavens or the Earth, as
virtually and by just construction swearing by that God, whose Throne the one,
and whose Footstool the other was. Nay he supposes those that swore by their
Head, implicitly to swear by that God whose workmanship it was, since we our
selves could not make one Hair of it black or white, Matthew. 5. 34, 35, 36.
compared with Matthew. 23.21, 22. For he speaks this (as Dr. Petit in his various
Lections well observes) in opposition to the Jewish Doctors, who did not think
swearing by Creatures to be properly Oaths, nor to have any obligatory virtue.
For they thought no Oaths binding but those in which they swore by the name of
God, (excepting their Oath by the Gold of the Temple and Corban, See Matthew.
23.). And therefore our Lord on the contrary intimates to them, That God
himself was interessed whenever they swore by any of his Creatures; For since
they could bear no proper testimony to the truth of their Assertions, or
Promises, The Appeal was implicitly and by just interpretation made to him, and
he was concerned to punish the false Appellant. So that whoever by such
Swearing pawns any of Gods Creatures for the Truth of liis Words, does
vertually call their Maker to be his Witness, and engage him to avenge the
Indignity offered to his own works, when they are abused to countenance our
lying and falsehood. It is not therefore of any great moment as to our practice
whether of these two notions of an Oath we prefer and follow.

Having thus stated the general Notion of an Oath, we may more easily determine
what profane Swearing is.

There is some Swearing in it self sinful and profane, and can never be
lawfully used on any occasion, As the swearing by a false God; because such an
Oath attributes the perfections of the only true God to a contemptible Idol,
which is a high degree of Blasphemy.

But on the other hand, our Swearing by the true God, is either lawful and
good, or sinful and profane, according to the circumstances wherein that action
is used.

To swear by the Blessed God, is so far from being in its own nature an evil or
impious action, that on the contrary when used on just and necessary occasions,
it is an action highly conducive to the honor of God, and to the public Good.
It Is an action highly conducive to the honor of God, whose glorious
perfections are openly acknowledged in those solemn regular Appeals we make to
him, in such important cases wherein there is no other way left to confirm the
truth of what we speak. And in such cases the Jews were by the Law of Moses not
only permitted but required to swear by the Name of God, Deuteronomy. 6.13. That being
one Branch of the Religious Worship due to him. Nay it is an action no less
conducive to the public good. It being one of the most proper and effectual
means to end strifes and controversies among Men, by confirming the truth of
what they speak, Heb. 6.13. For since in so manifold cases we must depend on
human Testimonies for finding out Truth, we can have no greater assurance that
men speak truly, then when they solemnly appeal to God as the Witness of it,
and their dreadful Avenger if they lie. For it is reasonably supposed that if
any thing can oblige Men to a strict regard to Truth, in what they deliberately
affirm, this awful Bond will. And Charity prompts us to hope that there are but
few whose Consciences are so seared as to have no reverence for an Oath, and no
dread of God's terrible Vengeance against those that by Perjury abuse his
sacred Name to the support of known falsehood.

And accordingly the Holy Scriptures abound with the Examples of good men's
swearing on such solemn occasions. The instances in the Old Testament are
numerous. Nay, even the New Testament contains frequent Examples of this kind,
even after the strict general prohibition of our Savior, Swear not at all. For
learned Critics have made it evident. That our Savior himself did thus swear
when adjur'd by the High Priest, Matthew. 26.61, 63, 64. compared with Lev. 5.1.
And there is no pretense to doubt of this being several times practiced by the
Apostle Paul in his Epistles. See 2 Cor. 11.31. 1 Romans 9. 1 Gal. 20. 2 Cor.
1.23. 1 These. 5.27. And as the Quakers are the only people that pretend to deny
the lawfulness of swearing, by interpreting our Saviors prohibition in the
strictest sense, so I do not see that they are herein consistent with
themselves For they do themselves frequently make solemn Appeals to God for the
Truth of what they say; as Barclay himself tells us, They are wont on solemn
occasions to say, We speak the Truth in the fear of God and before him, who is
our Witness and the searcher of our hearts. See his Works in Fol p. 553.
He dos indeed deny this to be an Oath. (as he dos the forementioned
Expressions of the Apostle Paul) but I take his denial to be contrary to the
common sense of mankind concerning the nature and import of an Oath. So that
it is rather the name of an Oath, and the circumstances of Swearing used among
us, that they seem to boggle at then the thing it self.

Nor is Swearing by Creatures on such occasions unlawful in it self, when the
Creature is only named in subordination to God, so that the Appeal it self is
evidently intended and directed to him. Thus We read of Moses calling the
Heaven and Earth to record against the Israelites, that he had set before them
life and death, Deuteronomy. 30.19, 21, 28. So Hannah swears to Ely, As thy Soul
lives, my Lord, I am the Woman that stood by thee here, praying to the Lord. 1 Samuel 20.3, -- So Abigail, 1 Samuel 20.16. -- So Vriah, 2 Samuel 11.11. -- So in our
common Form of Swearing we use these Words, So help me God, and the Contents of
this Book. So it has been usual with good men in order to their vindication
from gross public Calumnies, to call God, Angels, and Men, to attest the Truth
of what they offer in their own defense.

Now that Swearing (by God or his Creatures) which is in its sell lawful, when
used in a solemn manner on so important occasions, degenerates into sinful or
profane Swearing, when it is used in our ordinary Converse without any such due
seriousness and solemnity or any just occasion that should render it needful to
attain the forementioned ends. For as sacred things are said to be profaned
when they are irreverently managed and prostituted to any mean or vile use, so
is an Oath profaned, when we treat this awful act of Religious Worship with so
little respect, as to prostitute it to common and mean purposes, in attesting
our ordinary Discourse; whereas it should never be used but where there is
apparent need of it to confirm some doubted Truth that must be determined by
human Testimony. And the more expressly the Name of God himself is Invocated in
such Oaths, the profaneness of them is more evident and uncontestable. For it is
a manifest Indignity to that High and Glorious Being that his Sacred Name
should be thus interposed, and rash Appeals made to him upon every frivolous
occasion, merely to vent our irregular heat, or to give credit to every
trifling Assertion in our common Conversation. Nay even when we do not make any
explicit Appeal to God, it is yet a real pollution of his glorious and adorable
Name, when we rashly toss it in our Mouths for no other purpose then to signify
some foolish Wonder, or express some idle Passion, or applaud some vain Jest.
Thus, O Lord, and O God, are common in the Mouths of many when they serve to no
other end, but to fill up an empty gap in their ordinary Discourse.

Secondly, For the sin of profane Cursing, the notion of it is more plain and
obvious.

It Is indeed true that if we take Cursing in a large sense we cannot absolutely
condemn it as sinful; For

1. If we give the Name of Curses to all those Denunciations of the Vengeance
of God against Sinners which are uttered by a prophetic Spirit, There is no
doubt of the lawfulness of such Curses.

And indeed it is highly probable that many of those expressions which occur in
the Psalms, and which our Translation makes to be Imprecations are no other
then predictions of those Evils to the Churches Enemies which the Spirit of God
dictated to the Inspired Penmen. And the Original dos much favor this
supposition; those expressions being usually not in the Imperative Mood, but in
the Future Tense of the Indicative, and may be more properly rendered, Mine
Enemies shall be confounded, then, let them be so.

2. All Cursing is not Unlawful, that dos imply the wishing some kind of Evil
to others.

For doubtless we may in reference to the Enemies of the true Religion, and
indeed to all wicked and mischievous persons, without the least violation of
the great Law of Charity, wish disappointment in their pernicious Designs and
Enterprises, and the shame and confusion that such frustration of their attemps
will occasion. Nay in any case of public Contests wherein the interest of true
Religion or of important civil Right is concerned, we may lawfully wish and
pray for success to those who espouse the just and righteous side of the Cause,
against those that would either subvert the true Religion or invade and oppress
the civil Rights of others. Nay this seems consistent with Charity, whether
such Persecutors and Oppressors be supposed incorrigible or not. For if
incorrigible, their overthrow is a very desirable public Blessing. And if
corrigible, their ill success is the most likely means to convince and reform
them, as their prosperous one would be to harden them.

And to the one or other of these Heads, we may reduce all those Imprecations
against their Enemies that the Penmen of the Psalms use, without supposing any
thing in them contrary to the meek and forgiving disposition which the Law of
Christ so positively enjoins.

There are indeed some Curses used by good men in Scripture that do not belong
to these Heads. Such as those of Job and of Jeremy chiefly levelled against the
day of their birth, Job. 3. Jer. 10. But then I think we are under no
obligation to justify them. They seem rather mentioned for our caution as
instances of human Infirmity, of too great impatience and discontent under the
pressure of their present afflictions.

The Cursing then which the Scriptures condemn (and which this Act of
Parliament refers to) implies such rash Wishes of Evil to others or our selves
which we utter either in our passion or from a Spirit of malice and revenge, or
from a mere pleasure in such hellish Language.

And it falls under the notion of profane Cursing, as we either directly and
expressly, or by just construction solicit the Vengeance of God for the
infliction of such mischiefs on others or our selves. And the greater the
mischiefs are which we thus rashly imprecate, and the more eminently the
Justice of God is concerned in the execution of them, the higher is the degree
of profaneness. So that the common Expressions which Cursers now use, when they
call on God to damn themselves or others, contain the most horrid guilt that
this Sin can easily admit of. And truly that other phrase falls little short of
it, by which Men so often give themselves or others to the Devil, who is
considered in such wretched Imprecations as the Executioner of Divine Justice.

Having stated the general notion of profane Swearing and Cursing, I come now
to offer a few Arguments to dissuade men from the practice of them.

And those shall be drawn, from the Express prohibition of these Sins, from the
intrinsic Evil and pernicious tendency of them, from the Threatenings of God
denounc't against them, and from the weakness and folly of the pretenses
alleged to excuse or extenuate them.

First I begin with the express prohibition of these Vices.

Thus for common Swearing, that this is prohibited by the Law of God can be
doubted by none that own the divine authority of the Holy Scriptures. If we
suppose (with the generality of Expositors) that our Savior's Sermon in the
Mount gives us an Interpretation of rather then an addition to the precepts of
the Decalogue, there is no question but common swearing is one instance of
taking God's Holy Name in vain forbidden in the Third Command. But none ever
pretended to deny, that our Savior here forbids all such Common Swearing, when
he so strictly charges us not to Swear at all, when he enjoins that our
Communication be Yea, Yea, Nay, Nay, and adds this reason of it, For whatsoever
is more than these comes of evil, See Matthew. 5. from verse. 34. to 38. For he
delivers this charge in opposition to the Jewish Doctors, who themselves
thought swearing by the Name of God in their ordinary converse unlawful, but
made greater allowance for what they accounted smaller Oaths, as swearing by
Creatures without any express appeal to God or mention of him. And since our
Lord condemns all lesser Oaths in common Converse, he must in all reason be
understood much more to forbid all common swearing by the Name of God. And it is
evident that the Apostle James so understood these words oi our Savior, when
he delivers the like prohibition in so peremptory and comprehensive
Expressions, But above all things, my Brethren, swear not, neither by Heaven,
nor by Earth, neither by any other Oath. But let your Yea be Yea, and your Nay
be Nay, etc. James. 5.12. So that no man can doubt of common swearing being a
plain violation of the Law of Christ. And it is such a one as is manifestly
wilful Every man can easily forbear if he please to speak irreverently of his
Earthly Prince, and sure he may as easily forbear to trat with the like bold
irreverence the sacred Name of the Sovereign Majesty of Heaven.

Nor is rash Cursing less evidently forbidden. Thus we are charged by the Ap.
Paul, Bless and Curse not. Romans 12.14. And sure if we were allowed to curse
any, it should be those that are our unreasonable and malicious Enemies. But we
must be so far from wishing Evil to them that on the contrary we are enjoined,
To love our Enemies, to bless them that curse us, to do good to them that hate
us, and to pray for them that despitefully use and persecute us. Matthew. 5.44.
And accordingly the Ap. James mentions Cursing as one great instance and proof
of the Tongue's being an unruly evil, full of deadly poison. Jam. 3.8, 9. And
it is so heinous an Evil in the Psalmist's Judgment, that he gives this as the
genuine character of a Wicked Person, That his mouth is full of cursing. Ps.
10.7. And no wonder when this Sin is so opposite to that Love of our Neighbor
which is the sum of all the Duties of the second Table. And for that sin of a
man's cursing himself, it is evidently included and implied in the forementioned
prohibitions. And if it be not so expressly mentioned, it is only because it is
too unnatural a Crime to need any explicit condemnation. And indeed it argues a
monstrous degeneracy of human Nature that any man should be found guilty of it.

Those then must needs be inexcusable who profess their veneration for the
authority of our blessed Savior, and yet allow themselves in the perverse
violation of Precepts so plain, so just, and so easy to be observed. Sure such
persons should be sensible of the notorious inconsistency of their common
practice with the sincerity of their profession. To be a Christian, and yet a
common Murderer, Adulterer, Whoremonger, Thief, Drunkard, etc. look at first
view very incompatible: And sure it is as hard to reconcile a Man's being a
Christian with his being a common Swearer or Curser. So that if Men will not
renounce these Vices, they would in some respects do more right to Christ and
his Holy Religion by openly renouncing his Name, and casting off that
honorable Livery of his, which they only disgrace and stain by wearing of it.

Secondly. I would farther argue against these Vices from the intrinsic evil
and pernicious tendency of them:

I begin with Common-swearing, and I here chiefly intend that Swearing wherein
the Name of God is more expressly used and which is therefore especially called
Profane Swearing, and of the malignant nature and tendency of this Sin, I shall
only among many others mention the following instances.

1. I have already suggested, That common swearing dos in the very nature of
it, debase a solemn act of Religious Worship by prostituting it to a common and
mean use.

It Is only some momentous occasion and urgent necessity can warrant such solemn
Appeals to God, and they should be made with all appearance of profound Awe and
Reverence. So that this act of Divine Worship is profaned and exposed to
contempt, when used in a rash or trifling manner, without any subserviency to
such a valuable end. But

2. Common swearing argues a want of due Reverence toward God in the mind of
the speaker, and tends to abate it in the mind of the Hearers.

For it cannot be easily conceived that that Man's Soul is habituated to awful
apprehensions of so great and terrible a Majesty, who can ordinarily allow
himself to trifle with his fearful and reverend Name, and dare presume upon
every trivial occasion to make rash Appeals to his all seeing Eye, and to his
avenging Justice. For sure none that has a real and profound veneration for so
adorable a Being, would ever make this use of his Name without holy trembling
and dread, and without great deliberation both concerning the Truth of what he
speaks, and the just Occasion of interposing him as the Witness of it. What
then can we conclude concerning such as dare upon every slight occasion make a
common By word of his dreadful Name, such as never scruple to call the
sovereign Judge of the whole Earth to attest and avouch their ordinary Talk, and
stand Guarantee for the truth of all their trifling Assertions, but that there
is no fear of him before their Eyes, no sense of his unconceivable greatness
and glory upon their Hearts? How despicable is that Sovereign Majesty in thy
esteem, when thou dare with so high a presumption abuse those sacred Titles
of his to rant and bluster with, that should not be mentioned without profound
humility and dread! Is this such an Hallowing his Glorious Name as he requires
and thou pretendest so often to pray for, to treat it with less respect then
thou would the name of thy Prince or thy Father, nay to defile it by making
it serve so vile an end as the venting thy unruly Passion, whenever it prompts
thee to rage and storm against thy Fellow Creatures? Can those e thought to
stand in awe of that blessed and only Potentate, the King of Kings and Lord of
Lords, who are not afraid to bandy about his adorable Name, as if that were
intended to be the common scorn and sport of a lewd and irreligious age?

And as this ar gues such Irreverence toward God in the Swearer, so it tends
to corrupt the minds of those that hear him. For they are thereby (so far as
the Swearers Example can influence and infect them) tempted to the same slight
apprehensions of that glorious Majesty, and contempt of his Omniscience and
Justice, that the Swearer evidences by his bold and profane abuse of his holy
Name. So that it is no thanks to the common Swearer that those he converses with
retain any awe of God upon their minds, when they hear him daily treating him
with so open disrespect and insolent irreverence.

3. Common swearing tends to lessen Men's Reverence of an Oath it self, and
consequently to prepare them for the horrid guilt of Perjury or False-swearing.

It Is the character of a good Man, That He fears an Oath, Eccles. 9.2. and
therefore as he will not needlessly swear at all, so when he must do it, he has
the strictest regard possible to the truth of what he affirms, or sincerity of
what he promises under such an awful Bond. But now it is evident that common
Swearers are seldom or never very critical in examining the Truth of those
ordinary Assertions, which they rashly interpose the Name of God to warrant and
confirm. It cannot reasonably be thought they should be so very cautious in all
they speak at random, and especially under the transport of passion, when of
all times they are prone to swear the fastest. So that if once a Man come so
far by the habitual practice of this Sin, as to make no Conscience of using
Oaths to attest all that he utters in the hear of Discourse, (when he has
neither leisure nor sufficient sedateness of mind to enquire warily into the
truth of what he says), He gives us just ground to conclude that he makes
little matter of an Oath, since he dos upon so small an occasion run the hazard
of forswearing himself. And if a man can so easily forswear himself in Passion,
what security have we, that he will not do it in cool Blood, when he is under a
strong Temptation, and hopes his Perjury may pass undiscovered? For what should
in this case restrain him from it? If it be the Natural Reverence of an Oath,
and dread of the Justice of God as concerned to avenge all Perjury, sure if
these principles were prevalent and strong in him, they would restrain him from
all rash Swearing. For he cannot reasonably pretend to fear an Oath that
ordinarily Swears at random; Nor can he pretend to be much awed with the
apprehensions of God's avenging Justice that so frequently makes such hasty
inconsiderate Appeals to it. It may be feared that he that scruples not the
lesser guilt may venture on the greater, since those principles are evidently
weakened in him that should preserve him from it. And doubtless, It Is very much
owing to this Vice of Common Swearing, that Perjury it self has so greatly
abounded among us. A crime that at once tends utterly to destroy all Reverence
of God and Faith among men. So that if we would not have this Wickedness (which
is both the highest scandal to Religion and the most pernicious Bane to civil
Societys) to grow upon us, That Common Swearing must be restrained, which has
so evident a tendency to prepare men for it, by turning Solemn Oaths into
customary Forms of speaking.

For the Sin of profane Cursing the malignant Nature and tendency of it will
sufficiently appear in these two Instances

1. It Is a Sin that implys a high degree of Incharitableness toward men.

For if Cursers really mean as they speak, (and what opinion must we entertain
of their truth and honesty if they do not?) They imprecate the greatest
mischiefs imaginable to their fellow creatures, as commonly no less then that
the Devil may take them or God may damn them. Now if they are in earnest, what
can we take them for but Incarnate Devils that so passionately desire the
eternal ruin and misery of others? For if Devils could speak with human voice,
what language could we expect from those envious Spirits more suitable to the
poisonous malignity of their nature then this? And what injury are any of our
fellow creatures capable of doing to us, that can any way justify the barbarous
cruelty of such direful Imprecations? Would we indeed have all that cross our
humor or Interest, or offer us the least Indignity and affront, doomed for it,
to remediless Flames and to the vengeance of Eternal Fire? This were not only
to give way to the worst passion of human nature Revenge, but to carry it
beyond all bounds, as if no less then the irreparable misery of an Immortal
Soul could compensate every petty injury we receive. But if Cursers pretend,
that they do not mean so ill as they speak, and that their, real wishes are not
so unmerciful as their verbal ones, why then should they affect to talk so like
embodied Feinds? Why should they suffer their Tongues to be thus set on fire of
Hell? Why should they thus habituate them to the proper dialect of the Infernal
Regions?

And if it be so uncharitable a thing to curse others, what stupid barbarity is
it for a Man to curse and damn himself, This is such an instance of wickedness
as we can scarce think of without astonishment, so that were Men supposed
serious in such Imprecations, we must conclude that they are passionately
desirous of their own endless destruction, and impatient for the execution of
it. So that did we not see the contrary, we should be strongly tempred to think
such persons to be under the power of distraction and frenzy. But alas we find
by the use of their Reason in other matters, it is only a voluntary Frenzy, a
Madness that their atheistical Temper and their outrageous Passions are the
only causes of.

2. Profane Cursing expresses a very insolent contempt of the great God.

I know indeed many use such Curses against others as words of course to
express their passion by. And therefore would be ready to think we wrong them if
we should suppose their inward intentions as uncharitable as their expressions.
And perhaps it may be reasonably thought that few of those have arrived to such
a height of diabolical malice who yet too commonly use this hellish language.
But what apology then can such persons make for their bold abuse of the
vindictive justice of God, when by their Curses they make such rash and
senseless addresses to it to execute the dictates of their unruly passion and
rage? As if the Vengeance of the universal Sovereign and Judge of the whole
Earth were to be at our beck to accomplish every wicked Imprecation that our
Anger or Malice prompts us to utter! Can we imagine the Hearts of those to be
possessed with any deep veneration for that great and terrible Majesty, who can
find nothing else to trifle with or vent their hasty passion by, but his
tremendous vindictive Righteousness and his final sentence of eternal Damation?
For sure if we either considered or believed what these things mean, we should
not dare to play with those edged Tools, nor with that Fool (mentioned Prove.
26.18.) cast forth Firebrands, Arrows, and Death, and then pretend we are but
in sport or in passion. This is plainly to affront that very Attribute of God
which above all others claims our profoundest dread, and should rather strike
us with Terror and Trembling.

And for the sin of Men's cursing themselves, it argues an almost incredible
contempt of the Divine Vengeance. So that were not our Ears often grated with
this language, it could scarce be thought that any could arrive to such a pitch
of desperate and daring Impiety. For these Curses are such a bold and open
defiance of the glorious Majesty of Heaven, as we may well question whether
Devils themselves are guilty of. For they are said to believe and tremble. Jam.
2.19. They are represented as beseeching our Savior that he would not torment
them before the time. Matthew. 8. v. 29. Luke 8. v. 28. Whereas the more insolent
and fearless sinners of our Age, do with an unheard of impudence challenge the
Justice of God as if it were too slow in it is execution, and call for their own
damnation as if it were too long a coming. What tho they pretend they do not
wish it in good earnest? Should they give a righteous God so great provocation
to take them at their word, and fulfill their bold Imprecation? Can they find
nothing to trifle with and abuse but his tremendous Vengeance, Nothing to sport
with but Hell and Damnation? Should not such guilty Creatures rather tremble at
the thoughts of the living God, and dread to fall into his avenging hands?
Should such dry stubble thus provoke or play with the Consuming Fire? Hebr. 12.
ult. Is he the everlasting King and Judge, at whose Wrath the Earth trembles,
and the Nations are not able to abide his Indignation, and shall every
despicable Criminal and Malefactor with a desperate madness thus dare his
Almighty Power, and challenge his Vindictive Arm, thus stretch out his hand
against God, and strengthen himself against the Almighty, thus run upon him,
even upon his Neck and upon the think bosses of his Buckler? (To use the
Elegant Expressions of Eliphaz, Job. 15, 25, 26.) How monstrous and amazing
Impiety and folly is this? But

Thirdly I proceed to argue against these Vices from the awful Threats of God
denounc't against them.

And as both these Sins (if we will allow the third Precept of the Decalogue
that latitude and extent that our Savior's Exposition gives it) are a Taking
Gods holy Name in vain, i. e. a very presumptuous irreverent abuse of it, so
there is a very terrible Threatening annexed against the Breachers of it, The
Lord will not hold him guiltless that takes his Name in vain, Exodus 20.7. i. e.
He will vindicate the glory of his sacred Name by severely punishing those that
treat it with such profane Indignity and contempt. And agreably hereto the Ap.
James. enforces this Caution not to swear at all, with this Argument, Least you
fall into condemnation. James, 5. v. 12. (For so most copys read it, tho if we
should read it (as some do) (...), Least you fall into hypocrisy, It will
confirm the Argument against Common Swearing from it is tendency to involve men
in the guilt of Perjury). Thus to have our Mouths full of Cursing and
Bitterness, is one of those sins that render men obnoxious to the Vengeance of
God. Romans 3.14. compared with verse. 19. And our Savior plainly intimates to
us. That except in this point of swearing our Righteousness exceed that of the
Scribes and Pharisees (tho they allowed only common swearing by Creatures) we
cannot enter into the Kingdom of God. Matthew. 5.20. And as these general
Threatenings give all common Swearers and Cursers so just reason to fear the
same eternal Vengeance and Wrath that is not revealed from Heaven against all
ungodliness of Men, (and consequently against these palpable instances of it)
Romans 1.18. So other passages of Scripture plainly imply these Sins to be among
the number of those crying provocations, that usually draw down temporal
Judgments, and even public ones where they generally abound and reign
uncontrolled. Thus Hos. 4.2, 3. In the Catalogue of those Vices for which the
Land is said to mourn ( i. e. through the dismal Calamities they entail upon it)
Swearing leads the van, and is followed by Lying, Killing, Theft, and Adultery.
(Crimes of the first magnitude.) To the same purpose we read, Jer. 23.10.
Because of Swearing (or as your Margin reads it, Cursing) the Land mourns Thus
the flying Roll of the Prophet Zachary full of Curses is levelled against the
Swearer in general, as well as the False Swearer, bringing with it a fatal
consumption on his very House and Family; as if a Righteous God was resolved to
raze their Name out of this Earth that so pollute and dishonor his. Zech. 5.2,
3, 4, 5.

I come now in the

Fourth and last place, to argue against these Sins from the weakness and folly
of those pretenses that are alleged to excuse and extenuate them.

It has been often and justly objected against profane swearing, That no Man
has any show of temptation to it. In other Crimes the Devil proposes some
specious Bait, some sensual Pleasure or worldly advantage. And tho this will no
way justify our known violation of any Laws of God, who proposes Arguments to
countervail these of infinitely higher moment, yet a Man's being drawn to sin
chiefly by such allurements, seems at least to argue, that he chooses the sin
principally for the gain and the pleasure's sake: That he is not acted by mere
contempt of the authority of God; and would not have transgress't his Commands,
if they had not interfer'd with his secular profit, or sensual delight. But tho
this be in it self a very sorry pretense, and a small extenuation of a man's
guilt, yet even this is more then the common swearer can say for himself. He
cannot pretend that he pleases his Senses or Appetites by thus wounding his
Conscience. His numerous Oaths increase no other Treasures but those of Divine
Wrath. No passion of human Nature seems gratified by this sin, unless it be a
wretched malignity and despite against the blessed God himself. So that the
common swearer of all men seems to serve the Devil for naught to be wicked for
mere wickedness sake.

And what is so justly said of profane swearing may be in a great measure
applied to cursing too. For men cannot pretend to gratify any other passion by
it but that of Revenge; and they are so far from attaining this end, that their
Curses usually return on their own Heads, and like a recoyling Gun only wound
and mischieve those that let it off.

But since these Vices are practiced by many that pretend to wit and sense, we
should perhaps affront their judgment if we should suppose they had nothing to
say for themselves. And therefore it will be here requisite to take notice of
such Pleas or Excuses as they usually offer. And

First some alledg, That they rarely Swear or Curse but when they are in
passion, and in that case they find it hard to forbear, and hope their passion
will at least very much excuse their fault.

To show the vanity of this pretense, I shall only suggest the following
particulars.

1. Such anger it self, if it exceed the bounds prescribed by the Law of God,
is very sinful; and much more when it transports a Man to such instances of
profaneness and impiety as these. If he that calls a Man Fool in passion be in
danger of Hell fire, Matthew. 5.23. what is he that furiously damns him to the
Pit of Hell it self? So that passion is no better excuse for swearing and
cursing then it is for the Murders which so many commit in the heat of blood. As
nothing will satisfy such Murderers upon every slight injury but the blood of
him that has done it, so nothing will satisfy the Curser but his Damnation.

2. Whatever temptation injuries may give us in our passion to curse those that
do them, they cannot be pretended as any temptation to profane swearing.

Suppose that thy fellow creature has offered thee never so great an affront
which thy passion prompts thee to revenge, is that any tolerable plea why thou
should execute that revenge upon thy Maker? Is it he that has done thee
harm? Is it against him thou art incens't? Or have thou no better way to
retaliate the wrongs of thy Enemy, then by doing a far greater injury to the
author of thy Being and the great Benefactor of thy Life? Are their
provocations any ground for thy tearing and defiling his sacred Name, by whose
power thou art every moment preserved, and on whose daily care an innumerable
benefits, thy life it self and the continued comfort thereof depends? How
senselesly do thou pursue thy Revenge, when to vent thy indignation against
him that has done thee some (perhaps inconsiderable) evil, thou flyest in the
face of thy best Friend, and offerest the vilest indignity to him that has done
thee the greatest good? This sure is such an instance of stupid folly and
madness as can hardly be paralleled.

3. No Provocation can justify our Cursing those that offer it.

For all Curses are but the gratification of that private Revenge which the
divine Law has strictly forbidden. And indeed a Propensity thereto is one of
the most noted Lineaments of the Devil's Image upon us, and most opposite to
that Goodness which is the brightest part of the amiable Image of God. It Is the
character of his children, To love their Enemies, To bless those that curse
them, and to pray for those that despitefully use and persecute them. Whereas
to wish Evil to others as well as to do it to them, are passions that are only
kindled from the fire of Hell. And how unreasonable are the Wishes themselves
considering the smalness of the occasion? Another has given thee ill words, or
done thee some petty injury, or perhaps only cross't thy unreasonable humor,
and for this, thou desire he may fall under the direful Curse of God, and be
damned to endless misery. Is there any thing but monstrous uncharitableness and
devilish spite in such wishes? Or if thou pretendest that thou do not really
desire it, but only speak such words to express thy deep resentment of the
Injury received, have thou no other way to make thy fellow creature sensible of
the wrong he has done, but such rash addresses to the terrible vengeance of
God? Can thou find nothing for thy passion to abuse but his tremendous
Judgments? Will no Language serve thee to vent thy displeasure in, but such as
is fitter for an Incarnate Feind then a professed Christian? Nay since thy rash
Curses can do no harm to those they are darted against, but do truly arm the
vengeance of God against thy self, whilst thou really hazard thy own Damnation
merely for the satisfaction of thy Revenge in vainly wishing their's? And for
men's Cursing themselves it is a yet more amazing height of Folly, because
others have done us a small wrong to wish our own eternal ruin, and give the
Justice of God the highest provocation to execute it.

Secondly others pretend, That there is no way so proper for them to keep their
Inferiors in awe, as by such language as this. That a saucy Servant, or bold
Clown can no way be so easily humbled and frightened into his duty as by a
volley of Oaths and Curses, and will scarce think a Man in good earnest
offended with him unless he swear and damn.

To this pretense I shall only say these two things.

1. This no more then a bare pretense. There are thousands in the World that
know well enough how to keep their Inferiors in due awe and subjection without
any such unhallowed arts of Government. And those that will not be frightened
with the grave threats and frowns of such as have a just right to chastize
their Insolence, will as stiffly stand the shock of an empty peal of Oaths and
Curses. Whereas if they find that a Superior punctually makes his threats good,
they will as readily believe them for the suture as if he swore to them.

2. As this is but a mere pretense, so it is a very unreasonable and senseless
one.

Is it a matter of such concern to keep thy Inferiors in awe, that thou shoudst
scruple no means that tend to it? To treat them with extravagant passion or
barbarous severity would as effectually do it. But would the attaining of that
end excuse the use of such inhuman means? How much less then will it excuse thy
blasphemous Insolence against God? Have thou no other way to make others stand
in fear of thee, then by assuming the character of the unjust Judge, who neither
feared God nor regarded Man? Luke, 18, 2. Can thou find no better expedient
to prevent the affronts of others, then by offering thy self the most daring
Indignitys unto the Majesty of Heaven? Must nothing but his adorable name serve
thee to hector and rant with? Is there no way of persuading others that thou
art angry with them but by calling on him to damn them, as if his impartial
Justice were at the call and command of every such wild Fury as thy self?

Thirdly others pretend, That they have no other end in Swearing and Cursing
but to persuade others of the truth of what they say.

Answer 1. This can justify no Oaths but what we use on solemn Occasions, where
some important but doubted truth needs to be confirmed by human Testimony. And
in such Cases solemn appeals to God by Oaths are allowable.

2. Oaths ordinarily used in common Conversation are no proper means to attain
any such end as the giving credit to our Assertions. If thou art a Man of known
Veracity and Truth such Oaths are in ordinary Converse altogether needless, and
thy bare affirmation will be sufficient without them. Why then shoud'st thou
call thy own honesty into question, by acting as if thou supposed'st that no
man will believe thy bare Word without thy Oath to confirm it? But if thy
Veracity be really doubted by those thou conversest with, thy rash multiplied
Oaths will signify little to remove their suspicion. For those with whom
Swearing is a customary thing, and Oaths but words of course, no wise man will
ever lay a greater stress upon them then upon their naked affirmations. For he
that scarce speaks without an Oath, it he be given to Lying, is as prone to
swear when he speaks false as when he speaks true, and indeed ordinarily scarce
observes or considers when he swears and when he dos not. Nay

3. Customary Swearing rather disserves and crosses this very end that is
pretended to Excuse it.

For Swearing and Lying are so nearly allied, and so seldom separated, that he
that will do the one, it may be strongly presumed he will not much scruple the
other. What can give us a probable ground to conclude a man's Veracity but this,
That he seems to have the fear of God before his Eyes. So that if a Man appear
devoy'd of that, we have little security of the truth of what he says. And what
can give us a juster suspicion of that, then that he has no fear of an Oath,
and no reverence for the sacred Name of God? And mankind have generally so true
a sense of this, that with all but a few weak and silly people, The more a man
Swears the less he is believed, and his very multiplied rash Oaths raise a
suspicion of the truth of what he speaks when there is scarce any other ground
for it.

Fourthly others pretend, that they have got such a Custom of Swearing that
they cannot leave it.

To this Plea I shall only give this brief Reply.

1. If men should alledg the same pretense for other Sins they would easily see
the folly of it.

So has many a Drunkard an untoward inveterate Custom of making a Beast of
himself. Many a Thief can hardly forbear pilfering when he has a tempting
opportunity. Many are so habituated to Lying that they can scarce tell when
they do it. And some men's brutal Lusts seem to hurry them with an uncontrouled
violence. But sure this is thought in all other Cases a horrible aggravation of
men's Sins, because it shows that they have by long practice so stupify'd their
Consciences that they make little or no resistance against Temptations, being
now become seared and past feeling. And shall that then be thought to Excuse
the guilt of Swearers that heightens the guilt of all other Sinners? How comes
this Dialect of Hell to be so familiar to thee, but by the frequent endulged
use of it? And dos that abate the Crime and render it less heinous and
detestable?

2. Men are under no greater inability to leave this sin then others.

It Is a plain evidence, That men's pretenses that they cannot forbear are but
unreasonable, when the most desperate Swearer can refrain in company that he
stands in any awe of. The very fear of the penalty has already laid a
considerable restraint on this Vice. And if men would once use their
considering powers, should not the fear of God do as much to curb them as the
fear of Men? Besides the grace of God is not wanting to sincere endeavors. He
that calls us to Repentance for this and all other sins, can upon our humble
application to him, give us strength to perform our serious purposes of it.

3. If thou can not leave this wretched habit of Swearing and Cursing,
there is no remedy but to suffer the Vengeance denounc't against such sins.

Is it customary to thee to swear and damn, so is it customary with a righteous
God to avenge such abuse of his holy Name and contempt of his Terrible Justice.
If thou can not reform thy practice so neither can he repent of his dreadful
Threatenings. If thy inveterate wickedness lay thee under such a necessity of
going on to sin, so will his inflexible Justice lay him under a necssiety of
punishing such incorrigible sinners. But sure it is far easier for thee to
change thy temper and practice then for a just God to change his own nature, or
to falsify the truth of his word.

Fifthly, some pretend, That swearing is so much in fashion that they should be
ridiculed as precise and singular if they scrupled it.

To this I would only reply.

1. If Swearing be in fashion, it is so far from being a Mode peculiar to
Persons of Quality and Birth, that it is rather most used by the very scum of
mankind.

In this point of breeding, a Porter or Coachman can vye with a Gentleman or
Lord, and the meanest Sentinel or Tarpaulin equal the most huffing Officer. And
indeed it is so far from adding any real grace or decency to men's language,
that nothing usually renders men's discourses more sottish and senseless, more
rude and ill-manner'd then the Oaths and Curses wherewith they lard it. So that
were it not for grating upon the Ears of devout people, nothing could do more
to put men out of countenance with their hellish Language then to repeat it to
them. The Reader may see an Instance hereof in the late ingenious Author of the
Essays upon Projects. For I am loath to defile this paper with so abominable
stuff.

2. If it be in fashion to Swear and Curse, it must needs be accounted a very
odious one to all that have not quite ras't all sense of piety out of their
minds.

For nothing can ever make Swearing and Damning pass justly for a piece of good
breeding till we can persuade the World, it is a piece of commendable Gallantry
to despise and defy the Deity, and that to be a Rebel against the Laws of
Heaven is the truest badg of honor upon Earth. So that till professed Atheism
come in vogue, and Vice be capable of ennobling a man's blood, these Instances
of profaness will never pass for marks of Gentility, and to be a Swearer and
Curser will never be reckoned among men's Titles of Honor.

3. Let these Vices be never so common, No man should Swear and Curse for
company that is not content to be damned for company too.

If men must needs go with a multitude to do Evil, they know whither the broad
way will lead them. But sure it is much better to hazard the reproach of being
singular and precise then out of compliance with so detestable a fashion to
venture upon perishing for ever. It Is too great a complaisance to a lewd age to
go to Hell with them, and that for nothing.

Lastly, some may possibly pretend, That they at least may be allowed to Swear
and Curse, because they believe neither God nor Devil, neither Heaven nor Hell.

I must confess this is the most specious Plea that can be alleged for such
practices. For he that believes no God has some pretense to make bold with what
he takes to be an empty name. He has no fear of divine Justice to restrain him
from an insolent defiance of it. His Actions and his Principles are both of a
piece. And yet even to such I would suggest what is sufficient to dissuade them
from Swearing and Cursing. For

1. This pretense cannot excuse these Vices from rudeness and ill manners.

There is no Man that pretends to the Education of a Gentleman, but will think
it highly uncivil without the least provocation, to abuse any the Company has a
great respect for. Sure then that good breeding it self which Atheistical
persons sometimes boast of, should restrain them from wounding the Ears of
those that believe and reverence a Deity, with such profane abuse of his adored
Name. Especialy when thereby they violate the public Laws and affront the
authority of the Nation. It Is a great indecency to treat with contempt what the
generality of mankind pay the highest Veneration to. And if every Loyal Subject
resent it as a great provocation to hear his Prince abused and vilify'd, they
cannot imagine it a less offense to every good Man, to hear that Blessed Being
treated with such open Indignity to whom he bears the highest reverence and
affection. And indeed in what pious Soul would it not raise just horror and
Indignation to hear that Eternal Majesty, whom Angels adore and before whom
Devils tremble, made the May Game and scorn of every irreligious and lewd
Buffoon?

2. Even Interest it self should restrain Atheistical Persons from these Vices.

For it is certain they get nothing by them. The Age is not yet so degenerate
that mere Damning will qualify a man for preferment. And the most brutish
Epicure might enjoy all his beloved pleasures and never miss that of Swearing.
Now if there be no advantage to be had by these sins, it is much safer to let
them alone. For after all the confidence of Atheists, it is possible there may
be a God and a Life to come. So that if their great confidence should in this
point deceive them, (as most certainly it will) they will find that their Oaths
and Curses will but increase the score of their Guilt, and render the sight of
their incensed Judge more unsupportable to them. For among all their other sins
(as I have already suggested) they will find no shadow of Excuse for these. And
indeed no man should commit them but he who is willing to run the hazard of
Damnation for the mere pleasure of being wicked.

I shall only to these Arguments which are more directly suited to professed
Christians, subjoyn the Judgment of the more sober Heathens in reference to the
sin of Swearing, if possible to shame them our of it. Plato in his Book de
Legibus mentions it as a commendable Institution, That none should pollute the
Names of the Gods by a slight customary mention of them Hierocles recommends
Swearing rarely as necessary to preserve the due reverence of an Oath, and
speaks of common Swearing as the high Read to Perjury. Quintilian tells us, a
grave-Man should not Swear except in cases of necessity: And Epictetus advises,
if possible to avoid it. Isocrates allows Oaths only in two cases, either to
vindicate one's Innocence, or to save one's Self or Friends from unjust
Punishment. And sure such strict Maxims delivered by Pagan Moralists should
make the very blood rise in the face of those pretended Christians, who fall so
far short of their excellent Rules, and much more of those of our Blessed
Savior. For if we that enjoy the light of so glorious and clear a Revelation,
do not practice what the very Light of Nature dictates, even Pagans will rise
up in Judgment against us to reproach and condemn us.

And now I would entreat the Swearers and Cursers of the Age (if they have not
quite extinguish't their power of thinking) seriously to consider these plain
Arguments, in which they will find no rhetorical aggravations, but a naked
representation of these Vices in their native but ugly hue. Which if they would
impartially do, one would hope, unless they have quite abandoned their Reason,
they cannot withstand the evidence of Truth in them, nor go on in these wretched
practices without offering as ungrateful violence to their own Consciences, as
their profane language has long done to the Ears of all good Men.

Having dispatched this first Head, I come

II. to offer something for exciting both Magistrates and Private Persons to
their duty in order to the suppressing these Vices by the effectual execution
of the Law lately made against them.

I begin with Magistrates. I know indeed the Penalty which the Act it self lays
on the Justices of Peace in case they fail of their duty in executing it, may
seem to make it needless to urge them to it. Yet since all Magistrates may do
much to promote the design of this Act, by encouraging Informations, by
concealing the Name of the Informer (where the discovery of it is no way
necessary, nor can be legally demanded); and by severely punishing any Revenge
that Convicted Persons may execute on others for informing against them, I shall
only briefly suggest a few considerations to them.

1 You zeal for the honor of Almighty God should prompt you to do your utmost
for the suppression of these Vices.

You all pretend to make this one design of your public Administrations. The
great God puts an eminent opportunity into your hands to manifest the sincerity
of your pretensions. If then you have any devout and affectionate Veneration
for that Blessed and only Potentate, any real concern for his honor and for
the uncontested interest of Religion, you have now a fair occasion to show it.
And if you improve it not, God and all good Men will join in condemning your
inexcusable lukewarmness in so just and glorious a Cause.

2. Your regard to the public safety should also engage you to it.

You often pretend a mighty zeal for the Public Good. Now what can you do more
likely to subserve that truly valuable end, then by stopping that torrent of
Impiety and Profaneness that is otherwise like to overflow us again with new
and heavier Calamities?

I doubt not but all good men are fully persuaded, That our relapsing into
these and other Vices has had a great influence on the prolonging the successes
and triumphs of our Enemies, and the retarding our happy settlement. So that
our hopes of a more favorable providence to make a happy change in the scene
of our public Affairs chiefly depend on the success of these attempts of a
necessary and general Reformation. And those will do the truest service to
their Country that are most instrumental and active in promoting it.

3. Your concern for your own final account should effectually excite you to it.

As you profess ultimately to derive your Authority from God the Universal
Sovereign, and Fountain of all civil power, so you own your selves accountable
to him. Should you not then seriously think how the great Judge of the Earth
will resent it, if you trifle with so great an advantage for vindicating and
repairing his injured honor, and for restoring the Veneration due to his
sacred Name? And on the contrary. How highly he will approve of your fidelity,
if you now answer your character by being a Terror to Evildoers, If by the awe
of your just authority, you force insolent profaneness and iniquity to stop
it is mouth, and cast as open contempt on these detestable Vices, as they have
done upon the glory of God. Let not the guilt of these public Crimes lie any
longer at your door, by your connivance at them or the slackness of your
Endeavors to restrain them.

But I would chiefly address my self to private Persons. For since you are so
much concerned and are so necessary Instruments in the Execution of this Law,
it will be needful to excite you to your duty. And the rather because whereas
the Law it self obliges the Magistrate to do his part, It Is only Conscience and
a sincere regard to the glory of God that can excite you to do yours. And to
engage you to it, I shall briefly suggest to you the following particulars.

1. It Is your undoubted duty to contribute your Endeavors toward the
suppression of these detestable Vices.

You can no more question this, then you can your Obligations to advance the
glory of God and promote a public Reformation, so far as your private sphere
gives you fit opportunities for it. Those did but perform their necessary duty
that declared to Moses the Blasphemy of the Son of Shelimith, Levit. 24.11. Nor
those that found out and convicted Idolaters, Deuteronomy. 17.4, 5. -- And there are
multitudes of private persons that can never expect a more eminent advantage of
public usefulness to be put into their hands. So that their sloth will be
inexcusable if they make no emprovement of so valuable a Talent. And sure in
the present contest between the Kingdom of God and that of Satan, between the
interest of Piety and Virtue and that of Profaneness and Vice, no good man
ought to stand Neuter, and think himself unconcerned which prevails. Such a
clear Cause requires and will justify our forward Zeal, and here lukewarmness
and indifferency are truly detestable.

2. Without your Endeavors the design of this Law (viz the suppressing these
Vices) is like to be frustrated, and the guilt thereof will in this case lie
much upon your selves. For without Informations there can be no Convictions and
Forfeitures, and consequently Offenders will go on in bold defiance both to the
Laws of God and Man. So that if you shrink and give back, If you desist from
your Endeavors, from the consideration of the small trouble and hazard of
them, the declining Cause of Profaneness will again bear up it is head, and
endanger the overflowing the Land with a more irresistible violence then it did
before. You have now the fairest opportunity put into your hands of promoting a
public Reformation, so that if you improve it not, the guilt of other men's
sin will be in a great measure charged upon you. And will you that have so
often seemed to pray so earnestly for the suppression of these Vices decline so
necessary endeavors to farther it? Shall so glorious and so blessed a work
sink through your lukewarmness and indifferency in it? Do you pretend to lament
these abominable crimes, and will you not do what is so evidently in your power
toward the crushing of them? Shall the lewd Swearers of the Age be more
Zealous to profane then you to keep up the Reverence of God's Holy Name?

3. There is a happy prospect of success in your Endeavors.

For if once Informations become general by every good man's combining to do
his part, Offenders will have no hope of Impunity. And Experience dos already
sufficiently tell us, that how fond soever men are of Swearing, yet they are
loath to pay for it; so that we may hope in time they will rather part with their
Oaths then with their Money. Nay we see that how insolent soever these sinners
seem in outbraving the Justice of God, yet they are wonderfully appal'd and
hang down their heads when a Constable surprises them with a Warrant upon a
second or third Conviction. And how much soever they were wont to glory in this
vice, they do not take it for any great honor to have their Names on public
record in the black Roll. In this Capital City Oaths are in a great measure
silenc't in the streets and seek shelter in the Taverns and Alehouses, nor are
they altogether safe there. So that if you will but generally concur with
unanimous zeal in giving in Informations, there is little doubt but the fear of
the penalty will with the most effect what no other Arguments could hitherto
do. And I hope your attempts in this City will set a Pattern that will in a
little time influence other parts of the Kingdom and make the Reformation
Universal

4. You have no ground to be either ashamed or afraid in so necessary and
commendable a service to God and to the Interest of Religion.

In this honorable Cause, that Name of an Informer which in most other cases
has justly so ill a sound, is far from being any mark of Reproach. For
Offenders themselves, if they would speak impartially, cannot but own your
practice to be free from any suspicion of mean and base ends. For what should
incite a man without the least prospect of any advantage to himself, nay with a
certain prospect of some trouble and danger, to do so unwelcome an Office, and
so likely to disoblige those whom he would reform, but a sincere Zeal for the
honor of God and for the Observance of his Laws? They cannot reasonably
suppose you are acted with any other Spite and Malice, then a very just and
laudable one against Profaneness and Irreligion. Nay should those you inform
against, be so unreasonable as to misinterpret and censure your Zeal, sure the
Approbation of the great God and of all good men, should sufficiently
counterballance their groundless Reproaches and Calumnys. And it will be found
in the great day of Trial a greater honor to have been a faithful Informer
against Vice, then a base Conniver at it, and a wretched Betrayer of the honor
of God and Religion.

Nor should you be discouraged by the hazard you run of exposing your selves to
the malice or revenge of Offenders. If Magistrates would but as generaly
encourage Informations by refusing to discover the Informers name without just
cause (as some sew to their great honor have done) this difficulty would be in
a great measure removed. But however that be, you have the protection of the
Laws as a security against the injuries of any enraged Offenders, and I doubt
not the Government would punish them with a just severity. But it is a far more
considerable encouragement that you may expect the protection of the great God
whose Cause you herein so signally espouse. And should your Zeal for his honor
expose you to any present disadvantage, he can easily make it up in temporal
Blessings, and will do it abundantly with eternal Rewards. And sure we are not
the real Disciples of Christ, if every appearance of difficulties can deter us
from so evident a duty, if we dare baulk so signal a piece of service, merely
because we cannot do it without some self denial and hazard.

And if upon such Considerations you resolve upon the faithful discharge of
your Duty, it will be easy to find out the most proper method of doing it.
There are many in this City engaged in that excellent work to whom you may
adjoyn your selves. And indeed if every Parish had stated and select Consults,
they might carry on this great and pious design with greater regularity, order
and success by their mutual advice and resolution.

It remains now

III. To enquire into the grounds of those loud Complaints lately made against
private Informations.

It Is evident, That the Act against Swearing dos no way require that the
Offender should be present, when the Information is given against him. Nor dos
any Clause in it oblige the Justices of the Peace to discover the Informer's
Name, when the Offender dos not dispute the matter of fact. So that there is no
pretense of this method (of receiving private Informations upon Oath, and
concealing the Informer's Name when there is no just cause of declaring it)
being any way opposite to the design of this Act, and it is evident on the
contrary that it highly tends to promote the great end of it.

But since there are several Objections raised against it, I shall briefly
consider the most material I have yet met with.

1. Some alledg, That it is contrary to natural Justice and Equity, and to the
course of the Law in other cases, that a man should be convicted and punished
for a Crime, without having his Accuser brought face to face, at least without
so much as knowing who he is.

Answ. This Objection could indeed admit of no Reply, if the Accused person,
even when he complains of being wronged, could no way know, who his Accuser is,
and were debarred from the privilege both of defending his Innocence and
prosecuting the Accuser. But I suppose there is no such thing practiced. For no
Justices of the Peace deny any person the knowledge of the Informer's Name, if
the person accused insist upon his Innocence, and engage to prosecute the
Informer for Perjury in what he has swore against him. But if the person
accused desire to know the Informer's Name upon any other Terms, It Is
reasonable to suppose that he desires it only to have the opportunity of
Executing his private Revenge upon him. At least there is no just Cause to
discover the Informer's Name unless the accused person solemnly declare (and if
required do it upon Oath) that he knows the Information to be false, and in
that case I suppose no Justice of Peace will conceal the Informer's Name, nor
any honest Informer desire it.

Others object, That this method of private Informations exposes a Man to the
malice of any who will but venture to perjure themselves to do him a mischief.
And it seems to give Encouragment to such malice, when persons may hope to give
in false Informations undiscovered.

Answ. It Is not reasonable to suppose that any Man will perjure himself in
order to the convicting another, when he can thereby do him so very little
Injury. And this is the more unlikely ever to happen, when such a false
Informer runs so great hazard of being found guilty of perjury and being
severely punished for it. For there is no Man that is conscious of his own
Innocence but would prosecute such a perjured person to the utmost, and if he
engage to do so, he may know his Name.

If it be replied, That if a false Informer positively persist in his
Accusation and the person accused have no Witness or other Evidence to oppose
thereto, he seems left without Remedy.

To this I need only answer, this Objection concerns the Act it self, and not
this particular manner of executing it. The Lawmakers for the more effectual
suppression of these Vices have made the Information upon Oath of one witness,
sufficient to convict an Offender, because they supposed no man would falsely
upon Oath accuse another of such a Crime that has no hope to reap any advantage
from the Penalty. Especially when a perjured Informer runs so great hazard of
being detected, as will in all probability deter him from this dangerous way of
executing so poor a Revenge; since his Perjury can expose the accused person to
very small damage in comparison of the Punishment he runs the risk of, if the
Accuser should clear his Innocence.

Others object. That this way of clandestine Informations is very unfair and
dishonorable. It Is like slabbing a man behind his back. Whereas the Informer
should in civility first caution the Offender, and try what a gentle admonition
will do, before he use this rougher method of reforming him. At least he should
have the courage to avow what he dos, and not do it in so sneaking and
claudestine a way.

Answ. 1. If the Informer be well acquainted with the Offender it may be very
advisable first to try this gentler way of Admonition and Reproof.

2. But as this Act is chiefly designed for the reclaiming of Common Swearers,
and it is those generally that fall under the Lash of it, so it may be
reasonably presumed, that such are past the hope of being reformed by mere good
Advice, and are sensible of no other Argument but what touches their Interest;
And the Law gives them sufficient warning of the danger they run in respect of
that by these crimes.

3. It Is not because Informers are ashamed of what they do, that they desire to
pass undiscovered, but because they would obviate several Inconveniences that
such discovery of their Names would occasion to the real disadvantage of the
Act it self, as well as to their own particular prejudice. (Of which I shall
have occasion to make some mention in what follows.)

And as I can discern no solid weight in these Objections against concealing
the Informers Name, so on the other hand, it is undenyably evident that this
method is every way most conducive to attain the design of the Act by the
entire suppression of these abominable Vices. For

1. This method will greatly encourage those to give in Informations who are
truly acted therein by mere Zeal for the honor of Almighty God, and the
Interest of true Piety.

For as such will be very careful to give in none but true Informations, of
which the accused persons may easily upon reflection be conscious to themselves;
so they will be under no Temptation to be disheartened from their duty by the
fear of Revenge or ill will, when they know that those they accuse cannot learn
their Names without obliging themselves to prosecute them for Perjury, which
they may well suppose they will never attempt when incapable of proving it.

2. The discovery of the Informer's Name will be attended with great
Inconveniences to him, to the obstructing the design of the Act, without any
real considerable advantage to the Party accused.

If the Informer's Name be constantly discovered, he is thereby needlessly
exposs'd to the Malice and Revenge of the Offender, to whom he intends thereby
a real service. So that in all probability he will make the most of those he
convicts, his Enemies; however he do truly herein act the part of a sincere
Friend to them. And no doubt the prospect of this will greatly discourage many
from doing their duty, and render others too slack and cold in it. And if once
Informations be discouraged. The Terror of the penalty will be over, and the
Act gradually lose it is force, and these Insolent sinners as daringly outbrave
the Law of Man as they have hitherto done the Law of God. So that we may soon
expect that these pernicious vices will like a Torrent, that has broke down a
weak Digue, return upon us with a more irresistible violence.

And these Inconveniences to the Informer are attended with no real
considerable advantage to the Accused Party; unless we take it for an advantage
that by discouraging Informations, these Offenders may sin with greater hope of
Impunity. (Which is the very mischief which the Act is designed to obviate).
For if the Information be true, what is the Offender the better for knowing who
gives it? He may thereby indeed understand whom to level his spite against; Or
he may know whose company he should shun or stand on his guard in; and so
prevent a new Conviction by taking care to swear only in such company where he
may do it safely But if the Information be false, the person accused is not
denied the satisfaction of knowing whom to prosecute as perjured for giving it,
if he will engage to do it.

I shall only add, that I hope what I have here suggested will not tempt the
Swearers and Cursers of the Age to conclude, that if this method of private
Informations were laid aside, they should go unpunisht. For I doubt not they
will find so many inspired with Zeal in so just a Cause, as will soon convince
them, these Vices shall not escape the penalty of the Law for want of open
Informations. However some timorous and lukewarm persons may decline their
duty, there are others that are more justly afraid of being necessary to their
guilt by concealing it and conniving at it.

Upon the whole, If now both Magistrates and private persons would but heartily
join their Endeavors; the latter by faithfully giving, and the former by
prudent encouraging and countenancing Informations, We may hope to see these
crying Impietys of the Age effectually suppress't, that have been so long the
scandal and bane of our holy Religion, and the fruitful source of our public
Calamity's. Whereas if Magistrates discourage and frown upon Informers, and
their Zeal decline in giving Evidence against Offenders, we may justly fear
these heinous provocations will revive, and rise to as desperate a height as
ever, and in despite of the Law reign as uncontrol'd as before. And what can we
reasonably conclude from thence, but that such renewed profanation of the holy
Name and defiance of the terrible Justice of Almighty God, will draw down
heavyer Judgments upon us then we have yet felt. For the Justice of God will
not always be out dared by the Wickedness of Men. But if they are incorrigible
in Sinning, he will be inexorable in Punishing. For (to apply to our selves the
remarkable words of that pious Reformer Ezra 9.13, 14.) If after all that is
come upon us for our evil deeds and our great trespass (wherein God has yet
punished us far less then our Iniquitys deserved) and after so glorious a
deliverance as this we should again break his commands. What could we look for
but that a righteous God would be angry with us, till he have consumed us, so
that there should be no remnant nor escaping. For in this case our public sins
would be attended, with two of the highest aggravations we can well conceive,
an Insolent Contempt of God's terrible Judgments, and the vilest ingratitude
for as remarkable Favors as were ever bestowed by Heaven upon an unworthy
People.

FINIS.

