THE EXPOSITION OF DIONYSIUS SYRUS; Written above 900 Years since on the
Evangelist St. Mark.

Translated by DUDLEY LOFTUS J. U. D. and one of the Masters of the High Court
of Chancery in IRELAND, Anno 1672.

WHEREWITH Are Bound up several other Tracts of the same Author, and an
ancient SYRIACK SCHOLIA on the Four Evangelists; As also some PERSIAN,
ARMENIAN, and GREEK Antiquities, Translated as aforesaid.

The Titles whereof are set down immediately after the Epistle to the READER,
with Reference to the several Pages where they are.

DVBLIN: Printed for Joseph Wild, Bookseller in Castle-street 1672.

TO THE Sacred Majesty OF CATHERINE OF PORTUGAL, Queen of England, Scotland,
France, and Ireland, and the many Dominions thereunto belonging.
MADAM,
IF Success, the Grand Patroness of bold Attempts, may prevail to justify or
conceal my presumption in this humble Address, by Your Majesty's favorable
acceptance, I shall then attain to the highest Elevation of ambition; if
otherwise, I shall own your Majesty's reprehension to be as just, as my
presumption is great; yet will I hope, that the drift of my sincere Intention
to serve Your Majesty, in promoting Your progress to that period, which You
most desire to attain; and the fame of so renowned an Author, as is Dionysius
Syrus, whose Interpreter I am, may intercede for pardon; which, if it shall be
denied in the Signature of Grace, I shall resort to that of Justice, and
therein exhibit my Plea, which is the Author's Merit, and the uncomputable
piety, and transcendent Learning of his Works; Comprehendiendo mucha sententia
en pocas palabras, or, mucho valor en poco peso; which (as by the Law of Mines)
the value appropriates unto Your Majesty as Sovereign in that kind, You having
as great a Reputation abroad in the Zeal of Religion, as You have at home in
the fame of an assiduous Devotion, You being not more glorious in the splendour
of Your Crown, than in the Eminency of Your Piety, for which reason, I humbly
conceive it as lawful to present You with this piece of the Author, as it
would be unlawful to detain from Your Majesty, what is Your own: however I
shall have reason to acknowledge my own failing, and to beg Your Majesty's
pardon; for by imparting so small a piece of the Author's Work, I may rather
set Your Majesty a longing, than give You satisfaction, which shall be the
Endeavor of my Soul, and the whole Retinue of Faculties thereunto belonging,
as being the most devoted of

Your Majesty's subjects And Faithful Servant, DUDLEY LOFTUS.

To the Indifferent READER.
IN the publication of this Treatise, I rely upon an higher Faith of Acceptance
than novelty or antiquity, though both of them are considerable persuasives,
and are found in the Author; who being distanced from us by a great interspace
of time and place, it being above 900 Years since he wrote: and he being now
first brought to light out of the Mist of a Syriack Manuscript into our
Language, affords many things observable, worthy to be Transcribed into the
Table Book of thy memory, relating as well to positive Points, as to
Scholastical Disquisitions in Theology. For amongst the many Tapers or rather
Flambeau's set up in the Oriental Church, and crowned with light for the
illustration of the Gospel, none carries a greater flame than this Dionysius,
to conduct thee without fear of misguidance into a rectified understanding of
Holy Scripture, or to show and confute the Errors of the ancient Heresiarchs;
for he is as a Celestin or a Cyril against Nestorius; as an Athanasius, a
Liberius, or an Hilarious against Arius; as a Gregory, a Bazil, or a Nazianzen
(who was termed Orientis lumen) against Macedonius. As there is nothing in
this Treatise which will offend an ind^fferent Reader; so most things in the
rest of his Works may be allowed of in his sense, both by Roman and English
Catholics: For I find him deciding those Controversies as fully, as clearly,
and with as much indifferency, as if they had been referred in terminis to his
Umpirage; and undoubtedly if most Controversies between them were referred to
the determination and genuine Expositions of disinterested Oriental Antiquity,
especially to the unsuspected Testimonies of Syriack Authors, as well those
Differences which gave occasion to Protestant and Roman Catholics to part one
from the other, as those others which have grown up in the progress of
Separation, might easily be reduced to such terms of Agreement, as to make them
mutually interrogate each other, (as Tiberius did his Soldiers) (...) What do
we contend for? It is certainly true, That we may rely upon the unsuspected
Testimony of the Holy Greek and Latin Fathers, who have been the great
Assertors and Patrons of Truth; yet the exuberancy of their Style (many times)
overflowing in Rhetorical and florid elocution of Metaphors, Allegories, and
Hyperboles, have made their expressions liable to various senses, which as they
were severally apprehended by different Readers, gave occasion for diverse
Opinions, which may be best reconciled by reading of Syriack Fathers, who
expound Scripture in the plainest terms without affectation of Style, or
flourishes of Oratory, and were not too much affected with litigious
speculations, (the late encumbrances of Christian Religion) and have not
derived their Doctrine from the source of any extremity of Opinion, but usually
give such a sense of the Ancients, as may give satisfaction to the indifferent
of both parties, whereof I shall hereafter give many Instances, over and above
what are contained in this Treatise, in my Notes upon the same Author, the
rest of whose Works I am now Translating into Latin, for the satisfaction and
more general advantage of all those, who by the advice of reason, are willing
to surrender themselves to the determination of sincere Antiquity, and are not
swayable in Religion by the dictates of Interest, nor conducted by reasons of
State to the determination of their Profession; for it is to no purpose, nor of
much import, to endeavor the reconciliation of those, who proportion the zeal
which they have for Religion, by the weights of reasons of State, or refined
products of Policy.

There is nothing in this Treatise, which favors the Saints of the Phanatick
Calendar, nor oppugneth the Catholic Religion; but it may be allowed without
any great stress, in the Principles either of Roman Catholocism, or English
Protestancy, and may easily be espoused to those, who are not precontracted to
prejudices and prepossessions of Education. It will be censured perhaps by the
Schismatical pride of those, who can never read ancient Authors with that
indifferency, which is requisite to frame a right judgment of them; for how
can they affect ancient Expositors, who are resolved to follow their own sense,
and to stand to no judgment but their own.

This Author Dionysius Syrus, is of an authentic reputation, being a
replenished Treasury of Christian Doctrine, affording Rules of Faith to measure
thy persuasion, and of conscience, to govern thy actions: and though the
Language wherein he wrote, hitherto interdicted him all communication with
those of our Horizon; yet it is the same which our Savior Christ honored with
his own lips, whilst he personally conversed with the World, and is in my
esteem one of the faithfullest Repositories, not only of ancient secrets, but
also of the most uncorrupted Truths.

That which may recommend him farther to thy approbation, is the brevitie of
his Exposition; for if that Coin be most to be prized, which is of greatest
value in the smaller pieces, then certainly a Commentary on Holy Writ, which
comprehends most matter in fewer words, does deserve most commendation.

The whole Contexture of the Author, seems to be the result of mature and
concocted thoughts, without wandering Riveries of a rambling Fantasy, or the
affectation of frivolous subtilties.

His Style savours rather of a studied plainness, than a negligent rudeness,
his Interpretations being so clear and chrystalline, as that thou may
thereby discern the true meaning of the Text, without torture to thy
understanding: and it is not my intention to furbish up an old Author, so long
hidden under the rubbish of Antiquity, with the brightness of a new style; for
nothing sits more forward in my inclination, than to speak the sense of the
Author plainly, without setting thereunto the Bias of affection, or
intermixing it with the muddie immersions of interest: and if the plainness of
my language be a fault, I had rather confess it than deny it; for my intentions
are free from all other ends, than a clear Representation of the Author,
abstracting from all interests and relative considerations, endeavoring to
adjust my words by a true Translation to the Author's meaning, and thereby
render a sincere testimony to Truth, and do right to my Author, without
omission of entire clauses, or the alteration of single words; for Translations
of Books are like Rituals, where an Alteration is worse than an Omission.

True it is, That to Translate is but a painful office under another man; Yet I
am not of their opinion, who think that an exact conformity to the words of
another is too great a token of slaverie, but do esteem it the honor of a
Translator: for as it is my custom to speak sincerely and boldly, according to
the dictates of my understanding: so in Translating, I esteem it my duty to
rehearse the perfect sense of my Author in its native sincerity: For, a
Translator ought not to imitate the Painters of Angels, who rather intend
beauty than similitude, and regard more the Symmetries of a fair imagination,
than the aspect and proportion of Truth; nor ought he to transfer the plain
words of an Author into the aires of humane elegancy, for he has not the
liberty to design a new Fancy, but to draw a new Copy; and therefore excesses,
which argue skill in a Poet, do convince a Translator, as well as a Painter, of
ignorance; or that which is worse, and do not agree with the Function of a
sincere Translator.

The variety of the Author in this and the rest of his Works, are sufficient
to lead the Reader into a large field of Contemplation; for, Observations are
not here found, like so many Daizes, in a bare Common, here and there one; but
in such abundance as may serve to satisfy the appetite of a curious Reader
with profitable instructions; and were it not for the discovery of profitable
Truths, I should not think it worth the labor of a serious man, to study the
Oriental Languages: For, to Translate out of one Language into another, useless
or common notions, were no better an employment, than what Priors, Prefects,
and Guardians of Convents impose on their Subjects (viz.) to scrape pebbles,
and to fill bottomless vessels.

This Dionysius Syrus was neither the Areopagite, nor Dionysius exiguus, so
famous for the computation of the Christian Era, nor Dionysius Alexandrinus;
for, the Authors whom he quotes, bring him so low down in the series of Time,
that he could not have been so much as a Contemporary with any of them,
especially the first and the last named. For, Dionysius Alexandrinus was
contemporary with St. Cyprian, who lived about the middle of the Third Century;
and our Dionysius cites St. Severus, who lived about the Year 649.

It is certain, That he flourished before 1058. of the Grecian account, which
was not that, whereby either the Egyptians, or the Armenians measure their
Calculation of time; For, the Era Copti, which is commonly termed the
Diocletian, is counted ab eo tempore quo Copton, celebrem urbem, Diocletianus
solo aequavit: And therefore according to a rectified collation of time,
falls short of our account 280 Years; for, the Fifth of their Era was the
285 of ours: And the computation of the Armenian Era, falls short of our
computation of the number of Years from our Savior's Birth, 551 Years; but the
Grecian account falls short of ours about 310 or 320 Years: So that this
Treatise of our Dionysius, being Dated the Year 1058 of the Greeks; it follows
by the subduction of 310 Years out of 1058, that he flourished before the Year
784. For, in this Volume, wherein is contained his Exposition of St. Mark, and
the other Three Evangelists, he mentions several Treatises written by him,
(viz.) his Exposition on the Old Testament, and on the Epistles of the New, and
several other Treatises, as you may see in his Exposition on Matthew 27, and
Mark 7.

This Author is considerable in himself, as also in regard of those ancient
Authors he quotes, as well Grecian as Syrian Fathers and Doctors. I shall not
need to say any thing concerning the Greek Fathers, whose authority is
conspicuous enough; yet it will not be amiss to speak a word of some of those
Syriack Fathers and Doctors, of whom he makes most use of in his Works, such as
is Ephraim Syrus, Moses Bar. Cepha, St. Severus, St. Philoxenus Mabugensis, and
Jacobus Sarugensis.

St. Ephraim lived about the Year 365; and St. Hierom in his Book De Script.
Eccl. speaking of his works, says, In Ecclesiis post Lectionem Scripturarum
public legi solebant. I shall not need to enlarge my self in his commendation;
For Amphilochus in the life of St. Bazil, Photius in his Bibliotheca; as also
Nicephorus in his History highly commend him: And Gregorius Nyssenus describes
his Life, with a very large effusion of his Praises. And Gerardus Vossius says
of him, Is fuit quem clara Mesopotamia produxit, Graecia excepit, and tota
antiquitas venerata est. And no wonder, for he was admired by Basilius magnus
Archbishop of Cesarea; the reason wherefore, is set down by Photins in these
words;(...)

Johannes Darensis was an Archbishop in Syria; and as the modern Syrians say,
He was a Disciple of Saint Ephraim; and according to what is related by Abraham
Ekelensis, He lived in the Fourth Century after Christ, though Morinus seems to
argue to the contrary. But it is certain, That he has wrote many profitable
things, and particularly on Dionysius the Areopagite concerning the Angels and
h^eir Hierarchy.

As touching Severus, whom (so far as I can gather from deliberate conjecture)
I take to be Severus Alexandrinus. Genebrard in his Chronography, reduces his
Prelacy in that Church, to the Year of our Lord 646, though others, upon a more
exact Chronography of Ecclesiastical Annals, make him to have lived after Peter
Patriarch of Alexandria, who governed in that See Ten Years, and succeeded
Cyrus, who died An. 640. according to the Chronology of Nicephorus, he wrote in
the Syriack Language. Some would make this Severus an Eutichian Heretic,
mistaking him for Severus Antiochenus, of whom Nicephorus writes thus;
Doctrinam hic tuebatur Entichis de confusis duabus naturis in Christo. And upon
this mistake perhaps, the Translator of Severus, in the Bibliotheca Patrum,
gives the name of Alexandrinus to the other, which the Original does not. Our
Severus is termed among his Countrymen, (...) Severus the mouth of all the
Doctors; which could not have been his Attribute, had he been an Eutichian; for
the Heresy of Eutiches was never more vigorously, nor with more reason
oppugned, than by Dionysius, and other Doctors of that Nation, as appears by
many passages of his, and of theirs, in his Exposition on the Four Gospels.
This Severus is celebrated as for many other Tracts, so also for his (...),
often quoted by Dionysius Syrus, and Bar Cepha.

He has several Sermons bound up, with the Sermons of other Authors in a
Syriack Manuscript, now remaining in Trinity College Library in Dublin,
wherein I find this Passage, worthy to be inserted.

(...): i. e. Christ, for an Establishment, placed the Holy Apostles, First, in
the Holy Church; but afterward, that happiness might abound, and be
propagated, they ordained to every Order and Degree therein, those, who from
them, and by their hands received Deduction, conferring on the Bishops those
things which did belong to the High Priests, and to Presbyters those things
which were peculiar to the Priests, and to the Deacons, those things which were
peculiar to their Administration, to the intent that those things which did
appertain to the Priestly Function, might be decently performed according to
the consonancy and requisition of Administrations. Whence it appears, That
Bishops are the Apostles Successors, and at least of Apostolic institution.
And that they are of a different Order from Presbyters, and that there is a
perpetual succession; and it seems also hereby, That there are no more Orders
in the Church of Apostolic institution, than those of Bishop, Priest, and
Deacon, and that there is subordination of Orders in the Church, according to
that of Tim. 3.13. For they, who have used the Office of a Deacon well,
purchase to themselves a good Degree. That is to say, a greater Degree. For
though the Greek there uses the Positive Degree, (...) as also several ancient
Versions; Yet, I concieve, it is to be taken in a comparative sense, by way of
Enallagie, of the Positive, For the Comparative, according to that of Mat.
18.8. Bonum tibi est ingredi in vitam claudum, quam duas manus, etc. And Mark
14.21. (...), Good were it for that man that he had never been born, i. e.
better, in which sense it is taken by the Aethiopick Translator in that place,
(viz.) 1 Timothy 3.13. (...). They who minister well, purchase to themselves a
greater imposition, (viz.) of hands of the Bishop; For 1 Timothy 4. v. 4. The
Aethiopick expressly explains who had the power of laying on of hands in these
very words, (...) Laying on the hands of Bishops. But that I may not proceed
too far in digression, I must return to the File of my former Discourse, and in
the next place speak of Bar Cepha.

Bar Cepha seems to have been contemporary with Severus, or to have lived
within a very short time after him; for he wrote before the Year 700, and cites
Severus. Bellarmine takes notice, That this Bar Cepha quotes Athanasius, Cyril,
and Chrysostom, sine splendida ulla verborum praefatione. But he would not have
laid any particular blame on him for that reason, had he known or considered,
That both Dionysius Syrus, and other Syriack Authors, use the same plainness
in naming the best of Greek and Syriack Fathers, without the addition of any
Title of Honor.

I have no more to say of Philoxenus Mabugensis, than that he was a Bishop, and
that his authority is often made use of by Dionysius Syrus, and that he is
quoted by Moses Bar Cepha. 1 par. cap. 20.

As to Jacobus Sarugensis, I shall say no more here, than what I have spoken of
the aforementioned Philoxenus, I intending to prefix a large Discourse of the
abovenamed, and many other Authors quoted by our Dionysius, to the Latin
Edition of his Exposition on the Four Gospels.

As to the Book out of which I have Translated this Treatise of Dionysius on
St, Mark, and other passages of the same Author herewith published, take
notice (Reader) That it is a fair Manuscript, which the most learned and
renowned Vsserius, late Lord Archbishop of Armagh, and Primate of all Ireland,
purchased chased for a great sum of Money, together with the Samaritan
Pentateuch, and other Syriack Manuscripts at Antiech, the which he caused to be
transported thence into Ireland, Forty Years fince, or thereabouts, and now
belongs to the Library of Trinity College in the University of Dublin, which
together with other loose Flowers, I thought fit to bind up in this Nosegay,
which I here present to thy acceptance, in their Native sincerity, without any
extrinsick blemish of a forced or a corrupt Translation, hoping that thou will
improve such Truths as are therein contained, and have been so long smothered
in an unknown Tongue, as a help or furtherance to use and advantage; which that
thou may do, (...) God be thy help.

The several Titles of Syriack, Armenian, Persian, and Greek Treatises, annexed
to the Exposition of Dionysius Syrus on St. MARK.
Dionysius Syrus his Exposition on the Ten Beatitudes, pronounced in the Fifth
chapter of Saint Matthew, etc. Page 63 Dionysius his Exposition on the
Prophecy of Zacharias Page 77 The Exposition of Dionysius Syrus on the
Magnificat Page 81 Dionysius his Exposition on Simeon's Nunc dimittas, his
Benediction, and his Prophecy. Page 85 Dionysius Syrus his Exposition on the
Ave Maria Page 89 An Exposition of the Lords Prayer, taken out of Dionysius
Syrus his Catena, on the sixth chapter of St. Matthew Page 91 The Form of
Prayer which our Savior made after his Baptism when the Heavens were opened,
as it is delivered by Dionysius Syrus, according to the Testimony of St.
Philoxenus Page 97 Dionysius Syrus his Question and Answer concerning the Form
of Prayer which John the Baptist taught his Disciples Page 99 Gregorius the
Syriack Scholiast, called (...) on the Four Gospels Page 101 Mark chap. I. The
beginning of the Gospel of Jesus Christ Luke chap. I. Page 137 Johannis chap.
I. The Word was made flesh, and dwelt in us. Page 149 The Syriack Scholiast his
Reconciliation of St. Paul and James, touching Justification Page 159 The
Genealogy of Melchizedeck Page 160 The Position of the Syriack Scholiast,
dogmatically declaring, That the sin of a High Priest, is greater than a sin of
the same kind, committed either by Prince or people, by him expressed in the
Fourth chapter of Levit. ver. 3. Page 161 The Opinion of Gregorius Syrus
concerning the Suns going retrograde ten degrees Page 162 Gregorius Syrus his
Explication of the nature of Jephthah's Vow Page 163 Gregorius Syrus concerning
Gideon's soldiers lapping the Water Page 164 The Letter of Abgarus King of
Edessa, to our Savior Christ Page 165 The Answer of Christ to the Letter of
Abgarus ibid. Pilate to Tiberius Caesar concerning Christ Page 166 Lentulus
President of Jerusalem, to the Senate and people of Rome, Greeting Page 168
Dionysius Syrus his Opinion concerning the Nature of the sin against the Holy
Ghost Page 169 Dionysius Syrus concerning Free Will, in his Exposition on the
Eighteenth chapter of Matthew, ver. 7. Page 172 Dionysius Syrus concerning the
Woman that had six husbands, John 4. Page 175 Dionysius Syrus concerning
Herod's taking his Brothers Wife Page 177 Dionysius Syrus his Exposition on the
withering of the Fig Tree Page 180 Dionysius Syrus his Exposition, declaring
sundry opinions concerning John the Baptists eating of Locusts and Honey Page
183 Dionysius Syrus concerning the darkness over the earth, when our Savior
was crucified, mentioned Matthew 27 Page 185 Dionysius concerning the Majesty
of Christ Page 187 Dionysius Syrus his Description of the Roman Government in
Judea Page 189 Dionysius Syrus his Evposition concerning the Tax made by
Augustus Page 191 Introductio Dionysii Syri in Expositionem suam Quatuor
Evangelistarum. Page 193
ERRATA.
Page 68. line 28. Land for Lord. Page 158. line 2. deference for difference.
Page 182. line 2. branches for pranches.
CHAP. I.
SInce that we have finished our Treatise upon Matthew the Apostle at large,
and therein have gathered together in Writing much of the meaning of the rest
of his Fellow Evangelists: In such passages whetein they agree, we are to
proceed to the Exposition of St. Mark; and such Expositions as you shall not
find on him, you may be furnished with, out of what we have written on St.
Matthew. Let us therefore apply our selves to the occasion of the Book, having
confidence in God, who is gracious, and his mercies endure for eve^; and is
also able to furnish us with strength and words, that we shall be able to
finish this Enterprise.

THE EXPOSITION OF Dionysius Syrus, alias Jacobus Exiguus, UPON THE Gospel of
St. Mark, TRANSLATED BY DUDLEY LOFTUS, J.U.D.
Through Confidence in God, the Lord of all the World, assisting and
strengthening us, We proceed to render the sense and meaning of the Evangelist
St. Mark.

THE EXPOSITION OF Dionysius Syrus, alias Jacobus Exiguus, UPON THE Gospel of
St. Mark, TRANSLATED BY DUDLEY LOFTUS, J.V.D.
Through Confidence in God, the Lord of all the World, assisting and
strengthening us, We proceed to render the sense and meaning of the Evangelist
Saint Mark.

CHAP. I.
SInce that we have finished our Treatise upon Matthew the Apostle at large,
and therein have gathered together in Writing much of the meaning of the rest
of his Fellow Evangelists: In such passages wherein they agree, we are to
proceed to the Exposition of St. Mark; and such Expositions as you shall not
find on him, you may be furnished with, out of what we have written on St.
Matthew. Let us therefore apply our selves to the occasion of the Book, having
confidence in God, who is gracious, and his mercies endure for ever; and is
also able to furnish us with strength and words, that we shall be able to
finish this Enterprise.

CHAP. II. The proper Occasion of the Book.
BLessed Mark was he, of whom it is written in the Acts of the Apostles, John,
who was surnamed Mark: It was he, who once adhered unto Paul and Barnabas, when
they Preached unto the Gentiles; He was of the College of the Seventy two, and
a Disciple of St. Peter. He wrote his Gospel in the Roman Tongue at Rome, he
wrote it briefly; not but that he had enough to have written at large, but that
he had two Reasons to contract himself. First, He knew that the Romans were
desirous to have received the Gospel from St. Peter. The second Reason was,
That he might imitate his Master St. Peter, who wrote his Epistles concisely,
in few and apt words; for the Romans besought St. Peter, That he would deliver
in Writing the Gospel which he had Preached by word of mouth concerning those
things which our Lord had done; and he gave command unto Mark his Disciple, to
commit the same to Writing, and the occasion of the Narrative was thus:

Because Shimeon had detected Simon the Sorcerer in Samaria, he betook himself
by flight unto Rome in the days of Claudius Caesar; and by means of Sorcerie,
and some appearances of Fancy which he presented, he became famous amongst the
Romans; insomuch, that they erected an Image for him, as if he had been a God,
on the brink of the River which is called Tyber (because King Tyberinus was
drowned therein) and another for his Curtezan, whose name was Sahelina, and in
former times had been a common Strumpet in Tire. When Shimeon had heard of this
Seduction, he went to Rome to detect Simon; on a certain day, Simon by his
Sorcerie made show of raising a dead man, which was only by delusion of the
fancy; but Peter restored him to life in very deed, in the Name of Christ. The
Romans then seeing the matter to be thus, rose up against Simon, with intention
to stone him: Whereupon, he being enraged with anger, said unto them, Since
that you have not approved of me, I will go to my Father who is in Heaven; and
by his Sorcery made show, as if a fiery Chariot had snatched him up aloft: And
after he had mounted higher than all the sublime Buildings of Rome, Peter then
took courage, and interdicted the Devils, who bore him up, and made the sign of
the Cross in their sight, and immediately they forsook him, and fled, and he
fell on the earth, and dyed. Which being observed by the Romans, they glorified
God, and straightway gathered up a heap of stones against Simon: And Peter
instructed them, and built a Church, which he governed for a long time; and
when the Romans understood that Peter was disposed to depart thence, and to
Preach the Gospel elsewhere, they used persuasions to him, That he should write
a Gospel for them; which he did not do, for two Reasons: First, Because he
could not attend it; for he was the prime Preacher, and desired to Preach unto
the Jews and Gentiles. Secondly, Lest the Faithful should forsake the other
three Gospels, and adhere to his only, as being the Chief and Primate of all
the rest. Moreover, He did not hold himself worthy to write a Gospel, because
of his denial, and therefore he persuaded Mark, and he wrote; and whatsoever he
delivered by word of mouth, his Disciple wrote; and because Matthew had spoken
of the Genealogy of Christ, and his Generation, according to the Flesh, he took
his beginning from his Baptism.

Others speak of another occasion: Tatianus a Disciple of Justinus the
Philosopher and Martyr, made a Collection out of the Four Evangelists, and
thereof made and composed a Gospel, and called it a Diateseron, that is of
harmonies; and it was this Book which Prince Ephraim expounded, it begins thus,
In the beginning was the Word. Clemens Romanus wrote in his great Epistle
against those who contemned Marriage; for that married men being ordained
Apostles, they observed Chastity after they were made Disciples: as also Moses
and others, who after they were thought worthy of Divine Revelations, abstained
from the Marriage bed: Says Clemens, Do they also despise the Apostles? for
Peter and Philip begat children, and Paul himself made no scruple to salute
the Daughter of his marriage in an Epistle; but he did not lead her about with
him, by reason of the modesty of his Ministry. Whereas it is written in the
Acts of the Apostles, That after Peter was freed from Prison by an Angel, he
came to the house of Mary the Mother of John, who was surnamed Mark; it is
said, that this Mary was the wife of Shimeon, and that Mark was his Son, and
that the young Maiden Roda, who opened unto him, was his Daughter; and Peter
makes mention of her in his first Epistle which he wrote from Rome, describing
her under a figure, whilst he calls her Babel, by reason of her excellency and
renown; The chosen Church which is in Babel saluteth you, and Mark my son.
Peter, after he was delivered out of Prison, went to Antioch, and in the same
Year built a Church there, and gave command to worship toward the East; and
taught, that on the first day of the Week our Lord proceeded from his Mothers
womb, and on the same day was the Resurrection: And after two Years, he heard
of the error of Simon, and placed Evodius Bishop in Antioch, as his Successor,
and this Bishop governed Twenty five Years; but Peter went up to Rome, by
occasion of Simon: This Simon was by Nation a Samaritan, of the Town called
Gathnin; he was named Shimeon, but Peter changed his name, and called him
Simon. And when Peter entered into Rome, he found a Dog at the gate of Simons
house, and said unto him, Go in, signify unto Simon that Shimeon is come to
the gate. Again, Simon spoke in the Ear of an Ox, and it was parted in two;
but Peter revived it. Moreover, some of his followers desired him to work some
sign in the fight of Shimeon, and it so fell out, that they met with a certain
dead man, the son of Cyprianus, one of the Magistrates of the City, and Simon
approached the Bier whereon he was carried, and spoke many things aloud, and
with a low voice, but the dead man was not raised; yet Peter immediately drew
nigh, and cried with a loud voice, and said in the Name of Jesus Christ who
has been crucified, Arise from the Bier; and with these words, the dead man
was restored to life: Whereupon, the Romans rose up to stone Simon; and when he
made show as if he were ascending into Heaven, Peter rebuked the Devils, and
they forsook him, so that he fell down and dyed, as we said in the first
occasion. And when Peter had governed the Church of Rome for the space of
Twenty five Years, Nero commanded that he should be crucified with his Head
downwards; he established Bishop in his place Elius, whom the Apostle
mentions in his second Epistle to Timothy; and after him, succeeded Clemens
for Nine Years: And near the time that Peter was to be crucified, the Romans
urged him by many persuasions, That he would write a Gospel unto them; but he
did not incline to their persuasion, lest that the Gospel of Matthew being
already written, it should be thought it had been displeasing to Peter, had he
written another, but he persuaded Mark to write unto them the deeds of our
Lord, his Objections and Replies; whereof he omitted many, and chiefly took
care with much diligence to write those things which concerned Peter's denial,
and it is possible, that Peter himself excited his diligence in that
particular; and because Simon had Preached there, that our Lord had not assumed
a Body, he therefore took care to write of such things as concerned his
Humanity: And after Mark wrote a Gospel in Rome, he immediately went to Egypt,
and Preached there, and Established a Church in Alexandria, Mark therefore is
settled in a SEE. We are further to know, That there were Evangelists of the
Twelve, and of the Seventy and two, according to the number of the Apostles and
Evangelists; but after the Apostles departed this life, their Disciples
carefully examined them, and chose out of them four Gospels, which the Church
retained, because they observed them to be agreeable and true; and finally,
because they were willing to prohibit men from using multiplicity of Books:
because they agreed in the same mind, they ordered the Apostles to begin and
end, as the top and foundation; the other Evangelists they placed in the
middle, to the intent they might honor the Seventy and two. They took Two
Evangelists out of the Twelve, and Two out of the Seventy and two: Others say,
that this Inquisition, or Examination, was made in the days of the Apostles,
and that they chose two Gospels of their own, and two of the Seventy and two,
which they ordained to be read in the Church.

CHAP. III.
WHerefore did not Mark write the Acts of Christ one after another, as did
Luke? We say, That St. Mark did not write those things that were first done, in
the first place, nor every thing as they succeeded one to another; but after
the example of Matthew, observing that order wherein they seemed to adhere one
to another, whether they were words or actions; to the intent, that so far as
it was possible, there might be found an harmony and agreement between them,
but not so as to be an exact History of things done, but Doctrine useful to
Religion: He did not write concerning Genealogies, because he observed they
were sufficiently Treated of by Matthew.

CHAP. IV.
THere are in Mark Six Parables and Similitudes, Twenty and two Miracles, and
Sixteen Testimonies, which he produced in confirmation of what he said.

MARK, Chap. I. The Beginning of the Gospel of Jesus Christ.
THE beginning of the Gospel was Baptism: Moreover, Basilius and Philoxenus say
thus, That St. Mark first used the word Evangelium, or Gospel; and that Baptism
was the beginning of the Gospel. Others say, That the beginning of the
Evangelium, which is good Tidings, is the Baptism of Christ, as blessed Mark
says; and inasmuch as he says, The Beginning of the Gospel, he shows, that
he was the first that gave the name of Evangelium to a Book. Moreover,
forasmuch as Evangelium, or Gospel, is by interpretation good Tidings, and
Christ, before his Baptism, did neither Preach nor Evangelize; but after he was
Baptized and Tempted, he immediately Preached, Repent, the Kingdom is at hand,
as Matthew and Mark have written. Moreover, from his Birth to his Baptism, he
was governed by the Law, and from his Baptism by such a new Administration as
comported with the New Testament. Again, before his Baptism, he performed no
Miracle, nor delivered any Doctrine, otherwise than by Question and Answer in
the Temple, when he was Twelve years old, as Luke says. Moreover, those things
which were from his Birth to his Baptism, are not to be reputed as of the
Gospel, though they have relation thereunto, and are compiled therewith, that
we might be taught after what manner were his Conception and Birth: Nor were it
possible that we should be capable of receiving the Doctrine of the Gospel, if
we had not first learned where and how he was born; whereas in those Years,
from his Birth, to his being Thirty Years of Age, he satisfied the Obligation
of the Law of Nature, and the written Law; then he applied himself to frame a
Module of a new World in his Baptism, and to Preach the Gospel of the Kingdom
of God. And forasmuch as Mark knew that Baptism was the Beginning of the
Gospel, and that our Lord thence took his Commencement in the new
Administration, he wrote in the beginning of his Book thus, The Beginning of
the Gospel. And if it shall be Objected, Wherefore did the other Evangelists
begin higher than his Baptism? It is plain that Matthew wrote so, that he might
make it appear unto the Hebrews to whom he wrote, That as the Prophets had
before written, that Christ should spring from the Lineage of David, so he did
then spring thence; and Luke, that he might bring them into Contempt who
unskilfully undertook to write the Histories of deeds, and John, that he might
write concerning the Divinity of Christ, for that the other three omitted it,
lest it should be concealed, and Christ be reputed but a mere man; for these
three causes, they took their rise so high, and not for that his Conception,
his Birth, his Circumcision, etc. were of the Gospel.

The Son of God. He calls Jesus Christ the Son of God, and not the Son of
Grace, as say the Nestorians, for we are the sons of grace; and that Mark does
not here call Jesus Christ the Son of Grace, but the Natural Son of God, is
evident from that which the Apostle said to the Philippians in an Epistle, Let
this mind be in your selves which was also in Christ Jesus, who being the
likeness, thought it not robbery to be equal with God, but evacuated himself of
reputation, and assumed the likeness of a servant, and was made in the likeness
of the sons of men, and in fashion was found as man, and humbled himself, and
became obedient even to death, even the death of the Cross; wherefore God has
exceedingly exalted him, and given him a Name more excellent than all names,
That at the Name of Jesus every knee should how, etc. Let the Nestorians and
Calcedonians be demanded, Who is he who so evacuated himself, and assumed the
likeness of a servant, Man, or the word God? Divine Nature, or Nature Humane?
for Man and Humane Nature, were already evacuated, and servants, wherefore this
is the sense of the words, that the word God evacuated himself; and observe,
that the word God, who evacuated himself, and assumed the likeness of a
servant, does he call Jesus Christ, and to him is attributed Subjection,
Obedience, and Death, and the Cross, and to him is attributed Exaltation, and
the giving of the Name of God, which is more excellent than all Names. And
forasmuch as the Apostle said concerning the word God, that he evacuated
himself, these are evident Demonstrations,

First, That he being God, by Nature was incarnate, and made Man of his own
will, without being changed from being God.

Secondly, That being equal in Nature with the Holy Ghost and Giver thereof,
and having a natural Holiness, he took upon him to be anointed and sanctified
by the Holy Ghost as he was Man; for being made Man, he suffered natural and
animal Passions, but not culpable; Hunger and Thirst, Sleep and Death, did he
taste for us: And,

Thirdly, That being called by eminent and exalted Names, to wit, Lord and God,
and Omnipotent, and other the like; so that whatsoever he had, did as naturally
belong unto him, as to the Father, and the Holy Ghost, as having life of his
own nature, having power over all things, and having glory due unto him from
all things, yet it is said, That it was given him of the Father, and that he
received it from the Father. And this moreover, for that he was evacuated, and
made man. And these were Demonstrations of his Exinanition, that he vouchsafed
to be called by humble and inferior names, as of Man, Son of Man, and a Stone.
Moreover, it is certain, That the word God, who was the natural Son of God the
Father, is called Christ, and not the Son of man, who was of Mary; for David
says, That thy Throne, O God (is) for ever and ever; a right Scepter is the
Scepter of thy Kingdom; thou have loved righteousness, and hated iniquity;
wherefore God, thy God, has anointed thee with the oil of gladness above thy
fellows. It is therefore clearly understood, that he whom he calls God, and of
whom he says, Thy Throne, O God, for ever, is the same whom God the Father
anointed, and not the Son of Man, who was of Mary. Furthermore, forasmuch as he
says, That he anointed him above his fellows; that is to say, more than all
they who were anointed by the Holy Ghost, because they stood in need of
anointing, and were anointed by the Holy Ghost; but the word God was anointed,
and sanctified by the Holy Ghost, not being in want thereof, because he was
equal with the Holy Ghost, and had a natural Holiness, and was full, as St.
John says, of his fullness have we all received; but because he was made man,
he received the Spirit, and his anointing, and his holiness, that by his
Mediation he might give us the Spirit to anoint and sanctify us, for that this
word was anointed and sanctified by the Spirit, because he was sent into the
World, and was made man, is manifest from that which he says of himself, Say
ye of him whom the Father has sanctified, and sent into the world, thou
blasphemest? because I said unto you that I am the Son of God; for it is
certain, that he who was sent from God the Father into the world, was God the
word; and he who was sent, was sanctified by the Spirit; that the word God is
called Christ, because he was made man, St. Paul says, But to us there is one
God, the Father of whom (are) all things; and one Lord Jesus Christ, by whom
(are) all things; and one Holy Ghost, in whom (are) all things. Moreover, he
says of Christ, that all things were made by his hands, by whose hands
therefore says Paul, that all things were created, whether by the hands of the
Son of man, who was begotten of Mary, or by the hands of the word God, as John
says, All things were made by him; and the same word, by whom all things have
been created, does Paul call Jesus Christ. It is evident therefore from these
premises, that Mark calls the Natural Son of God the Father, who was
incarnated, and made man, by the Name of Christ, and not the Son of man, who
was born of Mary, who was the Son of Grace, as say the Heretics:

As it is written in Isaiah the Prophet, behold, I send my Angel: That is to
say, he produces this Testimony, to prove, That the Beginning of the Gospel,
is the Baptism of Christ; for this Allegation, Behold, I send my Angel, is
written in Malachi, and not in Isaiah; but others say, that it was also written
in Isaiah, and that it is lost: Others say, That this Gospel was Translated out
of the Roman Language into the Greek, and out of the Greek into the Syriack,
and that the Interpreters mistake put Isaiah in the place of Malachi. Others,
That in the Book of Diateseron, which is preserved in Alexandria, and was
written by Tatianus the Bishop; as also in the Greek Gospel and the Harkalian,
it is written in the Prophet, without expressing what Prophet. Others say, that
this Quotation has reference to the voice of one crying in the wilderness,
Prepare ye the way of the Lord, make his paths strait; for Isaiah speaks after
that manner, but not to this, Behold, I send my Angel; for the Evangelist was
not curious as to the exactness of his Narrative, according to the custom of a
Book wherein a Subject is Treated of at large, but wrote after an ordinary
manner, according as other Divine Writers have done after this sort, all the
people saw the Voices and the Lightnings; whereas it is known, that Voices
cannot fall under the sense of sight. Again, a Bullock or a Lamb, whose Ear is
cleft, or wants a Tail, whereas a Bullock has no Tail: In like manner, it is
said, My hand kissed my mouth; whereas the mouth did kiss, and not the hand. So
Mark sets down that of Isaiah, then this, I send my Angel; and after this, The
voice of one crying; not distinguishing, to which of the two sayings he
referred the Quotation out of Isaiah.

The voice of one crying: Wherefore is John called a voice? because Christ is
called the word, and a word without a voice or writing, is not known; therefore
very aptly is John called a voice, because with his voice was Preached the
only Word.

Prepare the way of the Lord. The way and path, he calls the coming of Christ,
Prepare your minds and thoughts against the coming of Christ.

John was in the wilderness. He calls the Wilderness, the desolate passage from
Earth to Heaven. By Baptising and Preaching, he signified that the destruction
of Mortality was to be destroyed. By his clothing of Hair, he signified
Repentance. By the Girdle about his Loins, and the Band upon his Bowels, he
denotes the sensitive and intellectual Faculties, and Continency from an
exorbitant Appetite, which in Prosperity is exuberant. By the winged Locusts,
the seed of the Just to meet the Lord. By the sweetness of Honey, the sweetness
of the Blessings which come from our Lord, of higher value than Jewels.
Moreover, Honey signifies the purging of the World from the rust of sin, for
Honey is of a cleansing Nature.

(...) The Region of Judaea. That is to say, a place of Towns or Villages. The
Garment of Camels Hair, signifies the meanness of his Apparel, and his
Poverty; for he was not clothed with Wool, but with course Hair.

The time is accomplished, and the Kingdom is at hand. That is to say, the time
of the shadows of the Law, and the fulfilling of Mysteries and Types is at
hand; the Kingdom of God he ealls here, the Gospel and Grace.

A certain man with an unclean spirit. He calls the Devil unclean, by reason of
the unclean deeds he frequently acted by him in whom he dwelt.

Art thou come to destroy us? He hints two things: First, Their fear of our
Lord which possessed them from the victory had against them in the Wilderness.
Secondly, Their wickedness, in respect that the delivery of that man out of
their power who was their Captive, was reputed their loss.

I know thee who thou art, the Holy One of God. He speaks unto him as unto a
holy man, and not as persuaded that he was God.

And when they had found him, they said unto him, all men seek thee. This
saying all in this place, is like to this. Jesus looked upon her with all the
Earth, and all the Nations round about me, and all they who came were Thieves
and Robbers.

See thou say nothing to any man. He prohibited them who were cured, to publish
the same, lest he might be suppressed by the Jews as a vainglorious person,
for he knew that the Miracles which he did were not to be concealed. When he
performed Miracles before the multitude, he gave no command that they should
not publish them, as in Kotna, and when he multiplied the bread; but as
touching the matter of Lazarus, he forbade his own followers to publish it, as
he did also concerning this Leprous man, the Paralytick, and the blind men. And
we say, that among the Multitudes, he openly wrought Miracles, to the intent
that he might draw them to faith in him, and did not praerequire from them
faith in him, as he did amongst his own followers; for when he changed Water
into Wine, he did not first of all take the Suffrages of the company to
acknowledge whether he were able to do it or no, as he did in the case of the
Leprous person, the Paralitick and the blind men, whom he did not cure, until
they had confessed that he was God.

As Moses commanded for a testimony unto them. He commanded the Leprous person
to offer an Oblation, that he might manifest the agreement of both Testaments.
Secondly, That he might show that there was one giver of them both, although
the first was the Doctrine of Babes, and ours of Perfection. Thirdly, That he
might declare, that this of God was not contrary to that of the Law, so that
they needed not to suppress this for the other.

CHAP. II.
THey lifted up the Roof. By Art they found out a way to lift up the Roof of
the House, and easily to let down the Bed in such manner, that neither the
Timber nor Dust might fall upon them, as many in these days have the cunning
to do the same.

A new piece of Cloth. That is to say, the new Doctrine of the Gospel. An old
Garment, the old Doctrine of the Law. New Wine, the Truth of the Gospel. A new
Garment, and new Bottles, are those who receive the Gospel. Old Wine, the
Doctrine of the Law, and their Traditions. And the old Garments, and the old
Bottles, are the Scribes and Pharisees. By these things, he teaches and
declares, That it does not belong to the Preachers of the New Testament, to
minister to the things of the Law.

And the Disciples pulled the Ears of Corn. That is to say, they rubbed the
Ears, and did eat. The Pharisees accused our Lord for two causes; the first,
that it was the Sabbath day; the second, that the Law did not permit the eating
of any new increase, until an oblation were made at the Altar.

What David did when he was in need, and they who were with him, how he went
into the house of God. Because there was a great Testimony concerning David
that he was righteous, our Lord reproves them by his practice, showing that
David was not blamed; nor were his Disciples worthy of blame, for pulling the
Ears of Corn, being constrained by Hunger. He who took the Bread was righteous,
and he who gave it was a Priest, and he was not blamed, though it was not at
all lawful for him to eat thereof, but only for the Priests; therefore this
has been known of old, that the Commandments of the Law ought to be measured
by the exigency of nature, and he does naturally find out their parsimony.

Matthew. The Priests in the Temple dispensed with the Sabbath. That is to say,
by Sacrifices, and Sprinklings, and Incense, and Lights, all which did require
labor. Again, for that every day there was offered one Lamb in the Morning,
and another in the Evening; and on the Sabbath day two in the Morning, and two
in the Evening; and the Shewbread was Baked, and put upon the Table of
Shewbread.

Mark, when Abiathar was High Priest. In Samuel it is written, That Ahimelech
went and brought the bread to David. And Mark says, That Abiathar his son gave
(it.) Some say, That Ahimelech the High Priest did not go and bring it forth,
but that he commanded as the Senior, and Abiathar gave it into his hands; for
it would have been a shame for the High Priest to have performed such a
service, but he commanded his Son, and he went and brought it forth, after his
Father had required that he should exercise the Function of a Priest, and
therefore Mark mentions him. Others say, That there were two Highpriests, as
in the Genealogy of Ministers, Ahimelech and Abiathar, as Nadab and Abihu, and
Eliezer and Ithamar, and Hophni and Phineas. Others say, That as there were two
Brethren Abiah and Zachariah, so were Ahimelech and Abiathar his son.

CHAP. III.
ANd he imposed on them the name Beni Regesch, which Regesch is expounded by
the Hebrew, to be (...) Thunder, (...) That is to say, such as give the sense
of Divine knowledge unto men by their Preaching, which is heard plainly like
Thunder by every one; or the Sons of the Gospel are understood by (...) Also
our Lord is to make his last manifestation of himself in Lightning. Lightning
and Thunder have affinity one to the other, even as by the opening and breaking
of a Cloud, by reason of Exhalations therein imprisoned, much Rain happens; and
when the voices of Thunder, and Commotions of Earthquakes are heard, Fire
flashes from them, as sparks from the collision of Steel; so also is it here,
because our Lord is called Lightning, his Gospel is called Thunder, which
denounces good things to come. And James and John are called Beni Regesch,
viz. Sons of Thunder; that is to say, Sons of the Gospel, by reason of the
perfect love of the Gospel toward her Sons, whereby they are governed and
preserved, as Children by their Mother; and she also is honored by them, as a
Mother by her Children. Others say, That Regesch, by the voice Thunder and
Tumult, does denote many things. The Sons of Thunder, that is to say, Sons of
the Gospel. Others, Beni Regesch, (...) that is to say, for that they did all
perceive by Mysteries.

Which are the Sons of Thunder. That is to say, Ye who now perceive only in
Mysteries, when the Resurrection shall be from the Sepulcher, the time will
come, that your Words shall be Preached through the whole World, as with
Thunder.

And his Kindred heard, and came out to take him. He calls the Sons of Joseph
his Kindred, because they observed that he wrought mighty Works, and that the
Multitudes cried out against him, they were desirous to pacify them.

He is gone out of his mind. His Kindred had mean Thoughts of him as yet, that
peradventure he was vexed with a Devil, or else they used some craft, that they
might pacify the Wrath of those who were enraged against him, and that they
might keep him amongst themselves.

He has Beelzebub, and by the Prince of Devils does he cast out. Whence did
the Jews learn the name of Beelzebub, and that he was the Prince of Devils,
since that it is not written in Books, that he is the Prince of Devils? We say,
That they learned this from their familiarity with Devils, by reason they were
subjected unto them by Sorcery. They declared unto them the names of the Devils
whom they worshipped, and who was their Prince. Men say, That the Devil had not
gone out at any time, unless he had substituted another in his place, or unless
many had come and tormented him.

CHAP. IV.
ANd a Sower went out to sow. He calls himself by the name of Sower. By the
Seed, he means his Gospel.

The way side. He calls the obdurate Soul, which is not perfectly taken with
the fear of God.

The Fowl, i. e. the Devil.

He who has ears to hear. That is to say, They who have pure Thoughts, and do
determine of, and mind such Things as these, and not the Doctrine of the
Pharisees.

To you it is given to know the Mystery. That is to say, The Gospel which was
hid in Times past, and by which has been revealed the Resurrection and
Immortality, which he calls the Kingdom of God.

So is the Kingdom of God: As a man who casts seed on the ground. He calls
Earth, the Souls and Hearts of the Faithful, wherein he sowes the Gospel, as
also his Disciples after him.

And sleeps, and rises in the night. Night and day, he calls the time of his
Ascension, and last manifestation of him.

And the seed increases and grows. That is to say, The Gospel is magnified,
and flourishes. And observe, That he does not say that they do make it ^ise,
but that the Seed rises; thereby showing, that it is not by constraint, but by
the power that is placed in us, that virtuous dispositions do spring up in us
as Seeds which increase and shoot up. And in like manner, it is of our own
Will, that evil dispositions do spring up in us.

He knowing not how. It is not said of himself, that he did not know; For he is
the wisdom of the Father, as the Father knew him, so he knew the Father,
according to what he said. If therefore he knew the Father, as the Father, as
the Father knew him, how could he but know the Seeds growing and increasing? He
speaks therefore after the manner of Plow-men, for they having once cast the
Seed into the ground, they take no more pains about it, for it springs up and
increases: So we have it in the power of our own Will to increase in virtue.
Do ye also sow, and teach all men, and do not trouble your Thoughts about the
increase, more than the Plovv-man does; for it is God that brings the Seed to
perfection. Again, This of his knowing not, is thus to be understood, That the
Seed, without his further labor, arrives at perfection, by Divine power and
operation.

The Earth produces fruit of her self. As if a man should say, I have sowed
the Seed of the Gospel in men's Souls, and it ascends unto Heaven; it is of Men,
and of the power which is in them, that the fruits of Virtue may bud forth by
this Gospel.

First the blade, then the ear, and afterward the full Corn. So also, Men
first receive the Preaching of the Gospel, and afterward exercise Virtues, and
at last are promoted by their Virtue, to the highest pitch of excellency, and
arrive to the stature of the perfect. And it is thus said, because they do not
all in the same order rise in perfection, but first of all those few who are
subject to the Gospel, and then by degrees many, who all are to come to such
perfection, as that they may yield the fruits of Religion.

And immediately he brings the Sickle. Even as when the Corn is full ripe, it
is reaped and gathered into Barns; so also, Men when they arrive at the highest
pitch of Virtue, they are to be exalted above the Heavens, and to be Caressed
with the delicacies in the Kingdom.

As a grain of mustard seed. He speaks concerning the plenty and abundance
which is to follow Preaching.

So that the Fowl might lodge under the shade thereof. Some Men rashly say,
That the Devils are here called Fowl, as having need to be hidden under the
shade of the Gospel; and do not take notice, that the Devils are reserved to
Darkness and Torment, and not to be hidden under the shade of the Gospel.
Others say, That the Angels are here called Fowl. Others, That Kings and
Princes are called Fowl.

And there was a great Whirlewind. It is probable, That his own Vessel only
was tossed with the Waves.

And the Winds, and the Waves, fell upon the Ship. That he did not awake with
all this Tempest, was an effect of his Divine Providence.

CHAP. V.
He said unto him my name is Legion. Legion is as we should say, a great
company of Men in Arms. According to this, the Legions went out of the Land of
Macedon, whereby is signified many Bands of Grecians. Others say, That Legion
in the Roman Tongue, signifies the number of Ten thousand. Others say, An
Hundred and forty thousand, or Fourteen Myriads. Others, A Thousand only; but
the first is thought the true Computation: But however it be, this shows,
That they were many; for this nature is subtle, and is not encumbered with a
body; neither does heat take place in them, as in bodies; for they who are
Tempted of Devils, have less strength than they, and this is ordered by the
Providence of God; otherwise, one Devil would destroy all Mankind. And it has
been said, That the Devils do for the most part reside in the Wilderness, and
that some of them are permitted to be amongst Men, for Trial of their Liberty,
and that the power of God might be made known in them. Some Men do prevaricate,
and say, That there is not any Providence over Things that are visible, for
that Ten thousand Devils have dominion over one Man: Against whom we can reply,
for a general Providence is here manifest in this, That one Man is preserved
from the Tyranny of Ten thousand Tyrants and Potentates, whereas one of them
were able to destroy Thousands, and Ten thousands, if he had permission from
God.

Send us into those Swine. Inasmuch as they persuaded our Lord to permit them
to enter into the Swine, it is apparent, that not so much as vile Swine are
left out of the care of Providence.

And he began to preach in the ten Cities. This was a City, whose Inhabitants
were gathered from Ten Cities; or it was a City, whereunto were subjected Ten
Cities, as that of Kiriath-Arba, that is to say Hebron, which had dominion over
four Villages: Or, it was the Head or Mother of Ten Cities, according as they
call a City, a Metropolis; that is to say, Mother and Governess of other Cities.

CHAP. VI.
IS not this the son of Mary? He calls him the son of Mary, as if he were
descended from Joseph; and Carpenter, in respect of Joseph's craft, who was his
reputed Father.

There is not a Prophet despised. That is to say, as Moses, who was reproached
by those of his own generation and people; and Jeremiah, by those of his own
City. In like manner, the people of Nazareth here desire to vilify new Things
in respect of old.

And he could not do there a Miracle, no not any mighty Work. That he could not
do a mighty Work, does not denote a defect of his power, but the Wickedness of
their mind; and it is like the expression of Jeremiah, The Lord cannot spare
you any more, by reason of the wickedness of your doings. And like this saying,
For two things that are immutable, the Lord cannot lie, and the Son cannot do
any thing of himself.

Save a staff only. Matthew says, Ye shall not take so much as a staff. Our
Lord hints, Ye shall not take from others unto whom ye are to go, any thing,
lest they may think that ye are sent as if it were to Trade, and he gave to
understand that he would supply whatsoever they wanted; therefore this passage
of Mark is not contrary to that of Matthew, for that both of them are to be
reconciled thus. From others ye shall take nothing, lest ye be esteemed
covetous; but they were not forbidden to take from their own houses, because
they were to make use of such things in the way, a staff to sustain them,
sandals or shoes for the hardness of the Way and Thorns; because Matthew had
been before a Publican, and had experimented the rigid passion of covetousness,
he therefore endeavors now to alienate them therefrom, and therefore he
commanded them, That they should not take so much as a staff. Others are of
opinion, That by both they are prohibited from a staff, and they read this
(...) which Mark uses, for (...) which is interpreted (...) neither; so that
the sense is to run thus, Neither so much as a staff.

Others, shake off the dust. Dust is declarative of labor.

Others, shake off the dust, in demonstration of the earthliness of their
minds, and that they were to perish utterly; for truly the Wicked perish in the
Whirlewind of their Iniquity, and labor in the Dust of their Misery.

Others thus, shake off the dust. That is to say, in Token of the pains taken
in their behalf; and that because the Jews would not be persuaded to receive
advantage by the labor of others, they have fitted themselves to a severe
Judgment.

In Testimony against them, as a sign of their guilt.

And they anointed the sick with oil. That is to say, wheresoever they
Traveled in Judaea, they carried with them that Oil which had been blessed by
our Lord, and cured the sick. Others say, That wheresoever they went, they took
the Oil that belonged to the House, and blessed it in the Name of Christ, and
anointed the Sick therewith.

For Herod was afraid of John, and conserved him. That is to say, for that he
did not give him to be put to death, or for that he observed his counsel, the
Prison wherein John was slain, as Matthew says, was called (...), and in the
Arabian Language is interpreted by the word (...) Mutabikon, which in the
Syriack Tongue signifies a Sword or Knife.

And they sat down by hundreds, and by fifties. That is to say, in one Rank an
Hundred, and in another Fifty.

CHAP. VII.
EAting bread without washing their hands. The Jews accused his Disciples, for
that they did eat bread before they washed their hands; all the Jews and
Pharisees, except they wash their hands curiously. That is to say, the Priests
and the Elders by way of Tradition, commanded that before they eat bread, they
should very well wash their hands. And things bought out of the market, unless
they be washed, they eat not, and many other the like things: That is to say,
the Jews had four kinds of washings.

The first wherewith they washed, that is to say, wherewith they cleansed their
bodies by reason of Nocturnal pollution, and of the touching of dead Carcasses,
and so forth.

The second was, That which they used seven days before the Passover, to wit,
the wrensing of all their Utensils with Water, as for purification, from the
vessels of Gold unto vessels of Earth, and Woollen Clothes.

The third was, That which was used by some of them when they dipped in Water
from morning to morning their necessary vessels which were of daily use, as
Pots and Cups, and Kettles.

The fourth was this, when they invited any of the Scribes and Pharisees, and
men of Note, they washed with Water in honor of them, the Beds and Chairs, and
vessels of Brass, and whatsoever vessels they used in the service, all these
our Savior abrogated, he spoke here also concerning the washing of hands.

For from within the heart proceeds evil thoughts; and not from the washing
of hands, or cups, or pots. What he says of the heart, he means concerning the
soul, because the heart is the lodging of the Soul, and there she forms all her
cogitations, according to what is said, My heart and my flesh praise the living
Lord. And we bear our hearts in our hands, and it is reputed a people which
has erred in its heart.

Lasciviousness. That is to say, Fornication above Nature, which is committed
by salacious and libidinous persons.

An evil eye. This does denote the envious and wicked.

And entered into a certain house. Not that he hid himself for fear, but first
that the Jews might not think that he loved the Gentiles more than them.
Secondly, Forasmuch as he was to work a Miracle on the daughter of the
Canaanitish Woman, that it might not be thought he was a lover of Glory.

And this Woman was a Gentile of Phinicia of Syria. That is to say, the Region
of Phinicia called the second Syria, which is placed between Euphemia and
Shisar; but the first Syria is Antiochia unto Judaea: and of these, and others
of the like name, have we written at large on the Epistles.

And he came unto the Sea of Galilee, to the confine of Decapolis. That is to
say, to Banis.

And they brought unto him one that was deaf and dumb. That is to say, he had
two infirmities, for he was deaf, and could not speak; he was dumb, and could
not hear. Two of the organs of his senses were defective, his Ears and his
Tongue.

And they besought him to put his hand upon him. That is to say, as he had done
to the rest of those whom he had cured and restored.

And he took him aside by himself from the multitude. For three Reasons, he did
not cure him before the multitude.

First, That he might not be thought to have affected glory.

Secondly, That he might convince those who had seen the Miracle which he had
done, and yet cast Calumnies on Faith in him, that he sighed even for them.

Thirdly, That he might teach us, that when we perform form good Works, we
should rather hide them, than hunt after vain glory, by exposing them to open
view, and to public fame.

And put his finger into his ears, and he spit, and touched his tongue.
Inasmuch as he did spit, and touched his Tongue, he showed, That he was
altogether of the same mass with Adam, of the dust, and that he inspired into
him a living soul. And in putting his fingers into his ears, he signified, That
it was he who created the Senses, and established the Members of Children in
the Womb. My Father, says he, works until now, and I also work. In three
Things Christ delayed the Cure of this deaf man, In that he led him aside: In
that he put his fingers into his ears: and In that he did spit, and touch his
tongue; for he was able to have granted him Health in a moment: For if the
Resurrection be in the twinkling of an eye? as Paul says, he might with more
ease have wrought the Cure of one man, but he delayed it for three Reasons.

The first was, That the deaf man might perceive that his Cure was not wrought
all at once, but by little and little.

Secondly, That the Miracle might be the more magnified, and not be esteemed a
fancy.

Thirdly, That he might confirm his being made Man, and that the Mystery of his
Dispensation might not be thought a fantasy, as the Phanaticks say; for this
cause Mark was the more careful in this matter, that he might eradicate from
the persuasion of the Romans the doctrines of Simon, for he said that his
Dispensation was in fancy. Moreover, He touched the Ears and Tongue of the dumb
man, lest the Jews might say, That he nicely avoided the afflicted and
diseased, and that therefore he did not touch them.

And he looked up to heaven. He looked up to Heaven, that he might ascribe to
his Father what he had done, and that he might convince those who said he was
an enemy to God.

And he sighed. First, by reason of the hardness of their hearts, who saw the
Miracles which he wrought, and did not believe. Secondly, because there were
some amongst them, who did not only not believe when they saw the Miracles
which he did, but also crucified him. Thirdly, as a Shepherd, who sighs for his
lost sheep; and as a Mariner, for his ship that is lost. Fourthly, by reason of
Humane Nature, which until then, was humbled, afflicted, and brought into
subjection. Fifthly, by reason of the captivity of our nature by the Devils.

And looking up to heaven, he said unto him Ephphatha. He did not open him by
prayer or supplication; but as in the beginning, he commanded the light, and it
was made: And if any one say, That in the Beginning the Father commanded the
Creatures that they should be made; We answer, That there was the same
Commandment of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost, as it is
written, That by the word of the Lord the heavens were made.

And straightway his ears were opened. This was the operation of God, who, so
soon as he commands any thing, it is perfectly done, according to that he
commanded, and they were, and he commanded, and he arose; wherefore from hence,
That he commanded, and it was done, we understand, That Christ, who is God, was
made man.

And he charged them, that they should tell no man thereof. For he abstained
from vain glory, nay rather, he Taught how to shun it, and this which he said:
And he charged them, being of the plural number, whereas there was but one deaf
man which he Cured, must be taken in this sense, That he joined this deaf man
with others whom he had Cured; or he charged this deaf man, together with the
multitude there assembled, That they should tell no man.

CHAP. VIII.
ANd he came to Bethsaida, and they brought unto him a blind man. That is to
say, That they might Tempt him as his Friends.

And he took him by the hand, and led him out of the town. Wherefore he led him
out, has been spoken unto by us concerning the deaf man.

And he did spit on his eyes. This, in like manner, have we explained before.

And he asked him, Do thou see any thing? That the blind man might be
confirmed concerning his Cure.

I see men like trees, walking. The word walking, is to be referred to men, and
not to trees, according to that, All the people saw the voices, and the
lightnings, and the Priests accompanied them in the way, and they flew. It had
been an easy thing for him in the twinkling of an eye to have Cured him, but
he prolonged his Cure, that the blind man might be more sensible thereof. And
that this Miracle might be confirmed, and that the Humanation of Christ might
not be taken for a fancy, some say, That because this blind man, and that deaf
man were doubtful in the Faith, therefore did Christ prolong their Cure, and
effected it by little and little, that they might be sensible thereof.

And sent him to his house: Thereby abstaining from vain glory, and Teaching us
to fly from it.

And Peter took him, and began to rebuke him: Not angerly, but lovingly, and
rather by way of Deprecation.

But he turned about, and looked. That is to say, Jesus looked on his
Disciples; as if a man should say, observe what Simeon says, even that which a
Religious man should not think fit to admit into his Thoughts.

Get thee behind me Satan. He calls him Satan, by way of Admonition unto them,
that no man should presume to find fault with such Things as are acceptable to
God, as if they were complying with the mind of the Devil.

CHAP. IX.
I Have brought unto thee my son. That is to say, Not the Spirit which did not
speak, but the man who ^^ught the infirm person spoke, for his speech was
suppressed whilst he was Tormented.

He bruiseth him, and he foameth. That is to say, Froth did come out of his
mouth, and he was like a dry stick.

And he spoke to his Disciples that they should cast him out, and they could
not: Because it was not decent that they should work Miracles when they were so
near our Lord; for when they were sent into Judaea, they themselves did not
only do mighty deeds, but also said unto our Lord, Behold, the Devils are
subject unto us through thy Name. Nay, others acted in his Name, insomuch that
they said, We saw a man casting out Devils in thy Name, and we forbade him. We
have expounded the rest of this matter upon Matthew.

And he wallowed, and foamed. That is to say, he did beat with his legs, and he
cast up foam.

And Jesus asked his Father. He did not ask as being ignorant; for he who knew
the Father perfectly, knew also the time when this unclean spirit entered: but
he asked the question for four Reasons.

First, That he might show the contempt of the Jews. Secondly, That the power
of Christ might be the more taken notice of, and published. Thirdly, That the
Miracle might be the more magnified in the eyes of the Beholders. Fourthly,
That those who stood in need of Cure, might be sensible of his Cure, and these
things we have explained in Matthew.
John said unto him, Master, we have seen a man who casts out Devils in thy
Name, and we prohibited him. It is probable, That this man was one of those who
often came to our Lord, although he did not follow him, as did his Disciples;
and because he was worthy, our Lord bestowed on him this power: But the
Disciples, when they observed it, they forbade him the exercise thereof. That
is to say, They admonished him under pain of Excommunication, since thou art
not of those who adhere to our Lord, it is not lawful for thee to cast out
Devils in his Name; but our Lord says unto them,

Forbid them not for there is no man who works a miracle in my Name, and can
suddenly speak evil of me.

If thy hand offend thee, cut it off, it is better for thee maimed, etc. By the
Hand and by the Foot, he signifies the Congregation: That is to say, The
lesser sort of People and Commonalty. That is to say, Whosoever is Arrogant, a
Glutton, or a Covetous person, or a Fornicator, whether he be a Governor of the
Congregation, or of the meaner sort, if he offend the Church, to wit, the
Faithful, cut him off, and cast him out of the Church, lest that he infect the
whole Church by his offense, and so all fall into Hell.

For every one shall be salted with fire, and every sacrifice shall be salted
with salt. That is to say, even as that (Coin) which is tried and purged by
fire, is of use to a Kingdom. And as Salt preserves tender Bodies from
Corruption, so also the grace of the Spirit preserves loose minds from the
corrupt odor of sin; That is to say, The Humor of sin.

Others thus; For every one shall be salted with fire. That is to say, Every
mind which is salted with the grace of the Holy Spirit, shines in knowledge,
and is beautified with the fear of God.

Moreover, There is no man, whosoever he be, who can by his craft escape Fire
in the World to come, for both good and bad shall be tried; for the Fire is to
illustrate the Just, and not to burn them: but the wicked it does burn and
torment.

Moreover, This sense agrees with the words which he spoke before, That their
fire is not quenched, and their worm dies not.

Every sacrifice. In both illustrations there is one scope of our Lord. He
calls by the name of Sacrifice, the Souls and their Faculties, which are
offered as Sacrifices unto God. By salt, is to be understood Love and Mercy:
That is to say, That it is requisite that your conversation and minds should be
purified by Love and Mercy, as it were by Salt and Fire, that ye may enter into
the Kingdom of Heaven. He calls Conversation a Sacrifice, and by Salt he means
the grace of the Holy Ghost which ye have received, that it may be unto you an
earnest of those things which are to come.

Others say, That he speaks unto them by way of Admonition, that together with
the Faith they should take care to keep a good Conversation; for as fire does
take off all dross that is in a vessel, and purifies it; and as every thing
that is slain, which he here calls a Sacrifice, gains a savor by Salt, and is
preserved from corruption, so let your Conversation be in all the World, like
fire, which purifieth from rust, and like salt, which takes away insipidness,
being in respect of your Conversation removed from ancient Customs, and a
wicked Conversation; and as salt is good whilst it remains in its own nature,
so also is the Priesthood whilst it is preserved in its purity, and a right
Faith; and if this lose its savor, the Faithful cease in the abcision of Hope,
because the salt, viz. the Priest has not wherewith to salt, that is, to give
a savor.

Have salt in your selves. That is to say, keep in that savouriness which ye
have received, and let not the World rob you of it.

Be in peace one with another. That is to say, Pastors and Flocks; for as
Contention does diminish the flocks of Christ, so does Peace preserve and
multiply Doctors and Teachers.

CHAP. X.
ANd they shall be both one flesh. That is to say, in the exercise of Marriage
Rites, and in respect of what is born of both of them.

And Jesus beheld him, and loved him. He did not love him for the reality of
his mind, yet our Lord loved him, and looked upon him, for the outward show
which he made unto him; and hereby he Taught, That whosoever observes these
things truly, ought to be esteemed a lover of Truth: And this is like unto
that, that Herod was sorry for the request of the Damsel, because outwardly he
seemed to be so.

And take up thy Cross, and follow me. That is to say, Crucify thy Soul
against the World, and the desires thereof.

Lands with Persecution. That is to say, They shall not only in the World to
come receive the reward of their pains in Preaching, but here likewise; the
case being, as if one should leave his natural Father, and find many spiritual
Fathers and Brothers also.

Lands with Persecution. That is to say, Monasteries with Xenodochies; to wit,
Houses for Strangers, for them who were constituted Governors of them, and took
care of them, by reason of them, and the care of them, were brought under
persecution by strangers, and reduced to the Necessities of the World, and to
Tribulation.

And James and John the sons of Zebedee approached unto him. Mark says, That
they desired that they might sit on the right, and on the left hand; but
Matthew writes, That it was the request of their Mother; for the Jews were of
Opinion, That when Christ was to come, he should bring all Nations into
subjection under him, and that they should be made Generals and Colonels; and
with this sense agrees the old, plain and simple, that is to say, the sincere
Exposition. And she desired of our Lord that her Sons might be Princes, and
that they might sit near his Throne; but he did not grant unto them their
request, because they asked in vain glory, and for private respects, and not
for public advantage, as Peter; for had they desired it, as Peter, in
Humility, and for the good of the People, Behold, we have left all, and
followed Thee, they had been answered as Peter: That is to say, They had heard
of Thrones and Crowns.

Moreover, He did not grant their request, That the rest of the Disciples might
not murmur against them, and become envious, for the very request displeased
them.

Blind Timeus, the son of Timeus. It is thought that he agreed with his Father
as well in blindness, as in name; for the word Timeus does denote that defect
of the Eyes, where there is not room for the sight.

CHAP. XI.
ANd many spread their garments in the way. That is to say, in Honor of
Christ, and that they might kneel down for Benediction, and receive Health,
even from the print of the feet of the fool of the Ass on which he rode.

CHAP. XII.
THou art not far from the Kingdom of God. That is to say, If thou love and
believe my Preaching, thou must add to the fullness of the Law which thou now
have; but if thou will not, thou art far from it.

Beware of the Scribes, who love to go in stoles. That is to say, in gay and
long garments.

And Jesus sitting over against the treasury. That is to say, of the Temple, he
saw how the people cast money.

The treasury, he calls here the Ark which was separated for the Priests,
whereinto every one that would cast in an Offering unto the Lord, he calls
(...) gold or silver: And that name is imposed thereon, because of the image or
stamp it bore. There were many who exchanged souzes for pence, and pence for
souzes, and round pieces for clipped pieces, and the Syrians called them (...)
Meharphono, and the Arabians (...) and the Grecians Sacostra, therefore (...)
he calls the Money which the Money Changers bought and sold.

And many that were rich cast in. Rich men cast in much money.

Two minutes. That is to say, two pence.

And there came a certain poor widow, and cast in two minutes, which are
quadrants. That is to say, two pence.

Others, Two Quadrants, two Danacks.

Others, Two Paulins, she cast a piece of money which contained two Paulins.

Others, A minute. That is to say, a quadrant, was six and thirty Tasugs, it
contained therefore Thirty six Tasugs, and Thirty six Tasugs, which amount to
Seventy two Tasugs, and these Seventy two make up three souzes.

She cast in more than all the men cast in. And how did she cast in more than
all, whereas they cast in twice as much as she? He presently explains the
difficulty, and says, For all they cast in of their abundance. Christ here
teaches us two things. First, That this gift which was made out of her penury,
was more abundant, and greater in God's esteem, than that which proceeded from
Redundancy. Secondly, That God does not regard the greatness or smallness of a
gift, but the will and mind wherewith it is given; and it is certain, That if
it be given with a cheerful will, it is accounted much and great with God,
although it be small; but if otherwise, it is meanly esteemed by God, though
much in quantity.

CHAP. XIII.
But of that day and hour knows no man, no, not the Angels, neither the Son,
but the Father. The Heretics, to wit, the Arrians, when they are desirous to
vilify the Son, they produce this Argument. To whom we answer, For, inasmuch
as he is God, he knew all things that are, before they were made; but inasmuch
as he was man, he says, he knows not; and the very same that is God, is man,
and no other, as he is life by nature, and became death for us, forasmuch as he
was man; so, though he does know all things as being God, he said, that he did
not know as man: And as he was before Abraham in respect of his Godhead,
according as he said, Before Abraham was I am: yet he was after him, as being
man; for if he had said I know, he had been like to the Father only, and not
at all like unto us; but he said, I know not, that he might be likened unto us,
and that there might be no place left for mistakes, or to say, that he was not
made man; for this property of man, not to know things in futurity, was common
to him, for he communicated in our want of knowledge, even as in other humane
infirmities; and this is manifest from hence, that he did not say, Neither the
Son of God knows, but neither the Son simply; as he was the Son of God, so
was he a so the Son of man, and in that respect wanted knowledge, though he
knew all things as God.

Moreover, it is certain, That as he was man, he said he did not know,
forasmuch as he did not say concerning the Holy Ghost that he did not know.

Again, we say, That God the Father is greater than the day of the coming of
the Son, and is more hidden and concealed than that day; and yet the Son says,
Even as the Father knows the Son, the Son knows the Father. If therefore he
knows the Father, who is high, and exalted above all things, and is more
hidden and concealed than this day, how much more then does he know this day?
And if any one shall object, That the Father knows the Son perfectly, but that
the Son knows the Father but in part, let him know, That for the same reason
he might conclude, that the Father knows not the Son but in part; for the
same knowledge is attributed to the Father and the Son, as the Father knows
the Son, etc.

We say further, That if the Father knows this day and hour, the Son must
necessarily know it, because there is one knowledge of the Father, and of the
Son, and of the Spirit, for they are of one and the same nature, the same will,
the same power and operation, and therefore necessarily have they one and the
same knowledge.

Moreover, for that the Son created the Worlds, and Times, and Years, and
Months, and Hours, and Days, it is manifest, That he knows the day and hour of
his appearance; but if any one shall object, That he has not yet created the
day of his coming, he may be convinced by the force of two reasons.

First, From this which is written, That he finished the heaven and the earth,
and all that was in them, and God finished his works on the seventh day.
Secondly, Let it be granted, That it were so, though it be not a Truth, yet he
knew as God before hand those Things which are not, and he knows every thing
before hand.
Again, How does he know the Prognostications and the Signs which are to be at
the day of his coming, and yet not know the day? for he declares how that
there shall be lightning, and that the Sun shall be darkened, and other such
like things; and the Stars shall fall from Heaven, and the powers of Heaven
shall be shaken, and the sign of the Son of man shall appear, and other the
like things which are to happen in that day and hour; and how is it possible,
That one should know what things are in the House, and not know the House? or
how does a man know the thing that is within a City, or a Ship, without knowing
the City or the Ship? And how can he who knows what things are without and
within a Wall, say that he does not know the Wall in the middle.

Moreover, as he knew the hour of his Birth, and the day of his first coming in
Bethlehem, so does he know his second coming.

Furthermore, Paul says, That Christ is the power and wisdom of the Father;
and in this that he says the power, he shows, That there is nothing out of
his Jurisdiction and Providence; and by that of wisdom, he declares, That there
is nothing out of the reach of his knowledge, but that all things which are,
and are to come, are comprehended within the compass of his knowledge; for if
he can err in any thing, he is not perfect wisdom, especially since that he is
the Divine wisdom of the Father, and in him is hidden all wisdom, and he it is
that gives wisdom to the wise, as says the Son of Syrach, All wisdom is of the
Lord, and Christ is the Lord, whence it was that the Angels said to the
Shepherds, there is born unto you a Savior, who is Christ the Lord.

Neither the Angels. In this which the Angels said unto the Shepherds, viz. To
you is born, etc. which neither the Angels knew, did he forbid them to declare
that day; and by this, That neither the Son (that is to say my self) he stopped
their mouths from asking him; for in like manner, they asked him after the
Resurrection, Art thou at this time about to restore the Kingdom? And he stopped
their mouths, saying, It does not belong unto you to know the times and seasons
which the Father has appointed, etc.

But the Father. Inasmuch as he spoke of the knowledge of the Father, he
prevented them, that they might not ask him; and it is like to that of the
mother of the sons of Zebedee, for being unwilling to answer whether he would
grant the request or no, he answered, It is not mine to give; when assuredly it
was he who was to place the Sheep on his right hand, and the Goats on his left,
and to call, Come ye blessed of my Father; he did not answer, I will do it,
that his Disciples who were there might not be offended, who yet were so much
distasted, that he spoke unto them, and pacified them, even as a Father having
Sons, and they ask him for somewhat that is hidden, where he has put it, and
he being unwilling to let them know, says, I know not; and wherefore did he
not reveal it, because it was not for their advantage, nor their Successors;
for if he had declared it unto them, they had been careless and remiss, and had
not been diligently constant in prayer; and that this was so, is known from
what he said, Watch and pray.

But of the day and hour. And it is necessary to know in the first place, That
the Scriptures are not always to be taken according to the outward sound of
words; nor when they say, That God is a consuming fire, are we to think, That
he burns or flameth; nor that he is of Kin, or a Watchman, or corporeal, or
compounded of differing Natures, or that he is subject to Passions, that he is
angry, that he sleeps or wakes, or is sorrowful, or that he erred, or was
ignorant; and according to that, He who is not born of water, and of the
Spirit, shall not enter into the Kingdom; whereas many have been made famous
for Martyrdom, who have not been baptized, the Thief also entered into Paradise:
And no man can say, That Jesus is Lord, but by the Spirit; yet the Manichees,
the Mercionites, the Gentiles, and the Jews, are well pleased with the word,
and use it without the grace of the Spirit; and like it is to this, All of them
have declined together, and are become reprobate, and all they who came were
Thieves and Robbers: So also is this expression, for if he did not know this
day, and this hour, how was this said, That I and my Father are one? for if in
knowledge he be not one, wherein is he one? And if he did not know the day as
well as the Father, how said he, That all whatsoever the Father has is mine?
And if the Father has any thing which the Son knows not, how is it said,
That no man knows the Father, but the Son? And this is objected, and how do
these agree? Is he one? and the Father knows nothing which the Son does not
know; and this, there is nothing high and exalted, but it is little in
comparison of other things; and thus says the Apostle, In him are hid all the
treasures of wisdom; and how, the Son, and neither the Son, but the Father. And
if he knows the Father, it is certain that he knows him with all his knowledge.

Again, If he knows the Father, how does he know the Father, and knows not this
day? therefore this day is greater than the Father; and if the Father knows
this day, of necessity also does the Son know it; and if it be not so, the
Father seems not to know; or else how much greater is the knowledge of this
day, than the knowledge of the Father? And if he be maker of all things, how
does he not know his own Works? or is this day not reckoned amongst his Works,
nor in the number of the days of the year? And if so, let them show what it
is, or where it is; for every complete day is made up of a day and night, and
hours are the course of vicissitudes; and an hour, according to the opinion of
the Philosophers, is not at all; for that which is past, is not, nor that which
is to come, for it is not yet; and if he who had all things in his hand knows
not the day, how did he create any thing which he knows not? how do these
agree? And if the Spirit searches out every thing, even the profundities of
God, and this is the Spirit of Christ, how is it that he does not know those
things which were made by him? And how does he know that the consummation (of
the World) shall be in the night? That two shall be in a Bed, and one shall be
led away, and yet not know the day? for because of the long interspace of time,
they thought that the end of the World was at hand, and that his appearance
should have been in their days, as Paul said unto some, Wonder not, behold the
day of the Lord comes. He governs them as Children, for they had reapt no
advantage from the knowledge of this day, nor the Generations after them,
neither did he reveal the time of our death; and by this Declaration, he
teaches us, That if we be ask't by any one an unprofitable question, we should
prudently shift it off, as it were, for want of knowledge, lest instead of a
Fish, we should hold forth to our Neighbors a Serpent.

Moreover, If these passages, viz. He knows not that day; I know ye not, as he
said unto the foolish (Virgins) and I never knew ye, as he said, should be
understood according to the outward sound of words; many of the like are spoken
of the Father, as this, God remembered Noah, as if he had recovered himself out
of forgetfulness. Again, I will go down, and see whether they have acted and
done according to the cry that has ascended up. And the like again, They did
what I commanded them not, and it came not into my mind. And again, Adam where
art thou? Where is Abel thy Brother? And if the Father, who is not clothed
with a Body, is attended with Attributes of Infirmity, how much rather should
not he, who is clothed with a Body for us, speak after the manner of men, and
as a Tree that is remote, and at a great distance, and unseen, is known by the
fruit which are presented to view and brought nigh; so is our Lord made known
by his signs, and by his Works, and by the Prophesies which have been made
concerning him, and not by words which sound of infirmity; and if he being
clothed with a Body, there were those who denied that he was born of the
Virgin, and said that he was not begotten, but that he was a stranger, and that
he appeared only in fancy; how much the rather would they have said so, had it
not been for these Attributes of Infirmity.

Moreover, He did not reveal this day, because it would not have advantaged
them to have known it, and many would have been remiss in the exercise of
virtue until the last hour, but now forasmuch as the coming to Judgment is
concealed from us, we stand alvvayes in danger and fear.

Moreover, It seemed good unto God, that knovving it, he should not reveal it;
and to man it was a reproach that he should have done it; therefore forasmuch
as he was deemed only to be a man, it was not a matter of odium to conceal
from them the day; but if any one had promised them who knew and would not have
revealed it, he had been thought wicked and envious; and if he had revealed
itit, had produced remisness.

Furthermore, This is to be taken notice of, That Mark only says, That
neither the Son knows; whereas Matthew says no such thing. Matthew, he wrote
to the Hebrews; and Mark, to the Romans. The Hebrews, They doubted of his
Divinity; and the Romans, of his Humanity, by reason of the seed of fancy which
Simon had sown amongst them, viz. That our Lord had not assumed a Body, for
which reason Mark adds, Neither the Son, Teaching thereby, That he was not only
God, but also man, who was like unto us in every thing, sin excepted.

After another Exposition, thus: Mark does not here call our Lord Son, but the
faithful, who are called Sons by reason of Baptism; and Christ he calls Father,
for he is the Father of the World to come; And my children, a little while I am
with you, and behold I, and the children which the Lord has given me; for the
name Father, is used for the Father and the Son; for the Father, by Nature; for
the Son, by Dispensation. And he used here a communion of name to his
Disciples, as this, Destroy this Temple, and I will raise it; whilst he spoke
of his Body, the Jews understood a Temple of stones. In like manner the
Disciples here, when they heard (these words) Neither the Angels, nor the Son,
but the Father, they thought that he had called his own father Father, and
himself Son; and they declined the question, because it was not of advantage to
know; for if he spoke concerning the Father, he knows the day, this is not
worthy admiration, for naturally he had this knowledge: but this deserves
admiration, That the faithful should gain a foreknowledge of any thing.

Furthermore, As he being the power and life of all things, was exercised with
infirmities, and slept, and was wearied, and was hungry; so here he is brought
to that pass, that he knows not the day. Because the Disciples were desirous to
know that which was too high for them, and that they might not be troubled,
because he did not reveal the mystery unto them, he says, That neither the
Angels.

Take ye heed, watch and pray, for ye know not the day. He commanded them that
they should be vigilant, and watchful, for it is certain, That if they had
known it, they had slept, and would not have watched; therefore that he might
drive forth sloathfulness out of them, he does not reveal the day; and
forasmuch as he says, Pray, he shows, That the power of Prayer is able to
free (us) from the fear of this day.

As a man taking a far journey. Even as a man ready to go to a remote place,
calls his servants, and gives them power over his goods, promising to reward
them plentifully who shall observe his commands, and to punish those who shall
slight his Word; if he should also reveal unto them the day of his coming, one
of these two things would happen: if the day of his coming were near and
short, they would give themselves pleasure, they would live vvantonly and
idly, saying, The time is short, and there is not space sufficient to fulfill
his will; and neglectful men do altogether weaken and cut off hope: if the time
of his coming were long, they would live pleasantly and idly, and those who are
idle are neglectful, they would Wander and play the fool until the day came;
for inasmuch as he exhorts them to apply themselves to their Work, concealing
from them the day, they are incited on both sides to the performance of his
Will. It is thus to be explained after another manner, Even as a man the Master
of a Family being about to take a Journey, if he acquaint his servants with the
day of his return, from the day of his setting forth, the fear of him is taken
from them, and they eat and drink, etc. and say, our Master deferreth his
coming, for he appointed such a day for his return; but if he do not appoint a
day for his coming, they remain in fear and terror, thinking with themselves,
perhaps he may come in an hour we know not of, and may take us in our follies:
So also Christ did not reveal that day unto us, nor the time of our death, that
we might be retained in awe, and be careful and watchful.

Moreover, the Master who took the Journey, and declared the day of his coming
to his servants, was bound up within restriction and limits, and could neither
anticipate nor prolong the time, according to justice; for if he come before
the time appointed, and they do not come forth to meet him, it is not just,
that he should reprehend them, because the day appointed is not yet come; and
if he prolongs the time, when he comes, the same thing happens: So our Lord
also, had he revealed this day, they had been like Lords, and he as a servant,
so that he could not have prevented nor delayed the time; for if he had done
the one or the other, one of the two had happened, either they had said that
because the day of his coming was not known before, it fell out so, or that
there was a cogent Master above him, who constrained him to anticipate, or go
beyond the time appointed; for as much therefore as he did not reveal the time,
he remained in the power of his dominion; and forasmuch as he excited their
diligence to watch and pray, he kept them in fear, and expelled carelessness out
of them. Again, as he gave men to understand that they were mortal, that
therefore they might be kept in awe, and practice Holiness, but did not declare
unto them on what day they should dye, lest they might sin upon the opinion
that their life was to last longer; so here, he did not reveal to his Apostles
the day of his coming, to the end they might be watchful and diligent in prayer.

CHAP. XIV.
ONE of the Twelve. It is known that Judas was not of the least, but one of
those of best note amongst the Twelve. Some say that he was the Third, for he
was ranked next to Simeon and James; but because the Evangelists wrote the
Gospel after his Treachery, they placed him last in order.

Who dippeth with me in the dish. There were two round Tables set before them,
and Judas sat down at our Lords Table. Others say, That there was but one
round Table, and all of them sat down to it; but that there were two Dishes at
the Table, and Judas dipped into that which was our Lords.

And he took with him Peter, and James, and John. These three he took with him
when he prayed here; he took them also with him when he raised to life the
Damsel, and when he was Transfigured in the Mount; not that he undervalued the
rest: but, first of all, for the great love which they bore unto him; secondly,
because Judas was not worthy of that sight; thirdly, for a Testimony of what
he did, for the Testimony of Three is sure.

And he went a little nearer, and fell upon the earth. John expresses this
exactly, He departed from them about a stones cast; he did not pray before
them, that he might not be thought proud or vainglorious, and that he might
Teach them to pray privately: nor did he depart to a great distance, that they
might hear the words of his prayer what they were, and might learn by that
pattern.

But not my will. He does not say so, as if his Will were contrary to the Will
of his Father; but by way of submission, he used this expression.

Moreover, He did it for instruction to others, that we should not be troubled
for those Things which befall us from enemies; which oftentimes happens not
from our Will, but from the infirmity of Nature; for he was pleased to Teach
this to all men in his own person, That what passions we suffer by reason of
those who vex us, is not blameable, by reason of the infirmity of Nature; yet
ought we to take a care, if we be not cleared of them by the love of God, that
we shun natural commotions.

Whomsoever I kiss, the same is he. Judas, because it was night, lest as they
went, they might take another, and leave our Lord, he gave this sign unto them,
Whomsoever I shall kiss, take. And, it is probable, That it was usual with our
Lord, to kiss any of the Disciples when they came from a remote place.

A certain young man followed him. Some say, That it was John the Evangelist.
Others say no; and it is known from hence, That John did not walk naked with
our Lord, nor any other of his Disciples. Others say, He was none of the
Twelve, but some other man; and the Jews, by reason of their Wickedness,
apprehended him, and taking hold of the linen cloth wherein he was vvrapped,
he left the same behind him, and fled. Others say, That it was this Mark the
Evangelist, and therefore he did not make express mention of his name.

Sought for testimony against Jesus. Wherefore did they seek Witnesses? for
this that he said, Destroy this Temple, and I will raise it up in three days.
And if he did not build it he was a Liar, for this was no greater a work,
than to raise him who had been dead four days.

The servants. That is to say, The Soldiers or Executioners, Seditions, (...)
That is to say, Wars and Contentions.

The Soldiers. (...) That is to say, Those who were sent to guard him; The
way is in Greek called (...) Praetorium: That is to say, The Court of Justice.

CHAP. XV.
SImon a Cyrenian. He was of the Gentiles, the Father of Alexander and Rufus,
he who was chosen by our Lord; he called him an Apostle, and in respect of the
love he bore him, he esteemed his Mother as his own: when our Lord went out of
the Court of Justice, he bore his own Cross; but when they saw Simon coming
from his Town, they pressed him, and laid the Cross upon him.

And they led him to Gogulta. It is called Gogulta, by reason of its roundness.

Which is by interpretation a skull. That is to say, by reason of its figure,
which is high, and rising a little from the ground.

And they gave him to drink wine mixed with myrrh. That is to say, That he
might be Transported beyond the use of Reason, and Intoxicated, and might not
be sensible of what they were to do unto him; but he did not drink it for two
Reasons.

First, None of the Prophets prophesied that he was to drink Wine. Secondly,
That he might not deviate out of the way which the Prophets had strewed for
him; not that he did so, because the Prophets foretold it, but because he was
to fulfill his office or dispensation; and myrrh is that which they join with
aloes: That is to say, tsaboro, and it is another kind of Fruit, and it is not
so bitter as tsaboro.
And he received it not. That is to say, He drank it not. Once they gave him
Vinegar, and another time Wine mixed with Myrrh, that they might add asperity
and bitterness to his Passion; and that, as a Token of the exceeding-great
Hatred toward him.

And when they had crucified him, they divided his garments. In Matthew we have
expounded these Things.

What every man should have. That is to say, To which of them such a part
should fall, and which of the Soldiers was to take such a part; his Under-Coat
was glorious, having never a seam from the upper side; and they did not divide
it, but put a price thereupon, and divided the price into four parts, and then
they cast lots amongst themselves, and agreed, That he unto whom the lot fell,
should have the Coat, and pay the other three parts of the price to his
Comrades, and this is that which Mark says, What every man should have. That
is to say, what every one of the Soldiers should have, whether the Coat, or
part of the price.

And the occasion of his death was written. That is to say, That he was
Crucified, because he designed to usurp the Kingdom.

And with him they crucified two thieves. First, Because he was found guilty of
Rebellion against God and the King, as they were. Secondly, That the Psalm
might be fulfilled, in his being reckoned with transgressors; They crucified
them together, thereby to hide their Envy and Arrogance.

And one ran and filled a sponge with vinegar. That is to say, instead of Wine,
they gave him Vinegar; that they might dry his Tongue, so that he might not cry
any more.

And when the evening of the preparation was come. The setting of the Sun, and
the end of the preparation, he calls Evening; and it may allude unto him, who
that day cried out to him, Go and prepare thou Christ everlasting blessings,
and which are to come.

Came Joseph who was of Ramatha. He calls him honored, because he was not by
descent a Counselor, but by bribing and money obtained the place of a
Counselor. In like manner, there was a Family or Tribe in the land of the
Romans, and it was highly honored; and if there were not any to be found of
the Progeny of Kings, they set up Kings out of that Tribe; and when any of them
Transgressed, they whipped his Horse instead of him, with white handgripes of
Wool: Amongst the Persians also was a Tribe called (...) Gondi namiran; that
is to say, Immortal Tribe. And it was not lawful to instruct or correct them
when they offended.

He was confident, and went in unto Pilate. That is to say, That he durst ask
him who was Crucified as a Rebel against the Kingdom, and was reputed as an
Enemy to God.

Again, It was a bold Act, because he knew that he was to be accounted an Enemy
to the Jews, for honoring the body of our Lord; he was confident: That is to
say, because it was a Festival, and the Law did not permit it.

And Pilate marvailed if he were already dead. He marvailed, because he thought
the time of his death was not yet come. At the Third hour he was Crucified, and
at the Ninth hour he dyed; and from the Third, to the Ninth, are but six hours:
for it was thought, that one who had been Crucified but six hours, would not
have dyed; and when he heard that he was dead, he wondered. And this Testifies
for Christ, That he dyed of his own Will, and not by constraint; for that he
dyed truly as to his Body, we say, but, that he admitted death of his own Will,
and not by constraint as we; the Thieves were not dead: but he because of his
own accord he permitted death to approach unto him, therefore he dyed at the
Ninth hour.

Again, He marvailed as at something that was not customary; for every one that
is Crucified remains a day or two, but he failed in the Ninth hour of the day,
and whatsoever was done there, was a miracle.

CHAP. XVI.
AND when the Sabbath was past, Mary Magdalene, and the other Mary, bought
sweet spices, that they might anoint him. That is to say, according to the
custom of Women, who on the Sabbath, or the Third day of the Week, or on
Friday, and on Festivals, went in honor of the dead to the Sepulcher, with
perfumes and sweet ointments.

And they saw a young man sitting on the right hand. They called the Angel
Gabriel a young man, because he appeared in the likeness of a young man; That
he might signify, that he who was risen, did restore our nature to its Youth:
And that he appeared on the right hand, shows, That he was to Preach glorious
and prosperous Things unto the Women.

But go, tell his Disciples and Cephas. He distinguished and singled out
Cephas, as him who had carried himself defectively in respect of Faith; for,
Behold he came twice to the Sepulcher. And that he might fill him with
consolation, inasmuch as he was terrified and confounded with shame, by reason
of his denial, and that he might know that his repentance was complete. And he
calls him Peter, to show the strength of his love, though he was somewhat
liable to humane failing; and that he was restored by Repentance to his former
Honor, so as to be the foundation of the Church.

And in the morning, the first day of the week, he arose and appeared. In the
Greek Copy, and the Harkalian, it is thus written: When he arose in the morning
of the first of the week, he appeared first of all to Mary Magdalene. This
sense is apt, and it is apparent, That first he said when he arose, and then
made a distinction, by interposing a point, and afterward added the other
words, viz. in the morning of the first of the week, he appeared to Mary
Magdalene. Whence we understand, That our Savior first arose at a time unknown
to any but the Father, and the Holy Ghost, for no Creature knew it; for if we
do not know our own Resurrection, at what hour or time it shall be, so no man
knows at what time Christ arose. That he arose truly, we know; but at what
time or hour of the night, we know not: but whilst it was the time of the
morning of the first of the week, he appeared to Mary Magdalene, as John has
said, and written.

Again, The words morning, and appeared, are annexed to Mary, and not to the
time when he arose; yet here the word arose is interposed, though in congruity
of sense, it goes before the word morning, because he spoke briefly of the
Resurrection; and in what manner he appeared to Mary, he rendered the sense
confused.

St. Severus says, That there are many Copies of the Gospel of Mark, which
want from the morning of the first day of the week he arose, unto the end of
the Book; so that the Gospel ends with these words, Neither said they any thing
to any man, for they were afraid.

Afterward he appeared to the eleven. That is to say, He laid before them
their want of Faith, and hardness of Heart, saying, That they did not give
credit unto them who had seen that he was risen.

He that believes, and shall be baptized, shall be saved. That is to say, He
who believes in the Father, and in the Son, and in the Holy Ghost, Three
persons, and one God, and shall be baptized in the Name of these three persons,
shall be saved from sin, which is the death of the foul.

Moreover, He shall live a life Immortal, whereunto shall be joined inseparably
joys which shall never fail.

He that believes. He shows, That first a man gets Faith, and then works
Miracles; according to this, If ye have Faith, ye shall remove Mountains. As
these signs have been wrought amongst them; so if Faith shall be found in them,
they shall work Miracles, according to what is said, He who has Faith, can do
every thing.

He that does not believe. That is to say, Unbelievers shall have a life mixed
with torments without end.

In my name shall they cast out Devils. That is to say, the Apostles and
Disciples cast out many Devils, and spoke the Languages of the Nations.

They shall take up Serpents. There are two kinds of Serpents, the one proceeds
from the earth, the other from Devils, and neither kind, says he, shall be
able to hurt the faithful who keeps his Commandments.

And if they shall drink any deadly poison. They say, That the Gentiles made
one of the Seventy two Disciples to drink deadly poison, and he did not dye
therewith; and that they cast poison into the Cup of the Mysteries wherein was
the blood of Redemption, and made a Saint drink thereof, and he did not thereof
dye: and many others there were who drank poison, and it hurt them not.

And they shall lay hands on the sick. This we have seen done, even to this
day, by many Priests: But the Heathens object, If these words of Christ are
true, wherefore do not they cast out Devils, and take hold of Serpents, etc?

We answer, according to the judgment of Philoxenus, That Christ does not use
the word by way of a (...). That is to say, for a determinal and universal
term, but an indefinite; for he does not say, That these Things shall belong to
every one that believes in him, but to those who believe in him; for he did
not use the word all, or every of them in his Proposition: Therefore it is not
said of every one of them, but that there are many who shall be attended with
these signs, as Apostles and Saints.

He ascended into Heaven, and sat on the right hand: For the right hand
denotes Honor. According to this, He shall place the sheep on his right hand.
That is to say, He shall associate them with himself in glory; for the Father
is not corporeal, that he should have a right and left hand, neither have the
Angels a right and left hand, for this belongs to Bodies: but the right hand of
God the Father, signifies equality of Session, of Majesty with him; for there
is but one Kingdom, and Glory, and Honor, of the Father, and of the Son, and
of the Holy Ghost.

And our Lord helped them, and confirmed their words, by the signs which they
wrought. That is to say, He showed that their words were true, by the Miracles
and Cures, and Signs which he wrought by their hands; for those who saw the
Apostles and Disciples that they cured Lepers, and raised the Dead, and other
Miracles, they confirmed their words, and entertained their Preaching, and
believed whatsoever they Preached.

Through the prayers of the Holy Apostles, pardon unto us, O God, for the love
of thy Humanity, our Trespasses, whether willingly or unwillingly, of knowledge
or ignorance: And also, O Lord, have mercy on the sinner and weak person who
wrote, through thy abundant mercies. Amen.

Here ends the Exposition of the Gospel of Blessed MARK, his Prayer be with us,
Amen.

MATTHEW the Son of JOHN wrote This; He who Reads it, Let him pray for him in
our Lord.

Finished Anno 1058. according to the Computation of the Grecians.

DIONYSIVS SYRVS HIS EXPOSITION OF THE Ten Beatitudes, Pronounced in the Fifth
Chapter of St. Matthew, etc. Translated out of the SYRIACK LANGUAGE, BY DVDLEY
LOFTVS, J. U. D.
BEfore our Savior pronounced the Beatitudes, he ascended a Mountain, that he
might thereby show, that it was he who descended on Mount Sinai, and gave the
Ten Commandments.

Furthermore, That he might raise the Disciples, and the Multitude, to the
Contemplation of heavenly Things; and that he might show that his Doctrine was
high and superior to Things that are earthly, and that it is not overcast with
a Lie, but shines forth unto all men; for he appeared as a man, and ascended
the Mount, because the children of Israel desired that they might not see that
fire, lest they should dye.

Moreover, He said thus, The Lord shall raise unto them a Prophet of their
Brethren, because he was a Mediator between God and men, as Moses between God
and Israel.

And he foretold Things to come, and Taught Ten Commandments, as Moses did; and
as the Ten Commandments comprehend the Law, so the Ten Beatitudes contain the
whole Gospel.

And how are the Beatitudes said to be Ten, since there are but Nine of them?

We say, That Luke added another: And blessed are they who weep now, for they
shall rejoice. Signifying by him that weeps, him who lamenteth for his sins,
and our fall from Paradise; and that he freed them from dissolute Laughter, and
vain Mirth; and that he who freed them from dissolute laughter, and vain mirth,
will cause them to rejoice in the world to come who fly therfrom; but if they
say, that Luke delivered that which Matthew said, Blessed are they who mourn:
Let them know, that it is another Beatitude (i.e.) The Assumption of the Body
and Blood when he gave these blessings; as yet he had not communicated the
Mysteries, and therefore there is one of the Beatitudes wanting, that it might
be fulfilled in the receiving of his Body and Blood.

Moreover, Also there are Nine Commandments, yet are they called Ten.

I. The First, I am the Lord thy God. II. The Second, Thou shall not swear by
the Name of the Lord. III. The Third, Keep the Sabbath day. IV. The Fourth,
Honor thy Father and thy Mother. V. The Fifth, Thou shall not commit Murder.
VI. The Sixth, Thou shall not commit Adultery. VII. The Seventh, Thou shall not
Steal. VIII. The Eigth, Thou shall not bear false Witness. IX. The Ninth, Thou
shall not covet the House, nor Wife of thy Neighbor.
And wherefore then are they called Ten, being but Nine?

Because the number of Ten is a perfect number, and Perfection is not to be
found in the Law, but in the Gospel; and therefore there was a defect in the
Commandments, that Perfection might be found in the Gospel according to the
letter Jud, which is the first letter of Jesus, which signifies Ten.

Moreover, The Doctrine of the Beatitudes is applicable unto all men in
general, and not to the Disciples only; and that is manifest from hence, That
he says, Not Blessed are ye, but Blessed are they, speaking as to many. The
name therefore of the Beatitudes, comprehends all joy and exultation, even as
the name unhappy comprehends whatsoever is sad or grievous.

I. Blessed are the poor in spirit.
Poor he' calls those who enjoy wealth, and of their own accord become poor,
scattering it among the poor, according to that, Sell thy possession, and give
to the poor.

Again, Poor he calls those, who are able to acquire wealth, and do not acquire
it, by reason of the Kingdom of Heaven, as Monks and Votaries.

Again, Those who possess Riches, and yet are not affected with them, or which
have them; but yet are poor in spirit notwithstanding, and dispense them
honorably, as did Job and Abraham.

Moreover, He does not call them poor in opposition to wealth, because they if
they offend are condemned, but the poor in spirit (i. e.) Those who are void of
sin, and empty of sin and iniquity; and as the poor want the wealth of this
World, so these are void of sin and iniquity.

Again, The poor he calls those, who are not puffed up in their minds, either in
respect of Justice, or Wealth, or Wisdom; but are meek and humble, according to
this, With whom shall I walk, but with the meek and humble? For the enchantment
of pride was the firstborn of Satan in the beginning, and therewith he lifted
up his Heel against his Creator, and thereby caused man to fall; justly
therefore does our Savior purge this passion, giving a blessing unto the
Righteous, who are free from pride.

The Kingdom of Heaven. The Kingdom, he calls the Bliss which the Saints enjoy
after the Resurrection.

II. Blessed are they who mourn.
Mourning may be said in two senses. Worldly Mourning, whereby a man mourns
for that he is not rich, or that he is unable to revenge himself on his Enemy,
or for the separation of Lovers. This Mourning begets Death, according to
that, worldly sorrow works Death; but Mourning for God's sake, is the cause
of life, and gains comfort, and doubleth blessings: Not to those who mourn
for Poverty, or the Death of others, but to those who mourn for their sins,
being afraid of Judgment, according to that, I have watered my Bed all the
night.

Again, He calls him a Mourner, who being free from sin, mourns for the evil of
other men, as Samuel for that of Saul, and David, who said, Sadness has seized
on me for the sins of those who have left thy Law: Or when we compute the
Happiness from which Adam fell, or the Infelicity wherein we are left,
according as it was said of one of the Saints, That whenever he was willing
to eat, did weep; and when he was asked the Reason, answered, I remember what
we were in the beginning, and how low we are cast to eat the grass, as the
Beasts: These therefore are Mourners, who mourn for their sins.

Again, Mourners are those who eschew the pleasures of the world, and
continually lament, fearing lest their virtue should decay.

Severus calls Mourning the patient Longanimity in severities of Suffering, and
a Monastic life, and the removal from worldly desires.

Moreover, Mourning is a sad affection of the soul, which is placed in the
deprivation of those sins which are delightful.

Again, Mourners he calls those, who are sad in respect of the fear of future
enjoyments.

For they shall be comforted. When they shall be revealed, and that Fear shall
be taken from them which they had of what they possessed.

III. Blessed are the meek.
Since that of the poor in spirit, is like unto that of the meek, wherefore
does he reiterate it? The first of the poor in spirit, is spiritual, and is of
those who are perfect in mind, who totally cast off all worldly Things out of
their mind; but this second, is bodily of those who are eminent in descent, or
otherwise; it is fit that they should possess meekness, for meekness is the
term of perfection, and it shows it self two manner of ways, either in
gravity and quality, and plainness of behavior, or in a separation made for
God; and here he gives the blessing to that which is made by separation, and
therefore the meek is he who being virtuous, is satisfied with moderation,
though he has but little.

Again, He calls him meek, who is zealous in the practice of good things, and
patient in the toleration of evil.

For they shall inherit the earth. Earth is the Fruit of the blessed, not this
which begets Thorns to those who dwell thereon, nor the Lord of Paradise, or of
the Center, but that which is above the Heavens (viz.) the Firmament, which is
not susceptible of passion, but is made for the life and delight of the Just,
concerning which David says, I believe that I shall see the blessings of the
Lord in the Land of the Living: And after the general Resurrection, the Just
shall ascend to the earth; that is to say, above the Firmament which is seen of
us, and there they shall be comforted without end; but the Wicked perish on
this Earth, and shall be tormented immortally: And wherefore does he call Earth
the Firmament? That he might illustrate the Things which are hidden, for those
which are revealed.

IV. Blessed are they who hunger and thirst.
Hunger and Thirst are taken three manner of ways, either by reason of want of
Victuals, or by reason of Righteousness, as in long Fasting, or for that,
whereby one coveteth the knowledge of God and his Doctrine, according to that,
He was hungry; not for Bread, but for the hearing of the Word of God: And here
he does not give the blessing to those who are affected with bodily Hunger and
Thirst, but to those who have an hungring and thirsting after the knowledge of
God, and the Doctrine of Salvation.

Righteousness. They call that Righteousness which is of them who without a
worthy mind divide unto every man that which is equal, as a Judge who justifies
the Just, and condemns the guilty; but Matthew does not call this Justice, but
that which is opposed to Fraud and Oppression.

Moreover, The keeping of the Commandments is called Righteousness.

Again, All Virtue in general is called Righteousness: Our Savior also is
called Righteousness, according to that which Paul said, That he was made for
us Righteousness and Holiness.

For they shall be filled. That is to say, with unspeakable pleasures in the
Kingdom.

V. Blessed are the merciful, for they shall, etc.
Mercy is taken in three several senses.

Bodily, as if a man should give Alms, and should aid the Weak, and fill the
Hungry.

Mental, as if a man should love him who wrongs him, and should forgive the
injuries of his Enemies.

Spiritual, as if a man should love those who are erroneous, and should convert
them from the error of their ways, and should instruct the ignorant, and
bring them to the Lord; and this is like the mercy of God, who always loves
the Creatures: Here he gives the blessing, not only to those who show mercy in
deeds, but to those also, who in the cogitations of their minds possess mercy.

Merciful. So he calls them who have mercy on the poor and strangers, and on
offenders, and the guilty, and those who have a good will to show mercy, though
it be not in their power to perform it; and those who have mercy on themselves,
and are restrained from sin, lest they should enter into Torment.

Again, Those who have compassion with those who suffer, and are grieved for
those who grieve. And it is certain, That these are merciful, because the
trouble of mind which arises from the evil which afflicts strangers, is the
extremity of mercy.

Moreover, That Will abounds with Love, which suffers with those who suffer
for those things which afflict them.

Moreover, Mercy is principal among the Virtues of the Soul, and deriveth it is
name from God himself, who is truly merciful.

Moreover, To have mercy on the good, is the perfection of Righteousness
natural and legal.

VI. Blessed are the pure in heart.
(i. e.) In their Souls, Consciences and Hearts, because they are freed from
all kinds of evil and bitterness, and rust of sin, and he is pure of mind; and
pureness of body is to be cleansed with water, and to be washed from Turpitude,
and this also is commendable: And it is fitting that men should be washed from
filth, but the blessing does not appertain to this, but unto that of the Soul,
because the Saints, and those which are pure, appear so in Soul and Body by the
proper pureness and cleanness of the Soul.

For they shall see God. But how said he unto Moses, No man can see me, and
live? And John also, No man saw God at any time? And Paul, No man ever saw him?

We say, That they said so concerning the natural and hidden Vision of God; for
the Nature of God, such as it is, personally transcends the comprehension of
humane understandings, and therefore they said, That he is neither seen nor
comprehended. Therefore this, That they shall see God, has this meaning, That
he who is pure in heart, participateth of Divine Revelations, and gains life
uncorruptible, and a Kingdom for joy without ceasing; and the light of Truth
are called the Vision of God, therefore he calls Vision a Communion,
according to that, The wicked shall be taken away, and shall not see glory
(which is) That they shall not participate of Glory.

Moreover, God created us after his Image, as the Wax according to the likeness
of the Seal wherewith it is impressed, and breareth its Effigies; but we by our
wickedness have covered it, as Rust obscureth Iron; for he whose heart is pure
from Passions, sees in himself the image of Divine nature, as Iron, when it is
polished from its dross, yields splendour and brightness, especially if it be
brought to a clear Sun shine: Let us therefore be pure in heart, that we may be
worthy of the blessing, and be comforted in the Vision of the Divine image.

Again, Vision is taken in seven several significations, but generally it may
be reduced into three (viz.) to Sense, Reason and Faith; and God is only seen
by Faith, and Faith is the persuasion of those things which are in Hope.

Again, He is seen in his Works, according to that, They shall seek after God,
and find him out in his creatures. The Organ of this sight is a pure Heart,
which does not adhere to earthly Things.

Furthermore, They call sight, the light and revelation which the Soul
receives from within, by the knowledge of him, and of these spiritual Things,
according to that, Clear mine eyes, that I may see the wonderful things which
are in thy Law.

VII. Blessed are the Peacemakers.
For Peace is the equality of Will which is perfected in Love, and the
Proprieties of Peace, and its Faculties, are Love, Quietness, Unanimity and
Charity. These are the contraries to Peace, Scandal, Commotion; and the
Properties of him who is in Commotion, are distorted Eyes, tuberous Lips,
gnashing Teeth, a distended Neck, a moving and shaking Head, Hands beating the
Air, stamping Feet; therefore he calls them Peacemakers, who cause War and
Seditions to cease.

Moreover, Him who works quietness between the Soul and the Body, for the
Spirit loves whatsoever keeps down the Body.

Moreover, Whomsoever works quietness between himself and others.

For they shall be called the Sons of God. But how can man, that is made of
dust, be the Son of God?

We say, That by Grace this was bestowed on him, as it was in the beginning,
Free Will, our own Liberty and Immortality are by Grace, and what is this
Filiation? (That is to say) That man was made of mortal, corruptible and
temporal: immortal, incorruptible and eternal, and that which is more, he was
made a divine man; for he who was worthy to be the Son of God, possesses the
glory of his Father, as bodily Sons do inherit the riches of their Fathers.

VIII. Blessed are they who are persecuted for Righteousness.
(i. e.) The Martyrs and Confessors, who are persecuted by the Devil or
Tyrants; and our Lord calls Righteousness himself, as has been said before.

Moreover, He calls Righteousness all the victories of virtues; those who are
persecuted for virtue, either for the care of our Brethren, or for Truth's sake.

Moreover, This eighth Beatitude, has affinity with the number Eight, and, as
the Head of all Beatitudes, is placed in the summity of divine virtues. This
David shows in the eight Psalm, and also Moses, by the Circumcision the
eighth day, cutting off and circumcising the dead skin wherewith we were
clothed for Transgression of the Commandment; and here the eighth Beatitude
gains us a return to Heaven, and a regress to our former Righteousness.

Again, This number of eight is celebrated in Nature, and in Books, and among
the Heathen Philosophers.

Moreover, There are eight passions of the right hand, and eight of the left;
those of the right, are Simplicity of the Mind, Mourning, Humility,
Righteousness, Mercy, Pureness of Thought, Peace, and perfect Suffering. Those
of the left hand, are Pride, Fornication, Vain glory, Intemperance,
Covetousness, Anger, Envy, Disdain. There is a Cure set down for every one of
the left handed passions (viz.) one of those of the right hand; and the Soul is
rectified, and the Body perfected of him who takes care thereof. Pride (which
is the first Devil) a man overcomes by Simplicity, which is of mean nature.
And Fornication (the second, being of a Swinish nature) by the passion of the
heart and Mourning. Vain glory (a Thorn which pricketh on every side, and is
without Fruit) by Humility, which is the good ground, and cultivated with all
virtues. Gulosity (a burning fire, and never satisfied) by an appetite
regulated by Justice and Vprightness. The rich man (an Oppressor of, and hated
by all men) by clemency and mercy toward all men. A turbulent passion of the
mind, and commotion of a confused person, by sincerity of thoughts and cordial
love. Envy (the Fountain of all Contention and Strife) by Peace, the reconciler
of differences. Disdain (the Father of pusillanimity and neglect) by patient
suffering, the mother and root of all good Things.

IX. Blessed are ye when men deride you.
(i. e.) When men call you Sorcerers, Criminal, Erroneous, and by other
reviling Terms; for scorns and reproaches sometimes are a greater punishment
than blows, and many times men strangle themselves, for that they have been
reproached or reviled; for what reason is this Beatitude of Reproach set in the
last place? By reason of the asperity thereof; for if a man have not attained
the perfection of the former, he cannot endure this; for he needs to be a
fortified man, who can bear a reproach, according as Job, who bore the
reproaches of his friends; and David, those of Shimei.

And persecute you (i. e.) Because they were to convert the Gentiles from
worshipping of Idols, to Faith in the Father, in the Son, and in the Holy
Ghost, therefore persecutions arise against you.

And speak against you every evil word. Not for your offenses, but by reason of
me, it being untrue what they shall say against you, as Paul said, Let none of
you suffer as an evil doer, but as a Christian. Then rejoice and be glad for
your reward (i. e.) in Truth when the Apostles were reproached and reviled for
Christ, they greatly rejoiced, and now a reward is given unto them, and then
the glory which is to be revealed in us, and these words are taken to concern
all those who suffer Tentation for Christ.

For so persecuted they the Prophets. This passage does not only regard the
Apostles, but also the Doctors; That as the Prophets suffered for the Father,
so ye (shall suffer) for me: And by this he shows his Majesty, and the
Equality of his Glory with the Father. And inasmuch as he said, The Prophets
which were before them. He showed, That even they also had Prophets.

Again, Though in every of the Beatitudes, the Kingdom is not promised, be not
dismayed; for though the rewards in the Beatitudes, be diverse and different one
from the other, yet all and every of them will bring him who observes any of
them to the Kingdom of Heaven: And after he taught them their Duty, he applies
himself to the praising of them, that they might not be troubled, and say, How
can we attain the fulfilling of the Commandments, which is requisite for our
entrance into Heaven?

DIONYSIUS HIS EXPOSITION ON THE PROPHECY of ZACHARIAS: Translated by D. L.
BLessed be the Lord God of Israel. That is to say, He is worthy of all
Acknowledgments of thankful Benediction, because he has showed his care and
providence for us.

Who has visited his people. That is to say, By the eye of the Spirit he saw
that the Blind were to be restored to sight, and the rest of the Miracles which
our Savior wrought.

And wrought them Redemption. That is to say, from Satan, Death and Sin.

And has raised an horn for us. He calls Christ an horn, according to that
then, I will raise an horn unto David, Psalm. 132.17. An horn is taken from the
similitude of wi^d Beasts, which fight and help themselves with their horns.

In the house of David his servant. For in respect to him were the promises
made, That of the seed of David Christ should arise, Severus de Gebulo. God is
the horn of the Righteous and Saints; wherefore is he called an horn? as an
horn is one of the integral parts of the body, and has nothing like the body;
for it is not flesh specifically, nor bones, nor nerves, nor veins, nor any of
the entralls, though it be of the body. So Christ, though he be of men, yet
has he not in him any thing like unto men, of those things which are of sin.

As he spoke by the mouth of the Holy Prophets. That Christ should arise from
the seed of David.

That he might redeem us from our Enemies. That is to say, from the Devil and
his ministers, and from sin and death.

And has remembered his Covenant. That he remembered, is as much as to say, he
performed: viz. The agreement which he made with Abraham, this day has he
performed; for Covenants are the Agreements which he made with Abraham,
swearing, That of his seed one should arise in whom all Nations should be
blessed. By my self have I sworn, said the Lord, because thou have done this
thing, and have not withheld thy Son from me, etc.

And the Oath which he swear. That is to say, That which I swear by my self,
says the Lord of lords. He calls his seed which sojourned in the Land of his
Enemies, the children of Israel; and the seed wherein all Nations were to be
blessed, he calls Christ.

And that they might serve him without fear. He therefore delivered us, that we
might worship him, and not Idols, without being afraid of the Devil.

In Justice and Righteousness. That is to say, in Holiness, and not in
Sacrifices of dumb Beasts.

Thou Child, the Prophet of the Highest. That is to say, If Christ be the
Highest, he has Prophets also, as has his Father. It is manifest, That the
Word is the most high, from that which John said, That he who came from on
high, is above all; therefore it was the most High God who was incarnated, and
his Prophet was John, not far off, but near at hand; for he said, Behold there
comes one after me.

For thou shall go before the face. That is to say, To prepare the way before
him in the minds of men who are sunk in sins.

Again, He went before his Face, for he said, Behold there comes after me one
who is more powerful than I.

That he might give knowledge of salvation to his people. To give unto the
Faithful knowledge of salvation by remission (of sins) he calls his people
those who believe in him, that he might give them the knowledge of God the
Father, who is the true God, and that they might lead their lives, as Christ
said, This is life, that they may know thee the true God.

By the tender mercies of God. That is to say, By the mercies and favor of God.

He sent unto us from on high a branch. According to that, Behold a man, and
his name was a branch.

Others call the Star which declared unto the Wise men, a branch, which came
from on High, and preached unto the Wise men who sat in sin.

To give light unto them who are in darkness. He calls sin darkness, and the
shadow of death; for to this end he came from on High, that he might expiate
our sins and iniquities, which are darkness and death, because he is the light
of the World.

To guide our feet in the way. Feet and the way, he calls Conversation and
Actings.

In the way of peace. That is, in the way of the Gospel, according to that,
Your feet shod with the blessing of the Gospel: And he made peace between us
and his Father.

THE EXPOSITON OF DIONYSIVS SYRVS ON THE MAGNIFICAT: Translated by D. L.
MY Soul does magnify the Lord. That is to say, My Soul gives Thanks, and
glorifies him who has magnified me, and made me the Mother of his Son. It is a
Query, Whether the Lord magnified Mary, or whether Mary (magnified) the Lord?
And it is certain, That the Lord magnified Mary. Again, Magnify here, is like
that of the Scripture, which says, Give Majesty unto God.

And my Spirit has rejoiced in God. Because he has sent down his Son unto me,
and has preserved me from that Curse, In sorrow shall thou conceive.

Regarded the lowliness of thy Hand-maiden. That is to say, He has beheld my
Humility, and has exalted me, and made me the Mother of his Son. Moses also by
reason of his Humility, was made a Prince.

And he saw that she obscured her self in the low condition of a Maidservant,
though she was to be the Mother of his Son.

Behold, from henceforth all generations shall call me blessed. That is to say,
From this time that she conceived the Word of God. And this she spoke by
Prophecy, For behold, all generations of the earth called her blessed,
according as she said.

Has done great things to me. That is to say, That she conceived him without
the Society of Man, and bare him with the Conservation of Virginity.

He that is mighty, and holy is his Name. Because he is Mighty and Omnipotent,
he has done great things for me.

And his mercy is to generations. Because he pours forth his mercies upon
those who are of a righteous and virtuous Conversation. And she took of those
Things which were her own, and conferred them upon others (i. e.) because she
feared God, he multiplied his mercy on her in Virginity.

He has gotten the victory with his arm (i. e.) his Dominion and Kingdom he
calls Victory. In time past, the Victory, the Arm, and Dominion of the Lord,
was seen in the Wonders which he wrought by the Prophets; but in this time
forward, by the Revelation of his Son.

He has scattered the proud. In time past, the Proud and Vain glorious, but in
the time to come, the Crucifiers.

He has put down the mighty (i. e.) In times past, the Kings who rose up
against the Hebrews; but at this time, the Gentiles and the Jews, and the
Heretics, who have risen against the Church.

And exalted the humble (i. e.) In the time of Abraham and Isaac, and afterward
the Apostles and Faithful.

The hungry he has filled with good things (i. e.) Really he satisfied, and
will satisfy; and spiritually he satisfies, and will satisfy those who
hunger after virtue, and in the world to come will fill them with good Things
and Rewards.

The rich he dismissed (i. e.) Those who gloried in their Riches, he vomited out,
and drove away from him.

He has helped his servant Israel (i. e.) In Egypt, and in the Wilderness, and
in that he gave him the Land of Promise, and freed him from his Enemies.

He has remembered his mercy (i. e.) Mary does not insinuate, as if he had
forgotten what he had said; but by the words he remembered, is to be understood,
That he fulfilled his mercy and his promise which he made unto Abraham, that
Christ should rise of his seed.

Moreover, That which God promised by his mercy unto Abraham, That in his seed
the Nations should be blessed, did he fulfill by the Twelve Apostles, and by
the multitude of Jews who believed; as also the Promises of Palesti were
performed by Joshuah the Son of Nun and Caleb.

DIONYSIVS his EXPOSITION ON SIMEON 's Nunc Dimittas, His Benediction, and his
Prophecy.
Translated by D. L.
DIsmiss now thy servant. He begs a Dismiss from Christ, though he was not
detained by him, but by the Spirit; for he knew that there was one Nature of
the Father, and of the Son, and of the Spirit: and that they have one Will,
which he had learned by the Spirit. By these words, Dismiss thou thy servant.
He prays to be dismissed out of this life.

According to thy Word. It is likely that he had formerly heard from him
somewhat concerning this, and therefore he put him in mind of what he had said
unto him.

In peace. That is to say, Without pain and passion. He begged a quiet
departure, and that very day he was dismissed this life, though others say the
day after.

Mine eyes have seen thy mercy. His Incarnation or Incorporation he calls
mercy, whereby he redeemed all Nations.

Which thou preparedst in the sight. That is to say, In his clemency he was
gracious to sinners, and propitious unto them.

A light for revelation of the Gentiles. When Christ was revealed in person, he
was a light to the Gentiles who sat in darkness; and they discerned and
distinguished between the false gods, and the true God, and worshipped him.

And the glory of thy people. He was glory to the Israelites, because he was
incarnated of their Nation, and chose from amongst them Twelve Apostles, and
Seventy two Evangelists; and although there was amongst them one wicked man,
yet the rest of them believed, as said the Apostle.

And Simeon blessed them. The Virgin, because she was worthy to be the Mother
of him who was begotten of the Father eternally; and Joseph, because he was an
assistant to the Virgin: and they were both Ministers in this mystery.

Behold he is set for the fall. That is to say, Of the Scribes and Pharisees,
and Priests, who did not believe.

And rising of many. That is to say, Of Publicans and Harlots who believed in
him, and arose; and of all the sons of Adam who believed.

Is set. Here is fulfilled that which was spoken by the person of the Father,
Behold, I am to set up in Sion a stone of offense; and it was well said, I am
to set up. And Simeon said is set up, by reason he was placed in the midst of
those who believing, arose; and of those who denying, fell.

In Israel. He said so, for that as yet they had liberty of choice; and the
fall and rising were not from Jesus, but from proper freedom and power of those
who believe or deny.

And for a sign of Contention. For all Tongues spoke against him, and were all
overcome by him, according to that, I came not to bring Peace.

For a sign. Because, that as a sign does not only show it self, but other
things also; so Jesus does not only reveal himself, but also the Father and
the Spirit.

Of Contention. For the Jews of that time were divided in opinion concerning
him: Some of them called him a Prophet, and others of them a Deceiver: As also
the Christians of this time, some of them call him God made Man, others, Man
made God, and two natures after the union: And some of them call him Creator,
others call him a Creature.

And a Spear shall pass through thy soul. He calls a Spear the defect of Faith
in Mary concerning him at that time, and also at the time of his Passion. He
did not say, That a Spear shall stick in thee, but it shall pass through thy
soul: That he might show that her defect of Faith was not permanent with her,
because she received from the Apostles correction, when the Spirit came down
into the upper Room, and instructed her concerning the Majesty of him whom she
had born.

Moreover, He calls a Spear the Contumely and Reproach which the Jews cast
upon her, which as a Spear were to transfix her.

Again, He calls a Spear that which transfixed (her Son) on the Cross, which
having passed through our Savior, he said that it passed through Mary; for it
was the Custom, that they who were Crucified, did end their life not with a
Sword, but with a Spear: when therefore the Son receives a wound, the Mother
also is likewise wounded, especially when she is near at hand, and sees it;
for although as God, he was by nature the Son of the Father, yet inasmuch as he
was made Man, he was naturally the Son of Mary. In the Greek, instead of a
Spear, it is written a Sword: Others, Through thy soul. That is to say, Through
thy Son shall pass a Spear, and the sting of the Serpent of Paradise, by reason
of the Transgression of the Commandment hitherto, and she calls her soul her
Son.

That thoughts of many might be revealed. That is to say, this Spear; to wit,
doubting and scandal which passes thy soul does reveal the Thoughts of many
hearts; whether they raise doubts concerning him out of infirmity, or out of an
evil mind, receive Correction from the Spirit, as Mary did, and as many others
at that time, and as the Faithful afterward.

DIONYSIVS SYRVS HIS EXPOSITION ON THE AVE MARIA.
Translated by D. L.
AND the Angel came to her (i. e.) The Angel declared his message unto her
being alone, for as he had done unto Zacharias and Joseph, speaking unto them,
he did not so declare unto Joseph, for without the communication of Joseph in
the conception, she conceived by the Holy Ghost; but he denounced the matter
unto Zachary, because he communicated in the conception of John.

Peace unto thee full of grace. He commenceth his Discourse from Peace, for
this Child was to destroy the Hostility which was between earthly and heavenly
Things, between the Nation of the Jews and the Gentiles, and between the Soul
and the Body; and also his Administration was to be accomplished, according to
what Isaiah said, He shall speak Peace with his people. Who filled her with
Peace? The Father. And what was this Grace? It was this, That she conceived God
in the flesh.

Our Lord is with thee. He does not say, My Lord only, but also of all the
Hosts, which is known from hence, That it was God who was conceived; for he was
not only Lord of the Angels, but he was God also. And why did he say God? We
say, That he observed the custom of servants, who do not call their Masters by
their name.

Blessed amongst women. That is to say, In thee is blotted out the Curse, by
thy bearing him in whom are blessed all Nations.

An EXPOSITION of the LORDS PRAYER, taken out of DIONYSIVS SYRVS his CATENA, on
the Sixth Chapter of St. Matthew: And Translated by D. L.
PRay thus. That is to say, Not as the Gentiles and Hypocrites, but as I teach
you.

(...) Prayer is sometimes taken for a promise of Vows which are separated or
designed by us to God, according to what David said, I will perform my vows to
the Lord: As also for whatsoever comes from the lips.

And (...) Prayer is an Oblation made to God after the performance of a
promise, therefore (...) ought first to be accomplished, and then (...) to
follow.

(...) Prayer is taken three manner of ways.

First, For Words; as that of Hannah, who prayed with her mouth. Secondly, For
matter of Fact; as that of Phinehas, who prayed by a zealous deed. Thirdly, For
that of the mind; according to that, I will pray in the Spirit, and I will pray
with knowledge.
And every one of these three manner of ways, bodily, mentally, spiritually,
our Lord recommends unto us the latter.

Our Father who art in Heaven.
Our Father may be termed several ways.

First, Our remote Father, as Adam the Father of us all. Secondly, Our next
Father, as Abraham, who was the Father of Isaac. Thirdly, Accidental Fathers.
Fourthly, An Instructor of Youths is called a Father: Fifthly, An aged man is
called a Father. Sixthly, The High Priest is called Father. Seventhly, The
Three hundred and eighteen Doctors are called Fathers.
Moreover, Satan is called the Father of them who are subject unto him; but in
none of these kinds do we call God our Father, but by reason of Baptism; and
forasmuch as Christ and we also are born in Baptism, we are Brethren unto him,
and Sons to the Father, as David said, I will declare thy Name to my Brethren,
and he gave them authority to be called the Sons of God. And we call the Father
our Father. Christ was the natural Son of his Father, but we are the Sons of
Grace. Unto whom does it belong to call God his Father? He who is perfect in a
good Conversation, is he who calls God our Father; but he who is of a sordid
and evil Conversation, calls Satan his Father, because he fulfills his Will.

Why does he teach us to say Our Father generally, and not peculiarly every one
of us, My Father who art in Heaven? That he might show that we are one Body,
and that our Father is one; and that we might pray for the entire body of
Brethren.

Moreover, by the words Our Father, he beats down Pride, and exalted Opinions
of our selves, showing, That Kings and Beggars are equal in that glorious
Pedigree; if ye all have one Father, ye are also of one kind in the Spirit:

Our Father who art in Heaven.
Not that he is confined to Heaven, but that he might divert the mind of him
who prays from earthly Cogitations, and raise it to Heaven.

Again, He says in Heaven, That we might be weaned from earthly Parents, and
to show that his dwelling is in Heaven.

Hallowed by the Name.
That is to say, That by our glorious and gracious living, the Name of God may
be sanctified and glorified.

Again, That we might consecrate our lips and our mouths to his Name, because
he is Holy before we can call him Holy.

Again, Hallowed. That is to say, Let thy Holy Name be praised or celebrated,
(...) is an Hebrew name, and signifies separation. And whatsoever thing is
separated from another, whether it be in beauty, or in riches, etc, the Hebrew
calls it (...) Holy, according to that, The Holy in the Land, and Renowned.

Thy Name.

Thy Name is used in the place of God, according to the phrase of Scripture,
Praise the Name of his holiness, and let them know that thy Name is the Lord
only.

Thy Kingdom come.
That is to say, That thou may deliver us from evil.

The word Kingdom is taken in sundry senses, as we have hinted heretofore.

Kingdom, The Beatitude of the World to come, wherein we shall be made immortal.

Kingdom, The time after the Resurrection of Christ, according to that, I will
not drink of the fruit of the Vine, until I drink it anew in the Kingdom.

Kingdom, The Gospel.

Kingdom, The Theory of Things of small quantity, according to that, The
Kingdom is like unto Leaven.

Kingdom, The Contemplation of the Trinity, according to that, The Kingdom
comes not by observation, and the Kingdom of God is within you. Here he calls
the Kingdom, the Grace of the Holy Spirit which we receive in Baptism.

Again, Thy Kingdom come. He teaches us to pray for Faith in him, therefore he
calls Faith the Kingdom.

Thy Will be done.
He teaches us to pray for a virtuous and chaste Conversation.

Moreover, Be pleased that we who dwell on earth may glorify thee.

As in Heaven, so also in Earth.

That is to say, As thou art well-pleased with the Angels in Heaven, so also be
pleased with us who dwell on Earth.

Give us the Bread of our Exigency.
By Bread, is understood all things necessary for the Body, Meat, Drink,
Raiment and Lodging, all which are requisite for the Body.

This day.
In that he says the day, he means the present time.

Remit unto us our debts, as we also.
For remission, he gives remission; we as men, remit unto men; but he as God,
remits unto us our many Trespasses: And as is the disproportion between a grain
and a Mountain, between a drop and the Sea, so little is our remission in
comparison of that remission he grants us.

Lead us not into Tentation.
That is to say, Let us not be the occasion of their being condemned, who are
to bring Tribulations upon us.

And again, It does not befit us to presume of our own accord the exposing of
our selves to Tentations; for Satan himself continually raises them up against
us, and therefore let not us excite them.

But deliver us from Evil.

That is to say, It behooves us always to pray, that we may be delivered from
the Temptations which the evil one raises against us.

For thine is the Kingdom.
If the Kingdom be his, then Satan is his Slave, and cannot presume to attempt
any thing, unless he permit him, as he gave him permission in the case of Job,
and of the Swine.

The Power and the Glory
His is the Power, for he is able to do all Things.

And Glory for ever.
For as his Kingdom is sure, and his Power great, so also shall his Glory,
without end, remain for ever. He comprehends the Prayer in Ten sentences,
according to the Mystery of the Ten Commandments, and the Ten Beatitudes; and
Jud (which signifies Ten) is the letter of Jesus, and the five first sentences
concern the Soul, and the five latter concern the Body, that we may purge the
Ten senses. He applies himself after Prayer to root out of the mind anger and
wrath, which if it be not done, Prayer is not accepted.

The Form of PRAYER which our Savior made after his Baptism when the Heavens
were opened, as it is delivered by Dionysius Syrus, according to the Testimony
of St. Philoxenus, and Translated by D. L.
O Father, according to the good pleasure of thy Will I am made Man; and from
the time in which I was born of a Virgin, unto this day, I have finished those
things which are agreeing to the nature of Man, and with due observance have
performed all thy Commandments, the Mysteries and Types of the Law: And now I
am baptized, and so I have ordained Baptism, that from thence, as from the
place of spiritual Eirth, the Regeneration of Men may be accomplished: and as
John was the last of the Legal Priests, so am I the first of the Evangelical.
Thou therefore, O Father, by the mediation of my Prayer open the Heavens, and
from thence send thy Holy Spirit upon this womb of Baptism; that as he did
untye the womb of the Virgin, and thence form me, so also he would loose this
Baptismal womb, and so sanctify it unto men, that from thence now men may be
begotten, who may become thy Sons, and my Brethren, and Heirs of thy Kingdom.
And what the Priests under the Law until John could not do, grant unto the
Priests of the New Testament (whose chief I am in the oblation of this Prayer)
that whenever they shall celebrate Baptism, or pour forth Prayers unto thee,
as the Holy Spirit is seen with me in open Vision, so also it may be made
manifest, that the same Spirit will adjoyn himself in their society a more
secret way, and will by them perform the ministeries of the New Testament, for
which I am made Man; and as the High Priest, I do offer these Prayers in thy
sight.

Dionysius Syrus his Question and Answer concerning the Prayer which JOHN the
Baptist taught his DISCIPLES: Translated by D.L.
Quest. What was the Prayer which John taught his Disciples?

Answ. Some recite it thus, O Lord fit us for thy Kingdom, and that we may
enjoy the happiness thereof with thy Son. Others thus, O Father show me the day
of the Baptism of thy Son. But what if one should say, What need was there of
this Prayer after he had baptized the Son, had seen the Spirit, and had heard
the Father? Others say, That he prayed thus, Repent, for the Kingdom of Heaven
is at hand. Others thus, O Father, let me hear thy Voice. O Son, show me thy
Person. O Spirit, show me thy Descent, and raise up thy Power. But neither is
this approved, the first Exposition carries with it the greater verisimilitude.

Gregorius the SYRIACK SCHOLIAST, called (...) on the Four Gospels: Translated
by DUDLEY LOFTUS J.U.D.
MATTHEW the First. The Son of David the Son of Abraham.
HE mentions David, for that they hoped Christ would arise from him,
according to that, Was not Christ to rise from the seed of David, and from
Bethlehem? He mentions Abraham also, for that it has been said, In his seed
shall all Nations be blessed. And Luke, because that he wrote unto the
Gentiles, mounted up unto Adam the common Father, and from him to God, the
Creator of all things.

Jacob begat Judah and his Brethren.

He did not mention the Brethren of Isaac and Jacob, for that the Nation of the
Hebrews were not to derive their Genealogy from them, as from the Brethren of
Judah; for these were Hebrews, the other were Edomites, the sons of Ishmael and
Esau.

Judah begat Pharez and Zarah of Thamar.

Pharez was a Type of the New Testament, whose resemblance he was made, in
regard he first put out his hand, which was afterward withdrawn. And after
Zarah, who was a Type of the Old Testament, came out, and therefore he
expresses both their names; and the Evangelist abstains from making mention of
Zarah, Rebecca, and other virtuous Women; but mentions Rahab, Ruth and
Beersheba, to reprove the Jews, who upbraided the Lineage of the Gentiles with
the peculiarity of the people of God, and thought that the meritorious cause of
becoming the servants of God, was Lineage or Wisdom; whereas he shows, That
David the Great descended from Thamar the Ammonite, who committed Fornication
with her Father-in-law, and from Rahab the Harlot, who received the Spies in
Jericho, and from Ruth the Moabite, though against the Moabites and Ammonites
it was decreed, That they should not enter into the House of the Lord for ever;
and King Solomon the wise was begotten of Beersheba the Hittite, who at first
had unlawful Communication with David.

Joram begat Hosiah.

Joram did not beget Hosiah, but Ahaziah, and Ahaziah begat Joash, and Joash
begat Amoziah, and Amoziah begat Hosiah. In the Catena he is called. (...)
Africanus of Emaus, and St. Severus say, That the Evangelists omitted these
three, for that they descended from Attaliah the Sister of Ahab. she who for
her wickedness was also called the sister of Jezabel; but if it were so, How
comes he to make mention of Ahaziah and Manaasse, who were more wicked?
Georgius de Gentilibus says, Concerning this, the Author of the Catena, after
the citation of many Opinions, rests upon none, but says, (...) Id est, quam
voluerit sententian sequatur lector.
That the first Scribe failed by reason of the similitude of letters, and
instead of Ahaziah wrote Hosiah; but neither does this Opinion prevail with me,
because that if these three be brought into computation with the others, they
make up Seventeen Generations; and if they were not omitted by the Evangelist,
How did he set down Seventeen, and reckon but Fourteen? It is therefore known
that the computation of Origin ought rather to take place, and to be credited,
who says, That the Evangelist omitted those persons, to accommodate the
computation to the pleasure of the believing Hebrews, who much respected the
number Fourteen.

Josia begat Jocania, and his Brethren in the Captivity of Babylon.

Jocania who was the Grandson of Josia, he calls his son, for Josia begat
Jehoiachim who was Aliakim, and Jehoiachim begat Jocania; and the Uncles of
Jocania on the Fathers side Jehu, Achaz and Zedekia are called his brothers
children according to the custom of Scripture, as Abraham said unto Lot the son
of his brother, We are Brethren. And because the Prophet Daniel reckons the
seventy years of Captivity in the Transmigration from the Prophecy of
Jeremiah, which began the 13th of Josia, Matthew says, That he begat Josiah,
although it was Achaziah.

Jocania begat Shelathiel.

Jeremiah the Prophet said concerning Jocaniah, That his Throne shall perish
without children, and that no man of his seed shall sit upon the Throne of
David. How therefore can Christ, of whom it is said, The Lord will give him the
Throne of his Father David, derive his Genealogy from him, for one of the two
must necessarily be false, either the Prophecy, or the Genealogy? Saint
Severus answers, That the Throne from whence the seed of Jocaniah was to
fail, was not the heavenly one which appertained to our Lord, but an earthly
one, My Kingdom is not of the world. And Shelathiel the son of Jocaniah here
mentioned, was the son of Neri, named in St. Luke, the son of Neri and Jocaniah
were Brethren as from the Mother, and when Neri dyed without sons, Jocaniah
married his Wife, and of her begat Shelathiel, it being clear that Matthew did
set down the Natural Genealogy, and Luke the Legal.

Zurubabel begat Abiud.

Luke makes Resa to be son of Zurubabel, and Saint Severus says, That both of
them were his sons, and that Matthew reckoned upon the one, and Luke upon the
other.

Jacob begat Joseph.

Luke sets down Joseph to be the son of Heli, and it is said that Jacob and
Heli were Brethren on the Mothers side, and when Heli dyed without children,
Jacob took his Wife, and of her begat Joseph, who, according to the Law, was
the son of Heli, and naturally the son of Jacob.

Moreover, Luke shows, That although Joseph be reduced to Heli, yet so the
Genealogy of Christ may be brought to David by Nathan; and he does not fix the
Genealogy upon Mary, for that the Families were not to be deduced from Women;
yet by the mention of the Genealogy of Joseph, that of the Virgin is made
known, because their Ancestors were Brethren one to another, the Father of the
Virgin was called by many names, Joiakim, Jonchir, Tsadock, Josedack, and her
Mother was called Hana and Dina.

Of whom was born Jesus who is called the Greek, who is said to be Christ, that
is to say Jesus, which is interpreted a Redeemer, it is a name of his Humanity;
but Son, the Word, and Splendour, are names of his Divinity; but Christ and
Emanuel are both of them names of Association, and from the unction of the
Humanity with the Godhead comes the name Christ.

(...) Nondum, when as they had not come together.

The Greek has it, before they came together, she was found with child. Some
say that she was a Votress, and that Joseph espoused her for Tuition, and not
for marital Conversation; but St. Severus says, That he espoused her as it
were for marital converse, or else it had not been said, When as yet they did
not come together; but forasmuch as a miracle preceded their coming together,
he was prohibited from carnal commerce.

For he that is born in her. That is to say, the word born is to be taken for
conceived, and for this reason it is said in her, and not of her.

And thou shall call his Name Jesus. (...) That is to say, Thou Joseph; but
Luke says, (...) That is to say, Thou Mary shall call.

And knew her not until she brought forth her firstborn son. That is to say,
Neither did he know her after she brought him forth, according to that, The
Raven went forth, and returned not until the waters were dried up; and it is
clear that he did not return after the waters were dried up. The like is said
of Malchil the daughter of Saul, she brought not forth until she dyed. And he
is called her firstborn son, not that she brought forth another after him, but
for that before him she brought forth no other; and Jose and James were called
his Brethren as in respect of Joseph, but not in regard of Mary.

CHAP. II.
THere came wise men from the East. Some say, That there came three Princes
with a Thousand men. And holy James says, That there were Twelve Princes, who
left Seven thousand at Euphrates, and came to Jerusalem with a Thousand. St.
Junnais and Cyrillus say, That they came when he was an Infant, and wrapped in
swaddling clothes, for the Star conducted them before he was born. And Eusebius
and Epiphanius, and Prince Ephraim, and Prince James say, That those wise men
came two years afterward, when they had carried him to Jerusalem, and were in
Bethlehem, and therefore the Evangelist says, That they entered into a House,
and not into a Cave, and in the same night the Angel appeared unto Joseph, and
he fled from thence into Egypt. And it is very manifest, That when he was born,
he went from Bethlehem to Nazareth, as Luke says; and after Two years, when
the wise men came, he fled from Bethlehem to Egypt, as Matthew says.

We have seen his star in the East. Some say, That an Angel appeared unto them
in the likeness of a star, and according to the relation of others, They saw in
the star a young maid bearing a man child in her arms, having a crown on his
head. Others say, That they saw in the star letters declarative of his birth.
Others say, That Balaam their Father, or Zardushti their Prophet, foretold the
same.

And would not be comforted, because they were not. That is to say, They could
not revive.

He shall be called a Nazaren. Matthew knew this either from an unknown
Prophet, or from Tradition, or from the Holy Ghost. And Prince Ephraim says,
That a Branch, or a Bough, is in the Hebrew called Nozor, it being apparent,
that this is the Prophecy, That a branch shall proceed from the root of Jesse.
And hence it is, That the words he shall be called a Nazaren, import, That he
shall be called a Branch.

CHAP. III.
IN those days came John the Baptist. That is to say, He does not speak of
those days when Jesus returned from Egypt, for he was then Five years of age,
being Two years old when he went thither, and remaining there Three years; but
he calls the whole space of Twenty and five years, that he dwelt in Nazareth
after his coming from Egypt, those days; for when he was Thirty years of age,
he was baptized by John.

Repent, the Kingdom of Heaven is at hand. That is to say, the Gospel of Christ
which leads to Heaven. And John was the first who used this expression of the
Kingdom of Heaven.

And his meat was Locusts, and wild Honey. Some say, That he calls sweet Roots
and Sprouts by the name of Locusts, and in the Diateseron it is written Milk
and Honey.

Sadduces. They were Samaritans.

To fly from the wrath to come. That is to say, From the destruction of
Jerusalem, which was to come to pass by Vespasian.

From these stones. That is to say, From the steril Gentiles.

And he saw the Spirit of God. Matthew and Mark, and John, say only of John the
Baptist, that he saw the Spirit. And Luke says, That the Heavens were opened,
and the Spirit descended after he was baptized, whilst he prayed. But whether
he saw, or they saw, he does not mention. And St. Junnis says, That the whole
multitude saw the Spirit; because, that when they could not by the voice which
they heard, know, who it was the Testimony concerned: The Spirit rested upon
him, and showed him unto them.

CHAP. IV.
THen Jesus was led of the Holy Spirit into the Wilderness. He did not
immediately after his Baptism go into the Wilderness, for that Three days
after he was baptized, he wrought the miracle of converting Water into Wine in
Kotna.

To be Tempted of the Devil. (...) That is to say, (...) are Accusations, and
(...) signifies as much as if one should repeat the crimes of another.

He was afterward an hungered. That is to say, in confirmation of his Humanity;
but though Moses and Elias fasted each of them Forty days, it was not said of
them that they suffered Hunger, for no man doubted but that they were men.

And showed him all the Kingdoms of the World, and the Glory of them. That is
to say, by the ministry of the Fancy, but not really, and in Truth. Luke
places the conflict of Vainglory in the Third place, and that congruously,
because the Two conflicts, viz. of Bread, and of showing him the Kingdoms, were
in the Wilderness, but that of Hunger, was on the Temple in the City.

He departed into Galilee. That is to say, He Taught us that we should not
stand in the way of evil.

For they were Fishers. That is to say, in the Old Testament Shepherds were
chosen and called, as Jacob, Moses and David, because they were to govern their
own and peculiar people; but in the New, they were Fishers, because they were
commanded to Teach without limitation every one who was prepared, as well of
the Gentiles, as of the Jews.

CHAP. V.
BLessed are they who mourn. That is to say, who mourn for their sins.

For they shall be comforted. That is to say, by pardon and forgiveness.

For they shall inherit the Earth. He calls Earth the extremity of the
Firmament, whereunto the righteous are to ascend in the Resurrection, as David
said, I hope to see the blessings of the Lord in the Land of the Living.

The Peacemakers. That is to say, They who work a reconciliation between the
Soul and the Body, insomuch that the Soul desires nothing that may be hurtful
to the Body.

It is good for nothing. (...) This word is unusual, and is not to be found
elsewhere in the whole Contexture of the Scripture.

Guilty of Judgment. That is to say of Murder.

Guilty of the Congregation. That is to say, To be expelled out of the
Congregation.

Raka. This word signifies Contempt in respect of the Body, and the word Fool
Contempt in regard of the Soul.

Thou shall not go thence, until thou shall pay. The word until, does not
denote a Release from Hell, nor an end of Torment.

Has committed Adultery in his heart. He does not condemn the natural motion,
but the will of him who is incited lasciviously.

And shall take away thy Tunick. (...) That is to say, Thy upper garment.

Thy Vest. (...) That is to say, The nether garment which covers the
nakedness.

CHAP. VI.
THey have received their Reward. That is to say, Praise from Men.

Our Father which art in Heaven. He Teaches us, That we should seek those
Things which are above the Earth, and not that God is confined to the Heavens.

From Evil. That is to say, from Satan.

The light of the Body is the Eye. The Eye mystically signifies the Fathers
and Teachers, and the Body signifies the People.

CHAP. VII.
JVdge not. That is to say, wickedly.

Not every one who shall say unto me, Lord, Lord. That is to say, Faith without
good Works does not avail.

CHAP. VIII.
AS Moses commanded for a testimony unto them. That is to say, That they might
Testify for me that I do not destroy the Law.

When Jesus heard, he marvelled. That is to say, According to his Humane
Nature; for the Divine Nature does not wonder at any thing, because admiration
is a passion of the rational Soul, not comprehending the cause of a Thing.

And saw his Wives mother. He declares hereby, That he had a Wife: And it has
been said, That when he was called to the Office of an Apostle, he did not any
more converse with her.

Bury my Father. Either he was sick unto death, or was very aged.

Permit us to go into the herd of Swine. That is to say, To the intent that
when the Swine should perish, the Owners of them might persecute him.

CHAP. IX.
AND passed over, and came to his own City. That is to say, to Capernaum, as
Mark says; for in Bethlehem he was born, in Nazareth he was bred, and he
dwelled in Capernaum.

Thy sins are forgiven thee. That is to say, because sins were the cause of the
Palsy, by the taking away the cause, he also took away the effect.

Sitting amongst the Publicans, whose name was Matthew. This he writes of
himself; and such was his Humility, that he was not ashamed of his former
calling, to wit, of being a Customer, which was reproachful.

CHAP. X.
THE first Simon who is called Cephas. He was the chief of the Apostles, he was
of Bethsaida, of the Tribe of Naphtali,. He Taught one year in Antioch, and
built a Church there, and went to Rome, and preached there for the space of
Twenty seven years; and when Paul came unto him there was a great perturbation
in Rome, and Nero commanded that both of them should be slain; and Peter
desired to be crucified with his Head downwards, that he might, as it were,
kiss his Lords feet.

And John his brother. That is to say, The Evangelist. He departed from
Jerusalem together with Mary the mother of our Lord, and they were banished
together to the Island of Patmus; and when he returned from Banishment, he
Preached in Asia, and built a Church in Ephesus, and Ignatius the fiery and
Polycarp ministered unto him, and he buried the Blessed Mary, and no man knows
where he laid her. He lived seventy and three years, and dyed after all the
Apostles, and was buried in Ephesus.

Bartholomew. His name was Jesus, and in honor of his Master, he did not call
him by his name, but by the name of his Father.

Think not that I come to send peace on earth. Some Object, How does this agree
with that, He shall speak peace with the Nations? And that, He is our peace?
And that, My peace I give unto you?

We answer, That those Things respect the perfection of the Gospel, but this
has relation to the beginning thereof.

A Prophet in the name of a Prophet. That is to say, Although he be a Prophet
in name only, and not in deed.

CHAP. XI.
A Reed shaken with the wind. That is to say, What think ye of him who has a
wavering mind ready to bend with every wind? And of him, who having formerly
known me, will now make show as if he knew me not?

And more than a Prophet. That is to say, He Prophesied, and gave Testimony of
me, as did the rest of the Prophets. And he has this superadded excellency,
That he saw me bodily.

CHAP. XII.
I Will have mercy, and not sacrifice. That is to say, If the Sabbath were
broken by sacrifice, how much rather might it be broken by mercy, which is more
pleasing to God than sacrifice.

Behold my servant in whom I am well pleased. For as much as he assumed the
likeness of a servant, to wit, his humane nature, he is called a servant by the
Prophet Esaias.

Neither shall he cry. That is to say, Furiously, or in wrath; for otherwise
he did constantly cry and preach: as says St. John, In the last day of the
Feast he stood up.

Every idle word. That is to say, Every lying word.

An evil and adulterous generation. That is to say, A people which follows
after Idols.

But the sign of the Prophet Jonas. That is to say, Of my Sepulcher and
Resurrection.

So shall the Son of man be in the heart of the earth three days, and three
nights. Some compute from part of the whole days of the Friday, Saturday, and
of the first day of the Week, and so reckon three days; and it is clear that
there were not so, three days and three nights, but peradventure we may say,
That the first day was that wherein he was Crucified, and the night thereof was
those hours wherein the Sun was darkened; and the second day, was the remainder
of Friday, and the night thereof was the whole night until Saturday morning;
and the third day was the whole Saturday, and the night thereof was part of the
night before the morning of the first day of the Week, for it is not known at
what hour our Lord arose.

CHAP. XIII.
TO him that has. That is to say, A good Will and Diligence.

It shall be given. That is to say, The understanding of the Gospel.

And to him that has not. That is to say, Much.

Even that. That is to say, That little which he has.

Shall be taken from him. That is to say, It shall be lost through his
negligence.

Every Scribe. That is to say, Who interprets the two Testaments, and knows the
sense of Holy Scripture.

The Son of the Carpenter. That is, of Joseph. Mark says, Was not this the
Carpenter the Son of Mary? And it is possible, That they saw him in some such
like action.

CHAP. XIV.
HErod the Tetrarch heard. That is to say, One of the Four Potentates who
governed in the Land of Israel.

The first was this Herod, who Ruled in Galilee, and this was he who cut off
the Head of John the Baptist, and he was the son of Herod who slew the
Children, and the Son of Herod who was surnamed Agrippus, who is mentioned in
the Acts.

The second was Philip, who governed in Ituria, and he also was the son of
Herod who put the Children to death.

The third was Pontius Pilate, who governed in Judaea.

The fourth was Lysinius who governed in Abilene: These four governed after the
rejection of Archelaus Grandchilde of Herod, who put the Children to death.

Told Jesus. That is to say, Herod thinks that thou art John risen from the
dead, and therefore he departed thence into the Wilderness.

When Jesus heard of it; viz. what Herod said.

CHAP. XV.
WHich my Father who is in Heaven has not planted, shall be rooted out, viz.
The Traditions of the Elders which God has not set down, are to be rooted out.

CHAP. XVI.
AND upon this Rock. That is, upon thee.

Will I build my Church. That is, the Congregation of the Faithful.

And he began to rebuke him. That is, He said unto our Lord, if thou shall
suffer, and shall be slain, our Preaching will cease.

For whosoever will save his life. That is, in the World to come.

Shall lose it, viz. In this World.

There are some standing here, viz. Peter, James and John.

Who shall not taste of death, until they shall see the Son of man. That is to
say, in Mount Tabor.

Coming in his Kingdom. That is, clothed in glory and majesty.

CHAP. XVII.
AND after six days, viz. After he promised and said, That they should see his
glory. Luke says, After eight days, reckoning the day wherein he discoursed
of these things with his Disciples, and the day wherein he ascended to Mount
Tabor, with the six intermediate days.

And led Peter. Because he was chief of the Apostles.

And there appeared unto them Moses. That is to say, From the dead.

And Elias, viz. From among the living; and they appeared not bodily, but by
representation.

Ye shall say to this mountain. He calls Satan by the name of mountain,
according to what the Prophet Zachary said, What art thou great mountain before
Zarubabel?

Faith as a grain of mustard seed. That is, which does not doubt at all; and it
is certain, that such a Faith as this is not found in every man.

Take and give for me and thee. Hence it appears, that Simon also was a
firstborn Son; for every firstborn son was to pay yearly two Didrachma's or
Souzes to the Highpriests, and whether this piece of money were newly created,
or whether the Fish had found it, and swallowed it, God only knows.

CHAP. XVIII.
AND Jesus called a little Boy. It has been said, That Ignatius the fiery was
this Boy.

But woe to the man by whom scandals shall come. Some say that this is meant
concerning Judas Iscariot.

But if thy hand or thy foot. That is, thy servant or thy wife.

Does not leave the Ninety and Nine. That is to say, the Angels.

In the Mountain. That is, in Heaven above.

Wherefore. That is to say, because it is fit to forgive much.

CHAP. XIX.
AN Eunuch for the Kingdom of Heaven. He praises those who cut off their
lascivious thoughts, and not those who abscind their prolifick members, for
this is forbidden by the Apostles Canons.

Every one is not sufficient for this thing. Every one cannot conserve
Virginity.

Easier for a Camel. St. Cyrell expounds this of a thick Cable, but Moses Bar
Cepha takes it for a great Animal.

The Master of the House. That is, God.

CHAP. XX.
WHO went out early in the Morning. That is to say, in the beginning of the
Creation he was careful of this, that the house of Adam should do good things.

And he went out the third hour. That is, when the Children of Israel went out
of Egypt.

And he went out the sixth, and the ninth hour. That is, in the time of the
Judges, and Kings of Israel.

And about the eleventh hour. That is, the later times when the Gospel of our
Lord began to be Preached.

Who have born the burden of the day. That is to say, Persecution in Egypt,
Tribulation in the Wilderness, and Captivities and Banishments.

CHAP. XXI.
HE came to Bethphage. The Greek reads it (...), it is a place where that
bituminous matter grows wherewith Women paint the hands and feet of
themselves, and their Children.

Others say, That Phagi is interpreted over against.

Others, A place where several ways meet.

Others, A wild Fig Tree; Phagi in the Greek Tongue is expounded Lintels.

And sitting on a Foal. This signifies the submission of the Gentiles who were
not brought under the yoke of the Law, and not that he rode for weariness,
because he rode from Bethany, and not from a remote place.

Had two sons. That is to say, the people of God, and the Gentiles.

Labor in the Vineyard. That is, keep the Commandments of God.

Master of the house. That is God.

And planted a Vineyard. The people of Israel.

And hedged it round. That is, He established the Law for them.

And built a Tower therein. That is, the Temple.

And set it out to Husbandmen. To the Priests.

The time of fruit. When they inherited the Land of promise.

He sent his servants. That is to say, the Prophets who were before the
Captivity of Babylon.

Moreover, he sent other servants, viz. The Prophets who were after the
Captivity.

His Son, viz. Christ in the flesh.

When he shall come. That is, in the day of Judgment.

The stone which the builders refused. That is to say, the Jewish Doctors.

CHAP. XXII.
A Man who was not clad with a wedding garment.

That is, a Believer destitute of good works.

For many are called. Those who believe.

And few are chosen. They who are adorned with good Works.

CHAP. XXIII.
THeir Phylacteries. That is to say, Tables whereon they wrote the Ten
Commandments, which the Scribes and Pharisees hung about their necks.

And enlarge the borders of their vestments. That is to say, they did
interweave Scarlet in the manner of Stars on the borders of their garments,
that they might be known.

He who swears by the Corban which is thereupon, is guilty. That is to say,
he calls the Vessels or Utensils and Vestments of administration which
approached the Altar by the name of Corban; and it is certain that though they
were simple in themselves, yet were they sanctified in their relation to the
Altar.

Unto the blood of Zacharias, the Son of Barachias. That is to say, the Father
of John the Baptist, after whom your power was dissolved, and you have not
authority to put any one to death.

Some say, that this was Zacharias, one of the Twelve Prophets; but this
conjecture is not true, for he was not slain, but dyed in peace, nor does the
scope of our Lords speech testify the same.

Ye shall not see me henceforth. That is, from the time I am to ascend into
Heaven.

Until ye shall say, Blessed is he who comes in the Name of the Lord. That is,
at my last coming.

CHAP. XXIV.
When therefore ye shall see the abomination of desolation. That is to say,
the ensign of the Eagle which Caius Caesar commanded that they should set up
upon the Temple.

And unless those days were shortened. That is to say, Jerusalem was then
besieged but One hundred and sixteen days by the Romans after the crucifying
of our Lord, viz. from the 25th of April, to the 9th of August.

Then if one shall say unto you, Lo, here is Christ. This he says of
Antichrist, to wit, a lying Christ; and he gives charge that they should not
believe in him, for it is Satan who enters into a deceiving Jew, and works
feigned miracles, and before the latter coming of our Lord shall for a little
while appear.

The sign of the Son of man in the clouds. That is, a Cross shining in the Air.

With a Trumpet. In some of the Greek copies, with the voice of a Trumpet.

Heaven and Earth shall pass away. Passing away, he does not call a total
annihilation or privation, but mutation, like this, He passed away from evil,
and did that which was good.

Who then is. The word who, is not here to be taken interrogatively, but
approbatively.

CHAP. XXV.
TEN Virgins. The full number of virtuous souls.

The Bridegroom and the Bride. The word Bride is not to be found in all the
Greek copies, and particularly in that of Alexandria.

To one he gave talents. To wit, to the chief Priests who consecrate the holy
Unction, offer the Oblation, and confer Orders, and baptize, and consecrate
Churches.

To another two, viz. the Priests, who offer the Oblation, and do baptize.

And to another one. As to the Deacons, who purify only.

Which thou did not sow. That is to say, what Satan sowed, thou did reap.

The Son of man in his glory. He raises the contemplation of the Disciples to
the glory of his latter coming, that they might not be offended at the meanness
of his first coming.

CHAP. XXVI.
AND they covenanted with him. That is to say, they promised unto him.

Thirty pieces of money. The word, for the most part, is taken for silver.

To such an one. His name was not published, lest Judas hearing of it, should
make ready those who were to crucify him, and so the washing, and receiving of
the mysteries might have been disturbed, and as some think that this was Joseph
the Counselor, and as others would have it, it was Nicodemus, or Lazarus, or
Simon of Cyrene.

And when it was Evening. That is, the Evening before the preparation.
Hypolitus of Rome says, That our Lord did not eat the Passover this Evening,
for it ought to have been eaten in the morning of the day; but he celebrated
the mystery only of his body and blood in bread and wine. But Juannis, and the
rest of the Doctors say, That he did eat the Lamb. But the first Opinion is
most to be approved of, as appears by the Gospel, which mentions only the
preparation of the Passover.

Moreover, The Law it self so testifies, which did not command to eat on the
Evening preceding the 15th day, but on the morning of the 15th day, which the
Evangelist John clearly demonstrates, for on the morning of the preparation
they had not yet eaten the Passover; and our Lord who came for the fulfilling
of the old Law, had broken it by eating before day; and if he had so done, this
alone had been sufficient to have furnished them with high matter of
accusation, nor had they needed any thing else to have laid to his charge.

Who dippeth his hand. All dipped with him, but the rest of the Disciples
withheld when he put forth his hand, but Judas impudently put forth his hand
to dip at the very same time with our Lord; and that they dipped either in Wine
or Vinegar, or Water, is clear by the Law, which prohibited to eat any thing
made or prepared with fire.

As it is written concerning him. Some object thus, and say, If Judas betrayed
him for the fulfilling of the Scripture, as our Lord himself says, Wherefore
does he pronounce a woe unto him?

We say, That he is condemned for betraying him with an evil conscience, and
not for the fulfilling of the Law.

And he said, Take ye all of it. Prince Ephraim, and Prince Jacobus say, That
our Lord communicated the mysteries unto Judas, but after he had dissacrated
the bread by dipping it in water. But others say, That the mysteries do not
become unholy by dipping them in water. St. Juannis and Severus say, That he
did partake of the holy bread, without being absolved of its holiness. And St.
Philoxenus says, That he did not at all partake thereof, forasmuch as Satan
had entered into him, wherefore we do not communicate unto those who are
possessed. And David Caenobita the son of Paul, says, That he did partake
thereof, not being unholied; but he for want of faith, did eat it as mere bread.

When they had sung. In some of the Syriack copies it is in the singular number
without the letter vau, as if Jesus only had sung; but it ought to be in the
plural number with the said letter, and to refer to the Disciples, as it is in
all Greek Copies.

This night before the Cock crow, thou shall deny me thrice. Mark says, Before
the Cock crow twice, thou shall deny me thrice. Both agree in the same sense,
but Mark declares this, That the Cock at one time, or uno impetu, did double
its voice.

Twelve Legions. A Legion, is Ten thousand.

I am able to destroy the Temple of God, and to build it up in three days. He
did not say so, but destroy this Temple, to wit, Ye, wherefore those Witnesses
were reputed false Witnesses.

CHAP. XXVII.
AND he went and hanged himself. Luke in the Acts does not say, That he hanged
himself, but that he burst asunder in the midst, and all his bowels gushed out;
and it might have been, that after he was hanged, he burst asunder.

A famous prisoner called Baraba. His name was Jesus; and that no error might
arise from the Identity of name, he was named from his Father.

Scourged Jesus with whips. Cords that were pleated, for it was the custom of
the Romans to scourge him first whom they would crucify.

They plated a Crown of Boughs. That is to say, of Thorn, having white blossoms.

They came to a place which was called Golgotha. They say, That Shem the son of
Noah did there bury the head of Adam, and this was the Court of Aran the
Jebusite.

And they gave him to drink vinegar. In some of the Greek copies it is written
Wine.

The cause of his death in writing. In the Greek it is, His accusation which
was written. Luke and John say, That they wrote in three Languages, in Hebrew,
Latin and Greek. The reason was, that these three Nations were then celebrated
in Jerusalem, more than the Syrians and the Arabians, and the rest, which much
less esteemed them.

And they crucified with him two Thieves. He who was on his right hand had the
name of Titus, and he on the left hand was named Domcus, for so it is to be
found in the Book of St. Aretus, the Disciple of Paul.

Also the Thieves who were crucified with him, reviled him. It is probable,
that both of them did at first blaspheme; but afterward, he on the right hand,
when he saw the darkness which happened, took it into consideration, and
confessed; and the other, though he saw what happened, did not consider it.

And there was darkness over the whole earth. This darkness was not only upon
the Land of Jerusalem, but it was also observed to extend unto Athens, as
Dionysius the Areopagite declares in his Discourse against Apoloponis the
Sophister; and this was an Eclipse of the Sun, not by the Moon, as are all
natural Eclipses thereof; but it was contrary to custom by the body of some
thick cloud, or some other thing, which by Gods Providence arose in the face of
the Sun, and darkened it; and it is demonst able from hence, That it was not in
the Newness of the Moon, but about the full Moon, to wit, on the 14th day
thereof.

Until the ninth hour. Matthew and Luke do not set forth at what hour our Lord
was crucified, but Mark says, it was the Third hour when they crucified him.
And John says, it was about the Sixth hour when Pilate sat upon the Tribunal,
and said unto the Jews, Shall I Crucify your King? And some, desirous to show
the Truth of both sayings, say, That Pilate sat in Judgment upon our Lord from
the Third hour to the Sixth, and at the Sixth hour delivered him up to be
crucified, as St. John says. But Mark, forasmuch as from the Third hour
wherein they began to judge him, they were resolved in their minds to crucify
him, he said, That they crucified him the Third hour. And we say, That this
might have been probable, if before the compelling of Simon of Cyrene, and the
coming to Golgotha, and the drinking of imbittered Wine, and the dividing of
his garments, Mark had said this, That it was about the Third hour when they
crucified him: But behold it was not so. Others say, That this in St. John is
an error, not of the Evangelist (God forbid) but of the first Scribe, who,
instead of Three which he would have written, wrote Six. But without
undervaluing the insufficiency of these two Answers, I say, That Mark reckoned
from the hours which were from the beginning of the day, until the hour wherein
our Lord was crucified, and they were three; but John computeth the hour from
the time when the Jewish Sergeants apprehended our Lord, and bound him at night
before the Cock crowed, until the hour wherein they crucified him, and it was
the sixth hour, three of the night of the preparation, and three of the day.

And many bodies of the Saints. He calls those Saints, who believed in our
Lord, and departed this life a few days before.

And after his Resurrection they came into the holy City. That is to say,
Jerusalem. It has been said, That they remained therein only Three days
preaching, and afterward returned to their Sepulchers: Neither did they appear
unto all men, but to their Kindred only; and some say, That he does not here
call this earthly Jerusalem the holy City, but the heavenly one.

One of them was Mary Magdalen. Eusebius faith, That there were two Magdalens,
and each of them was called Mary. The one of them was this which Matthew speaks
of, and it is likely she was the daughter of Simon the Leper, and sister of
Lazarus. The other, was she out of whom he cast seven Devils, whereof Luke
speaks.

And they rolled a great stone, and cast it to. In all the Syriack copies these
verbs are written in the plural number, but in the Greek the singular number is
used, and that is congruous; for this story concerns Joseph of Arimathea only,
wherefore it is said, He took it, and rolled it, and put it to.

CHAP. XXVIII.
AND for fear of him. i.e. because he was an Angel. For I know that (ye seek)
Jesus who was crucified. The Greek has it, The Nazarite who was crucified. And
take notice, That in three Greek copies, and in one Syriack, the name Nazarite
is not found.

All power is given unto me in heaven and in earth. The word given, he takes
for revealed, to wit, my power which was hidden henceforward is revealed.

Amen. That is, in Truth.
MARK,
CHAP. I. The Beginning of the Gospel of Jesus Christ.
THat Baptism was the Beginning of the Gospel, according to the order set down
by St. Mark, is evident from this, That before our Lord was Baptized, he
neither Preached, nor Evangelized; but after that he was Baptized, and Tempted,
he began to say, Repent, the Kingdom of heaven is at hand. And St. Basil says,
That this Mark first used the word Evangelium, and this is clear from hence,
That the other Three Evangelists made no mention thereof.

A voice crying in the wilderness. John is called a voice, because he made
known Christ the Word; for by the voice is made known the Word that is hidden
in the mind.

Confessing their sins. Hence it is manifest, That confession is necessary for
the Faithful.

And straightway he came up out of the water. That is to say, our Lord.

He saw. To wit, John the Baptist.

And straightway the Spirit took him out. To wit, the holy Spirit.

What have we to do with thee. This one speaks as from the mouth of them all.

CHAP. II.
THE son of Halphaeus. All the Doctors agree, That this Levi was Matthew the
Publican, who was an Evangelist, and that Jesus sat down in his House, and Mark
here calls him the son of Halphaeus; and that this was not the brother of James
the son of Halphaeus, is demonstrable from this, That Matthew was of the Tribe
of Issachar, and this (James) was of the Tribe of Menasse.

When Abiathar was High Priest. In the Book of Samuel it is written, That David
desired the holy bread from Achimelech the Father of Abiathar, and it is
possible that he desired it from Achimelech, and that Abiathar his son gave it.

CHAP. III.
SOns of Thunder. Because the sons of Zebedee did preach with a high voice, he
calls them by this name.

And his Kindred heard. That is to say, the children of Joseph.

CHAP. IV.
THat under the shadow thereof the Fowl may dwell. That is to say, the Gentiles
without the Law, may rest under the shade of the Gospel.

And they left the multitudes. In some Copies it is read, He left, but that
reading is not to be approved, but we ought to follow the Greek Copies, to wit,
That he and his Disciples left them, or dismissed them.

And there was a great tempest. The Syriack word signifies a boisterous wind
which blows on the face of the earth, and raises up dust and sand; it is of
an Hebrew derivation, and is expounded the ascent of God.

CHAP. V.
LEGION. That is to say, Ten Thousand.

CHAP. VI.
BEhold the Carpenter the son of Mary. It is likely that Joseph was dead, and
therefore he did not mention him with his mother and brethren.

Except a Rod. The word except, bears the sense of neither in this place; and
it is clear from this, That Matthew says neither a Rod.

It is not lawful for thee to take the wife of thy brother. Because she had by
fraud caused him to be put to death; and had it not been for this, it had not
been unlawful for him to take her to Wife, according to the Law of Moses.

CHAP. X.
TImaeus the son of Timaeus. In two Greek copies, it is a blind man the son of
a blind man.

And to say, Son of David. In two Greek copies, we find it, Son of the Son of
David have mercy upon me.

CHAP. XIII.
AND not the Son, but the Father. Matthew has not (the wo^ds) and not the Son.
And our Lord said this with reservat^on and not that he was ignorant of the
thing; for he who knew the Father who was concealed and ^ncomprehensible,
saying, No man knows the Father but ^he Son. H^w could he but know the time of
the end of the World? He said thus for this reason, to wit, That if he had said
I know and will not tell, they had been offended; and it he had said he knew,
and had declared it unto them, others would have known it from them, and have
communicated it to all other generations: and so by reason of the remoteness of
time, they would have grown negligent and careless. Hence it is known, That it
is more advantageous to the sons of men to be ignorant of a matter of this
kind, than to have knowledge thereof.

CHAP. XIV.
AND he took the Chalice, and gave thanks, and blessed, and gave unto them. In
the Greek it is not said, That he blessed any mo^e than the body only.

And a certain young man followed him, and was naked, only covered with a
linen cloth. That this was a stranger is known from hence, that his Disciples
were modest, and ashamed to accompany him with a linen cloth only.

Wine mixed with myrrh. That he might be the more intoxicated, and not be
sensible of the agony of death.

And Mary the mother of James the less. That is to say, the brother of our
Lord; and that he might be distinguished from James the brother of Zebedee, he
calls him the less; and this Mary was not the mother of our Lord, but the wife
of Joseph, to wit, the mother of his children.

And of Jose and Shalom. These also were the natural sons of Joseph, and were
called the brethren of our Lord in name only, and not by consociation of blood.

CHAP. XVI.
AFter this he was seen of two of them. Luke the Evangelist speaks clearly of
one of them that he was Cleophas; but as concerning the other, there are
different opinions. Some say, it was the wife of Cleophas. Others say, That it
was Luke himself; and that he might not seek glory, he did not mention his name.

And confirmed their words with the signs which they wrought. St. Severus
says, in the Seventy seventh discourse of his Epithronion, That in approved
Greek copies, the Gospel of Mark ends with these words, For they were afraid.

LUKE,
CHAP. I.
FOrasmuch as many. That is to say, The Sect of Simon the Sorcerer, and those
of the Circumcision; for it is said, That there were Eighty four Gospels
according to the number of Apostles and Disciples; and after the Apostles
departed this life, their Disciples chose two of those of the Apostles, to wit,
those of Matthew and John; and two of those of the Disciples, to wit, Mark and
Luke, and that they destroyed the rest.

According to what they have delivered. That is to say, The Apostles.

To us. That is to say, To me and to Mark.

Of the Word. That is to say, of Preaching; to wit, Evangelical denuntiation,
and the doctrine of our Lord in the World; and that this voice the Word is
applicable to those Three senses, is apparent from the words of Gregorius
Theologus.

Theophilus. This man was a Believer, and one of the Rulers of Alexandria.

Nor Seicera (strong drink) That is to say, a certain kind of drink which was
made of Honey, and of Dates, etc.

From the Birth of Jesus to his Baptism were Thirty years, and from his Baptism
to his Ascension were Two years and Six months.

He shall be great. That is to say, His greatness shall be revealed to Angels
and to Men.

And the power of him on high shall come upon thee. All the Greek Doctors
agree, That with this saying, the Divinity was united with the Soul and Body;
and amongst the Syrian Fathers, Absanius of Mabog says, That with this saying,
the Word was united with the Flesh, as John says, The Word was made flesh, and
dwelt in us; and after Forty days when the body was formed, it received the
rational soul.

By the name of his father Zacharia. Every firstborn son they called by the
name of his Father, according to the custom which they held.

And they made signs unto his father. This shows, That his speech failed also
with his hearing.

And he was in the Wilderness. When he was Two years and an half old, his
Mother fled with him from Herod, for he was born Six months before our Lord;
and when our Lord was Two years old, the Wise men came, and Herod slew the
Children: and because Zacharia had caused his son to fly away, he sent to put
him to death between the Altar and the Temple, whereunto he fled, and betook
himself, viz. to the horns of the Altar.

CHAP. II.
THat all the people of his Empire should be taxed. The Greek, That all the
inhabitated World should be taxed. Here the Syriack sense is more to be
approved, than the Greek, because Caesar's power did not extend its self to all
Nations of the World.

And good tidings unto men. You may take notice, that the word Amen is hereunto
added in some Syriack Copies, but not in the Greek.

And when eight days were accomplished. The Armenians partly adhering to the
fancy of Julianus, say, That he was not in Truth circumcised, but that they
only drew a line over his skin.

And when the days of their purification were accomplished. She who bore a son,
was purified in Forty days; but she who bore a daughter, in Eighty days.

His name was Simeon. He was the Father of Jesus the son of Asira, and he was
one of the Seventy and two Interpreters, who Translated the Hebrew Bible into
the Greek in the days of Ptolomy, and because he doubted concerning this
passage, viz. a Virgin shall conceive, and bring forth, spoken by Esaias the
Prophet, he was bound Two hundred and eighty years to the Oblation, until he
saw him who was born of a Virgin.

Behold he is appointed for the fall. That is to say, of the Scribes and
Pharisees.

And for the rising of many in Israel. That is to say, of sinners who shall be
justified by him.

And for a sign of contention. That is to say, There shall be diverse Opinions
concerning him.

Of the Tribe of Aser, she also was aged. In the Greek, the words she also are
not written, for she was not so old as Simeon.

CHAP. III.
With your allowance. That is, whatsoever was given by the King for their
maintenance.

I baptize you with water. That is to say, I wash you from sins.

The son of Heli. Matthew the Evangelist calls Joseph the son of James, and not
the son of Heli; and Aphrichianus the Genealogist says, That Heli was the son
of Matthath, and that James was the son of Mathan, Brethren by the Mother whose
name was Estha, and they were searchers of Secrets; and when Heli dyed without
sons, James his Brother took his Wife according to the Law for constitution of
sons, and of her begat Joseph. Hence it is that Joseph was the natural son of
James, as Matthew said; and the legal son of Heli, as Luke said.

The son of Matthath the son of Levi, the son of Melchi. Aprichianus says,
That according to the Tradition they received from the Hebrew Genealogists,
Heli Matthath and Levi were Brethren the sons of Melchi, and not as Luke said,
Heli the son of Matthath, and Matthath the son of Levi.

The son of Zerubabel. Matthew says, That Zerubabel begat Abiud; and Luke
says, That Zerubabel begat Resa; and St. Severus says, That Zerubabel had
two sons, Abiud and Resa; and Matthew computed Abiud, and Luke reckoned upon
Resa: and George of the Gentiles says, That they had not one Father, but two,
who were called by the same name Zerubabel: and others say, That Abiud was
Resa, to wit, that one person was called by two names.

The son of Shelathiel the son of Neri. Matthew says, That Jechonia begat
Shelathiel, and Luke says, That Neri begat Shelathiel; and St. Severus says,
That Melchi the Father of Neri took a Wife whose name was Nahashta, and of her
begat Neri; and when Melchi dyed, Jehoiakim the King who was Eliakim, took
Nahashta his Wife for her beauty, and of her begat Jochania, and Neri and
Jochania were Brethren by the Mother; and Neri took a Wife, and dyed without
sons; and Jochania his Brother took his Wife, and of her begat Shelathiel.
Hence it was, that this Shelathiel was the natural son of Jochania, as Matthew
said; and the legal son of Neri, as Luke said; and George of the Gentiles does
not agree to this, but says, That Shelathiel the son of Jochania was one, and
Shelathiel the son of Neri was another.

The son of Joram. This Joram was not the son of Jehoshaphet, as Matthew says,
but the son of Mathitha.

The son of Nathan the son of David. Matthew says, That David begat Solomon;
and Luke says, That David begat Nathan: and this difference proceeds from
this, That Matthew was willing to write only the natural Genealogy which was
deduced from Solomon the son of David; and Luke, by reason of a contest amongst
the Jews, was forced to write the natural and legal Genealogy which was
deduced from Nathan the son of David, for which reason many names in Luke
differ from those in Matthew.

The son of Jesse, the son of Obed, the son of Boaz. Julianus King of the
Gentiles, objects, and says, If Luke wrote the legal Generations, wherefore
does he mention Obed to be the son of Boaz, according to the rule of nature,
and not the son of Malion, according to the legal deduction, as it is written
in the book of Ruth?

The Doctors answer thus, That there was a controversy amongst the Jews
concerning Joseph, whether he proceeded from David or no? and therefore blessed
Luke proves, That not only naturally as Matthew writes, but legally also the
Genealogy of Joseph mounts up to David; and Luke ascending from David to
Abraham, computes the natural Fathers, as Matthew did.

The son of Abraham the son of Terah. From hence Luke begins to carry on the
Genealogy where Matthew left off, and to raise it to Adam, because he did not
as St. Matthew write his Gospel to the Hebrews, who boasted of Abraham, but to
all Nations who were deduced from Adam as well as he.

The son of Adam who was from God. Aprichianus sets down Fifty persons from
Abraham to Christ; and in all the Copies of Luke, which are read in the Holy
Churches, there are Fifty and Six; and so from Adam to our Lord, Seventy and
six: and according to the natural Genealogy of the Gospel of Matthew from
Abraham to Joseph, there were Forty persons; and according to the Book of the
Kings, there were Forty and four, to wit, Ahazia and Joash, and Amotsia and
Eliakim, who was Jehoiakim being added.

CHAP. IV.
HE departed from him for a season. That is to say, until the time of the
Passion when he incited the Jews to apprehend him.

The acceptable year of the Lord. That is to say, The year wherein Repentance
for sin was to be accepted by the Lord.

Naaman the Oromojan. That is to say, the Syrian. The Nestorian reads the
Syriack word with Pathocho over Olaph, and a quiescent R. That is to say, the
Gentile; but that reading is not to be approved of, because the Greek reads it
o (...), the Syrian.

CHAP. VII.
OR expect we another. Some say, That this disjunctive particle bears in this
place the sense of a negative; and that John did not say thus interrogatively,
but positively, as if he would have said, Thou art he, and we do not expect
another; but this is not the meaning of the words.

CHAP. IX.
AND a returning spirit. That is to say, on certain days it left him, and then
Tormented him as an ague.

CHAP. X.
THen to this City. That is to say, and not to this City.

Peradventure they had repented in sackeloth and ashes. The Nestorians read the
word repented in the masculine plural, but not rightly, because the Greek reads
it (...).

And behold a certain Scribe arose to tempt him. The Commentators of Cineria
are of Opinion, That this was the same who is mentioned in Matthew and Mark, to
have said to our Lord, Good Master, What shall I do to inherit eternal life?
And that this was not he is certain from this consideration that there is
mention made of him by Luke hereafter in the paragraphy of the tenth Sabbath.

Thou art sollicitous about many things. That is to say, more than are
necessary.

But one thing is requisite. That is to say, The exigency of the day.

CHAP. XI.
TEach us to pray. The prayer Our Father which art in Heaven, Matthew and Luke
only mention it, and Luke does not add, For thine is the Kingdom, etc. The
Queen of the South. The Sarakians say, That the name of this Queen was Balkis.

CHAP. XII.
COmmand my brother to divide inheritance with me. This man was covetous, and
because his brother followed our Lord, he hoped that our Lord would have said
unto him, Leave whatsoever thou have unto thy brother, and come after me. But
when he discovered the evil intention of his Covetousness, which made him
forsake the secular Judges to come unto him, he did not vouchsafe to answer his
request.

The Baptism wherewith I shall be baptized. That is to say, I am to dye a
voluntary death, wherein I am to rise from the Earth, as out of the Water.

CHAP. XIII.
TO day and to morrow. That is to say, This year and the next.

Out of Jerusalem. That is to say, it was necessary that the Jews the sons of
Jerusalem, should partake in the murder of the Prophets; for though Jeremy was
slain in Egypt, yet was he stoned by those Jews of Jerusalem who fled from the
Chaldeans, and Daniel dyed a natural death in Babylon.

CHAP. XVI.
AND takes another, commits adultery. That is to say, he who without a
lawful cause puts away the first.

There was a certain rich man. Because he was wicked, his name is not
mentioned, according to that, I will not remember their name with my lips. And
moreover, That he might show that he was to blot the names of the wicked out of
the Book of Life; and many of the Doctors say, That this rich man was not in
any real subsistency, neither Lazarus the Beggar, but that it was only a
Parable; and it is certain, That as yet the wicked have not received Torment,
nor the Righteous Bliss, as Paul says, They received not the promise, that
they might not be perfected without us. Saint Cyril says, That this Rich man
was in very deed, and that his name was Naphtali of the Tribe of Dan, and that
Lazarus was descended from the Gibeonites, and behold his Water-pot is
preserved hitherunto, and whosoever is ulcerous or lame in his Feet, is Cured
thereby.

And was clothed with fine linen. That is to say, pure white Cotton, which by
reason of the exceeding fineness thereof, is like to the air.

CHAP. XVII.
MIght say unto this Sycamore tree be thou plucked up by the roots, and be
planted in the sea. He brought this Tree for an instance, by reason it has
more Roots than other Trees.

CHAP. XVIII.
AND was not restrained by shame of men. Who adored the fire which is
insensible.

But I fast twice in the Week. That is to say, The Pharisees fasted the second
and fifth day of the Week.

CHAP. XXII.
HE who is greatest amongst you. It is likely that they did not remember what
was said unto Peter, That thou art Cephas, and on thee will I build my Church,
and I will give thee the Keys of Heaven.

Here are two Swords. St. Junnis says, That they were Knives for the Passover
which were prepared there.

CHAP. XXIII.
AND they gave him vinegar. That he might drink thereof, and dye the sooner.

CHAP. XXIV.
AND from Jerusalem sixty furlongs. In some of the Greek copies it is an
Hundred and sixty.

Peace be with ye amen. The word amen is not found in all copies.

And he took and did eat before them. He did eat, that he might remove from
them the Opinion of a Phantasm, and not that he stood in need of meat.

And he lifted up his hands, and blessed them. That is to say, he made them
Bishops; and when he sent them two and two, he made them Deacons; to wit,
purifiers from evil spirits; and when he breathed on them, and gave them power
to forgive sins, he ordained them Priests.

JOHN wrote his Gospel in the Greek Tongue at the Request of those of Asia. And
Eusebius says, That Peter and Paul came unto him to Ephesus, and did persuade
him to write.

JOHANNIS
CHAP. I. The Word was made flesh, and dwelt in us.
HE here declares his natural union and personality with humane nature, and not
the change of his nature.

And of his fullness have we all received. This is the saying of the Evangelist,
and not of the Baptist.

And grace. That is to say new; for grace, that is to say, old.

Truth and grace was by Jesus Christ. He does not say, That the Law of Moses
was false, but that it was the shadow of this body.

These things were done in Bethany beyond Jo^dan. In ancient Copies it is
written, These things were done in the passage of Jordan. And this is to be
approved, for Bethany was not in the Wilderness where John baptized, for it was
about Twelve miles from Jordan.

One of those who heard That is to say, Andrew, and John himself was the other;
but he would not express his name, being restrained by humility.

Can any good thing come out of Nazareth? He says this, as having read that
Christ was to spring from Bethlehem, and not knowing that he was born in
Bethlehem.

CHAP. II.
FOrty and six years was this Temple in building. That building did not require
so long a space of time, but they were hindered by their bordering Nations.

CHAP. III.
UNless a man shall be born of Water, and the Spirit. He does not say, Unless a
man has been born. For just men who went before, inherited the Kingdom, and
were not baptized; but shall be baptized, to wit, henceforward.

CHAP. IV.
HIs Disciples went into the City. It is probable, That as yet he had not
commanded them that they should not enter into the City of the Samaritans, and
they entered not to learn, but to buy victuals.

Was not thy husband. That is to say, is not, because the five husbands which
she took, dyed one after another; she was reputed an Homicide, as Thamar was by
Judah; and for the reproach of Widowhood, she took a sixth, with a Covenant
that he should not have commerce with her as a Wife.

The sowers. That is to say, the Prophets. The reapers. That is to say, the
Apostles.
CHAP. V.
THere was a feast of the Jews. That is to say, Pentecost.

Which was called in the Hebrew Bethesda. That is to say, an house of ignominy,
because they washed therein the Sacrifices from blood and excrements. Some men,
by another reading, will have the word to signify an house of mercies, from
the help given to the blind and lame; it sounds like this, The Lord was with
Joseph, and shed mercy upon him. But this is not to be approved, because the
Greek reads it (...) That is to say, a house of the excrements of sheep, and
instead of Bethesda, calls it Bethtsaida.

And he who descended first after the commotion of the water, was cured. Some
say, That it conferred remedy, by reason that the body of Esaia was buried
there.

Thou art whole, sin no more. This shows, That sin was the cause of his
Palsy.

The Son can do nothing of his own will. By this he shows the harmony of will
between the Father and the Son, and does not set sorth the imbecility of his
power.

For the hour comes, and now is, when the dead shall hear. He hints the
Resurrection of Laza^rus.

The hour comes, when all they who are in the grave. Inasmuch as he does not
here add, and now is, he signifies the general Resurrection to come.

CHAP. VI.
FOR him the Father has sealed (to be) God. That is to say, That he has
demonstrated and revealed, That the Son of man which ye have seen, is God.

I am the bread of life. St. Joannis says, That here he calls God the bread of
life; and where he says, and the bread which I shall give, is my body, he
means his body.

I am the bread which came down from Heaven. That is to say, his Godhead.

And the bread which I shall give, is my body. That is to say, his Humanity.

No man can come to me, unless it be given to him from my Father. That is to
say, without Gods assistance, Grace is not to be acquired.

CHAP. VII.
THat I have made a man altogether whole. Not a part of him only as
Circumcision, but his whole Body which had the Palsy; and if for one member
the Sabbath may be broken, how much rather shall it be broken for all the
Members.

When Christ comes, no man knows from whence. This is to be understood
concerning Idiots, and not of their Scribes, who knew that he was to come from
Bethlehem, and of the seed of David.

Search and look, for out of Galilee arises no Prophet.

CHAP. VIII.
THere is found in the Copy of Alexandria, the Paragraphy of the Adulterous
Woman which they brought to Jesus, asking him, Whether she ought to be stoned?
But whilst he stooped, and wrote the sins of every one of them, they left her,
and went their way; but Jesus said unto her, Go thy way, and henceforward do
not sin.

If ye be sons of Abraham. That is to say, he shows they were not; for he said
before, I know that ye are the seed of Abraham, but that by deeds ye are not
his sons, speaking according to the Apostle, Not all those who are of Israel
are Israelites

And he saw and rejoiced. By reason of the nearness of the time, he speaks as
if he had been already Crucified.

CHAP. IX.
Master, who did sin, he or his Parents, that he was born blind? Because they
heard him say to the sick of the Palsy, Sin no more, they thought that sin was
the cause of his Palsy.

Neither he sinned, nor his Parents. Not that they were without sin, but that
the cause of blindness was not sin; and in that he said, Neither he sinned, he
confuteth the Platonic conceit, which holds, That Souls declining from
Virtue in their first bodies, are in a kind of Torment imprisoned in their
second Bodies, as in Sepulchers, and therefore Bodies are called (...), and
Sepulchers ((...)) simata, in terms of Affinity; and a Soul is called (...),
and could (...), and by these words, Neither his Parents, he refutes the Jewish
Opinion, That the sins of the Fathers are imposed on the heads of their
Children.

While it is day, the night comes when no man can work. That is to say, He
calls this World the day wherein men may be justified, and he calls the World
to come Night, where there is no place for Repentance; but Paul on the
contrary, calls this World Night, for that spiritual things are not therein
discerned.

I am come for judgment of this world. That is to say, for trial of men; and
above he said, That God did not send his Son that he might judge the world; to
wit, That he should pronounce sentence against the sons of men, for this was
the scope of his second coming, for here is Trial, and there is Judgment.

CHAP. X.
AND that they might have more abundantly. Not of life, but of such corporeal
things as they had.

And it was the Feast of Renovation at Jerusalem, and it was Winter. On the
25th of December, Bicorus the Master of the Host of Antiochus, Epiphanes entered
into the Temple, and erected therein the image of Jupiter, and profaned it;
and three years afterward, as upon the same day, Judas Mathabaeus, and every
year on the same day they celebrate a Feast.

CHAP. XI.
LAzarus. That is to say, an helper; and Prince Ephraim says, That after he
was raised from the dead, John the Evangelist baptized him, together with his
siners, and the Mother of God; he preached in Alexandria, and was Crowned in
the days of Tiberius. But Eusebius says, That he preached in Cyprus, and that
he dyed there, and was buried there.

And if a man walk in the day, he stumbleth not. That is to say, with me whom
am the Sun of righteousness.

Whose name was Caiphas. It is said, That this was Josephus the Writer, he whom
the Romans took, and would not put him to death, for that he was a wise man,
and did foretell many things, as afterward they came to pass; and as it seems
unto me, he was for this reason called Caiphas, viz. because the Arabians calls
him who subtil^y declares a thing Kaiph.

A Town called Ephraim. This was a City on the East of Bethel, and they say
that he there wrought a miracle, that there comes not there any evil creeping
thing.

CHAP. XII.
YE also, all of ye are clean. These words, All of ye, are not congruous, nor
are they in the Greek, but were added by the Writer, it being clear, that it
ought to be read, Ye also are clean, but not all of ye.

CHAP. XIII.
WHO leaned on his bosom. This was John, for he sat behind, between him and
Simon; not in order, being a youth.

CHAP. XIV.
My Father is greater than me. That is to say, in Majesty.

Moreover, he is greater than this bodily appearance, and by reason of the
imbecility of their minds, he said this to comfort them:

CHAP. XVII.
THat they might know thee the only true God, and Jesus Christ whom thou have
sent. Theodorus expounds Thee thee only, etc. of the Three persons. And whom
thou have sent, concerning the Son of man assumed; but he erred, for Christ is
not the name of the Son of man, but of God-man.

And for their sakes I sanctify my self. That is to say, I offer to thee my
self a sacrifice, to wit, a separation and sanctification for them.

CHAP. XVIII.
AND they themselves entered into the Judgment Hall, lest they should be defiled
when they were to eat the Passover. This shows, That the Jews had not yet
eaten the Passover on the morning of the Friday, and therefore they did not
eat it on Friday Eve, as our Lord did eat.

CHAP. XIX.
FOR that Sabbath was an high day. For therein was the celebration of the
Passover, and therein was accomplished the Week of Fifty years, for the
setting free of servants, and the reversion of Inheritances.

CHAP. XX.
Entered not in. Either he was afraid, or gave a difference of honor to Simeon.
My Father and your Father, my God and your God. That is to say, my Father by
nature, and your Father by grace; and my God by grace, and your God by nature.

He breathed on them, and said, Receive the Holy Ghost. That is to say, he
ordained them Priests, and only gave them authority of remission of sins, until
they should be completed in the upper room; and it is likely, that he disposed
them to receive the Spirit afterward in the upper room plenarily.

And they saw burning coals laid, and fish laid thereon, and bread. These he
created of nothing, and not as before, when he fed the multitudes.

Neither the world it self, as I suppose, would be sufficient for the Books
which should be written. That is to say, Man who is a little World would not
have been sufficient to comprehend his Wonders, and to know the power of his
Divinity: And men say, That these words are not the words of the Evangelist,
but are as this, The Angel at certrin seasons moved the water.

FINIS.
The Syriack Scholiast his Reconciliation of Saint Paul and James, touching
JUSTIFICATION.
Translated by D. L. J. U. D.
JAMES II. Ver. 26. Faith without Works is dead.


THis is not contrary to that of St. Paul, who says, That a man is justified
by the Law of Faith, and not by the Law of Works: For St. James speaks of Faith
subsequent unto Baptisin, and Paul of Faith precedent to Baptism, as St.
Severus makes it appear; for he who believes, and is to be baptized, although
he has not good Works, is justified; but after he is baptized, of necessity
good Works are required of him, and both of them refer the matter unto Abraham.
St. James, after he was Circumcised, and offered up Isaac upon the Altar. And
Paul, before he was Circumcised, when he believed in God, and it was imputed
unto him for righteousness in Circumcision, which is a Type of Baptism.

The Genealogy OF MELCHIZEDECK.
Translated by D. L. J.U.D.
THis Melchizedeck was King of Salem, whose Father and Mother were not written
in the Genealogies, because they were not first born; and he was of the seed of
Shem, Shem begat Arphaxad, and Arphaxad begat Melchizedeck: And when Noah
dyed, he gave Commandment unto Shem concerning the bones of our Father Adam,
for they had them with them in a Chest when they departed from the Land of
Eden, to this spiritual Land; and Shem went to the Chest, and took out the
bones of our Father Adam, and sealed the Chest with the signature of his
Father, and said unto his Brethren, My Father commrnded me to go and observe
the original of Seas and Rivers; and he said unto the Father of Melchizedeck,
and to his Mother Jozvet, Give me your blessing to accompany me in this Journey.

The Position of the Syriack Scholiast, dogmatically declaring, That the Sin of
a High Priest, is greater than a sin of the same kind, committed either by
Prince or people, by him expressed in the Fourth Chapter of Levit. ver. 3.
Translated out of the Syriack Language, by D.L. J.U.D.
IF the Priest that is anointed, do sin according to the sin of the people.

In the Greek, If the High Priest, he who is anointed, shall sin, so as to make
the people to sin (i. e.) they imitating him, and offending in the same kind,
the whole Congregation shall offer an Oblation, a young Bullock for his sin (i.
e.) All the people when they offend offer the same Oblation only, which the
Priest did when he offended; and therefore it is said, That the transgression
of him who stands in an high place, ought to be reputed, as if it were the
sin of all those who stand under him.

And if a Ruler shall sin (i. e.) a Prince, he shall bring his offering a Kid
of the Goats (i. e.) his Oblation is less than that of the Priest, or that of
the Congregation altogether; nor was he sprinkled with blood seven times, by
reason of his Prerogative of Honor: And although in some respects the Prince
himself be less than the Priest, and the people do far exceed him in number,
yet he is greater than any one of the Congregation, and therefore every one of
them offending offers a Female, but he a Male kid.

The Opinion of Gregorius Syrus concerning the Suns going retrogade ten degrees.
Translated out of the Syriack Language, by D.L. J.U.D.
BY reason of the Suns return from the West to the East retrogade, the shadow
returned from the East to the West. And if these degrees be computed according
to the number of the degrees in the Zodiac (viz.) 360. every fifteen degrees
make up one hour of the 24. of the natural day; so that it is clear, that the
addition was an hour and of an hour, viz. 20 degrees; for whereas the Sun went
ten degrees toward the East, it must of necessity return ten degrees toward the
West, before it comes to the place which it left.

Gregorius Syrus his explication of the nature of Jephthah's Vow.
Translated out of the Syriack Language, by D.L. J U.D.
JEphthah was not commended for his Vow, because he vowed without distinction:
Whatsoever comes forth to meet me from the gate of my house, I will offer it
up for a burnt offering. For what would he have done, if an Ass or a Dog had
come forth? Nor is he discommended for that he confirmed his Vow, and had a
greater honor for the love of God, than for natural propensions of mercy; nor
was he forbidden, as Abraham was, that men might be restrained from the like
indefinite vows.

Gregorius Syrus concerning Gideon's Soldiers lapping the Water.
Translated out of the Syriack Language, by D. L. J. U. D.
AND the Lord said unto Gideon, every one who lappeth water with his tongue as
a Dog lappeth, set them together (i.e.) With those Three hundred, who by reason
of their infirmity, were so wearied, that they could not kneel and drink, but
moistened their tongues with their hands; God separated them, because oftentimes
he shows his strength by the weak. And some men are of Opinion, That by
reason of their diligence, they made no stay to drink, but hastily lapped, and
past by. And as others will have it, Every one of them had but one hand, and
therefore they could not lap. But this sense is not to be admitted of, because
a little after it is said concerning them, They took Lamps in their left hand,
and Trumpets in their right hand to sound, and they cried, The Sword of the
Lord, and of Gideon. And according to our Opinion, hereby are signified the
Saints, who make use of their appetites only in necessity.

The Letter of Abgarus King of Edessa, to our Savior Christ.
Translated out of the Persian Language, by D. L. J. U. D.
I Have heard of thy Holy Life, and of the Miracles which Thou have wrought,
and how the Jews are treacherously bent against Thee, and that they have a
purpose to put Thee to death: I shall know my own felicity, if Thou art minded
to come into this Land; and I promise to give Thee a moiety of my Kingdom, and
I shall conform my life unto Thee, if thou will honor this Territory.

The Answer of CHRIST to the Letter of Abgarus.
I Give thee Thanks for the desire thou have to see Me, it is not convenient
that I should go thither, I came for the sheep which are lost of Israel; it
behooves Me to remain with them, and to teach them, and to fulfill what the
Prophets have written concerning Me; and when I shall ascend into Heaven, I
will send one of my own Disciples, who shall teach thee the way of peace, and
shall cure thee of the disease which thou have, in my Name. Let God be Keeper.

PILATE to TIBERIUS CAESAR concerning CHRIST.
Translated out of the Greek by D. L.
SInce that the wonderful Resurrection and Assumption of our Savior into
Heaven, have been taken notice of by many; and for that it has been the
ancient custom of Nations to signify new Occurrences unto those who are chief
in Authority, lest they should remain ignorant of any thing which happened,
therefore it is, That Pilate has communicated unto King Tiberius those things
which have been published concerning the Resurrection of our Savior from the
dead through all Palestine, with the addition of some portentous things which
he heard concerning him; and how that after he arose from the dead, he was by
many believed to be God. It is said, That Tiberius referred this matter to the
Senate, and that the Senate rejected the same, because they had not first
approved of it, for according to the ancient Custom, No man could obtain Divine
honor, but by the Sentence and Deeree of the Senate; and that was done truly
for this cause, for that the salutary Doctrine of the Gospel had no need of
humane approbation or commendation: But this matter concerning our Seviour
being rejected by the Roman Senate, after it was referred unto them, Tiberius
keeping his former Opinion, entertained no absurd Thoughts concerning Christ.
These things, Tertullian, a man well exercised in the Roman Laws, and
celebrated among the most illustrious of Rome, sets down after this manner
verbatim, in his Apology for the Christians, which he wrote in the Roman
Tongue, but Translated into the Greek. But that we may discourse how these Laws
were made, it was an ancient Decree, That none should be Consecrated for a God
by a King, before he should be approved of by the Senate. And this was for our
sake, That the Divinity should be given you by a humane Decree; That unless God
should please man, he should not be God; therefore it behooves man, according to
this Decree, to be propitious unto God: for which reason, Tiberius, under whom
the name of Christians came into the World when this Doctrine was related unto
him from Palestine, where it began, communicated the same unto the Senate, and
withal declared, That he was well pleased therewith; but the Senate rejected
it, forasmuch as it had not been first approved of by them: yet he remained
steadfast in his Opinion, Threatening death unto those who should accuse the
Christians. This persuasion possessed his mind by the dispensation of Divine
Providence, and thereby the Doctrine of the Gospel being interrupted by no
impediments, ran through the World.

Lentulus President of Jerusalem, to the Senate and People of Rome, Greeting.
THere appeared in our time, and yet remains, a Man of great Renown, called
JESUS CHRIST, who is called by the Nations a Prophet of Truth, whom his
Disciples call the Son of God, raising the dead, and curing Diseases. A Man of
a tall stature, comely, having a venerable Countenance, whom the beholders may
both love and fear. The hair of his Head crisped, and curled, somewhat brown,
and shining, falling upon the shoulders, parted in the midst, according to the
manner of the Nazarens, having a smooth and clear Forehead, and a Face without
wrinkle or spot, adorned with a moderate ruddiness, no fault can be found with
his Nose or Mouth, having a thick Beard and somewhat reddish, inclining to the
color of the hair of his Head; not long, but divided into two parts. His Eyes
are lively and clear. Terrible he is in reproving, pleasing and lovely in
admonition. Cheerful, with reservation of Gravity, who was never seen to laugh,
but to weep often; such is his composition of Body, having Hands and Members
delightful to be seen. In Speech he is grave, of few words, and modest,
beautiful among the sons of men. Farewell.

Dionysius Syrus his Opinion concerning the Nature of the Sin against the Holy
Ghost.
MATTHEW. 12.31. All manner of Sin and Blasphemy shall be forgiven unto men, but
the Blasphemy against the Holy Ghost, etc.


PEradventure he terrified them, to the end they might be corrected; with many
words ye have blasphemed me, ye have called me a Deceiver, a Devil, a
Samaritan, a Transgressor of the Law, and have said, That I am not come from
God: These things shall be forgiven unto ye; but, forasmuch as ye have
blasphemed against the Holy Spirit, by whom I have cast out Devils, and Cured
the Sick, and have said, That I did so by the help of Beelzebub, and have
attributed Divine miracles unto Devils, This Blasphemy shall not be remitted
unto ye, neither in this World, nor in that which is to come.

Object. If Blasphemy against him shall be forgiven, and Blasphemy against the
Spirit shall not be forgiven, therefore the Son is less than the Spirit, and
how is Blasphemy against the Spirit irremissible? for behold the Jews, who
blasphemed against him, as also the Macedonians, who called him a thing made,
when they believed and repented, obtained forgiveness.

Resp. We Answer, That he does not say that universally all Blasphemies against
the Holy Ghost are irremissible, but unless they repent, they shall not be
remitted unto them; and many who blasphemed against the Son, and did not
repent, did not obtain pardon; and many who did blaspheme against the Spirit,
and afterward repented, have obtained pardon.

Moreover, He shows that Blasphemy against himself is of a lower degree, but
Blasphemy against the Spirit is great and difficult. There might be some excuse
for Blasphemy against him, because they saw him vested with a body, and he
appeared to be a man; but the proof of the Spirit they took from the
Scriptures, and the Prophets, who spoke concerning him, and therefore they were
inexcusable; and according to what I said, ye are offended with me, because I
am clothed with flesh: but forasmuch as ye have not seen the Spirit so
clothed, but working miracles, wherefore do ye blaspheme against him?

Neither in this World, nor in that which is to come. For some men are
Tormented here and there, as the Sodomites, and the Jews, who were Tormented
here in the Captivity, and in the other World, because they did not believe;
and there are others who are neither Tormented here nor there, as the Apostles,
the Martyrs, and Job: for although they suffered afflictions, yet whatsoever
they endured, was not a punishment, but a colluctation with evil, and a trial
of integrity; for there is a difference between a punishment which proceeds
from sin, and trials which are permitted for proof of the Elect and Virtuous;
for the one hardly receives remission of the sins which he committed, by the
tribulation he endures, but the other obtains a Crown of Righteousness.

And there are some who are Tormented here, as Beggars and Lazarus, and he who
to^k the Wife of his Father, and some there, as the Rich man; and it being
certain that some are Tormented here, and some there, our Lord said, Neither in
this World, nor in that which is to come.

Moreover, He calls his body the son of man, that is to say, Whosoever shall
blaspheme against my body, (saying) I came not from a Virgin, or that I did not
descend from Heaven, or that my body has not suffered truly, but in fancy, I
shall forgive him upon Repentance; but he who shall blaspheme against the
Divinity, working miracles, shall not be forgiven; for this is a sin
accompanied with contempt, and is not made of poverty and delight; and although
this sin may be remitted, as we said before, by Repentance, yet it is the worst
of all sins.

DIONYSIVS SYRVS CONCERNING FREE WILL, IN HIS Exposition on the Eighteenth
Chapter of MATTHEW, Ver. 7.
Translated by D. L. J. U. D.
FOR it is necessary that offenses should come. By the word necessary, he does
not take away the liberty and power which they have in themselves, but has
regard to the Scandals which by their own liberty and will they were to bring
necessarily upon themselves, by reason of which they were to be condemned.

Again, He did not cast them under a constraint of fact, but foresaw that they
were incurably sick, and of their own will were to produce Scandals, and
therefore he said, It is necessary, forasmuch as they were to be the cause
thereof; for if they had been unwilling, they would not have come.

But if it were necessary that Scandals should come, why does he denounce a Woe
unto the World? We say, That as he abstained from the doing of some things as
he was God, so being Man, he suffered passions, and did whatsoever became him;
but because they were not the better, he denounces a Woe unto them: They were
honored, and were not the better; but when they were scourged, they were
amended. And as a Physician, taking care of his sick Patient who will not obey
his commands, says, Woe to such a man by reason of his sickness, which he
increases by his own disobedience.

If it be necessary that Scandals should come, how is it possible that we
should escape them? We say, It is necessary that Scandals should come, but it
is not necessary that we should perish thereby; even as a Physician says, it
is of necessity that such a man should be sick, yet it is not necessary that he
should be destroyed thereby, who is forewarned thereof; and it is certainly
known from hence, that there have been virtuous men who have escaped from evils
and scandals; therefore that a man is destroyed, proceeds from his neglect.

If every man were upright, and no man should bring Scandals, this saying would
be false, It is necessary that they should come. We say, That if they were to
be upright, he had not said, It is necessary; but because he knew that they
were not to be upright, he said, It is necessary (i. e.) absolutely Om^imod^
venient scandala.
.

And wherefore did not he grant unto them that they should not be troubled with
Scandals? We say, That of neglect they were scandalized, if destruction
proceeded from the cause of Scandal, every man must necessarily have been
destroyed; but if some escape, he who does not escape, may repute himself the
cause thereof.

Otherwise thus, It is necessary Scandals should come. Some men say, That these
words are founded upon the passion and death of our Lord, for his death was
necessary; this is clear from hence, That he said, A grain of wheat, unless it
fall into the ground and dye, bears no fruit. And Paul, that by his death, we
vanquish him who had power; and if the vanquishing of death is necessary, so
also is the death of our Lord, and Regeneration necessary. And we ought to
know, That although the Passion of our Lord were necessary, yet the Actors and
Authors thereof were not of necessity, nor did they unvoluntarily attempt the
same, otherwise he had not pronounced a Woe against him by whom Scandals should
come; and if according to their madness the Treachery of Judas was of
necessity, who was the cause of his bursting and hanging himself?

Dionysius Syrus concerning the woman that had six husbands, John 4.
Translated by D. L. J. U. D.
GO call thy husband (i. e.) That he might partake of these spiritual Things.

I have no husband. She did not declare that she had a husband, because she
hastened to decline her answer to his demand, and because she was willing to
conceal the shame of the matter of Fact between her and her husband, and
because she thought she spoke with a man who had not known secrets.

For thou have had five husbands. He reveals two secrets to her:

First, That he reckoned the five husbands which she had. Secondly, In that he
declared the Intreague between her and her last husband.
St. Ephraim: The five husbands which she took dyed one after another, and when
she was reputed one, that had caused the death of her husbands, as Thamar
seemed to be unto Judah, she took a man to avoid the reproach of widowhood,
that he might be a protector unto her without the use of marital commerce, but
that he might only bear the name of her husband, for she did not compel him
to perform that office, inasmuch as she was afraid least he should dye, but she
took care to avoid her reproach.

Others thus, This Woman lived an unclean life, and it seemed the Husband which
she now had, she did not take according to the Law, wherefore she said, I have
no husband; nor did she take the five former husbands orderly, and openly, as
appears from the admiration of the Woman, saying, That which was known to
none of the City, he being a stranger, has he declared openly before all men.

He is not thy husband. He said so, because he plowed, and did not sow.

DIONYSIUS SYRUS CONCERNING HEROD'S TAKING His BROTHERS WIFE.
Translated by D.L. J.U.D.
MATTHEW. 14. For Herodias sake, his Brother Philips Wife.


WHerefore did John prohibit Herod to take his Brothers Wife, whom the Law
commanded him to take? viz. When the man dyed without sons, his Brother was to
take his Wife, that he might raise seed to his deceased Brother; and this was
the practice, for inasmuch as they had no hope of a Resurrection, they bent
their endeavors only for the acquisition of things appertaining to this life.

Philip had a Daughter by Herodias, who was also called Herodias, after her
mothers name; for which reason, John prohibited him to accompany with his
Brothers wife.

But Herod was not of the Jews, but of the Gentiles, wherefore then did John
reprove him? Because his Father, himself, and his Brethren, made show, as if
they would be reputed Jews, and that they would be subject to the Law of God.

Josephus the Writer says, That in the life time of his Brother he was so
infatuated, as to commit Adultery with her, and that he separated her from his
Brother whilst he was alive; and he injured his Wife the Daughter of Arethas
King of the Parthians. His Father in-law made War against him, because he
contemned his Daughter, and made a Strumpet of his Daughter in-law; and it was
by reason of her, that Herod lost his Kingdom, and was with her cast into
Prison in Bethany a Town of Galilee.

Others say, That after the death of his Brother, he committed Fornication with
her.

Others, That in the life time of his Brother, he committed Folly with her,
wherefore, and not for that she had a Daughter, he forbade him to take her, for
a Female was not called Seed, nor did the Law prohibit a man to take the Wife
of his Brother after his death.

It is not lawful for thee to take her. The Law in the Old Testament commanded
to take the Wife of a deceased Brother, and this John was a Preacher of the New
Testament, and therefore he forbade Herod.

Others say, That because he had polluted himself with Herodias, and with her
Daughter, therefore John did prohibit him.

Others say, That the Prohibition proceeded from hence, that Herodias and Herod
conspired together, and caused Philip to be put to death. It Is true, a Brother
had power to take the Wife of a deceased Brother; but if he dyed having Sons,
the Law did not permit his Brother to take his Wife, but a stranger, and this
was to the end that Kindred of the Hebrews might be kept among themselves, and
multiplied, forasmuch as they wanted hope of the Resurrection, and a stranger
was not to raise seed (i. e.) an heir.

Dionysius Syrus his Exposition on the withering of the Fig Tree.
Translated by D.L. J.V.D.
AND he saw a Fig tree in the way, and came. That he came to it, and cursed it,
because there was no fruit thereon, the Evangelist wrote in respect of the
Preaching of the Disciples; Mark says, For it was not the time of Figs, for it
was Nisan, when Trees yielded blossoms, and not fruit.

And he said, let there not be fruit on thee for ever. Some say, That he cursed
the Fig Tree, because it was a figure of the Law which had no fruit to offer
unto Christ. Others, because it was a figure of the multitude: But we say, That
there was fruit in the Law, and in the multitude, though not much; for behold,
there were Twelve Apostles, and Seventy two Evangelists, besides Paul, and the
Jews, who believed in our Lord, who were all the fruit of the Law, and of the
multitude.

But he dried up the Fig Tree. First of all in respect of the Disciples, that
they might understand that he was not destitute of power, but suffered of his
own accord.

Secondly, In respect of the Jews, that he might put them to shame; for if he
had desired it in the time of his Passion, he might as well have dried up them
as the Fig Tree, he therefore curs't it (as we said) that there should be no
opinion taken up of his weakness as if he had dyed unwillingly, for the time of
his Passion drawing near, it was necessary that he should show his power to his
Disciples and Crucifiers, yet he did not exercise the same upon men, because he
was a lover of Mankind; and if he had shown his power upon a man, it would have
been thought that he had been dried up by reason of his sins, and not by the
power of his acting; he showed his power upon that which was another man's
possession, and it is from possessions or riches that an honorable life is
associated with temporal esteem, but by a Tree, and from that Tree, which is of
all other Trees most soft and moist, insomuch that when it is cut down, it does
scarce wither in a long time; and in that he dried it up by a word of his
mouth, he did show unto his Disciples and Crucifiers his power, and that he
suffered voluntarily. The Tree which Adam did eat of, was a Fig Tree, and
therein was a retribution of Justice. This Tree, when Christ caused it to
wither, the Owners thereof brought it to the City, and the Crucifiers took it,
and thereon Crucified our Lord. Some men would have this signification in the
Fig Tree, that it was called (...) as that which incited and invited Adam and
his Issue to his fall, as if it had said, (...) i.e. Come thou even unto me,
because the Fig Tree was the Tree whereof they eat, and therefore our Lord
caused it to wither, for that it had seduced Adam and Eve.

Others say, That when the multitude cut down Branches from the Trees, and cast
them in the way, the Owner of the Fig Tree did not permit them to cut thereof,
and therefore he caused it to wither.

Others say, Because the Gadarens did not come to our Lord, he drowned their
Swine, that they might come forth to him against their wills; so the Lord of
the Fig Tree determined in his mind, that he would not come forth to Christ,
and therefore he caused the Fig tree to wither, that he might come forth
against his will.

Others say, That when our Lord said, Destroy this Temple, and the third day,
etc. And again, Concerning the Temple of stones, That there should not be left
a stone upon a stone: That it was an expository sentence, and was confirmed by
the sign of the drying up of the Fig Tree.

And straightway this Fig Tree withered. Mark says, That it withered in the
morning, and we say straightway, because immediately it withered, as St.
Matthew says; and in the morning, the Disciples say, that it was withered, as
St. Mark says.

And his Disciples marvailed. Because that in the Fig Tree he first showed his
power of inflicting punishment.

Dionysius Syrus his Exposition, declaring sundry Opinions concerning John the
Baptists eating of Locusts and Honey.
Translated by D. L. J. U. D.
AND his meat was Locusts, and wild Honey. Some say, That he calls Locusts the
honey which we eat, for the Wilderness of Siphim is hot, and there were
continually produced therein Locusts and Bees, which yielded honey. Others say,
That they were Roots, which he pounded and mixed with honey, and did eat
thereof. Others say, That it is written in some Greek Copies, That he did eat
sweet Roots, and dwelt in the Desert. The Translator out of the Greek into
Syriack, from the similitude of words, thought that his meat was Locusts, and
wild honey. Others, That in the (...) (i. e.) of four, it is written, That his
meat was milk and wild honey, using milk in his childhood, and honey when he
came to the stature of a man. As others will have it, they are moist and tender
Roots, like unto (...) and not very pleasant. And some call them (...) And
others (...): Some say, That they are Roots called (...) which in show are like
unto Locusts, but in taste sweet as honey. Others say, That they are sprouts of
Plants, and that this honey is bitter which wild Bees make. Others say, That a
Locust is a winged creature, and that the honey was natural, which by reason of
the warmth of the place, and the mixture of the Air, is continually found
therein.

Moreover Isiodor the Presbyter says, They were not Locusts, but somewhat of
the inwards of Cotton, or the fruits of Thorny Cotton, like the tender tops or
buds which proceed from the branches of Plants. Others say, He calls Preaching
his meat, and names it Locusts, because it carries (as it were upon the wing)
those who profess Christ; and he calls it Honey, because whatsoever he preached
was sweet, as Repentance, and the Kingdom; for it is the custom of Scripture to
call Doctrine by the name of meat, according to this, He hunger'd, but not
after bread. Others think, That Locusts signify the Pharisees and Sadduces,
who were evil, as a generation of Vipers, and Serpents, vomiting gall, whom he
converted by his Doctrine, and caused them to ascend into Heaven, and purified
them as Locusts, who were pure by the Law. And by Honey, he signifies the
Gentiles, who were Fountains flowing with the bitterness of ungodliness and
wickedness, and his Preaching converted them, and made them Fountains flowing
with Truth, and sweetness of conversation. John was grieved with three
afflictions or difficulties. In his meat, forasmuch as he did eat Locusts. In
raiment, for that he was clad with hair. In a house, inasmuch as he dwelt in a
desolate Wilderness; and these things he suffered for God and the Kingdom, and
that he might be an example to others who were to succeed him, that they might
tread in his steps.

Dionysius Syrus concerning the Darkness over the Earth, when our Savior was
Crucified, mentioned Matthew. 27.
Translated by D. L. J. V. D.
FRom the sixth hour there was darkness on the whole earth, until the ninth
hour. This was, That the Jews might understand that Christ was he who caused
the darkness in Egypt, for there was darkness when the Legal Passover was to
be slain, and here also was darkness when Christ was slain on the Cross. And
that it might be known that he who was the Creator of all things was Crucified,
therefore the Creatures lost their light; and that the Prophecy of Zachary
might be fulfilled, The Sun shall be darkened at Noonday. Concerning the
Eclipse of the Sun, it is most true, That on the Thirtieth of the Moon the Sun
grows dark on the day when they New Moon.
both come under the same sign of the Zodiac; and although it comes to pass
that the Sun and Moon be Eclipsed twice a year, yet is the Sun but for a
smaller space Eclipsed; nor is it darkened, but seems only to us as if it were
darkened, it being undeprivable of light; nor is it everywhere discernable that
it is Eclipsed, but in certain places, and chiefly at the Perhaps he means the
period of 19 years.
length of years: for when the Sun comes to one of the Circles which are
called the darkning Limits, and is placed directly behind the Moon as to the
Circle called the Ecliptic, the Moon then being under the Sun, it is said to
be obscured; but when the Moon is Eclipsed, the cause thereof is, that it is
placed in the Circle (viz.) the darkning Limit, and the shadow of the earth
(viz.) the extension thereof does not permit the light of the Sun to shine on
that place of the Circle where the Moon takes its course at that time, and it
is obscured on the sudden, and having passed beyond that place, it again
borrows light of the Sun; but in the time of Crucifying our Lord, the
contrary happened in matter of Fact, for the Moon was not only not in
conjunction with the Sun, but also removed therefrom the space of the
Hemisphere, which was the measure of the Suns course which it runs in One
hundred and eighty days, and Sixty five minutes, and Fifteen degrees (i. e.)
days, and half of the Circle, and this was declarative of the Majesty of him
who was Crucified; and because the Lord of Lights was hung upon the Cross,
therefore they failed, and this darkness has three properties differing from
natural computation: First, That it was in the Full of the Moon. Secondly, That
it lasted the space of Three hours. Thirdly, That it prevailed over all the
earth. And all the Greek and Caldean Philosophers who were in Caldea and Egypt,
wrote, That one of the Trinity suffered that day.
And this agrees with what David said, The Kings of the earth arose (i.e.)
from their Thrones, and wondered at the sign that happened: For this darkness was
like to that in the beginning of the Creation, all the earth did put on
mourning for its Lord, the Sun being clothed with Cypress, and the Moon grew
red, and became as blood; and though it were not the time of her * birth, it
suddenly appeared in the East, and ran impetuously to the West, and associated
her self with the Sun, and they both sat in mourning, as good servants that
are afflicted for the evil which befalls their Masters. Moreover, it is
evident, That the darkness when Christ was Crucified, was not an Eclipse; and
it is evident from these demonstrations, An Eclipse does not continue Three
hours, but this was a darkness of Three hours. Moreover, An Eclipse is not over
all the earth, but this darkness was over all places of the earth; and a Solary
Eclipse happens on the Thirtieth day of the Moon, but this darkness was on
the Fifteenth of the Moon, when the Sun was removed from the Moon half its
course (i. e.) One hundred and eighty days [of the Suns motion] and stood in
the midst of the Sphere of the Firmament. Concerning the Eclipse of the Sun,
and of the Moon, and the natural cause of their effects, we have spoken at
large in the Book of our Epistle in the Tract concerning Faith, and the nature
of things intellectual and sensitive, which is called a Book of the Doubts
which I have made.

Dionysius concerning the Majesty of CHRIST.
Translated by D. L. J. U. D.
HE shall be great. In other Copies, And he shall be called the Son of God. The
Heretics say, That afterward he was to be great. Against whom we say, That he
was not newly called the Son of the most High, nor was he magnified; but he was
naturally Great, and this which was said, That he shall be, and shall be
called, signifies, That he was to be revealed, and made known, for those
things which were to be when they were not, differ from such things as had a
being, and were concealed, but afterward were to be revealed. And this word
Great, signifies as much as that he had Majesty, and that it was to be
revealed, according to that, I have made known thy Name to the sons of men; not
that he had not been, but that he was from Eternity; and not that the Father
had not been truly, or that he was not called Father, did he manifest him unto
men eternally, but that he was eternally a Father, and was hidden. By this then
that I have made known, he says, as much as I have revealed unto them thy
Name; and this is like unto that which is written in Isaiah, That he shall be
called the Lord of all the earth, not as if he had not been Lord from the
beginning.

And if they say that he was newly called, this will convince them that he is
the power of the Highest, and the power of the Highest is more intimate, and of
more affinity with the Father, than this, That he is the Son of the Highest,
for many are called the sons of the most High, according to that, Ye are all
the sons of him who is on High, but these are never called the power of the
most High. Again, we say, That whatsoever is the Father, the Son is also; and
whatsoever the Father has, the Son has, except the peculiar proprieties
(viz.) the personal indications (i. e.) that the Father is the cause, and the
begetter of the Son, and the Son is the effect, and that which is begotten of
him, and whatsoever is the Fathers, is the Sons also, except propriety;
therefore as the Father has naturally sublimity, and goodness, and the
Godhead, and Life, and Majesty, so the Son has, for he is his natural Son; but
because he was conceived, and was made man in the flesh, it has been said
concerning him, That he shall be great; and this was his Exinanition in Truth,
That what he was naturally, was said that he was to be, and that he was called
so, and assumed it, and this, That he shall be glad, is like to this, That he
was, according to this, Of her was born Jesus, who is called Christ. Here these
words, That he shall be called, are synonymous with to the words, That he is,
and every one that teaches, shall be called Rabbi, and every one who shall
break one of the Commandments, shall be called least; for as these things were
called so, so they were indeed.

Dionysius Syrus his Description of the Roman Government in Judaea.
Translated by D. L. J U. D.
THE Romans, after they had subdued the Jews, and had made them Tributary,
they set up Herod King over them, who slew the Children; and when he dyed, and
was ejected for his offense, Tiberius Caesar divided the Region into four
parts, and in one part of Judaea he placed Pilate, and over the Region of
Galilee Herod, and over the Region of Heturia and Troconia, Philip the Brother
of Herod, and over the Country of Abilene, Lucinius, and every one of these
four Governors was called Tetrach (i. e.) Governor of one of the four parts.
Others say, That the Kingdom which Herod governed, and after him Archelaus his
son, did Tiborius divide into four parts, and the Region of Galilee he
delivered unto Herod, and the Region of Heturia to Philip, and over the
Country of Troconia, he placed a man whose name is not mentioned in writing,
and when he offended, he was ejected from his Government, and the Country was
(...) unto Philip, wherefore his name is not written; and over the Country of
Abilene, he established Lucinius, and these four were called Kings, but Pilate
exercised the office of a Governor in Jerusalem, and the places adjoining; and
although he was less in power than those four, yet he was not subject unto
them, he exercised the Government, administering Justice, and raising of Money,
according to the Prerogative of Kings, according to the degree of Muphties
among the Persians. Pontius Pilate is expounded right hand, or one of these
five, for (...), signifies five, or he had two names (i. e.) Pontius and
Pilate, or he was of the Country called Pontius.

Herod in Galilee. It was this Herod who put John to death, and in whose days
Christ suffered; he was not the same who slew the Children, he begat Herod,
who was surnamed Agrippus, he governed those four parts, and in his days the
Romans came and undermined the Temple, and the Kingdom of the Jews was
abolished; Titus only undermined and burned the Temple, but Domitian his
Brother when he Reigned, he subverted the stones, and thereof built an Idol
Temple.

Dionysius Syrus his Exposition concerning the Tax made by Augustus.
Translated by D. L. J. U. D.
THere went out a command from Augustus Caesar. Augustus was the proper name of
this King, but the name Caesar was a common name; for every King who was set
over the Romans was called Caesar, even unto this, as the King of the Egyptians
was called Pharaoh, and of the Persians Kosro, and this Caesar governed the
Romans, the Egyptians, the Hebrews, and the Assyrians. The Command went out,
That the inhabited World should be Taxed, because he was desirous to know the
number of men within his Jurisdiction, according as David sent Joab, and
numbered the people. Others say, because he was willing to send every one into
his own City and Country; but these opinions are not the likeliest to be true,
but that which is most probable, is, That he was willing to raise Pole Money,
which is manifest from that which Gamaliel said in the Acts of the Apostles,
That Judah of Galilee arose in the days when men were taxed for Pole Money,
and there was not another tax neither before nor after that. And St. Ephraim in
his Exposition testifies as much, and Christ was born in the time of this Tax,
and he excited this King thereunto, though he were unworthy, as he did unto
Balaam, and the Wise men, that Joseph and Mary coming up from Nazareth to
Bethlehem might there be Taxed, and our Lord be born there, to fulfill the word
of Micah, Thou Bethlehem, etc. And that the Jews might not contend and say,
That he was not Christ, neither of the Lineage of David, therefore he ascended
thither; and he was born in the Forty third year of Augustus, and the Thirty
third of Herod. Augustus is expounded an arising, brightness and splendour, and
Christ is the splendour of the Father, and did arise from on high. Augustus had
not yet governed Sixteen years, and Christ unto whom he was Type, has no end
of his Kingdom. And if Caesar Taxed them for Pole Money, Christ also said, Give
unto Caesar that which is Caesar's. And if it were to know how many men were
within the compass of his Jurisdiction, Christ also, in regard of the
Providence he has over us, said, The hairs of your heads are numbered; and if
it were for the return of every one into his own Country or Region, Christ
also brought forth Souls out of Hell, and caused them to return unto their
former place.

And it came to pass in those days. Not in those wherein John was Nursed up
until the day of his Proclamation, in those days Christ was Thirty years old:
Neither in the days that Elizabeth brought forth, for then Mary had conceived
Three Months; but days he calls in this place, the days after Elizabeth
brought forth.

FINIS.
The ARMENIAN CREED. Translated out of that Language by D.L. J.U.D.
WE profess and believe with a sincere heart, God the Father, not made nor
begotten, and without beginning, the Begetter of the Son, and Fountain of the
Holy Ghost.

We believe God the Word, not made but begotten, and having a beginning from
the Father before the world, being not after nor younger than the Father; the
Father being Father only, and the Son Son only.

We believe the Holy Ghost not made, eternal, not begotten, but proceeding,
coessential with the Father, and equal in glory with the Son.

We believe the Holy Trinity, One Nature, One Godhead, not Three Gods but One
God, One Will, One Kingdom, One Authority, Creator of all things visible and
invisible.

We believe the Holy Church, the remission of sins, the communion of Saints.

We believe that One of the Three Persons, the Word God, begotten of the Father
before the world, descending in time, took of the blood of the Virgin Mary the
Mother of God, and united it unto his Godhead; was Nine months contained in
the Womb of an uncorrupted Virgin, and that he was perfect God, and perfect
man, with soul, mind, and body; One Soul, and One Person, composed in One
Subsistence.

God was made Man without mutation, without confusion, without seed of
Conception, of incorrupt Nativity. There is no beginning of his Divinity, nor
end of his Humanity; for Jesus Christ yesterday, and to day, and for ever.

We believe our Lord Jesus Christ conversed on earth; and that after Thirty
Years conversation here, He was Baptized, the Father testifying, This is my
well-beloved Son, and the Holy Ghost descending as a Dove. That He was tempted
of Satan, and that he assiduously preached Salvation unto men. That He labored
in Body, and suffered in weariness. That he was hungry and thirsty. That He
afterward voluntarily came among his enemies. That he was Crucified, and Dyed
in his Body, but lived in the Divinity: He preached unto souls, and took Hell
captive, and freed the Spirits. After Three days he arose from the Dead, and
appeared to the Disciples.

I believe our Lord Jesus Christ is with the self same Body ascended into
Heaven, and that he sits on the Right Hand of the Father. Moreover, That He is
with the same Body, and with the glory of the Father, to judge the living and
the dead at the Resurrection of all men. I believe also a retribution of Works,
eternal life for the Just, and eternal torment for Sinners.

FINIS.
INTRODUCTIO DIONYSIISYRI IN EXPOSITIONEM SUAM QUATUOR EVANGELISTARUM.

Per DUDLEIUM LOFYUSIUM J. U. D. in Linguam Latinam versa.

DVBLINII, Et prostant venales apud Josophum Wild. M. D C. LXXII.

Virtute quidem and auxilio sanctae Trinitatis in essentia aequalis, Patris and
Filii ac Spiritus sancti, unius very Dei, exorsi sumus scribere explicationem
Evangelii colendi and sancti e quatuor sanctis Evangelistis Matthaeo, Marco,
Luca and Johanne collecti, quam edidit sanctus Dominus Dionysius (viz.) Jacobus
filius Crucis, qui secernens eam quasi in Sectiones, ab omnibus libris
Expositorum ad instar flabelliferi divenit.
Caput primum ipsius Sancti praenominati.
ABsoluta explicatione Legis antiquae and Prophetarum (Frater noster) prout
expedire visum est, breviter stiloque quem potui adhibere simpliciore, novam
aggressisumus (i.e.) Evangelium, Actus Apostolorum, necnon Pauli Epistolas, ea
mente, ut eandem simili modo tractemus, de propriis tamen nostris nihil
dicturi, sed Expositorum innitentes fundamento aedificium spirituale and animae
proficiens struximus. Cum autem intuiti fuerimus and exploraverimus
explicationem Evangelii, quam ediderunt ipsi quorum nomina sum recitaturus
(viz.) Dominus Ephraim, and Dominus Johannes and Cyrillus insuper etiam Moses
Bar Cepha and Johannes de Dara, cum non modica aliorum Doctorum Caterva, and
nobis videatur omnino impossible omnes eorum Expositiones in uno libro
coacervare, ne ita ultra justam produceretur mensuram hujusmodi Tractatus ut ei
non sufficeret librorum and Schedarum multitudo, Nobis visum est omnium istorum
Expositorum sensum in Compendium deducere, nec non longitudinem and latitudinem
verborum, quibus usi sunt, in quantum poterimus contrahere; and haec est
instituti nostri ratio, ne auditores nimis longa gravet oration, non aliter ac
repletio and nimia cibi quantitas ventrem, and ut pigri and negligentes
expergiscantur ad studium and lectionem moderatam and ad auditionem contractam
and brevem, tu vero, horum diligens, cum auditoribus and auscultantibus preces
fundito assiduas pro Dionysio Alienigena, Jacobo (scilicet) Exiguo and servo
Dei, ut per potentiam ejus id faciam, quod fuerit requisitum, and non
respondeam interroganti vel roganti confusus, and in principio quidem minute
Scripturi sumus potestatem and sensum absconditum secundum Capitula quae
ordinarunt Doctores qui olim Expositiones ediderunt.

Caput Secundum.
DUobus modis constat hominibus esse Deum, e natura and e Scriptura: e natura,
quia insitum est hominibus, quod sit Deus and quod sit omnium rerum Creator,
probationibus etiam rationalibus and naturalibus innotescit quod sit Deus. Duo
sunt nomina unum aeternum, alterum temporale, aeternum significat illud quod
incipit and non desinit sicut Angeli: aut id quod non incipit sed desinit sicut
cogitatio Dei de Creaturis: aut id quod nec incipit nec desinit, quod est Deus.
Nomen vero temporale significat id quod incipit and desinit; propterea notum
est Deum esse ex hoc, quod h^c mundus sit temporalis and creatus, hic mundus
est corpus and corpus non est aeternum, ergo hic mundus non est aeternus,
praeterea, mundus circumseptus est and habet terminos, est etiam compositus and
sensibilis and in parts divisibilis, and incidunt ei mutationes, capax est
etiam accidentium and in se habet contrarietates, and circumscribitur spatio
and loco, illud vero cui haec omnia impugnant non est aeternum, and illud quod
non est aeternum temporaneum est and creatum, and habet Creatorem qui est
aeternus, and hic est Deus qui nec incipit nec desinet, dein dicimus quod est
Deus, sicut quando aspicimus domum intelligimus fuisse Machinatorem qui
condidit eam, etiamsi non adsit, similiter dicendum est de Cathedra and de
navi, sic etiam nos aspicientes Creaturas intelligimus Deum qui eas creavit,
iterum ex eo quod mundus conservatur and permanet, non obstantibus quae ei
insunt contrarietatibus, intelligimus quod sit Deus qui eum conservat and cujus
potestate fulcitur mundus.

Caput Tertium.
VNicus est Deus and non plures secundum Ethnicorum stoliditatem: and constat
ex hoc quod unum non dividitur, duo vero aut plura dividuntur, Deus igitur non
dividitur: Unum igitur quatenus unum non est divisibile, iterum unum non cadit
sub numero duo vero aut plura sub numero cadunt, Deus non eadit sub numero ergo
est unus, Notumest porro quod Deus unus est and non plures, ex eo, quod
completus and perfectus est in potestate in bonitate and justitia, ubi enim non
est mutatio, unum est quod cognoscitur, ubi vero est mutatio plura esse
dicuntur.

Caput Quartum.
INtroductio ad hoc, ut dicatur, quod hic Deus unus sit tres personae: and hoc
inde constat quo Creatura ex doubus suppositis sit constituta, uno simplice,
altero composito (i. e.) ex materia and forma; Et Deus non est una persona, ne
sit diminutior Creaturis, neque duae personae solum, ne adaequetur Creaturis,
est vero tres personae ut sit superior Creaturis, quatuor non est, ne daretur
(...) seu Deorum multitudo, dein vero de Angelis aut hominibus quorum
unusquisque est vivens and loquens (i. e.) cui sit verbum, and Spiritus,
etiamsi sit persona, non dicitur quod verbum unius vel Spiritus alterius sit
persona, Pater est causa, and Spiritus causatum, causa vero tripliciter
dicitur, est enim naturalis, opificialis and materialis, homo est causa
naturalis filii qui genitus est, opificialis qui conficit vel fabricat arcam,
Deus vero est causa naturalis filii qui ab eo aeterne genitus est, and Spiritus
qui ab eo processit, est insuper causa opificialis scilicet efficiens (i. e.)
Creaturarum quas creavit, si vero pater sit causa naturalis filii and Spiritus
propterea tres est personae.

Caput Quintum.
COntra dicentes, quo Deus non generatur, dicimus, quod non referimus humanam
generationem ad Deum, sed Deus generavit filium and protulit Spiritum ab
aeterno, citra tempus, passionem and decretum, prout nascitur verbum ab
intellectu and prodeunt radii a Caelo, cum generatio ejus long sit eminentior
generatione Creaturarum.

Caput Sextum.
VErbum porro Dei non simile est nostri: nostrum enim est corruptibile, Deus
vero est aeternus, and verbum etiam ejus aeternum est, in aeternum es tu Domine
and verbum tuum stabilitur in Caelo. Spiritus apud Deum, persona seu
subsistentia est vivens and operativa, and non se habet ut Spiritus and halitus
noster qui exit for as and cum verbo perit, neque est persona, sed dissolvitur,
insuper verbum nostrum exit cum lingua and voce and dissolvitur in aerem,
verbum vero Deus stabile est secundum hoc, per verbum Domini facti sunt Coeli,
Spiritus noster aer est, sed Spiritus Dei non est hujusmodi, sed est persona
stabilis (sicuti dicitur) per Spiritum oris sui facta sunt miracula.

Caput Septimum.
DE lapsu Satanae. Sicut enim una cum saxo separato a summitate montis, and e
pondere suo in profundum projecto, cum alia casu suo pertigerit, saxa
descendunt multa, quae ei non compinguntur sic and virtutes aliae (Daemones
scilicet) quia non fundatae fuerunt per earum voluntatem in bono, ex liberate
earum una cum Diabolo descenderunt in peccati profunditatem.

Caput Octavum.
QVapropter fuit homo creatus? Dicimus minime convenisse fieri lumen, absque
spectatore, vel gloriam sine testimonio, vel bonitatem absque deliciis, and
propterea creatus fuit homo ut gauderet iis, and fecit eum Deus ad suam
similitudinem, quia fecit eum rationalem and Dominatorem Creaturarum,
sapientem, and quia liberate donatus fuit: imo ad similitudinem suam quia
diligebat bona and virtutem misericordiae colebat.

Caput Nonum.
CVR Satanas invidit Adamo? Invidit ei quia observasset pulverem honorari cum
imagine Dei, and cum eum destruere non potuerat, obtulit ei consilium non
aliter ac ille qui lampada prae flammae suae validitate extinguere non potest,
immiscendo oleo aquam, lucem ejus extinguit, sic per consilium Serpentis
extinxit seductor beatitudinem, and vice justitiae ortum est peccatum.

Caput Decimum.
CVR homo mutatus est a bono in malum? Dicimus ex voluntate sua, similis est
enim ei cujus oculi clauduntur, qui tempore meridiano invenitur in tenebris,
oculum enim fecit Deus, and non caecitatem, visum quidem creavit, non tamen, ut
videamus vel non videamus, sic etiam monstravit virtutem and monuit nos de
elongatione a malo.

Caput Vndecimum.
SED quum noverat quidem Deus hominem casurum, quare creavit eum? Respondemus
quod Deus in beatitudinem creavit eum, id vero quod cecidit, infirmitas and
iniquitas, and mors e voluntate sua fuit, and postea exortae sunt decidui
rebelliones contra rectitudinem per am voluntatem: sicut radices decoctae sanum
reddunt corpus and quemadmodum vasis figulini plumbo completi and postea fracti
creta, de novo reficitur quando liberatur plumbo, sic suscitat in resurrectione
Deus corpus quod corruptum est quando liberatur a plumbo, scilicet a peccato,
and quum noverat eum casurum noverat etiam ab aeterno seipsum venturum and
liberaturum eum and inspiraturum eum ut prius.

Perscrutatio Duodecima.
QVare incarnatus fuit filius and neque Pater neque Spiritus? Respondemus ne
vitiarentur proprietates personarum: Pater ipse genuit, Filius natus fuit,
Spiritus vero prodiit: Filius cui proprium fuit generari ipse natus fuit and
incarnatus, verbum insuper natum fuit a Patre sicut verbum nostrum ab
intellectu, and sicut verbum nestrum obsignatur and incorporatur in Charta, non
tamen intellectus qui protulit illud, neque halitus iste a quo prodiit, sic
etiam and verbum incorporatur, non tamen intellectus, pater, neque Spiritus
iste qui a patre prodiit.

Caput Decimum tertium.
NON voluntas Dei permansit in virgin, sed verbum Deus, dicit enim Johannes
quod verbum caro factum est, and habitavit in nobis, and Paulus etiam, misit
Deus filium suum and factus erat ex muliere. Iterum de filio ejus (loquitur)
qui natus fuit in carne; dum per illud quod natus fuit in carne, monstrat quod
aliam generationem habuit aeternam: and Gabriel etiam virtus excelsi habitabit
super te (i. e.) verbum Deus, erubescant igitur Haeretici dicentes quod
voluntas ejus solummodo habitavit in Virgin.

Caput Decimum quartum.
QVomodo dicit Scriptura quod descendit verbum, and habitavit in Virgin, and
misit Deus filium suum and factus est? Dicimus non quasi migravit e loco in
locum vel quod reliquit locum unum and accessit alterum quod proprium est
corporibus and rebus definitis, sed quod ipse qui fuit absconditus revelatus
fuit in carne, and invisibilis visus fuit, and sicut radii solis ingrediuntur
fenestram domus quae repletur iis, sunt tamen in Coelo in mari and in domo quam
ingressi sunt and in omni loco, sic and verbum, quando habitavit in Virgin
erat in Coelo, and in Virgin, and in omni loco sed vocebulum Vbi competit
corporibus non vero Deo.

Investigatio Caput Decimum quintum.
QVomodo unitum fuit verbum carni absque eo quod inquinaretur vel reciperet
turpitudinem? Dicimus quod sicut hodie contingit omnibus infantibus qui eduntur
utero hominum and brutorum, formamque habent and non inquinantur ab eo,
similiter and verbum quando habitabat in Virgin. Dicimus insuper quod Deus
aeque appropinquat and distat a Coelo and Terra omnibusque creaturis, and si
aliquibus appropinquando expolitus, aliisque inquinatus esset, potestas and
natura ejus videretur composita, spiritualia etiam superiora sunt sordibus
corporalibus, Angelus enim quando accedit sordes putridas, non inquinatur neque
anima offenditur ex inquinatione corporis, neque sol faedatur dum transit per
turpitudines, neque ignis recipit a pabulo qualemcunque inquinationem, si vero
spiritualia and visibilia ita se habent quanto magis non inficitur e sordibus
Creator, imo sanctificat and purgat uterum.

Objectio Caput Decimum sextum.
SI unitum fuit carni nostrae, passum est mutationem: Respondemus, Quemadmodum
Sol non mutatur quando ministrat hominibus aestate and hieme, neque minuitur;
nec mutatur Doctoris scientia balbutiendo cum pueris, nec anima, quando unitur
corpori, nec ignis ferro conjunctus mutatur e sua natura, ita etiam non mutatum
fuit verbum quando carni fuit unitum.

Objectio Caput Decimum septimum.
QVare non salvavit nos per Angelum vel Legatum? sed per seipsum. Dicimus quod
non fuit possibile ut per creaturas servaretur humana natura, sed per
Creatorem, sicut vas vitreum, quando frangitur, non accommodatur per
Architectum vel fabrum, sed per Vitriarium qui id confecit, sic etiam and nos
quando incidimus in peccatum, impossible est ut alius quisquam nos restauret,
nisi Deus qui nos creavit, iterum neque redemptionem per Legatum effecit, ne
adorarent errantes nuncium Prophetam vel Angelum qui fuerat mittendus.

Caput Decimum octavum.
QVare ab utero exiit verbum per Nativitatem? Dicimus uterum esse membrum
praestantissimum, etenim res est certa, quod omnis homo in eo figitur, quia
quotidie morimur, and uter contra mortem contendit, propterea fuit congruum ut
ex utero, qui contendit cum morte Deus prodiret; and quemadmodum qui vas a
sordibus vult complete absolvere, totum abluit, similiter fecit Christus, quia
principium eorum qui nascuntur a ventre and utero est, finis vero est mors,
medium vero inter principium and finem intercedens, est vita: per ista tria
transiit verbum, per uterum scilicet per vitam and per mortem, ut auferret
maledictionem propter transgressionem mandati denique non est in hominibus
membrum abominabile, sed omnia aeque sunt honoranda.

Caput Decimum nonum.
QVare incarnatum fuit verbum? Respondemus, In gratia sua creavit hominem, and
quando peccavit, per gratiam suam eum servavit, descendit enim and fuit
incarnatum ut eum redimeret: quomodo vero factum est homo, monstrat Apostolus,
Quia filii participes fuerunt sanguinis and carnis, ipse quoque similiter,
filios vocat animas, quod pro more Scripturae est hominem a part denominantis;
secundum hoc descendit cum septuaginta quinque animabus, and sicut unitur anima
corpori and facta est una cum eo natura and persona, sic verbum unitum fuit
carni animatae, ideo factum est homo ut per mortem ejus destrueret Diabolum:
insuper hoc velamine colluctatus est cum Satana, and superavit eum, quia ipse
operculo Serpentis vicerat hominem.

Caput Vicesimum.
QVomodo non laesum fuit per Incarnationem? Respondemus, quia hujusmodi habuit
virtutem ut majestate sua remanens, fuerit incarnatum, absque eo quod perderet
propriam suam majestatem, and sicut Rex quando dignatur consuetudinem habere
cum suis Ministris non laedit suam auctoritatem, neque vir si se tradiderit
ligandum debilioribus, dicitur, quod virtus ejus defecerit, sic quidem non
laesus fuit Deus per exinanitionem sed superavit passiones per ejus
exinanitionem, fuit etiam in inferno, non tamen laesus per tristitiam, in
Sepulchro etiam and non passus est corruptionem, in Gehenna etiam fuit, non
tamen abaestu ejus fuit consumptus.

Objectio Caput Vicesimum primum.
QVare cum incarnatum fuerat verbum, per mortem servavit hominem and non ex
authoritate and mandato? Dicimus quod justum fuit verbum, and quatenus justum,
non vi ducturum erat hominem, potuit quidem vi convertere omnes homines, sed
non defraudaturum erat libertatem, neque vi ducturum proprium arbitrium,
propterea non imperio servavit; sed per verbum justitiae, quum enim ausus
fuerat Satanas objicere contra Christum qui fuit peccati expers, injustitiam,
ipse servavit totum genus humanum and quando sanabat, partem aegrotantem
tangebat and non sanam, sic genus quod aegrotum erat in peccato induit verbum
ut ejus auferret passiones.

Caput Vicesimum secundum.
SED quare a principio non venit Christus? Dicimus quod sicuti infanti primo
loco carnem non porrigunt comedendam, usque dum maturiorem attingat aetatem,
ita quando genus nostrum erat perficiendum, advenit medicus, posteaquam enim
excreverat in cumulum omnium peccatorum mensura, and nulla species iniquitatis
restabat inter homines, quae non fuerat perimpleta, tunc venit medicus ejus in
salutem.

Caput Vicesimum tertium.
SED quomodo posteaquam accommodata fuerit cura, immersi sumus adhuc in
peccatis? Dicimus quod sicut Serpens capite conoulcatus non repent moritur,
sed adhuc caudam suam vibrat, sic, etiamsi Dominus noster fortiter superaverit
and destruxerit iniquitatem, reliquiis tamen suis mundo adhuc nocet.

Caput Vicesimum quartum.
QVare non vi adduxit homines ad bonum? Dicimus quod nihil proficiunt ex fide
coacta, sed magis rei fiunt, sicut homo coacte existens apud eum quem odio
habet.

Caput Vicesimum quintum.
QVare non fecit Deus hominem ut ex natura cultum ejus diligeret? Dicimus, si
hoc fecisset, voluntatem and libertatem defraudasset, and hae defuissent
homini, and natura ligari inveniretur sicut ignis qui non sua sponte urit, and
etiamsi circumdaretur multitudine Creaturarum mandato suo subjugatarum, and non
haberent libertatem, neque beatitudinem, neque operarum suarum mercedem
haberent.

Caput Vicesimum sextum.
QVomodo occisus fuit Satan, irritum factum fuit peccatum and mortua est mors?
Dicimus quod tribus modis mortuus est Satan, primo ratione cruciatus and
perturbationis suae. Secundum hoc quod anima quae peccaverit morietur, cum
satis sit notum quod mors animae est ejus cruciatus, sic mortuus est Satanas
quatenus cruciatus fuit ob perditam suam eminentiam, and quia contempta fuit
Idololatria. Secundo mortuus est Satanas quatenus potentiam ejus promovendi
iniquitatem trucidavit Christus, and revelavit peccatum, and monstravit id
esse, and fugiant homines ab eo, Sin vero mortuus est Satanas quomodo
tentationibus suis homines colaphizat? Dicimus quod hoc fieri permittit Deus
aliquando apparenter, aliquando re vera, sicuti in Sanctis and vincentibus,
prout apud Jobum fecit, praeterea irritum factum est peccatum, quia deletum
est, dixit enim gaudium est nobis quia mortua est iniquitas nostra and
projiciet in mare peccata nostra, and Pharmaca purgativa peccati sunt
poenitentia and mysteria vivifica, mors vero mortua est, per mortem Christi
cujus vis soluta est ad instar Serpentis iniquae, cujus dentes franguntur, and
Serpentis caudam vibrantis, etiamsi capite sit contritus, dein mortuum est
peccatum quia suscitavit Christus corpus suum ad incorruptibilitatem, prout nos
etiam suscitaturus est.

Caput Vicesimum septimum.
QVare dedit nobis Baptismum? Respondemus ut nos mitteret in vitam and
beatitudines aeternas, carnais generatio ad mortem misit, sed spiritualis
scilicet baptismi ad vitam. Id vero quod tribus vicibus absorpti sumus in
baptismo innuit mystice descensum Domini nostri in Sepulchrum trid^o, and
ascensus noster e baptisterio innuit ejus resurrectionem. Ipse sepultus fuit in
terra, and nos in aqua, similia enim sibi invicem imo intertexta sunt elementa
aquae and terrae quia simul sunt commixta.

Caput Vicesimum octavum.
QVare sumimus corpus and sanguinem? Dicimus quod sicut ignis ferro unitus
acqu^rit ei efficentiam, adeo ut splendeat and urat non aliter ac ipse ignis,
sic etiam and Christus, quando accepit panem and vinum ea fecit corpus and
sanguinem suum vere, and acquisivit iis virtutem and sanctitatem adeo ut quando
ea suscipimus e nobis faciunt evanescere mortem, and possidere nos faciunt
vitam immortatem, and sicut fermentum totam massam ad se attrahit, sic and
mysteria sancta immortalitatem ad nos attrahunt, Deus enim verbum quando carni
unitus fuit eam fecit Deum, non per naturam sed per efficaciam: sic and corpus
quod manducamus, dicitur quod e Virgin natus fuit, and fuit non per naturam,
sed per unionem cum verbo, Deus.

Caput Vicesimum nonum contra Gentiles.
OBjiciunt contra nos Mahumet any, quod nonnihil mutavimus in Evangelio: ad
quos dicimus aut vos habetis producere testes de hujusmodi mutatione per nos
facta; aut nos habemus jurare, quod nihil mutavimus; quia ut vos dicitis testes
spectant ad allegantem, and juramentum ad negantem, vos quidem adversarii
nostri estis, propterea testimonium vestrum contra nos non erit accipiendum,
and si dixeritis; quod in Scriptura vestra scriptum est, quod nos rogavimus ad
supplendum ex loco ejus. Respondendum erit, quod hoc de nobis dictum non fuit,
sed de Judaeis, quod constat ex verbis istum locum praecedentibus. Monstrate
nobis quis in eo mutavit aliquid, quo tempore, qua causa, and quaenam verba
mutavimus: si dixeritis Apostoli, ecce Scriptura vestra perhibet de iis
testimonium quod homines fuerunt virtute praediti: and in quo tempore? An ante
exortam ditionem vestram vel postea, utrum pro lucro corporali mutavimus in eo
aliquid, ecce enim scriptum est in eo ut vendamus quicquid nobis sit and demus
pauperibus: si vero pro causa spirituali quomodo permiserat Deus ut mutarent
Scripturas, and ut essent contra voluntatem ejus? Et quae verba mutarunt?
Mandata difficilia non mutarunt quia in eo restant adhuc hujusmodi, qui te
percusserit super maxillam tuam, etc. Sin vero verba abjecta and vilia, ecce in
eo reperiuntur in eo hujusmodi, oravit and lachrimavit Jesus, constat igitur
nihil in eo mutatum esse. Et ecce in Scriptura vestra scriptum est, si vobis
aliqua occurrerit ambiguit as vel dubitatio, interrogate eos qui legerunt
Scripturas antiquas, considerate quomodo per nos mittit vobis Scripturaram
vestram, dein tradit Propheta vester, dixisse Deum, quod datum est Jesu
Evangelium cui inest lumen and vita and directio and via veritatis, si igitur
in eo sit lumen and vita, quis fugit a luce nisi caecus, a vita nisi mortuus a
via nisi latro, and a veritate nisi mendax, propterea firmum est nostrum
Evangelium, and eo magis, quia a vobis ipsis recipit testimonium, and superat
Phantasias, and mandata ejus curant peccata and morbos animae, and hoc
praenunciat nobis de futuris, and ii qui hoc receperunt non prae timore aut vi
gladii coacti consenserunt ei, sed quia viderunt divina miracula.

Caput Tricesimum contra Judaeos.
JUdaei etiam nobis objiciunt quod Moses dixit, neque addas legi nec minuas
Evangelium vero est additamentum: iis respondemus, ecce etiam vos addidistis
Legi, libros Prophetarum and Sapientiam, sin vero dixeritis quod isti etiam
libri concordes sunt Legi ecce etiam Evangelium convenit legi eamque complet:
si vero Piscatores fuerunt Apostoli, Prophetae etiam fuerunt Pastores, and quia
non sufficiebat Lex ad perficiendum homines in justitia opus fuit Evangelii.
Dicunt insuper quod ei insunt mendacia quia in eo habentur contradictiones;
propterea respondemus quod inventitur additio and diminutio narrationum sed non
contrarietas, and ecce in lege scriptum est quod quacunque die comederis ex
arbore morieris attamen post annos noningintos and triginta annos obiit, and
non addam maledicendum terrae, attamen scriptum est quod in maledictione
comedes.

Caput Tricesimum primum.
QVot modis dicatur Lex? Lex sex modis dieitur, prima est Lex illa naturalis
quae est discretio and Curia conscientiae quae data est iis, qui e progeny
funt Adami, and impressa est eorum cordibus. Secunda est Lex scripta per Mosen
(exempli gratia) non committes Adulterium, etc. Tertia est illa Christi, qui te
percusserit super maxillam tuam, quarta est illud quod gratia servabimur,
quinta est illa quae residet in membris scilicet peccatum. Sexta quae est ipse
Spiritus sanctus, Vetus Testamentum datum fuit in monte Sinai, post exitum
populi ex Aegypto, cum fumo, vapore and igne propter duritiem populi. Novum
vero datum fuit in Caenaculo post exitum Gentium e peccato, tertia hora primi
diei Sabbathi: Testamentum exponitur statutum and mandatum, and post mortem
confirmatur, per mortem filii confirmatur, Evangelium vero exponitur Nunciatio,
nuntiamus enim quod Deus descendit in terram, quod mors soluta est, quod regnum
revelatum est, and Prophetae clamarunt Deum daturum verbum annunciationis.
Evangelista Nuncius. Evangelium vero est narratio humanationis verbi, and
scripta Pauli and Apostolorum docent occasionem humanationis and bona inde
profluentia.

Caput Tricesimum secundum.
PHiloxenus dicit quod Baptismus fuit principium Evangelii, e Nativitate enim
Baptismum usque, secundum legem mores suos instituit, propterea baptismus est
principium Evangelii, and Basilius in Sermon fuo contra Eumonium dicit quo
principium Evangelii est praedicatio Johannis, quod and Marcus vocat principium
Evangelii, illa enim quae spectabant ad conceptionem ejus non pro Evangelio
habentur. Idiotas elegit Dominus noster ne personarum dignitati attribueretur
miraculorum stupor, sic and Pater in Testamento veteri, inferioris conditionis
homines elegit, Mosen lingua impeditum, Davidem Pastorem, Amos Pastorem,
Ehurmanu mutilum, in veteri quidem Pastores elegit, quia gregi determinatae in
terra Judaeorum praefecti erant, in novo piscatores quia in tota Terra piscati
sunt indefinite, quasi in rete cujuscunque generis venientes.

Caput Tricesimum tertium.
PER quatuor Evangelistas scriptum fuit Evangelium quia in quatuor mundi plagas
erat propagandum, quatuor etiam sunt Elementa, and quatuor flumina, and quatuor
ventos vidit Daniel, and quatuor equos, and quatuor currus vidit Zacharia, and
quatuor Candelabra, and quatuor fuerunt Cumuli, and currus quem vidit Ezechiel
eique juncta quatuor animalia mystice innuunt quatuor Evangelistas, Leo propter
audaciam, and dispositionem eorum ad erroris contritionem, Aquila vero quia per
eos capiuntur Daemones, sicut per aquilas animalia, apprehendunt etiam
abscondita sicut vident aquilae and prospiciunt long, Bos etiam quia subjugant
mundum per eorum Doctrinam, Homo quia homines fuerunt, Alae significant
eminentiam Evangelii, and in quantum manus hominis habuerunt animalia, auxilium
Christi Evangelistis praestitum innuitur, Rota in medio rotae typus est
Testamentorum, oculi mystice significant perfectam scientiam quam seminarunt
Apostoli in mundo: Homo in curru significat verbum quod homo faciendum erat.

Caput Tricesimum quartum.
DUO Apostolorum scripserunt and duo Discipulorum Marous erat Petri Discipulus,
and Lucas Johannis: Non scripserunt quatuor Apostolorum, tum quia nihil egerunt
gloriae captandae gratia, tum etiam ne parvi penderentur Discipuli, and ne
dicerent homines quod non fuerunt participes cum Apostolis in praedicatione and
Scriptura, Quis coegit quatuor Evangelia, eademque in uno libro ordinavit?
Nonnulli dicunt quod Eusebius Caesariensis quando observasset Eumonium
Alexandrinum confecisse Evangelium (...) vocatum, (hoc est) e quatuor and
adhaerentiam verborum mutasse, similiter etiam fecisse Titianum Graecum
Haereticum, ipse coegit ista quatuor and eorum singula seorsim scripsit, A lii
dicunt, quod Johannes Evangelista ordinavit eadem in unum librum quando ad eum
tria allata fuerant quae suo adjunxit.

Caput Tricesimum quintum.
POstquam Paulus electus fuerat and necesse erat ut Apostoli abirent in
Regiones ad praedicandum inceperunt tres Evangelistae scribere Evangelium,
Matthaeus antequam sparsi erant Apostoli, postea vero Marcus and Lucas, and
quando scripta Matthaei ad fideles in Epheso pervenerant Johanni persuadebant
ut scriberet ipse etiam de his quae desiderabantur.

Caput Tricesimum sextum. Occasio Scripturae Matthaei in particulari.
ORta jam persecutione contra Apostolos, lapidato Stephano, occisoque Jacobo,
factum est ut dispergerentur Apostoli, and ut praedicarent Evangelium gentibus;
Hebraei vero qui crediderunt, hoc observato, Matthaeum accesserunt rogaruntque
ab eo, ut quicquid iis verbo tenus dixisset, ipsis in scriptis traderet, quod
etiam praestitit: tres Evangelistae ea solummodo quae in uno anno egerat
Dominus noster scriptis mandarunt, ab incarceratione scilicet Johannis usque ad
ascensionem, exceptis Nativitate, Baptismo and Tentatione, aliisque nonnullis
sine quibus fieri vix potuit ut Narrationum suarum caperent exordium, Johannes
vero scripsit de Divinitate and de hujusmodi rebus quae duobus praecedentibus
annis gesserat Christus a tempore quo incepit Johannes praedicare usque ad
tempus quo in carcerem inciderat scopus vero suarum Scriptionum fuit adventus
Domini nostri in carne, beatitudinesque nobis ab eo profluentes.

Caput Tricesimum septimum.
MAtthaeus in Regione Palestinae scripsit haebraice, and Marcus Romae lingua
Romana (i. e.) lingua Franeorum, Dominus tamen Juunis dicit quod Marcus
scripsit in Aegypto; Lucas scripsit Graece in Alexandria, Johannes scripsit
Graece in Epheso, tribus linguis scriptum fuit Evangelium, quia tres hae
linguae supra Crucem Christi fuerunt scriptae, Haebraice, Graece, and Latin,
Hebraice ratione Judaeorum, Graece ratione Pilati, Latin ratione Herodis, and
in ipsissimis linguis quibus usi sunt in accusatione ejus hosts ejus,
Evangelium praedicarunt Evangelistae.

Caput Tricesimum octavum.
LVcas processit secundum rerum ordinem, and omnia suo ordine disposuit, and
prout gesta erant a Domino nostro scripsit, Johannes etiam similiter fecit,
salvt eo, quod nonnulla in medio reliquit, quia dicta fuerano per socios suos;
Matthaeus vero non eodem processit modo sed usus est Doctrinae methodo,
cohaerentia insimul collocando, leges enim quas instituit Dominus noster in uno
capite ord^navit, alteri vero Evangelistae sparsim eas tradiderunt, and Marcus
sequitur dispositionem Matthaei: multi vero non intell gentes modum quo quisque
eorum scripsit respective, existimarunt se fuisse fibi invicem contrarios.

Caput Tricesimum nonum.
QUia principium Evangelii fuit Baptismus Christi, prout supra diximus,
propterea inde exorsus est Marcus, Matthaeus enim altius ingressum fecit apud
Genealogiam Familiarum ut monstraret Hebraeis quod sicuti praedixissent
Prophetae, Christus ortus est. Lucas vero altius orditur and pertingit usque ad
nativitatem Johannis ut subaccuseret eos, qui praefatione omissa, aggressi
fuerant scriptionem historiae Christi: Johannes ascendit usque ad sermonem
divinum, ut monstraret, quod etiamsi socii sui scripsissent Christum hominem
fuisse quatenus incarnatum, erat, tamen Deus and cum patre fuerat, and postea
incarnatus and homo factus fuit. Doctrina eorum medio platearum, and alta voce
fuit praedicata, ipsis dicentibus Deus revelatus est in corpore and toleravit
passiones in carne, mortuus fuit and resurrexit and confirmata fuit eorum
praedicatio per miracula quae fecerunt.

Caput Quadragesimum.
JOhannes loquutus est de sublimibus, and socii sui de inferioribus, Matthaeus
quidem quia ad Judaeos scripsit, ei curae fuit, ut narraret ejus generationem
and consuetudinem in carne, Marcus vero sollicitus fuit ut scriberet contra
Simonem, qui praedicaverat filium dispensationem suam egisse per Phantasiam,
quapropter confirmavit ea quae ad corporationem spectabant, dicitur quod ei
dedit in mandatis Petrus ut scriberet vice sua, and hac ratione (ut nonnulli
existimant) ne propter Petri eminentiam sociorum suorum Scripturae parvi
haberentur, ipse mandavit ei ut scriberet de ejus abnegatione accurate,
similiter Lucae mandavit Paulus ut scriberet, in cujus imitationem extense ad
modum Oratoris loquitur in confirmationem Theophili.

Caput Quadragesimum primum.
JOhannes cum vidisset quod ea quae spectabant ad ejus humanitatem, ex illis
quae scripserant socii sui fuerant confirmata, scripsit ipse de Divinitate,
humilia loquutus est Dominus noster, tam propter infirmitatem and torum, quam
in confirmationem humanationis, and ut doceret humilitatem, and ut crederetur
quod a Deo missus fuit. Licet personae eminenti loqui humilia (e g.) Vbi es tu
Adame? Et Vbi est Abel frater tuus? Humili vero personae non licet grandia de
se loqui, ne existimaretur inverecunda occasio loquendi de Christo, fuit, ut
monstraret naturae suae majestatem, dicimus insuper quod dupliciter de Deo
loquuntur Scripturae vel secundum id quod est, hunc in modum quod aeternus est,
and Pater and Filius and Spiritus sanctus, vel secundum id quod eo inferius
est, sicuti ignis est, irascitur, indignatus est and quod poenituit eum de
hominibus: tribus modis loquuntur Scripturae de hominibus, primo secundum id
quod est (i. e.) homo vivens, rationalis, mortalis secundo, supra id quod est,
scilicet Deus and filii Dei, tertio infra id quod est quemadmodum vocatur
tinea, vermis, lupus, vulpes; multis insuper modis loquuntur, adeo ut necesse
erit de quocunque Scripturae verbo haec quatuor intelligere scilicet
occasionem, scopum, tempus, and personam, quae referuntur ad hujusmodi verbum,
si vero hoc non fecerimus in errandi periculo constituti sumus, aliter quomodo
potest consistere haec sententia qui non odio habet patrem suum cum ista, filii
auscultate parentibus vestris.

Caput Quadragesimum secundum.
SEptem sunt Capita praestituenda omni libro, Scopus scopus vero est Evangelii
ut lucrifaciamus hominibus vitam in Deo scilicet per Verbum fidem in Trinitate,
and per operam, mores Virtute praeditos. Secundo, Vtilitas ejus, prodest
Evangelium ad salutem animae. Tertio, Ordo (i. e.) ordo legendi Evangelium post
legem and Prophetas, quia in eo perimplentur quae in Scriptura praefigurata
sunt. Quarto Occasio editionis and hoc est Evangelium (i. e.) enunciatio bona.
Quinto, Divisio in Capita, Evangelium vero dividitur in cognitionem Dei unius
scilicet trium personarum, and in praxim morum Virtute praeditorum, and in
cognitionem Virtutum caelestium, quae gaudent in conversionem peccatorum, and
in mandata in commemorationem judicii, and in remunerationem bonorum. Sexto,
Cujus est Liber? Liber est Christi qui praedicatus fuit per duos Apostolos and
duos Discipulos. Septimo, Sub qua notione res erit tractanda, id est
consideratur respectu Theoriae (i. e.) quatenus discursus est Divinitatis, vel
praxeos (i. e.) ratione morum sanctorum, Matthaeus vero exponitur versatus in
Commercio, praedicatio vocatur Evangelium quia non occulte sed manifest
narratum fuit.

Caput Quadragesimum tertium.
EVsebius Caesariensis sollicitus fuit ut constitueret Canones Evangelii, quod
constat ex Epistola ejus ad Carpianum, and in iis monstrat harmoniam
Evangelistarum, scripserat etiam Eumonius and Titianus etiam Evangelium vocatum
(...) (i. e.) quatuor prout supra diximus, and quando venerant ad historiam
resurrectionis and observaverant variationem abstinuerunt ab ista opera, sed
Eusebio curae erat, ut hujusmodi Canones conficeret, and ut iis ostenderet
Evangelistarum inter se convenientiam per modum concordantiae hujusmodi; Olaph
est primus Canon and per eum docet quatuor Evangelistas idem dixisse, ecce enim
monstrat hanc narrationem (viz.) Hic est filius meus dilectus in quo complacui
esse in primo Canone, positamque esse in Matthaeo Sect. 18. in Marco' 14. in
Luca 16. in Johanne 18. Canones quos ordinavit sunt december, and in primo omnes
quatuor convenient. Iterum vero ubi scripta est in Matthaeo in Canonibus duabus
vicibus aut tribus una litera, prout res est, and in Canonibus sociorum suorum
non ita, scire debes alios Evangelistas bis fecisse mentionem narrationis, in
duobus scilicet locis and voluit Canonum Dispositor ut istam literam ordinaret
ad significandum narrationem saepius repetitam fuisse apud alios, Litera (...)
in principio Canonis Matthaei bis scribitur, and in Canone Marci similiter,
quia Johannes duobus in locis narrationem repetit, Matthaeus etiam and Marcus,
itidem, necesse habuit Canonum Dispositor ut eandem literam bis scriberet ut
adaequaret Canonem ei qui bis narrationem scripsisset.

In Canone vero secundo tres convenient Matthaeus, Marcus and Lucas.
In tertio tres convenient Matthaeus, Lucas and Johannes.
In quarto tres convenient Matthaeus, Marcus and Johannes.
In quinto duo convenient Matthaeus and Lucas.
In sexto duo convenient Matthaeus, Marcus.
In septimo duo Matthaeus, Johannes.
In octavo duo Marcus, Lucas.
In nono duo Lucas, Johannes.
In decimo ubi singulariter scripsit unusquisque (e.g.) Paragraphus Samaritanae
cujus facit mentionem nullus alius Evangelistarum praeter Johannem.

Caput Quadragesimum quartum.
December constituit Canones, quia numerus denarius e quatuor nascitur, quia ita
computatur, scilicet quatuor, tres, duo, unus, ecce coeunt in december.

In Canone primo quatuor convenient.
In Canone secundo, tertio and quarto tres convenient.
In quinto, sexto and septimo convenient duo, pariter ac in octavo and nono.
In decimo unusquisque secundum quod sibi proprium est, prout diximus, clarum
est tamen quod in aliquo uno associatur, prout in Canone primo ponitur historia
earum quae unxerunt Dominum nostrum, cum fuerint tres differentes, ob id enim
solummodo quod unxerunt scribuntur in Canone primo, historia insuper Paralytici
cum apud Matthaeum and Marcum idem fuit, apud Johannem tamen alius and alius
fuit verum in uno Canone disponuntur, sciendum est quod in singulis
Evangelistis sunt numeri procedentes respective, and sub numero progreditur
numerus Canonum, and in quocunque Canone inveniatur narratio, noveris tu quot
Evangelistae convenient in eadem, in Canone primo incipit a convenientia
Narrationum Evangelistarum ut os obthuraret iis, qui dicunt quod sibi invicem
sunt contradicentes: E Canone secundo exit Johannes quia multa separata habet,
a Marco, a Johanne tria, a Marco septemdecem.

Caput Quadragesimum quintum.
DIximus insuper quot numeros habent singuli Evangelistae Matthaeus habet in
Canone primo numeros 426. habet cum Marco, Luca and Johanne numeros 64.

In Canone secundo habet cum Marco and Luca 101. In Canone tertio habet cum
Luca and Johanne numeros 8. In Canone quarto habet cum Marco and Johanne
numeros 17. In quinto cum Luca 87. In sexto cum Marco numeros 17. In septimo
cum Johanne 9. sibi propria habet 76. inest ipse octo Canonibus a primo
scilicet in septimum, and decimo.
Marcus habet 290. numeros in Canone primo habet cum Matthaeo, Luca and Johanne
numeros 65. in secundo cum Matthaeo and Luca 101. in quarto cum Matthaeo and
Johanne 17. in sexto cum Matthaeo 17. in octavo cum Luca 23. in decimo sibi
habet propria 27. Versatur in sex Canonibus in primo in secundo in quarto in
sexto in octavo and decimo.

Lucas habet numeros 402. in Canone primo cum sociis suis 64. in secundo cum
Matthaeo and Marco and Johanne numeros 8. in quinto cum Matthaeo 109. in 8. cum
Marco 23. in decimo sibi habet propria 86. Versatur in septem Canonibus in
primo, secundo, tertio in quinto in octavo (in nono) and decimo.

Johannes habet numeros 171. in Canone primo cum tribus sociis suis habet
numeros 26. in tertio cum Matthaeo and Marco 24. in septimo cum Matthaeo 17. in
nono cum Luca 9. in decimo propria habet 23. Versatur in sex Canonibus in primo
and tertio and quarto and septimo and nono and decimo, sunt in Matthaeo Canones
62. signa 28. numerus Canonum 360. Testimonia 32. Miracula 26. quae computavit
Theologus verbis extensis parabolae 17.

Non probandus est numerus Canonum quia sibi non convenit numerus.

FINIS.

