A DISCOURSE Concerning the Nominal and Real Trinitarians.

Non Partum Studiis agimur, sed sumsimus arma
Consiliis inimica tuis, Discordia vecors.
Printed in the Year 1695.

Of the Nominal, and Real TRINITARIANS.
The Distinction of Trinitarians, into Nominals and Realists; and the Design of
these Sheets.
IT will easily appear, to all that have seen the late Prints between the
Trinitarians and Unitarians; That the Questions controverted between us, are
managed here, on another Foot as they speak, in another Method, and by
different Arguments, than in Foreign parts, or by the Latin Writers. Among
other remarks that we have made and urged, the English Unitarians show; That
their Opposers do indeed all go under the common name of Trinitarians, but are
(in truth) a great many several and contrary Sects. They all cast up their
Caps, and cry, Trinity, Trinity: But the Ideas they have of the Trinity, and
consequently their Faiths concerning this (pretended) Mystery, are so many and
so contrary; that they are less one Party among themselves, than the far more
Learned, and far greater Number of them (I mean hereby, the Nominal
Trinitarians) are one Party with Us. As much as the Socinians are clamoured on,
for (abominable, intolerable) Heretics; there is nothing more certain than
that the Nominal Trinitarians, who are truly and properly the Church, and who
are by much the Majority of Christians, are altogether in the same Sentiments
concerning Almighty GOD, and the Person of our Savior; that we are.

This is one of the Points that I shall insist on, and evince in these Sheets:
but I shall argue diverse other Matters, these two especially. That the several
Sects of Real Trinitarians are guilty of a manifest Tritheism, their Doctrine
(necessarily and immediately) infers three Gods: and that the Nominal
Trinitarians have causlesly innovated the Language of the Holy Scripture, and
of the (Primitive) Church, concerning GOD, and the Person of the Lord Christ. I
said, in the Language of Scripture, and of the ancient Church; for they have
retained the Primitive and true Doctrine, only they have not kept to the Form
of sound Words. I will speak, first, of (our Brethren) the Nominal
Trinitarians; then of the Tritheistick Tribes, or Realists.

Of the Nominal Trinitarians; that these are the Church.
THE first observation to be made on the Nominals, is; that these are the
Church; which I prove by two (incontestable) Arguments.

1. Their Doctrine has been espoused by a General Council. The Council
assembled at the Lateran, in the Year 1215, established (in the most ample
manner, and most express Terms) the Doctrine of the School-Divines or Nominal
Trinitarians; and condemns, in the Person and Writings of Abbat Joachim, the
Doctrine of the Real Trinitarians, as Heretical and Mad; I use the very words
of the 2d Canon of that Council. To this Argument, I must note two things.

First, This Council was more truly General, than almost any of the Councils
that are so called. Here were present 1200 Fathers; the Ambassadors of the
Emperor of Constantinople, the King of the Romans, the Kings of France,
England, Arragon, Hungary, Jerusalem, Cyprus, and diverse others: Here also were
the five Patriarchs, (partly in Person, partly by their Legates) the Roman,
Constantinopolitan, he of Jerusalem, the Antiochian and Alexandrian; whose
Presence (by themselves or their Legates) is supposed necessary toward
constituting an Ecumenical (or General) Council.

Secondly, Divines and Canonists do not give the name of Heresy to any
Doctrine, because it is rejected by a great number of Learned Men, or by a
National Council: but they reckon it Heresy, if it has been censured by a
General Council, which represents the Universal Church. Be the mistake never so
great, let it have been condemned by never so many Writers; whether Fathers or
Moderns, or both: it is only Error, it is not Heresy, unless it has been
Anathematized by the Catholic (or Universal) Church; and the Catholic Church
is never understood to speak, but by a General Council; which for that reason
is called the Church Representative.

Briefly, Heresy and the Faith can be declared, but only by a General Council;
the General Council at the Lateran (in Rome) has avowed the Doctrine of the
Nominal Trinitarians, and Anathematized the Hypothesis and Explication of the
Real Trinitarians: therefore, say I, the former are the Church; the latter are
Heretics. I am amazed, when I hear some Real Trinitarians say in their Books;
That the Doctrine of the Nominals never had any other public Authority, but
the Creed and 2d Canon of the Council of Lateran: for what other equal
Authority thereto can it have; is not a General Council the highest Court of
the Church? Her Canons declare the Faith, her Anathemas Heresy. And what other
Council ever was so General as this; in which were assembled, the Emperor, and
Kings of the East and West, the Latin and Greek Churches, 1200 Fathers; and
what especially makes a General Council, the five Patriarchs of Christendom.

What will the Realists say here; that this was a Popish Council? First, it
would be News indeed, that the Roman Catholics are not Orthodox, in the
Questions concerning the Trinity, and the Incarnation. It has ever been granted
to them, both by the Lutherans, Calvinists, and Church of England, that they
are sound in Fundamentals; in the Doctrines of the Trinity, the Incarnation,
the Satisfaction, and such like: their Error consists, in the Additions they
have made to the Fundamentals; and namely, by their Doctrines of Indulgences,
Transubstantiation, Worship and Invocation of Images and Saints, and the rest.
And is the Greek Church also Heretical in the Doctrine of the Trinity? for in
this Council, the Greek Emperor and Church were represented, as well as the
Latin Church: nay, of the five Patriarchs here present, four of them belong to
the Orient, or Greek Church. When the Realists have turned themselves all ways,
they will find themselves held, and even bound by the Authority of this
Council; which is too Great and Venerable to be (openly, or directly)
disclaimed.

It Is objected to this Council, by Mr. Spanheim, the present (Learned)
Professor at Leyden; that they assented to, and published 70 Canons in 20 days
Time; and that the Canons were not framed by the Fathers, but by the Pope.
These are frivolous Exceptions, unworthy of so Learned an Historian: for it is
not at all to the purpose, who contrived these Canons; seeing they were
approved, assented to, and published by the Council. Canons are ofttimes
composed by some particular Father in a Council; sometimes by a Committee of
the Council, sometimes (as in the present Case) by the President: but by
whomsoever they are drawn up, they are not the Canons of that Person or
Persons; but of the Council, when the Council has examined, approved and voted
them. But Mr. Spanheim does not find Fault with this Council, for their
Explication of the Doctrine of the Trinity, or the Canons that refer to any
part of that Article; but because it was convened, under pretense indeed to
carry on the War against the Saracens, in the Holy Land; but really to raise a
Crusade (or Holy War) against the Albigenses, and to confirm the Vassalage of
John King of England to the Sea of Rome, against the Consent of the English
Peerage; that is (in short) to enlarge the Jurisdiction, and increase the
Authority of the Western Patriarch, or Bishop of Rome.

2. My second (as I said, incontestable) Proof, that the Nominal Trinitarians
are the Church, is, that the Divinity-Chairs, and all Writers, whether of
Controversy, or Systems, have ever followed the Doctrine of the Schools (which
is the Doctrine of the Nominal Trinitarians) and the Creed, and 2d Canon of the
(beforesaid) Council of Lateran, in declaring the Doctrine of the Trinity. They
all take it, as the Council-Schools and Nominals do, for their Foundation; That
there is but one only and self-same Divine Substance: and in that Substance,
but one (infinite) Undestanding, but one (almighty) Energy, and Will, in
number. Which is to say, there is but one really Subsisting (divine) Person, or
God is but one subsisting Person; tho in a Critical or Classical Sense of the
word Persons, namely, when Persons is used only for various Relations of the
same really subsisting Person, we may say there are three Divine Persons. A
subsisting Person is (by Confession of all) one particular Substance, having
(one) Understanding, Will and Energy (or power of Action) in number: therefore
God being (according to the Council, Schools, and all Nominals) one Substance,
or one particular spiritual Substance, with one only Understanding, Energy and
Will; he can be, according to them, but one subsisting Person, tho he may be
more Metaphysical or Classical Persons, that is, more Relations or Properties.
This, I say, is the Doctrine of that Council, of the Schools, and of the
Nominal Trinitarians; and it has always been approved and taught by the
Divinity-Chairs, and by the Writers both of Systems and Controversy; therefore
the Nominals, not the Realists, are the Church.

I shall grant, that the real Trinitarians have on their side, the most (and
most considerable) of the Fathers; reckoning from about the Year of Christ 140,
and meaning those Fathers, whose Writings have been suffered to come down to
our Times; and excepting out of the Number, the Party in the first Nicen
Council, which some little time after the breaking up of that Council, were
considered as the Orthodox Party, and the Church, and were persecuted as such
by the Arians: But the Nominals have what is much more considerable, all the
Moderns; accounting the Moderns from the Council of Lateran, or the Year 1215.
Since that Council, Learning, and more especially Theological Learning, has not
only been revived, but greatly improved; the later Divines have been better
Critics, Interpreters, Philosophers, than the Fathers were; and the two last
Ages only, have afforded more Hundreds of able Divines, than there were single
Persons of the Fathers. Of the Latin Fathers, only St. Jerem would have been
accounted a Learned Divine in our Age; and of the Greeks, Origin, Eusebius, the
two Gregory's, Basil, St. John Chrysostom, and four or five more: had the rest
wrote in any part of the two last Ages, they should undoubtedly have been
reckoned among the Scriblers. The Nominals therefore, if you demand Authority,
produce a General Council, not only establishing their Hypothesis, or
Explication of the Trinity, but denouncing Anathema to the contrary Doctrine
and the Realists: if you require a Poll, if you will be judged by most Votes,
they have for them an hundred (far more Learned) Moderns, against one Father
who can be cited for their Opposers, the Realists.

Why the Nominals are so called; their Doctrine, and Agreement with the
Unitarians.
THE Church then, as I said, is unquestionably the Nominal Party; and this
Party is so called, because as the Realists are denominated from their
believing three distinct Divine Spirits or Minds, who are so many real
subsisting Persons: so the Nominals believe three Divine Persons, who are
Persons in Name only, indeed and in truth they are but one subsisting Person.
This will appear by all more fully and clearly, by the account I shall now give
(in their own Words and Terms) of their Doctrine, Hypothesis, or Explication.

The Nominals are one Party in several Subdivisions; they must be called one
Party, because their Explications so far agree, as really to leave but one God,
and one Divine Person properly and physically so called. All the Divisions of
the Nominals accord, that there is but one only and self-same Divine Essence
and Substance, the Divine Substance according to them, is one in Number: not,
as the Realists hold, one in Properties only; which indeed were only a likeness
of Substances, not an Unity. As the Divine Substance is numerically One, so
(according to the Nominals) is the Divine Understanding, Energy, and Will; they
are not repeated as the Persons are, but they are one as strictly and properly,
as the Essence or Substance is one: Or more clearly, if it may be, thus; as
there is but one Divine spiritual Substance, so there is but one (omniscient)
Understanding, but one (omnipotent) Energy, but one (most Holy) Will. They
allow indeed of three Persons in the Sense hereafter declared; but all these
Persons have but one Understanding, one Will, one Energy in Number. Having laid
this honest and sound Foundation, they take a Latitude, and without quarrelling
with, or censuring one another, in declaring what is to be meant by the three
Persons. One says, they are only three Acts of God, whereby he is denominated
after three several manners. On the account of his Creating, Redeeming, and
Sanctifying Mankind, he is called three Persons: for (say these Gentlemen) a
Creator is a Person, a Redeemer is a Person, a Sanctifier is a Person. If you
reply, true; but one Person may perform all these Acts, and sustain all these
Denominations: they answer, you have rightly understood them, for they intend
not to say, there are three (Divine) physical or subsisting Persons, but three
Persons in a Critical or Classical (or if you will, Metaphysical) sense of the
word Persons. For instance, three such Persons as one Man, who happens to be a
King, a Husband, and a Father, may be said to be. Every Body knows who is that
Learned Professor that preached this Trinity, first in three Sermons to the
University of Oxford, with great applause; afterward maintained it with no
less Approbation among the London Divines, in diverse Letters by him published.
The Socinians, not only never denied three such Persons in God, or such a
Trinity, but as willingly avow it, as this Professor himself, his Learned
Auditory at Oxford, or his Admirers at London. Why are we Heretics, while he
is not only confessed to be Orthodox, and Catholic, but is esteemed as (a worthy
and deserving) Apologist for the Faith? Why may not the Author of the Brief
Notes on the Creed of Athanasius, or he of the Considerations on the
Explications and Defenses of the Trinity, succeed to this Professor in his
Canonship, at Christ-Church? It cannot be denied, that could they but
prevaricate, they might pass for as Orthodox, and as sound Trinitarians, as the
very greatest and bitterest of their Calumniators: their Faith concerning God
is the same, both for Sense and Terms; but the Professor, though a real
Unitarian, and only a Nominal Trinitarian, can asperse Socinus, they (on the
contrary) see no reason to disclaim their Friends and Partisans.

Other Nominals soar high; they explain their Trinity after a very peculiar and
surprising manner. The Father, say they, is the Fountain of the Deity, the
Author and the Cause of the other two Persons; he is original Mind and Wisdom:
who from all Eternity most perfectly understood himself and his own
Perfections, and also Willed (that is, Loved) himself in a most perfect manner.
No one will doubt (say they) that God always, or from all Eternity, perfectly
understood himself: and it is Natural and Connate to every Being that has
Understanding, to Will (or Love) himself; (...) or Self-love is an Affection
naturally arising in intellectual Beings; it is the first Affection of such
Beings, and adheres inseparably to them. But seeing whatsoever understands,
does understand by conceiving within it self an Image of the thing understood;
therefore the Father (as has been said) understanding himself from all
Eternity, conceived within himself (from all Eternity) a most perfect Image of
himself. Which Image, because thus conceived, and as it were generated by him,
is called the Son; it is also called the Wisdom of God, his reflex Wisdom,
because it is the Wisdom that resulteth from the Father's understanding himself,
and his own Perfections. As God understands, he Wills also (or Loves)
himself: this second Act, or God's Loving himself, is the Holy Spirit or third
Person; as understanding himself (or the reflex Wisdom of original Mind and
Wisdom) was the second Person of the Trinity. To understand one self, and to
love (or will) one self in created and finite Beings, are but only Acts of the
Understanding and Will; but in God, we call them Persons. Though nothing can be
more ridiculous, than this account of a Trinity; yet to purchase their quiet,
the Socinians are content to wear a strange, and odd Badg. For Peace-sake, they
will say with our Holy Mother the Church, Understanding (or reflex Wisdom) is a
Person, and Love another Person; and these two, with original Wisdom, shall be
called a Trinity. Indeed we could wish, that so grave a Matron as the Church,
would leave off Trifling: but seeing for the main of it, the thing is true; for
it is true, that the Father is original Mind or Wisdom, and he Understands,
and Wills himself; we can bear with a little impropriety in speaking of
Things. The Church requires us to say, Father, Son and Spirit, Trinity, three
Divine Persons, but she declares at the same time, that the meaning only is,
God (or original Mind) Understands and Loves himself: it would be hard if
Sons should contend with a Mother, about a few (uncouth, or ill-chose) Terms
and Words, on which she (confessedly) puts a sober meaning, a Sense no way
contrary to the Unity of God, or that there is in truth but one subsisting
Divine Person.

Well, here are two Explications of the Trinity, by the Nominals. The first
says, the Trinity of Divine Persons are the three external Acts of Creation,
Redemption, and Sanctification; or God considered as the Creator, the Redeemer,
and Sanctifier of the World, or of Mankind. The other says, the second and
third Persons of the Trinity, are indeed three Acts of God, but they are
internal Acts, even his Understanding and Loving himself: So that the whole
Trinity is original Mind (or the subsisting Person of the Father) Knowing and
Willing himself; so these two Parties. But another Division of the Nominals
tell us, the Divine Persons are not bare Acts of God, whether External or
Internal, but they are three Attributes of God: Goodness, Wisdom, and Power,
say they, are that Trinity which the Church teaches; and she teaches no other.
But then, say I, it is evident again, that the Church and the Socinians are well
agreed; for the latter, no less than the former, believe this Trinity; and the
only Heretics in these Questions, are the Real Trinitarians, who believe a
Trinity of three really subsisting Persons, three distinct Spirits, three
(Almighty, All-knowing) Beings.

But they are not very many, tho they are Learned Men, that speak after these
manners: the Schoolmen, and the Divines that follow them, and who more
properly are the Nominal Party, deliver themselves in other Terms; though in
the main, in what truly gives to them the Name of Nominal Trinitarians, all the
Divisions of them perfectly agree. Because we litigate in the English Tongue,
and contest these Questions only with English Writers; it will be fit to
represent the Doctrine of the Schools, or the Party which (I said) are more
properly (it may be) the Nominal Trinitarians, out of the late Books of Dr. S
-- th against Dr. Sherlock. They teach, that God or the Trinity is one
(Numerical self-same) Spiritual and Divine Substance, one (only) Spirit, one
(solitary) Being. And though he is three Persons (by which, what they mean we
shall see presently); there is in the whole Trinty but one (infinite)
Understanding, one (sovereign) Will, one (almighty) Energy or Power of Action
in Number. This one Divine inteltectual Substance, or really subsisting Person,
is (at it were) distinguished and diversified by three relative Modes, or
relative Subsistences: which Subsistences or Modes are so entirely Relative,
that their very Subsistence is nothing else but their Relation; their Relation
is not somewhat consequent upon, or supervenient to their Subsistence, as in
created Persons, but is one and the same with it. These relative Modes being
three in Number, are the three Personalities of the Deity; but the concrete and
abstract Terms (namely Personalities and Persons) are but only different ways
of expressing the same thing. And therefore as we describe the Personalities in
the Godhead, by Relations; relative Subsistences, relative Modes, relative
Properties, or such like: So we say also that every Person (as well as every
Personality) in the Trinity is wholly Relative; that is, that which makes the
first Person in the Trinity to be a Person, makes him to be a Father; and what
makes him to be a Father, makes him to be a Person; so that (as we have but now
said) both Persons and Personalities in the Trinity are merely Relations, or
relative Properties of the one (self-same) Divine Substance, Being, or Spirit.
These three relative Modes, Relations, or relative Properties, in the Divine
Substance or Godhead, are Innascibility or Paternity, passive Generation, and
passive Spiration; in plainer English, to Beget, to be Begotten, and to Proceed
or be Breathed: the first makes the Person of the Father, the other two make
or constitute the Son and Holy Spirit. This is the Sum of what Doctor S -- th
says in his last Book, or Tritheism Charged, page 156, 157. Mr. Hooker (Author
of the Ecclesiastical Policy) expresses this Doctrine, though not so fully, yet
more intelligibly to the Unlearned, in these words. The Substance of God, with
this property to be of none, does make the Person of the Father; the very
self-same Substance in Number, with this property to be of the Father, makes
the Person of the Son; the same Substance having added to it the property of
proceeding from the other two, makes the Person of the Holy Ghost: So that in
every Person there is implied both the Substance of God, which is one, and also
that Property which causes the same Person [that is to say, the Divine
Substance with one of the three Properties before said, as suppose the Property
to be of none] really and truly to differ from the other two. That is, to
differ from the Divine Substance considered under the Properties to be of the
Father, and to proceed from the Father and Son. Mr. Hooker then, as well as Dr.
S -- th, understood the Doctrine of the Schools and Church concerning the
Trinity, to be this. That there is but one infinite intellectual Divine
Substance in Number, which Substance is the Subject (if we may so speak) of
sundry Divine Attributes, such as Omnipotence, perfect Goodness, consummate
Holiness, and the rest: none of which Attributes is more than once in the
Divine Substance or Godhead; there is in God but one Omniscience, one
Omnipotence, one Holiness, one Goodness in number; as the Nature or Substance
is but one in number, so each Attribute is but once (not thrice) in the Nature,
or Godhead. But then besides these Attributes, there are also three Persons in
God; not subsisting Persons, for that would plainly make three Beings, three
Spirits, and three Gods; but three such Persons as in very Deed are but so many
Properties, or Modes, or if you will give them any the like Name. Such
Properties as Grammarians and Classical Authors (and after them,
Metaphysicians) call Persons: for according to them, a Father is a Person, a
Son is a Person, a Sanctifier is a Person; and whosoever sustains these three
Relations (or any other the like) is by them called three Persons. Thus, for
example, M. Tullius, acknowledges in every Man no less than four Persons;
namely, first, The rational Nature, by which we differ from Brutes; next, the
particular Properties (of Body and Mind) which distinguish one rational Nature
(or Man) from another; thirdly, the circumstance, or manner of Life of each
Man, as that he is a Rich Man or a Poor; lastly, The Profession that any one
takes up, as to be a Civilian, a Professor in Philosophy, a Pleader, a Poet, or
Writer to the Stage. De Officiis; l. 2. c. 30, 32. A Person then in
grammatical, critical speaking, is not a subsisting Being; but some either
(characterizing) Property, or some Relation, or State, of a subsisting
intellectual Being: and it is of Persons, critically so called, that the Church
would be understood, when she says, there are three Persons in God; she does
not mean three subsisting Persons, or Persons who are called Persons, because
they are so many intellectual Beings. Dr. S -- th very well understood the
Doctrine of the Schools, when he notes; that the three Divine Persons are three
relative Subsistences, but so (says he) that their Subsistence is nothing else
but their Relation; that is, they are mere States, Modes, or Relations, which
(in a sense) subsist in the Divine Substance, Nature, or Godhead. Which indeed
is to say, God is three Persons, as any particular Man, may be three Persons:
for the same Man may be a Father, a Son, and may proceed from two others;
namely, from Father and Mother. And though this is not the very manner of God's
being three Persons; yet the ternary Personality in God is sounded on the same
Notion and Conception of the word Persons: and that Conception no more destroys
his real Unity, whether as a Being, as a Spirit, or as God, than that
threefold Personality in a Man, makes him to be more than one Man, or than one
subsisting Person. The short is, according to these Gentlemen, God is but one
subsisting (or real Person: but this one (physical) Person having three
(internal) Relations, is thereby three relative Persons; three such Persons as
one Man (or one Angel) who happens to have three Relations, is. The three
relative Persons no more contradict the Unity of God, than the theeefold
Relation of Solomon, namely, as Son of David, as Father of Rehoboam, and as
proceeding from David and Bathsheba, contradicts his being but one Man, or one
subsisting and physical Person.

It is well known, what Judgment the Real Unitarians make of this Explication
of the Trinity. Mr. How (because he delights to be civil) contents himself to
say; the Real Trinitarians will judge, it is not Sense; View of the
Considerations, page 50. The Bishop of Gloc. thinks it can have little better
Success, than only to make sport for the Socinians; so he concludes his 28
Propositions in his 2d Defense of them. But Dr. Cudworth cries, it is the
Philosophy of Gotham. Nay, Mr. How himself, though out of regard to so great a
Party as the Nominal Trinitarians are, he will only say of their Explication,
it is not Sense; yet he reckons P. Lombard, the supposed Parent of this
Explication of the Trinity, one of the four Evangelists of Antichrist. Dr.
Bull also, and the Learned Author (Mr. J. B.) of the Answer to Dr. S -- th's
Animadversions on Dr. Sherlock; say a great many bitter things of the Divines
of the Schools, by occasion of this (senseless) Explication of the Trinity.
These Gentlemen cannot bear it, that the same intellectual Substance in number,
which is but only to say the same numerical Person, should be made to be three
Persons, because of three (pretended) internal Relations, or a threefold
Relation to himself, which he is (absurdly) feigned to sustain. They confess,
that the same intellectual Substance, or subsisting Person, may be a Father,
and Son, and may proceed from another, or others: but then these must be
external, not internal Relations; that is, he cannot be Father and Son to
himself, as is implied in the Scholastic Explication, because it supposes this
Father, Son, and Proceeder, are really but one subsisting (or physical) Person,
though they are three (and may be 300) Critical or Metaphysical Persons. If the
Schools and Nominals said, God is three Persons, because of three external
Relations, that is, three Relations to his Creatures: this might be understood,
because the same Man may have three Relations to others, and is (on that
account) called by Classical Writers three Persons, though now, and in the
English Tongue that Sense of the word Persons is quite out of Use. But to talk
of three internal Relations, or that the same intellectual Substance (which is
to say, the same subsisting or physical Person) is Unbegotten, and Begotten, is
of none, and yet proceeds from two; to make him a Father and a Son, when there
is none but himself to whom he is either way so related: it is such pitious
Trifling, as utterly destroys the Patience of the Realists that hear it; while
others think that the Philosopher, who is said never to have laughed but once,
might even have done it a second Time on this ocasion. In very Deed, our
Brother S -- th has need of all his Talents and Helps, his Leisure, Learning,
Wit, Courage, the Council of Lateran, and all the Moderns, to defend him
against the insults of the Realists; who have here so manifest an Advantage,
and are (for the most part) Men so able to take and manage it, that he will
find at length, he has no way to rescue his Explication or himself, but by
Recriminating; that is, by showing the as great Absurdity, and plain
Impossibility of the Explication of the Trinity b the Realists.

It may be worth while to inquire here, whether the Nominals do not know, or
are not aware, that in very deed they are Unitarians, or (as some call us)
Socinians? I am of Opinion they are sensible of it, and I ground my self on the
express words of some of them, and those too the most esteemed: For example,
Dr. J. Wallis, and Dr. S -- th intimate plainly enough; that the Socinian
Doctrine and theirs, is the same. Dr. Wallis answering to a Socinian, in his 3d
Letter or Vindication of the Athanasian Creed, p. 62, 63. has these words. That
which makes these Expressions [he means the Terms used by Trinitarians,
especially this, God is three Persons or three Persons are one God] seem harsh
to the Socinians, is, because they have used themselves to fancy that Notion
only of the word Person, according to which three Men are accounted to be three
Persons, and these three Persons to be three Men. But they may consider there
is another Nation of the word Person, and in common use too, wherein the same
Man may be said to sustain diverse Persons, and those Persons to be the same
Man, that is, the same Man sustaining diverse Capacities. And then it will seem
no more harsh to say, the three Persons, Father, Son and Holy Ghost, are one
God; than to say, God the Creator, God the Redeemer, and God the Sanctifier, is
one God: which I suppose, even to this Answerer [he means the Socinian, to whom
he is there answering] would not seem harsh, or be thought nonsense. Here he
says these two things; 1. That three Persons when affirmed of God, are not to
be taken as when we say, three Men are three Persons; but in that sense,
wherein the same Man is commonly (he means by Grammarians and Classical
Authors) called three Persons, because he has three Capacities; as (suppose)
of a King, an Husband, and a Father. This is the Sense, in which God is said to
be a Trinity, or three Persons: he has these three Capacities, of Creator,
Redeemer, and Sanctifier; and in that regard (or sense) is said to be three
Persons. 2. That to a Socinian, this account not only will not be Nonsense,
but not so much as harsh or uncouth. No one can deny, that the Doctor well
perceived, that the Socinian Doctrine and his were indeed the same: a Sicinian,
he says, would not be offended at this Explication of a Trinity of Persons;
Person here not being intended for a subsisting Person, as a particular Man is,
but for a Capacity only of a really subsisting Person. And whereas the Socinian
Author of the Considerations on the Explications of the Trinity had said; if
Dr. S -- th and the Nominal Party believe but one Divine Substance in Number,
which has one only Understanding, one Will, one Energy or power of Action in
Number, he is a Socinian or Unitarian; for in very Deed, this is but one
(really) subsisting Person: Dr. S -- th nothing abashed, with his usual
dexterity and presence of Mind, answers to this effect; That so he believes,
and so the Church believes, and that it is a good hearing, that the Socinians
are come over to him, and to the Church, or fall in with him, and the Church. I
cannot at present find the particular page of Tritheism charged, where this is
said, not having made a mark against those Lines; but I remember well, that I
report rightly the Sense of the Passage. His words need no Comment, they are a
plain acknowledgment that (by that way of expressing themselves) the Socinians
fall in with the Church, and with him. But whereas he says, they fall in with
the Church, as the Socinians are content, that in Honor to the Church it be so
said: so the English Unitarians (or as they call us, Socinians) claim it as
their right; to be owned the first Discoveres, that all the Heats between the
Church and the Socinians, have arose from this only, this they mistook one
another true meaning, by occasion of the canting un-scriptural Terms, Trinity,
Persons (and such like) used by the Church.

For it is most true, that tho for Peace-sake we submit to the Language of the
Church, as it is interpreted bby the Nominals; yet the Church's Terms are very
improper: for the same single numerical subsisting Person (as the Church and
the Socinians believe God to be) is not now in any Language called three
Persons, by occasion of three Relations, Modes, or Properties adhering to him;
tho it is confessed, the (Roman) Classical Authors so spoke.

But whereas the Nominals, or the Church, since the Council of Lateran, that
they may seem not to have departed from the Fathers, still talk of Trinity,
Paternity, Generation, Procession, Hypostatical Union, Father, Son, and Spirit;
on which (as we have seen) they put such a meaning, even those of them that
speak most Harshly and Improperly, as no ways destroys the Unity of God, or
that he is but one physical and subsisting Person; and hereupon the Realists
insult them, as People that know not, or at best heed not what they say: the
Socinians think it is even necessary, nay, a due Justice, to have more regard
and respect for these their weak Brethren. First, We consider; that after all
the improper Terms, impertinent Language, and unsignificant, and sometimes
dangerous Words, used by the Nominals; all the Denominations of them agree at
length, in this Sound and Orthodox Explication and Conclusion, that there is
but one Divine intellectual Substance, but one infinite Spirit, but one
subsisting Person of God. Secondly, The Nominals choose indeed to speak
(almost, a Realist would say altogether) Nonsensically, and to retain the
dangerous Tritheistical Terms of the Fathers, Trinity, etc. but this was, that
they might restore the true Faith and genuine Christianity, without Noise and
Tumult: the School-Divines, and Council at Lateran, reformed the corrupted
Doctrine of the Church, by only interpreting (soberly and dexterously) the
Language and Terms, which their Tritheistick Predecessors had brought into the
Church, into her very Liturgies, and Creeds. -- So many Councils, so many
Fathers, and from them so many Nations had affirmed a Trinity of Divine
Persons; that to oppose this Doctrine, would have begot endless Strises, bitter
Contentions and Persecutions: and after all, probably the Reformers would have
come off no better than the Socinians have done; that is, with all the clear
Truth they have of their side, and all their Dexterity and Wit in managing it,
being overpowered by the numbers of the contrary Herd, they should have been
answered with Penal Laws, and Sanguinary Prosecutions of the those Laws. They
took therefore a Course that would do their Business, unperceived by the most;
and when perceived by some few, it would not be hard to convict them of
Tritheism, and explode them as Tritheists; and so de facto they served Abbat
Joachim. And then getting their Explication (of the Trinity) confirmed by the
Council of Lateran, they happily restored the public Profession (and Faith) of
the Unity of God, by an Authority which none dares to contradict: for a General
Council (as was before noted) is the highest Court of the Church; that last
Tribunal (on Earth) from which there lies no Appeal.

Of the Noetians and Sabellians.
THERE is yet another Branch of Nominal Trinitarians, more ancient far than
those yet mentioned; for about the Year of Christ 200, the Noetians, and but a
little after them the Sabellians arose: both these said, there is but one
Divine Substance, Essence or Nature; and as the Substance of the Father, Son
and Spiirt, is numerically One, so consequently (said they) there is but one
Person of God; Father, Son and Spirit, are but only three Names of God, given
to him in Scripture, by occasion of so many several Dispensations toward the
Creature. For in regard of the Creation, God is called the Father: he is named
the Son, as he wrought Miracles and accomplished the whole Work of Man's
Redemption, by the Lord Christ, in whom he dwelt after a peculiar and
extraordinary manner; and who indeed was the Son of God, by miraculous
Conception in the Womb of Holy Mary: He has the Name of the Holy Ghost or Holy
Spirit, from his omnipotent Energy or Power, by which he effects all things.
In a word, the Noetians and Sabellians held, that God is but one subsisting
Person; yet that with respect to things without Him, he may be called (as the
Modern Nominals now speak) three Relative Persons: the one subsisting Person of
God sustaineth the three Names of Father, Son and Spirit; which being the
Relations of God toward things without him, he is so many Relative Persons, or
Persons in a Classical critical Sense.

And this too is the Explication of the Trinity, by that Party in the first
Nicene Council, who contrived the word Homo-usios, or Consubstantial; by which
they meant, that the three Divine Persons have all the same Substance: and this
is the Party, which after the breaking up of that famous Council, and upon the
sudden Prevalence of the Arian Faction, were persecuted by the Arians; and were
considered by all others as the true Nicene Party, till about the Year of
Christ 380, the Realists obtained that it should be said, that God is tres
Hypostases, three subsisting Persons. Indeed there are several Comma's in the
Nicene Creed, very hardly reconcilable to the Sabellian Doctrine: but as there
were three powerful, and almost equal Parties in the Nicene Council, the Arian
Party, the Realists, and the Sabellians; the latter thought it enough, if they
could procure Homo-usios (consubstantial) to be inserted into the Creed. For
that ambiguous Word may be interpreted in favor of all those Parties. It may
be interpreted the same Substance, the very same, or same in Number, and so it
establishes the Sabellian Doctrine; or the same in Kind and all Properties, and
so it countenances the Realists; or it may be understood of like Substance, and
so it pleases the Ariani molles, the moderate Arians: tho the rigid Arians in
the Council would by no means admit of it; they rather chose to lose their
Bishoprics. But when the Council was broke up, it was perceived by the other
Parties, that the zealous Assertors of Homo-usios (of the same Substance) were
all of them Sabellians; believed that God is but one subsisting Person, and
therefore destroyed the real Existence of the Son, whom the Arians as well as
the Realists took to be a subsisting Person, not a relative Person, a Respect
or a Name only. And as the Arians discovered, that the Homo-usians were indeed
Sabellians; so these latter charged the Arians and Realists as guilty of a
manifest Tritheism, because they so interpreted Homo-usios, as to make Father,
Son and Spirit, to be distinct, intellectual Substances, or subsisting Persons.
Let us hear their own Historian, Socrates, L. 1. c. 23. After the Council, the
Bishops wrangled about the word Homo-usios. Those that were for it, were
censured by the contrary Party, as Sabellians; and were called Impious, because
they destroyed the real Existence of the Son. Those that were against it, were
condemned by such as were for it, as reviving Gentilism, or the belief of more
Gods. And this Truth, that Sabellianism was then taken to be the Nicene
Doctrine, or the same with the Doctrine of Consubstantiality, is owned by the
Learned Critic H. Valesius, in his Notes on Sacrates, L. 1. c. 24. For whereas
the Historian says, That Cyrus Bishop of Berea was deposed, for holding the
Sabellian Doctrine: Valesius notes hereupon, in these words; that is, for the
Doctrine of the Consubstantiality, or the Doctrine of the Nicene Council, which
Council brought in the Homo-usiotes, or Consubstantiality.

The Sum of what has been said, concerning the Nominals.
THESE at length are the Divisions of the Nominals. They all agree, that the
three Persons of God are not subsisting Persons; they are not so many distinct
Lives, Understandings, Wills, or Energies, which (together with a particular
Substance) make a subsisting Person, and if they are more than one, they make
so many physical real or subsisting Persons: no, they are Persons in a quite
different Sense, from that vulgar acceptance of the word Persons. They are
either three Attributes of God; Goodness, Wisdom, and Power. Or three external
Acts; Creation, Redemption, and Sanctification. Or two internal Acts of the
subsisting Person of the Father; that is to say, the Father Understanding, and
Willing himself and his own Perfections. Or three internal Relations; that is,
three Relations of God to himself: namely, the Divine Substance or Godhead,
considered as Unbegotten, and Proceeding. Or three Names of God, ascribed to
him by the Holy Scriptures, because he is the Father of all things, by
Creation; and because he did Inhabit and Operate (after an extraordinary and
miraculous manner) in the Person of the Man Christ Jesus, who was verily the
Son of God by his wonderful manner of Conception; and (last of all) because he
effects all things (more especially, our Sanctification) by his Spirit, which
is to say; his Energy or Power.

Every one sees, these are very crude Conceits to be dignified with the Name of
Mysteries: but withal the Reader is to know, that the Mystery is still behind.
For the Mystery lies not here, that one subsisting Person is made to be three
Relative Persons, or three Names, or three Attributes; or that God is called
Father because he Created all things, Son because he Inhabited and Operated in
the Son our Lord Christ, or Spirit because he is that Almighty Energy which
effected all things: for all this, though very harsh and improper, is yet
intelligible; and the manner of speaking in Ancient Times, did warrant such
ways of expressing themselves, as may be seen in the Classical Authors, both
Romans and Greeks. But it is Mystery, because (or, as) when you apply any of
these Explications of the Trinity, to the Incarnation, the Hypostatical Union,
or the Satisfaction; it is next to impossible, to make any degree of Sense of
it: for how can we say that an Attribute, or a Property, or a Name, or to be
Begotten, or any such like was Incarnate, or Satisfied for Sin? as also because
the Terms Generation and Procession cannot, without most remote and ridiculous
Subtleties, be applied to three Attributes; or to Understanding, and Willing
ones self; or to the same Unbegotten, and unproceeding Substance; or to
Creation and Redemption and Sanctification. In short, our poor Brethren the
Nominals are here purely constrained and forced to call their Doctrine Mystery;
because it is so hard to find a way, to reconcile it to the ordinary Forms of
speaking, that is, to common Sense. Therefore here the Realists glory over
them; here they have an ample Field, for Wit and Sarcasm to parade in: here
they ask the Nominals an hundred malevolent pleasant Questions; to which they
answer, by objecting Profaness to the Questionists, and by the serious word
Mystery. Moreover they (the Nominals) comfort themselves, that the whole
Mystery (or Absurdity) of their Doctrine, consists only in the Terms [ Trinity,
etc.] which they are forced to retain, to preserve the Church's Peace; not in
the Sense, or thing intended: for the meaning and Sum of their Doctrine, as
they explain it, is; there is but one Divine subsisting Person; not more such
Persons, for that were to say more Gods.

Besides, after all the dry Bobs of the Realists, on the Nominals; themselves
must take their turn of being jeered. For when their Explications come to be
examined; and their Contradictions to, and Comdemnations of one another as
Tritheists, are considered: the Nominals will seem to be profound Philosophers,
deep Sages, in comparison with these their Opposers; and these Opposers (the
Realists) such awkward, uncouth Rusticks, that a great deal of Charity or
Discretion must be used within ones self, to be civil to them. But I shall not
consider their Persons or Doctrine, as the Nominals do; neither with Railery,
nor Anger, as the manner now is: but only as desirous to convince them, that
they have as causlesly departed from the Doctrine of the Church, as dangerously.

Of the Realists: that they are divided, into two Factions; which comdemn each
the other, of manifest Tritheism.
THE first Observation, to be made on the Real Trinitarians, is; not only that
(as has been said) they stand Condemned and Anathematized as Heretics, by a
General Council, and by all the Moderns, who are more, and more Learned than
the Fathers; or that they are every day challenged and impeached of Tritheism,
by Learned Men of the Nominal Party, and Appeals made to Universities, and the
Divinity-Chairs, against them: But they themselves being divided among
themselves, censure one another as manifest Tritheists. They are divided into
many Parties, but all those Parties are again bandied into two principal
Factions; that can never be reconciled to one another.

One of these Factions says, that the three Divine Persons are every way
equal: namely, Coeternal, alike Omnipotent, Omniscient, and Omnipresent. Most
of the Fathers, after the Year 380, were of this Persuasion: because they
plainly saw, that to ascribe any Perfection, or degree of that Perfection, to
the Father, more than to the Son or Spirit, is to say in effect; that the
Father only is true God, not the Son or Spirit, because whosoever has not
omnimodous Perfection, cannot be God. And for this reason, they affirm, and
earnestly contend; That any one of the three Divine Persons, is equal to all
the Three; the whole Trinity is not greater, or more perfectly God, than any
one of the Trinity is. Surely a strange Paradox, that one Third should be
Equal, or Equivalent to the Whole. Yet the Modern Realists, the most hold this
Opinion, as well as th Ancients did.

But the more Learned and Ablest of the Moderns, detest so much as the Mention
of three Equal Divine Persons: for what are three Gods, say they, of three
equally Supereminent and All-sufficient (subsisting) Persons are not three
Gods? If they are Equal in Dignity and Power, as well as Coeternal; we can
possibly have no other Notion of three Gods, but three such Persons. Therefore
these Gentlemen suppose, that the Son and Spirit are inferior to the Father in
all things; but only this, that they are Coeternal with him: they are
Subordinate to him, Dependent on him; and are Omnipotent (and the rest of the
Divine Attributes) not ad intra, or of themselves, but only as he concurs with
them to all their Actions. Episcopius (Instit. l. 4. c. 32.) and Dr. Cudworth (
Intellec. System, page 603, 604.) largely defend this Opinion; and condemn
those of undeniable Tritheism, who make the Son and Spirit to be equal to the
Father. But to know the Writers, who believe the equality of the Son and Spirit
with the Father, from those that deny it; this Rule most commonly will serve.
They that say the Son is (...) (God of himself, and Independent) generally hold
the absolute Equality of all the three Persons; and that one Person of the
Trinity, is equal to the whole Trinity: for if he were not, they plainly, see,
he could not be perfect God; for something would be wanting to him, that is
found in the whole Trinity. But those that deny (...), do (more commonly) make
the Son and Spirit subordinate to the Father; not only in Dignity, but in all
other Respects: but these, though they ground themselves on the Authority of
the Nicene Creed (which in direct opposition to (...), or God of himself,
affirms, the Son is God of God, that is, God of, or from the Father) seldom
care to speak plain, that they may avoid giving Offense.

Let us consider the Arguments, with which these two Factions of Realists
attack one another: and what effectual use the Nominals make of those very
Arguments, to ridicule and destroy both Parties, and their common Principle or
Foundation, namely this; that the Divine Persons are subsisting Persons, not
Persons, but only critically so called.

By what Arguments the Parties of Realists, attack and oppose each the other;
and what (effectual) Use, the Nominals make of this Contention.
FIRST, say they who affirm the Equality; if the Son and Spirit are Subordinate
in Dignity and Authority, and inferior in Power and other Divine Attributes: it
seems self-evident, that either the Father only must be said to the truly God,
because he only has omnimodous Perfection, and in the highest Degree; or that
there is one Great God, and two Inferior or lesser ones. To this, they that
maintain the Inequality of the three Persons, answer; by retorting the
Argument, thus: If the Divine Persons are equal, then there are three
Omnipotents, and three Omniscients; which is the very Notion of three Gods, and
is denied in terminis (or expressly) by the Athanasian Creed, which says, not
three Almighties, but one Almighty, etc.

But was it ever heard, since the Creation of things, say (the common Enemy to
both) the Nominals; that two contending erroneous Parties, did more effectually
ruin one another's common Mistake? For as it is self-evident on the one Hand,
that it being the very Definition of God (the Notion that all Men have of him)
that he is a Being Omnimodously (or absolutely) Perfect; therefore if the Son
or Spirit want some Perfections, or some degree of Perfection, neither of them
can be God, but the Father only: So on the other hand, it is noless
incontestable: that three Distinct, and (really) subsisting Persons, each of
which possesses all Perfections, and every degree of those Perfections, must
(of necessity) be three Gods. Why do not these unhappy Men, say the Nominals,
see; that three Almighties, and three Omniscients, are most certainly three
Gods: and that on the contrary, if only one of them is (internally and verily)
Almighty, as well as Superior in Dignity to the other two; he only is true
God, they are Gods only by Courtesy and Civility of Speech? Do not the two
contrary Arguments of these unlucky Reasoners, make a Dilemma; that overthrows
their common Foundation, even this, that the Persons of the Trinity are
subsisting Persons? Have they not shown us, how to argue succesfully against
them both; for we learn from themselves, to say: either the (imagined,)
subsisting Persons of their Trinity are equal, or not equal; if equal, they
must be three Gods, because nothing is wanting to any of them toward making him
a perfect God; if unequal, only one of them is properly and truly God, the
other two by Civility and Courtesy only; they may be Gods to those that have a
mind to compliment, but wanting some Perfections, or some Degrees of
Perfection, neither of them can be God in a Theological or Philosophical Sense.
But the Pleasure and Sport of the Nominals increases, when the Realists seek to
extricate themselves from these Noozes. For example.

The Realists that are for the Equality, say; Father, Son, and Spirit, though
omnimodously Perfect (and subsisting) Persons, are one God, by their mutual
Concord and Agreement: So also Origin, and other Antenicenes, make out the
Unity of God in a Ternary of Persons; tho they did not believe the Equality. To
this, the Nominals answer; the (supposed) Divine subsisting Persons are hereby
loving Friends; which is a good Hearing, for should three Almighties fall out,
what would the World do? but if they are not only distinct, but subsisting
Persons, they are as much three Gods, in a proper and natural Sense, as if they
were never so much at odds; Concord does not make a Real or Physical Unity,
which is the Unity of God, but only a Moral Unity, or such as is between
Friends or Allies.

Other Realists, almost all the Moderns, see, and confess this; therefore they
say, their Gods are one; because they are in one another. But say the Nominals,
God is in his Creatures, more especially in the Faithful, and they in him; as
our Savior himself witnesses: are they thereby all but one God? is the
Creature deified by being in God, and he in us?

No, no, say others; but the Divine Persons who are thus in one another, have
like Substances, Natures, and Properties: which cannot be said of God and the
Creatures. Admirable again, cry the Nominals; but remove this one Scruple. If
these resembling Gods, are so united in their Substances, or so in one another;
that their Substances are continuous, like the Parts of the same Angel, or like
the (assignable) Parts of the same Divine Person, it is plain that by such an
Union (or mutual Immeation) of their Parts, they are become but one
(subsisting) Person in number, which is what the Nominals and Socinians contend
for: but if they are only so united, or so in one another, that their Parts are
only Contiguous, like Wine and Oil shook together, and yet never incorporating;
this is but only Contact and Juxta-position, and does not make the three
Persons to be one, much less one God, any more than all the Men in a close
Crowd are one Man, or than the Wine and Oil (before-said) are one Substance. In
a word, say the Nominals, who sees not; that the three Divine subsisting
Persons, having like Substances or Properties, or what is all one, like
Natures, are but only Gods resembling one another? and whether they be in at
out of one another, likes are never the same.

It Is well; but it may be, they have better luck, who say the Divine Persons
are not equal; but the Second and Third are subordinate in Authority, and
inferior in their Perfections. The Objection. against them, is; that hereby,
either the second and third Persons, are neither of them God, but only the
First: or here is one great God, and two lesser. They reply, that as a Father
and his two Sons, are one Master of the Family; though the Authority and Power
is in the Father, and only secondarily derivatively, and less absolutely in the
Sons: So Father, Son, and H. Spirit are one God, because the two latter (though
subject and inferior to the former) have like Authority and Power with him, for
that he always concurs with them. But the Nominals cry; this is not one God, in
a Physical or Natural Sense, but only in a Political: and that the (supposed)
Father of the Family and his two Sons, may as well be said to be one Man; as
one Master, For in very Deed, only the Father is Master; though he delegates
Authority and Power to his Children, during his Pleasue: or if Power and
Authority is absolutely and irrevocably conferred on them, they are as much
Masters as he; and there is no longer one Master, but three.

Secondly, Another Argument of. those that contend for the Equality, is; if the
Son and Spirit are unequal to the Father, and he only has omnifarious
Perfection, with all degrees of those Perfections: then the two former are very
unnecessarily superadded to the latter; he is perfect God without them, they
add nothing to him; we can understand them but only as Foils to set off, and to
recommend. his Perfections.

This Reasoning also is retorted, by them that hold the inequality of the
Persons in the (supposed) Trinity: for they reply; if there are three equally
perfect (Divine) subsisting Persons, two of them are redundant, or more than
needs. If we suppose them, say these Gentlemen, unequal, we leave but one God;
because the Second and Third are God but only as they are united to the First,
by his Concurrence with them, and by their Subordination and Subjection to him:
but if we say, they are equal; here are two unnecessary Persons supposed not
only without any cause for it, for any one of these absolutely perfect Persons
is sufficient for himself, and for the Creation; but the Unity also of God, the
first and most important Article of Revealed Religion, is lost, because it
cannot be imagined, but That three (subsisting) absolutely perfect Persons must
be as truly three Gods, as one such Person (which no Body will deny) is one God.

Here again the Nominals see, and take their Advantage: it is well, very well
argued, Gentlemen, say they, on both sides. For it is so true, as not to be
questioned; that if the subsisting Persons which you have imagined, are
unequal, and only one of them is All-sufficient, for himself, and for the
Creation: the two impotent Persons are but dead Weights; of no use, but only
that the other may be the better pleased at his own Perfection, when compared
with their Littleness. And it is true again, what the other Party says; that of
three subsisting All-sufficient Persons, two are not only redundant, but take
away the Unity of God: for if it is true, that one such Person is a perfect God,
three of them (for that very Reason) must be three perfect Gods. Why do you not
perceive, say the Nominals to the Realists, that your own Arguments destroy
your Hypothesis? one perfect Person and two imperfect Persons are indeed one
God, but the whole Godhead then is in the perfect Person, as We and the
Socinians contend: and three (subsisting) absolutely perfect Persons are a
Trinity, not only of Persons, but (because each of them is absolutely Perfect)
of Gods. O strange Inadvertence, say these Gentlemen! that Men should not see,
that one perfect Person is alone a (most) complete God, and is not helped to be
more so, by the addition of two Imperfects: and that three perfect (subsisting)
Persons either are three Gods, or one cannot be one God; but one perfect Person
is the very Definition of God, dictated to us by Natural Light.

Again, Thirdly; Say they that hold the Equality of the Persons. If the second
and third Persons are inferior in Power, and other Divine Attributes, and
Subordinate in Dignity and Authority; they must be infinitely Inferior, and
infinitely Subordinate; for whatsoever is short of infinite Perfection, is
infinitely short of it: for if a Perfection is not Infinite, it is but only
Finite, which is infinitely short of Infinite; as all both Philosophers and
Divines agree. Let us apply this, to the (supposed) subsisting Divine Persons:
if the Second and Third are less Perfect than the First, they are (for that
Reason) but finitely Perfect, and consequently are infinitely short of the
Perfection of the First. But will you say, in the hearing of sober and
descerning Persons; that a finite Perfection or Person is God? God, say the
Party that hold the Inequality; but if it is so certain (as you take it to be)
that two less perfect Beings can neither of them be God, but only an absolutely
perfect Person: it will follow however, from this very Reasoning, that three
perfect Persons are three Gods. Because for that very Cause, why you affirm,
that of two less perfect Persons, neither of them can be God; you must say,
three perfect Persons are three Gods: for the weight of your Argument, laying
in this Supposition, That only a perfect Person, and every such Person, is a
perfect God; you must either give up that, or own that your whole Reasoning is
Impertinent and Null.

The Nominals turn also this Concertation against the common Hypothesis of both
these Parties of Realists. How well, say they, and surely is it argued by the
former; that Persons less than absolutely Perfect, are (of necessity) but
finitely Perfectly, and consequently cannot be Gods, or God? and it is as
soundly urged; that if this be a good Reasoning, if imperfect Persons cannot be
Gods or God, and a perfect Person is, then three or more perfect Persons must
be more Gods: because as Imperfection or less Perfection denies Godhead; so
the omnimodous absolute Perfection of Persons, must make so many Gods as there
are such Persons.

But hitherto of the first Observation on the Realists; that the two grand
Factions of them, and which include all their lesser Parties, condemn one
another of Tritheism: and that the Church, or Nominal Trinitarians, turn the
Arguments of the contending Parties of Realists, against them and the Principle
for which they strive; namely, That the Persons of the Trinity are subsisting
Persons; when indeed it is only God that really subsists, the Persons of the
Godhead are only Persons critically so called, that is, they are only Relative
Subsistences, they are but only the internal Relations of God to himself, or
his external (threefold) Relation to his Creatures.

That the Realists themselves do not dissemble their Tritheism.
MY next Observation on them, is; That themselves do (sometimes almost openly,
and explicitly.) own and profess their Tritheism; both the Ancients, and
Moderns; both those that hold the Equality of Persons, and those that deny it.
Let us take some Examples, of this.

Arnobius calls the Father, and in contradistinction to the Son, Deum
Principem, the principal God; he calls the Son, Deum ex Principis Dei jussione
loquentem, The God who speaks by the Commandment of the chief God. l.2. p. 81.
But can it ever be avoided; that a principal God, and a less principal God, who
speaks only by command from the chief God, are too Gods?

Justin Martyr calls the Son, (...) the God who is Servant, to God the maker of
all things. Dialog. cum Tryph. page 279. Are not God the Servant, and the God
to whom he is Servant, most certainly two Gods? do not these Predications
manifestly suppose and imply them to be distinct Gods: can the same God in
number, be said to be Servant and Lord; and that too (as they speak) ad Idem,
or ad Eundem, with respect to the same thing or to himself?

But Origin yet more expressly; we call the Son, the second God. Cont. Cells.
l.5. p. 258. And again, the first God (or the Father) works not; no nor
properly speaking does the (Son or) second God. Cont. Cells. l. 6. p. 318. Shall
not a first and a second God be allowed to be two Gods; could this Father more
plainly declare his Tritheism?

I grant, that Origin and all the Ante-Nicens, were such Realists, as held the
Inequality of the three Divine Persons; but still they believed them to be so
many Gods. Origin was is much of Opinion, that the Son is inferior to the
Father; that (with Arius) he will not allow him to be truly Co eternal, but
only the oldest of the Creatures,(...) (says he, contr. Celf. l. 5, p. 257.)
(...) And he is so far from thinking that the Son is Almighty; that he every
where denies that he may be Prayed to: except only as to a Mediator, who (says
he) is to Pray with us, and for us. Origen's first and 2d Books concerning
Prayer, have so many Arguments directed against Praying to any but the Father;
and particularly that we should not Pray to the Son, he calls them Fools that
do: that it well appears indeed, he held Father and Son to be subsisting
Persons, as the Realists do; and that he durst say, there are two Gods, a first
and a second God: but yet that in Truth, the Supreme Divinity (or true
Divinity) is in the Father only. Which also is the Opinion of all the
Ante-Nicens, and was the Doctrine that Arius (afterward) maintained: with
whom, those Modern Realists who hold the Inequality, do (almost) wholly
symbolize; it may be said, that most of those who hold the Inequality of the
supposed three Divine (subsisting) Persons, perfectly agree with the Ariani
molles, the moderate Arians.

But here comes one, that will make all the World to know the inmost thoughts
of the Realists; he perfectly (and in terms) discovers their Secret. It Is St.
Basil, called by his Party of Realists (who hold the Inequality) Basilius
Magnus, Basil the Great, To those, (says this bold Man) who accuse us, as
holding three Gods; we answer: God is not one, in Number, but only in Nature.
He means, as the Nature of Man, namely, the common Humanity, is one; but there
are many particular Men, Peter, James, John, etc. So the Nature of God, or the
common Divinity is one; but there are as truly more Gods in number, or more
particular Gods, as there are more particular Men; Father, Son and Spirit are
each of them as truly a God, as Peter, James and John, are each of them a
particular Man. This famous Passage is to be found in Basil's 141st Epistle, ad
Caesarienses. Again (Adv. Eunom.) In the Number and in the Properties, there is
a Diversity or Multiplicity; in the Properties by which each Divine Person is
uncharacterized, we believe a Diversity; and an Unity, only in what makes the
Deity. i.e. In the Divine Attributes, that are common to all the three Divine
Persons: for each Person has Omniscience, Omnipotence, and Omnipresence,
perfect Goodness; which Attributes make the Deity, as Rationality and
Risibility make the Humanity. Basil then held; that to this Question, how many
Gods, it must be answered: three Gods in Number, or three Personal Gods, and
one in Nature or Divine Properties. Which is to say; in very Deed, three Gods:
but yet Gods so resembling one another, that from the sameness of their
Attributes or Essential (not Personal) Properties, they may be called one God;
even as all Men, or Mankind from the sameness of their Nature, namely, the
Rational, are in common speech often times called Man. Which Comparison, or
Explication of their Meaning and Doctrine, is often used by St. Basil, and St.
Gregory Nyssen; the Patriarchs and Founders of those Realists, who affirm the
Equality of the (supposed) Divine subsisting Persons.

As for the Modern Realists, they are only some late Writers of our own Nation;
the first and chief is Dr. Cudworth, after him followed Dr. Bull: then Dr.
Sherlock, my Lord the Bishop of Gloucester, Mr. How, Mr. Milbourn, Mr. J.B. in
his late (Learned and Bitter.) Answer to Dr. S -- th. Some of these are for the
absolute Equality of the Divine Persons, in all Essential Attributes; such as
Power, Wisdom, Omnipresence: but some, as Dr. Cudworth especially, will allow
the Son and Spirit to be equal in nothing to the Father, but only that they are
Coeternal; and by this, he thinks, he sufficiently acquits himself of Arianism.
But both Parties most openly avow their Tritheism; and that many ways. By
saying; there are three infinite Spirits, three Omniscient Minds, three Divine
intellectual Substances; three Divine Persons as really Subsisting, and as
truly Distinct and diverse, as three Angels or three Men are. Again, by their
Explication of the Possibility, and the Manner, of an Unity in Trinity. Some of
them saving; three subsisting Divine Persons are one God, by a certain most
close Unition of their Substances; Others, by mutual Consciousness, of one
another's Thoughts and Actions; or because, besides their having like
Substances and Properties, they are also in one another. They see nor, what
it is mavelous Men of their Sense should not see; that several subsisting
Persons each of which is a perfect God, three Almighties, three Omniscients,
whether Conscious, or not Conscious to one another, whether in or out of one
another, whether agreeing or at odds, none of these Foreign Considerations can
so alter the Case, but that all Three must as truly be three perfect Gods, as
each of them (is confessed) to be one perfect God.

But let us hear Mr. J. S. in his late Answer to Dr. S -- th's Animadversions
on Dr. Sherlock. For as this Gentleman is well skilled in these Questions; so
he delivers his Mind without much Reserve: he seems not to be afraid, to say
what he thinks; because it is so certain, that the Fathers (after the Year 380.)
were in the very same Sentiments concerning the Trinity; namely, that the
Persons of the Trinity arc really distinct and subsisting Persons, and equally
have all Divine Perfections, in the highest Degree. He faith, page 141. Each
distinct Divine Person, is as completely and perfectly God; as each distinct
Angdical Person is a complete perfect Angel. He demands at page 75. Will the
Animadverter (Dr. S -- th) deny; that one Divine Person is one God? I will
answer for Dr. S -- th. It Is Heresy, to say; that the Persons of the Trinity
are as distinct, as three Angelical Persons: for Angels or Angelical Persons
are distinguished in their Substances, and have so many several Understandings,
Wills and Energies; but in all these Respects, the Persons of the Trinity are
not distinct, but are (Identically) the same. Nor is one Person of the Trinity
as completely and perfectly God; as an Angelical Person is completely and
perfectly an Angel: for one Angelical Person is a complete and perfect Angel;
but all three Persons of the Trinity, and not one only, are necessary to
complete the Notion and due Conception of one God. Therefore to his Question,
Is not one Divine Person one God? I answer, no; three Divine Persons are one
God: that is to say, taking the word Persons in the Sense that the Church
intends it, namely, for Relative Persons, or the threefold Relation of the
Deity. But taking a Divine Person, as this Author and his Fellow-Realists do,
for a subsisting Person, a distinct intellectual Being, and Infinite Mind and
Spirit; I answer, and the Church also so answers: that indeed every such Person
is one God, and three such are three Gods.

Page 85. When God is said to be three Persons, the term God is taken in a
Logical Sense; and is equivalent to a terminus Communis, or a Species. As who
should say; there are truly three Gods, in a proper, physical, and natural
Sense of the word God: for the words. God and Man are specifical Terms; the
former implies diverse (personal) Gods, as the other implies many (personal and
individual) Men. He is so far from being ashamed of all this; that he adds
again,

Page 85. The Fathers of the Nicene Council, nay the whole Eastern Church did
appropriate a the title one God to the Father; and God of God to the Son. The
Fathers meant thereby, the Son is God (not of or from himself, but) from, or
by, or of the Father. See what use Mr. J. B. makes of this, at page 91. The
Phrase God of God does necessarily imply a Multiplication of the term God, in
some Sense or other. And one and the same numerical God (in concreto) can never
be God of God and not God of God: these two cannot be verified of the same
Subject; of one and the same God, in concreto, or in Person. It Is Heresy in
excelsis; and the last words in Person, designed only to blind his true
meaning, or to mollify it to those that happen to understand him, do but
increase the grossness of his Tritheism. He has said (in those words) in
effect; the Nicene Creed, and Oriental Church acknowledging one who is God of
God, this God (who is God of, or from God) cannot be the same God with him from
or of whom he is God, namely, with God the Father: these two must be several
Subjects, different Gods. This avowed Tritheism, I say, is neither hid nor
sofmed by adding; different Gods, in concreto, or in Person: for it was never
said (or so much as thought) before, that the multiplication of Persons in the
Godhead, or these expressions, God the Father, God the Son, God the H. Spirit,
would warrant any one to say several Gods, or that God of God is not the same
both Subject and God, with God the Father and God the Holy Spirit. In short,
that which this Author and his Party of Realists intend, and say, (though
somewhat Covertly and Artificially) is; that as all the Men in the World, in
concreto, are notwithstanding sometimes expressed by the general abstract word
Man: So the three Gods, in concreto, three Personal (really subsisting) Gods
may also be expressed; but they care not how seldom, the seldomer the better,
by that (scurvy, Socinian) abstract word God.

I have not made these (short) remarks on Mr. J. B. with a malevotent
Intention; to create Envy, or to raise up Enemies, to him: I shall confess,
that as broadly as he has spoke; St. Sasil, Gregory Nyssen, and other Fathers
(after the Year 380) so Taught, and so Spoke; and I have before given some
instances of it; as I shall give more, in the Continuation of my Answer to Dr.
BuII's Defense of the Nicene Faith, and Judgment of the Catholic Church. But
all that I design, is only; to appeal to the World, whether the Realists have
not notoriously owned and professed their Tritheism, with which they are
charged, not only by the Socinians, but by the Nominals; which is to say, by
the Church. Dr. S -- th is but one Man, he is only a private Doctor; but he has
rightly understood the Doctrine of the Church: if a General Council were again
to assemble, they would certainly espouse his two Books; he has said neither
more, nor less, nor otherwise, than the Catholic Church (since the Council of
Lateran) has constantly taught. Mr. J. B. is a Learned and very discerning
Person, so are other Realists of this Nation (I must not say, of the English,
or of the Catholic Church, for they are departed from both) who have lately
written against the Socinians: but they have opposed to ours, such an
Explication of the words God, Persons, Trinity; as Dr. S -- th has deservedly
called a Trinity of Gods; nor will they be ever able to wipe off the
Imputation. Mr. J.B. must not think, he has answered Dr. S -- th: he has only,
sometimes mistaken him; sometimes misreported, or perverted, his plain and
obvious Meaning; or quarrelled with the Doctrine of the Schools, and of the
Lateran Council, (which is to say, of the Catholic Church) to make room for
the (exploded) Tritheism of St. Basil, and some other Fathers.

The Doctrine of the Catholic Church, Mr. J.B. knows well, can be fetched only
from General Councils; the Church is never understood to speak, but by a
General Council: particular Fathers are but only particular Doctors; they are
not the Church, how many soever they are. Therefore I desire Mr. J. B. to tell
me, what Council ever used his Language; that one Divine Person is one God, as
perfectly one God, as one Angelical Person is one perfect Angel? In what
Council shall we find, that the word God is equivalent to a Species; which is
to say, the Divinity no less than the Humanity (or the Manhood) comprehends
several Individuals, of the same both Nature and Denomination: as there are
many Men, in concreto, so there are diverse Gods also, in concreto. Can he
direct us to that Council, which teaches; that God of God, and God not of God
(that is, Father and Son) are not the same God; or that the term God implies
any Multiplication? Did ever any Council so far apostatize from Christianity,
as to deny; that there is but one numerical God: and call that Doctrine the
Faith of Jews, Mahometans, and Heathens? But this is Mr. J.B's Language, and
the Doctrine of all the Realists; they all intend as he has said: nor will any
of them censure his Book, but applaud it as a great and extraordinary
Performance. I do not regard the Impertinences of Mr. Tho. Holdsworth (of
North-Stoneham, near Southampton) in his late Impar Conatui, which he has
opposed to Mr. J. B. This Orlando has vomited up his Crudities, on a Person too
much above him to take notice of him; and all that I shall trouble my self to
say of him, is: that if, as he has been careful to tell us the Place of his
Residence, and of his Vicinage, so he had also told us his Age; we might have
guessed, with more certainty than now we well can, whether he raves, or dotes.

The Realists speak much more Mystically, or Absurdly, than the Nominals.
I Must make another Remark on the Realists; namely: That the absurd
contradictory and impossible Things, partly expresty said by 'em, partly
implied in their Doctrine, are far less tolerable or accountable; than the
(forced) Improprieties, in the use of Words and Terms, by the Nominals, are.

I confess, both Parties so often depart, from the common use of Terms and
Words; that one as well as the other is frequently forced, to the (...) of
Mystery: when they cannot assoil the Difficulties, objected to themselves by
each other, or by the Socinians to both; when they find that the use of Words,
and the nature of Things, are both against them, they cry Mystery; their
Doctrine then (they confess) though a Truth, is however a Mystery, above the
Capacity, whether of themselves or of any others. But then, say I; the Realists
would cover such flat Impossibilities, such gross Contradictions to common
Sense, in a Word such Monstrosities, under the cloak of Mystery: that they have
infinitely more need of that (wretched) Blind, than the Nominals; who only by
explaining their Terms, which Custom and Law have imposed on them, go a great
way in fairly satissying all Difficulties; and when they cannot perfectly
account for them, they make some small use of Mystery. To understand this; we
must take a short view, of the (polite, happy) Things, said by them both.

The Nominals teach, there is but one, (numerical) God, or one God in Number;
who yet is three Persons. That the Father is God, the Son is God, the H. Ghost
is God; yet all three are but one God, one God in Number, one self-same God.
They are perfectly aware, this were equally Impossible and Ridiculous; if
'twere not dexterously interpreted and explained: it would not be Mystery, or
Mysterious Truth, but notorious Falsehood and Absurdity, they well know; if
wholly left in these Terms, without an Explication. Therefore they declare,
that by the term Persons, and the words Father, Son and Spirit, they mean not
(with the Vulgar) several subsisting Persons; that is to say, So many
intellectual Substances, with each his own particular Life, Understanding,
Will, and power of Action; for they confess there is in God but one Substance,
Life, Understanding, Will, Energy, in number: but three Persons in God are so
many States, or Respects, or Properties, or Relations (or something equivalent
to these) of the same ore Divine intellectual Substance or Nature. And in this
Sense also, according to the Nominals, the words Father, Son and Spirit (when
used of God) are to be understood: namely, as Relations or States, all of them
sustained by one and the same subsisting Person, or intellectual Substance; not
as in so many Subjects, or as denominating variously three distinct Beings.
They show, that so the Classical Authors, both Greek and Latin, spoke: and as
their Language was adopted by the Church, in speaking of God, with great
Propriety; so in process of Time, the use of Words being much altered, occasion
was given to introduce the Heresy of the Realists; who unlearnedly
understanding the old Words, in a novel Sense, have brought into the Church
three Gods, instead of one.

Again, they (the Nominals) say, the second Person of the Trinity (or of God)
was Incarnate in the Man Christ Jesus; in such manner, that thereby the Lord
Christ is God as well as Man. This also is called by that Mystical Name, the
Hypostatical (or personal) Union. But they mean no more by it, than this; that
God was as much and truly united to the Humanity, as the Human Nature is
capable of: that is to say, in a most extraordinary, mavelous, and (to us)
unaccountable Manner.

When they say, O God the Father have Mercy on us; O God the Son, O God the
Holy Ghost, have Mercy on us; they intend not hereby three Objects of Worship,
or so many several Patrons and Helpers: but only as these are so many Relations
and Respects of the Deity, either to himself or to us; so they invocate him by
these Distinctions, or in these several Properties and Relations. In short, the
whole Mystery consists in the Terms they use; and scarce at all, if at all in
the Sense, or things intended by those Terms: which things (or sense) are
received, and embraced by us the Unitarians; for we admit the whole Doctrine,
as here declared and explained.

But it is quite otherwise with the Realists; their Nonsense is in the thing
meant, not in the Words or Terms. They say, there are three Divine subsisting
Persons, three infinite Spirits, three omniscient Minds, three distinct
Almighties, as distinct as so many Angels or Men; each of them as truly,
properly, adequately, and perfectly God, as each Man is a Man, and each Angel
an Angel: and yet all of them are but one God. This, we confess, is Mystery
with a Witness; the Mystery (every one sees) lies not in the Words and Terms,
but the thing it self is absurd and impossible: to cry Mystery here, is to
profess; that by Mystery, we mean Contradiction, and Impossibilities.

The Excuses they make for this Mystery, are as mysterious, or more mysterious
than the Mystery, for which they would apologize. For to say, these three (most
perfect) Gods become one God, by their mutual Accord and Love, is; as if you
should pretend, that by Love and Accord, three Men are one Man. And when they
say, they are one God by likeness or sameness of Nature and Properties; and by
being in one another: they might equally say, that two or more Angels, because
they have the same Nature and Properties, and being Spiritual, do immeate, or
are in one another, are thereby one Angel. These Explications of their Mystery,
are assuredly as great Mysteries, as direct Contradictions to Reason and common
Experience; as the Doctrine it self, of one God and three Divine subsisting
Persons. But why do the Realists expect, that Mankind will be persuaded to
accept such palpable abnegations of all consistent Sense, for Mystery: words
that are hardly Sense, or of either ambiguous or obscure meaning, may be put
off (with some or other, who care not for the Trouble of considering) for
Mystery; but gross Contradictions, obvious and notorious Nonsense, will never
be mistaken for Mystery. It Is true, People may be constrained to profess it, or
to subscribe to it; but they never believe it, no not when (through a long
habit of Submission to the Commands of others) they seem to themselves to
believe it. I doubt not, that the Doctors of the Church of Rome, seem to
themselves to believe the Transubstantiation; because having accustomed
themselves to submit to the Declarations of the Church, they have never
suffered any reluctance to arise in their Minds, against any of those.
Declarations: notwithstanding, I am persuaded, not a Man of them truly believes
that Mystery; were all Fears and Hopes, and other blassing Interests removed,
they would presently perceive, that in very Deed they believe it not; their
Reasons never assented to an impossible Proportion, nor could assent; but only
(as I said) through a long habit of Submission, they did not discern, that they
assented not to the Church's Declarations. And this, I believe, is true also,
of all who pretend, or seem to believe any other inconsistent, or impossible
Doctrines.

The Tritheism of the Realists, not grounded on the H. Scripture.
BUT this once more; it is not on a probable or prudent Ground, that the
Realists sometimes pretend, that the Tritheism they impose has such a
Foundation in Holy Scripture: that as on the one side, to believe the Trinity
in their Notion of it, is a violence done to Reason; so not to own and profess
it, would oblige them to as great a Violence, and Disobedience to Holy
Scripture.

I confess, I have often wondered; that Men so Learned and Discerning, as very
many of the Realists are, should maintain such an Opinion; and after having
made such Concessions to the Nominals, and to the Unitarians, as the Realists
do. They grant it, to be certain and incontestable, not only in Reason, but in
Holy Scripture, that there is but one God, but one Creator; they allow this to
be so true and evident, that the Scripture ought never to be so interpreted, as
in any degree to contradict this first Article of all revealed Religion:
because to interpret Holy Scripture at any Time, or in any part of it,
inconsistently with that Article, were to make it contradict it self, and that
too, where it speaks most plainly and expressly. I say, this Foundation being
laid, and agreed on all Hands; I have often wondered at the pretense of the
Realists: for their Doctrine being a manifest Tritheism, as explained by them;
in saying it is what the Holy Scriptures teach, they say, that the Sacred
Scriptures contradict themselves. They would have it understood as a great
deference, on their Parts, toward the Holy Scriptures; that they embrace and
profess the Doctrine therein contained, though such Doctrine very flatly
contradicts all Reason and common Sense, and withal other parts of the same
Scriptures: but it were far more becoming such as they are, to express their
Reverence for the Scripture, by interpreting it consistently with it self, and
with Reason, as the Nominals and Unitarians do; than to expose it to the
contempt and unbelief of all others, by such a Reverence of it as this Book
needs not; that is to say, by pretending to believe it indeed, but believe it
as manifestly inconsistent with it self; as well as with that Reason which God
has infused into the Human Nature, for a Guide and Judge, in all either obscure
or doubtful Matters. It is the Church and the Unitarians, that truly reverence
the Scriptures; by rescuing them from senseless, and contradictory (which is to
say, impossible) Senses.

But supposing it were true, that the mere Words of some few (suspected, or
ambiguous) Texts, did seem very much to favor the Doctrine of the Realists;
yet seeing those Texts (as interpreted by the Realists) too plainly contradict
evident Reason, and the Nature of things: why will not these Gentlemen see,
that in such a Clash as this, We must interpret the Scripture consistently with
Reason and the nature of things; because words will bear to be somewhat
strained, much rather than things? The nature of Things, and the dictates of
Reason, are Eternal and Immutable; they will not admit, or bear the least
Stretch, Strain, or Violence done to them: but Words are of a very desultory
and vagrant Meaning; they are sometimes to be taken Literally, or as they
Sound, sometimes in a metaphorical or figurative Sense; sometimes in an
Hyperbolical, that is excessive; nay, sometimes in an Ironical (which is to
say, contrary) Sense: which being the Case of all Books and Writings
whatsoever, there can never be a real Necessity of so interpreting the
Scripture, that it should contradict the known Nature of things, plain Reason,
or it self.

Whereas some say here, and are willing always to repeat it; that the current
of Scripture is so much, and so clearly, for such a Trinity as the Realists
profess: that it would be manifest Violence, done to the Divine Word, to
interpret it as the Socinians do. I answer, Cedo locum, name me the Text, or
Context, alleged for the Doctrine of the Trinity; that is not interpreted by
some of the most Learned Critics and Interpreters of the Trinitarian Party, in
the same manner as it is understood by the Unitarians. Why do they pretend, that
they are constrained, and by the clearness, and the current of Scripture; to
profess a Trinity of Divine (subsisting) Persons: when all Learned Men know,
that the Texts they have to alledg, are so far from being the current of
Scripture, that they are few in Number, and also of very suspected Authority,
that is, they are justly doubted of, whether they are genuine original Parts of
Scripture, or have been added to it; and so far from being clear, that they are
extremely Ambiguous, and accordingly not only some, but even the generality of
Trinitarian Critics interpret most of them, as we do; and not only most of
them, but the Principal of them, more particularly the (objected) Texts that
seem to impute the Creation of Things to our Savior. As I said but now, Cedo
locum, I demand that Text, or Context, which I will not show is interpreted by
the most sufficient of their own Party, as we take it: but if so, as it is not
the first Time this Challenge has been made to them; why do they (so untruly)
pretend, that they are carried away by the Current of Scripture, and by the
clearness of it, both on their sides? May they call a few single Texts (or
rather, shreds of Texts the Current of Scripture: or talk of the clearness of
their Texts; when they cannot alledg so much as one, but is interpreted to an
Unitarian Sense by some of their own (best) Writers, on the Scriptures, and of
Controversy?

With how much more Reason and Sincerity, may the Unitarians claim the current
of Scripture; and that it is clear also, on their Side? For there is not a Page
there, but speaks of God in the singular Number; there God is never called
Persons, but Person: he is always spoken of, and to, by singular Pronouns, such
as I, Thou, Thee, He, Him, Me; which are never used in any Language, but only
of one single Person; never of three (subsisting) Persons.

When the Realists say, the Scriptures are clear of their side; they mean it
chiefly of those Texts, wherein Christ is called God: and of those, in which
the Creation of the World, and of all things, is (or seems to be) attributed to
him. But how often is the name God given in Holy Scripture, to those that
either represent God, as Kings and Magistrates; or that are like to him in some
very distinguishing Respect, or in whom he dwells after a peculiar manner, as
Prophets, and Heroical Persons: is, not Moses (for one Instance) on all these
accounts called God, and by God himself? And is it a Marvel then, that the
Mediator also of the New Testament, as well as he of the Old, is dignified with
this Name? And yet (as I have said elsewhere) I am well assured, that the
Realists will never prove, against the Author of the Brief History of the
Socinians; that the name God is really given to the Lord Christ, in any Text
that is a genuine Part of Scripture: that is to say, that has not been
corrupted by the Zeal of Catholics, to make it more conformable to their
Sentiments. As to the Texts, that impute the Creation of things, to the Son;
that is, to the Lord Christ: do not all Learned Men know, that the best of the
Trinitarian Interpreters, some of the zealousest Men of the Party, understand
all those Texts of the New Creation; that is, of the Renovation of things on
Earth, by the Ministry of Christ; and in Heaven, by his Exaltation above the
Angels? And secondly, That neither is there any need of this; for those Texts
may be thus translated: all things were made for him; and without regard to
him, was nothing made that was made. Were made for him; that is to say, they
were originally made by God, for the Messiah: namely, to subject them (in
fullness of Time) to him, and to his Law. Which is the Interpretation of St.
John Chrysostom, a most Learned Trinitarian, in the Opus Imperfectum, on St.
Matthew.

In short, I would not have it said; that the current of Scripture is, much
less is clearly, on their side, who contend for a Trinity of Divine
(subsisting) Persons: because it is so well known, that this (senseless,
extravagant) boast of some small Writers of Controversy, is the Jest and Sport
of their own Critics and Interpreters of Note; who have far more scorn for
such Sciolists, than they have Enmity to the Socinians.

Of the Unitarians; their Agreement with the Church.
THE Unitarians, called also Socinians, are a Sect or Party, or Denomination of
Christians, who have endeavored to perfect that Reformation; that was so
happily begun by Dr. M. Luther, Mr. J. Calvin, and here (in England) by
Archbishop Cranmer.

Dr. Luther subverted the Infallibility, and Supremacy of the Pope; the Worship
and Invocation of Angels, and Saints; the (superstitious) monastic Vows; the
Merchandise of Indulgencies, by which poor Sinners had been long cozened into a
Belief, that they could buy the Pardon of their Sins, from the Pope and his
Factors: and this not only without Restitution, Amendment, or Repentance, but
without Confession; for that also was sometimes a Clause in their Bulls of
Indulgence, that the Purchaser should be absolved of all his Sins, whether
Confessed or not Confessed. The forms of Indulgences were so ample, that is, so
General and Comprehensive; that Men of any Wealth never cared, what Sins they
were guilty of: because they knew they could at any time, whether Dead or
Alive, purchase their Pardon; if they had neglected it in their Life Time,
'twas but leaving so much Money by Will, for Masses and Indulgences, and they
were sure all should be forgiven. The Story of the French Gentleman is well
known; who being admonished by his Friend, of his horrible Cursing and
Blaspheming; answered: Man, there is no fear, cannot I buy my Pardon of the
Friars Austins? I would be forgiven for an Ounce of Gold, though I had ravished
the Mother of God, and cut off both her Breasts. This was the state of Things,
when Dr. Luther appeared, and opposed himself (so successfully) to these
Corruptions; as I said, he entirely ruined the Market of Indulgences, Monastic
Vows, Invocation of Saints and Angels, the Supremacy and Infallibility of the
Chair of Rome.

Mr. J. Calvin, besides that he greatly strengthened, and confirmed what Dr.
Luther had begun; by his extraordinary Erudition, fine Wit, and indefatigable
Diligence, in all which Mr. Calvin excelled the very greatest of the first
Reformers: he carried the Reformation somewhat farther, than Luther had done.
He took away the use of Images, which can serve only for a snare to the Weak;
and for an Avocation, and Amusement, to the Discerning. His Doctrine concerning
the Sacraments, has fewer Follies than, not only that of Rome, but, than
Luthers; he rejected the Consubstantiation, as well as the Transubstantiation,
and was not imposed on by the Doctrine of Ubiquity. I need say nothing of
Archbishop Cranmer; because his Reformation is known to every Englishman: his
Doctrine and Discipline being expressed in the 39 Articles, the Books of
Homilies, of Canons, and the Common Prayer.

All Protestants have a great Reverence, for these famous and excellent Men;
even those of us, who think, that their Reformation is yet very incomplete. I
may add, that as much as these Reformers are detested, by the Papists; the very
Papists, all Orders of them (from the highest to the lowest; from the Pope, to
the Begging, and discalceate Friar) are greatly in their Debt. For now they
have Learned Priests, Holy Popes; and the Kings and States of the Roman
Communion, are no longer the Slaves of the Pope: all which was otherways, when
there were no Protestants, of whom the Pope and Conclave and (the rest of
their) Hierarchy might stand in some awe. The Popes consider now; that they
must act Soberly, live Exemplarily, and inspect the Conduct and Sufficiency of
the Clergy; else the Princes and People, now in their Communion, will desert to
the Protestants.

It was Dr. Luther, as odious as his Name among them is; who took off the Yoke,
and filed the Chains, from the Necks and Hands of Emperors, of Kings and
Nations. From laying prostrate, under the Feet of the Pope; from holding his
Bridle, and his Stirrup; from expecting (after their Election by the Princes of
the Empire) till the Pope should please to crown them, and thereby give them
the Name and Power of Emperors; from Trembling, every time that a (crouching)
Friar was turned, into a (boisterous) Pope: I say, from this miserable
Vassalage, the German Emperors, and other Catholic Kings and States, are
delivered; and care now, just so much, and no more, for his Holiness's Love or
Anger; as the Example of his Life, or the actual Assistance he can lend to 'em,
shall merit. Since Luther, the Clergy (also) of the Roman Communion, are
Learned and exemplary Men; in their own Defense, and for their own Security,
they must be so. And they dare now, withstand any new Encroachments on their
Privileges, or their Revenues, by the Court of Rome. Nay, they have retrieved,
in some Degree, their ancient Rights and Authority: for Rome dreads (and ever
will dread) another Luther; in case she should (unjustly, or rashly) either
oppress, or offend the inferior Clergy. Those of the Lay-Communion of that
Church, are now led with a Pastoral-Staff; not hared with the Church's Thunder,
Excommunications and deliverings up to Satan. They are sent of no more Errands
to Syria and Asia; in pretense, to rescue the Holy Sepulcher; in Deed, to
enlarge the Papal Bounds, and Authority. They are fed now with much sounder
Doctrine; and led, by a better Example. For now the necessity of Repentance,
and Amendment, are taught; Indulgences are now owned, to be only Prudential and
Charitable relaxations of Penance; Images are now used, only as Memorials of
departed Saints, and Incentives to imitate their Example; the Sacrifice of the
Mass is now only a commemorative Sacrifice, which even Protestants believe it
to be; the Virgin Mary and the Saints are prayed to, only to pray with us, and
for us: and the like abatement is made, in other Articles. And whereas with
reference to the Example of their Priests, it has been a Proverb in some
Places; He that will give his Child to the Devil, let him make him a Priest:
now, and for almost two Ages last past; their danger from the Protestants, as
was said before, has reformed their Manners.

These are the Services, done by the first Reformers; as well to the Papists
themselves, as to us of the Reformation: their Memory is glorious, and ought to
be precious also, among us. But we say also; that the Augean Stable was too
foul, to be absolutely cleansed at once, even by Hercules and his Companions:
Dr. Luther did a great deal, the Labors of his Companions and Seconds were
very laudable; but much Filth is still left behind. We desire to be (fairly and
heartily) heard, concerning some corruptions in the Faith; and some abuses in
the Morality, still taught: and particularly, which is the Subject of these
present Papers, concerning the Object of our Faith and Worship, Almighty GOD.

We see, we own; that the Doctrine of the Church, meaning by the Church the
Nominal Trinitarians, is sound, as to the Sense and Intention of it: but we
(humbly) offer, that the Terms in which it is expressed, are Unscriptural, and
very Dangerous. The words Trinity, Incarnation, Hypostatical Union, are never
used in Scripture; nor is God ever there called Persons, but Person. And it is
evident, that by occasion of these Terms; the Vulgar have such a conception of
the Trinity, as is certain Tritheism. When the People hear of God the Father,
God the Son, and God the Holy Ghost; they know not, that thereby are meant only
so many Relations of God, either internal Relations to himself, or external
Relations to the Creature: but they conceive in their Minds, such a Father, Son
and Spirit distinct from both, as are so many several subsisting Spirits, so
many distinct All-perfect Beings; in very Deed so many Living Gods, and not one
God under three several Conceptions. For tho they are taught to say, three
Divine Persons and but one God; and that God the Father, God his Son, and God
the Holy Ghost, tho each of them is God, yet all of them are but one God: this
last all of them but one God, because they know not how it is to be conceived
with the other (namely, that each of them is God; and one of them is God the
Father, another God the Son;) they utterly lose the Conception of one God, and
retain only what is intelligible to them, namely, three Divine Persons, each of
them a God.

We think, that the Church having gained her Point, against the Fathers and
Realists, in the Lateran Council; and having been in Possession of the Truth,
for near 500 Years together: she may now fling off the Disguise hitherto used,
the dangerous Tritheistick terms, Trinity, Persons, and the rest; she may now
begin to declare the Truth she owns, in Terms and Words that are proper for it.
Why does she frown upon those, nay, persecute them, that believe the Unity of
God in the Sense that she holds it; only because they would cast out the Terms
that so plainly favor the Tritheists, that is, the Realists? What has the
Church to fear; has not the Lateran Council, and all Writers ever since,
declared the Realists to be Heretics: therefore what need is there to retain
their Terms, when we have discharged the Notions intended by them?

It Is true, we can say as the Church does, three Divine Persons; the Father is
God, the Son is God, the Holy Ghost is God; taking these words in the Church's
Sense, not for subsisting Persons, that is to say, Living, Spirits, but for
Relations, Properties, Modes, or such like. We can say, God was Incarnate;
meaning he did inhabit the Lord Christ, after an ineffable manner, and without
Measure: which is really as much as the Church intends by the word Incarnation.
We own the (eternal) Generation of the Son or Word, and Procession of the
Spirit, by and from the Father; explaining our selves, with the School-Divines,
the Church, and diverse Fathers, thus: that God or the Father, or original
Wisdom, conceived a most perfect Image of himself, by understanding, and
considering his own Perfections; and that he loves (or wills) as well as
understands himself. We can even say, three Divine subsisting Persons;
intending with Dr. S -- th, the Schools, the Lateran Council, and the Church,
Relative Subsistences, whose Subsistence is nothing else but their Relation.
Which are Dr. S -- th's express words, Tritheism charged, p. 156.

I cannot but ask it again; why does the Church keep, or impose on us, such
Words and Terms; as in their present Signification, destroy the Faith we both
embrace; the Faith of the real Unity of God? We can say as the Church says, we
can use her Terms; because we know her meaning: but we cannot but say of them,
as Mr. Calvin did (when asked his Opinion) of the English Common Prayers,
Tolerabiles Ineptiae. For in very Deed, it is mere Trifling, and something
worse; when the signification of these Terms and Words is wholly altered, from
what it anciently was, yet still to retain them: while the Church knows at the
same Time, that they give wrong Notions to the Vulgar, making all our People
Tritheists; and serve also to animate, and harden the Realists in their Heresy.

But I must do the Church this right, to confess; that most of her greatest
Men, particularly the first Reformers, have published to all the World their
hearty desire, that all these terms of the Realists were abolished; and all
were obliged to use the Scripture Language and Words only: which would heal all
our Breaches, and perfectly restore our Peace; not only in this, but in
(almost) all other Questions and Strifes. Let us hear, of so many as might be
alleged, Dr. M. Luther, and Mr. J. Calvin.

M. Luther complains; The word Trinity sounds odly: it were better to call
Almighty God, God; than Trinity. Postil. major. Dominic.

Mr. Calvin is yet less pleased, with these kind of Terms; he says, I like not
this Prayer, O Holy Blessed and Glorious Trinity. It savours of Barbarity; --
the word Trinity is barbarous, insipid, profane, an human Invention, grounded
on no Testimony of God's Word, the Popish God, unknown to the Prophets and
Apostles. Admon. 1. ad Polon.

December. 17. 1695.
FINIS.

