A DISCOURSE ABOUT CONSCIENCE, Relating to the Present Differences AMONG US.

In Opposition to both Extremes OF POPERY and FANATICISM.

LONDON, Printed for William Crook, at the Green Dragon without Temple Bar,
next Devereux Court. 1684.

A DISCOURSE ABOUT CONSCIENCE, etc.
THE Design of this short Discourse, is to treat about the Nature and Office of
Conscience, how, or in what respect it does oblige; which, as it appears by the
Practice of some Men, laying Claim thereunto, ha^h been either grossly mistaken,
or wilfully abused: But be it either one way, or other, I am sure it has been
made the common Cloak and Excuse for some of the greatest Disorders, and
unwarrantable Proceedings, not only against the peaceable Communion of our
Church, but the legal, and well-established Government of the State. Now if
these few Lines, charitably offered, may conduce any thing toward the
rectifying of such Mistakes, and consequently the preventing the like Abuses in
any that are willing to be undeceived, I have all the End I aim at; if not, I
shall have however this Satisfaction, that what I have here offered toward it,
is done with all the Kindness and Charity that possibly I could, without
betraying the Cause I have undertaken, or doing Injury to that Church, whose
Communion I have here took Occasion to recommend, and plead for: And therefore
without any tedious Preface, or fruitless Apology, I shall address my self to
the Subject in hand, and that in a very plain and impartial manner.

Now in my Discourse hereupon, I shall show you,

First, What Conscience is, or what is included in the Notion of it. Secondly,
What it is to live up to Conscience. Thirdly, That notwithstanding Conscience,
by many persons pretending to it, has been, and is still abused, yet ought not
to be neglected, or laid aside. Fourthly, What things Conscience ought chiefly
to be concerned for, or exercised about. Fifthly, To offer a few things by way
of Advice, concerning the governing of our selves, with relation to our
Consciences.
From whence you may perceive, that I intend to speak of Conscience, not so
much as it relates to Matters of Doctrine, as to Matters of Practice; not how
it ought to form our Judgments and model our Opinions, as how it ought to
direct our Lives, and govern our Actions, which is much more necessary of the
two.

1. WHAT is meant by Conscience, which is almost in every one's Mouth, and has
created so much Noise and Bussle in the World.

Conscience is that Power, or Faculty of the Mind, which judges of our Actions
according to a right Rule, whether they be agreeable to it or not; or it is the
reflex Act of our Reason and Understanding, respecting the Goodness or Badness
of our Actions; so that Conscience is an Act of the Understanding, and but
another Name for Reason: It Is Reason exercised about the Lawfulness, or
Unlawfulness of what we do; or the Judgment of our Minds, acquitting, or
condemning us in our own Thoughts.

In which Description of Conscience, we may take Notice of these following
things, which enter the Definition, and constitute the Nature of it.

First, Conscience supposes a Rule by which it ought to be directed and
governed in all its Actings; for Conscience is no Lordly, nor Lawless
Principle, and therefore is not left at Liberty to think or do what it list, to
act rashly, and at all Adventures. No, Conscience is under Authority and
Restraint, and ought to be kept within Bounds, and not suffered to run out into
an unaccountable Extravagancy, or violent Extreme; to keep its Eye daily on the
Rule, and take Advice from thence in what it does for God, whose Will ought to
be a Law in this Case, and none else. And that, be sure, is a Rule large enough
for Conscience to walk by; and which, together with Judgment and Discretion in
the Application thereof, is sufficient to direct a Christian upon all occasions.

Secondly, There must be a Knowledge of this Rule, otherwise Conscience is not
concerned.

The very Notion of the Word, according to the Letter and Derivation of it,
(...) in Greek, and Conscientia in Latin imports as much. There cannot be
Conscientia without Scientia, no Conscience without Knowledge. If I am wholly
ignorant of the Rule or Law, it is all one to me, as if there were none at all;
and obliges me no further than I have or may have any Knowledge or Information
thereof; in this Sense, Quod non apparet, non est, It Is all one not to be, as
not to appear so.

I must therefore know what my Duty is, or what it is the Law requires of me,
before I can think my self obliged thereby; and till I know it, or have the
Means of arriving at the Knowledge of it, I lie under no Obligation from
thence: For a blind Man may with as much Reason be obliged to walk steadily in
a straight Line, or narrow Path, tho he cannot see one Step of his way, as that
a man should be obliged in Conscience to any Law, whereof he is totally
ignorant, or deprived of the means of knowing of it. I speak here of
invincible, not affected Ignorance, there being as much difference between them
two, as between natural and wilful Blindness, between a man's having no Eyes at
all, and another that shuts them close, and will not open or make use of them
to see his way. The former excuses indeed; but the later never did, and never
will. For instance, those miserably blind Heathen, who sit in Darkness, and see
no Light, who never heard of the Name of Christ, nor once had the glad Tidings
of Salvation preached unto them; they are not bound to believe and embrace the
Gospel under the Penalty of Damnation, as we are, who enjoy the means, and
daily sit under the joyful Sound thereof. All that they are to do, is to comply
with the rational Dictates of their own Mind, and conform to that part of the
Divine Law which is written upon their Hearts, and to live up to the light of
natural Religion: The ground or reason of which Hypothesis is taken from that
of the Apostle, Romans 2.14, 15. For when the Gentiles, which have not the Law,
do by Nature the things contained in the Law, these having not a Law, are a Law
unto themselves: Which shows the work of the Law written in their Hearts, their
Consciences also bearing them Witness, and their Thoughts in the mran time
accusing, or excusing one another. Now according to this of the Apostle, If the
Gentiles do by Nature the things contained in the Law, and their Consciences
thereupon excuse and bear witness on their behalf (as is here expressly
affirmed) why should we be so uncharitable as to pass Sentence against those
who are acquitted by their own Consciences, or think that the Great and Good
God, who is the Maker of us all, will be as partial and severe as we are wont
to be in our Censures of them. No, for we are told in every Nation, he that
fears God, and works Righteousness shall be accepted, Acts 10.35. This
Proposition of the Apostle, being, no doubt, true in every Age, as well before,
as after Christ's Time, there being but one way of Salvation both for Jew and
Gentile, and but one Mediator between God and Man, who is called the Savior of
all Men, though more especially of such as believe, i. e. of Christians; no other
name being given among Men, no other Mediator being constituted throughout the
World beside him, where by they can hope to be saved, Acts 4.12. though how-and
in what manner the Merit of Christ is applied, unto them that have no explicit
Knowledge or Faith in him, is a Mystery too high for our Reach; and therefore,
as a secret thing, belongs only to God.

The meaning of all that has been said upon this particular, is in short this,
That there must be not only a Rule, but a Knowledge of that Rule before it can
oblige Conscience.

Thirdly, There is the Judgment of the Mind concerning our Actions, a judging
of them by a known Rule, of what Kind or Nature they are, whether good or bad,
well or ill done, agreeable to the Intent of the Law or not. From whence
arises in the

Fourth place, The giving, or passing Sentence upon our selves, in reference to
the Lawfulness, or Unlawfulness of our Actions; the acquitting, or condemning
our selves in our own Breasts, and judging of our Spiritual State; or moral
Condition, whether we are able to approve our selves unto God, who is the
strict Observer, and supreme Judge of all our Actions.

And from these two last Acts results the Testimony of our Consciences; which
if it vote on our Behalf, yields us matter of Comfort in the midst of all our
Sufferings, enables us to hold up our Heads with Joy, and gives us Confidence
toward God, whereby we may draw near with a true Heart, in full assurance of
Faith, having our Hearts sprinkled from an Evil Assurance, and our Bodies washed
with pure Water, Heb. 10.22. And again, Beloved, if our Hearts (that is, our
Consciences) condemn us not, then have we Confidence toward God, 1 John 3.21.

But if the Testimony of Conscience make against us, then it cannot choose but
afflict and disquiet us, make our Countenances to fall, and cause sad thoughts
to arise within us; which in some men is attended with greater Horror than in
others, according as Conscience is awakened, or laid to sleep.

The whole Transaction of Conscience in this Affair, is sometimes represented
by way of Syllogism, in three Propositions.

That which forms the first Proposition, is called (...): This makes Report of
the Law, and draws its Medium, or Argument from thence.

That which forms the Minor, is called (...), or Conscience: This makes a
particular Application of the Law, or Rule unto a Man's own self, or brings it
home to his own Case.

The Third infers the Conclusion from both, and is therefore called (...),
which is the Judgment of Conscience upon the whole; whereby a man is able to
judge of his Actions, and pass Sentence upon himself, either of Absolution, or
Condemnation.

Having resolved the first Enquiry, What Conscience is? it will from hence more
easily appear in the next place.

2. WHAT it is to make Conscience of our Actions, or to live according to
Conscience.

Negatively, It Is not to do what we list, to walk at large, or live at random,
it is not to be transported with Humor, or Passion, or Discontent. It Is not to
act in Conformity to the Opinions of other Men, or of a particular Sect or
Party as such; no nor always to follow the Dictates and Persuasions of our own
prejudiced and mis-inform'd Minds, whereof, notwithstanding, some People are so
very fond, as to make no difference between Conscience and Prejudice.

Wherefore positively; To act according to Conscience, is to walk by Rule, and
live according to Law; to frame all our Actions according to the Will and
Direction of our Maker, who has absolute Authority over us, and claims a
greater Share in us, than we can in our selves: For Conscience is under
Authority, tied to a Rule, and must have a Law for its Direction and Governance.

Now when we perform our Actions in such a manner as may be agreeable to the
Rule which is given us for the right Government thereof; and when the general
Practice of our Lives bears some Proportion thereunto; this is to make
Conscience of our ways, and to approve our selves to our selves in so doing.

That man therefore that has no respect to the Rule of his Actions, nor takes
any care to render them in some good measure answerable to it; such a one (let
his plea and pretense be never so specious and demure) makes no Conscience how
he lives, and consequently can never expect the Testimony of Conscience on his
side, much less be able to Rejoice in it.

Now the chief Rule or Law that is to direct Conscience, and govern our
Actions, is the Canon of Holy Scripture, the written Word, or revealed Will of
God. This lays the strongest, nay, the only Obligation upon Conscience; which
can acquit us no farther, than our Actions are correspondent to this Rule; and
unto which all others are subordinate, and may be applied.

So that to live according to Conscience, is to measure out our Actions by the
Rule of God's Word; to conform the General Practice and Course of our Lives
unto the Law of Christ, which is the most perfect Rule of Righteousness, that
is, or can be given us, and unto which all others ought to refer: It Is to live
in Obedience to a Divine Command, and to subject our selves entirely to the
Will and Pleasure of him, who has the absolute Dispose and Government of our
Consciences, and to whom we owe all the Duty and Service we are capable of. He
that does otherwise does amiss, and can never be able to justify himself unto
his own Mind, much less answer it to God when he cannot do it to his own
Conscience.

From what has been said, it appears, that Conscience is, as I said before, no
lawless or ungovernable Principle, no prejudiced, or discontented Passion, no
affected, or superstitious Impulse, etc. as some would make us believe: It Is no
Tyrannical, or Despotick Lord, so as to impose its own private Dictates for
Divine Commands; much less the wild Extravagancies, and enthusiastic Conceits
of this or that Sect, under pretense of Religion, whereof Instances have not
been wanting in this Nation and Age of ours. Conscience is God's Substitute and
Vicegerent, and can act or impose no further than it has Warrant or Authority
from him so to do: To do more than this, is to exceed its Commission, and to do
that which all the fine Pretenses in the World will never be able to bear us
out in.

3. NOTWITHSTANDING, Conscience, by many persons pretending to it, has been
wretchedly Abused, yet it ought not to be slighted, or cast off ever the more
upon that Account.

Now this implies two things.

First, It supposes that Conscience may be abused; nay, actually has been so;
and that to very ill Purposes: And this is too great a Truth ever to be denied,
and which sad Experience does every day give us too manifest and undeniable a
Proof of.

To instance only in Generals; Many there are, and God knows how few amongst us
can plead Not Guilty in this respect, who have cried up Religion, and pleaded
Conscience; yet have had no regard to the Laws of the one, or Rule of the
other, who, it is to be feared, never took any pains to examine and search into
the Nature and Reason of their Actions, whether they were agreeable to the mind
of God, or had any Command of his, to Warrant and Authorize them. Conscience in
such Persons had never regard to any Law but that of their own Passions and
Interests, which has put them upon many notorious and foul Impieties, and
which have been first practiced, then excused, and at length arrived at that
height of Confidence, as publicly to be maintained and justified in the face
of the whole World; and that under the name and plea of Conscience,
notwithstanding they were directly opposed to the common Dictates of Nature,
and express Laws of Christian Religion.

Thus among the Heathen, Conscience through blindness and superstition, has
mis-lead them to many vile, and unnatural pieces of wickedness; and among
Christians, who ought to have known and done better, it has been guilty of
little less. The most Tragical Crimes that ever came upon the Stage, have been
acted under this Veil, and disguised with this Pretense.

This it was which put Agamemnon upon sacrificing his Daughter, and urged his
Son Orestes to revenge his Father's Death in the Murder of his Mother. This
moved the Carthaginians to the Slaughter of two 100 young Noblemen at a time,
to appease their surly God Saturn, after a notable Defeat received from their
Enemies. And upon this account it became a common Practice among several
Nations, to offer up their Children in Sacrifice to their Idols; which
Abomination of the Heathen, as the Holy Scripture calls it, was afterward
imitated by the backsliding Israelites, who burnt their children to Moloch, and
made them pass through the fire in the valley of Hinnon, 2 Chr. 28.3. And it
was Conscience mingled with Spite and Malice, that moved their Contrymen in
after-Ages to crucify the Lord of Life, and put him to open Shame and Death:
For, say they, we have a Law, and by that Law he ought to die, etc. John 19.7.

And well had it been, if this Abomination had been confined to the Heathen
World, or past no further than the Borders of the Jewish Nation: But which is
more to be aggravated and lamented too, Christians of almost all Parties and
Persuasions, have not come behind the very worst of the Heathens, acting over
again all the Extravagancies of a Pagan Superstition, and that for Religion and
Conscience sake, if they may be believed.

This has created Factions, and sown Sedition both in Church and State;
invaded Kingdoms from abroad, and incited to Rebellion at home, contrived
Plots, and hatched Conspiracies, acted Treasons, and committed Massacres, and
absolved Subjects from their Allegiance, and made them cast off the Yoke of
Obedience to their Lawful Sovereigns.

Whatever Mischief or Wickedness is or can be employed in the Name of Rebellion,
and Murder, Sacrilege, or Treason, Ambition, and Revenge, they have all been
the Dictates of some Men's Consciences, and proceeded from the Oracle of a
deluded and mistaken Religion. Under this pretense ill Men have cherished their
Natural Infirmities, let loose their Passions, vented their Spleen, disguised
their Ambition, promoted their own private Interest to the Ruin of the
Public, and carried on the worst design of a Spiteful Nature and Discontented
Faction.

Now Conscience in such Men as these was Legibus Soluta, had no respect to
Laws, unless it were to break and violate them, being Lawless, and Disobedient,
etc. 1 Timothy 1.9.

Such a Conscience as this can as easily break all Bands, and cut in sunder all
the Cords of Obedience as Sampson did the Cords, wherewith his Enemies had
bound him: And when once the Tie of Conscience is loosed or broken, little
hopes of their being held by any other.

But we know very well, from whence the Principles of such a Conscience came at
first, and what Mischief and Confusion it has wrought in all parts of
Christendom ever since. Whoever therefore is acted thereby, whether they know
it, or no, yet for certain they are no better than Factours for Popery, the
Tools and Engines of a Jesuit, and the very Spawn of the Fisherman of Rome,
actuated by a Spirit wholly Opposite to that of Christ and his Gospel: A
Spirit, that like the Evil One is ever restless and unquiet, which has been
formerly at work, and no doubt is so still, though like their Predecessors in
the Powder Plot, they dig under ground in a more Secret and Clandestine manner,
endeavoring not only to create Jealousies and Discontents, but contriving and
laying Snares to involve us in the like unnatural Guilt and Treachery with
themselves: For it is well known, the Papists have Leavened most of our Sects,
and under their Mask and Disguise have Oppugn'd our Church, sowed the Tares of
Faction and Dissension among us, and armed her Bosom Friends, (which are
evermore the worst of Enemies) with Weapons and Arguments to undermine and
weaken her.

And really when I consider the great Imposture of that Corrupt Church, and the
vast numbers that have been craftily seduced and mislead by her, who under the
Plea of Conscience, and Outcry of Religion have acted so many Barbarous and
unhumane Cruelties, it is enough (methinks) to make a Serious Man to forswear
all Conscience, and for ever Abjure all thoughts of Religion, were he not very
well assured of the Abuse of the one and Innocence of the other, and how none
but the very worst of Men have made those Holy Pretenses a Retreat for their
Wicked and Abominable Practices.

Good God! That any who pretend to Conscience and Religion, and not only so,
but to Conscience in its greatest Strictness, and to Religion in its highest
Purity, should yet so notoriously abuse the one, prostitute the other, and act
in Contradiction to both. If this be to make Conscience of our Actions, it is
in such a manner as no Good Man would be desirous of; and if this be Religion,
I plainly declare, I have none of this kind, and do heartily wish I never may.

If Conscience, and consequently Christianity, is the Refuge of Treason, and
Sanctuary of Rebellion, if the Holy Jesus came (as one would think by some Men's
Practices he did) to Sanctify Murder, and Canonize those Men whose hands are
full of Blood, to License Sacrilege and Sedition, or Legitimate the most lewd
and Infamous Impieties, I should choose rather to be a Disciple of Honest
Socrates, and content my self to be virtuous at the rate of a Heathen, than
according to the Measures of such a Religion.

But blessed be God, we know better things, and have been taught quite
otherwise, we have not thus learned Christ; his Religion is Pure Religion and
Undefiled; his Commands are Holy, Just, and Good; he countenanceth no sort of
Immorality, but encourages the Universal Practice of all Virtue. It threatens
Damnation to such as resist Authority, which is the Ordinance of God, and
affirms the Damnation of those Men to be just, who think to do evil, that good
may come of it. Romans 3.8. It makes it as necessary for Subjects to submit (I do
not say always to Obey) but to submit to their Governors, as for Children to be
Obedient to their Parents, and for Servants to be subject to their Masters; and
he that goes about to take off the Obligation of the one, may upon the same
terms take away all Duty in Children toward Parents, and all Faithfulness in
Servants toward Masters: For Obedience and Subjection to Civil Government, is
as Natural and Sacred, as that which is exercised in Families, and kept up in a
Man's own House.

I have insisted the longer on this, not so much to look backward as forward;
to undeceive people by opening their Eyes and discovering those Pious Frauds,
Profane Cheats, and Hypocritical Abuses, which for a long time has past
cleverly with some Men, under the Notion of Conscience and Religion; and to
show you what Spirit such Men are of, thereby to Caution you for the future
against all such lewd Principles and Pretenses, how speciously soever they may
be gilded over, and that you take heed, that you suffer not your selves to be
cheated out of a Peaceable, Loyal, and Well-tempered Religion, by any bold
Incendiary or cunning Hypocrite of them all, be they of what Party or Faction
they will, whether Foreign or Domestic, at Home or Abroad. But yet in the

Second place, Notwithstanding Conscience has been so grossly mistaken and
abused; yet it ought not to be slighted, much less cast off upon that account,
any more than Religion which has often met with the like hard Fate, or Civil
Government which has been Usurped by those that had no Right to it, and
managed quite contrary to the Primitive End and Institution thereof.

Now if the Abuses of Government and Religion be not a sufficient Reason for
our rejecting of them, no more is it for the laying aside of Conscience.
Because the greatest Abuse can never be made an Argument for the Total
Abandoning thereof.

For if you come once to cast off Conscience, you throw off with it all
Obligation to Duty, you take away all Sense of Good and Evil, all Difference
between Virtue and Vice, Right and Wrong, and thereby reduce Mankind into the
Rank of Brute-beasts.

Without regard to Conscience you are not capable of Religion, nor of the
ordinary Duties of Morality, we cannot do one good Action without it, nor
rejoice in the Witness and Testimony thereof.

There will be then no peace in Private Families, nor good Government in
Public Societies; no Obedience to Magistrates nor Subjection to Authority. No
Man then will either Fear God or Honor the King; or do their Duty one toward
another, all which are yet enjoined and bound expressly upon our Consciences,
by the Holy Spirit.

Conscience then is useful and necessary in that it implys an Obligation to
Duty, and lays upon us the strongest Bonds of Obedience. There is no Argument
or Persuasive like it: It is stronger than all our little Hopes and Fears in
this World; it is not to be compelled by force, nor bribed by Interest, nor
frighted by all the Terrors and Apprehensions of Death and the Grave. Insomuch,
as Conscience, though daily abused by ill Men to ill designs, is yet of
excellent use, where rightly informed, duly applied, and carefully heeded and
attended unto. Where it is Reverenced and regarded as it ought, it tends
mightily to the making Men thoroughly Good and Virtuous, Just in their
Pretenses, Honest in their Intentions, Upright and Sincere in all their
Promises and Professions; all which, where Men make no Scruple of any thing,
must needs be False, Dissembling, and Treacherous.

Where Men are willing to exercise a good Conscience, or keep it void of
Offense, they will not put Tricks and Cheats upon themselves or others, they
will not go about to mock God and deceive their own Souls, they will scorn to
do an ill Action and afterward color it over with a plausible Excuse or
Hypocritical Evasion. But will endeavor after the practice of unfeignee
Goodness, a hearty Compliance with their whole Duty, having their Conversation,
as the Apostle speaks, In Simplicity and Godly Sincerity, and not with Fleshly
Wisdom. 2 Cor. 1.12. In a word, he will strive to approve himself to God as
well as Man, and to Man as well as God; that he may become as good as possibly
he can, that is, as the Grace of God and his own honest endeavors will enable
him to be.

That Man therefore, that makes no Conscience of any thing he does or says, can
never become so good as he ought; He can be no true and lasting Friend either
to Church or State, to his King or Country, and consequently unsafe to be
trusted by either; but he that shall go about to Debauch and Prostitute his
Conscience, is of all others the very worst, and no Sinner to the Conscientious
Sinner, who can sin with a good Conscience, and do Evil that Good may come of
it, whose Damnation as it is most just, so their reclaiming is most difficult,
as being obstinate in their Prejudices against every thing, that is or can be
offered for their Conviction.

And thus you see the great Use and Necessity of Conscience, where it is
regarded and valued as it ought, and therefore is not to be decry'd, for the
ill use made thereof: For to cast off Conscience is in effect to cast off all
Religion With it; to Banish all true Goo^ness, Common Honesty, and Moral Virtue
out of the World, and consequently all that Order, Pence, Union, and Civil
Society, which results from thence, and wherein the Happiness of this Life does
chiefly consist.

I PROCEED now in the Fourth place, to show in or about what things Conscience
ought principally to be concerned or exercised.

First, For the better understanding of which, I must remind you a little of
what I have already hinted in the description of Conscience, namely, that
Conscience presupposes a Rule or Law; and therefore is not particularly
concerned about things Indifferent as such, which come within the compass of no
Rule, nor within the Limits of any Command or Prohibition. For Conscience is no
further concerned about any thing or action, than as it is an Instance of
Obedience to, or Transgression of a Law; now where there is no Law, there is no
Transgression, no nor Obedience neither.

Now the things we call Indifferent are such as God has given no particular
Command either for or against, and upon that account become of a Middle nature
between Good and Evil, as being neither commanded nor forbidden; if therefore
not commanded, they do not oblige Conscience in point of Obedience; if not
forbidden they offend not Conscience in point of Guilt.

This is the true and easy Notion of things Indifferent, as coming under no
immediate Injunction or Prohibition, and therefore left free as to the
Performance or Omission, unless Prudence shall otherwise direct or lawful
Authority interpose.

But some there are, who will admit nothing for Indifferent, but what Scripture
does expressly warrant and affirm to be so; but then there can be nothing called
Indifferent in the World, because there is no Text throughout the whole Bible,
that speaks any thing to this purpose, or makes mention of what is Indifferent
and what not; And yet that some things in or about Religion are indifferent,
and may be done or not done without Sin, we have the general consent of most of
our Reformed Divines; Calv. Beza, Bucer, Pola. P. Martyr cum plurimis aliis,
quos omnes enumerare jam taederet.
and that as well of Foreign Churches as of our own.

It Is therefore sufficient warrant for me to judge any thing indifferent,
whereof the Scripture is wholly silent and makes no mention at all, either one
way or other, as in Matters of External Rites and Ceremonies, the Outward Modes
and Circumstances of Divine Worship, which are all of them, of an indifferent
Nature, and wherein there is no Religion or Sin at all, as considered
absolutely in themselves, and stripped of all other Circumstances, which may
alter the case.

Indifferent things therefore being neither good nor evil in themselves, may be
done, or not done, without sinning against God, or offending Conscience.

But when these things, which are indifferent in their own Nature, do either
tend to, or come under the General Rules of Order and Decency, and have withal
the Addition of lawful Authority to re-commend them; then the Practice of them
becomes not only lawful, but in that respect necessary, though they remain still
indifferent as to their own Nature. I say, though the Nature of them is not
changed by the superaddition of lawful Authority, but remain indifferent as
before, yet the Practice of them is no longer so; but becomes a necessary
Instance of our Obedience; and therefore Obstinacy in refusing to comply with
such Injunctions, cannot excuse from Guilt, except it could be proved, That
Disobedience to the lawful commands of the Magistrate is no Sin, and the study
of the Churches Peace and Quiet is no Duty.

For the clearer Illustration of this, I shall instance but in one Ceremony at
present, which by many is scrupled at; but, I think, without any Ground, either
from Scripture, or Reason; and that is, Kneeling at the Blessed Sacrament,
which is the only Ceremony that is enjoined or required from the Layety in the
Communion of our Church. It Is impossible we should receive the Holy Sacrament
without some Gesture which is natural to every Action, whether it be Sitting,
Standing, Kneeling, or Leaning, i. e. inclining the Body on one side, which is
generally thought to be the Posture of our Savior and his Disciples, at the
first Institution thereof, according to the Custom of the East. Each of these
Postures considered in themselves are equally indifferent, and one to be
scrupled no more than another, because they are all of them natural to bodily
Action. Kneeling therefore in the First place being not forbidden in Scripture,
is no more unlawful than Sitting or Standing; and being a natural Gesture of
the Body, is as indifferent as any of the rest: But then Secondly, as it is a
devout Posture, and expressive of greater Reverence and Humility than that of
Sitting or Standing; so it may be preferred as more convenient and suitable to
the Piety and Devotion of that Holy Ordinance, than any other Gesture.

But Thirdly, As it is enjoined by the Authority and Governors of the Church
(whose Power in things of this Nature, some men are unwilling to understand) so
it becomes more necessary and binding as to the Use thereof: What was
indifferent before in one respect, becomes convenient in another, and necessary
in a third: It Is indifferent in its own nature, because not forbidden: It Is
convenient, in regard of its natural Significancy, as betokening more Reverence
and Devotion; and it is necessary, in respect of the Command of our Governors,
as an Instance of our Obedience to them, which God has made our Duty, and that
for Conscience sake.

That Action therefore which is natural and indifferent, convenient and
reverent, and upon those Accounts commanded and enjoined; I would fain know
where does the Unlawfulness of it lie, or where is the Sin of such an Action to
be found?

They therefore that shall scruple Kneeling at the S. Sacrament, especially
since our Church has assured them, that there is no intention of adoring the
Elements, or the supposed Presence of Christ's Body, I fear, understand not,
what Reverence and Devotion is, so well as they ought; but discover something
of a Temper, which if left loose, would be troublesome and uneasy under all
Government and Discipline, though never so so pure and primitive, notwithstanding
they seem such Zealous Contenders for it.

But pray, why should a Lawful Authority be blamed, for doing that which
particular Men, and private Teachers do daily practice in their several
Meetings, and Illegal Assembles, namely, imposing upon the Consciences of Men,
and requiring their Submission to several things, which they have no express
Rule for in Scripture, and yet make this the great Objection against the
Worship and Discipline of our Church; in which respect they are no less
Magisterial, if not more, than our Governors, whom upon all occasions they
Arraign as such; for without any Authority from God or the Magistrate, they
exercise an Arbitrary Dominion over the Consciences of those Men, who have
weakness enough to list themselves into their Party: They take away the nature
of things indifferent, and make some things necessary, which were not so
before, and some things they can dispense withal as indifferent, which are
necessarily required, to the ensnaring of Peoples Consciences, who otherwise it
may be, mean well, and are too honest to suspect the bottom of their designs,
as I might instance both in the Classical and Congregational way: Whereas our
Church never pretended to alter the nature of things, either necessary and
essential to Religion, or only accidental and indifferent, but leaves them as
they are: She only directs the Practice of them so far as they tend to Order
and Decency, are expressive of Reverence and Devoition, and become a proof of
Obedience and Submission, to lawful Authority; a Duty which I cannot think so
meanly of as some do, considering how peremptorily it is enjoined by the Holy
Ghost in many places of the Gospel, and the great Influence it has upon the
Peace of the Church and Security of the Government, under which we live.

Secondly, Conscience I told you includes Knowledge as much in the Notion of
the thing, as Composition of the word; where there is no Knowledge, there can
be no Conscience, because in such a case it is withwhat to do, or how to govern
it self and judge aright; whereupon Conscience is not so much concerned about
things that are uncertain, whereof we can have no sure Proof or clear Evidence,
either from Sense Reason, or Revelation, which are the three only ways of
attaining Knowledge, or arriving at the certainty of any thing.

Thus in matters of School Question or Controversial Divinity, which are banded
to and fro with probable Arguments on both sides: For Instance, Whether The
Fire in Hell be Material or Metaphorical, true In the Letter or in a Figure, so
we do but believe there is such a place as Hell reserved for the Punishment of
Wicked Men, as Scripture does assure us, Conscience, as to the rest, is not
concerned to believe either one way or other; because Scripture is silent in
the case, and the Arguments from Reason on either hand are alike probable; and
if I am induced to believe one part of the Question rather than the other, this
can arise no higher, than to a private Opinion of my own, not a public Article
of my Christian Faith, wherein my private Judgment not my Conscience is
concerned. That Christ was born of a Pure Virgin is matter of Faith, and
consequently of Conscience to believe, because Scripture does affirm it; but
whether she remained so all her Life long, is not so: Indeed it has been an
Opinion in the Church, that she did, but however there is no other Argument but
that of Pie Credimus, that can induce us to be of that mind.

In like manner the Descent of Christ into Hell, so we do not deny the thing,
which has for many Ages been a received Article of the Apostles Creed, tho
left out in some others, it matters not greatly, whether it were Local or
Virtual, Metaphorical, or Metonymical: for in all these several Senses it has
been taken by Learned and Pious Men; but in which of these we need not be
overmuch concerned; for this Article being not expressly Revealed, or clearly
delivered in Scripture, we believe it chiefly upon the account of the Apostles
Creed, whose Antiquity ought to command our Reverence and Respect, tho I think
it cannot strictly oblige my Conscience; especially when the Church has not
determined any thing in the Case (any more than Scripture) but left me at
Liberty to judge either way as I see cause. The like may be said of the
Knowledge of the Saints departed, with many others, which for Brevity sake I
now omit.

Thirdly, Some things there are, tho for certain Revealed, yet being Obscure
and Unintelligible in their own nature, cannt so immediately oblige our
Consciences, as those that are more plain and Obvious.

The Decrees of God, Arcana of Providence, the great and Stupendous Mystery of
the Blessed Trinity, and Incomprehensible Union of the Two Natures in the Son
of God; these are, in many things, above our Reach and Capacity, and so far as
they are above us, belong not to us. A modest and humble Faith is here
requisite, and all that is expected from the common and ordinary sort of
Christians; a too curious search and inquiry into these Venerable Mysteries
being not convenient for all, nor absolutely necessary for any.

A particular Explication of them, concerns my Faith no further than as it is
consonant to Sacred Scripture, and agreeable to what is more plainly revealed
in Holy Writ; or else by natural and genuine Consequence, may be deduced
therefrom.

But now, as for other Difficulties that may arise from thence, I am not bound
to pin my Faith on any one man's Sleeve, nor receive his Scheme, or Hypothesis,
(...) for inspired Doctrine: No, nor for Truth neither, any further than he can
confirm it by Scripture, which is the sole infallible Test of Divine Truth: All
that in this Case I am obliged to do, is to guide my Conscience by Scripture,
and my Judgment by the catholic Determinations of the Church, that is, I am
obliged in Conscience to believe all that the Scripture reveals, and make that
the Rule of my Faith and Obedience: But in all other things where difficulties
may arise, and Scripture is either totally silent, or very obscure, here we
ought to believe as the Church believes; mistake me not, I do not speak it in a
Popish Sense, which sets up the Traditien of the Church in Opposition to
Scripture; and in an impious manner, prefers them before it, teaching for
Doctrines the Commandments of Men; but my meaning is, that I, and every body
else, in matters dubious and obscure, ought to be so modest as to mistrust our
own particular Judgments, rather than that of the Church, and submit our
Private Opinions to her Public Determinations. If not, yet the least that in
this Case we ought to do, is to keep our Persuasion to our selves, rather than
disturb the Peace, or oppose the received Doctrine of the Church, out of an
indiscreet Zeal for any fond or affected Opinion of our own. For pray consider,
Can it be any other than Pride, or Self-conceit, to call it no worse, for a few
private persons to oppose their particular Sentiments to the Catholic Faith,
and what they decry in their Governors to practice more unjustly themselves, by
Prescribing to their Superiors in Matters dubious and uncertain, and which are
perpetually controverted on all hands?

In all things of this nature Conscience obliges me to be Humble and Modest
rather than Positive and Peremptory; and therefore it would better become us to
receive our Faith from, than impose ours upon the Church in whose Communion we
live, and of the Truth of whose Doctrine we are satisfied in the main, as the
Dissenting Brethren are generally with ours. But however, if they see Reason to
Dissent in their private Thoughts from the Established Faith, they ought to keep
their Judgment to themselves, and not disturb her Peace on that account: In
this Sense let them remember that of the Apostle, He that has Faith, let him
have it to himself. And he that keeps it there, way keep it safe enough, and
out of the reach of all Humane Power and Compulsion. For Conscience, while it
keeps within its due bounds cannot, ought not, to be compelled by any Power
upon Earth; for in that respect it is free, and never to be fore't.

But Secondly, and positively, Conscience is chiefly and more immediately
concerned about such things as are more necessary and substantial, plain and
obvious in Religion.

And these in the First place are the Main Fundamental Articles of our
Christian Faith, which constitute the greatest part of our Creed, and have an
immediate influence on our Lives, and they are those that are contained in our
several Creeds, which are the brief Summary of the Christain Doctrine, and
comprehensive of the most Material Articles of our Belief.

And Secondly, Matters of Practice, which are less controverted than Matters of
Doctrine, and are agreed unto on all hands, and to which all the Articles of
our Faith ought to refer, and are no further necessary than they do so: For all
Notions and Opinions are but things indifferent in themselves; it matters not
whether they be true or false, if they pass no further than the Brain, and are
of no other use than to gratify a Musing Genius and Speculative Fancy. For to
what purpose is the Belief of a God, if we live without him in the World? But
they are of great Moment and Concern in relation to Practice; so far as they
pass from the Head to the Heart and have an Influence upon our Lives: Truth
therefore is valuable and ought to be highly prized, because of its near
Relation to Virtue and Goodness, and Error to be shunned and avoided in regard
of its vicious Contagion, and the ill effect it has upon our Morals.

Conscience therefore is concerned principally about such things in Religion as
are solid and substantial, plain and evident, necessary to be done, certain and
easy to be known; and such, for the most part, are the Agenda or Matters of
Practice, which take in all the Instances of our Duty toward God and Man, and
branch themselves forth into the great Commands of leading a Godly, Righteous,
and Sober Life.

As for the more Ignorant sort of People, and such as are Weak in the Faith, we
should press upon them the great and necessary Duties of Religion and Morality,
such as the Fear of God, Loyalty to their King, Love to their Neighbor,
Honesty in their Dealings, Temperance and Sobriety toward themselves, A
Thankful use and acknoledgment of Mercies, and a Patient-Bearing and
Improvement of Affliction. These we ought daily to press upon our People,
rather than amuse them with Curious Notions, or receive them to doubtful
Disputations which often stagger more than they confirm, and shake their Faith
instead of settling it: And tho the Apostle bids us, Prove all things and hold
fast that which is good, Thessal. 5.21. Yet this is not spoken to all
indifferently; it belongs not to the Ordinary and less knowing of Christians,
who are usually incapable of such an Inquiry, but to such who have Leisure and
Opportunity to make the Trial, Judgment and Skill, to go through with it, or to
do it to better purpose, and with less danger to themselves and others: But for
the Generality of People, where they are satisfied, that no Sin is imposed on
their Practice, nor dangerous Error on their Belief, where they have the means
of Grace and Salvation afforded them, constant Hours of Devotion, and stated
Times of Public Worship, where they have the Liberty and Encouragement to be
as Holy and Devout as they will, as Virtuous and Strict in their Morals as they
please themselves; In this case, (which God be praised is ours) People ought to
rest satisfied in the Communion of such a Church, without troubling themselves
with needless Scruples, uncomfortable Dolbts, or superstitious Curiosities,
which are apt to take up too much of their Time and Thoughts, that might be
better employed in the Practice of well known and necessary Duties, and
improving themselves in the happy Progress of a good and virtuous Life: And if
such a Church will not satisfy them, I know not (all things considered) where
they can find a better: For no Church under the Sun is absolutely perfect and
free from corruptions and defects; nor can ever hope to be so, as long as it is
made up of Men, that is, of Persons frail and fallible, and of like Passions
and Infirmities with the rest of the World; though I do believe this Church of
ours has as few of them as any other under the Cope of Heaven: Nay, I should
not mistake if I said much fewer.

Conscience then is more to be heeded in reference to our Actings than
Opinions; and it is more safe and easy to govern our Acions in respect of
Practice, than to chufe for our selves in point of Doctrine. If a man holds no
Doctrine that is prejudicial to Holiaess and a good Life, he need not be much
troubled about other things that are too high for him, and above his Reach, I
dare adventure to say, it is safer for him to err with Modesty and Humility, out
of Love to the Churches Peace, and in submission to its Authority, than to be
sound and orthodox in his Judgment, and withal, of a stubbom, refractory, and
contentious Spirit: And a humble, modest, peaceable-minded Man is more
acceptable with his Errors and Failings in Judgment, than a proud and obstinate
person, though he chance to have Truth on his Side: Therefore according to the
common use and acceptance of the Word, he is looked upon as most Conscientious,
who lives best, and not who knows most; who is just and honest in his Morals,
not who is sound and right in his Apprehensions. He that lives well, though he
knows not very much, has more of Conscience, than he that knows more, and yet
lives a great deal worse: For Conscience is not so much a Speculative, as
Practical thing; and many times there is more of it found among the simple,
honest, and well-meaning fort of Christians, than among the more deeply
learned, and profound Speculati.

This shows the too great folly and perverseness; of many of our People, who
seem to be eaten up with Zeal, and plead Conscience in those things which they
do not well understand, and it may be never will; whereas a Meek, Humble, and
Teachable Spirit would better become them, and tend much more to their own
Praise, and the Churches Peace; and be more agreeable to the Rules of the
Gospel, and the great Ends of Religion: For they may sooner hope to be the one
than the other, that is, they may become Humble and Meek, when they cannot be
skilled in all the points of Religion, or matters controverted, and under
dispute.

Conscience then is most properly exercised about the more plain and necessary
Duties of Religion, namely, matters of Practice, and such Doctrines as tend
more immediately toward the leading of a godly, righteous, and sober Life.

And thus have I done with the fourth General Head, and which I chiefly
intended in the drawing up of this Discourse.

It remains now, that in the

5th. AND last place, to offer a few things by way of Advice concerning the
well-governing our selves with relation to our Consciences; and the

First is this, That you be very careful to get Conscience rightly informed,
and well instructed, that you may arrive at a clear and distinct Apprehension
of your Duty in all Capacities, and under all Relations whatever and Do this
with all the Faithfulness and impartiality in the world, being swayed by
passion, biased by Interest, and carried away with prejudice as little as may
be.

Labor to know, and be Instructed in the Truth for Truths-sake, not so much to
set your Head, as your Heart Right, not to furnish you with matter or Talk and
Dispute, which evermore engenders Strife and Envy; but to understand your Duty,
in order to the faithful practice and performance of it. Now this you must do,
before you can safely follow the Dictates of Conscience, or rely upon the
Testimony thereof. In order hereunto, you ought to consider the Nature and
Extent of the Rule, by which Conscience is to be governed and directed in all
her Actions and Undertakings; and this, I told you, is the Word of God, which,
laying aside all prejudice and partiality, you ought diligently to take heed,
and attend unto; and where Doubts and Difficulties may arise, to consult and
advise with your Teachers, whom God has set over you, or with any other whom
you have reason to judge most eminent for their Piety, Learning, Prudence and
Integrity: to beg their Assistance, and receive their Instructions, with that
Modesty and Respect as becomes Learners and Disciples, who desire nothing more
than to come to the Knowledge of the Truth, that they might be saved.

For want of this Care Conscience has been strangely misted, and run it self
into many gross Errors, and foul Mistakes. Thus many have been prompted to very
ill things, one while by Passion, another while by Prejudice, and a third, by a
corrupt and self-Interest; and yet have thought they have been led by Zeal, and
acted by Conscience all the while, when, as upon strict enquiry, they have
found their Zeal was not according to Knowledge, and what they called
Conscience, in no wise agreeable to the Rules of their Religion. For the
avoiding of which, we should endeavor as much as in us lies, to get our
Consciences well informed, and to use the means in order thereunto.

Secondly, If you would have Conscience to be rightly informed, you must
endeavor after a humble, meek, and teacheable Spirit: For it is said, the meek
will he guide in Judgment, and the week he will teach his way, Psalm 25.9. And
it is said, God resists the proud, but gives Grace to the humble, 1 Pet. 5.5.

Now the meek and humble stand highest in Gods Grace and Favor; and therefore
more likely to be made acquainted with his Mind and Will: Nay, they are
naturally most capable of Instruction, and best fitted for it, as being most
desirous to know their Duty, and submit to it when they have done.

Whereas on the other hand, Pride, and Passion, and Self-conceit, are apt to
puff men up, prejudice them against theTruth, and fill them with Scorn and
Contempt of the best Counsel and Advice in the World. A peevish and froward
Disposition, makes men impatient of Contradiction, and to mis-judge every thing
that thwarts their particular Sentiments, insomuch as the best Advice is
commonly lost and thrown away upon such perverse Tempers, though offered in never
so kind and charitable a Manner.

Thirdly, After Conscience is well informed, keep it close to its Rule, and do
not suffer it wilfully or wantonly to swerve from it upon any account, or under
any pretense whatever, otherwise it may be in danger to seduce and deceive.

Conscience is chiefly exercised about good or evil, the doing of the one, and
the avoiding of the other. Now, though the Word of God is the great Standing
Rule, according to which we ought to take our principal Measures of good and
evil; yet this difference is more early taught us by the Light of Nature, and
the Suggestion of our own Minds; and therefore whatever appears a Sin, or is
universally condemned for such, by that Law, Conscience must needs judge it to
be a Sin too, and believe it condemned likewise by the Word of God: For no
natural (or rather unnatural) Crime can possibly commence a religious Duty; and
to think otherwise, is to lie under one of the grossest Delusions, and
scandalous Mistakes: For hereby we set the two Laws, to wit, that of Nature and
Revelatron in opposition to one another; yea, we make them absolutely
inconsistent and contradictory, though both of them at first came from God.

Conscience therefore ought not to plead for, or encourage the Practice of any
Sin, namely which appears to be so by the Light of Nature, as well as Religion;
and therefore all Treasons and Rebellions, Murders, and Conspiracies, Sacrilege
and Perjury are great Sins, and such as are discerned to be so by natural
Light; and therefore can never become otherwise, however they may be palliated,
or pleaded for: Never think that the Plea of Conscience, Religion, or
Reformation, can justify a wicked or immoral Action, such as Rebellion and
Perjury, which all Mankind does naturally acknowledge and condemn for such.

Now every man almost has so much of the Law of Nature yet left within him, as
to discern the great Evil of such things, though not always to shun, yet to
condemn the Guilt thereof.

What ever Nature tells us is a Sin, Conscience for that very reason must
disapprove of it too, because the Religion of Christ is but the Law of Nature
perfected and improved; and therefore no pretense of Conscience drawn from
Scripture can make that to be lawful, or cease to be a Sin which was so before.
Now if God's Law obliges not to Sin, much less the private Dictates, or
impulse of Conscience, which ought evermore to make that her Rule, and fetch
all her Directions from thence.

For a man therefore to allow himself in the Commission of such crimes as all
Laws and Religions in the World must needs condemn as impious and wicked, pray
what Conscience has such a Man? But then to plead Conscience in favor of such
things is so much the worse still, and renders his Crime infinitely more wicked
and abominable. Such a man is never to be excused in what he does of this
nature: For his Excuse, instead of extenuating, does but add to his Guilt, and
mightily aggravate the Heinousness thereof.

Fourthly, That, while I am pleading for Conscience, I may impartially
discharge my own, Conscience ought not to be separate from Charity, any more
than from Truth. Love, Charity and Good Will, are the chief Gospel-Precepts and
Standing Principles of Christ's Religion: And all Zeal for the Church or State;
Nay, for the Christian Religion in general, or reformed Religion in particular,
if void of Charity, is little worth. Charity, I mean, not only for those of our
own Communion, but even toward them that differ from us: For so far as they do
it purely on the account of Conscience, and no otherwise, we ought to retain
some Charity for them, be they of what Church or Communion they will.

Indeed where Conscience is manifestly abused, and carries them to any thing
that is wicked and unlawful; where any Sin or Immorality is countenanced or
encouraged, under the Notion or Plea of Conscience, there we must leave them,
and deservedly too, to the Public Censures of the Church, and Punishment of
the State: but where it is mere Conscience, and not Faction or Peevishness that
makes the Difference, there our Charity is as much due to them, as it is owing
from them to us upon the like occasion: For in this case there is but one Rule
for them and us to walk and judge by.

Therefore let a man be never so much in the right; let his Zeal for Truth be
never so great, yet if his Zeal does devour his Charity, sour and corrupt his
Spirit, embitter and provoke him beyond what is seemly and convenient, let his
Cause be never so good, his Arguments never so strong, if they fail in this,
all the rest signifies not much; the lack of this one thing makes all the rest
defective, and for the most part unsuccessful: For let me appeal to the most
zealous Boarnarges of them all, can any man, who believes the Scripture, read
the 13th Chapter of St. Paul's first Epistle to the Corinthians, which treats
purposely on the necessity and commendation of this most excellent Grace of
Charity? I say, can he read that, and yet think it possible to be a good
Christian, or discharge a good Conscience without it? For does he not prefer it
to the Tongues of Men and Angels; to the Gift of Prophecy, and working of
Miracles? Nay, does he not prefer Charity before the most comprehensive
Knowledge, miraculous Faith, liberal Alms-deeds, and voluntary Martyrdom? 1
Cor. 3.1. etc. Though I speak with the Tongue of Men or Angels, though I have the
gift of Prophecy, and understand all Mysteries, and all Knowledge, and though I
have all Faith, and though I bestow all my Goods to feed the Poor, and though I
give my Body to be burnt, and have not Charity, it profits me nothing.

Now the Excellency and Advantage which Charity has over all other Gifts of
God's Holy Spirit, is proved at large from the wonderful good Offices and
Effects thereof. Charity suffers long, and is kind, envies not, vaunteth not it
self, is not pufft up, nor easily provoked It rejoices in nothing but the
Truth; it bears, believes, hopes, and endures all things; and therefore in the
Conclusion he gives Charity the Preference of all others, Verse. 13. Now
abides Faith, Hope, and Charity, these three, but the greatest of these is
Charity.

Our Religion and consequently our Church, though she condemn Divisions and
Separations in all those that leave off, and depart from her Communion; yet
does not wholly exclude them from her Charity, and therefore neither should we
from ours, merely upon the Difference of Opinion, and especially, if this
Difference be for Conscience sake, and not out of Faction and Frowardness as I
said before, and would always be understood.

And that I may not be thought to speak without book, or affirm more then our
Church will own, I shall refer you to that excellent piece called, The
Moderation of the Church of England; out of which I have collected a few
Passages, some whereof I have repeated more at large.

Queen Elizabeth in her Injunctions, 1559. declares that [Her Majesty being
most desirous of all other Earthly things, tha^ her people should live in
Charity, both toward God and Man, and therein abound in good works, Wills
and straightly Commands all her Subjects to forbear all vain and contentious
Disputation in matters of Religion, and not to use in despite or rebuke of any
Person, these Convitious (or Reviling) words of Papist, Heretic, Satismatick
or Sacramentary, or any such like expressions of Reproach] that is, we ought
not to use these or the like Expressions in way of Reproach or vilifying of one
another, as some in the heat of their wrangling and Contention are very apt to
do, to the exasperating rather than convincing of Gainsayers.

And King James, that Learned and Judicious Prince forbids [ Pulpits to be made
Pasquills.] And gave in charge to the Archbishop [That no Preacher of any
Denomination whatsoever, shall presume to fall into bitter Invectives, and
undecent Railings against the Persons of either Papists or Puritans; but
modestly and gravely, when they are occasioned by their Text, free both the
Doctrine and Discipline of the Church of England from the Aspersions of the
Adversaries.]

To which we may add that memorable Passage out of Archbishop Laud. [The
Church of England] (says he) is not such a Shrew to her Children as to deny
her Blessing, ordenounce an Anathema against them, if some peacebly dissent in
some particulars remoter from the Foundation.]

And in the Homily against Contention, Sermon. 1. We are exhorted therein, [so to
read the Scripture, that by reading thereof we may be made the better Livers
rather than the more Contentious Disputers. And if any thing be necessary to be
taught, Reasoned, and Disputed, let us do it with all Meekness, Softness, and
Lenity, etc. For it is better to give place Meekly, then to win the Victory
with the breach of Charity, etc.

And again, We cannot be joined to Christ our Head, except we be glued with
Concord and Charity one to another. For he that is not of this Unity, is not of
the Church of Christ, which is a Congregation or Unity together, and not a
division, etc.

But for the Readers further satisfaction therein, if he desires it, I shall
refer him, to the Book it self, above mentioned, where the Learned Author gives
an account of the Churches great Charity and Moderation throughout all the
Parts and Branches of her Constitution which bespeaks her of a truly Christian
and Primitive Temper, wherein I wish all her Children would follow and Imitate
her: And thereby set an Example to all those that are otherwise minded, or
dissent from our Church in this, as well as in other Instances of their Duty.

For methinks those that would set up for serious, Conscientious Persons, ought
not to break the bond of Christian Charity, nor pass the bounds of the Churches
Moderation, by indulging their passions, or giving way to a peevish, froward,
and Invidious Humor against all that differ from them in matters of Faith, and
Doctrine, or purely out of Judgment, and Conscience,

For I could never yet be persuaded that Railing, and ill Language against
Papists on the one hand, or Dissenters on the other, is or ought to be a
Distinguishing Character of a truly Loyal Son of the Church; specially when I
consider that most of those that are addicted thereunto, are least capable of
convincing them otherways: Or if they are, yet this seems the most unlikely way
they can take for the doing of it, for we are told, That the wrath of Man
works not the Righteousness of God, James 1.20.

Now if you would see the Indecency and Unseemlyness, of ill Language and
reproachful Speeches, I need but remind you of the Rude and Slovenly
Expressions, that are commonly used, and with a great deal of Venom spit in
the Face of our Church.

They can hardly find any other name for a Surpliss, than that of a
Superstitious Rag and Relick of Popery; though there may be more Popery and
Superstition in their conceit about it, then in the thing it self; for
superstition is not in the Object, but only in the mind or conceit of the
Person that thinks so.

Thus they have accustomed to revile our Liturgy under the notion of the
English Mass Book, the Bishops and Governors of our Church are branded for
Limbs of Antichrist, and the Church her self reputed for little better then
Antichristian and Idolatrous: Neither have they learnt to stop here; but have
adventured to fly in the Face of the Civil Government as well as the
Ecclesiastical, against both which they have Shot their Venomous Arrows, even
bitier words. Psalm. 64.3.

But now I appeal to any sober and serious Person, be he of what Persuasion he
will, whether this be according to the Principles of the Christian Religion,
which is Professed in common by us all, or whether it is purely Conscience which
puts them upon such unseemly Practices; or is this Language fit to be bestowed
upon one of the most Eminent and Famous among all the Reformed Churches, and
who, [without Vanity be it spoken,] has been, one of the greatest Bulworks
against Popery, and Champion for the Reformation, and I hope, and pray daily it
will continue to be so as long as God shall be pleased to continue Her or
Himself a Church upon Earth.

Now if Language of this Nature, though arising from the great and extraordinary
Zeal of our Adversaries, is so unhandsome and ill becoming in them toward us,
why should we think it any whit the more commendable and seemly in us toward
them, or out of our mouths then out of theirs? That which is Evil and Offensive
in it self, is and will be so, let who will be guilty of it.

Wherefore methinks it would be more like Christian, and make more for the
credit of Religion and Honor of our Church, if we had more Charity and
Kindness one for another, even in those things, wherein we differ, so they be
not Factious or Scandalous, nor have an ill influence on our Lives and Manners,
rather than imitate the Example of some of our hotheaded Dissenters in some of
their worst Qualities, to wit, in their Uncharitable Censures, and Unchristian
Revilings and Calumnies. For the bitter and fiery Spirit of a Jewish Zealot, is
very unagreeable to the Meek, and Gentle Disposition of a true follower and
Disciple of Christ, according to St. Luke 9.54, 55. And when his Disciples,
James and John saw this, they said, Lord, will thou that we Command Fire to
come down from Heaven, and consume them, even as Elias did. But he turned, and
rebuked them, and said, ye know not what manner of Spirit ye are of. And I
shall be beholding to any man that shall be able to make out any other sense
and meaning thereof.

5thly A good Christian ought to live according to his own Conscience, rather
then according to the Opinion of other Men. Besure that man lives with the most
comfort and content to himself, who walks by the constant Rule of Gods Word,
and not by that of the World, which consists chiefly in Humor and Opinion, and
alters almost every day, and upon the least Occasion. Whereas the Law of God is
a sure and standing Rule, which being diligently heeded and attended unto, will
not suffer us to go wrong or mistake our way.

It Is impossible a man should live so Regular in all respects, or carry himself
so universally blameless and inoffensive, as to gain the good Word and Opinion
of all men, though he should make it his chief study or sole business to do so;
for men's Humors and Interests being so different and many times so contrary,
that which likes one, does not like another, and what this man commends,
another may be apt to find fault withal.

Nay, one and the same person is not always consistent with himself, nor can
keep long in the same mind: His thoughts and Judgments of things do often alter
with his Affection and Interest, and notwithstanding the Reason of things
remains one and the same, yet his Opinion of them may not do so, and then they
will be sure to pass their Censures on men's Persons and Actions, according as
they are in good or bad Humor, or as they judge, may make most for their
present Interest.

Now he undertakes a hard task indeed, who Studies to please those, whose minds
are so fickle and wavering, and whose Humors are made up of such sudden
Conradictions.

The People of the World are Masters or our Credit and Reputation, which they
may give or take from us at pleasure, as many times they do upon very slight or
no ground at all: They depend upon the Opinion, which men are pleased to
conceive of us, which they may alter when they list, whether we give cause for
it, or no.

But now no man or Number of men can be Masters of our Consciences; we may keep
them Innocent and in Peace, let the World say or do what she can: For though the
deserved Commendation of a Virtuous Action depends upon the Good Will of
others; yet the Satisfaction it inwardly creates, is a Good they have nothing
to do withal, and can never deprive us of, though they would. It concerns us
therefore to take all the care we can of our Consciences, and study rather to
pprove our selves to them, than to the Multitude, the one being Practicable,
when the other is not.

Not that I would have any man careless of his Credit and good Name, for he
that is not tender of his Fame, will hardly be so of his Conscience; and the
Reputation which is given to Virtuous Deeds, ought to be looked upon as no small
Incitement to the performance of them. But my meaning is, no man ought to be so
Studious of Popular Applause, or affect the good Opinion of the World, by such
mean and unworthy Arts, as may tend to the Injuring of his Conscience, or
prejudice of his Duty, which he ows to God and the Church, to his Prince or
Country. But let a man do, what he thinks in his Conscience he ought to do,
let him provide things honest in the sight of all men, run into no open
Scandal, give no just or wilful cause of offense, and avoid as much as he can
all Temptations or Provocations to evil, and then he ought not, he need not
value the Talk of the World, nor Speech of People.

A Wise man, which in Solomon's sense is a Prudent, Good man, should first take
care of doing his Duty, and then live above the spiteful Talk and Reports of
the Vulgar, or regard their Censures no otherwise, then the Moon in the Fable
did the barking of a Dog, which neither obscured her Light, nor made her alter
her Course. No, no, The inward content, which a man receives in the doing of a
good Action is infinitely to be preferred before the Credit and Reputation,
which it gains him abroad; an Unwise man seeks his Reward and Satisfaction,
where it is not to be found, namely from without, in the Goods and Possessions,
in the Modes and Opinions of the World; but a good man finds it within himself,
in the Right Order and Government of his Mind and Passions, and in the
Testimony and Approbation of God and his own Conscience.

2d. Again, it concerns us not only to Live, but to Value our selves, and judge
of our Estate toward God, according to the Testimony of Conscience, rather
than by the Fancy or Opinion which men are pleased to conceive of us.

The generality of men, Esteem and Value themselves according to the Good or
Evil, that befalls them in the World, and happens to them in their outward
Concerns.

If they are Sick or in Pain, in Poverty or Distress, under Misfortune or
Disgrace, they commonly bemoan their Condition, Lament their Miserable Estate,
and are apt to think themselves the most Unfortunate Wretches of all others;
When as all this has befallen the very Best of men, who yet have been Happy
amidst the greatest outward Misfortune, as long as they kept safe their
Innocence, Answered the end of Affliction, and made an entire Resignation of
themselves and their concerns unto the Will of God: And so long as a man does
this, he can never be Miserable, neither should he think himself so, let things
go never so cross, let the World Censure never so hard, or Reflect never so
spiteful and severe.

Alas, Happiness and Misery is not to be measured by the Good or Evil, that
befalls the Body, by Prosperity or Adversity, by good Report or bad Report;
otherwise who would be Innocent, or where shall we find a good man upon Earth,
who has escaped the Lash of the tongue, or has not been ill treated and
misrepresented in one kind or other: I never yet did hear of such a Person, and
quite despair of ever doing so; and yet if mere Calumnies and Reproaches can
make a man Guilty, then our Blessed Savior must have been one of the Vilest
Creatures upon Earth; For no man could be more heavily Charged, and spitefully
reviled, and yet deserve it less then he did, and all this from his own
malicious Contrymen the Jews and upon the account of their Religion too.

But, God be praised, these things are not the measure of Guilt of Innocence:
The best men would be most hardly dealt withal, were it in the power of the
World to dispense out their Rewards or Punishments. Guilt and Unhappiness do
not hang upon the Scandalous Tongues of Men, nor soar upon the Wings of Fame,
neither do they flow from the Invidious Talk of Rash and prejudiced People; but
they have their Seat and Abode in the mind: As long as there is Peace in the
Conscience, and Innocence in the Soul, it is not in the Power of man or any
thing under the Sun to make such a Person better or worse, more or less
Innocent or Guilty, Happy or Miserable. For notwithstanding all the ill things
that may be said or thought of such a one, yet at the same time the Testimony
of a good Conscience is able to make amends for all: And notwithstanding the
Reproaches of the wicked may fall upon him; yet this is a Continual Feast ever
at hand to welcome and entertain him, a rich Cordial to cheer and revive him,
being moreover the Pledge and Earnest of a more Ample Reward.

Which God of his Infinite mercy, Prepare us for, and bring us unto in his own
due time, and that for the sake of his beloved Son and our most Blessed
Redeemer, Christ Jesus the Righteous, to whom with the Father and Holy Spirit,
be Ascribed as is most due, all Honor and Glory, Praise and Adoration, now and
for ever more, Amen, Amen.

FINIS.

