An Epistle to be Communicated to Friends, and to be read in the Fear of the
Lord in their Men and Women's Meetings, and other Meetings; only among Friends,
as they in the Wisdom of God shall see meet and serviceable.
FRIENDS,
WHereas it has pleased the Lord in the unspeakable Riches of his Mercy, to
visit a Remnant in his Love, and to meet with us in a Way where we expected him
not, when we were wandering from Mountain to Hill, and choosing our own Ways,
seeking the Living amongst the Dead; yea, when we had long thus wearied our
selves, and almost dispaired of finding what we sought, but were saying in our
selves, Who shall ascend up, or descend down for us, to bring that to us,
without which our immortal Souls can find no Rest? Even in that time is the
Lord appeared, not as a God afar off, but a God near, even in our Hearts is he
appeared through the Light of his Son, and thereby opened he our Hearts and
Understandings, according to his divine Wisdom, who knew every ones State and
every ones Necessity; and he became as a Pillar of a Cloud by Day, and as a
Pillar of Fire by Night unto all such as embraced and received his Appearance,
and followed him faithfully; yea, he became as a wall of fire round about them
who did wholely put their trust in him. And thus has he gathered us to be a
people, who were once as scattered Sheep that knew not the true Shepherd; and
has made us as Firstlings upon his holy Mountain, that we might be as Lights
and Leaders to the next Generations; and many are so in the Sight of the Lord
and his Anointed, and are so felt and known among his People.

And seeing we are called to be as Firstlings and Examples to the Generations
that are coming after us, it is highly needful that we watch diligently in the
Fear and Wisdom of God, that nothing may be, nor remain among us as an Old
Leaven, to grieve and burden the Redeemed, nor to be an Occasion of Evil
Example to the Young Ones that are coming up after us: And considering that it
is every ones Duty to be faithful in their Measures, and not to put that under
a Bushel which is manifested from the Lord, but to bring it forth in the true
Love of God, and Faithfulness to each other, to the edifying and building up,
and to the Amendment and Admonition of those concerned, and that all Causes of
Stumbling might be removed, and that we might not leave a Hoof in Egypt, but
might all follow the Lamb as the Redeemed of the Lord together; and being
Washed, Sanctified and Born again, might come to sing the New Song, with the
New Name in our Foreheads, and Hallelujahs in our Mouths, Amen, Amen.

For these good Ends it is in my heart to signify these two things, that at
the present are principally upon me, which I have born a weight concerning for
several years, and did hope that some elder and fitter might feel the like
Weight, and bring forth a Testimony concerning the same, whereupon I have
forborne as long as well I durst; but now finding that I am not cleared of the
Matter, but that in a fresh living Sense it is renewed in me, I dare not longer
forbear to write the things that are upon my Spirit in these two Particulars,
and recommend the same unto God's Witness in all Consciences.

The first thing that lies before me is, concerning the bringing up of our
Children, which is a very weighty Concern; and every one that has the bringing
up of Children will have very much to answer for, if they do not quit
themselves as before the Lord in all Diligence and Faithfulness; they are God's
Creatures, and given to Parents as a Gift from him, upon whom they are to
improve their utmost Diligence, that they may grow up in the Fear of God; and
that Parents should not overlook things in their Children through fond
Affection, which they know by the Light of Jesus to be evil and bad; neither
speak to them in a slender Reproof, as Eli did to his Sons, but from their
youth upwards to set before their Eyes the Weight and Danger of their Iniquity,
and that in a Holy Zeal, as for the Lord, and in a deep sense of his holy
Power, seeking in their young years to reach the Witness of God in them, and
above all things, to be a Good Example to them in all things, or else we break
down in them that which we seek to build up; for how can we build them up in
the Faith, except we so stand in the Faith as to obtain the Victory in our
selves? and how can we bring their Minds to the Light of Jesus, except we walk
in it? Neither ought any one to be bitter to their Children, nor to require
more of them then we know they are of Ability to perform; and when they fall
short of their Duty, not to Correct them in our own Wills, nor in a Wrathful
Angry Mind; for that Mind is it self for Correction; but on the contrary, to
help them with the Rod of a gentle Chastizement, in the Fear of God, to bow
their own stubborn Wills, and so comes the Witness in them to be reached, and
they grow sensible in themselves that the Rod has been a Help to them, and
come to feel a Love and Unity with them that have so helped them, while their
Minds are kept to the Truth.

And seeing we are as a City set upon a Hill, and as Forerunners and Leaders
to the next Generations, where and in what should the Pattern of our Godly
Lives more appear and shine forth, then to the Innocent Children of our own
Birth and Generation, which are committed to us as a particular Charge and
Ministry, from their time of greatest Innocence upwards, to whom we are bound
by the Band of Nature, and by the Ordinance of God, to take Care over, and to
bring up in his pure Fear, in all Wisdom, Discretion and Watchfulness that we
may be a good Savor in them and to them, whether it be unto Life, if they be
Obedient, or unto Condemnation, if they become Rebellious? But alas! (with a
great grief of spirit I write it) here is a great want and shortness in many
professing Truth (I speak not of all) for first, they receive not their
Children as from the Lord, in the Faith as his Gift, neither do they offer them
up again to him in their hearts, as being his, but seeing their own Likeness
brought forth, embrace it as their own, and nourish it up in the self-love, and
their lives being bound up in the children, every Appearance of sickness or
death is as a death to the Parents; and accordingly if the Child grow up till
its perverse and crooked Will begins to appear, then is the Father (and for the
most part, most of all the Mother) afraid to give it due Correction fearing
lest the Child should be grieved and vexed, and perhaps grow sick, yea, perhaps
dye, if it should be corrected to the breaking of its stout and stubborn Will;
and what is this but Unbelief and Self-love in such Parents? but when Parents
receive and possess their Children in the Faith, then the Light rules in the
Parents, and that gives daily wisdom to rule the Children in God's wisdom; but
when fleshly affection rules, what miserable disorder does it bring forth, even
amongst them that profess truth? and many times their children grow worse then
many in the world; and that which is most to be lamented it happens sometimes,
that the Parents have not quit themselves as they ought, nor fully cleared
themselves of their Blood, so that there lies a Guilt upon the Parents, and an
Offense and stumbling in the minds of the Children, when they come to years,
and to see how their Parents Care was not over them as it ought to have been:
Oh, that none among us might be found guilty in this matter, but that every
Friend would be diligent to keep a Good Conscience in the sight of God, that
our Children may have a blessed Remembrance of us when we come to be taken from
them, and they come to be in our state and condition, and that the Remembrance
of our dealing with them may be as a good Pattern to them, and so from
Generation to Generation, to the Honor and Glory of him who first called us,
and to the edifying of them in the Faith, and to our Joy and everlasting
Comfort, Amen.

The second thing that lies as a weight upon me, and have done for several
Years, is concerning the manner of Trading that is practiced by several
professing the pure Principle of Truth, both Merchants and Shopkeepers, and
other Tradesmen, who take too much Liberty in getting and borowing Money ^f
others to enlarge their Trading in the World, b^yond what Truth allows: When I
first felt the weight of this matter upon me, I presently examined my own
Affairs, and took such a course as to prevent all peril of any Body suffering
by me, however things might happen; and the same course did our Brethren take,
who lived in those parts, they feeling the weight of the matter upon them as
well as I; so that we came to sit every one as under our own Fig Tree, being
satisfied that if we came to suffer loss in our outward things, whether for our
Testimony, or by War, or by Sea, we should lose but our own: But many I find to
be otherwise minded, who out of a greedy, though uncertain Hope of Profit, gets
that which is other Men's into their Hands; and when they see things goes not
according to their Expectations, but that Losses and Crosses happens in their
Trading, are not so faithful and open hearted to let their Creditors know
thereof, but rather goes on, setting themselves at Ease, and takes a large
Liberty in their Housekeeping and Expenses, as if all that is under their
Hands were their own; and this lasts a while, until not only their own, but
other men's Estates are spent also, and all the while under a show of
Profession, although all uprightness, and fear of God, and regard to make a
righteous Account with men be lost; these are a stink among men, and a shame to
their Profession: And this Evil increases daily in some parts of this Nation,
where many young Ones, brought up among us, and has little to begin withal,
upon the Reputation of Truth dares to adventure upon, and get Credits, and set
themselves in a high posture of Trading, Housekeeping, and Expenses. And some
that are Ancient Professors of Truth, and should watch over them, and Counsel
and Bridle them with the Bridle of Truth and Righteousness, in the Power and
Wisdom of God, they are so encumbered with great Dealings, and great Debts, and
Credits, and Adventures, both of what is their own and other men's, that they
are not without Peril and Danger of falling short at one time or other, if loss
at Sea, or spoiling of Goods for their Testimony should happen to themselves;
and in the mean time that Godly care and jealousy is not taken by such over
the younger sort as it ought to be; but some runs on without fear of God, or
upright Communication of their State and Condition unto sound and faithful
weighty Friends (and especially to such, whom they have made to be concerned in
their Concerns) as they ought to do from time to time, that it might stand in
their choice, whether they would be longer concerned with them or not; which is
but a righteous and just thing, that every Creditor ought to keep, not only the
Propriety, but the Command of what is his own, to ask it and receive it, when
he sees cause, and not to be beguiled by great shows, as if the Debtor were in
a good Condition as to his outward Estate, when indeed its very bad: But such
do like this World, first seek the Kingdom of this World under a Profession of
Truth: But if the Kingdom of Heaven were first sought, as it ought to be, then
every one would sink down in the fear of God, to feel him leading them and
ordering their Trading and Merchandise in sujection to his Will, Jam. 4.13, 14,
15. Go to now, ye that say to day or to morrow, We will go into such a City,
and continue there a Year, and buy and sell, and get Gain; whereas ye know not
what shall be on the morrow: For what is your Life, it is even a Vapor, that
appears for a little time, and then vanishes away. For that ye ought to say,
If the the Lord will, we shall live and do this or that. And not to go on in
their own Wills, adventuring the Estates of others without their knowledge or
consent; when they themselves knows well enough, that if the Adventures fail,
their Security must fail also. Oh! how many Widows and Orphans, Old and Weak
are there oppressed and wronged by these things? Does not such think and
believe that the Want, Poverty, and Cry of these will bring down Vengeance from
the Righteous God? or think they not, that God will visit for these things for
his precious Truth and Names-sake, and for the Cry of the Opressed? yea,
assuredly he will plead their Cause, and will disburthen and clear his Truth
and People of them, and their unrighteous Deeds together.

Is it not our duty, both Old and Young, to set our Affairs in such a posture,
as that we may be out of danger that any Body should suffer by us, while we in
the mean time only aim at our own profit and advantage. Oh, let the Truth here
be judge, and then I know the Elder Friends will labor to quit themselves in
this matter, and so have power to put a stop and bridle to such young Ones as
takes this course, or else the peril and reproach of both will lie at their
Door in a great measure. Oh! that a holy Zeal may increase in many Hearts for
the removing of this great Evil, and let go the eager desire of great profit;
and every one to be content with his own, and serve the Lord and his Truth
therewith according to his Ability. (and if he please, he will increase it) And
take care of the younger sort, and become good Examples to them in this matter,
that the stink of offenses in this kind may be stopped, and the Truth of God
may prosper and flowrish more and more, Amen.

Colchester the 29th of the 9th Mon. 1677. Geertruyd Deril^ ^iesen.


