THE Damnable Principle OF THE JESUITS Touching the MURDERING OF KINGS: Fully
laid open in Two Eminent Instances de facto, by their own Confession.

As troops of Robbers wait for a Man, so the Company of Priests murder in the
way by Consent, Hosea 6.9. LONDON, Printed for Will. Bowtel, at the Sign of the
Star near Mercers Chapel in Cheapside. 1679.

THE JESUITS Ghostly Ways, etc.
BEfore the Advent of Jesuits (says France of their Catholic Church) we
never understood what it was to destroy Kings and Princes. That is a
Merchandise indeed too horrid for any Christian people to deal in, but yet it
seems not so bad, as to deter Jesuits from having to do with it. And as it
first of all came out of their shops by that wicked Vow of blind Obedience,
which they made to their Superiors, so they dearly love still to keep up that
traffic, because of the no small gain it brings in to them here, and they are
the absolute lovers of this world,) and besides that, like Paper and
Packthread, Heaven when they tramp out of this life, is thrown in to the
bargain, and given them as the last Recompense of all their Meritorious Deeds
and Services: so that now Kings and Princes seem to hold the tenure of their
lives at the will of two Landlords, God, and the Jesuits, and either of them
may turn them out of Possession whenever they think fit.

I have made choice of these two ensuing Stories, being, I think, as remarkable
as almost any in History, (and there are not a few) to show you how bloodily
they are bent both in their Natures and by their Function, against all that are
not of the same damnable Faith with them; not sparing even so much as sacred
Majesty, for whom they ought to have a continual Reverence and Dread, as being
the peculiar Seals of Gods more immediate impress of himself, especially too,
when he has so strictly charged us all not so much as to touch his Anointed,
that is, not to do them the least hurt or prejudice, no, not even in our
thoughts, and certainly then much less to come near them with blood-thirsty and
violent hands.

He who made the Humble Remonstrance and Request to the then French King, being
extremely desirous to make it appear that the Jesuits were most Calumniously
accused of having attempted against the life of the Queen of England, says
thus: As for the English, those who have writ the truth, have testified our
fidelity, and have not dared, to accuse us of attempting any thing against the
Queen in her estate: and those who would fain calumniate us, know not how to
fix their lies and forgeries upon any of our deportments, by any probable
Reason of truth. But however I will make it out that that Jesuit is a Second
Herodotus: and I confer no flight and trivial honor on him, when I compare him
to that great person, who it is thought, was the father, or author of the lying
and fabulous History.

William Parry, Doctor of the Civil Law, a man of smart parts, but as it is
said of him, of profuse wastfulness, riot, Speed's Chron. in Q. Eliz. an. Dom.
1584. f. 1157.94.
and prodigality, after he had eat and drank out his own estate, and consumed
the greatest part of his two widows fortunes; and wounded his creditor, Hugh
Hare, a Gentleman of the Temple, by committing burglary; for which fact he was
condemned to dye, but by the compassion and tenderness of the Queen, upon his
suing for it, got his reprieve of life: he was deliberating with himself what
course to take, and at last resolved to fly his Country, and to sail for
France. And being got to the City of Paris, and desirous to screw himself into
a familiarity with some English Gentlemen, fugitives likewise from their own
Country, for the sake of their Religion; they were somewhat shie at first how
they entertained him, not knowing but that he might come expressly to them to
spy out their actions; which made them send him to Lions, and afterward to
Venice; where, being an Englishman, he was put to the Inquisition: But he gave
so good an Account of his Catholic Religion, that his Judges thought it their
duty to send him back; being well beloved by all the Catholics, and by Father
Benedicto Palmio, a Jesuit of great reputation among them, he took up a
hellish resolution, to fall from his natural allegiance, and wholly to devote
himself to the interests of the Sea of Rome: and to confirm this absolutely to
them, he projected to kill the Queen, and by the same means to set fire to the
four corners of England: grounding this his enterprise here, both to deliver
his Country from the tyranny under which it groaned, and to advance to the
Crown the Queen of Scots, a Catholic Princess, who had lately married Prince
Dauphine, and who (laying her title from Margaret* the eldest daughter of King
Henry the seventh, linked in marriage with James the fourth King of that name;
she being the daughter of King James the fifth, his son,) was the nearest in
blood, and the lawful heir to the crown of England. An opinion that came from
his own instinct, without ever having before his departure communicated it to
the Queen of Scots, as since he confessed in the prison. But because this
enterprise was somewhat arduous and difficult, and his conscience was not so
stiffed, but that it gave him now and then bitter remorses, he went to confer
about it with Palmio, who according to the common maxim of his sect, not only
did not dissuade him from it, but greatly confirmed him in it, and told him
that in such a matter as that was, only length of time could be prejudicial.
Whereupon he packs away again to Lions, and discovering his design to the
Jesuits, he is mightily commended and honored by them. Some little time after
he returns to Paris, where some English Gentlemen fugitives being acquainted
with his intention, began to embrace, and hug him in their arms: among the rest
one Thomas Morgan, who assured him that within a short time after he should be
in England, and should have executed his business, he would give order for a
puissant army of Scots to come thither, to secure the Kingdom to the Queen of
Scots. Now although Parry seemed to be resolved on all things, yet he could not
sometimes keep out the stings that gnawed and tore his conscience. And
therefore he communicated it to some persons of the English Church, all of whom
dissuaded him from it: especially a learned Priest named Watell, who wisely
remonstrated to him, that all the rules of God, and of the world were repugnant
and contrary to that his deliberation. In so great an irresolution, he resolves
to inquire, and take advice of the Jesuits of Paris, among whom he addresses
himself to father Hannibal Coldretto, to whom he discoursed in confession, his
first intention, and the incertainty and disquiet into which Watel had reduced
him. But the Jesuit who never wanted persuasive reasons to urge on such a
wickedness, affirmed to him that Watel, and all others who went about to fill
his soul with such kind of frivolous scruples, were Heretics. And having set
all things to rights again, made him, according to their usual manner, receive
the communion with some other Lords. Parry being fully satisfied now in his
mind, takes his leave of them, and comes back for England, resolved to put his
Treason into effect. The better to accomplish which, he sought out all the ways
he could think of to get to kiss the Queens hand; saying he had something to
communicate to her Majesty of very great importance, and which he could deliver
to none but her self. This was about February, in the year 1583. And in short,
at the last he got himself introduced into her presence, he discoursed to her
in full length the particularities of his voyage, and how counterfeiting
himself to be a fugitive, he had made a discovery of all the practices and
conspiracies which the English Catholics had contrived against her Majesty:
and also that he had promised them to be the first that should undertake her
death: which had gained him great credit among them. But for all that, he would
sooner choose a thousand tortures than sully his soul with so damnable a
thought. He was a man of good Oratory, and could deliver himself excellently
well upon any thing; of a fine, graceful presence; and who was prepared
beforehand with all things which he should have to say to her. The Queen, who
did not want spies, knew very well that one part of his story was true enough;
which made her give the more credit to all the rest. She gave him the honor to
be near her person, and commanded him not to go out of her Court, but in the
mean time try to feel the pulse of her enemies by his insinuating letters. All
this he promised to do with the greatest faithfulness in the world; and upon
those promises, feeding that Princess with lies, he often had the privilege of
her ear. One day she being a hunting with some Ladies, he followed her close,
without ever suffering his eye to lose sight of her, and as she was got a
pretty way off from her company, having light off her Horse a little to refresh
herself at the foot of a Tree, in a Wood; Parry being near her, was twice in
the mind to have killed her, but he was hindered at that time through the
thoughts and prospect of the frequent privacy she permitted him to have with
her. Another time walking with her after supper, in the garden of her Palace
called White Hall, which is next to the Thames, where he had a Boat waiting on
him, to save himself after he had given the fatal blow, as he sought his
opportunity, the Queen gave him the goby, after the manner you shall now hear:
He thought to have done his business within a little time after, it beginning
then to grow duskish, and when he had got her down to the bottom of the Garden,
then to murder her; but she was from that time making up toward her Palace,
telling him that it was high time for her to be in her Chamber, being afraid of
blasts, and that she was the next morning early to be let blood by the advice
of her Physicians: and withal laughing said, that they would not take so much
blood away from her, as many in the world desired they should: at these words
she withdraws, leaving Parry in a great astonishment and confusion in having
let slip so fair an opportunity and convenience for him to perform his bloody
and damnable design.

Now as carried himself after this manner to the Queen, imagining he stood in
need of a confident to second him, he addressed himself to one Edmund Nevill,
his friend, a worthy Gentleman, who suffered in the afflictions of England, for
his Religion, whom he went often to visit; and after he had made him solemnly
swear upon the Holy Gospel, not to reveal a word of what he should tell him, he
discovered to him by little and little his intention; and the sum, if he would
be one with him, of the confederacy; and how that he had as much reason as most
people to resent the injuries which had been done him in particular: and that
it was the true and only means of re-establishing the Catholic Religion in
England, as also to establish the Queen of Scots there too. That in doing so
good a deed they should both have a pretty large share in the spoil. Nevill not
being able well to digest that new counsel; Parry asked him if he had never
read the book of Father Allen, which animated his resolutions, and every word
of which was a warrant for his prepared mind; and every line taught that Kings
might be deprived, excommunicated, and violently deposed in case of the
Religion of Rome, and that civil wars upon that sacred account were honorable.
I have, said he, a very easy access to the Queen, as also you may have as soon
as you will make your self known at Court. After we shall have given the fatal
blow, we will slip our selves into a boat which I have continually waiting on
me at the stairs, and from thence we will get into some Vessel that will then
be putting out to sea: This is a thing which we may both do upon my honor,
without the least disturbance. Nevill still entertaining him with fair
promises, but yet without absolutely giving him an, assurance that he would do
it, or a flat denial that he would not. In short, he thought it was not safe
for him any longer to delay the time without advertising the Queen of it, to
whom the eighth day of February 1584. he related all that had passed between
him and Parry, who was then at Supper with the Earl of Essex. The Queen;
extremely surprised commanded Walsingham, her chief Secretary of State, to
apprehend them both, but however to treat mildly with Parry, to see if
peradventure he could get out the truth from him: which he did, remonstrating
to him how that the Queen had received some hew Intelligence of a Conspiracy
against her. And because the Malcontents had some confidence in him, he
desired him to tell him if he had heard nothing of it. Two or three times being
interrogated upon that matter, he said he had never heard one syllable of it.
If he had confessed the Intrigue between him and Nevil, and for an excuse had
added that what he had done was purely through disguise, and by way of
dissimulation, and he had only made use of that trick to sound the Opinions of
those who concealed a discontent in their souls, Walsingham said since to
several persons that he would have been absolutely acquitted. But having so
peremptorily denied it, he then laid before him the deposition of Nevil, which
put him into great confusion and astonishment, which obliged the Secretary to
make him his guest for that night. Then next morning early Parry went to wait
upon him in his Chamber, and told him that he remembered he had held some
discourse with Nevil touching a point of Doctrine contained in the Answer made
to the Book Entitled, The Execution of Justice in England, in which it was
proved, that for the Advancement of the Catholic Religion, it was lawful to
take away the life of a Prince: but that as to him, he had never spoken a word
of any design against the Queen. But yet Parry and Nevil are sent to two
several Prisons, with interdiction to their Keepers not to let any whosoever to
come near either of them, but those the Queen shall appoint. The former for
having concealed six Months and above, this Conspiracy; the other for the
Treason, whereof he was charged and accused. Both of them are interrogated, and
afterward upon request made to them gave their Confessions in writing, Nevil
the tenth of February, Parry the eleventh, and the thirteenth. That of Nevil
containing the subornations and pursuits of Parry to the utmost of his power:
that of Parry, how he had at first projected this Treason in Venice, encouraged
to it by the exhortations of the Jesuit Palmio: afterward confirmed by the
Jesuits of Lions, and last of all positively concluded on by the instigations
of Hannibal Coldretto, and other Jesuits of Paris, whereupon that devotion he
had been first confessed, and afterward he received the Communion. And it is a
thing which methinks ought not to be buried in silence, that being interrogated
by his Judges, he confessed that when he first of all discoursed with the Queen
about the Conspiracies which the Fugitive Catholics contrived against her, to
be re-instated in their houses; she made him answer, that her Opinion had never
obliged her to treat any person ill for Religion, unless under that color and
pretense, they endeavored to attempt against her, and her Kingdom: and that
for the future none should be punished for holding the Supremacy of the Pope,
so long as they behaved themselves like good and faithful Subjects. Nevil being
re-examined and brought face to face to Parry, persisted firmly in his
deposition. But it was a thing absolutely superfluous and needless: for Parry
had sufficiently confessed it, also there were found in his house several
Missives, Instructions, and Memorials that condemned him. Likewise during his
imprisonment, he wrote Letters to the Queen, by which he most humbly entreated
her to be pleased to pardon the fault, but not the penalty he deserved. He had
for his Judges Sir Christopher Wray Knight, Lord Chief Justice of England,
Speeds Chron. f. 1158. n. 99. Parries Letter to the Lords of the Council.
and several other Lords appointed for that purpose, who made him to come from
the Prison to Westminster, and there being again interrogated in the presence
of all the people, he confessed the Treason. Also his precedent confessions
were read before him, his missives that were sent to him for that effect; and
other pieces which were any ways serviceable, for the clearer proving of the
crime: adding that there was not any Conspiracy since the first year of the
Queens Reign, as touching Religion, in which he was not concerned, excepting
that of the Agnus Dei; and that besides that he had set down his Opinion in
writing, concerning the Successor of the Crown, to induce the people to
Rebellion. This criminal Cause was in hearing from the eighth of February 1584.
unto the five and twentieth. On which day Parry was condemned to be hanged by
the Neck, and that the rope should be presently cut, and he should be Bowelled,
to have his Entrails flung into the fire, and burnt before his eyes, afterward
to have his Head cut off, and his Body set at four quarters of the Town: and
that from the Prison he should be drawn on a Sledge through the City of London
unto the place of Execution. That Sentence was then pronounced, but yet not
immediately Executed. The second of March, Parry was put into the hands of the
Executioner. He, being advertised of this by the Sheriffs of London, and
Middlesex, as if he were going to his Nuptials, and to meet at the place of his
Execution the Mistress of his dearest Vows, dressed himself up in a long morning
Gown of black Damask, and put about the neckband of his Shirt a great starched
Ruff, such as was then wore, and in fashion. And taking his leave of the other
Prisoners, with a smooth and pleasant countenance, he made a Present to the
Jailer of a Ring in which was set in Gold a rich Diamond, with these words,
That he was very sorry he was not in a capacity of gratifying him better.

After that he was drawn upon a Sledge, and having mounted the Ladder, it is
reported he prayed the Executioner, putting the Rope about his neck himself,
not to rumple and disorder his Ruff. Thus dyed that great Martyr of the
Jesuits, to be sure not promising to himself any thing less than a Celestial
Paradise, for so detestable an enterprise in it self, though set out to himself
as Sacred, and as Meritorious a piece of Service as almost was possible to be
performed. So worthy was it, that Raggazzoni the Pope's Nuntio promised him, so
Catholic and pious an undertaking should not be forgot at their Altars; and so
Meritorious, as that it did not only find his Holiness his appprobation, but it
stirred up the Pope to give him readily, and as it were by divine commission
the Absolution of all his sins, upon the first solicitation of Cardinal Como.
And because the Letter does come in here so pat to the purpose, methinks I
cannot in Justice deny you the seeing of it, as it is Translated from the
Original Italian, and inserted in Speeds Chron.

In loc. qu. sup.

Cardinal Como's Letter to Parry.
SIr, His Holiness has seen your Letter of the first, with the Assurance
included, and cannot but commend the good disposition and Resolution, which you
write to hold toward the Service of the Church, and public benefit: wherein
his Holiness does exhort you to persevere, with causing to be brought to effect
that which you promise. And to the end you may be so much the more enabled by
that good Spirit, which has moved you thereunto, his Holiness does grant you
Plenary Indulgence, and Remission of all your sins, according to your request.
Assuring you that besides the merit that you shall receive therefore in Heaven,
his Holiness will further make himself debtor to acknowledge and requite your
deservings by all the best means he may. And that so much the more, in that you
use the more modesty, in not pretending any thing. Put therefore into effect
your holy and honorable determinations, and attend your health. And, to
conclude, I offer my self unto you heartily and with all good and happy success,

From Rome the xxx. of January, 1584. At your disposing, N. Card. de Como.


BUt you shall now hear another worse Tragedy acted against the same Gracious
Queen, which was an Assassination purchased in the Year 1597. by the Jesuits.

THE TREASON OF Edw. Squire.
THe Miracle of the Jesuits doubtless was great in the Conversion of Parry,
but however it was not so great, nor of the same stuff with this I am now going
to show you. For Parry by his last Confession acknowledged that he had had a
hand in all the Conspiracies formed against the Queen, and for Religion, but in
one. But this Gentleman, whose horrid Treason I am now to speak of, had always
been of the Protestant Religion, and yet notwithstanding by an English Jesuit
was not only brought over to that of the Roman Catholic, but also was wrought
upon to kill the Queen. And I do not question but if that enterprise had took
effect as they had designed, it would have been Meritorious enough, to be added
to that Book of Miracles composed by Lewis Richeome, of the company of Jesus.

It was the last public attempt that was made of taking away the Queens life;
and it was by one Edward Squire a Scrivener living at Greenwich, who by
Depu^ation was employed as Purveyor in the Queen's Stable; but hi^ wit being
superior to that of his calling, and not being content with the allowance of
his Fortune, he put himself in the Year 1595. into the Fleet of Sir Francis
Drake, who was taking his last Voyage into the Indies. The Vessel, which this
Squire was in being small, happened to be driven away by the weather, and lost
sight of the Fleet, and not ^ong after was taken near Guadalupe by five Spanish
Frigates, and he with the rest was brought a Prisoner into Spain, where having
been narrowly examined by Richard Walpool, an English Fugitive, by Order a
Jesuit, of great repute and Authority, he was quickly set at liberty, by the
means and Intercession of that Jesuit, who began to watch and observe him, and
perceiving in him something more than ordinary of natural parts and abilities,
he looked on him as a person made for his purpose, and a very fit Instrument
for him to work on.

And because he always found him firm to his English Religion, he purchased for
him another prison, and caused him to be put into the Holy House, and so to be
brought to the Inquisition, and there being persons on purpose ordered to
manage him as they saw fit, they knew so well how to work him, that they
quickly got him to be a Catholic; though peradventure, it was not out of any
other devotion, than to get loose from his Chains, and himself free out of
prison. But by what way soever it was, to be sure it could be by none but such
as was to be recommended in the Jesuit. And now having gained this advantage
over him, they thought they had a good footing whereby to reach all their
further designs, and they would not suffer him to take any breath, but still
kept rubbing of him down, and by all sorts of artifice they labored to fix him
fast in their nets, falling upon the old burden of their usual song,
remonstrating to him the afflictions and tyrannies used to the English
Catholics, who remained still in their Country; and much more to those who
had forsaken it, and all their estates; only that they might enjoy the full
freedom of their consciences: As also, as what Speed says, upon how few
persons the English State did stand, In vit. Eliz. f. 1163. n. 120.
and how easily those props were to be removed, if any devoted would put to
their hand. Squire, who wanted no wit to perceive whereat he aimed; first gave
some slight signification, and after a more serious protestation, that he was
the man that would sacrifice himself, and his utmost service in the cause.

Moreover, that of all these miseries and calamities, the Earl of Essex, then
Earl Marshal, and afterward Viceroy of Ireland, was the greatest Author; that
it was absolutely necessary to send him packing out of his country, as also
out of the world by poison; and that he would undertake to put him into a way,
to do it without the least hazard to himself. Squire having pretty glibly
swallowed this first Pill down, which his good ghostly father had given him to
take, he begins to pass further, and to propose also to him the taking away of
the Queens life, which was as needful to be done; and which would be as
pleasing to the Church, as the ridding the Earl of his: and then he completed
his charm. It were, no doubt, said he, a work meritorious to kill the Earl of
Essex; but also there is unum necessarium, one thing indispensably necessary;
and told him openly that he had a greater service for him to do, which would be
no less acceptable to God than men, and which would not put him into any danger
of life, though he should be seen doing it, because it was not to be done
immediately upon her person, nor in her presence, etc. if he would but
carefully follow his directions: but however, put it to the worst, though his
enter-prize should not succeed accordingly, but that he should be sound out in
it, and taken; yet he assured him, he would only exchange his present miserable
estate of life, into that of a glorious Saint and Martyr in Paradise, and he
hoped he would not think that any hard bargain, to lose earth to be possessed
of Heaven and Bliss. And he pursued him so closely, that at last he overcame
him, and made him consent to his will: but seeing that he often times wavered and
startled, he frequently confessed him for his further strengthening and
confirmation: remonstrating to him that he ought not any more to reflect within
himself, and to deliberate upon the matter; that the bargain was made with his
conscience and him, and now whether it was a work good or evil, he was not to
dispute; but without any more to do, to bethink himself of his vow: which if he
should in the least be failing in, he would be guilty of a crime
irreconcilable to God, and he would for certain throw himself into the lowest
pit of Hell and damnation: then he alleged to him, and bid him seriously to
consider it, the example of Jephtha, who thought he was rather obliged, in duty
to kill his Daughter, than to break the solemn vow which he had made. This poor
wretch thus manacled, as I may say, and settered with the Jesuits Devilish
persuasions, passes over to him a most firm and inviolable resolution: whom
having once more made to come to a confession, as to the last thing which was
to conclude this Holy conspiracy, he gave him his benediction, raising him up,
and putting his left hand round about his neck, and with the other doing on his
face the sign of the cross, he mumbled over a few words in Latin, and then
spoke thus to him distinctly in English. My son, God bless thee, and establish
and strengthen thee: be of good courage, I will engage my Soul for thine, and
thou shall have a share in my prayers, dead, or alive. After he had again
embraced him about the neck, Squire took his leave of Wallpoole, and within a
short time after set sail for England.

Now the instruction which the Jesuit had given him, was of a poison put into
a double bladder, which also then he presented him with: charging him not to
touch it but with thick double Gloves upon his hands, that so he may not poison
and destroy himself: for it is reported that the vigor of it was such, as
neither continuance of time, nor subtilty of air was able to check, or
un-virtuate the strength. And when the Queen was resolved to ride abroad, he
should prick the bladders full of holes, and so then rub the poison as he
pressed it out, upon the pommel of the Queen's Saddle: assuring himself that
the Queen must of necessity lay her hand on that, and then in all probability
at one time or another bringing up her hand to her mouth, or to some part of
her face, the poison would get such access to her, as most certainly to be her
death: that he must also do the like to the Earl of Essex, who was making ready
to go to Cadiz, and had raised several Troops, when Squire arrived at England;
who presented himself to a Privy Counselor, and being pretty favorably
received at his arrival, he was consulting how to put in execution his hellish
design against the Queen, before the Earls embarking, into whose retinue he was
resolved to put himself, if possibly he could: thinking that if the poison
would not do its work under some length of time, and it should have its
operation during his absence, he might not be any ways suspected. Upon this
reflection he watches all opportunities to effect his design; and one day
hearing the Queen had a mind to ride abroad, he ran presently to the stable
yard, where he found the Horse already Saddled, that she was to ride on; but he
pretending to mend something he saw amiss about the Horse, laid his hand upon
the pummel of her Saddle, and bruising the Poison out of the Bladders, he rubs
the pommel with it: exactly following the direction which had been given him by
his Father Confessor; and as he was busy about his work, he says aloud, and
cheerfully, God save the Queen, reiterating those words several times over. But
it pleased the Almighty, who had already delivered her from manifold dangers,
to continue still his wonted and wonderful protection to her, keeping her in
safety under the shadow of his wings; for although the season was then very
hot, being in the month of July, and so consequently the veins more open and
ready to receive any malignant influences, yet was she unhurt; and as God shut
up the mouths of the Lions that they should not touch Daniel the servant of the
most high, so had he ordered that poison, otherwise so strong and powerful, not
to have the least virtue which was proper to it. She remained well as ever, and
it had no more power over her, than Nebuchadnezzars fiery furnace had over the
bodies of those three faithful and famous persons, who had not so much as a
hair of their head singed, neither were their coats changed, nor indeed had so
much as the smell of the fire passed on them, for God had sent his Angel to
preserve them. But for all this, that wicked wretch did not leave off hoping
but that it would have its designed effect in time. Therefore without any
mistrust, Squire taking the remainder of the poison, within six days after
imbarques; and as the E^rl was at Sea, betwixt Faiel and Saint Michaels, a
little before dinner time, he rubs the Pommels of a wooden Chair, wherein this
Earl did usually sit at meals, with the same confection. This being done, it
happened that at Supper, the Earl finding himself a little indisposed, Squire
was cock sure in his thoughts that he had effectually done his work. But he was
also deceived herein, for it pleased God to preserve him safe, in making the
poison of no force at all. In the mean time some months slipped away, and
Wallpool could hear no news of the death of the Queen: wherefore then beginning
to suspect that Squire had only abused him, he was taking thought how to be
revenged on him, and he sent expressly an Englishman over, who pretending that
he had stole away from the Spanish Inquisition, by parcels and retail told them
all the conspiracy, and that he had made his escape on purpose to give the
Queen information of it. Although at the first they looked upon this as a trick
invented by some of Squire's enemies, yet it being a business of so high an
importance, they judged it a thing not to be despised. Squire was sent for, and
examined, to know the truth of the matter: he at first too denies all; but
close circumstances being put to him, and his conscience withal working; he
confesses the whole business, and how far he had gone in it, which was
impossible ever to have been found out but by himself, he having none privy to
his Treason; and at the Bar he had his sentence of death passed upon him, and
was accordingly executed in the year 1598. a revenge truly worthy a Jesuit to
take, and yet very miraculous too, that our gracious Queen should not have any
intelligence of that Treason, but by him who was the first designer of it. And
if Richeome would take my counsel, he should put in this miracle too, to help
fill up his Book.

FINIS.

