A DISCOURSE OF Infant Baptism, By way of DIALOGUE, BETWEEN Paedobaptista, A
Minister, for Infant Baptism.

Antipaedobaptista, his Friend, against it.

Aporeticus, An Ingenuous Doubter.

LONDON, Printed for T. Parkhurst, at the Bible and Three Crowns in Cheapside.
School.

A DIALOGUE ABOUT Infant Baptism.
The Speakers.
Paedobaptista, a Minister, for Infant Baptism.

Antipaedobaptista, his Friend, against it.

Aporeticus, an Ingenuous Doubter.

Paedobap. YOu are sensible, Antipoedobaptista, that Skepticism and Impiety
have not only spoiled the Beauty, but are ready to Prey upon the Vitals of
Religion.


Antipae. The Complaint is General; but I am afraid the case of Religion is
Desperate, and her wound Incurable.


Paedo. It will certainly prove so, if Men be resolved to hazard the Common
Cause of Religion for the sake of Private Opinion and Humor.


Antipaedo. Pray who are they that do it?


Paed. All those, who either begin, or hold up the Heats, and Contentions, that
first unsettled, and then turned Men from Practical Godliness: For ever since
different Apprehensions diverted Men's Zeal into the Channel of Controversy; It
has, like a Mighty Torrent, born down before it all Religious Stedfastness and
true Devotion: for when one Truth is undermined, it makes way for the shaking,
if not overwhelming all other.


Antipae. But what measures are now to be taken? For our Disputes are now as
keen, and many, as ever they were.


Paedo. The only Remedy now left, is heartily, and conscientiously to consider
of the Matters in Debate; and wherein we cannot agree, charitably to bear with
each other.


Antipaed. Difference in Opinion, I know, will strangely alienate Men's Minds;
But I bless God it never had that power over me, as to drive me from Communion
with those that dissent from me, if in other things Orthodox and Sober: But yet
I will not dissemble my Temptations to the contrary, I have sometimes been
ready to have harsh Thoughts of all Christians that were not just mine own
Length; but when I reflected upon mine own Infirmities and Ignorance, I
perceived, I needed the compassion and forbearance of my Neighbor, as much as
he did mine; Then I understood the Use of the great Gospel Command of Love, and
ever since I am grieved to see Men revive, lengthen, or aggravate.
Controversies that concern, or threaten not the Ruin of Fundamental Principles.


Paed. You speak well, and like a Christian; tho some of your peevish Brethren
will think you too moderate, and censure you as no upright Man, for halting
betwixt two Opinions. However, to requite your Kindness, I shall acquaint you
with a Ruled Case amongst our Divines, that is, That a mere Antipaedobaptist is
to be received into Church Communion, if he will Promise to give no Disturbance
by his Opinion; and our practice is conformable. Don't you think then, we have
great Reason deeply to resent that unseasonable opposition, the Men of your way
have lately made, by Letters, Printing, and Preaching, without the least
provocation from us? After so fair a Profession of Catholic Love as you have
already made, give me leave for our Vindication, calmly and plainly to acquaint
you with the Grounds of Infant Baptism. I hope you will be more Impartial than
those that have their Credit, or Interest engaged in the Controversy.


Antipaed. I willingly assent to your Proposal.


Aporet. And I shall think my self happy to hear the Point amicably discust;
for since by Reading and Company, I began to entertain Objections about Infants
Baptism, I reap no manner of advantage by that Ordinance: This Friendly
Conference (by God's Assistance) may tend to restore me to my former
stedfastness.


Antipaed. That our way may be the more clear, I must put you in mind, that we
are very suspicious of Consequences. We think there must be plain words for
every Institution, and Consequences ought to be Genuine.


Paedo. It is evidently to me the suspicion of a weak Cause, when the Defenders
of it are forced, for their Security, to declare against Consequences; This is
but a Blind they raise up, to hinder the Light, which they are afraid should
discover them. Read the New Testament, and you will find, Christ and his
Apostles did frequently prove their Doctrines by Consequences. How did our
Blessed Savior Prove the Resurrection against the Sadduces? Was it not by
Consequences? and that from a Passage, which at first sight, one would scarce
have thought would genuinely afforded such a Consequence; And one would think
there was as much in [I will be a God to thee and to thy seed after thee] to
prove the Right of Believers Children in the Covenant, as in the one half of
it, [I am thy God:] to prove the Resurrection of Believers themselves. How does
the Apostle Paul prove that the Gospel was to be Preached to the Gentiles, but
by Consequence? Act. 13.46.47. Then Paul and Barnabas waxed bold, and said, It
was necessary that the Word of God should first have been spoken unto you [ye
Jews] but seeing you put it from you, and judge your selves unworthy of
Everlasting Life, lo we turn to the Gentiles. Taking for their Warrant, Isa
49.6. I will set thee as a Light to the Gentiles. Concluding from thence, he
must be Preached to them; and yet this was a great part of the Mystery of
Godliness. 1 Timothy 3.16. Preached unto the Gentiles. But if these Instances do
not satisfy; take any one or two Chapters of the Epistle to the Romans: For
instance, Read the Third and Fourth Chapters. How does he prove that we are not
Justified by the Works of the Law? He asserts that Jews and Gentiles are
Sinners; And that we must be Justified in a way Exclusive of Boasting; And that
Abraham was Justified by Faith in Uncircumcision; That the Blessed Justified
Man is a Pardoned Man; and from hence he infers by Consequence, That we cannot
be Justified by the Law.


Antipaed. But we expect plain words for a Positive Institution.


Paed. What think you of the Observation of the Lord's Day? Is it by Divine
Institution? And what plain words can you find commanding us to observe it? If
you expect no less than a plain Command to Authorize the Baptizing of Infants,
you must say the same of the Lord's Day; and deny the one as well as the other.
Do not you also reckon Women's Communicating a Positive Institution?


Antipaed. Yes, we do so: But I admire you should urge that again, after it has
been so often Answered. You have been told of plain Scripture Example, Acts
1.14 compared with Chap. 2.42, 44.


Paed. Not so plain as you imagine it; For tho in Act. 1.14. it is expressly
said, that Mary and the other Women were with the Disciples in Prayers and
Supplications, Yet it is not expressly said, Act. 2.42. that they were with them
Breaking Bread; And to cut off all further Cavil; The words used are all
Masculine (not so discernable in our English Translation, as in the Greek
Original,) and in Act. 4.4. The number of the Men: and the Word (...), 1 Cor.
11.28. wherein you would comprehend Woman, (and so Infer a positive Command) is
determined by a Masculine Article. I am not for Excluding Women more than you,
but I urge this, to show you the Absurdity there is in denying Consequences;
and how Untenable that Doctrine is, as well as many more, without them.


Aporet. If you will not, Antipaedobaptista, exclude your Wife from the
Communion Table, you must so far as I am able to judge, admit of good
Consequences; and if so, it is like you may hear of good Reason to Include your
Children in the Covenant; and that doubtless would be a Comfortable Doctrine.


Antipae. It would so, but I despair to see it proved; I am assured to the
contary. You have neither Precept, nor President in the New Testament for
Baptising Infants; and the Consequences you make from Christ's blessing little
Children, and the Apostles baptising whole Families, are at best but
probabilities, and conjectures too weak to support your cause: We read of none
baptized but Believers, and Penitents; and we think such an Institution as
Baptism should have been delivered in plain Words.


Paed. You expressed an high Confidence in your arguing, but I am not surprised
at it; I have known those that could not say so much for your cause as I
suppose you can, even poor silly Women, boasting of their ability to confute
any adversary with this single Weapon, Where is Precept, or President? But have
a little Patience, and you shall see, I will so prove the thing in Question,
that I will turn the Argument of Precept and President against you. You have in
a few Words expressed your whole Strength, excepting some small matters you
have to say about the Practice of the Primitive times, which I shall take
notice of afterward; At present, I will speak to your Precept, and President.
But whereas you insist upon it again, that there should be plain Scripture
proof for an Institution, I must put you in mind here, that there are two
things in this Question. 1st. The Institution of the Ordinance of Baptism.
2dly. A Declaration of God's mind concerning the Subjects of Baptism. That God
has in plain Words instituted the Ordinance of Water Baptism, you will not
deny, though some others do. We are thus far agreed then, as to the Institution.
Whether the Subjects of Baptism be not as clearly and plainly declared, and
that Infants be such due Subjects of that Ordinance, is now to be spoken too;
and I shall urge nothing, which you shall have Reason to reject as ungenuine,
or dark Consequence.


Antipaed. I will patiently attend your Reasonings.


Paed. First then I will propound this plain Question to you: Do you think that
God who has been so merciful to Mankind as to provide a Savior for them, has
only provided for the Salvation of the Adult, and made no provision for the
Salvation of Infants that shall dye in Infancy?


Antipaed. I dare not think but that God has made provision for dying Infants;
It seems to me to be a blasphemous Reflection upon the God of Mercy; to suppose
him to damn all dying Infants, were to suppose him unmerciful and cruel: But I
think we need not judge so hardly of God or Them; Doubtless God has provided
for them in his Decree of Election, and all the Elect shall be brought to
Salvation.


Paed. It Is true the Elect shall obtain, and be saved; But now let me ask you
a second Question, Does God ever save any of the Elect but in the way and
Method of the Covenant of Grace?


Antipaed. I think it must be so; for all men are either under the Covenant of
Works or the Covenant of Grace, they are either saved by Grace, or left under
the Curse of the Law.


Paed. It Is very true; For they that are out of Gods Covenant, are Aliens to
the Commonwealth of Israel, and Strangers from the Covenants of Promise afar
off, without Christ and Hope: But this occasions another Question. How are
Infants brought into Covenant, whether with their Parents, upon their Parents
Faith, or upon some Qualification of their own?


Antipaed. I percieve what you aim at in this Question: If I say, Infants are
brought into Covenant by some Qualifications of their own; then you will say,
it must be a saving Qualification, Faith or Repentance; and this, Children,
that have not the exercise of their Reason, cannot have: Or if they had such
Qualifications before, to give them a Covenant Interest, they may have the same
Qualifications now; If I say it is upon their Parents Faith, you will reply,
there is now the same way of coming into the Covenant for them still: I will
therefore suspend my Answer, till I hear what you assert in this matter.


Paed. I shall do it plainly; God's way of Covenanting with men, has always
been to take the Children into Covenant with their Parents upon their Parents
Faith: But to be more particular, as soon as ever God added Seals to his
Covenant, he gave Command that Children should come under the Initiatiating
Seal of it, which was Circumcision, a Seal of the Righteousness of Faith. And
God's own promise gives the Reason of it, I will be a God to thee, and to thy
Seed after thee; which Abraham understood to be his Infant Seed, and
Circumcised them accordingly.


Antipaed. This will not advantage you; For we are not under the same Covenant;
For that Covenant was a Covenant of Works, or at least a mixed Covenant.


Paed. I am sorry you should take things upon Trust, especially, when the
Tendency of them may be so dangerous, as surely this must be; for if this be
true, it will bereave us of the comfortable Promises of the Old Testament, and
shake the foundation of the New: I told you the Apostle proved Justification
(Articulus stantis and cadentis Ecclesiae) from Consequences out of the Old
Testament, but take whether of these you will; That this Covenant is either a
Covenant of Works, or a mixed Covenant, and I shall show you the Inconvenience
that attends both. If this were wholly a Covenant of Works, then damnation must
be the portion of all that were under it; For none can perform the condition of
it in a fallen state: Pardon for the breach of it was not promised, and therefore
could not be expected: Does not this Sound very harsh? If a mixed Covenant,
because Temporal Blessings were comprehended in it, if that, ( I say) be your
Reason, pray clear me, Mat. 6.33. from that Imputation, viz. But seek ye first
the Kingdom of God and his Righteousness, and all these things shall be added
unto you: Besides this will follow; As you put them under a mixed Covenant, so
you must condemn them to a midling condition; and they all their days must hang
betwixt Hope and Fear; and never come to any sort of assurance, which would not
Immediately be dashed with the bitter Mixture of the Law: And living thus and
dying they must have an apartment of their own. This Doctrine will lay the floor
of a Limbus Patrum: For I cannot Imagine whither those that have neither Law
nor Gospel must go, but to a place where neither a broken Law, nor a saving
Gospel, will carry them. But this will not touch these, that can decline all
absurdily by denying of Consequences.


Antipaed. It Is an easy thing to charge a Doctrine with Inconsistency, but can
you prove that Covenant of Grace pure and unmixed?


Paed. That I can, For 1. The foundation of it was laid in Grace, viz. God's
Love to Abraham. 2. It was made in Christ, Gal. 3. v. 16. Now to Abraham and
his Seed were the promises made, he says not, and to Seeds, as of many, but as
of one, and to thy Seed, which is Christ. v. 17. And this I say, that the
Covenant that was confirmed before of God in Christ, the Law which was four
hundred and thirty years after, cannot disanull, that it should make the
promise of none Effect. v. 18. For if the Inheritance be of the Law, it is no
more of promise: but God gave it to Abraham by promise. v. 29. And if ye be
Christ's then are ye Abraham's seed, and heirs according to the Promise. 3. It
is repeated as such in the New Testament Heb. 8.10, For this is the Covenant
that I will make with the house of Israel, after those days says the Lord, I
will put my Laws into their mind, and write them in their hearts, and I will be
to them a God, and they shall be to me a people. 4. It was made upon Gospel
Terms, Romans 4. v. 3. For what says the Scripture, Abraham believed God and it
was counted to him for Righteousness. v. 4. Now to him that works is the
Reward reckoned not of Grace, but of debt. v. 5. But to him that works not,
but believes on him that justifyeth the ungodly, his Faith is reckoned for
Righteousness.


Antipaed. The Apostle tells us, that Circumcision binds to the observation of
the whole Law, that is, the Law given on Sinai, The Decalogue; for I will not
go about to Question the Gospel signification of much of the Ceremonial Law
especially in the Sacrifices.


Paed. The Law, says the Apostle, which was 430 years after cannot disanul the
Covenant that was before confirmed of God by Christ, Gal. 3.17. Whatever then
was the design of God in giving the Law, it was not any way to contradict or
destroy the Gospel; For the Law is not against the Promise, v. 21. Is the Law
then against the Promises of God? God forbid. It must then be added [or put] to
the Gospel in Subserviency to it, and for the discovery of Sin; For it (by
showing our weakness and Insufficiency) puts us upon looking out for some other
way of Salvation, and thus it is as a Schoolmaster to teach us, and lead us to
Christ. V. 19. Wherefore then served the Law? It was added because of
Transgressions, till the seed should come to whom the promise was made, and it
was ordained by Angels in the hand of a Mediator. v. 24. Wherefore the Law was
our Schoolmaster to bring us unto Christ, that we might be justified by Faith.


Antipaed. But there are many things spoke of that Law, that seem to make it a
Law of Works, and oppose it to the Gospel.


Poed. To the better understanding of this, you must distinguish betwixt God's
design in giving the Law, (which was, as I told you, to convince and humble
proud Man, and show him the necessity of a Savior) and the abuse of the Law,
through the mistake of the Carnal and Formal Jews, who expected Justification
from the Works of the Law, which they persuaded themselves they were able to
fulfill. You are to understand Paul in this latter sense, when he pronounces so
severely against that Law. Now that you may not think, that this distinction is
made to serve a Turn, or for an Evasion; The same Apostle is our Voucher, 1 Timothy 1.8. But we know that the Law is good if a Man use it lawfully. Where he
distinguishes betwixt the Lawful use, and the Erroneous abuse of the Law.


Antipaed. Well, If I yield it to be a Covenant of Grace, How will you improve
it for Infant Baptism?


Paed. If you yield it, you give up the Cause; for if it be one, and the same
Covenant, as there can be no more Covenants of Grace but one; then it must be,
as to the substance of it, the same. Tho there be a difference, as to degrees
of Grace, and Knowledge, and some particular Ordinances, yet is there no
alteration, as to the main Blessings and Privileges. This appears in the
Parable of the Vineyard: Where we see the Gentiles (signified by those in the
Highways) upon the Jews rejection of Christ, were Invited to the same Marriage
Supper; the same Church, State, and Kingdom of Heaven, which before had been
offered to them, (the Jews.) The Vineyard that was taken from the Husbandmen,
the Jews, was given to others that had not been Employed in it, the Gentiles:
For tho there be another Succession of men, yet it is into the very same
Vineyard. The Chief Priests understood it in this sense, and therefore wished it
might not fall out so, Luke 20.16. He shall come and destroy these Husbandmen,
and shall give the Vineyard to others; and when they heard it, they said, God
forbid. This sameness of the Covenant is further Illustrated by the Apostle,
under the Similitude of breaking Branches off an Olive Tree, and Engraffing
others in their Room. The Tree, The Fatness and Nourishment is the same, that
is, the Covenant and its Privileges, tho New Branches be Engraffed in the
place of the Old Ones, Romans 11. v. 15. For if the casting away of them be the
reconciling of the World, what shall receiving of them be, but Life from the
dead? v. 16. For if the First-fruit be holy, the Lump is also holy; and if the
Root be holy, so are the Branches: v. 17. And if some of the Branches be broken
off, and thou being a Wild Olive Tree, were Graften in amongst them, and with
them partakest of the Root and Fatness of the Olive Tree, etc. And that which
will help you to understand the whole Chapter, is, That such as the Breaking
off is, such must the Engraffing be. I will but mention one Text more to
confirm this, and that is, Ephesians. 2.14. For he is our Peace, who has made both
one, and has broken down the Middle-Wall of Partition between us: Where the
Jewish Church is compared to a separate Tenement, but by the calling of the
Gentiles the wall that parted them, is broken down, and they are made one
household, fellow-citizens, and Enjoy the same Privileges. What can be more
Evident?


Antipaed. But does not the Baptist, that was to prepare the way of the Lord,
tell the Jews, they ought not to plead the Covenant of Abraham, but if they
would be received to Baptism, they must repent? Mat. 3.8, 9. Bring forth
therefore fruits meet for Repentance. And think not to say within your selves,
we have Abraham to our Father, etc.


Paed. We would give the same Answer to the like persons. Who are they he
speaks to? Were they not a company of corrupt men? A generation of Vipers, that
boasted of being Abraham's children and yet did the Works of their Father the
Devil. The Pharisee was a Self Iusticiary; And the Sadduce denied the
Resurrection of the Dead? Should such plead their Parental Right? we would bid
them Repent: But what is this to the outing children of their Right? These were
adult, and had by their wickedness forfeited their right. Did not the Prophets
while their Church state stood, use the same Methods with them?


Antipaed. But you have not yet answered my Objection about the Obligation
Circumcision laid upon men to the keeping the whole Law; you only proved that
that Law was not a Covenant of Works.


Paed. You do well to put me in mind of it; The Apostle there speaks of the
erroneous opinion of the Jews, who sought for a Righteousness by the Works of
the Law, making the Law to themselves a Covenant of Works: Circumcision being
an Initiating Seal, was to them (according to their abuse of the Law) an
obligation to keep the whole; But in it self Circumcision did oblige only to
such Obedience, as God requires and accepts in his Covenant of Grace, according
to that dispensation of it that was then on foot; and therefore when a more
large, and manly state of the Church was to succeed, he took away that of
Circumcision, and in its room commanded Baptism. Col. 2. v. 10. And ye are
complete in him, which is the head of all Principality and Power. v. 11. In
whom also ye are circumcised with the Circumcision made without hands, in
putting off the Body of the sins of the flesh by the Circumcision of Christ. v.
12. Buried with him in Baptism, etc. Whereby we are complete in Christ without
Circumcision; for it contains all that was signified by Circumcision, the
Circumcision of the heart, and the putting off the Body of Sin: As their
Signification was the same, so one succeeded, but not typifyed the other.


Antipaed. Circumcision was only in Abraham's family, and other Believers in
the time of the old Testament had it not Enjoined to them; which must for that
Reason, seal somewhat peculiar to Abraham's Family, viz. The Promise of the
Land of Canaan, and the descent of the Messiah from that Family.


Paed. If it designed either of the things you mention; Then all that received
it, must partake of the Promise; but so could not Abraham's Servants, who were
neither of Abraham's Lineage, nor had a promise of the Canaanitish Inheritance.
Otherwise as Proselytes, Converts, or Believers, they were capable of the
spiritual Significancy: All therefore that entered into Abraham's family, which
then was most properly, and eminently the Church of God, (for other good men
that were scattered here and there and were not gathered into one body, tho
they belonged to the Covenant yet we are left in the dark as to what God
required of them, and therefore are the less able to judge concerning them) and
all that were admitted into that House, were to be Circumcised; nor was
Circumcision given them as a Mark of Distinction as you distinguish Beasts by
sliting and cutting; That is a gross conceit! but they were to be acquainted
with the meaning of that sign, and the contents of the Covenant. What a
Religious person was Eliezer Abraham's Servant? What a noble Testimony does God
give to Abraham as to his care in instructing his family after God, that is, To
relinquish Idolatry and false-Worship, and make a Profession of the true God.


Antipaed. But Circumcision took in only the Males, Baptism both Males and
Females.


Paed. You think you have a mighty Plea in this; but it is just nothing. 1. Do
you not consider, that in the various Editions of the Covenant of Grace, God
has made gradual Alterations without any change of the Substance: Tho Infants
were still included in the Covenant from Adam to Abraham, as parts of their
Parents, yet when God brought in the Male Children under the Seal of the
Covenant, this was an additional Mercy, but no change of the Covenant: Now were
the Female children hereby excluded from the Covenant it self. Pray give me the
true meaning of Exodus 12.48. -- For no Uncircumcised Person shall eat thereof:
By this Rule no Woman shall eat of the Passover.


Antipaed. Surely Women were not debarred.


Paed. But they were some way or other Circumcised then; For the Rule is
Positive, and Universal; What other Answer can you give than this? That the
Females were partakers of the Circumcision of the Males? 2. Do you not consider
that God seeing it fit to alter his Covenant for the better, when he saw fit to
alter the Seal of Circumcision (which was a painful Ordinance and not
applicable to Females) and to Substitute another for the same general end; It
is but suitable to his usual Method, to bring in Females expressly, which were
Implicitly under the Seal before; especially when Baptism is so easily
applicable both to Males and to Females.


Antipaed. But it is a doubt to me whether God intended Baptism to be a Seal of
the Covenant of Grace.


Paed. Your Doubting implies, you would willingly deny it if you durst. Will
you doubt also, Whether the Lord's Supper be a Seal of the Covenant of Grace
succeeding the Passover? pray tell me first, Was not Circumcision expressly
called a sign or a Seal of the Righteousness of Faith? And was it not so,
because it was a Token of the Covenant both on Man's part and God's? The
contempt of which God reckoned a Contempt, and rejection of his Covenant, Genesis
17.14. And the Uncircumcised Manchild whose flesh of his foreskin is not
circumcised, that Soul shall be cut off from his people, he has broken my
Covenant.


Antipaed. Be it so. What then?


Paed. If Baptism be appointed to the same Ends and uses in the New Testament,
it is as much the Seal of the Covenant as Circumcision was before; But it is
evident Baptism has the same Office in the Institution; For as Prosolytes and
Abraham's seed Entered into the Covenant of the Old Testament by Circumcision,
so has Christ appointed, that Consenters should be initiated into the new by
Baptism, as soon as teaching made them capable of giving Consent, Mat. 28.19.
Go ye therefore and teach all Nations Baptizing them, etc. and men are said to
accept of or reject the New Testament proffer, according to their Submission
to, or Refusal of Baptism.


Antipaed. This indeed seems to be so, Else Baptism would not have been so
Expressly commanded, and so generally propounded to all.


Paed. The Apostle expressly says so, 1 Cor. 12.13. For by one Spirit are we
all Baptized into one body, whether we be Jews or Gentiles, etc. But for your
further Satisfaction; Tell me 2dly. Does not the very make and frame of Baptism
show it to be a sign and Seal as well as Circumcision? Why else is Water used
but as a Token? What is the Application of it, but as a Sealing on God's part,
and ours? And what less does the Apostle say, Romans 6.3, 4. Know ye not that so
many of us as were Baptized into Jesus Christ were Baptized into his Death.
Therefore we are buried with him by Baptism into Death, that like as Christ was
raised up from the death by the Glory of the Father, even so we also should
walk in Newness of Life: And pray to what other end do you use it? Is it not a
sign of your solemn covenanting with God? 3. Tell me, Why are the Sacraments of
the Old Testament and the New so often compared together in the New Testament:
but to let us know they are for the same Uses, and that we lose Nothing by the
change of these Ordinances; they being so much the same in design, and End,
that the Apostle mutually gives the name of the one to the other? Thus
Effectual Spiritual Baptism is called spiritual Circumcision: Col. 2. v. 11. In
whom also ye are circumcised with the Circumcision made without hands, etc. v.
12. Buried with him in Baptism, etc. And the very Outward signs have
interchangeably one another names, 1 Cor. 5.7. -- For even Christ our Passover
is sacrificed for us. So Chap. 2. And were all baptized unto Moses in the cloud
and in the Sea.


Antipaed. But if the end of Circumcision and Baptism were the same; It would
seem strange that God should not keep the Old Seal of the Covenant still.


Paed. Suppose no other Reason could be given but God's Pleasure; What is this
to us? What if there were no other Reason but this, that Circumcision was
Bloody and Painful? This might sufficiently Answer your Objection: But other
Reasons might be suppus'd. When the Circumcised Jews Rejected Christ,
Circumcision could not be a Distinguishing Badge betwixt Christians, Jews and
Heathens. What if God had a mind to remove the Fond and Excessive Opinion of
the Jews, and the Confidence they had in Circumcision, by this Change? Those of
them that embraced Christianity were for introducing Circumcision, against whom
the Apostle Paul Disputes. What if God did it to notify his Mind about the
Admission of Females by Baptism? Now when the Partition Wall 'twixt Jews and
Gentiles was to be taken down, it could not have been by Circum^ision, but by
an Ordinance proper to both Sexes.


Antipaed. Still it sticks with me, That Infants having no Faith, cannot be in
the C^venant of Grace, or under the Seal of it. And if we might suppose them to
have Faith, or to be Regenerated by Baptism, then it follows, That Infants are
either in Covenant without Faith, or those that had true Faith and were
Regenerated may wholly fall from Grace: For, daily Experience tells us, that
many Baptized in Infancy become Ungodly.


Paedo. You have started a difficult case, and such as all Men do not Answer
alike. It is a great Question what is the State of Infants, as to Grace. Some
say, roundly, that Baptism confers Regeneration: Others will not say so much,
but that only Baptism confers Relative Grace, as Pardon, Adoption, etc. and
that the Parents Real Faith is enough to Entitle the Children to this, and that
Infants have a sufficiency of Grace suitable to their Infant-state; as, That
they are under the Covenant of Grace, Have Original Sin pardoned; And, in case
they dye in Infancy, the Spirit of God can, and will furnish them with such a
measure of the Sanctification of Nature, as will fit them for Heaven; Not that
they assert, That this Sanctification is an Effect of Baptism to all the
Infants of Believers, but only to such as dye in Infancy. And that Relative
Grace, which is the proper Effect of Baptism, Infants may lose it, when they
out-grow their Infantile State: And yet all this, without falling from Faith,
or Converting Grace. But let the Difficulty of Infant's Grace be what it will,
this is no Objection or Plea against Infant Baptism.


Antipaed. That is strange! But how will you make that appear?


Paed. Vey clearly. Do you Answer this Question. Was it not a Covenant of Grace
that was made to Abraham, and were not his Infant Seed under the Seal of it?


Ant. The Proof of that cannot well be denyd


Paed. Was not Faith and Grace as necessary to Justification and Salvation then
as now?


Antipaed. That cannot be denied.


Paed. Then must you grant, that want of Faith might be as well objected
against the Circumcision of Infants, as against their Baptizing. If Infants
could not be supposed to have such a measure of Grace then, as might be
sufficient for their Salvation, you must deny their Salvation; and say, Their
Circumsion was not a Sign, much less a Seal of the Righteousness of Faith: If
they had such a sufficiency; It cannot be denied but our Children are as
capable of the same sufficiency of Grace and Salvation.


Antipaed. What Advantage have Children by Baptism?


Paed. Their Advantage is great every way. You have a Breviate of them given by
the Apostle, Romans 9.4, 5. Who are Israelites, to whom pertains the Adoption,
and the Glory, and the Covenants, and the Giving of the Law, and the Service of
God, and the Promises; Whose are the Fathers, and of whom, as concerning the
Flesh, Christ came, etc. He here speaking of the Jewish Branches that were
broken off, and in whose Room the Gentiles were to be Engraffed. Indeed some
Privileges there mentioned are Judaical-peculiarities; as that, of them,
according to the Flesh, Christ came. This Privilege was so theirs, that it
cannot be communicated to others. Of them were the Fathers; If by that, no more
be meant, than than there was a constant Succession of Good Men, it is a
Benefit common to us with them; For the Church is the Seminary of Grace; They
had by this Covenant Relation, the Offer of the Gospel, and its Grace before
others, and were not cast out of their Privileges till they wilfully cast
themselves out. Ishmael was not turned out of Abraham's Family, till he was a
Scorner and Persecutor; Nor Esau refused the Blessing, till he Sold the
Birthright, and was Profane; And as to them belong the Promises, so the
Promises may be pleaded by them, and by their Parents in their behalf. And this
has been of mighty use to Godly Persons in all Ages, not only that they were
Baptized, but that they were Baptized in Infancy. And this is no Inconsiderable
Argument to me, that the Ordinance of Infant Baptism is from God. For tho (as
one Judiciously Remarks) it may in some cases be granted, Ford 's Practical Use
of Inf. Baptism, Ep. Ded. p. 5.
that an Ordinance Administered with some considerable Circumstantial
Irregularities may Sanctify. Yet that these Irregularities themselves should be
the Channels of Sanctifying Grace, is not easily imaginable. Now this is the
case of Infant Baptism. Many Holy Men, of many Ages, have found their hearts
warmed and quickened in the Exercise of Faith, Repentance, Love, Thankfulness,
Restrained from Sin, Excited to Duty by the consideration of Infant Baptism,
under that Circumstance, and the Covenant of Ancestors, the Foundation of that
Administration. How refreshing is it to hear a Dying Child plead Parental
Covenant Right? What Comfort and Satisfaction is it to a Religious Parent, to
be assured of the Divine Care over his Child, that he has so Solemnly Dedicated
to God? How much did God consult the Peace of his People when he took their
Children into Covenant with them.


Antipaed. But it seems evident from Christ's Commission, Mat. 28. Go Teach all
Nations, etc. That the Apostles were sent to Baptize the Adult; and such as
were capable of Instruction, in order to prepare them for Baptism; and there is
not a Word of Baptizing Infants.


Paed. That there is not a Word of Infants by Name is granted. But you have
been often told, that the Command of Disciplining Nations (for that is the
signification of the Word there used) does Include Infants, as well as the
Adult: And you cannot give us a sufficient Answer to Act. 15.10. Now therefore
why tempt ye God to put a Yoke upon the Neck of Disciples, etc. where Infants
that were under the Circumcision, were called Disciples as well as their
Fathers. I shall not prosecute this; But in Answer to the strength of this
Argument, I will lay before you a Truth, which if you had considered as you
might, it would have hindered you from making this Objection; It Is this, That
Commission has a direct Respect to the Conversion of the Gentile Nations; who
were Strangers to the Covenant, and therefore the Command would not run in any
other Terms then thus, Go and Convert them by Preaching, and then Baptize them;
and yet this plainly implies; That when they are Converted, their Infants,
according to God's known, and undoubted method, were to be Baptized with them.


Antipae. This is all but Conjecture.


Paed. I perceive a small thing will divert you, when you have not a mind to
see the Truth: But that you may discover the weight of this Observation, pray
do you answer me this Questian. Supposing it had been God's Pleasure, in the
time of the Old Testament, to be so Merciful to a Heathen Nation, as to send
any Special Prophets or Priests to Convert that Nation, might we not suppose
the Commission would run thus, Go Teach that Nation, Circumcising them in the
Name, etc. Or if God had continued Circumcision under the New Testament, Would
the Commission run otherwise than, Go and Disciple all Nations, Circumcising
them.


Antipaed. Upon such Supposition, I am convinced it would have been so; For at
that time, it was generally known, that Infants were to come into Covenant with
their Fathers. But now that Circumcision is taken away, and a New Ordinance of
Baptism appointed, I am not yet fully satisfied that, Go and Teach all Nations,
does mean First Convert these Nations, and then as they are Converted, Baptize
them and their Infants.


Paed. Was it not a Truth generally believed, and never questioned from the
time of Abraham, till Christ's Coming in the Flesh, That Infants were taken
into Covenant with their Parents.


Antipaed. It was so.


Paed. Is it then unreasonable to think, that the New Testament in the Command
of Baptizing, did take this for granted, as being Generally and Sufficiently
known? And that there was no need of giving Particular Directions for Infants.


Antipaed. This is still but Supposition.


Paed. But I will prove it to you, from Plain Scriptures in the New Testament,
that this was taken for granted, and Baptism was urged upon a supposition of
their Infants also Included.


Antipaed. I pray proceed.


Paed. The first Scripture I shall urge, is that, Acts 2.39. For the promise is
unto you and to your Children and to all that are far off, even as many as the
Lord our God shall call. Here we may Expect the true meaning of Christ's
Commission, as being the first occasion the Apostles had, of making an offer of
the Gospel. Well then, here I would have you to observe, That Peter gives a
direct Answer to the Jews that were pricked at their hearts, and hereupon made
this Enquiry, What shall we do [to be Saved?] He tells them, they must Repent
and be Baptized; This was the necessary Advice, and all of it that concerned
their Pardon and Salvation, about which they were Sollicitous; What he speaks
further about the receving of the Holy Ghost, was but an additional
Encouragement; The Reason of the Advice is that of v. 39.


Antipaed. But that relates to the Last clause of the Verse which Immediately
preceeds, -- Ye shall recive the Holy Ghost -- For the Promise is to you.


Paed. A Drowning man will catch at a Straw to save himself, tho in vain, you
cannot but see this is a poor Shift; Answer your self to these Questions. 1. Do
you think the Apostle intended this, the Promise of receving the Holy Ghost, is
to you and your Children, and to the Gentles that are afarr of? Have all
converted Gentiles a promise to receive such Gifts of the Holy Ghost as the
Apostle there speaks of? 2. Do you believe that the Apostle giving such an
Advice of Repenting and being Baptized (which only answered their great fear of
perishing) should give this as a reason of the additional Encouragement, and
not as a Reason of the main of the Advice? They were Expecting an answer of
their fear: What shall we do (to be saved) Here it was, that they were
concerned, and not about the Gifts of the Holy Ghost: and as he answered to
that, Repent, etc. so his Reason relates to that, as if he should say The
Promise of Pardon and acceptance is first To you Jews, and your; Children; and
next to the Gentiles, upon the Terms of Repentance and Submission to the
Covenant of Grace. 3. Do you not think that there is some thing in the Phrase
(you and your Children) more then barely to signify, if you Israelites Repent
you shall be saved, and so shall repenting Gentiles. Their Children were
Israelites, as well as themselves, and if he had not intended an Entail of
Privilege from Parent to Chlid, it had been enough to have said, The Promise
is to you Israelites, and to the Gentiles. But the Promise which God made to
Abraham [I will be a God to thee and thy Seed after thee] was so well
understood to be Inclusive of Infants, upon the Parents accepting the Covenant,
that the Jews understood it well enough to be a Comfort to them on their
Children's behalf, upon whom they had laid, in their Unbelief, the Blood of
Christ, as well as upon themselves.


Antipaed. Be it so that this Promise reached to the Descendants of Abraham,
yet this Text Limits the Promise to Conversion ( as many as the Lord our God
shall call.


Paed. Who would have Expected that a man of understanding should have made
such an Exception? I pray to what part of the discourse does the Limitation
belong? There are two Sentences ( the Promise is to you and to your Children)
and the Promise is also to (those that are afar off) viz. the Gentiles, even
(as many as the Lord our God shall call.)


Antipaed. It is true it is joined to the Latter Sentence.


Paed. And there is a manifest Reason that Limits it to the latter Sentence,
Because that though the Blessing of Abraham be come upon the Gentiles Gal. 3.14.
That the Blessing of Abraham might come on the Gentiles, through Jesus Christ:
Yet no Gentile Nation had such a Promise but as converted and called to
Christianity; and so becoming Abraham's Spiritual Seed, they are heirs of the
same Promises with the Jews: So that the meaning of that Scripture is plainly
this, Repent and be Baptized O ye Jews; for the Promise is to you and your
seed, as God spoke to Abraham; And it is the same Covenant that Baptism Seals
to; And your children have the same Privilege of Entering into Covenant with
your selves, as you know. And the same Promise of Pardon and Privilege is also
to as many Gentile Nations as shall be converted to the Faith; so yet they and
their Children may be Baptized into Covenant as well as they.


Antipaed. You have said enough of this Scripture; pray name another.


Paed. The next Scripture I shall offer you to prove Infant Baptism, That is,
that it was Sufficiently known in the New Testament that Infants came into the
Covenant with their Parents, shall be, 1 Cor. 7.14. For the unbelieveing
Husband is Sanctified by the Wife and the unbelieving Wife is sanctified by the
Husband: else were your Children Unclean but now are they Holy.


Antipaed. I Expected this, but I wonder you should urge it, when you have been
so often told, that the Holiness there is (a Marriage Holiness) and the
Holiness of their children is but this (that they are not Bastards.)


Paed. And I wonder more you Shelter your self under so pitiful an Evasion. But
to answer you. Will not you grant in the General, That whatever be the Holiness
here to be understood, it is a privilege which Children receive from their
Parents?


Antipaed. That cannot be denied.


Paed. Then if I prove, that this Holiness is not Legitimacy, but a privilege
of another Nature, and such as entitles them unto the Covenant, you will confess,
I prove what I produced this Scripture for.


Antipaed. Let me see the Performance.


Paed. To remove your Allegation, that the Childrens uncleanness is in this
case Bastardy and so intended by the Apostle; I ask you, Was not the Law of
Marriage observed among the Heathens? And was it not a known thing, that among
them, fornication was distinguished from the Issue of such Marriages, some
children being reckoned Bastards, and others Legitimate? If you say there was
no such thing, you contradict the Apostle, who here says, they were Husband
and Wife before Conversation; and elsewhere mentions fornication, as a sin
which the Heathens themselves owned as such, and that Incust was such a degree
of fornication, as was rarely found amongst them. If you grant this Distinction
of Bastard and Legitimate Children was found among the Heathen; then be sure
the Apostle did not design to overthrow this difference, and call all the
Children of Heathens Bastards. But I ask you further, If Marriages of the
Heathens were not Lawful Marriages, and so esteemed by the Apostle? Why did he
not direct them to be Married anew? This he would have done, If Infidels in the
Matrimonial state lived in fornication. I might ask yet further where the word
(Holy) is ever used to signify (Legitimacy) of Children? And if you seriously
consider the Occasion of the Apostles discourse you will find it was this; When
the Gospel was preached to the Heathens it frequently happened that sometimes
an Heathen Wife was converted, and not the Husband, and sometimes on the
contrary. Now in this case the Question was not, whether the Marriage was
Lawful? But whether it were to be continued in? Because if it were, the
converted Party was to live in Society with an Idolater. This might seem a
difficult case, and its rise from what we Read in Ezra; Where the Reforming
Israelites put away their strange Wives; but there was this difference in these
two Cases; In that of the Jews, they being of another Religion (when there was
no need, and expressly against God's Command) took Idolatrous Wives; Here, both
Parties, when they Married, were Idolaters alike; and therefore the Apostle
determines their Marriages being Lawful before, they might still continue in
that state, though but one Party were Converted, if both were willing. In this
case the Apostle takes it for granted, that the Marriage was Lawful, and if it
had not been so, there had been no room for so difficult a Question, and all
might have been Answered with this, That it was no Marriage, and therefore they
were at Liberty. Once again let me Ask you, Suppose among Christians, both
Husband and Wife be Unbelievers, are their Children Bastards, and do they live
in Fornication, till one at least be Converted? And does Faith make that
Marriage-Society, which was Fornication before, to become Lawful? And does it
Legitimate the Children?


Antipae. But if I grant all this, yet the Holiness of the Children seems not
to be real Sanctification; because the Believers (Wife or Husband) are said to
be Sanctified.


Paed. Nor do we say it is. But the Text evidently shows all we seek for, viz
That the Children in this case are not reckoned as the Children of Infidels
that are Strangers to the Covenant; but are Numbered amongst the Peculiar People
of God. Let it be observed, the Apostle gives this as a Reason of the advice
for the Continuance of their Conjugal Estate, The Unbelieving Party does not
make their Marriage-State Unholy, but the Relation is so Sanctified to a
Believer (as other things are for Holy and Lawful Uses) that Children have the
known Privilege, which Children of the Jews and Gentile Believers have; not to
be cast out of the Covenant as unclean, but to be accepted into the Covenant
with the Believing Parent. If you yet doubt, Whether this be the Sense of the
Apostles Reasoning, I pray you consider to what purpose the Apostle should have
mentioned their Children; certainly he intends to signify that the Children
have some privilege by their Parents, and if this privilege be not
Legitimacy, (as I have proved and I think for shame you will Urge it no more)
then there is no Church privilege can be thought of, but that known privilege
of Childrens Entering into Covenant with their Parents, and this the Apostle
does not speak of, as a New proposed Doctrine, but as generally known, and truly
appliable in this case, as well as others.


Antipaed. Have you any more Scriptures to offer for proof, That Children
entering into Covenant with their Parents, was a known, and unquestionable Truth
in the New Testament?


Paed. All these Scriptures that speak of the families privilege upon the
Master or Mistress's believing, Luke 19.9. And Jesus said unto him, This day is
Salvation come to this house, for as much as he also is the Son of Abraham. Acts
11.14. Who shall tell thee words whereby thou and all thy house shall be Saved.
16.15. And when she was baptized and her household, etc. 31. And they said
believe on the Lord Jesus Christ and thou shall be saved and thy house.


Antipaed. How weak is your Proof for Baptizing Infants from such Scriptures?
How can you prove that these houses had children?


Paed. Not so fast, I am not here arguing the Probability that these houses had
children. That they had not, you can as little prove, as I that they had: But
that for which I produce these Texts, is this, That the mentioning of (House)
or (Family) speaks plainly a Privilege, which that House or Family had by its
Master's Conversion; Like that which Abraham's Family had, when God enjoined
the Seal of the Covenant to him, which reached to his Consenting Servants, and
his Children; And Family is mentioned upon no other ground, but as Children
were reckoned with their Parents before, so it is still under the New
Testament. For if Salvation offered by Christ, and Baptizing, as the Seal of
that Salvation, had been intended only a Personal Privilege to Lydia, or the
Jailor, etc. the Addition of that Mercy to that House, or Family, had been
needless, and no Privilege would have been supposed to have accru'd to their
Houses, or Family as such. Nor can you turn off that to Zaccheus; Salvation is
come to thy House, by saying, Christ, who was Salvation, was going to his
House: for Christ, tho he be often called a Savior, yet is never called
Salvation: Besides, that agrees not with the Reason that is given, (for as much
as he also is a Son of Abraham) but the Reason evidently relates to the Word
(House) Salvation is come to thy (House) because thou being a Believer, and so
a (Son of Abraham) this Salvation belongs to thee, and to thy Family, according
to the Promise which God made to Abraham (I will be a God to thee and to thy
seed after thee.)


Antip. I have one Objection more, which if you can Answer, you will do much
toward my Satisfaction. I observe that there are such Antecedent
Qualifications required to Baptism, that it cannot be supposed that Infants
should be capable of Baptism, in that they cannot be so Qualifyed, Mark 16.16.
He that believes and is Baptized, shall be Saved, etc. Gal. 3.27. For as many
of you as have been Baptized into Christ, have put on Christ.


Paed. I know these Scriptures pass for Invincible Arguments with some, who
Argue thence, That Infants do not Believe, and therefore ought not to be
Baptized; They do not put on Christ, and therefore ought not to be Baptized:
But I do not Question but I shall make you quit your Argument presently, if you
will give me but a direct Answer to these Questions. 1. Do you think these
Scriptures speak of Infants, or of Adult grown Persons?


Antipae. I think these Scriptures speak of all that were to be Baptized, and
that none were to be Baptized, but such as by Faith could put on Christ.


Paed. 2ly. What do you think of Dying Infants, shall they be Saved or Damned?


Antipae. Why do you trouble me with that Question? If I say they are Damned,
you will call me Uncharitable.


Paed. But seeing you Argue against Infant Baptism from these Scriptures, you
cannot be offended if I make these Inferences from them: (1) You say, Infants
do not believe; And therefore cannot be Baptized; Will it not be as clear an
Inference Children cannot Believe; Therefore they must be Damned? (2.) I
Infer, if Children be not Damned, then in some sense or other Infants do
Believe, and put on Christ, and may be Baptized, and Saved; Or, (3.) I Infer,
That if it be Uncharitable to imagine, that Children are Damned for want of
Actual Faith, or Repentance, then surely these Scriptures do not speak of the
case of Infants, but only of the case of Adult Persons, to whom only the
Gospel was first to be Preached, and of whom Actual Faith, and Repentance were
required, before either themselves, or Infants could be capable of Baptism. Now
I leave it to your self to choose, which of these you please. If you make choice
of the first Inference, you destroy your Opinion in the judgment of all good
Men, who will abhor such Blasphemy against God, and such Uncharitableness to
all Infants. If you take the Second Inference, you yield up the whole Cause. If
you fly for Refuge to the Third Inference, Then you grant as much as we desire,
that the New Testament, taking it for granted (as a known General Truth) gave
no particular Commands, or Directions, about the Reception of Children into
Covenant (that being needless) but only gave directions about Receiving Adult
Jews or Gentiles into the Church upon their Conversion.


Aporet. This is hard choice; but I confess I see no other Remedy; But I would
rather fix upon the last Inference than upon the first; For methinks it goes
against Humane Nature, to think, or speak so harshly of poor Infants; and
surely no Parents (whose Bowels yern after their Children) can be fond of such
an Opinion. I pray call over the particulars discoursed, that we may have a
short sum of all.


Paed. I have proceeded by these steps. 1. I have proved that God has taken
care of the Salvation of Infants, as well as of the Adult. 2. I have proved
God's way and method to Salvation, is to bring them into the Covenant of Grace.
3. I have proved that Children were all along in Covenant with their Parents.
4. That as soon as God added Seals to the Covenant, he Commanded Children to be
brought under the Initiating Seal of it. 5. That this was not a Privilege
peculiar to the Children of the Jews only. But that the Infants of Proselited
Gentiles were Admitted to the Seal. 6. That the Covenant made with Abraham, was
a Covenant of Grace. 7. That the Edition of that Covenant in the New Testament
was the same for Substance. 8. That when God saw it fit to take away
Circumcision, he Instituted to his Covenant, as a Seal to it, the Ordinance of
Baptism. 9. In the Preaching of the Gospel to the Gentiles, for their
Conversion, it was never Questioned, but known of all, that their Children were
to come into Covenant with their Converted Parents. 10. That therefore it was
needless, to give particular directions about Infants. 11. That the Great
Business of the first Planters of the Gospel, being to Convert Jews and
Gentiles, all that was usually said about Baptism, related to the Adult. 12.
And I have also proved, that where there was occasion, the New Testament has
sufficiently declared the Infants Right to the Promise and Covenant, as derived
from their Believing Parents. 13. I have besides this Answered all your
Objections. And now tell me, whether this be not (for all the Talk about
Precept and President) a giving you both Precept and President plainly for
this, That Children were under Covenant with Abraham, and under the Seal of it:
I have also given you plain Declarations from the New Testament, That Children
were to come into Covenant with their Parents. And now I will put one Question
to you Antipaedobaptista; Children have been in Covenant, and under the Seal of
it all along. If you think they are not in Covenant still, show me, where,
when, and how, God has put them out. And here I might be as Peremptory with
you, as you were with me. Give me either Precept or President that will prove,
that God has taken this Privilege from them.


Aporet. One would think that the Dispute were at an end, when it has
proceeded so far as to prove, That Children were always in the Covenant, and
under the Seal of it, so soon as any Seals were Instituted; Except
Antipaedobaptista can prove from plain Scripture in the New Testament, that God
has repealed his Grant and Privilege, formerly given to Infants: If he affirm
that God has done so, the Proof must ly on his side.


Antipaed. God disolved the Jewish Church State at the Resurrection of Christ,
and set up a New Church State in the New Testament.


Paed. What do you mean by Church State? Do you mean God's taking down their
particular Ordinances of Worship, as Sacrifices, and consequently their Temple,
and the Services of it? Or do you mean, God took down these Promises by the
Messiah to the faithful and their Seed; upon which the Church was founded, and
constituted? Or do you mean that God destroyed the Nation, and Individual
Church of the Jews, and broke them off for their Unbelief? If you mean the
first or the last, you say Nothing that can prove their Church State altered.
The Question is, Whether now that God has taken away the Jewish Circumcision,
and their particular Mode of Worship, and has also destroyed the Nation, and
unchurched these Unbelievers? Whether God has set up a New Church upon a
foundation, quite distinct from that upon which the Church of the Jews was
Established, viz. a different Promise, and a different way of Salvation, and
Justification, than that which was given to Abraham.


Antipaed. You know the New Testament is said to be a better Covenant, and to
be Established upon better promises.


Paed. And you know, That though we grant that the New Testament Edition is in
many Respects better, yet I have proved to you before, that for Substance it
was the same.


Aporet. To save Labor and needless Talk. Pray for my Satisfaction Prove, That
God has not repealed the Essential Church State of the Jews nor Infants
Privilege.


Paed. Its more than I am obliged to do by the Rules of Disputation; But for
Truths sake, and your satisfaction, I will do it; And for that end will
recommend to your Consideration these few things. 1. No Edition of the Covenant
(and there were at least two Editions of the Covenant before Abraham's time)
repealed any Covenant privilege formerly granted, but confirmed and Enlarged
such Privileges; The New Testament Edition being every way better, it cannot
be supposed, that God would take away from Infants, their Covenant Privilege,
except he had given them something better in the Room of it. 2. Whatever God
saw fit to take from the Old Testament-Church, he has plainly declared the
Repeal of it in the New Testament; where he discharges Circumcision,
Sacrifices, and difference of Meat and Days: And it was necessary that God
should do so, or else we could not have known the mind of God in these matters.
But now tell me, Is not the Privilege of Children Entering into Covenant with
their Parents a greater Privilege, and matter of greater Importance than a
Ceremony? And would it not have been highly necessary, that if Cod should have
purposed to take it away, he should have plainly declared his mind about it? 3.
The Apostle, Gal. 3.15.17. Brethren, I speak after the manner of men, though it
be but a Man's Covenant, yet if it be confirmed, no man disanulleth, or adds
thereunto. 17. And this I say that the Covenant that was before confirmed of
God in Christ, the Law which was 430 years after cannot disanul, that it should
make the Promise of none Effect: I say, the Apostle here does expressly Affirm,
that God's Covenant of Grace (particularly that made to Abraham) as a Covenant
or Testament, is as to all Essential's unalterable; and that the Law which was
430 years after could not disanul it. And by the same Reason, the New Testament
could not disanul the Covenant to Abraham, neither as to promise nor
privilege. I need not repeat what I have already proved, That the New
Testament was not the taking down one house and setting up another, but
building upon the old foundation and planting the Gentiles where the Jews were
broken off, The Olive Tree is the same, and the Seed but one, Gal. 3.16. Not,
and to Seeds as of many, but as of one, etc. 4. If this Church State and
Covenant had been altered, then should not Abraham and we have been justified
after the same manner, which the Apostle affirms, Gal. 4.3. upon the
Supposition that the Church State of both was the same; Else it might have been
answered, That they might have been justified one way and we another. 5. Let it
be observed that the New Testament insists upon this Principle frequently as a
thing denied by none, That Abraham is the Father of the Faithful, and, That the
Gentiles were Children raised up to Abraham, That they were Abraham's Seed, and
Heirs according to the Promise, That this Blessing of Abraham is come upon the
Gentiles, That though the natural Seed of Abraham be now rejected upon Unbelief,
yet the Converted Gentiles were the Spiritual Seed. And if this had not been
Intended by God when he gave the Promise; the Promise to Abraham had been
broken upon the Rejection of the Jews, This the Apostle Expressly argues. Romans
9.6. Not as though the Word of God has taken none Effect. For they are not all
Israel, which are of Israel.


Antipaed. The Apostle there tells us, That the Children of the flesh are not
the Children of God, and that all are not Israel, that are of Israel. Neither
were they the Children of God, because they were of the Seed of Abraham, and
therefore it would seem that there is no such privilege to Infants by Birth.


Paed. The Apostle is there speaking of the rejection of the Jews for their
Unbelief, and asserts no more than this, that in that case when they put
themselves out of Covenant, it was no breach of Promise in God to reject them,
though they were the Natural Seed of Abraham. But what is all this against the
Privilege of Infants of Believing Parents? The Promise was still made to
Believers and their Seed, and in that sense the Promise was made to Abraham and
his own Imediate Natural Seed, as the Seed of a Believer, and so successively
to that Seed when grown up, when they continued in the Faith, and to their
Infant Seed, and so on to succeeding generations. Now if any Israelite forsook
God, he was not reckoned to be in Covenant, because he was of Abraham according
to the flesh: so that the Natural Seed of Israelites Believing, and of
Believing Gentiles were the Spiritual seed, though still the Infants were
Children by natural desent, and by it had this Privilege with their Parents,
not because their Parents were their Fathers, but because their Fathers were
Believers -- But this has diverted me, I will return to what I have to say
further. 6. That God is so far from taking down the Essential Church State of
the Jews, that (as I hinted before) he has taken down the Partition Wall of
Ceremonies, and has made them one house, of which the Apostles and Prophets are
secondary foundations, Ephesians. 2.14. For he is our peace who has made both one,
and has broken down the middle wall of partition between us. 19. Now
therefore, ye are no more Strangers, and Foreigners, but fellow Citizens with
the Saints and of the Housho^d of God. 20. And are built upon the Foundation of
the Apostles and Prophets, Jesus Christ himself being the chief Corner Stone.
Lastly, Consider also, that Christ has Expressly declared, that Children belong
to this Church as parts of the Kingdom of God, Mat. 19.13, 14. Then were there
brought unto him little Children, that he should put his hands upon them and
pray, and the disciples rebuked them. But Jesus said suffer little Children,
and forbid them not, to come unto me, for of such is the Kingdom of Heaven. I
know you would evade this Text, by telling us that (such) means (such like) in
Humility, etc. but that Christ intends these very little Children, is Evident.
1. Because he might (if such like had been his meaning) as properly have said,
suffer Doves and Lambs to come to me, for of such like is the Kingdom of
Heaven. 2. This taking them in his Arms and Blessing them, shows he meant them.
3. He asserts their Church Membership and that as a Reason why he would have
them come, (For of such is the Kingdom of Heaven.)


Antipaed. You have said enough to convince me that Infant Baptism is not a
groundless absurd opinion, there is much more to be said in its behalf, than
ever I Imagined, or was acquainted with before. I thought neither Argument nor
Solution was able to stand before me. And I assured my self the Smooth Stones
that I had chosen out of the Brook (the Pleas for Precept or Example and the
mighty Objection of Childrens Incapacity) would have knocked down the stoutest
Champion for Infant Baptism. I will try your Strength in one thing more, and
that is the manner of Baptizing. You know that we hold that it ought to be done
by total Immersion douseing, dipping, or covering the person with Water, This
has moved some, otherwise well enough satisfied with Infant Baptism, to be
Baptized after our way, taking the former to be only Sprinkling, and therefore
(as not answering our Lords Institution) null and void. And what Indeed can be
more plain? Seeing the Genuine proper and primitive signification of the Word
[(...)] the thing designed in this Sacrament, and the Concurrent practice of
the Primitive Church are all on our side.


Paed. What your Arguments want in Strength, you make up in Readiness. All that
you have said (and it is all that can be said) is very easily Answered. If you
will join with us in what I have been pleading for, the Covenant right of
Children, We shall leave you to your Liberty in this, to act as you are
persuaded in your own mind. The Scripture (as I shall show you anon) has not
determined the particular Mode, and why should we? To your First Argument from
the signification of the Word [Baptizo] I answer, That Word in Scripture is of
a large signification, and generally signifies to Wash, but determines not the
manner How; Whether by Aspersion, Superfusion or Dipping, I think most rarely
the Last, ( viz. Dipping) I Will give you some Instances in which you cannot
without manifest wresting of the Text confine it to Dipping or Dousing. My
first Instance is, Mark 7.4. Unless they Wash: (...), unless they be Baptized;
Spoken of their Traditionary washing of their Hands (by them accounted
Religious) That it is only meant of their hands is plain from v. 2.3. And when
they saw some of his Disciples eat bread with defiled (that is to say with
unwashen hands) they found fault. For the Pharisees, etc. And the Parallel
place, Mat. 15.2. where the Quarrel with the Disciples was for Eating with
Unwashen Hands, and their contrary practice was asserted. Now the Jewish way of
washing was by pouring Water upon the Hands, and not by dipping their hands in
Water; And therefore one that pours water on the hands of a man, is but
another Word for a Servant or Attendant. Thus Elisha poured Water on the hands
of Elijah. From both these Scriptures compared, I gather, That when one
(principal) part of the Body is washed, or (Baptized,) the whole man is said to
be Baptized, or washed. 2. That pouring on of Water is called Baptizing. I do
not see what you can object against this Scripture, and therefore I proceed to
another, and that is Hebrews the 9.10. Which stood only in Meats and Drinks and
diverse Washings, and carnal Ordinances Imposed on them, until the time of
Reformation: diverse Washings (in Greek Baptisms,) This Text undoubtedly relates
to the Ceremonious Legal Washings, of which some were by way of sprinkling,
compare it with these Places that speak professedly of them, Number. 8.7. And thus
shall thou do unto them to cleanse them, sprinkle Water of purifying upon them,
etc. to the 19. Besides, These Washings did signify to them their Pardon and
Sanctification.


Antipae. The Dutch Translators Translate John the Baptist, John the Dooper, or
Dipper.


Paed. You Triumph mightily in their Suffrage, and yet I know not by what
Authority they changed a Word used by the Scriptures, and retained all along in
the Christian Church, into a Word of a less and more restrained Sense? However
you take (Dooper) to signify their Painting (wherein the Wit of that People
lies) expresses it by his pouring Water upon the Head of the Penitent; and well
enough might they do so, for we read Lawrence was so Baptized; Nor can it be
well thought, that his Case was singular. You see then, Vossius in These de
Baptismo.
by Limitting the Word (Baptizo) you distinguish where the Law does not
distinguish. For plunging, or going under Water properly is [(...)] Do not you
think now, that if Dipping were [as one of your Writers affirms] the very form
of Baptism, but that God would have told us more exactly what it is, and
described it in every Circumstance? but seeing he has not determined the
Quantity of Elements in either Sacrament; as in the Lord's Supper, how great a
Piece of Bread, or how large a Draught of Wine we are to take; nor has he tied
us to the Quantity of Water in Bapiism. By this time you cannot but see, That
either an overfondness of a Received Opinion has Captivated you into a Belief
of the Impregnableness of such Weak Arguments. Or, that you have too easily
taken upon Trust bare Assertions from Men, that by plausible (for solid you see
it is not) Arguing would cast a Mist before your Eyes, that you may not
discover the Nakedness and Weakness of their Pleas about the Subjects of
Baptism. That which further lays open the Slender hold you have of Scripture,
is the Squeesing of Words and forcing them to your Purpose, and Indoctrinating
your Proselytes in Greek Critics; Shall such a great and necessary Truth lie
couched in a little and Arbitrary Criticism, which proves false or doubtful
when it comes to the Trial? They must have a stronger Faith than I either
pretend to, or desire, that can credit it.


Antipaed. But if the Word it self is not sufficient Witness for us, yet that
with the Aid of Scripture Examples will abundantly prove what we plead for. Was
not John Baptising in Enon? And is not the Reason plain, because there was much
Water there? John 3.23. Is not the Eunuch said to go into, and come out of the
Water, and is not the same said of our Blessed Savior? What can be more clear?


Paed. Nothing I confess to those, that will look at Scripture through the
Glass of their own Opinion, but a thinking and unprejudiced person will not be
deceved by appearances; your much Water in Greek is [POLLAYDATA,] many Waters,
Streams, or Rivulets, where though there might be much Water, comparatively to
other places in that Land, where Water was scarce; yet says nothing as to the
Depth of the Water: Besides the Name of the place Enon a little Fountain, (and
doubtless they gave it a name answerable to the Quantity of Waters there) and
the Account of Travelers favor this Exposition. Your Instances of going in or
coming out of the Water, are of no more Validity. There are few Waters but they
run Low, and a man cannot come to them but by descending, nor come from them,
but by ascending; and if you will have these Phrases to conclude any thing, it
must be the Baptising of the Administrator as well as the Penitent; and then it
will over-do, for it is spoken of both. But granting these already mentioned
were baptized by Dipping, How got they Water for Plunging in the midst of the
Night?


Antip. Yes; Why might not they have Vessels in the House large enough?


Paed. That is a mere Childish Cavil; so much Water would stink and corrupt
before it were used, and it is mere Conjecture all, and may as easily be denied
as affirmed.


Antipae. But Christ has affixed such a meaning to the Action of Plunging, that
can be Answered no other way, Romans 6.4. Therefore we are Buried with him by
Baptism into Death, etc. Col. 2.12. Buried with him in Baptism. How can
Sprinkling or Pouring on of Water, shadow out Death?


Paed. It will represent Death to Sin, as well to us, as Plunging did to them;
for as their Burying was by putting the Body down into a deep Hole, or by
hiding it in a hollowed Rock, laying it in at the side, whereby it was suddenly
covered, and out of sight. So ours is by laying it in the Ground, and throwing
Earth or Dust upon it. Is not our way then (considering the different Custom of
the Country) as Teaching and Edifying as yours? But that I may dispatch an
Answer to your whole Objection. The Spiritual Grace is as well signified by
Pouring or Sprinkling; for whether you will have the Water to signify the
Cleansing Power of Christ's Blood, nothing can do it more lively; seeing it is
called, The Blood of Sprinkling, Heb. 12.24. -- And to the Blood of Sprinkling:
Or, the Graces of the Holy Spirit purchased by that Blood, which the Scripture
calls, A pouring out of the Spirit; we are not behind you in your way of
Administration. As ours has all the Advantages you can pretend to in your way;
so ours labors not under the Inconveniency and Indecency that yours does.


Antipae. What do you mean.


Paed. I mean the Immodesty and Hazard of Baptizing Naked, or next to Naked.


Antipae. I wonder you will charge us with such an Abominable Practice, as
Baptizing Naked. It Is a thing we all detest.


Paed. It may be you do. But then let me tell you; 1. That you Baptize the
Garments as well as the Person that wears them. And, 2. You must quit all your
Pretense to Antiquity; for, so long as they practiced Dowsing, the Persons that
were to be Baptized, were stripped of their Garments. And this they did, to
signify, The putting off the Old Man, and Body of Sin; Baptizing in Water was
to them Cleansing from, and Dying to Sin; And the putting on the White Garment,
which they had on purpose, was a putting on the New Man: But tho in the Hot
Countries, where they went almost Naked, such practices were more seemly, yet
they would be next to Scandalous amongst us; And the Garments you have, if I be
rightly Informed, are not so Comely, and Distinguishing, as they should be: And
very light and loose sort of Garments they must be, that will on a sudden
Plunge, give Passage for the Water to the Whole Body.


Antipae. The hazard you speak of, would not be so much dreaded, if Men
Indulged not their own Unbelief and Carnallity. God will keep Men in the
Exercise of their Duty. I know not any one that ever got harm by being
Baptized, tho I have known many Weak People Paptized in Winter, and some have
been better after.


Paed. I have heard the same observed of Childrens being Baptized. Yet are we
not to tempt God, especially when he has not obliged us to the more severe way,
where there is Imminent Danger; God will have Mercy and not Sacrifice.

The Sabbath Day must rather be violated, than a Sick Person not Cured, or a
Necessitous Person not Relieved; And Circumcision is Dispensed with in the
Wilderness, because of the Danger and Inconvenience that attended it in that
unsettled and wandering State of the Church: And the Jews saw it necessary to
soften the Extremity of some Usages Commanded by God. If a Man had Two Children
that dyed upon Circumcision, Ainsworth, on Genesis 17 13.
it was taken for granted, that Circumcision was fatal to the Males of that
Family, and therefore the succeeding Children were not to be Circumcised in
Infancy. And I remember Mr. Tombs somewhere in his Precursor, allows of Warm
Water to Weak Persons. The Primitive Christians thought Sprinkling was
sufficient for the Clinici those that were Baptized in Sickness upon their Beds
-- But you are the Men, and Wisdom must dye with you -- Whole Congregations
must forfeit their Baptism, and be Unchurch'd, because Unplung'd. The desperate
Tendency of such a Tenet renders it suspicious to me. And it needs not only
Water, but Niter, and much Soap, to wash it from horrid Uncharitableness.


Aporet. If you please, Sir, we'll dismiss this Part of the Controversy, and
pass on to that which is Historical; Antipaedobaptista disowns the Consequence
of the Opinion, and his Practice is otherwise.


Paed. I know he does; but the most of his Fellows in this Controversy, will
have no Fellowship with us in the Lord's Supper, because we are Unbaptiz'd; and
least some Men's Christianity get the Ascendant of their Opinion, they are
Pronounced by these Zealots worse than we; and we, in their Language, set our
Thresholds beside God's Threshold, that is, if I take them, we are Idolaters.


Antipae. I heartily wish a better Understanding amongst Christians -- But if
you please, we will, according to Aporeticus his Motion, now proceed to what is
Alleged out of Antiquity; and here I must be free with you; I know little of
Antiquity, but what I see Collected by Writers of our Way.


Paed. I wish all Unskilful Men would Express themselves with the like
Modesty, they would not so readily have been Imposed upon, nor deceived others
that trusted to them: I shall give you an honest and short Account of what is
considerable in this matter. If you desire an Answer to Mr. Tombs, the
Learned Champion for your Way, which most that have Written after him, have
Copied from; you have it performed by Dr. Homes, Mr. Baxter, etc; Mr. Danvers,
that takes the Magdeburgensian Centurists, and gives you an Account, out of
them, of the Practice of Antiquity, neither does them nor us Justice, and has
brought but small Credit to his Cause. I have taken pains to compare his
Extract with the Historians, and I could give you several Instances of his
unfair Dealings; But I promised Brevity.


Antipae. There are Two of the Ancients that I have heard Quoted on our side,
Tertul. Lib. de Bap. c. 18. Veniant Ergo dum adolescunt veniant dum discunt dum
quo veniant docentur.
Tertullian and Gregory Nazianzen.


Paed. Tertullian indeed tells his Thoughts concerning Children that were not
in danger of Death, such might have their Baptism deferred; And obviating an
Objection that might be made from the Words of our Savior, Suffer little
Caildren to come to me. He Answers, Let them come when they grow up, and know
when they come; 1. You see the Insufficiency of the Answer he makes. It
satisfies not the Objection. Our Savior bids, Let the Children come; and he
Answers, Let them come when they grow up: Then they cease to be Children, such
as our Savior speaks of: If this Answer would have served our Savior, little
Children had never been brought to him. 2. From this it is Evident, that
Children were then Baptized, or what needed the Objection, or his Answer. 3.
That Christians, in that time, thought there was ground in that Scripture for
Childrens Admittance into the Church, and consequently their Baptism. Compare
what he here says, with what he Writes in another place, where he makes a
Descant upon these Words of the Apostle. Now your Children are Holy -- You will
see he uses an Exposition of that Text, De Anima, cap. 39.40.
and compares it with another ( John 3.5.) that must make him speak for Infant
Baptism or nothing. As for Nazianzen, he gives us his Opinion, That it would be
better (he thinks) that Children should put it off, till they can Answer some
Questions (I suppose in Imitation of the Adult. Oration: 40. que est in S.
Baptisma, p. 458. ut cit. a Vossio in These. de Bap. p. 435. 436. See Sellers
Remarks on the State of the Children of Believing Parents, p. 417, 418.
) And, to the Question -- Whether Children were to be Baptized, he Answers
Roundly, They should; and urges it from Childrens Receiving the like Seal of
Circumcision; and to Argue from Circumcision to Baptism was usual amongst the
Ancients.


Antip. If the Primitive Church were of your Mind, why put they off the Baptism
of the Children of Believing Parents.


Paed. And I may Ask you why the Baptism of Believers was delayed after their
Profession of Christianity. The Reasons in General were these. Some deferred
Baptism, both that of their own, and Children, out of a kind of Novation
Principle, That Sinners, after Baptism, were Irremissible; misunderstanding
Hebr. 6. (See Dr. Owen in Cor. and on Apostasy.) Others, till they could have a
Time, Place, Company, River, (as Jordan) or Administrator that pleased them;
some, because they would not discover their Errors concerning the Trinity,
into whose Name they were to be Baptized; some, because they would not give the
Church Satisfaction in Confessing their Sins; others, because they were
Resolved to live in their Sins, and would not cut off their Sins by Repentance,
or lay any Obligation upon themselves to Strict Holiness; Some, for fear of
Persecution, frequent in those days; Some, out of Imitation of Christ, who was
not Baptized till the 30th Year of his Age. Others on more pitiful Reasons, as
that they were unwilling to defray some little Charges and Expense that
attended it. Others out of mere Carelessness, or because they were busyed in
the Affairs of the World: Which last, I doubt not, would prevail with many in
our Time, if they had not been prevented by their Godly Parents.


Antip. The Reasons seem probable; But were there no Men in the First Times,
that set themselves against Infant Baptism?


Paed. The first that I find charged with it, was Pelagius, who once denied it,
and it was indeed for his Purpose; For it would have strengthened his hands, if
he could have wrested so Considerable an Argument from the Orthodox as Baptism:
For the Ground of it, that Children were Born in Sin, and therefore needed this
Sacrament, Knocked his Arguments against Original Sin on the Head. But so great
a Cloud of Witnesses were against him, even the whole Church of Christ, that he
was forced to let it alone, as too hot for his Fingers; and grant, That
Children ought to be Baptized; Usher Antiq. Ec. Brit. p. 148. 153. etc. 11. per
totum Edit. 1687.
and confess, That the Catholic Church was always of that Belief, and
Wondered that any that Read the Gospel, should be of another Mind. The next we
find were the German Anabaptists, a Generation of Men that were raised up by
the Devil to the Disgrace of the Reformation; a Company of Ignorant Furious
Enthusiasts.


Antipaed. By speaking so harshly of them you Reflect upon us.


Paed. No further than you undertake their Vindication, I persuade my self you
have nothing common with them but your opinion of Antipaedobaptism. I wonder
any of you will turn advocate for them; and to clear them, cast Reproach upon
the first Excellent Reformers, as if they had dealt falsely, and misrepresented
them, and link them with the malicious Papists. I would Counsel you to have
nothing to do with them, for you will get no Credit by their Company.


Antipaed. You are always throwing their actions in our Teeth.


Paed. I know no man that is Honest and considerate, that will make any further
Use of it, than this, That it is not likely, that so very glorious a Truth of
God as you hold this to be, That God first suffered the Pelagians (the first
sacrilegious Oppugners of the free grace of God) and then the German
Anabaptists, a Number of Brutish Ranters, to be the discoverers of, and then
the Propagators.


Antipaed. The Waldenses were for Antipaedobaptism.


Paed. They were so represented by the malicious Papists their Adversaries,
especially after the Reformation, such as Baronius, Spondanus, etc. The Truth
is the chief Quarrel against them was for their Opposition to the Grandeur and
Vices of the Clergy. It Is true some of them deferred the Baptizing of their
Children, but it was not because their (Barbs.) Ministers were abroad, and they
would not have them baptized by the Roman Clergy. If you would know what their
real Principles were you must take an Account of them from, 1. The Concessions
of their Adversaries when Unprejudiced, and when they design not to disgrace
them. Some of them plainly Profess, That for all the Noise about them, they had
ever distinctly declared, what it was they held; So Rob. Gaguinus, Gag. de
Relig. gestis. Francone, Edit. An. 1511. fol. 104.
a Monk, who Wrote a little before the Reformation. Phil. Bergomas, that Wrote
about the same Time, Bergom. Suppleus. Chron. fol. 282.298.
mentions no such thing of them. 2. From their own Public Professions, which
you may find in Bishop Usher de Succes. See Dr. Cave, Hist. liter. p. 632.
Eccles. Edit. An. 1687. c. 6. per totum. Fuller Hist. Holy War. B. 3. c. 10.
c. 8. p. 107, Momens Hist. Papal. defended; As also Illiricus by Voetius,
desperate causa. P. p. 666. lib. 3. chap. 9, 10.
etc. c. 10. p. 150. Besides, you may Read in English, Morland, Perin, Dr.
Allex. Boyer, in their Histories.


Antip. The Ancient Britains were for us.


Paed. The Quarrel was not about Infant Baptism, but about some ROMISH Rites
and Additionals to Baptism; See Bid Hist. Eccles. who is the Antientest Author.


Antip. Berongarius opposed Infant Baptism.


Paed. There is no such thing mentioned in the Councils against him. Usher de
success. p. 104, 105.


Aporet. I am satisfied in the Account you have given us; I Thank you for the
Trouble you have taken.


FINIS.
These Books for Infant Baptism, Printed for Tho. Parkhurst, at the Bible and
Three Crowns in Cheapside.
1. MUch in a Little; an Abstract of Mr. Baxter's Plain Scripture Proof for
Infants Church Membership.

2. Some Brief Directions for Improvement of Infant Baptism, by Will. Bagshaw.

3. An Argumentative and Practical Discourse of Infant Baptism, by Will.
Burkit, Vicar of Dedham.

4. The Improveableness of Water Baptism, by John Collinges, D. D.

5. Scripture Warrant sufficient for Infant Baptism, by Giles Firmin.

6. Infant Baptism of Christ's Appopntment, by S. Petto.

7. Scripture Light about the Gospel-Ordinance of Baptism, by Mr. Hughes
Minister of the Gospel.


